William Laud Arch-B: of Canterbury Prymat of England. W.M. s^ulps


CHRISTIAN Prayers and holy Meditations, as well for Private as Public
exercise: Gathered out of the most godly learned in our time, by Henry Bull.

Whereunto are added the prayers, commonly called Lidleys prayers.

PSALM. 55. In the Evening and Morning, and at Noone, will I pray unto the
Lord, and he will hear my prayer.

AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Middleton, dwelling in Fleetestreate at the sign
of the Falcon.

January has xxxj. days.
1 A The Circumcision of Christ. 2 b On which day Noe being in the Arc upon
the waters, began to see the tops of the high mountains. Gene. 8.13. 3 c 4 d 5
e 6 f The Epiphanie: Or apparition of our Lord Jesus. 7 g 8 A 9 b 10 c The 10.
Nabuchodonosor besieged once again Jerusalem. 2. Reg. 15. 11 d 12 e 13 f 14 g
15 A The midde Winter after Ptolomaeus. 16 b 17 c The 17. the good Prince
Scanderbeg king of Epirus, a scourge to the Turk, as upon this day died. 1466.
18 d 19 e 20 f 21 ^ 22 A The 22. the Duke of Somerset as upon this day was
beheaded. 1552. 2^ b 24 c 25 d 26 e 27 f The 27. Saint Paul as upon this day,
of a persecuter was converted, as he ioinneyed unto Damascus. Acts. 9.3. 28 ^
29 A 30 b 31 c

February has xxviii. days.
1 d 2 e The Purification of Marie. 3 f As upon this day Christ our Savior
was offered unto the Lord in the Temple at Jerusalem, and his mother the
Virgin Marie, was purified according to the Law, Luke 2.22. 4 g 5 A 6 b 7 c 8
d 9 e 10 f 11 g The 11. Noe forty days after he had seen the tops of the
mountains, sent out the Raven, and after that, the Dove, which returned. Genesis
8. 12 A 13 b 14 c 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g The eighteen day, Noe put out once
again the Dove, which brought an Olive branch. 19 A 20 b 21 c 22 d 23 e 24 f
Matthie Apostle. 25 g The Dove was sent the third time, and returned no more to
Noe. 26 A 27 b 28 c March has xxx^. days.
1 d 2 e 3 f The third, the Temple of Jerusalem was wholly finished and
consecrated. 1. Esdras. 6. 4 g 5 A 6 b 7 c 8 d 9 e 10 f The 10. as upon this
day, Christ being on the other side of Iorde^, was advertised of the sickness
of Lazarus. Ioh. 11.3 11 g 12 A 13 b The 13. the feast of Hester was
celebrated, because that day was appointed to put the Jews to death. 14 c 15 d
16 e The 16. Lazarus was raised up again. John. 11. 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 b The
20. Christ made his entrance into Jerusalem. 21 c 22 d 23 e 24 f The 24. he
made his Supper. 25 g Annuntiation of Marie. 26 A The 25. was taken. 27 b The
26. was crucified. 28 c The 27. he rested in the Sepulcher. 26 d The 28. he
rose again from death. 30 e 31 f April has xxx. days.
1 g Noe uncovered the Arc. Gene. 8. 2 A The tabernacle was prepared by Moses.
Exodus 40. 3 b 4 c 5 d Jesus Christ the eight day after his resurrection
appeared again to the Apostles which were assembled, where S. Thomas was
present. 6 e 7 f 8 g 9 A 10 b The 10. the people of Israel went over Jorden
dry footed. Joshua. 3.4. 11 c 12 d The 13. Assuerus gave out proclamation to
put all the Jews within his kingdom to death. Hester. 3. 13 e 14 f 15 g The
14. was the celebration of the Passover. 16 A 17 b The 15. the people came out
of Egypt Exodus 22. 18 c 19 d The 18. the people went over the red sea dry
footed, and Pharao was drowned with all his host. 20 e 21 f 22 g The 22. the
people came to Mara, the waters whereof they could not drink. Exodus 5. 23 A 24
b 25 c Mark Evangelist. 26 d The 24. the revelation was made to Daniel of that
which should come to pass, from the time of the Kings of Persia, unto Christ,
and from thence until the end of the world. Dan. 10.11.12 27 e 28 f 29 g 30 A
May has xxxj. days.
1 b Philip and Jacob. 2 c 3 d The ascension of Christ into heaven forty
days after his resurrection. Mark. 6. 4 e 5 f 6 g God commanded Noe to carry
victuals into the Arc. Genesis 6. 7 A 8 b 9 c 10 d 11 e 12 f 13 g 14 A The 14.
Ezekias did first celebrate the Passover. Para. 30. 15 b 16 c The 15. the
children of Israel murmured after flesh, and God sent them plenty of Quails.
17 d 18 e 19 f This was the thirty day after the departure from Egypt. Exodus
16. 20 g 21 A The 16. day GOD made Manna to rain down. Exodus 16. 22 b 23 c The
17. Noe entered into the Arc. Genesis 17. 24 d 25 e The 20. The people departed
from mount Sina. Number. 9. 26 f 27 g The 22. fire from above consumed a part of
the host of Israel. Number. 11. 28 A 29 b 30 c 31 d June has xxx. days.
1 e This day the children of Israel came to mount Sina, and went thence the
third month, where they tarried almost a year. 2 f 3 g 4 A 5 b 6 c The 6, the
Temple of Diana in Ephesus was burned, the year before Christ 54. 7 d 8 e 9 f
10 g 11 A 12 b 13 c The 13. day of this month, king Assuerus gave out
proclamation in favor of the Jews against Haman and his conspiracy. Hest. 8.
14 d 15 e 16 f 17 g 18 A 19 b 20 c 21 d 22 e 23 f 24 g John Baptist. 25 A 26 b
The Ark of Noah was lifted up the seven and twenty day, by the waters of the
flood. Genesis 7. 27 c 28 d 29 e Peter the Apostle. 30 f Iulie has xxxj. days.
1 g 2 A 3 b 4 c 5 d 6 e The 6. day of this month, the Josias of our age,
EDWARD the sixth, king of England died. Anno. 1553. 7 f 8 g 9 A Dog days
begin. 10 b The 9. of this month the city of Jerusalem assieged by the
space of eighteen moan: h^, was finally taken by the king of Babylon. Iere.
39. 11 c 12 d 13 e 14 f 15 g About this time, the great Sweat began in
England. Anno. 1551. 16 A 17 b 18 c 19 d 20 e 21 f 22 g Marie Magdalen. 23 A 24
b 25 c James Apostle. 26 d 27 e As upon this day the Atheniens received a great
overthrow in Sicilia, of the Syracusians. 28 f 29 g 30 A 31 b August has
xxxj. days.
1 c Aaron died in the mountain of Hor being a 123. years old, 40. years
after the coming out of Egypt. Number. 20. and 33.38.39. 2 d 3 e 4 f 5 g 6 A 7 b
8 c 9 d 10 e The 10. the Temple of Jerusalem was set on fire by the soldiers
of Titus, and has not since been builded again. Josephus lib. 6. cap. 26. 11
f 12 g 13 A 14 b 15 c 16 d 17 e 18 f 19 g Dog days end. 20 A 21 b 22 c 23 d
24 e Bartholomew Apostle. 25 f 26 g 27 A Religion as on this day, was
reformed, according to Gods express truth in the most renoumed city of
Geneua. Anno. 1535. 28 b 29 c 30 d 31 e September has xxx. days.
1 f 2 g 3 A 4 b 5 c 6 d 7 e Our Sovereign Lady QVEENE ELIZABETH was borne as
upon this day, at Greenewich. Anno 1532. 8 f 9 g 10 A The 9. of this month,
Jerusalem was put to fire and sword, and wholly overthrown, as Christ foretold
them. Josephus lib. 7. cap. 26. 11 b 12 c 13 d 14 e Chrysostom being chased
out of his Church of Constantinople, as upon this day, dyed. 15 f 16 g 17 A 18
b 19 c 20 d 21 e S. Matthevve Apostle. 22 f 23 g 24 A 25 b The 25. Nehemias did
finish the repayring of the walls of Jerusalem, Anno 1444. before Christ.
Nehe. 6.15. 26 c 27 d 28 e 29 f S. Michael. 30 g October has xxxj. days.
1 A 2 b The Jews fasted and wept for Godolias. Iere. 41. and 42. 3 c 4 d 5 e
6 f 7 g 8 A 9 b 10 c The 10. day was the feast of reconciliation, which was the
only day that God ordained to fast. 11 d 12 e 13 f 14 g 15 A 16 b 17 c 18 d
Luke Evangelist. 19 e The 17. day, which was the 150. after the beginning of
the flood, the Arc rested upon the mountain Ararat in Armenia. Genesis 8. 20 f
21 g 22 A 23 b 24 c The 24. Titus gave forth 3000. Jews to the wild beasts.
Anno. 73. 25 d 26 e 27 f 28 g Simon and Jude. 29 A 30 b 31 c November has xxx.
days.
1 d All Saints. 2 e 3 f 4 g 5 A The 10. This day happened the woeful
slaughter of Varna, where Ladislaus king of Hungary was slain by the Turk,
Anno. 1444. Also as upon this day Martin Luther was borne. Anno 1483. 6 b 7 c 8
d 9 e 10 f 11 g 12 A 13 b 14 c 15 d The 15. day was the counterfeit feast by
Jeroboam, after he had withdrawn the ten tribes of Israel from the obedience
of Roboham their lawful king, the which he ordained in Dan, and Bethel, after
he had set up the golden calves, to the intent the people should go no more to
worship in Jerusalem. 1. Kings. 12. 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 b 21 c 22 d 23 e
24 f 25 g The 17. day of this month QVEENE ELIZABETH began^e her reign. 26 A
27 b 28 c 29 d 30 e Andrew Apostle. December has xxxj. days.
1 f 2 g 3 A 4 b 5 c The shortest day. 6 d 7 e 8 f 9 g 10 A 11 b 12 c The 15.
day the year before the Nativity of Christ 165. Antiochus the great set up
an Idol upon the altar of the Lord in Jerusalem. 1. Macha. 1. 13 d 14 e 15 f 16
g The 20. day, Esdras gave forth proclamation to the Israelites, to forsake
their strange wives that they had married, and to send them away. 1. Esdr. 9.
17 A 18 b 19 c 20 d 21 e Thomas Apostle. 22 f 23 g S. John Evangelist died in
Ephesus, being of the age of 89. years, under Trai^n 24 A 25 b The Nativity of
Christ. 26 c S. Stephen. 27 d S. John Evangelist. 28 e Innocents. 29 f the
Emperor, about 30. years after the destruction of Jerusalem. 30 g A

A rule to know when the Term begins and ends.
HIlarie Term begins the three and twenty of January, if it be not
Sunday: if it be, then the next day after, and ends the twelfth of February.

Easter Term begins seventeen days after Easter, and ends four days
after the Ascension.

Trinity Term begins the next day after Corpus Christi day, and ends the
wednesday fortnight after.

Michaelmas Term begins the ninth of October, if it be not Sunday and
ends the seven and twenty of November.

Eight days before any Term begin, the Exchequer opens, except Trinity
Term, which opens but 4. days before.

An Almanacke for 21. years.
The years of our Lord. Dominical let. Easter day. Whit sunday. Aduent
Sunday. 1578 E 30. Mar. 18. May. 30. Nouem. 1579 D 19. April. 7. June. 29. 1580
CB 3. 22. 27. 1581 A 26. Mar. 14. 3. December. 1582 G 15. April. 3. June. 2. 1583
F 31. Mar. 19. May. 1. 1584 ED 19. April. 7. June. 29. Nouem. 1585 C 11. 30.
May 28. 1586 B 3. 22. 27. 1587 A 16. 4. June. 3. December. 1588 GF 7. 26. May. 1.
1589 E 30. Mar. 18. 30. Nouem. 1590 D 19. April. 7. June. 29. 1591 C 4. 23.
May. 28. 1592 BA 26. Mar. 14. 3. December. 1593 G 15. April. 3. June. 2. 1594 F
31. Mar. 19. May. 1. 1595 E 20. April. 8. June. 30. Nouem. 1596 DC 11. 30. May.
28. 1597 B 27. Mar. 15. 27. 1598 A 16. April. 4. June. 3. December.

AN INTRODVCTION TO PRAYER.
FOR AS MVCH AS OF our selves we are destitute of all good things, and utterly
void of all necessary helps to salvation: the Lord our GOD of his own free
mercy and goodness, offers himself to us in Christ, and in him he gives unto
us, in the steed of our misery, all felicity, in the steed of our poverty,
the unspeakable riches of his grace: he opens unto us in him the treasures
of heaven, that our Faith might wholly behold him, and our Hope be fully fixed
upon him. In whom it has pleased him that the f^lnesse of his grace should
dwell, that from thence we might all draw (as out of a most plentiful
founteine) the waters of eternal life. This secret and great misery is
reueiled to such only, whose eyes the Lord has opened, to see light in his
light. Therefore since we are taught by Faith that whatsoever we have need of
and is wanting in us, the same is laid up with God for us in Christ: it
remains that we seek it in him, and with Prayer crave it of him. The Apostle
therefore, Romans 10.
to show that true faith cannot be separate from the invocation of Gods holy
name, has set this order, that as faith comes by the Gospel, so by the same
faith our hearts are stirred up to call upon the name of God: and therefore he
says, that the spirit of adoption, which seals in our hearts the witness
of the gospel, raises up our spirits that they dare with boldness show
forth their desires: it stirs up in us unspeakable groninges, and causes
us to cry with confidence: Abba Father. By the benifite of prayer therefore
we attain to those riches which God has laid up in store for us: for
thereby we have familiar access to God, and boldly entering into the
sanctuary of heaven, we put him in mind of his promises: so that now by
experience we feel and find that to be true in deed, which by the word we
did before but only believe: now we enjoy those treasures by prayer, which by
faith we did before but only behold in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus.

Now how necessary and profitable this exercise of prayer is, it appears,
in that the Lord himself witnesses our whole salvation to consist in the
calling upon his name, whereby he is wholly present, with us: namely by his
providence and fatherly care by the which he watches over us: by his power, by
the which he susteineth and succoureth our weakness, being every moment
ready to perish: and by his goodness and mercy, by the which he receives us
into favor, being miserably loade^ and pressed down with sin* And hereby
grows singular rest and quietness to our conscience. For when we have
disclosed to him our necessity, herein we find most joyful and perfect
quietness, that none of our evils are hidden from him, whom we are persuaded
to be both most willing and also most able to help us.

Now that our prayer may be made in such wise as it ought to be, first we must
see that we be in heart and mind no otherwise prepared, then becomes those
that enter into talk with God, as we are taught. Eccle. 18. Before thou pray,
prepare thy self, and be not as one that tempts God.

We must consider therefore when we pray, in whose presence we stand, to who^ we
speak, and what we desire. We stand in the presence of the almighty creator of
heaven and earth, and all things therein contained: to whose eternal majesty
innumerable thousands of Angels do assist, se^ue and obey We speak unto him,
who knows the secrets of our hearts: before whom nothing is more odious then
hypocrisy, and dissimulation. We ask those things which be most to his glory
and the comfort of our consciences. We must therefore diligen^ly endeavor our
selves to remove all such things as may offend his divine majesty. And
first, that we be free from al worldly cares and fleshly cogitations, whereby
our minds are carried hither and thither, and being drawn out of heaven, and
from the pure beholding of God, are pressed down to the earth.

And here let us call to mind how irreverently we abuse the great goodness of
God, calling us into familiar talk with him, when we have not that reverent
fear of his sacred majesty, that we would have of an earthly creature or a
worldly Prince: but suffering our hearts to be carried away with wandering
thoughts and worldly imaginations, are otherwise occupied, and forsake him in
the mids of our prayer.

As God is a spirit, so he will be worshipped in spirit and truth: that is, in
the inward affections of the heart, and with a true, faithful and unfeigned
kind of worship. And therefore as at all other times he requires the heart: so
specially in the time of prayer, when we show our selves in his presence, and
enter into communication with him: and thereupon when he promises to hear all
those that call upon him, he makes a restreint and says: that call upon him in
truth. Seeing therefore the chief duty of prayer consists in the heart, we
must with our whole heart pour out our prayers unto God the searcher of
hearts, and with a sincere, unfeigned, and ardent affection and opening of our
heart before God call upon him, or else we shall not find him.

Let us know therefore, that none prepare themselves rightly to prayer, but
such as have a reverend fear of Gods majesty, which they cannot have that
come not to it unburdened of earthly cares and affections. And thi^ is it that
is meant in the Scriptures by the lifting up of hands, that we should remember
our selves to be far off from God, unless we lift up our hearts and minds
also on high. An therefore it is said in the Psalm: Psalm. 25.
To thee have I lift up my soul. The Scripture uses also this manner of
speech, To lift up prayer: that they which desire to be heard of God, should not
have their minds carried away with earthly cogitations and vanities. And though
it be hard to be so bent to prayer, but that we shall find that many bie
thoughts will creep upon us to hinder our prayer: yet the more hard it is,
the more earnestly we must wrestle to overcome all lets and hindrances, and
labor with inward groninges unto the Lord, Psalm. 86.
that he will link our hearts fast unto him, and not suffer us to beledde
away from him, by the vain suggestions of Satan, who at al times compassing
us about, is never more busy, then when we address our selves to prayer,
secretly and subtly creeping into our breasts and calling us back from God,
so that oftentimes, when we with all reverence should speak to God, we find
our hearts, talking with the vanities of the world, or with the foolish
imaginations of our own hearts.

Finally we must be in christian charity, love, and concord with all men,
seeking unfeigned, hearty, and brotherly reconciliation, if we have offended any
man, before we enter into prayer, or else God will not hear our prayers: yea
they are otherwise execrable, and full of damnable hypocrisy in Gods sight.
And this that is spoken of prayer, may be said also of hearing of Gods word, or
any other service of God.

We must therefore lay aside all malice, envy, wrath, grudge, contention,
wrangling, dissimulation, all guilefull, crafty, and subtle dealing, and with
a single heart do to other, as we would they should do to us, 1. Pet. 2.
Peter wills, that such as have once tasted how good and bounteous the Lord
is, and are become new creatures by the heavenly regeneration, through the
doctrine of the Gospel, should like holy and innocent babes, lay aside all
such works of the flesh, which do deprive a man of the kingedome of God. Gal.
5.
And S. Paul commands us, that laying aside those cursed works of
darkness, we should in the stead thereof, put on (even as the elect of God,
holy and beloved) tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any have
a quarrel to another, as Christ forgave us: and above all these things, (says
he) put on love which is the bond of perfection, and let the peace of God
rule in your hearts. Mark. 11.
When ye shall stand and pray (says S. Mark,) forgive, if ye have any thing
against any man, that your father also which is in heaven, may forgive you
your trespasses: for if ye will not forgive, your father which is heaven
will not pardon you your trespasses.

Moreover we must have such a fe^ling of our own misery and wretchedness, as
may work in us an earnest sorrow and vexation of mind for the same. Example
whereof we may see in the dear servants of God, when they, say that out of
the deep deepenesse, and out of the mids of the jaws of death, they utter
unto the Lord a sorrowful voice. He that desires mercy, must have a feeling
of his own misery, And therefore says David: Heal my soul O lord, for I
have sinned against thee. Psalm. 41. Psalm. 38.
There is no health in my flesh (says he) because of thy displeasure, neither
is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin.

Thi^ anguish and sorrow, stirs up in Gods children a fervent desire to
obtain comfort, help, and succor at Gods hand, and therefore such as feel
themselves oppressed with great calamities, having by the help of man no hope
of deliverance, do cry unto God with afflicted hearts, as David did in his
distress* My soul thirsts for God, Psalm. 41.
even for the living God. And, as the Heart being vvounded, brayeth for the
rivers of water, so pants m^ soul after thee, O God.

This is that godly sorrow which S. Paul says, works in Gods children
repentance to salvation. 1. Cor. 7. Psalm. 34.
The Lord is nigh to them, says David, that are of a con^rue heart, and will
save all such as are afflicted in spirit. To him will I look, Psalm. 66.
even unto him (says the Lord) that is afflicted and broken hearted, and
trembles at my words. Therefore David calls the time of trouble, the fit
and convenient time for the faithful to fly unto God by prayer. And albeit
they be not at all times in like distress, or continually groaning under the
burden of present evils: yet must they needs be ever in dread of new dangers,
and carefully afraid of further troubles to follow. As trouble and fear
therefore are the very spurs to stir them up to hearty and fervent prayer: so
by occasion thereof, they have more free access unto God, as though he did
thereby call them unto him.

This godly sorrow for sin, and fervent desire and longing for Gods loving
mercy and favor, comes not of our selves* but of the special goodness of
God: for we are of our selves dull and without all lust to pray: yea, so great
is our imperfection, that we know not how to pray as we ought, and therefore
the spirit helps our infirmity, instructs us what is right, and guides
our affections. He makes intercession for the Saints (says S. Paul) according
to the will of God, and that with sighs and groninges which cannot be
expressed: that is, he stir^eth up our hearts, gives us a desire and
boldness to pray: and causes us to mourn when we are by any means
hindered from it, and feel not our selves moved thereunto with such fervent
zeal and affection as we should be.

Now although we know that it is the only work of the holy Ghost, thus to
move and incline our hearts to prayer, notwithstanding we may not be negligent
and slothful to dispose and stir up our selves thereunto, but rather
contrariewise, so often as we feel our selves, cold and not disposed to
prayer as we ought to be, we must make our supplication unto the Lord, that it
would please him to inflame us with his holy spirit, whereby we may be
framed to pray with such feruencie of mind, as we ought to do.

When we are cast down by the sense and feeling of our own infirmity, sin
and misery: Yet must we pray (notwithstanding) in sure and steadfast hope to
obtain our requests* These be things indeed contrary in show, to join with
the feeling of the just vengeance of God, sure affiance of favor: which
things do yet very well agree, in that it is the goodness of God only that
raises us up being oppressed with our own evils, from the which of our selves
we cannot rise. For as repentance and faith are knit as co^panion^ together,
(albeit the one drives us down with fear, and the other lifts us up again
with comfort) so in praying they must needs go together. And this agreement
David expresses in few words. Psalm. 5.
I will (says he) in the multitude of thy mercies enter into thy house, and
in the temple of thy holi^es, I will vvor^hippe thee with fear.

Therefore when we are once touched with true repentance and feeling of our own
misery, we must withal have such a persuasion of Gods favor and mercy
toward us in all our prayers, that they shall be accepted of God so far
forth as it shall be necessary for us. This is the assurance, says S. John,
1. John. 5*
that we have in God, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us. Jf we have not a sure trust and confidence in the mercy and
promises of God, it is impossible to make our prayer to him aright: and
whosoever doubts whether God hears his prayer, that man obteineth nothing:
for to such prayers, God has made no promise. But contrariewise he says,
What s^eye shall ask in prayeer, Matthew. ^^ Mark. 11.
if ye believe, ye shall receive it. And again: whatsoever ye desire, believe
that ye shall obtain it, and it shall be done unto you. Ask says Saint
James, in faith, and waver not, for he that vvauereth, is like to the waves
of the sea, James. 1.
which are tossed of the vvinde and carried away. And why should we waver or
doubt, seeing the holy scriptures testify of God, that he is faithful, just
and true in all his words and promises, saying: The Lord is faithful in all
his words, he will ever be mindful of his covenant: the tr^the of the
Lord indureth for ever?

And although our faith be not so strong, and therefore our prayer so hearty
and zealous as it ought to be, yea though our faith be faint and cold, yet let
us hold fast this principle, that our prayers are not frustrate or in vain.

For our comfort herein, we have an example in the father which brought his
son, first to the Apostles, and afterward to Christ, and said: Mark. 9.
If thou can Lord, help: and yet afterward he acknowledged the weakness
of his faith* and desired to be made strong. I believe Lord (says he) help
mine unbelief. How often do the children of God complain of this
imperfection and imbecillitie of faith? Such as are exercised in true prayer,
do feel, that in craving of God the forgiveness of their sins, they bring
scarcely the tenth part of that sacrifice which David speaks of, Psalm. 51.
where he says: An acceptable sacrifice to God, is a troubled spirit: a
broken and an humble heart, O God, thou vvilt not despise. Many times they are
driven to wrestle with their own dullness and coldenesse in prayer: many times
their minds slip aside and wander away in vanity: many times they feel not
their own lack and misery to prick them sharply enough to prayer: yea, and
many times they are so beaten down with the sense and feeling of their own
sin and misery, as though they were forsaken of God, and their faith utterly
extinguished.

In what horror and anguish of heart was David when he said unto the Lord:
Psalm. 8^.
Why do thou reject my soul? Why hidest thou thy face from me? And
again, Cease from me until I go away and be not. Psalm. 39.
Whereby it might seem, that he (like a desperate man) desires nothing else,
but that the hand of God ceasing, ^e might rot in his evils: but it is not so.
For he says it not, for that he would have God to depart from him, as the
reprobate do: but only he complains, that the wrath of God was too heavy
for him to bear. A hard temptation is it, when the faithful are compelled to
cry: Psalm. 80.
How long vvilt thou be angry against the prayers of thy servants as though
their very prayers made God more angry. So when Jeremy says, The Lord has
shut out my prayer: Lamen. 3.
no doubt, he was shaken with a vehement pang of temptation.

These are the imperfections of Gods children, which even in believing and
hoping do oftentimes utter, some unfaithfulness, and in the very remedies
fall into nevve diseases: for there is no prayer they make, which the Lord
would not worthily loath and abhor, if he should not wink at their spots and
imperfections. And such examples are common in the scriptures. Whereby we see,
that the Lord often times suffers his to be grievously tempted and
afflicted, and hides from them the comfort of his spirit, as though they were
clean forsaken, but to their great consolation in the end.

This is the schole wherein the wisdom of God nurtureth and tries her
children, as we may see Ecclesi. 4. First she will walk with them (says
he) by crooked vvayes, and bring them unto fear and dread, and torment them
with her discipline, until she have tried their souls, and have proved them
by her judgments: then will she return the straight way unto them, and
comfort them, and shevve them her secrets, and heap upon them the treasures
of knowledge and understanding of righteousness. Thus we see the state of
Gods children, that when the Lord has showed them what they are of themselves
by the sight and horror of their sins and terror of Gods judgment for the
same: then will he show them what they are in Christ, Esai. 54.
as Esai says. For a time, a little while I have forsaken thee, but I will
gather thee together in vvonderfull mercies. In a short time of wrath I hide
my face a while from thee, but I will have mercy on thee for ever, says the
Lord thy redeemer.

Such is the loving kindness and mercy of God toward the afflicted, when
they are sorry for their sins, lamenting and mourning in their hearts to be
delivered from the same, that they might serve God in the freedom of
conscience.

This is that mourning, this is that hunger and thirste that Christ speaks
of: Blessed are they that mourn, Matthew. 5
for they shall be comfort: blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness* for they shall be satisfied.

God for his truth sake, will put the righteousness of Christ on them, and
wash their unrighteousness away in his blood. The bruised Reed will he not
break, and the smoking flax will he not quench. Esai. 42.
The afflicted* the heavy and broken hearted, the vveake and feeble will he
not forsake: Yea, be they never so feeble and frail, yet so long as this
lust, desire and mourning to be delivered from their sin and misery,
remains in them, God sees not their sins, rekoneth them not, nor la^eth
them to their charge, for his true^hes sake and love to Christ. He is not a
sinner in the sight of God, that would be no sinner. He that would be
delivered, has his heart loosed already: his heart sins not, but mourns,
repen^eth, and conse^teth to the law and will of God, and justifies God, that
is, he bears record that God which made the law, is righteous and just: and
such an heart trusting in Christ's blood, in Christ's righteousness, is accepted
for righteous, and his weakness, infirmity and frailty is pardoned, and his
sins not looked upon, until God put more strength in him: the increase
whereof he shall daily feel in such sort, that at the length he shall in all
troubles be able to say with David: Psalm. 23.
If I should go through the shadovv and dangers of death, I will not fear
whatsoever happen.

Now to stir up our hearts in consideration of our great misery and
necessity to a more fervent prayer, the Lord himself has commanded us to
call upon him for help and succor. Therefore let us have the commandments
of God always in our sight touching prayer, and whiles we pray, let us call
them to our remembrance* Matthew. 7. Psalm. 40. Ephe. 6.
Ask, seek, knock, vvatch, and pray. Call upon me (says God) in the day of
thy troble. Pray alvvay with all manner of prayer and supplication, and vvatch
thereunto with all diligence. 1. Tim. 5.
Rejoice alvvaye, pray continually, in all things be thankful: for this is
the will of God in Christ Jesus toward you* Col. 4. Philip. 4.
Continue in prayer, and vvatch in the same with thanksgiving, Let your
requests be shevved unto God in prayer and supplication, with giving of
thanks.

And this we are also no less bound to do by the commandment, whereby we are
forbidden to take the name of God in vain. For in that we are there forbidden
to take the name of God in vain, we are commanded also to take and to use it
to his glory, giving unto him the praise of all goodness, help, and succor,
whiles we ask and look for the same at his hand. Wherefore except we fly unto
him in our trouble, and necessity, except we call upon him for relief and
soccour, we provoke his displeasure no less, then if we should make unto our
selves Idols, or worship strange gods: for in the contempt of every one of the
commandments, we show like contempt and disobedience to the will of God, and
all these sentences which command us to call upon God do apperteine unto his
commandment: Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, and
so prayer is a work and chief service belonging to this commandment. We may
not therefore think that there are no sins but Idolatry, murder, theft,
whoredom, and such like, but that it is undoubtedly a great sin also, not to
render this service to God, that is, not to pray, not to ask, not to look for
help from God in our necessities not to render thanks for the benefits we
have received.

Therefore if our unworthiness at any time do cry out against us, stop or
fear us, in such sort, that our consciences are astonished and flee from God: if
we doubt whether God has respect to our prayers, gronings, and tears, we
must set before our eyes, how that we are commanded, though we be never so
unworthy and our sins never so many and great, to pray for reconciliation,
Gods favor and forgiveness of our sins. For else, whereas God commands us
to abstain from theft, murder, whoredom, etc. we may in like sort excuse our
selves and say, that we are unworthy to obey Gods commandments. Great is our
iniquity, and manifest is our contempt and despising of God, when we neglect
and delay to call for his help. Such as flee unto God therefore and call upon
him in their necessities, obey his will, and find therein no small consolation,
knowing that thereby they do unto him most acceptable service, for as much as
he pronou^ceth y^ nothing is to him more acceptable, the^ obedience to his will
and commandment

As we are commanded of God boldly and without all respect of our own
unworthiness to come unto him as a merciful father, and one that knows our
necessity, and pittieth out misery: so has he promised very graciously to
hear us, and grant our requests. And hereof rises yet a far more
comfortable and greater consolation: wherein consists our whole confidence and
trust of obteining succor and mercy at Goods hand. Wherefore he allureth us
w^^h many sweet promises to call upon him. Matthew. 7.
Ask, says he, and ye shall have: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you. Ye shall cry unto me, Jere. 25.
and I will hear you: ye shall seek me and ye shall find me. Psalm. 50.
Psalm. 145.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. The Lord is nigh
to all them that call upon him, that call upon him in truth: he does the
will of them that fear him, and he will hear their prayers. He shall call
upon me, Psalm. 91.
and I will hear him: I will be with him in his trouble, I will deliver
him and glorify him. Esai. 65.
At the voice of thy cry he will ^rtainelie have mercy on thee, when he
hears thee, he will answer thee. He that is Lord over all, Romans 8.
is rich and bountiful toward them that call upon him. Psalm. 145.
He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he will hear their cry,
and will save them. And God to declare his readiness in hearing of sinners,
Esai. 6^.
says: Before they cry I will answer, and vvhiles they are yet thinking
what to speak, I will hear.

Among many sweet promises of GOD, though these might be sufficient to provoke
us to fervent and hearty prayer, yet there be certain other notable and most
comfortable promises, which we should specially have in remembrance, Luke 11.
as these: If ye which are evil, can give good gifts to your children, how
much more shall your heavenly father give the holy ghost to them that desire
him? Ecclus. 2
Consider the old generation* and mark them well: was there ever any
confounded that put his trust in the Lord? or who has continued in his fear
and was forsaken? or whom did he ever despise that called upon him? And of
all other that is the most notable, which by the Prophet Joel is added
immediately after the prophecy of that horrible destruction that was at hand,
saying: whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

HERE let us consider the order of the promises, which perteine either
outwardly to the body, or inwardly to the soul. Which part (the soul I
mean) because it is much more precious then the other, we must first crave
such things as properly belong to the salvation thereof. But first of all
confessing our sins unto God with most humble and penitent hearts, let us
set before us the promises of remission of the same. For this sentence is true:
God hears no sinners, that is, such as delight and continue in sin. Wherefore
in all our prayers, yea, when we be about to ask any other things, whatsoever
they be, let us first think of the remission of sins, 1. John. ^.
having always in our sight some comfortable promises thereof, as this: If we
confess and acknovvledge our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive
our offenses, and to cleanse us from all iniquity. And hereunto let us crave
the light of the holy ghost, to kindle and confirm in us the true knowledge of
God. Let us pray for the continuance of Gods holy word and Gospel amongst
us, for the enlarging of his kingdom, and the aduauncing of his glory. Let us
beg the gift of faith, repentance, fear, patience, prayer, hope, love, joy,
peace of conscience, with such other fruits of the spirit, and for
everlasting life.

And here also we must remember that we do not only call our selves
continually to account for our new sins, craving at Gods hand, mercy and
forgiveness of the same, but also for those sins which might seem to have
been long ago forgotten: Psalm. 51.
as David having confessed an heinous offense, by that occasion returns even
to his mothers womb, wherein he had gathered the infection, heaping together
the sins of his whole life. Even so in an other place when he asks an other
thing, Psalm. 25.
he says: Remember not he sins of my youth: remember me according to thy
mercy, for thy goodness sake, O Lord. Again, look upon mine affliction and
travel, and forgive all my sins.

When we have thus prayed for things pertaining to the soul and to the
kingdom of God, we must pray also for corporal benefits, as well common as
private: as peace and tranquillity of those countries which give harborough to
the true professors of the gospel and godly congregations, being in this life
as Daniel in the midds of the lions. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.
says David. Also for defense from misery, deliverance from trouble, for
happy success in the works of our vocation, for health, living, protection
of life, goods, name, etc.

And although the Lord knows before we ask what we have need of, and is
ready to give liberally, yea and does give often times undesired: and
furthermore has promised, that seeking first the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof, all other things should be given us: yet he commands
us to ask corporal benefits, and that for three causes.

FIRST, that we should know that he is the author and giver thereof, and
therefore should not only be thankful for the same, but also stirred up,
thereby to seek, love, and worship him. SECONDLY, that we should be well
persuaded of his good providence toward us, Iosu. 1.
when we understand that he does not only promise that he will never fail
us, but also has his hand always stretched out to help them that call upon
him. THIRDLY, that our faith of reconciliatio^ and forgiveness of sins, should
be exercised through the asking of those corporal things.
And herein we must specially and above all things seek the glory of God, and
therefore we must pray for these corporal things in such sort, that we may
offer therewith our obedience unto God. Hereof we have examples of Christ when
he said: father, if it be possible, let this c^p pass from me: nevertheless,
not as I will, but as thou vvilt. With this obedience to the will of God spoke
David, when he desired to be brought again into his kingdom, saying: If I
shall find favor in the sight of the Lord, 2. Reg, 15
he will bring me again: but if he shall say unto me, thou do not please
me: I am ready: let him do as it seems him good. Job* 3.
And Job says: though he kill me, yet vvil I put my trust in him.

Therefore for as much as we do know that it is the lotte of Gods children to
be always under the cross, and therefore concerning these corporal benefits,
we know not how, or what to ask as we ought: we must herein offer our
obedience unto GOD, abiding his good will and pleasure so long as it shall
seem good unto him to exercise us in the want thereof, who suffers us sometime
to be afflicted for our chastisement, and for the probation of our continuance,
and also that we may receive with greater gladness (if to his divine wisdom
it seem expedient for us) that which with ardent desire we long looked for. 1.
Cor. 15
S. Paul says, When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because
we should not be condemeed with the world. But when we pray for spiritual
things, we must ask them absolutely and without condition: for thereunto do
perteine the chief promises of the Gospel, of the which God would have us
most assured. John. 6.
Verily, verily, I say unto you (says Christ) he that believes in me, Eze.
33.
has everlasting life. As sure as I live (says the Lord) I will not the
death of a sinner, but that he return and live.

To the promises of God we must join examples, whereby we learn that God
has heard and helped those that call upon him. For all deliverances, whether
they be of other (whereof the scripture is full) or of our selves (whereof we
have experience) are examples of Gods promises. Hereby did David comfort
himself in the anguish and heaviness of his heart, Psalm. 77.
saying: I will remember the works of the Lord, and call to mind thy
wonders of old time. Thou have mightily delivered thy people, even the sons
of Jacob and Joseph. Again, Psalm. 31.
I vvil be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have seen my trouble, thou
have known my soul in adversity. And thus being warned both by promises and
examples, let us learn to cast our care upon the Lord, to call upon him, and
to look for help at his hand: So shall our faith by little and little be more
firm and certain, and our heart shall rest in hope and expectation of Gods
help.

But for as much as of our selves we are unworthy to appear in Gods sight,
whose terrible majesty coming once into our mind, it is impossible, but that
we should fly from him as a fearful judge: therefore he has given unto us
a mediator, even our Lord jesus, that he being a mean between GOD and us,
might change the throne of dreadful glory into the throne of grace, and that
we by his merits having access unto God, might have assured trust to find
grace in his sight. 1. Ioh. 2.
If any man sin, says S. John, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus
Christ the just, and he is the Reconciliation for our sins. To him says S.
Peter, bear all the Prophets witness, Acts. 10
that through his name all that believe in him, shall receive forgiveness of
their sins. Ephe. 5.
By whom says S. Paul, we have boldness and entrance in all confidence
through faith in him. Heb. 4.
And again, We have not an high Priest which can not have compassion on
our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, sin
execpted: let us go boldly therefore unto the throne of his grace, that we
may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need.

And as we are commanded to call upon God, and have a promise also to be
heard: even so we are commanded to make our prayers unto him in the name,
faith, and confidence of this our mediator, and we have no promise to be
heard without him: in whom are all the promises of God, yea, and Amen, 2. Cor.
1. Luke 11.
confirmed and fulfilled. And no man comes to the father, but by the son.
For he is our mouth whereby we speak to the father, he is our eye whereby
we see the father, and he is our right hand whereby we offer our selves to
the Father. Whatsoever therefore we ask in his name, we have a promise to
obtain it. John. 16.
Verily, verily (says Christ) I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the
father in my name, he shall give it you: in my name, that is, for my sake: your
high bishop praying for you. Hitherto ye have not asked any thing in my name:
Ioh. 14
ask and ye shall receive. In that day ye shall ask in my name, and
whatsoever ye ask, I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.

Of prayer there be two parts, Petition, and thanksgiving. By petition we
pour forth our desires before God, requiring first those things that may set
forth his glory, and then such benefits as are profitable and necessary for
us. By giving of thanks, we praise and magnify his benefits bestowed upon us,
acknowledging that whatsoever good things we enioie, we have received them of
his free goodness and liberality. Therefore David joins these two parts
together in one verse, when he says: Call upon me in the day of necessity:
Psalm. 5
I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me

The scripture commands us to use both, and that continually. For our
necessity is so great, our life is so full of troubles and calamities, and so
many dangers hang over our heads every moment, that we have all cause
enough, yea even the most holy with sighs and groninges continually to fly
unto God, and to call upon him in most humble wise. But this we may better
perceive in things pertaining to the soul.

For when shall so many great sins, whereof we know our selves guilty,
suffer us to be without care and not to crave pardon of GOD for the same? when
will satan give us reast and quietness? when will he cease to range about,
seeking whom he may destroy? when shall our tentations give vstruce, so that
we shall not need to hasten unto GOD for help? Finally, the desire of the
kingdom and glory of God ought so to draw us wholly unto it, not by fits, but
continually, that all times should be fit and convenient for us to pray.
Wherefore, not without cause we are so often commanded to pray continually.
And though we be not driven with like necessity at al times to pray, yet in
this case S. James teaches us what we ought to do. Is any man heavy or
afflicted, says he? Let him pray, that i^, let him crave of God help and
comfort: and who so is merry, let him sing, that is, let him praise God.

Moreover the benefits and blessings of God, are large and plentiful toward
us, which way so ever we turn us, that we can never want matter and occasion
of praise and thanksgiving. And seeing we ought to acknowledge God to be the
author and giver of all good things* we should always receive the same at his
hand with thanksgiving* for to that end God continually bestows his good
blessings and benefits upon us, that we should continually show forth his
praise, and be thankful unto him for the same, and so we render v^^o him his
due honor. And S. Paul, when he says, that they are sanctified by the word
and prayer, signifies, that to us they are not holy and clean without the
word and prayer; and therefore David says, when he had felt the liberality of
the Lord, that there was put into his mouth a new song* that is, a new
occasion of praise and thanksgiving. Whereby he signifies, that it is a wicked
silence, if we pass over any of Gods benefits without praise* seeing that as
of^e^ as he does good unto us, so often he gives us occasion to speak good of
him. We should therefore continually, that is, as much as is possible, at all
times, in all places, and in all things, as occasions are continually offered
unto us, lift up our prayer unto God in craving help at his hand, and
confessing his praise, whereby we may both obtain of him all good things, and
also praise and magnify his name for all.

How this perseverance in prayer is required of us, Christ himself teaches us
by the parable of the three loaves, and of the widow, Lu. 11.18
and wicked Judge: wherebie we are taught to continue in prayer, with all
earnestness and fervent supplication, and never to faint or give over, until
we be assured in our spirit, that our prayer is heard.

The prayer of the humble, (says the son of Sirach) goes through the
clouds: Eccle. 35
it cease not until it come near, and it will not depart until the most
high God have respect thereunto. Behold says David, Psalm. 123.
as the eyes of the servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as the
eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress: so our eyes wait upon the
Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. And thus must we not cease to
do, until we may boldly say also with David: The Lord has heard the vo^ce
of my weeping, the Lord has heard my humble petition, the Lord has
received my prayer.

Now, concerning the form and manner of praying, least we should follow
our own fantasy, being of our selves so blind that we know not how to pray,
or what is meet and expedient for us, the Lord himself has sufficiently
instructed us: Who as he has taught us, throughout the whole scripture, how
and for what things we ought to pray: so has he set forth one manner of
prayer, in the which he has briefly comprehended all such things as we
ought, yea or in any wise may ask of God. Wherein he has expressed what is
due, pleasing and acceptable to him, what is necessary for us, and what he
will grant: so that there is nothing herein omitted, that might be thought
upon, to the praise and glory of GOD, or come into the mind of man for his
profit and commodity. And this is that prayer that our Lord Jesus Christ
taught his Disciples: Matthew. 9. Luke. 11.
when they asked of him how they should pray.

Whosoever therefore shall ask any thing that is not contained in this prayer,
they presume to add some thing of their own to the wisdom of God, they are
not obedient to his will: and they pray without faith, having no word of God
to warrante them, and therefore they shall obtain nothing. This prayer, says
Tertullian, is the doctrine of the wisdom of God, wherein he has taught
whatsoever he willed, and willed whatsoever was needful. Albeit we are not
so bound to this form of prayer, that we should not use any other kind of
words then the Lord himself herein has used. For there are elsewhere set
forth in the scriptures, many prayers far differing from this in words, and
yet written by the same spirit, and very profitable to be used of us. And
many prayers also are continually uttered of the faithful by the same spirit,
which vary from the same in words. But this is required of us, that none
should look for, seek, or ask any other thing at all, then that which is
briefly comprehended in this praye^; and which, though it differ in words,
yet differs not in sense and substance: like as it is certain that all the
prayers which are found in the scriptures, and which do continually proceed
from the hearts of the faithful, are referred by the direction of Gods spirit
unto this prayer, howsoever they differ in the variety of words.

Many good and godly men, even in our days well exercised in prayer, have left
unto us most worthy examples and testimonies hereof, furnished with ample and
large matter to form holy and true prayer, and full of power to inflame the
heart to a fervent invocation of Gods holy name: whereof we have given here
some taste unto the godly, and especially to the simple, not yet well exercised.

Read them, meditate, and pray, and ye shall find comfort in your souls. A
Meditation concerning Prayer.
THE MIND OF man has so large roomthe to receive good things, that nothing
in deed can fully fill it, but only God, whom then the mind fully possesses,
when it fully knows him, fully loves him, and in all things is framed after
his will. They therefore (dear Lord God) that are thy children, and have
tasted somewhat of thy goodness, do perpetually sigh, that is, do pray
until they come thereto: and in that they love thee also above all things, it
wonderfully wounds them, that other men do not so, that is, love thee, and
seek for thee with them.

Whereof it comes to pass, that they are inflamed with continual prayers
and desires, that thy kingdom might come every where, and thy goodness might
be both known, and in life expressed of every man.

And because there are innumerable many things, which as well in them selves,
as in others, be against thy glory, they are kindled with continual prayer
and desire, sighing unspeakably in thy sight, for the increase of thy spirit.
And sometimes, when they see thy glory more put back, then it was wont to be,
either in them selves, or in any other, then are they much more disquieted and
vexed.

But because they know, that thou do rule all things after thy good will,
and that none other can help them in their need, they oftentimes do go aside,
all business laid apart, and give them selves to godly cogitations and talk
with thee, complaining to thee, as to their father, of those things that
grieve them, begging thereto, and that most earnestly, thy help, not only for
them selves, but also for others, specially for those whom singularly they
embrace in thee, and often do repeat and remember thy gracious benefits both
to others, and to them selves also: wherethrough they are provoked to render to
thee hearty thanks, thereby being inflamed, as well-assuredly to hope well of
thy good will toward them, and patiently to bear al evils as also to study
and labor to mortify the affections of the flesh, and to order all their
whole life to the service of their brethren, and to the setting forth of thy
glory.

This they know is that prayer, which thy son Jesus Christ our Lord
commanded to be made to thee in ye chamber, the door being shut. In this kind
of prayer he him self did watch often, even all the whole night. Herein was
Paul frequent as all thy Saints be. This kind of prayer, is the true lifting
up of the mind to thee. This stands in the affections of the heart, not in
words and in the mouth. As thy children be endued with thy spirit, so frequent
they this talk with thee. The more thy spirit is in them, the more are they
in talk with thee. Oh give me plentifully thy spirit, which thou have
promised to pour out upon all flesh, that thus I may with thy Saints talk
with thee night and day, for thy only beloved sons sake, Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Moreover, thy Saints, to provoke them to this kind of prayer, do use first
their necessity, which they consider in three sorts: inwardly, concerning
their souls: outwardly, concerning their bodies: and finally concerning their
name and fame: whereto they add the necessity of those that be committed to
them: the necessity of thy Church, and of the Common weal.

Secondly, they use thy commandments, which require them under pain of sin,
to pray to thee in all their need.

Thirdly, they use the consideration of thy goodness, which art naturally
merciful to young Ravens calling upon thee, much more then to them, for whom
Ravens and all things else were made: for whom thou have not spared thy dear
son, but given him, etc.

Fourthly, they use thy most sweet and free premises, made to hear; and help
all them that call upon thee in Christ's name.

Fifthly, they use examples, how that thou which art the God of all, and rich
unto all them that call upon thee in Christ's name, have heard and helped
others calling upon thee.

Sixthly, they use the benefits given them before they asked, thereby not only
provoking them to ask more, but also certifying their faith, that if thou wast
so good to grant them many things unasked, now thou will not deny them any
thing they ask, to thy glory and their weal.

Last of all, they use the reading and waying of Psalms and other good
prayers, because they know that thereby peculiarly, besides the other
Scriptures, there is no small help: as may appear by Paul, Ephesians. 5. Col. 3.
where he wills the congregation to use Psalms, hymns, and spiritual
songs, but so, that in the heart we would sing and say them. Not that thy
children do not use their tongues and words in praying to thee: for they do
use their tongues, speech, and words, to stir up their inward desire and
feruencie of ye mind, full well knowing, that else it were a plain mocking of
thee, to pray with lips and tongues only. Oh that I might feel now thy
spirit so to affect me, that both with heart and mouth, I might heartily and
in faith pray unto thee.

Now concerning the things that are to be prayed for, thy children know, that
the prayer taught by thy son, most lively and plainly does contain the
same, and therefore they often use it, first asking of thee their heavenly
father, through Christ, that thy name might every where be had in holiness and
praise: then, that thy kingdom by regeneration and the ministry of the
gospel might come: and so thirdly, that willingly, perfectly, and perpetually,
they might study to do, yea do in deed, thy will with thy holy and
heavenly Angels, and spirits. These things they seek and pray for, namely thy
kingdom and thy righteousness, before and worldly benefit.

After which petitions, because all things, yea even the benefits of this
present life do come from thee, they do godly desire the same under the name
of daily bread, being instructed of thy wisdom, that after spiritual
benefits to ask corporal, is not unseemly unto thy children, which know
both spiritual and corporal to come from thy mercy.

In the other petitions they pray for things to be taken from them, beginning
with forgiveness of sins: which were impudently prayed for, if that their
hearts were not so broken, that they could forgive all things to al men for
their part. They add their profession, that is, charity, whereby they
profess, that they have forgiven all offenses done to them.

Howbeit, because it is not enough to have pardon of that which is past, except
they be preserved from new offenses, they pray thee, not to lead them into
temptation, by permitting them to the perverse suggestions of Satan, but
rather to deliver them from his importunity and power: understanding Satan
the author of all evil. Oh (dear God) that thou would endue me with thy
spirit of grace and prayer with thy children accordingly, to make this prayer
always when so ever I do pray.

As for outward evils, so long as they do not (as it were) enforce thy people
to sin, in that christian perfection does account them amongst thy
benefits: thy Son has not taught thy Church to pray for the taking away of
them in this prayer: for here he has contained but those things, for the which
all Christians generally and particularly may of faith pray at all times.

It often comes to pass, that exterior evils, because they be not evils in
deed, that is, they be not against Gods grace in us, therefore they cannot of
faith be prayed for, to be taken away: for thy children that have faith, do
always prefer thy judgment, before their own. The which judgment, when
they know by that which happens to them, they submit them selves thereto wholly:
although ye spirit make his unspeakable gronings to help their infirmities by
prayer, not to have them taken away, but that they might have strength and
patience to bear the burden accordingly. Which burden, if it be too heavy in
the better sense and feeling thereof, they in their prayers do complain
something, rather then pray to have it taken away, as our Savior did in ye
garden, when he added to his complaint: Not my will, but thy will be done.

So do thy people in all their complaints add, Not as we will, but as thou will: for they are taught by thy spirit, no otherwise to pray for the taking
away of corporal evils, either from them selves, or from others, unless they
by the same spirit do certainly see the same to make to thy glory: as did
thine Apostles and servants, when absolutely and without condition they did
ask health or miracle for any, when they healed or raised the dead by prayer:
for they knew, nothing can be better then when it is according to thy will. Oh
that I might always know thy will in all things, and for ever apply my self
thereto.

Hereof it comes that thy saints and dear children, which love their
neighbors as them selves, do yet notwithstanding, in their prayers ask
vengeance of some (as we may read in the Psalms of David) because in praying
and talking with thee, they see by thy holy spirit (for without it is no true
prayer) sometimes thy judgments upon some, which they perceive to sin to
death, and therefore ought not to be prayed for: because thy glory can not be
set forth as it should be, without their destruction.

Thy will is always best, and the thing whereto they frame all their desires.
Therefore, when they perceive that it is decreed with thee, such and such by
their destruction to set forth more mightily thy glory, how should they but
desire and pray for the same, and write it as David has done, that the godly
in reading and waying such prayers, might receive comfort, and the ungodly be
afraid: else, when that they perceive not so manifestly the determined
judgment of God, they in their prayers do most heartily pray for them, as
Samuel did for Saul, Moses for the Israelites, and Abraham for the Sodomites,
Oh good father, for thy mercies sake, give me the true love of mankind, but
yet so, that I may love man for thee, and in thee, and always prefer thy
glory above all things, through Christ our Lord.

Now though thy children do know that thy will can not but be done, and
nothing can be done, but that thou of thine own will have determined to do,
although no man should desire the same, yet are they earnest and frequent in
prayer: first to render obedience to thee, which requirest prayer as a
spiritual service to thee: secondly, because thou have ordained prayer to be
as an instrument and mean, by the which thou workest things with thee
already decreed and determined.

Thy children do use prayer to offer thee their service, if it shall please
thee to use the same: and as they do eat and drink, which is a mean
ordained of thee for the conservation of their life, not looking hereby to
lengthen their days above their bounds, which already thou have appointed,
but as becomes them, to use thy means, which thou have ordained to serve thy
providence: so do they (as men herein not curious to know thy providence
further then thou reuealest it) use prayer as a mean by the which thou art
accustomed to work many of thy childrens desire, that according to thy good
will, thou may use the same.

They do not think a mutabilitie in thee (for thou art GOD, and art not
changed, with thee there is no variableness,) and therefore they pray, not as
men which would have thy determinations and ordinances, (which are in most
wisdom, and mercy) to be altered, but rather that they might submit their
wills to thine, and make them more able to hear thy will and pleasure.

They know thou have promised to help them calling upon thee: wherefore they
dout not, but so thou will do, and therefore pray accordingly.

They love thee heartily, and therefore they can not but desire much to talk
with thee, that is, to pray: even as a well manered and loving wife will not
take upon her to ask any thing of her husband at all, but that she hops he
will take in good part, and do of his own freewill, although she had spoken
nothing thereof.

When she knows what her husbands will is in things, she gladly talks with
him thereof, and according as she sees he is disposed to do, she will often
desire him to do it. Even so thy children (I say) which heartily love thee, in
that they know thy wisdom and will is best, how can they but often talk
with thee, and desire thee to do that which they know is best, which they know
also thou would do, if none should ask or pray for the same?

Thy children use prayer, as a mean, by the which they see plainly thy power,
thy presence, thy providence, mercy and goodness toward them, in granting
their petitions, and by prayer they are confirmed of them all. Yea thy children
use prayer, to admonish them, how that all things are in thy hands. In prayer
they are (as it were) of thee put in mind of those things which they have
done against thee, their good Lord. By reason whereof repentance en^ueth, and
they conceive a purpose to live more purely ever afterward, and more heartily
to apply them selves to al innocence and goodness.

Who now considering so many great commodities to come by reason of prayer,
would marvel, why thy children are much in prayer, and in laboring to provoke
others thereunto? For as none that is a suter to any other, will use any thing
which might offend or hinder his suit: so no man that uses prayer, will flatter
him self in any thing that should displease thee, to whom by prayer he moves
suit, whenever he prays: so that nothing is a more provocation to all kind
of godliness then prayer is.

As concerning outward things which thy children pray for, although they know
thy will and decree is not variable, and thy purpose must needs come to pass,
yet do they receive by their prayer no small commodity. For, either they
obtain their requests or not. If they do obtain them, then prove they by
experience that thou do the will of them that fear thee, and so they are
more kindled to love and serve thee. And in deed for this purpose thou art
wont, when thou will do good to any, to stir up their minds to desire the
same good of thee, to the end that both thou and thy gifts may be so much the
more magnified and set by of them, by how much they have been earnest suitors
and petitioners for the same. For how can it but inflame them with love
toward thee, to perceive and feel thee so to care for them, hear them, and
love them?

If they do not obtain that they pray fort, yet undoubtedly they receive
great comfort, to see that the evils which press them, and whereof they
complain still, do not oppress and overcome them, and therefore they receive
strength to bear the same the better. O good father help me, that I might
heartily love thee, complain to thee in all my needs, and always by prayer
to pour out my heart before thee. Amen.

John Bradford.

A meditation upon the Lords prayer.
Our Father.
Exodus 1.
THou good Lord which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is therein,
together with thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, and with thy holy
spirit, thou the same God which openest thy self to Adam by thy promise: Genesis
3. Genesis 12.22.23.24.25. Exodus 13.14.15. Exodus 19.20.
thou the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob* yt which broughtest thy people of
Israel forth of Egypt with a mighty hand, and a stretched out power: thou
which gave thy law upon Mount Sinai: thou which spakest by thy Prophets,
Heb. 1.
and last of all in these latter days, by thy dearly beloved son Jesus
Christ, whom thou would should be made a second Adam, 1. Cor. 15 Romans 5.
that as by the first* we are Children of wrath, carnal, and full of
concupiscence: so by him we might be made children of grace, and spiritual, by
communicating with him the quality, merits, virtues, and grace of his flesh,
through the operation of his holy spirit, as he communicated with us ye
substance of our flesh, in the womb of the Virgin Marie, in the operation of
the same holy spirit, Matthew. 1. Luke 1.
being that blessed seed which was promised to Adam, Genesis 3.12 26.28. Psalm.
89.2. Reg. 7. Luke 1. Psalm. 110.
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and David, which should bruise the Serpents head,
which should bring the blessing on all nations, which should reign over thy
house for ever, and mightily overcome thine and our enemies, as indeed he did
by his incarnation, nativity, circumcision, exile, baptism, fasting,
temptation, doctrine, miracles, workings, agonies, bloody prayer, passion,
death, resurrection, and ascension, Romans 8.
and yet he still does by his meditation and intercession for us, Matthew. 24
and at the length will on all parts fully accomplish by his coming to
judgment, which will be soudenly in the twinkling of an eye, 1. Cor. 15.
in the blast of a trumpet, and shoute of an Archangel, 1. These. 4.1 2. Cor. 5.
Exodus 32.33. Psalm. 5. Joel 2. Psalm. 15. Genesis 6.
when he shall be seen with thousands of Saints, and innumerable thousands
of Angels, all the whole world being on fire, and all the people yt ever were,
are, or shall be, then standing before his tribunal or judgment seat, to
render an account of that they have done in this body, be it good or bad: Thou
(I say) this God which art holy, righteous, true, wise, pure, chaste, mighty,
merciful, good, gracious, a hater of sin, and a revenger of unrighteousness,
etc. Our heart is by nature so corrupt and vnsearchably evil, that out of it
springs all wicked concupiscence, so that the inclination thereof is prone to
evil, even from our birth up: and our mind and understanding is so darkened that
of our selves we cannot perceive those things that be of god as is all the
wisdom which we receive from Adam naturally, or otherwise attain by labor or
study before regeneration.
would that I which am borne in sin, and conceived in iniquity, which by
nature am a child of wrath, and in whom dwells continual enimitie against
thee: that I which am nothing but sin, and one that does evil always before
thee, should call thee and believe thee, this God and Father of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, to be in very deed my father: that is, thou would I
should be most assured, that thou of thine own good will which thou barest to
me wards before I was, yea before the world was, have in Christ chosen me to
be thy child, and through him art become my most loving Father, from whom I
should look for all good things, and be most certainly persuaded that look
how much thou art more then a man, so much thy love and fatherly providence
toward me, passes the love and providence of any father toward his child,
in loving me, caring how to help me, providing for me, nurturing me, and
helping me in all my needs. So certain thou would have me to be of this,
that to doubt of it does most displease thee and dishonor thee, as though
either thou were not true, or not able to do these things, or else becamest
not my father in respect of thine own goodness in Christ only, but also in
respect of my worthiness and deserts.

And that I should not waver or doubt of this, Causes to comfort our faith,
that God ^s our father.
that thou art my dear Father, and I thy child for ever, through Jesus
Christ, it is required in the first commandment, which says: I am the Lord
thy God, you shall have none other Gods but me.

Again, thy son does here command me to call thee by the name of father.
Moreover, in the first article of my belief, I profess the same, in saying: I
believe in God the Father almighty. Besides this, there are many other things
to confirm me herein, as the creation and government of the world generally,
and of every creature particularly, for all is made and kept for man, and so
for me, to serve me for my commodity, necessity, and admonition. Again, the
creation of me, in that thou have made me after thy Image, having a reasonable
soul, body, shape, etc. where thou might have made me a toade, a Serpent, a
Swine, deformed, frantike, etc. Moreover, thy wonderful conservation,
nourishing and keeping of me hitherto in my infansie, childhood, youth, etc.
all these (I say) should confirm my faith of thy fatherly love.

But of all things, the opening of thy self by thy word and promise of grace
made after man's fall, first to Adam, then to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and so to
other, being published by the Prophets from time to time, and last of all
accomplished by thy dear Son Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 1.
in whom thy promises are yea and Amen: the opening of thy self thus (I say)
in and by Christ, is the most chief and sure certificate, that thou art my
father for his sake, and I thy dear child, although of my self I am most
unworthy. For thou according to thy promises, John 3. Ephe. 5.
have not spared thy dear son Jesus Christ, but given him to the death of
the Cross for my sins. Thou would he should be made flesh of our flesh,
and blood of our blood, in the womb of the Uirgin Marie, by the operation of
thy holy spirit, that we by the working of the same spirit, through the
merits of his flesh and blood, might be made flesh of his flesh, and blood of
his blood: that is, as he has the substance of our flesh and blood: even so
we might have and for ever enjoy in him and through him, the qualities,
virtues, and gifts of righteousness, holiness, innocence, immortality, and
glory, wherewith he has endued our nature in his own person for us all, that
as now in faith and hope we have the same, so in his coming, we might fully
enjoy them in very deed: for then shall our bodies now vile, Phil. 3^
be like to his glorious body.

Herein appears thy love, 1. John 3.
not that we loved thee, but that thou louedst us, and have given thy Son for
us. Herein do thou commend unto us thy love, that when we were yet sinners,
Christ thy dear son dyed for us, so that nothing should separate us from
thy love in Christ Jesus, Romans 5.
neither affliction, anguish, persecution, famine, neither life nor death, Romans
8. Romans 5.
etc. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled unto thee by the death of
thy son, much more we being reconciled, shall be saved by his life.

And that I should not doubt hereof, but certainly be persuaded all this to
pertain to me, where I might have been borne of Turks and Infidels, lo thou
would I should be borne of Christian Parents, brought into thy Church by
Baptism, What Baptism is, and what it requires
which is a Sacrament of adoption, and requires faith as well of remission of
my sins, as of sanctification and holiness, to be wrought of thee in me by
thy grace and holy spirit.

Where I might have been borne in an ignorant time and Region, thou would I
should be borne in this time and Region, wherein is more knowledge revealed,
then ever was here, or in many places is.

Where I might have been of a corrupt judgment, and entangled with many
errors, lo, thou of thy goodness, as thou have reformed my judgment, so
do thou keep it, and now for the same judgments sake, do vouchsafe,
somewhat by the cross to try me. What is the effect or fruit that comes of
this certain persuasion, that God is our Father.
By all which things I should confirm my faith of this, that thou always have
been, art, and wilt be for ever my dear father.

In respect whereof, as I should be certain of salvation, and of the
inheritance of heaven for ever: so should I be thankful, call my whole care
on thee, trust to thee, and call on thee, with comfort and certain hope for
all things that I want.

For in that thou have given to me this benefit to be thy child undeserved
and undesired on my behalf, simply and only in respect of thine own
goodness and grace in Christ, least at any time I should doubt of it, how
should I but hope certainly that nothing profitable to me can be denied, in yt
thy power is infinite. For as thy good will is declared in adopting me, so
nothing can be finally wanting in me, which may make for my weal, for then
should not thy power be almighty: and therefore my belief requires, that I
should believe in thee the father Almighty.

In consideration whereof, I should in all things behave my self as a child,
rejoice in thee, praise thee, trust in thee, fear, thee, serve thee, love thee.
call upon thee, etc.

But alas, how heavy hearted am I? How unthankful am I? how full of
unbelief, and doubting of this thy rich mercy? how little do I love thee,
fear thee, call upon thee, etc?

Oh be merciful unto me, forgive me, good Father for thine own sake, and
grant me the spirit of thy children, to reveal thy self unto me, and Jesus
Christ thy dear Son our Lord, by whom we are made thy children, that I may
truly know thee, heartily love thee, faithfully hang upon thee in all my
needs, with good hope call upon thee, render faithfully this honor to thee,
that thou art my God and father, and I thy dear child through thy grace in
Christ, and so always be endued with an assured hope of thy goodness, and a
faithful obedient heart in all things to thy holy will.

At thy hands and from thee, as I must look for all things, so come I unto
thee, and pray thee to give me these things, which thy dear children have,
and thou requirest of me, that I may come and ask them of thee, as now I do,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

As by this word ( Father) I am taught to glory of thee and in thee, and all
that ever thou have (for thou art wholly mine, my Lord, my God, my father:) so
by this word ( Our) I am taught to glory of all the good that all and every
of thy servant that ever were, are, or shall be, had, have, or shall have.
For now I am taught to believe that thou have called me into the communion of
thy Church and people, whom hereby I perceive thou have commanded to be as
careful for me, as for them selves, and in all their prayers to be as mindful
of me, as of them selves.

Again, as by this word (Father,) I am taught to remember and render my duty
I owe to thee wards, faith, love, fear, obedience, etc. so by this word
(Our) I am taught my duty toward thy people, to be careful of them, and to
take their sorrow, poverty, affliction, etc. as mine own, and therefore to
labor to help them in heart and hand after my vocation and ability, utterly
abhorring all pride, selfeloue, arrogancy, and contempt of any.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament, and to rejoice. To lament,
because I am so far from consideration, much more from doing my duty to thy
people, in thoughts, words and deeds. To rejoice, because I am called of thee,
and placed in the blessed society of thy Saints, and made a member and
citizen of the heavenly Jerusalem: and because thou have given in commandment
to all thy Church, to be as careful for me as for them selves.

But alas, how far am I herefrom? As I am guilty of unthankfulness for
this thy calling me into the blessed communion of thy dear son and Church,
yea of thy self: so am I guilty of selfeloue, unmercifulness, pride,
arrogancy, forgetfulness, and contempt of thy children: for else I could not
but be otherwise affected, and otherwise labor then I do.

Oh be merciful unto me good father: forgive me, and grant for Christ's sake,
that as my tongue sounds this word Our, so I may in heart feel the true joy
of thy blessed communion, and the true love and compassion which thy children
have and feel toward their brethren: that I may rejoice in all trouble, in
respect of that joyful communion: that I may deny my self to honor thy
children upon earth, and endeavor my self to do them good for thy sake,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. I come only to thee, to give me that which I
can not, nor must not elsewhere have, and thou requirest it of me, that
therefore I should as thy child, come and crave it to thy glory.

Which art in heaven.
AS by these words Our Father, I am taught to glory and rejoice for the
blessed communion which I am called to with thee, dear Father, with thy
Christ, and with thy holy Church: so also am I here taught by these words,
Which art in heaven, to rejoice in respect of the place and blessed joys
whereunto at the length in thy good time I shall come. For now I may perceive
that as heaven is thy home, so is it mine also, being, as I am, thy child
through Christ, although here for a time I am bodily on earth and in misery.

Again, by these words, which art in heaven, I am admonished, not only to
discern thee from earthly Fathers, and to know how that thou art Almighty,
present in all places, and of most purity, to confirm thereby my faith, to be
provoked the more to fear thee, to reverence thee, etc. But also I am
admonished to judge of thy fatherly love, by heavenly benefits, and not by
corporal, simply and alonely: for oftentimes ye wicked prosper more in the
world, and have more worldly benefits then thy children. So that by this I
see, thou would pull up my mind from earth and earthly things, to heaven
and heavenly things, and that I should see further by corporal benefits, thy
heavenly providence for me. For if thou place me thus on earth, and thus bless
me as thou do, and hitherto have done from my youth up, in that thou art
nothing so careful for my body as for my soul: how should I but think much
of thy providence, for it is thy home, where is such glory as the eye has not
seen, etc. Of which things these corporal benefits of thine given me on
earth, should be (as it were) inductions, and the taking of them away,
admonitions to be more mindful of permanent things, and less mindful of
transitory things.

By reason hereof I have great cause to lament, and to rejoice. To lament,
because I am so earthly minded, so little desirous of my home, so unthankful
for thy providence and fatherly protection here on earth.

To rejoice, because of my home, and the great glory thereof: because thou
do so provide for me here, because thou do so correct and chasten me,
etc. But alas, I am altogether a wretch, earthly, and unthankful, not only
for these corporal benefits, health, riches, friends, fame, wisdom, etc.
for thy fatherly correction, sickness, temptation, etc. but also for thy
heavenly benefits, for Christ Jesus, for the promise of thy spirit, for thy
Gospel, etc. yea, even for heaven it self and thy whole glory, (...). 106.
as the Israelites were for the land of Canaan, and therefore never enjoyed it,
but perished in the wilderness. I am proud in prosperity and forget thee,
waxing secure and careless. I am impatient in ye cross, and too much consider
worldly discommodities.

Oh dear father, forgive me for thy Christ's sake all mine unthankfulness,
love of this world, contempt and oblivion of thy heavenly benefits, and grant
me thy holy spirit to illuminate the eyes of my mind with the light and
lively knowledge of thy presence, power, wisdom, and goodness in thy
creatures, but specially in Christ Jesus thy son, and so by the same spirit
inflame mine affections, that I may desire nothing in earth but thee, Col. 3.
Philip. 3.
and to be present with thee, that my conversation may be in heaven
continually, from whence grant me still to look for the Lord Jesus, to make
this my vile body like unto his own glorious and immortal body, according
to his own power, by which he is able to do all things. As thou have given me
to be thy child: so I pray thee, give me these things which be the properties
of thy children, given from thee in thy good time.

Hallowed be thy name.
THy name is that whereby thou art known: for names serve to discern and know
one thing from an other. Romans 1.
Now, though thou art known by thy creatures, yet in this our corrupt state,
they serve but to make us excuselesse. Therefore most properly, lively, and
comfortably thou art known by thy holy word, and especially by thy promise of
grace, and freely pardoning and receiving us into thy favor for Christ Jesus
sake. Psalm. 48.138. How Gods name is hallowed
For the which goodness in Christ, thou art praised and magnified, according
to thy name, that is, so much as men know thee in Christ, they magnify thee,
and praise thee, which here thou call hallowing or sanctifying. Not that
thou art the more holy in respect of thy self, but in respect of men, who the
more they know thee, the more they cannot but sanctify thee: that is, they
cannot but as in them selves by true faith, love, fear, and spiritual service
honor thee: so also in their outward behavior and words, they can not but
live in such sort, as other seeing them, may in, and by their holiness and
godly conversation, be occasioned, as to know thee, so to sanctify thy name
accordingly: and therefore thou set forth here unto me, what is the chief
and principal wish and desire of thy children and people, The chei^ desire of
gods chi^^dren.
namely that thou in Christ might be truly known and honored, both of
them selves and of other, inwardly and outwardly: as by the contrary a man may
easily perceive, The greatest grief of Gods people.
that the greatest sorrow and grief thy people have, is ignorance of thee,
false service or religion, and wicked conversation. Against the which they pray
and labor diligently after their vocations, as they for the obtaining of the
other, both to other and to them selves, do take no small pain in prayer,
study, and godly exercise.

By reason hereof I see, that I am far from this desire and lamentation which
is in thy children. Our ignorance.
I see mine ignorance of the true knowledge of thee and thy name: for else it
had not needed thee so by thy word to have revealed thy self. I see also mine
own ignorance of the excellency of the same: for else would thou not have
told me, that the sanctfying of thy name is the chiefest thing thou requirest
of every man.

Again, Our great need.
I see my great want of holiness: for else thou need not to teach me to
seek and pray for that I want not.

Moreover, I see my great peruersitie, which would not seek at thy hands for
sanctification, although I see my need thereof. For the which thou would
not have commanded me to pray, if I seeing my want, would have prayed unto
thee for the same.

Last of all, Gods love.
I see thy wonderful goodness, which wilt undoubtedly give unto me
sanctification and holiness: for thou would not that I should ask for that
thing, that thou will not give me.

So that I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because I am so
far from this desire and lamentation which thy children have. Also because of
my ignorance, poverty, peruersitie, unthankfulness etc. but most of all,
because thy holy name, word and religion is so blasphemed both in doctrine and
in living, of many, especially in this realm.

To rejoice I have great cause, for thy exceeding goodness and mercy, which
would so disclose thy self by thy works, word, and Gospel: which would
open these things thus unto me, and also give unto me and others sanctification
in thy sight by faith, and in the sight of men by pureness of life, and godly
conversation. But, alas, I do heartily neither the one nor the other, that is,
lament or rejoice, as thou father which searchest my heart, do right well
know.

Oh be merciful unto me, and forgive me, yea, give me of thine own pity, thy
holy spirit to reveal and open to my mind effectually my miserable estate
and condition, my ignorance, peruersitie, and my carelessness for thy true
honor and dishonor: in such sort, that I may heartily lament these evils, and
have the^ pardoned and taken from me, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Again, good Father, give me the same thy holy spirit, to reveal to me thy
name, word, and Gospel, that I may lively know thee, unfeignedly love thee,
heartily obey thee, and above all things desire and labor by all means
lawful, that all godliness in doctrine and conversation may be exercised both
in me and in all others, for whom thou would I should pray.

Here think upon ye state of religion, and ye life of the professors of the
Gospel, yt thou may lament some, pray for some, and give thanks for some.

Let thy kingdom come.
Gods kingdom in respect of his power.
THY kingdom is in two sorts to be considered: universally and particularly.
Uniuersally, according to thy power, wherewith thou gouernest all things every
where in earth, heaven, hell, devils, Angels, men, beasts, fowls, fishes, and
all other creatures.

Psalm. 104.
Of this kingdom spoke David when he said: This kingdom rules over all
Particularly thy kingdom is to be considered according to thy grace, Gods
kingdom in respect of his grace.
wherewith thou reignest only in thy Church and elect people, ruling and
governing all and every member of thy Church, to thy glory and their eternal
comfort. Not that out of this Church I exclude thy power, (for as therewith thou
defendest thy people, so thou punishest thy enemies:) but because thy grace is
specially considered, being (as it were) the very keeper that keeps and
guides thy people.

The time will be when this kingdom of grace and power, Gods kingdom in respect
of his glory.
now being as distinct, shall be united and made one kingdom of glory: which
will be when Christ shall give up his kingdom into thine hands, that is, in
the resurrection, when death the last enemy shall be subdued, and thou shall
be all in all.

In the mean season, this kingdom of grace is miraculously and mightily
propagated, How Gods kingdom is here co^serued and enlarged.
enlarged, and governed by the true Ministry of thy word and sacraments,
through the working of thy holy spirit. And this is the mean and way whereby,
as thou did first plant, so do thou enlarge, amplify, and preserve the
same.

This kingdom of grace begun, continued, and enlarged by the true preaching of
thy Gospel, and ministration of thy sacraments, is the thing which Christ
teaches here thy children to pray for, that it might come: that is to say,
that thy Gospel might so mightily, purely, and plenteously be preached (mauger
the head of all thine enemies) that the number of thine elect might be brought
in, and so the kingdom of thy glory might appear. So that, as I see thy
children desire, pray, and labor that thy Gospel might be truly preached,
heard, and lived in them selves and in others: so they lament the not preaching
and refusing, the not living and not believing thy Gospel: yea they lament the
lingering of ye coming of thy Christ: for in his coming they know they shall
be like unto him, and having this hope, 1. Ioh. 3.
they purify themselves as he is pure. By reason hereof I see, first that I am
far from this desire and lamenting, which thy chilhaue: Our ignorance.
I see my ignorance of thy kingdom and power every where: also of thy grace
in thy Church only, and of thy glory when all the enemies of thy grace shall
be cast down, and thy glory and power shall embrace each other. I see my
ignorance, how acceptable a service to thee is the true preaching, and the
hearing of thy Gospel: for else thou had not needed to have placed this
petition next to the petition of the sanctifying of thy name.

Again, I see here mine unableness to enter into thy kingdom, and to attain
to it: for else what need should I have to pray for that to come from thee,
which otherwise may be achieved?

Our peruersitie.
Thirdly, I see my peruersitie and contempt of thy kingdom and grace: for
although I see my want, yet I would not desire thy kingdom to come, if thou
did not command me so to pray: and if I would have prayed for it, thou
would not have commanded me.

Gods goodness.
Last of all, I see thy goodness, which wilt bring thy kingdom, and that as
generally, by sending forth ministers to preach truly: so particularly, by
regenerating me more and more, and by giving me, as grace here, so glory
elsewhere: for thou would not I should pray for that which thou will deny.

So that I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because of my
miserable state and condition: because of my sin, ignorance, rebellion,
peruersitie, satan's power, contempt of thy grace, thy Gospel, and ministry
here, or elsewhere. To rejoice, because of thy goodness and great mercy which
have brought me into thy Church, keep me in it, and wilt do so still. Also
because of the ministry of thy word and sacraments, by which the holy Ghost
is and will be effectual: and finally because of the great glory whereunto
thou have called me, and which now thou will give unto me asking the same.

But alas, how unthankful I am and sorrowlesse, Lord thou know, for my heart
is not hid from thee. Oh be merciful unto me and forgive me good father, and
grant me the spirit of thy children, to reveal unto me my ignorance of thy
kingdom, my poverty and peruersitie, that I may lament the same, and daily
labor for thy help and thy holy spirit, to suppress the kingdom of sin
in my self and in others.

Again, grant me that same thy holy spirit to reveal to me thy kingdom of
power, grace and glory, to kindle mine affections, to regenerate me more and
more, to reign in me as in a piece of thy kingdom, to give to me to desire,
to pray, and to labor for thy kingdom both to my self and to others
effectually to thy glory, and to assure my conscience of thy goodness, that
thou will give me grace and glory, etc.

Here call to mind the state of the ministry and ministers, the light and
life of gospellers, the errors and here^ies which men be entangled withal.

Thy will be done.
Gods omnipotent will unknown and unrevealed.
AS thy power is infinite, so is thy wisdom accordingly.

Whereby, as we may perceive yt nothing is, or can be done against thy power,
or otherwise then by it: so is there not, nor cannot be any thing done against,
or otherwise then by thy omnipotent and secret will, which is always (as thou
art) good holy, and just, how far so ever it seem otherwise to our foolish
reason and judgment: and therefore here we are taught to pray, that thy will
may be done here without sin on man's behalf, as it is on the Angels behalf
in heaven.

Again, for as much as thou art incomprehensible of thy self, as well
concerning thy power, Gods w^l revealed and known.
as concerning thy wisdom: we may not according thereto search thee, but
rather adore and worship thy majesty, and tremble at thy judgments, and
works, and therefore pray always, that we may be content with thy will, and be
buxome and obedient thereto.

And for as much as thou have revealed to us so much of thy will in thy word
written, as is necessary for us in this life to know, yea, as we can attain
unto, and a little further: we ought to take all things done against the same,
as sin and transgression, although thou can use the same sin, to serve
thy providence: of the which providence we can not, nor may not judge further
then thou have, and shall open it unto us.

So that this petition, Thy will be done, is not simply to be understood
concerning thy omnipotent will unrevealed, against the which nothing is nor can
be done, but rather concerning thy will revealed in thy law and Gospel, the
which thou here teach me that we should desire, not only to know it, but
also to do it, and that in such perfection and willingness, as it is in
heaven. The which thing I perceive hereby, that thy children do desire daily
in and for them selves and others, and do lament that contrary, in whom so
ever it be: so that often their eyes gush out with rivers of tears, Psalm. 119.
because men keep not thy laws.

By reason hereof I see that I am far from the sighs and tears of thy
people. I see my ignorance of thy will, Our ignorance.
if thou had not opened the same by thine own mouth. I see my ignorance,
how acceptable a service obedience to thy will is, and therefore do thou
place this petition among the first and continual desires of thy children.

Again I see my poverty in godly obedience, Our need.
which had need to be taught to pray for it, thereby to signify unto me my
want and inability to attain it, but by thy gift.

Thirdly, Our disobedience.
I see my disobedience: for else never would thou have commanded me to have
prayed for the doing of thy will, if I seeing my want, would have prayed so.

Gods goodness.
Last of all, I see thy goodness, which wilt give to me and others, to obey thy
will: that is, to love thee with all our hearts, to love our neighbor as our
selves, to dye to our selves, to live to thee, to take up our cross and to
follow thee, to believe, to repent, etc. for else thou would never have
bidden us to pray for a thing which we should not look for.

So that I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because of my
miserable state and condition, because of my sin, ignorance poverty, and
peruersitie: also because thy will is every where, either not known or
contemned, and satan's will, the will of the world, and of the flesh, readily
obeyed.

To rejoice I have great cause, for that thou have opened thy self and will
unto mankind: for that also thou peculiarly have taught me these things, and
because thou will grant me grace to do the same. But alas, how unthankful I
am, and how hard hearted, thou Lord do know.

Oh be merciful unto me, and forgive me: I beseech thee gracious God. Grant me
thy holy spirit to reveal to me my ignorance of thy will, my poverty and
peruersitie, that I may heartily bewail it, etc. and by the help and working
of the same spirit, may suppress the will of the flesh. Again, grant me thy
holy spirit to reveal to me thy will declared in thy law and Gospel, that
I may truly know the same: and inflame so my affections, that I may will and
love the same in such sort, that it may be my meat and drink to do thy will.

Here call to mind the ten commandments of God particularly or generally, what
therein he requires, and pray for the same particularly as you see your need,
and that not only for your self, but also for others.

Pray for patience to suffer what cross so ever God shall lay upon you, and
pray for them that be under the cross, that they may be patient: pray for
spiritual wisdom in every cross, peculiar or public, that you may see and
love Gods will.

Give us this day our daily bread.
Bread.
BY Bread, the food of the body, are understood all things necessary for
this corporal life, as meat, drink, health, success in our vocation, etc.

Give.
By this word Give we should understand, that not only spiritual things, but
also corporal benefits are Gods free gifts, and come not for our worthiness
or travel taken about the same, although our travels be oftentimes means, by
the which God does give corporal things.

By Daily we understand the contented minds of thy children, Daily.
with that which is sufficient for the present time, as having hope in thee,
that they shall not want, but daily shall receive at thy hands plenty and
enough of all things.

By this word Our are as well understood public benefits, Our.
as peace in the Common weal, good Magistrates, good laws, seasonable
weather, etc. Also particular benefits, namely children, health, success in
the works of our vocation, etc. And besides this, by it we should see the
care, even for corporal things which thy children have for others, as well as
for them selves.

So that here I may learn how far I am from that I should be, and that I
see thy children are come unto, I see my ignorance also, how that, as
spiritual things do come from thee, so do temporal things: and as they
come from thee, so are they conserved and kept of thee: and therefore thy
children are thankful, and look for them as thy mere gifts, notwithstanding
the means which they use if they have them: howbeit they use them but as
means, Psalm. 127.
for except thou work therewith, all is in vain.

Again, here I am taught to be content with that which is sufficient for the
present time, as thy children be which have the shortness of this life always
before their eyes: and therefore they ask but for daily sustenance, knowing
this life to be compared to a day, yea a watch, a sound, a shadow, etc.

Moreover, I may learn to see the compassion and brotherly care which thy
children have one for an other. Last of all, here I may see thy goodness,
which as thou will give me all things necessary for this life, (or else thou
would not bid me ask, etc.) so thou commaundest all men to pray and care
for me, and that bodily, much more then, if they be able, they are commanded
to help me both in body and soul.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because
I am not so affected as thy children be, because of my ignorance, my
ingratitude, my peruersitie and contempt of thy goodness, and of the
necessity of thy people, which (alas) be in great misery, some in exile, some
in prison, some in poverty, sickness, etc.

To rejoice I have great cause, because of thy goodness in teaching me these
things, in commanding me to ask what so ever I want, in giving me so many
things unasked, in keeping the benefits given me, in commanding men to care
for me, to pray for me, to help me, etc.

But alas, how far I am either from true lamenting or rejoicing, Lord thou
know. Oh be merciful unto me, and help me, forgive me, and grant me thy
holy spirit to reveal to me my need, ignorance, great ingratitude, and
contempt of thy mercies and thy people, and that in such sort, yt I might
heartily lament and bewail my misery, and through thy goodness be altered
with thy people, to mourn for the miseries of thy children, as for mine own.

Again, reveal to me thy goodness, dear father, even in corporal things,
that I may see thy mercy, thy presence, power, wisdom and righteousness in
every creature and corporal benefit, and that in such sort, that I may be
thoroughly affected truly to reverence, fear, love, and obey thee, to hang
upon thee, to be thankful to thee, and in all my need to come unto thee, not
only when I have ordinary means, by the which thou commonly workest, but
also when I have none, yea, when al means and helps are clean against me.

Here remember ye state of your children and family: also your parents,
neighbors, kinsfolks: also your friends, country, Magistrates, etc. as you
shall have time thereto, and by Gods good spirit shall be provoked.

Forgive us our debts, as we forgive them that are debtors unto us.
Debtes.
BY Our debtes we understand, not only the things we have done, but the
omission and leaving undone of the good things we ought to do.

Our.
By Our we understand, not only the particular sins of one, but also generally
the sins of all, and every one of the Church.

Forgiveness.
By Forgiveness we understand, free pardon and remission of sins, by the
merits and deserts of thy dear son Jesus Christ, who gave him self a
ransom for us.

Our forgiving.
By Our forgiving of other men's offenses to us ward, we understand thy good
will, not only that it pleases thee that we should live in love and amity,
but also that thou would have us to be certain of thy pardoning us of our
sins. For as certain as we are, that we pardon them that offend us, so
certain should we be that thou do pardon us: whereof the forgiving our
trespasses is (as it were) a sacrament unto us.

So yt by this petition I am taught to see that thy children, although by
imputation they be pure from sin, yet they acknowledge sin to be and
remain in them, and therefore do they pray for the remission and forgiveness
of the same.

Again, I am taught hereby to see how thy children do consider and take to
heart, not only the evils they do, but also the good they leave undone: and
therefore they pray thee heartily for pardon.

Moreover, I am here taught to see that thy children are careful for other
men, and for their trespasses, and therefore pray that they might be pardoned
in saying: Our sins, and not My sins.

Besides this, I am taught here to see how thy children not only forgive all
those that offend them, but also pray for the pardoning of the offenses of
their enemies, and such as offend them: So far are they from maliciousness,
pride, reuengement, etc.

Last of all, I am taught to see how merciful thou art, which wilt have us to
ask pardon (whereof thou would that we should in no ^oint dout, but be most
assured, that for Christ's sake thou hear us) and that not only for our
selves, but also for many others: for thou do not command us to ask for
any thing which thou will not give us.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because
of my miserable estate, which am so far from these affections that are in thy
children: which am so ignorant and careless of sin, not only in leaving good
undone, but also in doing evil, and that daily, in thought, word, and deed,
etc. I speak not of my carelesnes for other folks sins, as of my parents,
children, family, magistrates, etc. neither of the sins of them to whom I
have given occasion to sin.

To rejoice I have great cause, because of thy mercy in opening to me these
things, in commanding me to pray for pardon, in promising me pardon, and
commanding others to pray for me. And surely I ought to be persuaded of thy
mercy, though my sins be innumerable: for I see not only in this, but in
every petition, how that every one of the Church prays for me, yea Christ
thy son, who sits on thy right hand, prays for me, etc.

Oh dear father, be merciful unto me, and forgive me al my sins, and of thy
goodness give me thy holy spirit to open mine eyes, that I may see sin,
the better to know it, the more truly to hate it, and most earnestly to
strive against it, and that effectually, both in my self and others.

Again, grant me the same thy holy spirit, to reveal unto me the remedy of
sin by Christ only, and to work in me faith to embrace the same by Christ,
and thy mercies in him, that I may henceforth be endued with thy holy
spirit, to begin to obey thy good will more and more, and to increase in the
same for ever.

Here call to mind the special sins you have committed heretofore. Remember,
if you have occasioned any to sin, to pray for them by name. Remember that
Gods law should be so dear unto us, that the breaking thereof in others,
should be an occasion to make us to lament with tears, etc.

Lead us not into temptation.
Because of our continual and great infirmities: because of the great
diligence and subtilties of our enemies: and because thou art wont to punish
sin with sin (which of all punishments is the greatest and most to be
feared) in this petition thou would have thy children to have the same in
remembrance, and for a remedy hereof thou have appointed prayer, so that ye
only cause why any are overcome and led into temptation, is for that they
forget what they desire in the petition going before this, which should never
be out of their memory, to provoke them to be more thankful to thee, and
more vigilant and heedie hereafter for falling into the like perils.

For which to be avoided, you do most graciously set forth a remedy, in
commanding us to pray after pardon for our sins past, and for thy grace to
guide us, so that we be not led into temptation, but might be delivered from
evil. And because y^ would have all thy children to hang wholly upon thee,
to fear thee only, and only to love thee, thou do not teach them to pray,
suffer us not to be led, but lead us not into temptation, that (I say) they
might only fear thee, and certainly know that satan has no power over so
much as a pig, but what so ever thou give unto him, and of thy secret, but
most just judgment do appoint him to use, not as he will (for then we were
all lost) but as thou will, which can will nothing, but that which is most
just: as to give them to the guiding of satan, which will not be guided by thy
grace, as thou did Saul, etc.

Occasions to evil are in two sorts: Occasions to evil in two sorts
One by prosperity and success: an other by adversity and the cross, etc.
The evils coming of success, commonly are unthankfulness, pride, security,
and forgetting of our selves forgetting of others, forgetfulness of God, of
our mortality, etc The evils coming of adversity, commonly are impatiencie,
murmuring, grudging, dispairing, contemning of God, flattering of men,
stealing, lying, with many other evils, whereto tentations will entice a man
that is left to him self: What tentations are to the godly, and what the^ are
to the wicked.
where as to one that is guided with Gods spirit, temptations are but trials
to the glory of GOD, comfort of the tempted, and edifying of thy Church. But
(as I said) if a man be left alone, tentations entice eue^ to the devil him
self: and therefore thy children pray to be delivered from evil,
understanding thereby Satan him self, the sower and supporter of all evil.
And this thy children do as well for others, as for them selves. So that I may
learn hereby many good things: First to remember often our infirmity and
weakness, and the dangerous estate we stand in, in respect of our flesh, of
the world which is full of evil, of Satan which seeks to sift us, and as a
roaring Lion to destroy us, and of our sins which deserve al kind of
punishments and correction, that I might with thy children fear thee, watch,
pray, and desire the day of redemption and deliverance from all evils.

Again, I may learn here, that to avoid all dangers and evils, is not in
the power of man, but only thy work. By reason whereof, I should consider thy
great goodness, which hitherto have kept me from so many evils both of soul
and body, yea of name, goods, etc, as thou have done in my infansie,
childhood, youth, middle age, etc.

Thirdly, I may learn here that I should be careful for others, both that
they might be delivered from their evils, and that they might be preserved from
temptation, and from being overcome in the same, and therefore thou teach me
not to pray, Deliver me from evil simply, but, deliver us from evil.

Last of al, I am taught hereby to see thy goodness toward me, which wilt
deliver me from evil, and from being overcome in tentations: for thou would
not have me ask for that which I should not certainly look for at thy hands.
By reason whereof thou would have me to be in a certainty of my salvation
for ever. For else I can not believe my prayer to be heard, if that finally I
should not be delivered from evil: and therefore thou ioynest hereto a giving
of thanks, which with thy Church I should say: For thine is the kingdom,
thine is the power, thine is the glory, for ever.

By reason whereof, I have great cause to lament and to rejoice. To lament,
because of my corruption, infirmity, weakness, oblivion, and carelessness
for thy people, ingratitude, etc. because of satan's power, vigilancie, and
prudencie, which has overcome most, grave, wise and holy men, whereof some
never recovered: as Cain, Cham, Achitophel, Saul, Judas etc. To rejoice,
because of thy goodness, which teach me this, and show me the remedy,
commaundest all thy Church to pray for me, and wilt at length deliver me from
all evil, and give me glory. But alas, I am altogether careless and
miserable. Oh be merciful unto me dear father, and for Christ's sake forgive
me all my sins: grant me thy holy spirit, to reveal to me mine infirmities,
weakness, perils, dangers, etc. in such sort, that as I may heartily lament
my miseries, so I may ask and obtain thy grace to guide me from all evil for
evermore.

Again, grant me the same thy holy spirit to reveal to me thy love and
kindness toward me (and that in eternity:) in such sort, that I may be
thoroughly persuaded of the same, become thankful unto thee, and daily expect
and look for the revelation of thy kingdom, power, and glory, as one that
for ever shall have the fruition of the same, through thine own goodness and
mercy in Christ, prepared for me before the beginning and foundation of the
world was laid.

Here call to mind our security, satan's vigilancie, our negligence, his
diligence, our infirmity, his ability, our ignorance, his craft and
subtlety, etc.

Again, call to mind, how that he has overthrown for a time, many of the
dear Saints of God, to whom we are to be compared in nothing: as Adam, Eve,
Lot, Judas, Thamar, Moses, Aaron, Myrian, Sampson, Gedeon, Ely, David, Solomon,
Ezechias, Josias, Peter, Thomas, and innumerable more.

Also call to mind the goodness of God, and of our sheepeheard Christ, which
has kept us hitherto, keeps us still, and teaches us here to know that he
will keep us for ever: for he would not have us ask for deliverance from
evil, if that he would not we should certainly look for the same. If thou
doubt of final perseverance, thou dishonourest God. Be certain therefore,
rest in hope, be still in his word. See also how he has commanded his whole
Church, and every member thereof, to pray for thee as well as for them selves,
in these and all other things.

Now and then go about to recke^ how many and diverse kinds of evils there be,
and thereby as you may know you are delivered from none but by Gods great
goodness: so may you see that the number of evils that you have, are nothing
to be compared to the multitude of evils wherewith, if your Christ were not,
the devil would al to beray you, infect and corrupt you.

But what are all the miseries and evils that can be, to be compared to ye
least joy prepared for us in heaven? Oh think of those joys, and pray that
when the tide of death comes, we may hale forth of the haven of this flesh,
and this world joyfully.

In praying this petition, call to mind the evils you have been in, the evils
you are in, and the evils you may fall into, if God should not preserve you,
that you might be stirred up the more to thankfulness, to prayer, to trust in
God.

For thine is the kingdom, thine is the power, thine is the glory, for ever.
AS in ye beginning of this prayer by these words ( Our father which art in
heaven) thy children are excited and stirred up to a full confidence of
obtaining the petitions following, and all things necessary: so in the later
end thou have added for ye same purpose these words ( For thine is the
kingdom, thine is etc.) wherein I am taught these many things. First that in
prayer I should have such consideration of thy kingdom, power, glory, and
eternity, that my mind should be stricken with an admiration of the same.
Secondly, that I should so consider them, especially in prayer, that I should
not doubt, but that thou workest rulest and gouernest all things every where,
in all persons and creatures, most wisely, justly, and mercifully. Thirdly,
that in prayer al my petitio^s should tend to the ^etting forth of thy power,
of thy kingdom, and of thy glory.

Last of al, that in prayer I should in no wise doubt of being heard, but be
assured that thou, which have commanded me to pray, and have promised to hear
me, do^st most graciously for thy mercies sake, and truths sake, hear my
petitions, according to thy good will, through Jesus Christ thy dear son our
Lord and only Savior.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because
I consider not these things in prayer, in such sort as should move me to
admiration, and gratitude: because I consider not thy power and wisdom
generally in all things: because I am so careless for thy kingdom: and because
I am so full of dubitation and doubting of thy goodness. To rejoice I have
great cause: because thou reuealest these things unto me on this sort: because
of thy power, kingdom and glory, which makes to the hearing of my prayers,
and helping of me: because thou will use me as thine instrument to set forth
thy kingdom, power, and glory: and because it pleases thee to hear my
prayers, and assuredly wilt save me for ever.

But alas, how far am I from these lamentings and reioycings? By reason
whereof I deserve damnation. Oh, be merciful unto me, and forgive me, and of
thy goodness grant me thy holy spirit, to reveal to me my blindness,
oblivion, and contempt of thy kingdom, power, and glory, with the greatness
of my doubtings, that I may heartily, as lament them, so have them pardoned and
taken from me, through the merits of Jesus Christ thy son.

Again, give me thy holy spirit to reveal to me in such sort, thy kingdom,
power, glory, and eternity, that I may always have the same before mine eyes,
be moved with the admiration thereof, labor effectually to set forth the
same, and finally, as to have the fruition thereof after this life: so to
increase in an assured, certain, and lively expectation of the same, that I
may always and in all things rejoice in thee, through Christ, and give lauds,
thanks, and praises perpetually, unto thy most holy name: Oh blessed Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, three persons and one God, to whom be all honor and
glory, world without end.

Here think that if the kingdom, power, glory, and eternity be Gods, which
is our Father, what our dignity is, which be his children. If the power be our
fathers, of whom should we be afraid? If the devil be subject to the Lords
power and kingdom, (as he is) how can the subject have power over us which be
sons and heirs, in that he has not power over Porkets, without the
providence and permission of God? Therefore full well should we pray, Lead us
not into temptation, rather then, let us not be lead into temptation: for power
is the Lords, and the devil has none but that he has of Gods gift. No, he
were not able to receive power, if God did not make him able, although the
execution of it, is rather of Gods permission.

Give all thanks, praise, and glory, to God our Father, through Christ our
Lord and Savior. So be it. John Bradford.

PRIVATE PRAYERS for the Morning and Evening, and for other times of the day.
When you awake out of your sleep, pray thus.
MOst merciful God and father of our Savior Jesus Christ, I most humbly
thank thee for the sweet sleep and comfortable rest which thou have given me
this night past: beseeching thee, that like as thou have now awaked my body
from sleep, so thou would awake my soul from the sleep of sin and
darkness of this world: and that which thou have now awaked out of sleep,
thou would after death (whereof this sleep is but an image) restore and
raise again to life everlasting. O gracious God, make my body, I heartily
pray thee, such a companion, or rather a minister of godliness to my soul,
this day and all the time of this present life, that in the life to come, it
may be partaker with the same of everlasting happiness, through Christ Jesus
our Lord.

Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall show light
unto thee. Ephe. 5.

Occasions to Meditate.
Here call to mind ye great mirth and blessedness of the everlasting
resurrection. Also remember to muse upon that most clear light, yt bright
morning and new clearenesse of our bodies after the long darkness which they
have been in. All then shall be full of unspeakable joy and felicity.

When you behold the daylight, pray.
O Lord God, thou most glorious, and true light, from whence this light of the
day and sun does spring, and shine unto us: O light which lightenest every
man y^ comes into this world: O light which know no night nor evening,
but art always a midday most clear and fair: without whom al is most horrible
darkness, and by whom al things are most clear and bright: O thou wisdom
of the eternal father of mercies: lighten my mind, that I may see those
things only which please thee, and may be blinded to al other things. Grant me
so to walk in thy ways by the light of thy holy word, that nothing else may
be light and pleasant unto me.

Lighten mine eyes, Oh Lord, that I sleep not in death, least mine enemies
say, I have prevailed against him. Psalm 30.

Occasions to Meditate.
Muse a while, how much the light and eye of the mind and soul is better then
of the body. Also how much more we ought to care for the soul, that it may
see well, then for the body. Moreover, that beasts have bodily eyes as well
as men, but men only have eyes of the mind, and that, such as are godly wise.

When you arise, pray.
OUr first parents cast down them selves from a most excellent, high, and
honorable state, into shame and misery, and into the deep sea of all
wickedness and mischief: but oh Christ, thou putting forth thy hand, did
raise them up again. Even so we, except we be raised up by thee, shall lie
still for ever. O good Christ, our most gracious redeemer, as thou do
mercifully raise up now this my body, even so I beseech thee, raise up my mind
and heart to the true knowledge and love of thee, that my conversation may be
in heaven where thou art.

If you be risen with Christ, think upon those things yt be above. Col. 3.

Occasions to Meditate.
Think how foul the fall of Adam was by reason of sin: and so of every one
of us from the height of Gods grace. Again, think upon the inestimable
benefit of Christ, by whose help we daily arise again from our fallings.

When you apparel your self, pray.
O Christ, clothe me with thine own self, that I may be so far from making
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, that I may clean put off
all desires, and crucify the kingdom of the flesh in me. Be thou unto me a
garment to keep me warm, and to defend me from ye cold of this world. If thou
be absent (dear Lord) all things are cold, weak, and dead: but if thou be
with me, all things are warm, fresh, and cheerful, etc. Grant therefore,
that as I compass this my body with this garment: so thou would cloth me
wholly (but specially my soul) with thine own self.

Put upon you, as the elect of God, bowels of mercy, meekness, love, peace,
etc. Col 3.

Occasions to Meditate.
Call to mind a little how we are incorporate into Christ. Again, how he
does cloth us, govern and nourish us, and under his wings, protection and
providence, preserves us.

When you are made ready, to begin the day withal, pray.
O Almighty God and most merciful father, thou know and have taught us
also something to know, that the weakness of man and woman is great, and that
without thy grace they can neither do nor think any good thing. Have mercy
upon me, I humbly beseech thee, thy most weak, frail, and unworthy child.
Lighten my mind, that I may with pleasure look upon good things only. Inflame
my heart with the love thereof, that I may carefully covet them, and at the last
by thy gracious conducting may happily attain them, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. I distrusting altogether mine own weakness, commend and offer my
self, both soul and body into thy hands.

Thy loving spirit lead me forth into ye land of righteousness. Psalm. 143.

Cogitations meet to begin the day withal.
Think first that man consists of soul and body, and that the soul is from
heaven heavenly, firm and immortal: but the body is from the earth earthly,
frail, and mortal.

Again, think that though by reason of sin wherein you are conceived and
borne, the parts of the soul which do understand and desire, be so corrupt,
that without special grace to both parts, you can neither know nor love any
good thing in Gods sight, much less then do that is good: yet this
notwithstanding, think that you are regenerate by CHRIST'S resurrection,
(which your Baptism requires you to believe) and therefore have both those
parts something reformed, both to know, and to love, and therefore to do also
some good in the sight of God through Christ: for whose sake our poor doings
are accepted for good, the evil and infirmity cleaving thereunto, not being
imputed through faith.

Think that by faith, which is Gods seed (for they which believe are borne of
God, and made Gods children) given to those that be ordained to eternal life:
think (I say) that by faith you receive more and more the spirit of
sanctification, through ye use of Gods word and sacraments, and earnest
prayer, to illuminate your minds, understanding, judgment, and reason, and to
bow, form, frame, and inflame your affections with love and power to do that
which is good, and therefore use you the means aforesaid accordingly.

Think that by this spirit, you are through faith coupled to Christ as a
lively member, and so to God, and (as it were) made one with him: and by love,
which springs out of this faith, you are made one also with all that be of
God, and so you have fellowship with God and all good men that ever were or
shall be, in all the good that God and all his Saints have or shall have.

Think that as by faith, and love, through the spirit of God you are now
entered into this communion (the blessedness whereof no tongue can express (so
after this life you shall first in soul, and in the last day in body also
enjoy for ever the same society most perfectly, which now is but begun in
you.

Think then of your negligence, that do so little care for this your happy
estate.

Think upon your ingratitude to God for making you, redeeming you, calling
you, and so lovingly adopting you.

Think upon your folly in fantasing so much earthly and bodily pleasures.

Think upon your deafness and blindness, which hear not God not see him, he
calling you so diligently by his works, word and sacraments.

Think upon your frowardnes which will not be led of God, and his spirit.

Think upon your forgetfulness, and in consideration of your heavenly estate,
how your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, your members are ye members of
Christ, the whole world, and all things therein are your own. Therefore say
unto your soul, O my soul, arise, follow God, contemn this world, purpose well
and pursue it, long for the Lords coming, be ready and watch, that he come
not upon thee unawares. And for so much as you must live to Gods pleasure, see
the vocation and state of your life whereunto God has called you, and pray to
God for grace, knowledge, and ability, to take the most profitable things in
hand, well to begin, better to go on, and best of all to end the same, to Gods
glory, and to the profit of your brethren, and think that time lost wherein
you speak not, or do not, or at the least think not some thing to Gods
glory, and the commodity of your brethren.

When you go forth of the doors, pray.
Now must I walk among the snares of death, stretched out of satan and of
his mischievous ministers in the world, carrying with me a friend to them both,
and a foe to my self, even this body of sin and sinful flesh. Oh graund
captain Christ, lead me and guide me, I beseech thee. Defend me from the
plagues and subtilties, whereof I am in danger. Grant that I may take all
things that happen, as I should do, and setting mine eyes upon thee only, I
may so go on forward, in thy ways, as by nothing I be hindered, but rather
furthered, so that all my doings may tend to thy glory.

Show me thy ways (O Lord) and teach me thy paths. Psalm. 25.

Occasions to Meditate.
Consider, how vainly the most part of men are occupied: how many ways they
trouble and cumber themselves, thereby much alienating their minds from the
knowledge and cogitation of that which they should most esteem, and so become
a let and an offense to others. As in going abroad you will see that your
apparel be seemly in the sight of men: so see how seemly you appear in the
sight of God.

When you are going any journey, pray.
THis our life is a pilgrimage. From the Lord we came, and to the Lord we make
our journey: howbeit through dangerous and perilous ways, which our cruel
enemies have and do prepare for us, being now more then stark blind by
reason of sin. O Christ, which art a most true loades-man and guide, and also
most expert, faithful and friendly, put thou out thine hand, open mine eyes:
make thy high way known unto me, which thou did first enter into, out of
this corruptible life, and have prepared the same for us to immortality. Thou
art the way, lead us unto the father by thy self, that all we may be one with
him, as thou and he together be one.

Show me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee.
Psalm. 124.

Or pray thus.
Merciful father, thou art wont to send to thy servant and men of simple
hearts, thine Angels to be their keepers, and (as it were) guides, as elder
brethren to watch upon thy weak children. So did thou to young Tobias, to
Jacob, to Abraham's servant, to Joshua, etc. O gracious God, though we be much
unlike unto them (so many are our sins) yet for thine own goodness sake,
send thine holy Angels to pitch their tents about us, to hide us and defend us
from Satan and his slaves, to carry us in their hands, that we come not into
further danger then thou will deliver us out of, for thine own sake.

His Angels are ministers for them that are heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.

Satan sleeps not, but seeks always to destroy us. 1. Pet. 5.

Occasions to Meditate.
Think something how we are strangers from our country, from our home,
from our original, I mean from God. Again, think upon our madness, that do
linger and loyter so gladly in this our journey and pilgrimage. Also how
foolish we are to fantasy things which we can not carry with us, and to
contemn conscience, which will always be a companion to us, to our joy, if it
be good, but to our shame and sorrow if it be evil and corrupt. Finally how
unnatural we are, which so little desire to be at our home, to be with our
only father, Master, fellows, and friends.

When you are about to receive your meat, pray thus.
THis is a wonderful mystery of thy work (O maker and governor of the world)
that thou do sustain the lives of men and beasts with these meats. Surely
this power is neither in the bread nor food, but in thy will and word, by
which word al things do live and have their being. Again, how great a thing
is it that thou art able continually to give sustenaunce to so many creatures?
This is spoken of by thy prophet in setting forth thy praises: All things
look up to thee, Psalm. 145.
and thou give them meat in due season: thou openest thy hand, and fillest
with thy blessing every living thing.

These doubtless are wonderful works of thine Almightinesse. I therefore
heartily pray thee (O most liberal Lord and faithful father) that as thou by
meat, through thy word do minister life to these our bodies: even so by the
same word, with thy grace thou would quicken our souls, that both in soul
and body we may please thee, til this our mortal carcass shall put on
immortality, and we shall need no more any further food, but thee only,
which then wilt be all in all.

Taste and see how good the Lord is. Psalm. 34.

Bless the Lord (O my soul) which feeds and fills my mouth with good
things. Psalm. 103.

Occasions to Meditate.
Think a little how great Gods power is that made us. Also think how great
his wisdom is to preserve us. But most of all, think how many things are
given to our use: how wonderful it is to give us life, but most of all to
propagate and advance to immortality the life of the soul by his only
beck. Last of all think, that God by his providence for thy body, would have
thee to confirm thy faith of his providence likewise for thy soul.

In the meal time pray.
O Most liberal distributer of thy gifts, which give us al kind of good
things to use, and being pure, give pure things, being holy give holy
things: grant to us thy grace that we misuse not these thy gracious gifts
given to our use and profit. Let us not delight in these things, but let us
delight in thee from whom they come, as necessary for us for a season: till
we come unto thee. Grant us to be conversant amongst thy gifts, soberly,
purely, temperately, and holily, because thou art so. Then shall we not turn
that to the poison of our souls, which thou have given for the medicine of our
bodies: but using thy benefits thankfully we shall find them profitable, both
in soul and body.

Occasions to Meditate.
Think that the meats and drinks set before you, are given to you to use and
not to abuse. Think they are given to profit, and not to hurt you. Think
that they are not given to you alone, but unto others also by you. In eating
and drinking, think that you do but feed the worms. Remember the poor
prisoners, the sick, the afflicted, etc. as though you were in their case.

^ohn 6. ^ohn 4.
Think upon the food of your soul, Christ's body broken, and bloodshed. Desire
the meat that lasts for ever: labor for it. Christ's meat was to do his
fathers will.

After your meat, pray.
BY corporal meats thou do sustain our corporal daily life, ready
otherwise to perish. The which surely is a great work: but yet this is much
greater, more profitable and more holy, that thy grace (O Jesus Christ) does
preserve us from the death of the soul. For this life we ought much to thank
thee: and because thou do prolong it with thy good gifts, we most heartily
praise thee. How be it, this life is but the way to eternal life, which we
beseech thee for thy deaths sake that thou will give us, and so shall we not
only give thee (as we may) thanks for a time, for temporal things: but also
eternal thanks for eternal things. O grant to us these our desires for thy
mercies sake. Amen.

Occasions to Meditate.
Think now that God has given thee this his blessing of food and
sustenaunce, and thereto time that thou might, as repent, so seek his
glory, and the commodity of thy brethren: therefore go thereabouts: but
first pray for grace well to begin. Again, consider how thou have been
partaker of other men's labors, as of the Husbandmans, the Milners, the Bakers,
the Bruers, the Butchers, the Cooks, etc. See therefore that thou be not a
drone Be, but rather such a one as may help the hiue. If God have thus fed
thy body which he loves not but for thy souls sake: how can it be then, but
that he will be much more ready to feed thy soul? Therefore take a courage
to thee, and go to him for grace accordingly.

Cogitations for about the midday.
As thy body is now compassed on every side with light, so see that thy mind
may be also. As god gives thee thus plentifully this corporal light, so pray
him that he will give thee the spiritual light. Think that as the Sun is
now most clear, so shall our bodies be in the day of judgment. As now the
Sun is come to the highest, and therefore will begin to draw downward: so
is there nothing in the world so perfect and glorious, which when it is at the
full, will not decrease and so wear away.

When you come home again, pray.
THere is nothing (O Lord) more like to thy holy nature, then a quiet mind.
Thou have called us out of the troublesome disquietnesse of the world, into
that thy quiet rest and peace, which the world can not give, being such a peace
as passes all men's understanding. Houses are ordained for us, that thereby we
might be defended from the injury of the wether, from cruelty of beasts,
from disquietnesse of people, and rest from the toils of the world. O gracious
father, grant that through thy great mercy my body may enter into this house,
from outward actions, but so, that it may become boxom and obedient to the
soul, and make no resistaunce against the same, that in soul and body I may
have a godly quietness and peace to praise thy holy name. Amen.

Peace be to this house, and to all that dwell in the same. Matt. 10.

Occasions to Meditate.
Think what a return and how merry a return it will be to come to our
eternal, most quiet, and most happy home, then will all grief and sorrow
cease. What so ever here is pleasant and joyful, the same is nothing but a
very shaddowe in comparison of that which is to come.

At the Sun going down, pray.
How unhappy are they, (O Lord) from whom thye Sun goes down and gives
no light, I mean thy grace which is always clear as the midday. Dark night
unto them is the midday, which depart from thee. In thee is never night, but
always day light most clear. This corporal Sun has his courses, now up,
now down: but thou dear Lord, if we love thee, art always one. O that this
block and veil of sin were taken away from me, that there might be always
clear day in my mind.

Occasions to Meditate.
Think that as we are not sorry when the Sun goes down, because we know
it will rise again: even so we should not sorrow for death, wherthrough the
soul and body do part asunder: for they shall eftesoones return and come
together again in most glorious wise. This is meant of the bloody time of
queen Marie.
So long as the Sun is up, wild beasts keep their dens, Foxes their
burrowes, Owls their holes, etc. but when the Sun is down, then come they
abroad: so wicked men and hypocrites keep their dens in the time of the
Gospel, but it being taken away, then swarm they out of their holes, like
Bees, as this day does teach.

When the candles be light, pray.
MOst thick and dark clouds do cover our minds, except thy light (O Lord)
do drive them away. Thy sun (O most wise worker) is as it were a firebrand
to this world. Thy kingdom whereby light comes both to soul and body, is
a firebrand to the spiritual world. After day when the night comes, thou
have given for the remedy of darkness a candle. After sin for the remedy
of ignorance, thou have given thy doctrine, which thy dear son has brought
unto us. O thou that art the author and master of all truth, and art the true
light, make us so to see, that the dimnesse of our minds may be driven clean
away.

Lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, and send joy and gladness
into our hearts. Psalm. 4.

Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths. Psalm. 119.

Occasions to Meditate.
Think that the knowledge which God gives unto us by ye candlelight, (whereby
we see those things in this night of our bodies which are expedient for us)
should make us to wish much more for this doctrine of God and spiritual light
of our souls, and when we get it, the more to esteem it, and diligently to
embrace it. Again, that as all would be horror without candlelight, so there
is nothing but mere confusion, where Gods word takes no place.

When you make your self unready, pray.
THis our life and weak knit body by reason of sin, by little and little
shall be dissolved, and so shall be restored to the earth from whence it was
taken: then will be an end of this vanity, which by our folly we have wrought
to ourselves. O most meek father, so do thou untie me (for thou art he that
have knit these our weak members together) that I may perceive my self to be
losed and dissolved, and so may remember both of whom I was made, and also
whither I must go, least I be had unprovided unto thy tribunal seat.

Put off the old man with his lusts and concupiscences. Col. 3. Ephe. 4.

Be content with Joseph to put off thy prison apparel, that thou may put on
new. Genesis 41.

Occasions to Meditate.
Think that as we do willingly put off our garments, because we shall receive
them again when the night is past: so we should not willingly forsake our
bodies when God by death shall call us, because we shall receive them again in
the resurrection of the just.

When you enter into your bed, pray.
THe day now ended, men give them selves to rest in the night, and so this
life finished, we shall rest in death. Nothing is more like this life then
every day: nothing more like death then sleep: nothing more like to our
grave, then our bed. O Lord our keeper and defender, grant that I now laying
me down to rest, being unable to keep my self, may be preserved from the
crafts and assaults of the wicked enemy: And grant further, that when I have
run the ^ace of this life, thou would of thy mercy call me unto thee, that I
may live and watch with thee for evermore. And now gracious God give me to
take my rest in thee: and bring to pass, that thy goodness may be even in
sleep before my eyes, that sleeping I be not absent from thee, but may have my
dreams to draw me unto thee, and so both soul and body may be kept pure and
holy for ever.

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest. Psalm. 4.

Occasions to Meditate.
Think that as this troublesome day is now past, and night come, and so rest,
quietness, and pleasant sleep, which makes most excellent Princes and poor
wretches alike: even so after ye tumults, troubles, temptations and te^pestes
of this life, they that believe in Christ, have prepared for them an haven and
rest most pleasant and joyful. As you are not afraid to enter into your bed,
and to dispose your self to sleep, so be not afraid to dye, but rather
chearefully prepare your self thereunto.

Think, that now you are nearer your end by one days journey, then you were
in the morning.

When you feel sleep to be coming, pray.
O Lord Jesus Christ, my watchman and keeper, take me into thy protection.
Grant that my body sleeping, my mind may watch in thee, and be made merry by
some sight of that celestial and heavenly life, wherein thou art the king and
prince, together with the father and the holy Ghost, where the Angels and holy
souls be most happy citizens. Oh purify my soul, keep clean my body,
that in both I may please thee, sleeping and waking for ever. Amen.

A GENERAL CONfession of sins, with other prayers for the Morning and
Evening, to be used in families and public assemblies.
O Most merciful and loving father, whose love is infinite, whose mercy
endures for ever, we sinful creatures, trusting in thine unspeakable
goodness and love toward us, do appear this morning before thy divine
majesty, most humbly confessing our manifold sins and innumerable
transgressions of thy commandments and fatherly will. Against thee only,
against thee (O Lord) have we sinned, we acknowledge our offenses: we accuse
our selves unto thee (O merciful Lord) and will not hide our unrighteousness.
We find in our selves nothing but ignorance of thy will, disobedience, mistrust,
doubtfulnesse in thy goodness, and incredulity, hatred and contempt of al
spiritual things, selfeloue, confidence in our selves, and fervent lusting
after earnall things of this world: and this tree of our corrupt nature,
brings forth continually in us none other fruits but rotten and unsavory
works of the flesh, in thoughts, words and doings unto condemnation.

Wherefore we humbly beseech thy fatherly goodness, even for thy son Jesus
Christ's sake, (whom thou have set forth for a purchaser of mercy to us
through faith in his blood) make our hearts clean: take away our stony
hearts, and give unto us a true and lively faith, working in us unfeigned
repentance and amendment of our sinful life. Have mercy upon us, and forgive
us our sins for thy Sons sake: certify our consciences of remission of the
same, by thy holy spirit: by whose operation so mortify in us our old man,
the whole body of sin, that we continually dying, unto sin, may walk in
newness of life, to the glory of thy holy name, through Jesus Christ our
Savior. Amen.

An other confession of sins.
O Eternal God and most merciful father, we confess, and acknowledge here
before thy divine majesty, Romans 3. Psalm. 14.
that we are miserable sinners, conceived and borne in sin and iniquity,
Psalm. 51. Romans 7.
so that in us there is no goodness: for the flesh evermore rebelleth against
the spirit, whereby we continually transgress thy holy precepts and
commandments, and so purchase to ourselves through thy just judgment, death,
and damnation. Gal. 5. Romans 2. Iere. 3. Esai. 20.
Notwithstanding, (O heavenly father) for as much as we are displeased with our
selves for the sins we have committed against thee, and do unfeignedly repent
us of the same, we most humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to show
thy mercy upon us, to forgive us al our sins, and to increase thy holy spirit
in us, Col. 3. Romans 6. Ephe. 4.5. 1. Pet. 2.
that we acknowledging from the bottom of our hearts our own unrighteousness,
may from henceforth, not only mortify our sinful lusts and affections, but
also bring forth such fruits as may be agreeable to thy most blessed will,
through Jesus Christ our only Savior: whom thou have already given an
oblation and an offering for our sins, and for whose sake we are certainly
persuaded that thou will deny us nothing that we shall ask in his name,
according to thy will. For thy spirit does assure our consciences, that thou
art our merciful father, and so love us thy children through him, that
nothing is able to remove thy heavenly grace and favor from us. To thee
therefore with the son and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world
without end. So be it.

A prayer to be said in the Morning.
O Eternal GOD and heavenly father, seeing that by thy great mercy we have
quietly passed this night, grant we beseech thee, yt we may bestow this day
wholly in thy service, so that all our thoughts, words, and deeds, may redound
to the glory of thy name, and good example of our brethren. And as it has
pleased thee to make the sun to shine upon the earth, to give us bodily
light: even so vouchsafe to illuminate our understanding with the brightness
of thy spirit, to direct us in the way of righteousness, so that what thing so
ever we shall apply our selves unto, our special care and purpose may be to
walk in thy fear, and to serve and honor thee, looking for all our wealth
and prosperity, to come from thy only blessing, and that we may take nothing
in hand, which shall not be agreeable to thy most blessed will.

Furthermore, that we may in such sort travel for our bodies, and for this
present life, that we may have always a further regard, that is, to the
heavenly life, which thou have promised to thy children: and in the mean
season, that it may please thee to preserve and defend us both in body and
soul, to strengthen us against all the temptations of the devil, and to
deliver us from all perils and dangers that may happen unto us, if we be not
defended by thy godly power.

And for as much as to begin well and not to continue, is nothing: we beseech
thee to receive us not only this day, into thy holy protection, but also for
the time of our whole life, continuing and increasing in us daily, thy grace
and good gifts thereof, until thou shall bring us to that happy state, where
we shall fully and for ever be joined unto thy Son Jesus Christ our Savior,
which is the true light of our souls, shining day and night perpetually.

And to the end that we may obtain such grace at thy hand, vouchsafe (most
merciful father) to forgive and forget all our sins, which we have
heretofore committed against thee, and for thine infinite mercies sake to pardon
the same, as thou have promised to those that ask of thee with unfeigned heart,
for whom, as for our selves, we make our humble petitions unto thee, in the
name of thy son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in such sort, as he has
taught us, saying: Our father, etc.

An other prayer to be said in the Morning.
O Almighty and most gracious God, we heartily thank thee for the sweet
sleep and comfortable rest, which thou have given us this night past: and for
as much as thou have commanded by thy holy word, that no man should be idle,
but all occupied in godly and virtuous exercises, every man according to his
calling: we most humbly beseech thee, that thine eyes may attend upon us, daily
defend us, cherish, comfort, govern us, and al our counsels, studies, and
labors, in such wise, that we may spend and bestow this day according to thy
most holy will, setting thee always before our eyes, living in thy fear,
working that may be found acceptable before thy divine Majesty, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. So be it.

An other prayer for the Morning.
WE humbly and heartily give thanks unto thee (O heavenly father) through thy
dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, that to thy innumerable benefits, hitherto
powered upon our souls and upon our bodies, thou have kept us this night past
from many evils, both spiritual and corporal, and now of thy mercy do
offer and give us time to repent and to amend our lives, so that we might live
henceforth, not as we will, but as thou will: and as our bodies do draw
continually nearer and nearer their end (the grave I mean:) so our souls
might approach to their end, that is, heaven and not hell: for in one state we
stand not still, but either we are nearer and nearer the happy state of life,
or else the unhappy condition of death eternal.

Wherefore we beseech thee to be merciful unto us, good father, and as of thy
goodness thou give us time to repent and live godly, so of the same thy
goodness in Christ, we humbly beseech thee to give us thy gracious gift of
true, holy, perfect, and perpetual repentance, that we may more and more
lament our former sinful life, trusting unfeignedly in thy rich mercy, through
the merits of Jesus Christ, for the pardon of all our sins, and that we may
unfeignedly purpose, and effectually labor to amend our lives this day, and
so long as we have to live, in all our doings and words, and even in our very
thoughts, to the praise of thy holy name, and good example of our brethren.

And for as much as thou know our weakness, our ignorance, and great
untowardness to carry any great cross or affliction: we beseech thee our
sweet father, so to temper and order al things toward us this day and for
ever, that we be never further proved and tempted, then thou will make us able
to bear, and so to help us in the same, as may be most to thy glory and our
salvation, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An Evening prayer.
O Lord God, father everlasting, and full of pity, we acknowledge and
confess, that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much less to
present our selves before thy divine Majesty, with confidence that thou will
hear our prayers and grant our requests, if we consider our own wretched
deseruings. For our consciences do accuse us, and our sins witness against us,
and we know that thou art an upright Judge, which do not justify the
sinners and wicked men, ^xod. 2.
but punishest the faults of such as transgress thy commandments. Yet most
merciful father, since it has pleased thee, to command us to call upon thee
in all our troubles and adversities, promising even then to help us, when we
feel our selves, as it were swallowed up of death and desperation, ^sal. 50.
^sal. 18.
we utterly renounce all worldly confidence and trust, and flee to thy
sovereign goodness, as our only stay and refuge, beseeching thee not to call
to remembrance our manifold sins and wickedness, Psalm. 79.
whereby we continually provoke thy wrath and indignation against us: neither
our negligence, nor our unkindness, which have neither worthily esteemed,
nor in our lives sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of thy holy Gospel
revealed unto us: but rather to accept the obedience and death of thy son
Jesus Christ our Lord, Heb. 9.10
who by offering up his body in sacrifice once for all, has made a sufficient
recompense for all our sins.

Have mercy therefore upon us (O Lord) and forgive us our offenses. Teach us
by thy holy spirit, Psalm. 19.
that we may rightly way them, and earnestly repent us for the same: and so
much the rather (O Lord our God) because that the reprobate, ^sal. 58. ^sal. 5.
and such as thou have forsaken, can not praise thee, nor call upon thy name:
but the repenting heart, the sorrowful mind, the conscience oppressed,
hungering and thirsting for thy grace, shall ever more set forth thy praise
and glory.

^sal. 22.
And albeit we be but worms and dust, yet thou art our creator, and we be the
work of thy hands: ^. Cor. 6.
yea thou art our father, and we thy children: thou art our shepherd, and we
thy flock: thou art our redeemer, and we thy people whom thou have dearly
bought: ^ere. 10.
thou art our God, and we are thine inheritance.

^sal. 6.
Correct us not therefore in thine anger (O Lord our God) neither according to
our deserts do thou punish us, but mercifully chastise us with a fatherly
affection, that all the world may know, that at what time so ever a sinner
does repent him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, ^zech. 18
thou will put away all his wickedness out of thy remembrance, as thou have
promised by thy holy Prophet.

Finally, forasmuch as it has pleased thee to make the night for man to rest
in, as thou have ordained him the day to travel, grant (O dear father) that
we may so take our bodily rest, that our souls may continually watch for the
time that our Lord Jesus Christ shall apeare for our full deliverance out of
this mortal life, Luke 12. Matthew. 6. Luke 22.
and in the mean season that we be not overcome by any fantasies, dreams, or
other temptations, but may fully set our minds upon thee, love thee, fear
thee, and rest in thee, in such sort that our very sleep also may be to the
glory of thy holy name.

Furthermore, that our sleep be not excessive or over much, after the
insatiable desire of the flesh, but only sufficient to content our weak
nature, that we may the better be disposed to live in all godly conversation to
the glory of thy holy name, and profit of our brethren, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: in whose name we make our humble petitions unto thee, as he
has taught us.

Our father which etc. Almighty and everliving God, vouchsafe we beseech thee
to grant us perfect continuance in thy lively faith, augmenting and increasing
the same in us daily, until we grow to the full measure of our perfection in
Christ: whereof we make our confession, saying: I believe in God the father,
etc.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us, and
be merciful unto us: the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us,
and grant us his peace.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the
holy Ghost be with us, and remain with us for ever. So be it. 2. Cor. 13.

An other Evening prayer.
MOst merciful God and tender Father, which besides thine inestimable mercies
declared and given unto us in the making of the world for our sakes, in
redeeming of us by the death of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, in the calling
of us to the knowledge of thy blessed word, in keeping of us hitherto in thy
holy Church, and in thy most gracious governing of us, and all things hitherto
for our singular wealth and commodity, have also most fatherly cared for us,
and kept us this day from all dangers both of soul and body, giving us
health, food, apparel, and all other things necessary for the comfort and
succor of this poor and miserable life, which many other do want: for these
and all other thy good gifts and gracious benefits, which thou of thine own
goodness only and fatherly providence have hitherto powered upon us, and do
presently power upon us and many other, we most humbly thank thee and praise
thy holy name, beseeching thee, that as all things are now hidden by means of
the darkness which thou have sent over the earth, so thou would vouchsafe to
hide and bury all our sins, which this day or at any time heretofore we
have committed against thy holy commandments: and as now we purpose to lay
our bodies to rest, so grant the guard of thy good Angels to keep the same
this night and for evermore: and when soever our last sleep of death shall
come, grant that it may be in thee good father, so that our bodies may rest
both temporally and eternally, to thy glory and our joy, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. So be it.

An other Evening prayer.
O Eternal God and most merciful father, who this day, and all the time of our
life have graciously defended, nourished, and preserved our souls and bodies,
and made such fatherly provision for us poor sinners, ye of thy loving
kindness we have rich portions, not only in the creatures of heaven and earth,
but also in that plentiful redemption which thy most dear son Jesus Christ
has purchased for us: grant unto us (O merciful father) the assistance of thy
grace and holy spirit, that as our bodies shall now take their natural
rest, even so our souls and minds, at the beholding of thy goodness toward
us, may quiet themselves in thee, and conceive such inward pleasure and
heavenly sweetness in thy love, that whatsoever we shall from henchfoorth,
either think, speak, or do, it may be all to the honor of thy holy name,
through Jesus Christ thy dear son our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Thy mighty hand and outstretched arm (O Lord) be still our defense: thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear son, be our salvation:
thy truth and holy word our instruction: thy grace and holy spirit, our
comfort and consolation unto the end, and in the end.

A prayer for the remission of sins.
O Almighty and everliving Lord God, the dear Father of our Savior Jesus
Christ, which have made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is,
which art the only ruler and governor, conseruer and keeper of all things,
together with thy dearly beloved Son Christ Jesus our Lord, and with the
holy ghost the comforter: O holy, righteous, and wise: O strong, terrible,
mighty, and fearful Lord God, governor of the whole world, judge of al men: O
exorable, patient, and most gracious father, whose eyes are upon the ways of
all men, and are so clean, that they cannot abide impiety: thou searchest the
hearts, and triest the very thoughts and reins of all men, thou hate
sin, and abhorrest iniquity.

For sins sake thou have grievously punished mankind, thy most dear
creature, as thou have declared by the penalty of death laid upon all the
children of Adam: by the casting of Adam and his offspring out of Paradise, by
the cursing of the earth: by the drowning of the world: by the burning of Sodom
and Gomor: by hardening the heart of Pharao, so that no miracle could convert
him: by the drowning of him and his people in the red sea: by the
overthrowing of the Israelites in the wilderness, so that of six hundredth
thousand there were but two that entered into the land of promise: by rejecting
King Saul: by the punishments upon thy servant David, notwithstanding his
hearty repentance: by grievously afflicting Solomon in himself and his
posterity: by the captivity of the ten tribes: and by the thraldom of the
Jews, wherein until this present day they continue, a notable spectacle of thy
wrath to the world, against, and for sin.

But of all spectacles of thy anger against sin the greatest and most
notable is the death and bloody passion of thy dearly beloved son Jesus
Christ. Great was thine anger against sin, when in heaven and earth nothing
could be found which might appease thy wrath, save the bloudshedding of thine
only and most dearly beloved son, in whom, was and is all thy delight. Great
was the sore of sin that needed such a salve: mighty was the malady, that
needed such a medicine. If in Christ, in whom was no sin, thy wrath was so
fiarce of our sins, that he was constrained to cry: My God, my god, why have
thou forsaken me? How great and importable then is thine anger against us,
which are nothing but sinful? They that are thy children, through the
contemplation of thine anger against sin, set forth most evidently in the
death of Christ, do tremble and are afraid, lamenting them selves upon him,
and heartily crying for mercy: whereas the wicked are altogether careless and
contemptuous, nothing lamenting their iniquities, or crying to thee heartily
for mercy and pardon. Amongst whom we are rather to be placed, the^ amongst
thy children, for that we are so shameless for our sins, and careless for
thy wrath, heaping daily sin upon sin, so that the measure has ouerflowed
and ascended up to heaven, and brought thy heavy plagues upon us, which are
but earnest for greater to ensue: therefore to us pertains shame, and nothing
else is due but confusion.

What shall we do? what shall we say? who can give us penitent hearts? who
can open our lips, that our mouths might make acceptable confession unto thee?
Alas, of our selves we cannot think any good, much less wish it, and least of
all do it. As for Angels, or any other creatures, they have nothing but that
which they have received, and they are made to minister unto us: So that where
it passes the power of the master, the minister must needs want. Alas then,
what shall we do? Thou art holy, and we unholy: thou art good, and we
nothing but evil: thou art pure, and we altogether impure: thou art light, and
we most dark darkness: how then can there be any agreement betwixt us? O
what now may we do? Despair? No, for thou art God, and therefore good: thou
art merciful, and therefore thou forgiuest sins: with thee is mercy and
propiciation and therefore thou art worshipped.

when Adam had sinned, thou gave him mercy before he desired it: and will thou deny us mercy which now desire the same? Adam excused his fault and
accused thee: but we accuse our selves and excuse thee: and shall we be sent
empty away? Noe found favor when thy wrath abounned, and shall we seeking
grace, be frustrate? Abraham was pulled out of Idolatry, when the world was
drowned therein: and art thou his God only? Israel in captivity in Egypt was
graciously visited, and delivered: and dear God, the same good Lord shall we
always be forgotten?

How often in the wilderness did thou defer and spare thy plagues at the
requests of Moses, when the people them selves made no petition to thee? and
seeing we not only now make our petitions unto thee through thy goodness,
but also have a mediator for us, far above Moses, even Jesus Christ, shall
we (I say) dear Lord depart ashamed? So soon as David said, I have sinned,
thou did forthwith answer him, that he should not dye: thou had taken
away his sins: and gracious God, even the self same God, shall not we which
now with David gladly confess, that we have sinned, shall we (I say) not
hear by thy good spirit, that our sins be pardoned? O grant that with
Manasses we may find favor and mercy.

Remember that thou have not spared thine own only dear Son Jesus Christ,
but given him to dye for our sins, to rise for our righteousness, to ascend
for our possession taking in heaven, and to appear before thee for us for
ever, a high priest after the order of Melchizedech, that through him we might
have free access to come to thy throne, now rather of grace, then of justice.
Remember that thou by him have bidde^ us ask, and promised that we should
receive, saying: Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and
it shall be opened unto you* O dear GOD and most meek and merciful father,
we heartily beseech thee to be merciful unto us, for this thy Christ's sake,
for his deaths sake, for thy promise, truth, and mercies sake. Have mercy
upon us, pardon and forgive us al our sins, iniquities and trespasses, what
so ever we have committed against thee, in thought, word or deed, ever or at
any time hitherto by any means. Dear father, have mercy upon us. Though we
be poor, yet our Christ is rich: though we be sinners, yet he is righteous:
though we be fools, yet he is wise: though we be impure, yet is he pure and
holy: for his sake therefore be merciful unto us.

Call to mind how thou have promised that thou will power out of thy clean
waters, and wash us from our filth, and cleanse us from our evils. Forget not
that thou have promised to take from us our stony hearts, and to give us soft
hearts, new hearts, and to put into the midst of us right spirits. Remember
thy covenant, namely, that thou will be our God, and we shall be thy people:
that thou will put out of thy memory for ever, all our unrighteousness, and
have promised to write in our minds and hearts thy law and testimonies.

Remember that thou do straightly charge us to have none other Gods but thee,
saying, that thou art the Lord our God. O then declare the same to us all, we
heartily now beseech thee. Forgive us our sins, forget our iniquities,
cleanse us from our filthiness, wash us from our wickedness, power out thy
holy spirit upon us. Take from us our hard hearts, our stony hearts, our
impenitent hearts, our distrusting and doubtful hearts, our carnal, our
secure, our idle hearts, our impure, malicious, arrogant, envious, wrathful,
impatient, covetous, hypocritical, and epicurical hearts: and in place thereof
give us new hearts, soft hearts, faithful hearts, merciful hearts, loving,
obedient, chaste, pure, holy, righteous, true, simple, lowly, and patient
hearts, to fear thee, to love thee, to trust in thee for ever.

Write thy law in our hearts, grave it in our minds, we heartily beseech thee.
Give us the spirit of prayer: make us diligent and happy in the works of our
vocation: take into thy custody and governance for ever our souls and
bodies, our lives, and all that ever we have. Tempt us never further, the^ thou will make us able to bear: and what so ever thou know we have need of in
soul or body (dear God and gracious father,) vouchsafe to give us the same
in thy good time: and always, as thy children guide us, so that our life may
please thee, and our death praise thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord: for
whose sake we heartily pray thee, to grant these things thus asked, and al
other things necessary for soul and body, not only to us, but to al others
also, for whom thou would that we should pray, specially for thy children
that be in thraldom, in exile, in prison, misery, heaviness, poverty,
sickness, etc.

Be merciful to the whole realm of England, and grant us all true
repentance, and turn from us the evils that we so wickedly have deserved.
Pardon our enemies, persecutors and slaunderers, and if it be thy pleasure
turn their hearts. Be merciful unto our parents, brethren, and sisters,
friends, kinsefolkes, and familiars, neighbors, and such as by any means
thou have coupled and lincked to us by love or otherwise: and unto us poor
sinners here gathered together in thy holy name, grant thy blessing and holy
spirit to sanctify us, and dwell in us as thy dear children, to keep us this
day and for ever from all evil, to thy eternal glory, and our everlasting
comfort, and the profit of thy Church, which mercifully maintain, cherish and
comfort, strengthening them that stand, so that they never fall, lifting up
them that be fallen, and keep us from falling from thy truth, through the
merits of thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ our only Savior, which
lives and reigns with thee and the hol^e Ghost, to whom be all praise and
honor, both now and for ever. Amen.

I. B.

A prayer for the true knowledge of the mystery of our redemption in Christ.
O Almighty God, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by him also our
father, the father of all mercy, and God of all consolation, have mercy upon
us and hear our prayers. We most humbly beseech thee, for thy dear son
Jesus Christ's sake, for his merits and cruel death which he suffered to
deliver us from eternal death, and the power of darkness: send into our
hearts thy spirit of truth, to work in us a true, lively, and steadfast faith,
that the clear light and brightness of thy Gospel, the glory of Christ, may
shine unto us, and lighten our minds, that we may learn and understand the
wonderful and unspeakable riches of the mystery of our redemption in Christ
and by Christ. Ephe. 2.
O Father of glory, give unto us the spirit of wisdom, and bring us into
the true knowledge of this thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, and the knowledge
of thy self. Open and lighten the eyes of our minds and understanding, that
we may know what the hope is whereunto thou have called us, and how rich the
glory of thine inheritance is upon thy Saints, and the exceeding greatness of
thy power toward us: that by true faith, by understanding and knowledge of
thine eternal wisdom (which is Jesus Christ) we may be in deed as we are
called, true Christians, and unfeigned professors of thy holy name, to worship
thee in spirit and truth, and to set forth the glory of thy grace given unto
us in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

O dear Father, write in our hearts love of thy law, hate to all sin,
thankfulness of heart, and continual heat of thy holy spirit, for thy son
Jesus Christ's sake: To whom with thee and thy holy spirit, be all honor,
majesty, glory, thanks, rule, empire and dominion, for evermore. Amen.

A form of thanksgiving for our redemption, and prayer for the strength and
increase of faith.
Lord increase our faith.

Luk, 17.
Ephe. 4.
Eternal praise and thanks be given unto thee, dear God and father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which have blessed us with all spiritual blessing in
heavenly things by Christ, in that thou have chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world was laid, that we should be without blame before thee
through him, by whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of our sins: in whom, after we heard the word of truth, the
gospel of our salvation wherein we believed, we are sealed with the holy
spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, which spirit has
and does bear witness unto our spirits, that we are thy children, and
therefore cries in our hearts: Abba Father. (...) 8.
And thus (most gracious father) when thou have once given the earnest penny
of our salvation into our hearts, thou do not repent of thy gift and
calling, neither will thou at any time break thy covenant of grace and mercy
in Christ thy Sons merits, confirmed in us by that seal and love token. For
what though we be weak in our belief, Romans 3.
shall our unbelief make thy promise of no effect? No, thou will always be
found true, but all men are liars. And yet Lord, thou do most graciously
behold and accept, be it never so little a spark of faith. We say therefore
and cry unto thee, with one that wept and said: Matthew. 9.
I believe Lord, help my unbelief. Yea, that little, be it never so little, is
thy mere gift also. The which as thou begun, so (most merciful Lord) increase
the same more and more, to the peace and comfort of our conscience, and the
glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

A thanksgiving to God for his great benefits.
Honor and praise be given to thee (O Lord God almighty) most dear father
of heaven, for all thy mercies and loving kindness showed unto us, in that it
has pleased thy gracious goodness, freely and of thine own accord, to elect
and choose us to salvation before the beginning of the world: and even like
continual thanks be given unto thee, for creating us after thine own image,
for redeeming us with the precious blood of thy dear Son, when we were
utterly lost, for sanctifying us with thy holy spirit in the revelation and
knowledge of thy sacred word, for helping and succouring us in all our need and
necessity, for saving us from all dangers both of body and soul, for
comforting us so fatherly in all our troubles and afflictions, for sparing us so
long, and giving us so large a time of repentance. These benefits (O most
merciful father) like as we do acknowledge that we have received of thy only
goodness, even so we beseech thee for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake, to
grant us always thy holy spirit, whereby we may continually grow in
thankfulness toward thee, be led in all truth, and comforted in all
adversity.

Strengthen our faith, O Lord: kindle it more and more in feruentnesse and
love toward thee and our neighbors for thy sake. Suffer us not (most dear
father) to receive thy word any more in vain, but grant us always the
assistance of thy grace and holy spirit, that in heart, word, and deed,
Halowe^ be thy name.
we may sanctify and do worship to thy holy name: that we may help to
amplify and increase thy kingdom, Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done.
and that what so ever thou sendest, we may be heartily well content with thy
good will and pleasure. Suffer us not to lack the thing (O father) without the
which we can not serve thee: Give us this day, etc.
but bless thou so all the works of our hands, that we may have sufficient,
and not to be chargeable, but rather helpefull unto other. Be merciful, O
Lord, unto our offenses: Forgive us etc.
and seeing our debt is great which thou have forgiven us in Jesus Christ, make
us to love thee and our neighbors so much the more. Be thou (O father) our
captain and defender in all temptations: Lead us not into temptation.
hold thou us by thy merciful hand, that we thereby may be delivered from
all inconveniences, But deliver us from evil.
and end our lives in the sanctifying and honoring of thy name, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for true mortification.
O God my creator, preserver and everlasting defender, where first in my
creation I was made like unto thine own likeness, the devil (alas) has
since by Adams fall made me ougly, monstrous, and like evil favored to him
self. For what are now, Col. 3.
Lord, mine earthly members, but (as thine Apostle writes) adultery,
whoredom, uncleanness, unnatural lusts, evil concupiscence, covetousness
(which is the worshipping of Idols) and such other, for the which thy wrath is
wont to come upon the children of unbelief? Nevertheless, Lord, of thy great
mercy and goodness, against this so great a mischief, a much greater remedy
thy fatherly providence has ordained: for thou have sent Jesus Christ thy
dear and only natural Son into this world, the vale of miseries, to loose
the works of the devil, 1. John 3.
and to take away my sins.

1. John 5.
Therefore satan has now nothing to brag of, for through Christ, all that
believe in thee and so become thy children, do overcome the world, the flesh,
John 3.
and the devil. And this is the victory which overcomes the^ all, even our
faith. That faith I mean, which is persuaded that who so ever believes in
Christ, shall not perish, 1. John 5.
but have everlasting life.

That faith which believes ye testimony to be true which thou God the father
do testify of thy son, so making thee no liar: and this is ye testimony,
that thou have given us eternal life. Romans 8.
That faith which believes that thou father, who raisedst up Christ from
death, shall also quicken our mortal bodies through thy holy spirit dwelling
in us. That faith which believes it to be true which thy Son Christ
affirmed with a double oath, John 14.
verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes in me, the works that I do,
the same shall he do, and greater works then these shall he do, because I
go to my father. And finally, that faith which believes that now Christ
has been lift up on the cross, John 12.
he shall draw al things unto him. This faith (I say) is the victory which
overcomes our enemies, the devil, the world, and our flesh.

Thou therefore, dear father, which have promised to give what so ever I shall
ask in thy dear son Jesus name, John 14
for thy great mercy and infallible truths sake, do now in me the thing
that he came for: lose in me the works of the devil, and take away my sins,
1. John ^
I beseech thee: make steadfast my faith and confidence in thy promised mercies
and merciful promises: so that I assuredly believing in thee, may have (as
thou promisest) everlasting life, and making thee (dear God) no liar, may
believe, feel, and know in my heart and conscience, that the same everlasting
life is thy mere and free gift unto me, yea, already of thy great goodness,
undoubtedly given me, being now translated from death to life.

Of a thankfulness whereof, Lord, cause me now daily to mortify my earthly
members: Romans 8.
yea, dear father, since thy spirit which raised up Christ from death, dwells
within me, do thou (who raisedst Christ from death) quicken my mortal body
through thy spirit so dwelling in me, I beseech thee: yea Lord Jesus, according
to thy promise (because thou art now gone to thy father) make me work this
wonderful great work yt thou spakest of, John 14.
I mean, make me being of my self but a lump of sin, and a monster most
ougly, (as the vices whereon the members of my earthly body are above declared
to be co^pact, Col. 3.
do prove) make me, I say, yet through thy grace, to hate, abhor, flee, and
subdue all adultery, whoredom, uncleanness, unnatural lusts, evil
concupiscence, inordinate desires, wantonness, tenderness, delicateness,
idleness, drunkenness, gluttony, slothfulness, distrust, despair,
ignorance, weakness, wilfulness, idolatry, superstition, hypocrisy,
heresy, error, sects* variance, strife, wrath, envy, slanders, lying,
swearing, cursing, vainglorie, pride, covetousness, theft, deceit, flattery,
and what so ever else, O Lord, fights or rebelleth against thy holy spirit:
and then (O Father) I will boast and make vaunt against mine enemy the devil,
that I have done greater works then thy dear son Jesus did, John 14.
at what time he spoke these words among the Jews, because albeit he
vanquished Satan, yet in as much as he himself was utterly without sin,
the victory seemed the more easy. But I to vanquishe satan, being my self
altogether sinful, yea, contrary to my most sinful nature to subdue sin,
the devil, and mine own flesh, it seems a more victory and a greater work
then the other. For the which nevertheless, I will with all submission
acknowledge unto thy divine majesty, that the whole victory, Lord, in deed,
is thine, and thy holy spirit the beginner and finisher both of the will and
the work.

Now therefore (Lord Jesus) strengthen me with thy grace and might, that thou
may by me a most sinful wretch, draw all these my earthly members and
horrible vices before rehearsed, under my feet, that I may not only fight
against them, but also subdue them, Romans 8. John 12.
so that they may all turn to the best for me, as meet matter whereon I may
exercise my faith, power forth my hearty prayer, and give thee most hearty
thanks for victory: whereby I may learn and have experience that thou have in
me drawn all things unto thee, insomuch as thou thus (Lord) of thy divine
power drawest both the devil and the sin that dwells in me, to set forth
thine honor and glory, which thing for thy mercies sake bring to pass, O God
my creator, preserver and everlasting defender.

A meditation for the exercise of true mortification.
HE that will be ready in weighty matters to deny his own will, and to be
obedient to the will of God, the same had need to accustom him self to deny
his desires in matters of less weight, and to exercise mortification of his
own will in trifles. For if that our affections by this daily custom be not
(as it were) half slain, surely, surely, when the plunge shall come, we shall
find the more to do. If we can not watch with Christ one hour, (as he says
to Peter) we undoubtedly can much less go to death with him. Wherefore, that
in great tentations we may be ready to say with Christ: Not my will, but thy
will be done: (for as much as this commonly comes not to pass, but where the
roots of our lusts, by thy grace dear father, are almost rotten and rooted
out by a daily denial of that they desire) I humbly beseech thee for Christ's
sake to help me herein.

First pardon me my cherishing, and (as it were) watering of mine affections,
obeying them in their devises and superfluous desires: where through, in that
they have taken deep root, and are too lively in me. I secondly do beseech
thee to pull them up by the roots out of my heart, and so henceforth to
order me, that I may continually accustom my self to weaken the principal
root, that the by roots and branches may loose all their power. Grant me (I
beseech thee) that thy grace may daily mortify my concupiscence of pleasure in
things, that is, of wealth, riches, glory, liberty, favor of men, meats,
drinks, apparel, ease, yea, and life it self, that the horror and
impatiencie of more grievous things may be weakened, and I made more patient in
adversity.

Whereunto I further desire and pray thy goodness, dear father, that thou will
add this: namely that I may for ever become obedient and ready to do thy
good will in all things heartily and willingly to serve thee, and do whatsoever
may please thee. For doubtless altho^gh we accustom our selves in the
pleasant things of this life, to a mortification and denial of our selves,
yet we shall find enough to do, when more better and weighty crosses come.
For if thy son our savior (ever wont to obey thy good will) prayed so
heartily and often: Not my will, but thy will be done, (whereby he declares
himself to be very man) how can it be, but we, whose nature is corrupt, not
only in nativity, but in the rest of our whole life also, shall find both our
hands full in great and greeuos temptations, wholly to resign our selves unto
thee.

Grant therefore dear father, for thy Christ's sake, to me a most miserable
wretch, thy grace and spirit to be effectual in me, that daily I may
accustom my self, to deny my will in more easy and pleasant things of this
life, that when need shall be, I may com unto thee with a resigned will,
always steadfastly expecting thy mercy, and in the mean season, continually
obeying thee with readiness and willingness, doing what so ever may most please
thee, through Christ our Lord, who lives with thee, etc.

A meditation of the coming of Christ to judgment, and of the reward both of
the faithful and unfaithful.
OH Lord Jesus Christ the son of the everliving God, by whom all things were
made, are ruled and governed: as of thy love for our redemption thou did not
disdain to be our mediator, and to take upon thee our nature in the womb of
a virgin purely and without sin, by the operation of thy holy spirit, that
both thou might in thine own person wonderfully beautify and exalt our
nature, and work the same in us also, first abolishing the guiltines of sin
by remission, then sin it self by death, and last of all, death by raising
up again these our bodies, that they may be like to thine own glorious and
immortal body, according to the power wherewith thou art able to subject all
things unto thee: as (I say) of thy love for our redemption thou becamest man,
and that most poor and afflicted upon earth, by the space of three and thirty
years at the least, in most humility, and paiedst the price of our ransom by
thy most bitter death and passion: (for the which I most heartily give thanks
to thee) so of the same thy love toward us, in thy good time thou will come
again in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory, with flaming fire,
with thousa^ds of Saints, with Angels of thy power, with a mighty cry, shout of
an Archangel, and blast of a trumpe, Matthew. 24
soudenly as a lightening which shines from the East, etc. when men think
least, even as a thief in the night, when men be asleep, thou will so come, I
say, thus soudenly in the twinkling of an eye, Matthew. 2^
all men that ever have been, be, or shall be, with women and children,
appearing before thy tribunal seat, to render an account of all things,
which they have thought, spoken, and done against thy law, openly and before
all Angels, Saints, and devils, and so shall their corruptible body put on
incorruption: then shall they be endued with immortality, and glory: then
shall they be with thee, and go whither thou go: then shall they hear:
Come blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from ye
beginning etc. then shall they be set on seats of majesty, judging ye whole
world: then shall they reign with thee for ever: then shall God be al in all
with them and to them: then shall they enter and inherit heavenly Jerusalem,
and the glorious restfull land of Canaan, where it is always day and never
night, where is no manner of weeping, tears, infirmity, hunger, cold,
sickness, envy, malice, nor sin: but always joy without sorrow, mirth
without measure, pleasure without pain, heavenly harmony, most pleasant
melody, saying and singing: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hoastes, etc.

Finally the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man, that they shall then inherit and most surely
enjoy, although here they be tormented, prisoned, solicited of Satan, tempted
of the flesh, and entangled with the world, wherethrough they are enforced to
cry: Apoc. 22*
Thy kingdom come: Come Lord Jesus, etc.

How amiable are thy tabernacles? Like as the Heart desires the water brooks,
Psalm. 42.
etc. Now let thy servant depart in peace. I desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ. Romans 8.
We mourn in our selves, waiting for the deliverance of our bodies, etc. Oh
gracious Lord, when shall I find such mercy with thee, that I may repent,
believe, hope and look for these things, with the full fruition of those
heavenly joys which thou have prepared for all them that fear thee, and so
rest with thee for evermore.

I.B.

A meditation of the life everlasting, the place where it is, and the
incomparable joys thereof.
THat there is an everlasting life none will deny, but such as will deny God.
For if he be true and just, (which he must needs be, or else he is not God)
then can there not be but an eternal life. That he has both spoken it, and
promised it, in Mat. 25. 1. Cor. 15. Heb. 4.11.13. 1. Pet. 1. it plainly
appears and elsewhere in very many places. So that to deny an everlasting
life, is to deny God, to deny Christ and all that ever he did: also to deny
all piety and religion, to condemn of foolishness all good men, Martyrs.
Confessors, Evangelists, Prophets, Patriarchs. Finally the denial of eternal
life is nothing else but a denial of the immortality of the soul, and so a
plain making of man nothing better then beasts. If it be so, let us then eat
and drink, 1. Cor. 15
for to morrow we shall die. Lord preserve us from this Saduceall and
Epicuriall impiety, and grant us for thy mercies sake dear God, that we may
be assuredly persuaded, that there is in deed an eternal life and bliss with
thee, for them that put their trust in thee: amongst whom account me for thy
mercies sake.

Again this eternal life, Where this eternal life is.
and the place appointed for them that be thy servants, all men do grant to
be with thee. Albeit they do not think, that because thou art every where,
therefore eternal life is every where. For they by thy word do know, that in
as much as no man can see thee and live, John 4.
this eternal life and thy blessed presence is most pleasant and had in
fruition, after in an other world, whereunto by corporal death they do
depart, and are translated to a place above them, ^. Tim. 6.
where thou dwell lest in a light whereunto no man can approach. Abraham's bosom
(they read) was above, as the place for the wicked was allow and beneath.
Helias was caught up into heaven, and thy dear Son our Savior prayed, ye
where he is, John 17.
those also might be which thou had given him, and might see his glory.
Now he (dear father) we learn by thy spirit, was ascended and taken up in
his very body into heaven, Acts. 7.
whither Stephan looked up and saw thy Christ standing on thy right hand, to
whom he prayed, O Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Grant, I beseech thee,
gracious God and father, that I may have a clean heart, more and more to see
thee, and so in spirit to see and look often upon this place: whither bring
me at the length in body also I humbly pray thee.

Now what a thing this everlasting life is, no man is able to conceive, much
less able to utter: For the peace of God which is eternal life, 1. Cor. ^.
passes al understanding. The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard,
neither can man's heart conceive those things which thou (dear God) have
prepared for them yt love thee. What so ever therefore can be spoken or
imagined of thy kingdom, of the clearenesse, joy, and felicity of the same,
is nothing in comparison, as we may see by thy prophets: which (because they
could not otherwise) under corporal things, have shaddowed the same. What
knowledge may be had in this life of the life everlasting.
So that the confidence of eternal life, what a thing it is, can in no wise be
told. Howbeit, somewhat we may be brought into some sight of it by earthly
things, to think on this sort. If God have given here so many things in a
strange place, how many are ye great good things yt be at home? if in prison
are so many mercies, how many are they in the Palace? If the wicked have so
many benefits, what is the store prepared for thy servants, Oh Lord? If thy
children find such co^forts in the day of tears and mourning, what shall they
find in the day of the marriage? If with beasts men being, have ye use of
innumerable blessings, Oh how many are the blessings which they shall enjoy
with thy Angels, and with thy self (O dear God) when they shall see thee, and
have the fruition of thee: in who^ is fulness without lothing of all good and
fair things, so that nothing can be more desired, and that for evermore.

This thy chidren do not so see as they now believe it: I say yt even in their
bodies they shall see it for ever: as Job said. Job. 19.
They believe that they shall see thee, and their own eyes behold thee, when
these our corporal eyes, our bodies being raised, shall do their duties. Such
a knowledge of thee they believe to have, as shall not be only intellectual
and by faith, as now it is, but even a full sight and fruition, yea, a
conjunction and fellowship with thee. 1. Cor. 13
Now they see but as in a glass, even in a dark speaking: but then they shall
see thee face to face. Heb. 11.
For faith, though it be the substance of things hoped for and a certain dark
sight of thee: yet it may not be compared to the reward of faith, 1 Ioh. 13.
and glorious sight which we shall see in the life to come, when faith and hope
shall cease.

Now, thy children know that they be thy sons, though it yet appear not
what they shall be. We know (say they) that when our Christ God and man shall
appear, then shall we be like unto him, for we shall see him even as he is. Oh
great prerogative to see Christ as he is: which is not to be considered so much
for ye manhood, as for the godhead it self, as Paul does also write, 1. Cor.
15
that when all things are subject unto the Son, then shall he be subject unto
thee dear father also, yt God may be al in all. And therefore Christ our Savior
prayed for us, that we might know thee the only true God: Not that our Christ
thy Son is not with thee, the true, coequall, and substantial God, but that
we might know how that after the judgment such a mystery of his
mediatourship shall not be in heaven, as is now in earth.

Then thou blessed Trinity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost shall be al in all: thou shall be the end of our desires: thou shall be
looked upon without end: thou shall be loved without lothing: thou shall be
praised without weariness. Although lothsomenesse be wont to follow fullness,
yet our fullness in the contemplation of thy pleasures shall bring with it no
kind at all of lothsomenesse. Satietie of joys shall be in the beholding of
thee. Psalm. 16.
Pleasures are on thy right hand for ever. We shall be satisfied when we
arise after thine image, Psalm. 17.
I mean in the resurrection.

O dear father, show thy self unto us, and we ask no more. Oh grant us
with thy saints in everlasting life, to praise with perpetual praises thy holy
name. Happy then and happy again were we, if that day were come, that we
might singe with thy Angels, elders, and innumerable thousands, a new song,
and say: Apoc. 5.
Thou Christ Jesus which wast slain, art worthy to receive power, and riches,
and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.

In this blessed life all kind of maladies, griefs, sorrows, and evils be far
away, and all full of all kind of mirth, joy and pleasure. Oh that we might
see now a little with saint John that holy city new Jerusalem, descending
from heaven prepared of God as a bride trimmed for her husband. Oh that we
might now something hear the great voice speaking out of the throne: Behold the
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and he shall be unto them their GOD: he will wipe away all tears
from their eyes, and death sha be no more, nor weeping, nor crying, nor
sorrow, for the former things are gone.

I. B.

An other meditation of the blessed state and felicity of the life to come.
THis body is but a prison, wherein the soul is kept, and that verily not
beautilfull nor bright, but most foul and dark, disquiet, frail, and filled
up with much vermin and venomous vipers (I mean it concerning our affections)
standing in an air most unwholesome, and prospect most loathsome, if a man
consider the excrements of it by the eyes, nose, mouth, ears, hands feet,
and all the other parts. So that no Bocardo, no Little ease, no Dungeon, no
Bishops prison, no Gatehowse, no sink, no pit, may be compared in any point to
be so evil a prison for the body, as the body is for and of the soul:
wherethrough the children of GOD have been occasioned to cry and lament their
long being in it. Oh says David, How long shall I lie in this prison? Oh
wretch yt I am (says Paul) who shall deliver me out of this body of sin?
Romans 7.
which is an heavy burden to the soul, as the wiseman says. And the godly
cry: Luke 2.
now let thy servant depart in peace. O ye I were dissolved, and had put off
this earthly and frail tabernacle. Psalm. 143.
Take me unto thee, and bring my soul out of this prison, that it may give
thanks unto thee, O Lord. For so long as we be in this body, we can not see
the Lord: yea, it is as an heavy habitation, and depresseth down sore the
spirit from the familiarity which it else should have with God. This world and
life is an exile, a vale of misery, a wilderness of it self, being void of
all virtues and necessaries for eternal life, full of enemies, sorrows,
sighings, sobbings, gronings, miseries, etc. In danger to hunger, cold,
heat, thirst, sores, sickness, tentations, trouble, death and innumerable
calamities, being momentanie, short, unstable, and nothing but vain, and
therefore is compared to a warfare, a woman's travel, a shaddowe, a smoke, a
vapor, a word, a storm, a tempest, in ye which Gods people feel great
molestatio^s, griefs, and troubles, now of satan him self, now of the world,
now of their own flesh, and that so wonderfully, diversely, daungerously, and
contrarily, that they are enforced to cry: O Lord, when shall we come and
appear before thee? when shall this misery end? when shall we be delivered
out of this vale of misery? out of this wilderness? out of these continual
afflictions and most perilous seas?

But where thou art (Lord and dear Father of mercy) there is not only no
prison, no doloures, no sorrow, no sighings, no tears, no sickness, no
hunger, no heat, no cold, no pain, no tentations, no displeasure, no malice,
no pride, no vncleansure, no contention, no torments, no horror, no sin, no
filth, no stinche, no dearth, no death, no weeping, no tears, no misery, no
mischief: there is (I say) not only no such thing, or any evil, noysom, or
displeasant thing, but all liberty, all light, all pleasantness, all joy,
rejoicing, mirth, pleasure, health, wealth, riches, glory, power, treasure,
honor, triumph, comfort, solace, love, unity, peace, concord wisdom,
virtue, melody, meekness, felicity, beatitude, and all that ever can be
wished or desired in most security, eternity, and perpetuity, that may be
thought not only of man, but of Angels an Archangels, yea above al thoughts.
1. Cor. 2.
The eye has not seen the like, the ear has not heard, nor no heart is able
to conceive in any point, any part of the blissful beatitude which is with
thee most dear Lord and Savior, most gracious God and comforter.

Where thou art, O blessed God, the Archangels, Angels, Thrones, Powers,
Dominatio^s, Cherubines, Seraphines, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Uirgins, Confessors, and righteous spirits cease not to sing night and day:
Holy, Holy, Apoc. 4.
Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Honor, majesty, glory, power, empire, and
dominion, be unto thee, Oh God the creator, O Lord Jesus the Redeemer, Oh holy
spirit the comforter. Apoc. 5.


In recordation of this, O how thy children rejoice? how contemn they the
pleasures of this world? How little esteem they any corporal grief or
shame? how desire they to be with thee? How amiable are thy tabernacles, Oh
Lord GOD of hoastes, Psalm. 84.
say they? My soul has a desire to enter into the Courts of the Lord: my
heart and my soul rejoices in the living GOD: blessed are they that dwell in
thy house, that they may be always praising thee. For one day in thy Courts,
is better then a thousand elsewhere. I had rather be a door keeper in the
house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness, for the Lord God
is a light and defense. Psalm. 42.
And again, Like as the Heart desires the water brooks, so longs my soul
after thee, O God. My soul is a thirst for God, yea, even for the living God.
When shall I come to appear before the presence of God? My soul thirsts for
thee, Psalm. 63.
my flesh also longs after thee, in a barren and dry land, where no water is.

They (thy children I mean O Lord) desire the day of that their redemption.
Romans ^.
Still they cry, Let thy kingdom come. Apoc. 22* Phil. 3.
They cry, Come Lord Jesus. They lift up their heads, looking for thy
appearing, Oh Lord, which will make their vile bodies, like to thine own
glorious and immortal body. For when thou shall appear, they shallbe like
unto thee. Thy Angels will gather them together, Matt. 24.
and they shall meet thee in the clouds, and be always with thee. They shall
hear this joyful voyce^: Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning.

Then shall they be like to thy Angels. Then shall they be like unto the Son
in thy kingdom. Matt. 13. Apoc. 7.
Then shall they have crowns of glory, and be endued with white garments of
innocence and righteousness, having palms of victory in their hands. Oh
happy is he that may but see that immortal and incorruptible inheritance which
they shall enjoy for evermore. Amen.

I. B.

A meditation of the presence of God.
THere is nothing that makes more to true godliness of life, then the
persuasion of thy presence, (dear father) and that nothing is hid from thee,
but all to thee is open, and naked, even our very thoughts which one day thou
will reveal and open either to our praise or punishment in this life: as thou
did David's faults which he did secretly. 2. Reg. 12. or in the life to com
Math. 25. for nothing is so hid that shall not be revealed. Therefore does the
prophet say: Woe to them that keep secret their thoughts, to hide their
counsel from the Lord, and do their works in darkness: saying, who sees us?

Grant me therefore dear God, mercy for all my sins, especially my hid
and close sins. Enter not into judgment with me, I humbly beseech thee, give
me to believe truly in thy Christ, that I never come into judgment for them,
and that with David I might so reveal them unto thee, that thou would in
thy great mercy cover them. And grant further, that henceforth I may always
think my self continually conuersaunt before thee, so that if I do well, I
need not to pass of the publishing of it, as hypocrites do: if I think or do
any evil, I may forthwith know that the same shall not always be hid from men.

Grant me that I may always have in mind that day wherein the hid works of
darkness shall be illuminated, and also that sentenee of thy son, that
nothing is so secret which shall not be revealed. So in trouble and wrong I
shall find comfort, and otherwise be kept through thy grace from evil, which
do thou work I humbly beseech thee for Christ's sake.

I.B.

A meditation of the providence of God.
God works al in all maruellously, justly, and holilie.
THis ought to be unto us most certain, that nothing is done without thy
providence, (O Lord) that is, that nothing is done, be it good or bad, sweet
or sower, but by thy knowledge, that is, by thy will, wisdom, and ordinance,
(for all these knowledge does comprehend in it) as by thy holy word we are
taught in many places, that even the life of a sparrowe is not without thy
will, Matthew ^^
nor any liberty or power upon a porket have all the devils in Hell, Matthew. ^.
but by thy appointment and will: which will we always must believe most
assuredly to be all just and good, how so ever otherwise it seem unto us: for
thou art marvelous and not comprehensible in thy ways, and holy in all thy
works.

But hereunto it is necessary also for us to know no less certeinely, God
works* by means, without means, and against means.
that though all things be done by thy providence, yet the same providence
has many and diverse means to work by, which means being contemned, thy
providence is contemned also. As for example. Meat is a mean to serve thy
providence for the preservation of health and life here, so that he which
contemns to eat because thy providence is certain and infallible, the same
contemns thy providence.

In deed, if it were so that meat could not be had, then should we not tie
thy providence to this mean, but make it free as thou art free, that is. that
without meat thou can help and give health and life, for it is not of any
need that thou use any instrument or mean to serve thy providence. Thy
power and wisdom is infinite, and therefore should we hang on thy providence
even when all is clean against us. But for our erudition and infirmities sake,
it has pleased thee by means to work and deal with us here, to exercise us
in obedience, and because we cannot ^lse (so great is our corruption) sustain
thy naked and bare presence.

Grant me therefore dear father, I humbly beseech thee for Christ's sake, ye
as I something now know these things, so I may use this knowledge to my
comfort and commodity in thee: that is, grant that in what state soever I be,
I may not doubt but the same does come to me by thy most just ordinance, yea,
by thy merciful ordinance: for as thou art just, so art thou merciful: yea,
thy mercy is above all thy works.

And by this knowledge grant me that I may humble my self to obey thee, and
look for thy help in time convenient, not only when I have means by which
thou may work, and art so accustomed to do: but also when I have no means,
but am destitute thereof, yea, when all means be directly and clean against
me: grant I say that I may yet still hang upon thee and thy providence, not
doubting of a fatherly end in thy good time.

Again, least I should contemn thy providence, or presume upon it by
vncoupling those things which thou have coupled together: preserve me from
neglecting thy ordinary and lawful means in all my needs, if so be I may
have them, and with good conscience use the^, although I know thy providence be
not tied to them further then pleases thee: and grant that I may with
diligence, reverence and thankfulness, use them, and thereto my deligence,
wisedeme and industry in all things lawefull to serve thereby thy providence,
if it so please thee: howbeit, so that I hang in no part on the means or on my
diligence, wisdom, and industry, but only on thy providence: which more and
more persuade me to be altogether fatherly and good, how far so ever
otherwise it appear and seem, yea, or else is felt of me. By this I being
preserved from negligence on my behalf, and despair or murmuring toward
thee, shall become diligent and patient through thy mere and alone grace:
which give and increase in me, to the praise of thy holy name for ever, through
Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

I. B.

A Meditation of Gods power, beauty, goodness, etc.
Because thou Lord would have us to love thee, not only do thou will,
entice, allure, and provoke us, but also do command us so to do, promising
thy self unto such as love thee, and threatening us with damnation, if we do
otherwise. Whereby we may see both our great corruption and naughtiness, and
also thine exceeding great mercy toward us.

First concerning our corruption and naughtiness: what a thing is it, that
power, riches, authority, beauty, goodness* liberality, truth, justice, (all
which thou art good Lord) can not move us to love thee? Whatsoever things we
see fair, good, wise mighty, are but even sparcles of that power, beauty,
goodness, wisdom, which thou art. For to the end thou might declare thy
riches, beauty, power, wisdom, goodness, etc. thou have not only made, but
still do conserve all creatures to be (as David says of the heavens)
declarers and setters forth of thy glory, and as a book to teach us to know
thee.

How fair thou art, the beauty of the Sun, Moon, Stars, light, flowers,
rivers, fields, hills, ^irdes, beasts, men, and all creatures, yea, the
goodly shape and form of the whole world does declare.

How mighty thou art, we are taught by the creation of this world even of
naught, by governing the same, by punishing the wicked mighty Giants thereof,
by overthrowing their devises, by repressing the rages of the sea within her
bounds, by storms, tempests, and fires. These and such like declare unto us
thine invisible, almighty, and terrible power, whereby thou subduest all things
unto thee.

How rich thou art, this world, thy great and infinite treasure house does
well declare. What plenty is there not only of things, but also of every
kind of thing? Yea how do thou yearly and daily multiply these kinds? How
many seeds do thou make of one seed? Yea what great increase do thou
bring it unto? These can not but put us in remembrance of the exceeding riches
that thou have. For if to thine enemies which love thee not (as the most part
in this world be) if to them thou give so plentifully thy riches here, what
shall we think that with thy self you have laid up for thy friends?

How good thou art, all creatures generally and particularly do teach. What
creature is there in the world which thou have not made for our commodity? I
will not say how that thou might have made us creatures without sense or
reason, if thou had would. But amongst all things, none does so teach us
thy great love toward us, as does the death of thy most dearly beloved
son, John 15.
who suffered the pains and terrors thereof, yea and of hell it self, for our
sakes. If this thy love had been but a small love, it would never have lasted
so long, nor Christ should never have died.

I.B.

A Meditation concerning the sober usage of the body, that it may be subject
and obedient to the soul.
THis our body which God has made to be the Tabernacle and mansion of our
soul for this life, if we consider it accordingly, we could not but use it
otherwise than we do: that is, we would use it for the souls sake being the
guest thereof, and not for the body it self, and so should it be served in
things to help, but not to hinder the soul. A servant it is, and therefore it
ought to obey to serve the soul, that the soul might serve God, not as the
body will, neither as the soul it self will, but as God will, whose will we
should learn to know and behave our selves thereafter. The which thing to
observe is hard for us now, by reason of sin which has gotten a mansion
house in our bodies, and dwells in us as does the soul. To the which (sin
I mean) we are altogether of our selves inclined, because we naturally are
sinners and born in sin, by reason whereof we are ready as servants to sin,
and to use our bodies accordingly, making the soul to sit at reward, and
pampering up the servant to our shame.

Oh therefore (good Lord) that it would please thee to open this gear unto me,
and to give me eyes to consider effectually this my body what it is, namely a
servant lent for the soul to soiourne in, and serve thee in this life: yea it
is by reason of sin that has his dwelling there, become now to the soul
nothing else, but a prison, and that most streit, vile, stinking, filthy, and
therefore in danger of miseries to many in all ages, times and places, till death
have turned it to dust whereof it came, and whither it shall return, that the
soul may return to thee from whence it came, until the day of judgment
come, in the which thou will raise up that body, that then it may be partaker
with the soul, and the soul with it inseparably of weal or woe, according to
that is done in and by the same body here now in earth.

Oh that I could consider often and heartily these things, then should I not
pamper up this body to obey it, but bridle it that it might obey the soul:
then should I fly the pain it puts my soul unto by reason of sin and
provocation to all evil, and continually desire the dissolution of it with
Paul, and the deliverance from it as much as ever did prisoner his deliverance
out of prison: for alonely by it the devil has a door to tempt, and so to
hurt me: in it I am kept from thy presence, and thou from being so conversant
with me, as else thou would be: by it I am restrained from the sense and
feeling of all the joys and comforts (in manner) which are to be taken as
joys and comfortes in deed. If it were dissolved and I out of it, then could
Satan no more hurt me, then would thou speak with me face to face, then the
conflicting time were at an end, then sorrow would cease, and joy would
increase, and I should enter into inestimable rest. Oh that I could consider
this accordingly.

I.B.

Another Meditation concerning the sober usage of the body and pleasures in
this life.
THe beginning of all evil in our kind of living, springs out of the
deprauation and corruptnesse of our judgment, because our will always
follows that which reason judges to be followed. Now, that which every man
takes to be friendly and agreeing to his nature, the same does he judge
necessarily to be good for him, and to be desired. This is meat, drink,
apparel, riches, favor, dignity, rule, knowledge, and such like, because
they are thought good and agreeing, either to the body or to the mind, or to
both, for they help either to the conservation or to the pleasure of man
accounted of every one amongst good things.

Howbeit, such is the weakness of our wit on the one part, and the blindness
and too much rage of our lusts on the other part, that we being left to our
selves, can not but in the desire of things which we judge good and agreeing to
our nature, by the judgment of our senses and reason, we can not (I say) but
ouerpasse the bounds whereby they might be profitable unto us, and so we make
them hurtful unto us, which of themselves are ordained for our health.

What is more necessary then meat and drink, or more agreeing to nature? but
yet how few be there which do not hurt them selves by them? In like manner
it goes with riches, estimation, friends, learning, etc. yea although we be in
these most temperate, yet when there wants the spirit our regeneratour, we
are so drowned in them, that we utterly neglect to lift up our minds to the
good pleasure of God, to the end we might imitate and follow God our maker by
yielding our selves over, duly to use his gifts to the common and private
utility of our neighbors.

But now, God only is life and eternity, and can not but demand of us his
handie work, that we should render our selves and all we have to the end
wherefore we were made, that is, to resemble for our portion, his goodness,
as they which be nothing else but witnesses and instruments of his mercy: So
that when we wholly do naturally strive against that kind of life whereunto
he has created us, by seeking alwais our selves, what other thing ought to
ensue, but ye he should again destroy us, and take away his notable gifts,
wherewith he therefore endued us, that by all kind of well doing we should
resemble his image: yea what other thing may ensue, but that he should leave
us, and that eternally, that we might feel and by experience prove how bitter
a thing it is to leave the Lord, in whom is all goodness? Oh that I might
therefore find such favor in thy sight (dear father) that thou would
work in me by thy holy spirit, a true knowledge of all good things, and
hearty love to the same: through Christ Jesus our Lord and only Savior.
Amen.

I. B.

A Meditation of death, and the commodities it brings.
WHat other thing do we daily in this present life, but heap sin upon
sin, and hoorde up trespass upon trespass? so that this day is worse
always the^ yesterday by increasing, as days, so sins, and therefore thy
indignaiion, good Lord, against us: but when we shall be let go out of the
prison of this body, and so taken into thy blessed company, then shall we be
in most safety of immortality and salvation, then shall come unto us no
sickness, no need, no pain, no kind of evil to soul or body, but what so
ever good we can wish, that shall we have, and what so ever we loath, shall be
far from us. O dear father, that we had faith to behold these things
accordingly. O that our hearts were persuaded thereof, and our affections
inflamed with the desire of them. Then should we live in longing for that which
now we most loath. Oh help us, and grant that we being ignorant of things
to come, and of the time of our death, (which to thee is certain) may so live
and finish our journey here, that we may be ready, and then depart when our
departing may make most to thy glory, and our comfort through Christ.

What is this life but a smoke, a vapor, a shadow, a warrefare, a bubble of
water, a word, grass, a flower? That thou shall die, it is most certain, but
the time no man can tell when. The longer in this life thou do remain, the
more thou sinnest: which will turn to thy more pain. By cogitation of death
our minds be often in manner oppressed with darkness, because we do but
remember the night of the body, forgetting the light of the mind and of the
resurrection.

Hereto remember the good things that after this life shall ensue without
wavering in certeintie of faith, and so shall the passage of death be more
desired. It is like a failing over the sea to thy home and country: it is like
a medicine or purgation to the health of soul and body: it is the best
Physician: it is like to a woman's travel. For as the child being delivered
comes into a more large place, then the womb wherein it did lie before: so
thy soul being delivered out of the body, comes into a much more large and
fair place, even into heaven.

I. B.

A meditation upon the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.
OH Lord Jesus Christ, the son of the everliving God, by whom all things
were made, and be ruled and governed: thou the lively Image of the substance of
the Father, the eternal wisdom of God, the brightness of his glory, God of
God, light of light, coequal, coeternal and consubstantial with the Father:
thou which of the love thou had to mankind, when he was fallen from the
fellowshippe of God into the society of Satan and al evil, did vouchsafe
for our redemption, to become a mediator between God and man taking to thy
godhead our nature, as concerning the substance of it, and so becamest man,
also the heir of all, and most merciful Messiah, which by the power of thy
Godhead and merits of thy manhood, have made purgation of our sins, even by
thine own self, whilst thou was here on earth, being now set on the right
hand of thy father for us, even concerning our nature, in majesty, glory,
and power infinite. I pray and humbly beseech thy mercy to grant me at this
present to rehearse some of thy passions and sufferinges for me the last night
that thou wast here before thy death, that thy good spirit might thereby be
effectual to work in me faith, as well of the pardon of my sins by them, as
mortification of mine affections, comfort in my crosses, and patience in
afflictions, Amen.

In the midst of thy last supper with thy dear apostles, these things could
not but be before thee, namely that they all would leave thee, the most earnest
would forswear thee, and one of the twelve should most traitorously betray
thee: which were no small crosses unto thee. Judas was admonished of thee to
beware, but when he took no heed* but wilfully went out to finish his work,
contemning thy admonition and counsel, he could not but vex thy most loving
heart.

After supper there was contention amongst thy Disciples, who should be
greatest after thee, yet dreaming carnally of thee and thy kingdom, and having
this affection of pride and ambition busy amongst them, notwithstanding thy
diligence in reproving and teaching them.

After thy admonition to them of the cross that would come, thereby to make
them more vigilant, so gross were they, that they thought they could with
their two swords put away all perils, which was no little grief unto thee.
After thy coming to Gethsemane, heaviness pressed thee, and therefore thou
would thy disciples to pray. Thou did tell to Peter and his fellows, that
thy heart was heavy to death. Thou did will them to pray, being careful for
them also least they should fall into tentation. After this thou wentes^ a
stones cast from them, and did pray thy self, falling flat and groueling
upon the earth: but (alas) thou feltest no comfort, and therefore thou came
to thy disciples (which of all others were most sweet and dear unto thee)
but lo, to thy further discomforte they pass neither of thy perils, nor of
their own, and therefore sleep apace.

After thou had awaked them, thou go again to pray, but thou foundest no
comfort at all, and therefore did return again for some comfort at thy
dearest friends hands. But yet again, (alas) they are fast a sleep. Whereupon
thou art enforced to go again to thy heavenly father for some spark of
comfort in these thy wonderful crosses and agonies. Now, here thou wast so
discoraged and so comfortless, that even streams of blood came running from
thine eyes and ears, and other parts of thy body. But who is able to
express the infiniteness of thy crosses, even at thy being in the garden? All
which thou sufferedst for my sake, as well to satisfy thy Fathers wrath for my
sins, as also to sanctify all my sufferinges, the more gladly to be
sustained of me.

After thy bloody prayer thou came and yet again foundest thy disciples a
sleep, and before thou can well awake them, lo, Judas comes with a great
band of men to apprehend thee as a thief, and so does, leading thee away
bound to the high Bishops house Annas, and so from him to Caiphas. Here now to
augment this thy misery, behold thy disciples flee from thee: false witnesses
be brought against thee: thou art accused and condemned of blasphemy: Peter
even in thy sight forsweareth thee: thou art unjustly stricken for answearing
lawfully: thou art blindfold, stricken and buffetted all the whole night in the
Bishop Caiphas house of their cruel servants.

In the morning betimes thou art condemned again of the priests of
blasphemy, and therefore they bring thee before the secular power to Pilate,
by whom thou art openly arrained as other thieves and malefactors were: and
when he saw that thou wast accused of malice, yet he did not dismiss thee,
but did send thee to Herod, where thou wast shamfully derided in coming and
going to him and from him all the way, especially after Herod had apparelled
thee as a fool.

Before Pilate again therefore thou wast brought and accused falsely: no man did
take thy part, or speak a good word for thee.

Pilate caused thee to be whipped and scourged, and to be handled most
pitifully, to see if any pity might appear with the prelates, but no man at
all pitied thee.

Barrabas was preferred before thee: all the people, head and tail, was
against thee, and cried: hang him up. Uniustly to death wast thou judged thou
wast crowned with thorns that pierced thy brains: thou wast made a mocking
stock: thou wast reviled, beaten and most miserably handled.

Thou wentest through Jerusalem to the place of execution, even to the Mount of
Caluarie: a great cross to hang thee on, was laid upon thy back to bear and
draw, as long as thou wast able.

Thy body was racked to be nailed to the tree, thy hands were boared through,
and thy feet also, nails were put through them to fasten thee thereon: thou
wast hanged between heaven and earth, as one spued out of heaven, and vomited
out of the earth, unworthy of any place: the high Priest laughed thee to
scorn: the elders blasphemed thee, and said, God has no care for thee: the
common people laughed and cried out upon thee, thirst oppressed thee, but
vinegar only and gall was given thee to drink: heaven shined not upon thee:
the sun gave thee no light: the earth was afraid to bear thee: satan
tempted thee and thine own senses caused thee, to cry out: My God my God why
have thou forsaken me? Oh wonderful passions, which thou sufferedst. In them
thou teach me: in them thou comfortest me: for by them GOD is my father: my
sins are forgiven. By them I should learn to fear God, to love God, and
never to leave him for any tentations, but with thee to cry: Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit.

A prayer to Christ crucified.
AS thou, O Lord, wast crucified for me, so I beseech thee crucify me with
thee, that I may rise again with thee to everlasting life. Thy flesh was
crucified for me: crucify with thee (O Christ) the kingdom of the flesh,
which has dominion in me, that I may put off the old Adam, and by newness of
life may be transformed into thee the second Adam, sin, infidelity, and the
whole tyranny of satan being vanquished and overcome.

Bring to pass (O Lord) that by thy cross and paineful suffering, thy yoke
may be to me made light, and thy burden easy, that willingly and gladly
following thee, I may come whither thou art gone: that is, to thy father most
blessed and immortal, from whom nothing shall afterward be able to separate us.

God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing but in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

Gal. 6. A prayer to Christ ascended and reigning in glory.
OH good Christ, our first begotten brother and tender hearted Joseph: Oh
natural son of that Father, to whom we are made children of adoption through
thee: Oh our head reigning on high in glory: forget not us thy poor members
here on earth, whereunto abasing thy self thou came down and sufferedst for
us most cruel death. Out of this thy throne of Majesty and glory, thou
put us in assured hope and confidence, that we also shall attain to that
blessed place, whither thou art gone before to take possession for us. Oh our
strong tower of defense and succor, what can hurt us now trusting in thee?
Most unhappy are they which are ignorant of thee: Most happy are they, which
always behold thee. Blessed are they which have known thee here in the days
of their mortality: But more blessed are they which see thee in the heavens,
and shall see thee reigning with thy Father in joys incomparable. Oh Lord the
only joy and comfort of our souls, show us thy louinge countenance,
embrace us with the arms of thy mercy: receive us, O good Joseph, thy younger
brethren with ye kiss of comfort: power into our hearts thy holy spirit: pluck
us up from the earth and earthly things: open our eyes and lift them up unto
thee: open thy mouth, and call us unto thee: open our ears that we may hear
thee, so that whatsoever we do, speak or think, it may be directed unto thee
alone our redeemer, mediator and advocate.

If ye be risen again with Christ, seek the things which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God: set your affection on things that are
above, and not on things which are on the earth.

Col. 3. An other.
THou Lord did put away Marie Magdalen from the kissing of thy feet, John.
2^*
because thy flesh was not yet exalted, and she knew not yet the dignity of
thy clarified body, and beautified with the glory of immortality, but was
addicted only to thy bodily presence.

She yet sought the living among the dead, Luke. 24*
neither was it known to her that thou wast equal with thy father. Wherefore
thou would not suffer her so much as to kiss thy feet: because it was a
thing unworthy for thy majesty, Oh thou mighty Lion of the tribe of Judah:
thou co^querour of hell and death, ever living and immortal, thou art now
risen from death for us: thou art now ascended to thy father and our father,
and sit at his right hand in glory: suffer us to come near unto thee that
we may kiss thee: yea, Lord, thou lover of our souls, Cant. 1.
come thou rather unto us, and kiss us with the kiss of thy mouth, that we
may be glad and rejoice in thee: draw us that we may run after the savor
of thy sweet oyntmentes: Psalm. 17.
that we may behold thee in righteousness, and when thy glory shall appear
we may be satisfied: for in thy presence there is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.
and in thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

A prayer for true repentance.
MOst gracious God and merciful Father of our Savior Jesus Christ, because I
have sinned and don wickedly, and through thy goodness have received a desire
of repentance, whereunto this thy long suffering does draw my hard heart: I
beseech thee for thy great mercies sake in Christ, to work the same repentance
in me, and by thy spirit, power, and grace, so to humble, mortify, and fear
my conscience for my sins to salvation, that in thy good time thou may
comfort and quicken me again, through Jesus Christ thy dearly beloved son,
So be it.

I. B.

A prayer for the strength and increase of faith.
O Merciful God and dear father of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ (in whom
as thou art well pleased; so have thou commanded us to hear him) for as much
as he often bids us to ask of thee, and also promises that thou will hear
us, and grant us that which in his name we shall ask of thee: lo gracious
father we are bold to beg of thy mercy through thy son Jesus Christ one
sparkle of true faith and certain persuasion of thy goodness and love toward
us in Christ, where through I being assured of ye pardon of all my sins by
the mercies of Christ thy son, may be thankful to thee, love thee, and
serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life.

I. B.

A prayer for the true sense and feeling of Gods ^auour and mercy in Christ.
OH Lord God and dear Father, what shall I say that feel all things to be (in
manner) with me as in the wicked? Blind is my mind crooked is my will, and
perverse concupiscence is in me, as a spring or stinking puddle. O how faint
is faith in me? How little is my love to thee or to thy people? How great is
self love? How hard is my heart* By the reason whereof I am moved to doubt
of thy goodness toward me, whether thou art my merciful father, and whether I
be thy child or no. In deed worthily might I doubt, if that the having of
these were the cause, and not the fruit rather of thy children. The cause why
thou art my father is thy mercy, goodness, grace and truth in Christ Jesus
which can not but remain for ever. In respect whereof thou have borne me this
goodwill, to bring me into thy Church by baptism, and to accept me into the
number of thy children, that I might be holy, faithful, obedient and
innocent: and to call me diverse times by the ministry of thy word into thy
kingdom: besides thy innumerable other benefits, always hitherto powered
upon me. All which thou have done of this thy good will which thou of thine
own mercy barest to me in Christ, and for Christ, before the world was
made. The which thing as thou requirest straightly yt I should believe without
doubting, so would thou that in all my needs I should come unto thee as
unto a Father, and make my moan without mistrust of being heard in thy good
time, as most shall make to my comfort. Lo, therefore to thee dear Father, I
come through thy son our Lord, mediator and advocate Jesus Christ, who
sits on thy right hand making intercession for me, and pray thee of thy
great goodness and mercy in Christ to be merciful unto me, that I may feel
in deed thy sweet mercy as thy child. The time (Oh dear Father) I appoint
not, but I pray thee, that I may with hope still expect and look for thy
help. I hope that as thou for a little while have left me, so thou will come
and visit me, and that in thy great mercy, whereof I have need by reason of
my great misery.

Thou art wont for a little season in thine anger to hide thy face from them
whom thou love, but surely (O Redeemer) in eternal mercies thou will show
thy co^passions. For when thou leauest us, O Lord, thou do not leave us
very long, neither do thou leave us to our own loss, but to our iucre and
advantage: even that thy holy spirit with bigger portion of thy power and
virtue, may lighten and cheer us, that the want of feeling of our sorrow, may
be recompensed plentifully with the lively sense of having thee to our eternal
joy: and therefore thou swarest that in thine everlasting mercy thou will have
compassion on us. Of which thing, to the end we might be most assured, thine
oath is to be marked, Esai. 54.
for thou say: As I have sworn, that I will never bring any more ye waters
to drown the world: So have I sworn that I will never more be angry with thee,
nor reprove thee. The mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down,
but my loving kindness shall not move, and the bond of my peace shall not
fail thee. Thus say thou, the Lord our merciful redeemer.

Dear father, therefore I pray thee remember, even for thine own truth and
mercy sake, this promise and everlasting covenant, which in thy good time I
pray thee to write in my heart, that I may know thee to be the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: that I may love thee with all my heart
for ever: that I may love thy people for thy sake, that I may be holy in thy
sight through Christ: that I may always not only strive against sin, but
also overcome the same daily more and more, as thy children do, above all
things desiring the sanctification of thy name, the coming of thy kingdom,
the doing of thy will here on earth as it is in heaven, etc. through Jesus
Christ our redeemer, mediator, and advocate. Amen.

I. B.

A prayer against our spiritual enemies, the devil, the world, and the flesh.
O Lord God, the devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour: the flesh lusts against the spirit, the world persuadeth unto
vanities, that we may forget thee our Lord God, and so for ever be damned. Thus
are we miserably on every side beset and besieged of cruel and unrestful
enemies, and like at every moment to perish, if we be not defended with thy
godly power against their tyranny. We therefore poor and wretched sinners
despairing of our own strength, which in deed is none, most heartily pray thee
to indue us with strength from above, that we may be able through thy help,
with strong faith to resist satan, with fervent prayer to mortify the lusts
of the flesh, with continual meditation of thy holy law, to avoid the
foolish vanities and transitory plesures of this wicked world: that through
thy grace we being set at liberty from the power of these our mortal enemies,
may serve thee here in true holiness and righteousness, and after be partakers of
the everlasting joys prepared for thy children, which as they are great and
unspeakable, so are there few that do enjoy them. For straight is the way,
and narrow is the gate that leads thereunto, and few there be that find it.
Notwithstanding (O God) thou have a little flock to whom it is thy pleasure to
give that joyful kingdom: whose names are written in ye book of life. Make
us therefore of ye number, for Jesus Christ's sake, and place us amongst those
thy sheep which shall stand on thy right hand to receive ye blessed
inheritance, and dwell with thee for evermore.

A prayer for present help in tentation.
Dear father, to whom it is more easy to do all things, then for me to
think any one good thing: Lo, do thou but speak a word, and thy deadly
sick servant my soul, shall be made whole. Help (O Lord) for thy great
mercy sake, for thy truth sake, and for thy dear son Jesus Christ sake, and
let thy strength suffice against my weakness, and thy holy spirit against my
sinful flesh and old man.

Thou art faithful (O Father) who have promised that I shall not be tempted
further, then* thou will make me able to bear. Give now therefore thy grace
and strength unto thy servant, that I may with a strong faith in thine
infallible truth and promised mercy, vanquishe and subdue what so ever
rebelleth against thy most blessed will. Preserve and keep holy my soul and
body, and let them not be defiled and made a dungeon of devils and wicked
spirits, through delectation in sin. Behold dear father, the posts thereof
are sprinkled with the precious blood of thy dear son, and of thy great mercy
they are made the temple and tabernacle of thy holy spirit. Shall now (alas)
the devil, the world, or the flesh, pluck from thee that thing which
presently cries to thee with assured trust in thy promised help? Nay father*
but grant that I may by thy mighty power, turn all their crafts, deceits,
and raging assaults unto the increase of my faith, and that by experience of
thy fatherly assistance in this my present temptation, I may with assured hope
and trust in thy ready help and comfort, overcome my said enemies hereafter
in like assaults, and praise thy holy name for the victory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

My son, if thou will come into the service of the Lord, stand fast in
righteousness and fear, and prepare thy soul to tentation.

Eccle. 2. Remedies against sinful motions and tentations.
First remember that sin is so heinous a thing, that God by his justice might
worthily damn thee for the same, and is therefore to be abhorred as a sweet
poison, a flattering death and destruction of the soul which would out thee
off from God thy Savior, and make thee a bondslaue to satan thy deadly enemy.

Avoid therefore even at the first the occasions thereof, Psalm. 137.
and betimes quash out the brains of the children of Babylon against the hard
stones, whiles yet they be young and weak, least when they be grown elder and
stronger, they dash thee to pieces.

And for remedy against the same, flee unto God, who commands thee to call
upon him in thy troubles, and promises to deliver thee, and will not suffer
thee to be further tempted then he will make a way out, 1. Cor. 11.
whereby thou shall escape: and doubt not, but he that causes thee to hate
the sin which thy nature is to love, will deliver thee also from the danger
thereof, and make thee to triumph over satan, to his confusion, to Gods
glory, and to thy great comfort: which are causes that our tender loving
father sends tentations unto us: and he that is not tempted, what is he?

Now after thou have obtained the victory, remember two things: first to give
most hearty thanks to God for his grace and assistance, whereby thou have
overcome, and be not unthankful in any wise: and then that he who continually
goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, will not be long
or far away from thee, but will attempt again the same or as evil ways to
overcome thee. Watch therefore and pray.

A prayer for the avoiding of Gods heavy wrath and vengeance for our sins.
OH Lord God, strong and mighty, great and fearful, which dwell in the
heavens, and workest great wonders, we thy miserable children here upon
earth, do most humbly beseech thee to be merciful unto us, to pardon our
offenses, and to forgive us all our sins. O Lord, enter not into judgment
with thy servants, for if thou do, there shall no flesh be saved in thy
fight.

We confess and acknowledge, O Lord, that it is our sins, which has moved
thee to wrath, and to show such fearful tokens of thy displeasure toward
us in these our days: first with fire from heaven, betokening thy hot burning
indignation and wrathful displeasure for sin, which abounds at this day:
then with such horrible and monstrous shapes against nature, as were never
seen here in our days, nor in any time before us, which do betoken to us none
other thing, but thy plagues to come upon us for our degenerate and monstrous
life and conversation: and now besides all this, by great mortality, plague,
and pestilence thou have terribly threattened us, fatherly warned us, and
mercifully called us to repentance. The axe is set to the root of the tree,
and if we be not as rotten members without all sense and feeling, we may
perceive our fearful destruction and desolation to be at hand, (unless we
speedily repent and turn to thee) because we have been so long taught out of
thy most holy and sacred word, and yet no fruits of repentance or Christian
life will appear.

Woe and alas to these our days, that neither preaching by word most
comfortable, nor preaching by fire most terrible, nor preaching by monsters
most strange and ougly, neither yet by plagues and pestilence most horrible,
will stir up our stony hearts, and awake us from our sins.

We fear (O Lord) that the Turks with all the rest of the unbelieving will
condemn us in the last day: which if they had bin so long instructed by the
comfortable preaching of thy word, and sweet promises of thy Gospel, or seen
the woonders which we have seen, no doubt their righteousness would have
shined at this day, to our great shame and confusion. Thou have no less warned
us (O Lord) of thy fearful displeasure and heavy plagues at hand for our
great wickedness, then thou did the Israelites of that horrible destruction
which came upon them, whom thou first in mercy did call to repentance by
the preaching of thy word: but when no warning would serve, thou did send
them monstrous and fearful signs and tokens, to declare that thy visitatio^
was not far off. But they like unto us at this day, did always interpret
these things after the imagination of their own vain hearts, promising to
themselves peace, when destruction was over their heads.

Which things when we do call to mind (for as much as they are written for our
learning, example and warning) it makes us to tremble and quake for fear of
thy just judgments. For if thou have thus dealt with thine own dear and
chosen children, in token of thy great wrath against sin: what shall we
look for, who do no less deserve thy fearful scourge (for of mercy it is
that thou do thus long forbear us) and live as though there were no God at
all to be revenged upon our sins? It makes us to fear and cry inwardly in
our souls: Come Lord Jesus, holy and true in all thy doings, and shorten our
days: Apoc. 22.
bring this our pilgrimage to an end: suffer us not to heap sin upon sin
until the day of vengeance, least we be caught up amongst the number of the
wicked and reprobate, which shall never see thy loving countenance.

It makes us to cry to thee (O Lord) Let thy kingdom come, and end this our
sinefull life, wherein we do nothing but provoke thee to wrath.

Correct us not, Psalm. 6.
O Lord, in thine indignation, neither chasten us in thy heavy displeasure. And
though to us belongs nothing but shame and confusion, though our offenses
have deserved to be visited with the rod, Psalm. 89.
and our sins with scourges: yet in mercy Lord, and with fatherly
correction, chasten us, and thy loving kindness take not away from us. Psalm.
57.
To thee we flee for succor: under the wings of thy mercy shall be our refuge,
until thou turn thy wrathful countenance from us. We know that thy mercy
is above all thy works, Eccle. 2.
and even as great as thy self: therefore wit we say with holy Job, Job. 13.
Though thou kill us, yet will we put our trust in thee.

Thou came to comfort and pluck out of the dungeon of hell, such wretches as
we are. Thou art the good Samaritan that came to heal our deadly wounds:
thou art that good Physician that came to cure our mortal infirmities: thou
art the good shepherd that came to seek us wandering and lost sheep, Luke
15.
and to bring us to thy fold again: and more then that, Ephe. 5.
thou art our brother, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones, which have
tasted of our infirmities, felt our temptations, Esai. 53.
and borne the burden of our sins: therefore at thy hands we look for
mercy against the day of vengeance. And though thou punish us, yet our hope is
and ever shallbe, that thy rod shall no further touch us, then shall make to
thy glory, our commodity, and the strengthening and increase of our faith.

Let this thy Preaching sundry ways (O Lord) be sufficient for our warning,
and grant that we may speedily and from the bottom of our hearts repent,
endeavor to do thy righteous and blessed will revealed in thy word, and frame
our lives according to the same, that we may here live in thy fear all the
days of our life, and after this our sinful course is ended, may dwell with
thee in thy blessed kingdom, through the death and merits of Jesus Christ our
only redeemer. So be it.

Another prayer for the avoiding of Gods deserved wrath hanging over us for our
sins.
WHen we look back and behold our sinful life past, what a dongeon of
errors, vice, and wickedness, opens it self unto us? so that there is no man
but he must needs be ashamed of him self when he calls to mind what he has been: and trembles when he considers the wickedness and sinful course of his
life to come: for who shall vndertak^ that the rest of our life shall be any
better then that is past? How can we the^ sufficiently magnify and praise thy
great mercy, which have deferred thy punishment so long? Beholding therefore
this our dangerous and miserable state we come unto thee (O thou great and
mighty Judge) in trembling and fear, humbly beseeching thee not to heap upon
us thy deserved vengeance, but let thy tender kindness and love thou bear to
Jesus Christ thy son our gracious Lord and redeemer, cover our iniquites: for
whose sake (though we deserve all extremity) thou do pardon us.

If thou Lord shall straightly mark our iniquities, O Lord, who shall be able to
abide it?

Psalm. 103. A prayer to be said of all such as suffer any kind of cross.
Almighty God, king of al kings, and governor of al things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners and
to be merciful unto them that truly repent: we confess thou do most
justly punish us, for we have grievously sinned against thee, and we
acknowledge that in punishing us thou do declare thy self to be our most
merciful father, as well because thou do not punish us in any thing as we
have deserved, as also because by punishing us thou do call us, and (as it
were) draw us to increase in repentance, in faith, in prayer, in contemning of
the world, and in hearty desiring for everlasting life and thy blessed
presence.

Grant us therefore gracious Lord, thankefully to acknowledge thy great mercy,
which have thus favorably dealte with us in punishing us, not to our
confusion, but to our amendment. And seeing thou have sworn that thou will
not the death of a sinner, but that he turn and live, have mercy upon us and
turn us unto thee, for thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ's sake, whom
thou would should be made a slain sacrifice for our sins: thereby
declaring thy great and unspeakable anger against sin, and thine infinite
mercy toward us sinful wretches.

And for as much as the dullness, blindness, and corruption of our hearts is
such, that we are not able to arise up unto thee by faithful and hearty
prayer, according to our great necessity, without thy singular grace and
assistance: grant unto us, gracious Lord, thy holy and sanctifying spirit,
to work in us this good work, with grace to weigh and consider the need and
greatness of that we do desire, and with an assured faith and trust that
thou will grant us our requests, because thou art good and gracious, even to
young Ravens calling upon thee, much more then to us for whom thou have made
all things, yea, and have not spared also thine own dear son: because thou
have commanded us to call upon thee: because thy throne whereto we come, is
a throne of grace and mercy: because thou have given us a mediator Christ to
bring us unto thee, being the way by whom we come, being the door by whom
we enter, and being our head on whom we hang and hope, that our poor
petitions shall not be in vain, through him and for his names sake.

We beseech thee therefore of thy rich mercy, wherein thou art plentiful to
all the^ that call upon thee, to forgive us our sins, namely, our
unthankfulness, unbelief, selfeloue, neglect of thy word, security,
hypocrisy, contempt of thy long suffering, omission of prayer, doubting of thy
power, presence, mercy, and good will toward us, insensibleness of thy
grace, impaciencie, etc. and to this thy benefit of correcting us, add thy
gracious gift of repentance, faith, the spirit of prayer, the contempt of
this world, and hearty desiring for everlasting life. Indue us with thy holy
spirit according to thy covenant and mercy, as well to assure us of pardon,
and that thou do accept us into thy favor as thy dear children in Christ
and for his sake, as to write thy law in our hearts, and so to work in us,
that we may now begin and go forwards in believing living, fearing, obeying,
praying, hoping, and serving thee, as thou do require most fatherly and most
justly of us, accepting us as perfect in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer of the afflicted for the profession of Gods word.
O Gracious God, which seek all means possible, how to bring thy children
into the feeling and sure sense of thy mercy, and therefore when prosperity
will not serve, then sendest thou adversity, graciously correcting them here
who^ thou will have elsewhere to live with thee for ever: we poor wretches
give humble praises and thanks to thee, that thou have vouched us worthy of
thy correction at this present, hereby to work that which we in prosperity
and liberty did neglecte. For the which neglecting and many other our grievous
sins, whereof we now accuse our selves before thee, (most merciful Lord) thou
might most justly have given us over, and destroyed us both in soul and
body. But such is thy goodness toward us in Christ, that thou seem to forget
all our offenses, and as though we were far otherwise then we be in deed,
thou will that we should suffer this cross now laid upon us for thy truth
and gospels sake, and so be thy witnesses, with thy Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, and Confessors, yea, with thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ: to
whom thou do now here begin to fashion us like, that in his glory we may
be like to him also.

O good God, what are we on who^ thou should show this great mercy? Oh
loving Lord, forgive us our unthankfulness and sins. Oh faithful father,
give us thine holy spirit now to cry in our hearts, Abba dear father: to
assure us of our eternal election in Christ: to reveal more and more thy
truth unto us: to confirm, strengthen, and stablishe us so in the same, that
we may live and die in it as vessels of thy mercy, to thy glory, and to the
commodity of thy Church. Indue us with the spirit of thy wisdom, that with
good conscience we may always so answer the enemies in thy cause, as may
turn to their conversion or confusion, and our unspeakable co^solatio^ in
Christ Jesus: for whose sake we beseech thee henceforth to keep us, to give
us patience, and to will no otherwise for deliverance or mitigation of our
misery, then may stand always with thy good pleasure and merciful will toward
us.

Grant this dear father, not only to us in this place, but also to all others
else where, afflicted for thy names sake, through the death and merits of
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

I. B.

A prayer to God the father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
O Almighty and everliving God, the eternal father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which of thy unmeasurable goodness have opened thy self unto us, and with a loud
voice have said of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord, Hear him: O maker and
preserver of all things, with thy coeternall son our Lord Jesus Christ,
which reigns with thee, and was manifested in Jerusalem, and with thy holy
spirit, which was powered upon the Apostles: O wise God, merciful Judge, and
mighty Lord which have said: As truly as I live, I will not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should convert and amend: which also have said:
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee: have mercy
upon us for Jesus Christ's sake, whom thou would of thy merueylous and
incomprehensible counsel should be made for us a slain sacrifice, mediator,
reconciler, Heb. 9.10
and peacemaker, to the end yt thou might show thine exceeding great wrath
against sin, and thine inestimable mercy toward mankind. Sanctify and
illuminate our hearts and souls with thy holy spirit, that we may truly
believe in thee, call upon thee, be thankful unto thee, and obedient to thy
holy will. Defend, govern and cherish thy Church, as thou have promised, Esai.
59.
saying: This is my covenant that I have made with them, my spirit which is in
thee, and my word which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of ye mouth of thy seed for ever. Preserve those kingdoms and
commonweals, which give harborough to the people, and maintain the
ministry of thy holy word and Gospel, that the kingdom of thy son Jesus
Christ may increase and shine throughout all the world.

O Jesus Christ, Son of the everliving God, A prayer to God the son
crucified for us, and raised also from the dead, and now reigning at the
right hand of thy father, that thou may give gifts unto me, which have
said: Come unto me all ye that labor, John. 14.
and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you, have mercy upon us, and pray
for us unto thy eternal father: sanctify and govern us with thy holy
spirit: help and succor us in all our necessities as thou have promised,
saying: I will not leave you comfortless.

O holy and blessed spirit, A prayer to the holy ghost.
together with the father and the son, one true and everliving God, full of
majesty and power, which with thy heavenly inspiration quickenest the minds
of those that before were dead in sin, make joyful the hearts of the
faithful penitent, bring in to the way of truth, all such as have erred
and gone astraye, comfortest the souls of such as hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and plenteously inrichest those with diverse gifts, which ask
them in Jesus Christ's name: purify our hearts (we beseech thee) and inflame
them with the fire of thy love: replenishe them with thy heavenly benefits and
spiritual blessings, that they may be made meet temples for thee: lead us
into all truth, which art the only fountain of truth, and mortify in us
whatsoever proceeds not of thee.

Or else pray thus.
O Holy spirit, powered upon the Apostles, which have promised unto us by the
son of God our Redeemer, to kindle in us a true knowledge and invocation of
God, as it is written: Zach. 12.
I will power upon you ye spirit of grace and of compassion: make to arise in
our hearts a true fear of God, and a true faith and knowledge of thy mercy,
which the eternal father of our Lord Jesus Christ has promised unto us for
his sons sake. Be our comforter in all our counsels and dangers. Illuminate
our understanding, and fill our hearts with new affections and spiritual
motions, and renew us both in soul and body, that we may die to sin, and
live to righteousness, and so in true obedience may praise the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and his son our redeemer, and thee also our comforter
everlastingly.

A thanksgiving to God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
WE render thanks unto thee, O almighty and eternal GOD, with thy dear sone
our Lord Jesus Christ, and with thy holy spirit, for that of thine exceeding
great goodness, thou have made thy self known unto us by most assured and
evident testimonies: and for that thou have gathered and chosen unto thy self,
a perpetual Church, and would that thy son our Lord Jesus Christ should
suffer death, to restore us from death to life: for that thou have given to us
thy Gospel and the holy Ghost: for that thou forgiuest us our sins,
deliuerest us from the power of the devil, and from eternal death, and give
unto us everlasting life: finally, for that thou have visited us with many
great benefits, giving us life, food, doctrine, peace in such places as we
have lived in, and have diminished the pains which we have justly deserved.

A thanksgiving to the son
We give thanks unto thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, son of the living God,
crucified for us and risen again, because thou have coupled unto thee our
humane nature, and of thy inestimable love did give thy self to death for
us, turning upon thee the great wrath of God thy father conceived against us,
to reco^cile us unto him, and to purchase us eternal redemption: because thou
have brought us to this grace, wherein we stand and rejoice in hope of the
glory of GOD: because thou do preserve, cherishe, and defend thy Church
against the Devil and all thine enemies: because thou give and renewest
often the light of thy Gospel, and mayntainest the ministry of thy word:
because thou do forgive us our sins, and give unto us everlasting life:
because thou art our Mediator, and make continual intercession for us: and
finally because thou do succor and preserve us in all our necessities,
dangers and afflictions.

We give thanks also unto thee, A thanksgiving to the holy Ghost.
Oh holy spirit, the giver of life, which wast powered upon the Apostles,
because thou kindlest thy light in our hearts: because thou rulest,
instructest, admonishest, and helpest us: because thou gouernest and guidest
the labors and works of our vocation, and sancti^iest us to eternal life.

A prayer to God for his help and protection against the obstinate enemies of
the truth.
MOst righteous Judge, God of all mercy and comfort, which by thy secret
judgment and wisdom do suffer the wicked to triumph and increase for a
time, for trial of the faith of thy well-beloved little flock, and the mortifying
of their lusts, but at length to the utter confusion of thy enemies, and
joyful deliverance of thy people: look down we beseech thee on thy
dispersed sheep, out of thy holy habitation in heaven, and strengthen our
weakness against their furious rages: abate their pride: assuage their malice:
confound their devises, wherewith they lift up themselves against Christ Jesus
thy son our Lord and savior, to deface his glory, and to set up Antichrist.
We be not able of our selves to think a good thought, much less to stand
against their assaults, except thine undeserved grace and mighty arm defend
and deliver us. Perform thy promises made to Jacob, and stop the mouths of
the cursed Edomites. Call them to repentance whom thou have appointed to
salvation: bring home them that run astray, lighten the blind and teach the
ignorant: forgive all those that wilfully and obstinatly rebel not against thy
holy will. Let thy fearful threatenings pearce our stony hearts, and make us
tremble at thy judgments. Make the examples of them whom thou have
overthrown in their own devises, as Cain, Cham, Nimrod, Esau, Pharao, Saul,
Achitophel, Judas, and such other to be a warning for us, that we set not up
our selves against thy holy will. Grant free passage to thy holy word: that
it may work effectually in us the work of life and blessed hope of our
salvation, to the eternal praise of thy majesty through our mediator Christ
Jesus: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be
praise and thanksgiving in all congregations, world without end. So be it.

A prayer for the afflicted and persecuted under the tyranny of Antichrist.
O Merciful Father, who never do forsake suc^ as put their trust in thee:
stretch forth thy mighty arm to the defense of our brethren, by the rage of
enemies persecuted, and grievously tormented in sundry places for ye true
profession of thy holy Gospel, who in their extrem necessities cry for
comfort unto thee. Let not thy long suffering, O Lord, be an occasion, either
to increase the tyranny of thy enemies, or to discourage thy children, but with
speed O Lord, consider their great miseries and afflictions. Prevent the
cruel devise of Haman: stay the rage of Holophernes: break off the counsel
of Achitophell: Let not the wicked say, Where is now their God. Let thy
afflicted flock feel present aid and relief from thee O Lord: look down
upon them with thy pitiful eye from thy holy habitation: send terror and
trembling among their enemies: make an end of their outrageous tyranny: beat
back their boldness in suppressing thy truth, in destroying thy true
servants, in defacing thy glory, and in setting up Antichrist. Let them not
thus proudly advance themselves against thee and thy Christ, but let them
understand and feel that against thee they fight. Preserve and defend the
Uine, which thy right hand has planted, and let all Nations see the glory of
thine anointed. Amen.

A prayer to be said before the preaching of Gods word.
Almighty God and most merciful father, whose word is a lantern to our
feet, and a light unto our stepes, we most humbly beseech thee to illuminate
our minds, that we may understand the mysteries contained in thy holy law, and
into the self same thing, that we godly understand, we may be virtuously
transformed, so that of no part we offend thy divine majesty, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

An other.
IN this great darkness of our souls (O Lord) thou shinest diverse ways unto us
by the light of thy grace, but in nothing so effectually as in the preaching of
thy word. Great is the Harvest (as thou thy self have said) and the workmen
are few. The greatest part of men are ignorant and wrapped in miserable
blindness, and few there be that teach thy word truly, and as they ought. We
beseech thee therefore to send forth workmen into thy harvest. Send
teachers (O Lord) which are taught of thee, and instructed by the spirit of
godly wisdom and understanding, which by their preaching will seek, not
themselves, but thee, because they are godly: and can so do, because they are
wise and understand. Give to the preacher of thy word here present, out of
the treasures of thy wisdom, that which he may power upon us to our
salvation: and unto us give thy grace and holy spirit (O Lord) so to hear and
to receive thy word, that the good seed which falls upon us be not choked
with thorns, or withered away with heat, or devoured by the fowls of the
air, but may grow up in a good ground, and fructify with great increase.

A prayer to be said after the Preaching of Gods word.
1. Pet. 5.
Almighty God and most merciful father, we heartily beseech thee that this
seed of thy word now sown amongst us, Number. 29. Deu. 9. Ios. 7. Matthew. 13
may take such deep root, that neither the burning heat of affliction, or
persecution cause it to wither, neither the thornie cares of this life do
choke it, but that as seed sown in good ground, it may bring forth thirty,
sixty, and an hundredth fold, as thy heavenly wisdom has appointed. And
because we have need continually to crave many things at thy hands, we humbly
beseech thee (O heavenly father) to grant us thy holy spirit, Luke. 11. Romans
8. James. 5. 1. John. 5. Romans 12. Wisdom. 9*
so to direct our petitions, that they may proceed from such a fervent mind,
as may be agreeable to thy most blessed will.

And seeing that our infirmity is such, 2. Cor. 3. John. 19. Philip. 2 Psalm.
40. 1. Pet. 1.
that we are able to do nothing without thy help, and that thou art not
ignorant with how many and great tentations we poor wretches are on every
side compassed and enclosed, let thy strength (O Lord) sustain our
weakness, 1. pet. 5. Luke. 17.
and assist us with thy grace, that we may be safely preserved against all the
assaults of Satan, who goes about like a roaring Lion seeking to devour us.
Increase our faith (O merciful Father) that we do not swerve at any time
from thy heavenly word. Augment in us hope and love, Psalm. 95. Heb. 3.15 1.
John. 2
with a careful keeping of all thy commandments, that no hardness of heart, no
hypocrisy, no concupiscence of the eyes, nor inticements of ye world, do draw
us away from thy obedience. And seeing the times are dangerous wherein we live,
let thy fatherly providence defend us against the violence of all our
enemies, and specially against the furious rage of that Romish idol, enemy
to thy Christ.

1. Tim. 2.
Furthermore for as much as by thy holy Apostle we be taught to make our
prayers and supplications for all men, we pray not only for ourselves here
present, but beseech thee also to reduce all such as be yet ignorant, from the
miserable captivity of blindness and error, Romans 15. 1. Cor. 1. Ephe. 4.
to the pure understanding of thy heavenly truth, that we all with one consent
and unity of mind, may worship thee our only God and savior.

We beseech thee also (most dear father) for all pastors and ministers to
whom thou have committed the dispensation of thy holy word, and charge of thy
chosen people, Ioh. 21. Math. 28. 2. John. 9. Mark. 6.
that both in their life and doctrine they may be found faithful, setting
only before their eyes thy glory, and that by them all poor sheep which
wander and go astray, may be sought out and brought to thy fold.

Again, that it would please thee to deliver thy Church from such idle
sheepeheardes, wolves, and hirelinges, as seek themselves and their bellies,
and not thy glory, and the safegarde of thy flock.

Moreover because the hearts of rulers are in thy hands, Pro. 21. Romans 17.
Ioh. 16. Romans 13. John. 16.
we make our prayers unto thee for all Princes and Magistrates, to whom thou
haste committed the administration of justice: John. 16.
especially (O Lord) for the Queens Majesty, that it would please thee to
indue her with thy plentiful grace and principal spirit, that she may with a
pure faith acknowledge Jesus Christ thy only son to be King of all Kings,
and governor of all governors, even as thou have given all power unto him
both in heaven and in earth: and so work in her heart, that she considering
whose minister she is, may heartily seek, and zealously promote thy true honor
and glory, carefully traueling to bring thy people committed to her charge,
(and yet remaining almost in all parts of this realm in miserable blindness
and dark ignorance) to the true knowledge of thee, ruling and guidinge them,
as she is taught and commanded by thy holy word.

Also we beseech thee, to indue all such as are in any authority under her,
with thy grace and holy Spirit, that they may be found vprighte and faithful
in their calling, favorers and furtherers of thy holy Gospel, maintainers and
defenders of the true Preachers and ministers thereof, and such as in singlenes
of heart will seek not themselves, but thy glory and the commodity of thy
people.

And for that we be all members of the mystical body of Christ Jesus, 2. Cor.
2. Romans 12. Jacob. 5.
we make our requests unto thee, (O heavenly father) for all such as are
afflicted with any kind of cross or tribulation, as war, plague, famine,
sickness, poverty, imprisonment, persecution, banishment, or any other kind
of thy rods, whether it be grief of body, or unquietness of mind, 2. Cor.
1. Heb. 13.
that it would please thee to give them patience and constancy, till thou
send them full deliverance out of all their troubles. Finally (O Lord) we
most humbly beseech thee to show thy great mercy vppon-our brethren which are
persecuted, cast in prison, and daily condemned to death for the testimony of
thy truth, Heb. 13. Romans 8. Psalm. 41. John. 1.
and though they be utterly destitute of all man's aid, yet let thy sweet
comfort never depart from them, but so inflame their hearts with thy holy
spirit, that they may boldly and cheerfully abide such trial as thy godly
wisdom shall appoint: 1. Pete. 1. Acts. 2. Math. 10. Luke 21.
so that at length as well by their death as by their life, the kingdom of thy
son Jesus Christ may increase and shine through all the world. In whose name
we make our humble petitions unto thee, as he has taught us, saying: Our
father which art, etc.

A prayer to be said before the receiving of the communion.
O Father of mercy and God of all consolation, seeing all creatures do
acknowledge and confess thee to be their governor and Lord, it becomes us,
the workmanship of thine own hands, at all times to reverence and magnify
thy godly majesty: Gene. 1. Ephe. 2. Galat. 1 Genesis 3. Acts. 4. Heb. 9.
First, for that thou have created us to thine own image and similitude, but
chiefly because thou have delivered us from that everlasting death and
damnation into the which Satan drew mankind by the means of sin: Apoc. 5
John. 3. Heb. 8. Heb. 4. 1. Pet. 1. Esa. 43.53. Matthew. 3.17. Iere. 31.
from the bondage whereof neither man nor Angel was able to make us free: but
thou (O Lord) rich in mercy and infinite in goodness, have provided our
redemption to stand in thine only and well-beloved son: whom of very love
thou did give to be made man like unto us in all things, Heb. 8. Romans 5.
Heb. 2. John. 6. Genesis 3. Romans 5: Ephe. 3.
sin excepted, that in his body he might receive the punishment of our
transgression, by his death to make satisfaction to thy justice, and by his
resurrection to destroy him that was author of death, and so to bring again
life to the world, from which the whole ofspringe of Adam was most justly
exiled.

Ephe. 2. Ioh. 6.17 Gene. 6. Romans 3. Esai. 64. Psalm. 5.12 Romans 7. Math. 16. 1.
Cor. 2. Luke 11. Mark. 10.
O Lord, we acknowledge that no creature was able to comprehend the length and
breadth, the deepenes and heighte of that thy most excellent love, which moved
thee to show mercy where none was deserved, to promise and give life where
death had gotten victory, to receive us into thy grace when we could do
nothing but rebel against thy majesty. The blind dulnes of our corrupt nature
will not suffer us sufficiently to wey these thy most ample benefits. Yet
nevertheless at the commandment of Jesus Christ our Lord, we present our
selves to this thy table (which he has left to be used in remembrance of his
death until his coming again) to declare and witness before the world,
Matthew. 16 Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11. John. 8. Galat. 5. Romans 8. 1. Pet. 1. Ephe. 5.
Ephe. 2. Heb. 4. Romans 3. Math. 25. Philip. 3. Ephe. 1. Ephe. 2. Apoc. 13.
that by him alone we have received liberty and life: that by him alone thou
do acknowedge us to be thy children and heirs: that by him alone we have
entrance to the throne of thy grace: that by him alone we are possessed in our
spiritual Kingdom to eat and drink at his table, and with whom we have our
conversation presently in heaven, and by whom our bodies shall be raised up
again from the dust, and shall be placed with him in that endless joy, which
thou (O Father of mercy) have prepared for thine elect before the foundation
of the world was laid. Romans 3. Ephe. 2. Titus. 3. Romans 8.
And these most inestimable benefits we acknowledge and confess to have
received of thy free mercy and grace, by thine only beloved son Jesus
Christ. For the which therefore we thy congregation, moved by thy holy
spirit, do render to thee all thanks, praise and glory for ever and ever.

A thanksgiving after the receiving of the Communion.
MOst merciful father, we render unto thee all praise, thanks, honor and
glory, for that it has pleased thee of thy great mercies to grant unto us
miserable sinners, so excellent a gift and treasure, as to receive us into the
fellowshippe and company of thy dear son Jesus Christ our Lord, 1. Cor. 10
whom thou have delivered to death for us, Romans 4. John. 6.
and have given him unto us, as a necessary food and nourishment unto
everlasting life. And now we beseech thee also (O heavenly) father to grant us
this request, that thou never suffer us to become so unkind as to forget so
worthy benefits, but rather imprint and fasten them sure in our hearts, that
we may grow and increase daily more and more in true faith, Luke 25. Galat. 5.
1. Tim. 4. Ephe. 5. 2. Pet. 3. Matthew. 5. 1. Pet. 2.
which continually is exercised in all manner of good works: and so much the
rather, (O Lord) confirm us in these perilous days and rages of Satan, that
we may constantly stand and continue in the confession of the same, to the
advancement of thy glory, which art God over all things, blessed for ever.

A lamentation of a sinner afflicted in conscience for his offenses.
IN the mids of the desperate assaults of my soul, the intolerable
heaviness of my mind has heretofore (Lord) cried as shril in thine ears,
as though I had shriked and with lamentations cried out saying, help: help
me my God, my creator, my most provident keeper and everlasting defender, for
behold I perish.

On this occasion (Lord) when heaviness of mind did heretofore assault me, I
remembered that thou had many times set before mine eyes the wonderful
greatness of thy most tender love toward me, by the great multitude of thy
benefits powered upon me, which benefits every of thy works (as they came
before mine eyes) gave me just occasion to be mindful of.

Would not (thought I) if I had in a manner any grace at all, would not such
love bring now into my heart a wonderful delectation, joy, and comfort in God
for the same? And again, could such delight in Gods sweet mercy and tender
love toward me (if I were not as evil as a castaway that were none of Gods
children) be without lothing of my sin, and lust and desire to do Gods holy
will? And these things thought I (fie upon me unthankful wretch) are either
not at all in me, or else in deed so coldly and slenderly, that they being
truly weighed and compared to righteousness, Esai. 64.
are more vile then a filthy cloth starched in corrupt blood.

Oh (thought I) I am afraid, I have deceived my self: for thy servants at
all times (I trow) feel otherwise then I now do, ye fruits of thy spirit,
as love, joy, peace, and such like. But my love (alas) toward thee, what is
it? my joy is not once almost felt of me: for my very soul within me (as
David in his heaviness said) refuses comfort, Psalm. 77.
and fares as though it did utterly despair: and what peace can I feel then,
or certainty of thy favor and love? Justly may I power out this dolorous
lamentatio^ of Sion: The Lord has forsaken me, Esai. 49.
and my Lord has forgotten me.

Even in the midst (I say) of these my former desperate assaults, mine
intolerable heaviness cried to thee, O my God, and from heaven thou heardest my
groaninges, and thereupon first preparedst my heart to ask comfort of thee,
and then thou did accept my prayer, and gave me plentifully my asking.

Oh my soul, consider well that thou art never able to declare the exceeding
goodness of God in this, that he heard the very desires of thee being
afflicted: who is so ready favorably to grant the requests of the afflicted,
that oftentimes he tarrieth not until they do call, but or ever they call upon
him, he favorably hears them, as the Psalmist says: Psalm. 10.
The desire of the afflicted thou hear O Lord: thou preparest their
hearts, and thine ears hears them.

Oh Lord my God, meruellous things are these, whether I consider this
meruellous manner of thy hearing, or else the meruellous nature and property
of thy goodness. Meruellous (no doubt) is that thy hearing, whereby the very
desires of the afflicted are heard: but much more marvelous is this thy
goodness, which tarriest not until the afflicted do desire thy help, but
preparest first their hearts to desire, and then thou give them their desires.

Yea Lord (worthy of all praise) it cannot otherwise be. For how should
thou do otherwise then thy nature and property is? Art not thou very
goodness and mercy it self? How can thou then but pity and help misery?

Art not thou both the creator and also the conseruer of all things? in so
much as the Lions whelps roaring after their pray, ^sal. 104. ^sal. 147.
do seek their food at thy hands, and the Ravens birds lacking meat, do
call upon thee.

If then thy fatherly providence and tender care (O Lord) upon all thy
creatures be so great, that the very beasts and fowls have this experience
of thy goodness in their necessities that their roarings and cryings have the
strength of earnest callinges and desires: how much rather do these
sighinges, groninges, and desperate heaviness of men, but chiefly of thy
children, cry and call loud in thine ears, though they speak never a word
at all?

Should I then now despair of thy fatherly mercy, whiles presently I feel
thee, Psalm. 77.
stir up my soul and heart to crave help at thy hand? Should I think
that thou will absent thy self for ever? that thou will be no more entreated?
that thy mercy is clean gone? that thy promise is come utterly to an end?
and that thou will now shut up thy loving kindness in displeasure.

Nay Lord, for all alterations are of thy right hand, and turn always to the
best to them that fear thee, All this is but mine own infirmity: for thou
art ever one, thy promises be infallible, and thy love toward thine,
everlastingly during. I will therefore in this my present tentation, and
grievous assault, power out the heaviness of my heart before thee dear
father. Out of the deep will I cry, Psalm. 77.
and lift up my soul unto thee, from whom I assuredly know my help is
coming. I will also for my present comfort, call to remembrance (O Lord my
God) thy tender mercies toward me already showed, the multitude of thy
benefits, the greatness of the same, the long continuance of them, even from
my conception until this instant, and finally thy continual lust and desire
to power them upon me.

And moreover, since thy goodness is so great (O Lord) that thou do not only
pity misery, but also call the heavy hearted and afflicted unto thee,
Matthew. 11
promising that thou will ease their misery: for as much as by the motion of
thy good spirit I loath and abhor my sins, feel the greuousnesse of them,
and thy heavy wrath toward me for the same, and finally, what need I have
of thy gracious aid and succor: therefore (Oh Lord) in thy Son Christ's
name, with sure confidence and trust in thine infallible promise, in this mine
anguish and trouble I come unto thee at thy merciful calling, and crave
comfort at thy hand. For thou have promised, that when I loath my sins, thou will vterly forget them: when I feel the grievous burden of them, thy mercy
swalloweth them up: when I seek that I want, thou will assuredly grant it
me, For since thou mouest my heart to desire help, how should I mistrust, but
thou will for thy truth sake, give me my asking?

Yea, where I know not how, or what to desire as I ought, thy holy spirit
graciously working in me, Romans 8.
makes intercession mightily for me with groninges which can not be
expressed, and therewithal certifieth my spirit, that by adoption through thy
great mercy and goodness I am become thy child and heir.

Why should I not then be of good comfort and joyful in thee my God? For if
thou be on my side, who can be against me? Since thou did not spare thine
own son, but gave him for me, even when I was thine enemy: Romans 8.
how shall thou not with him, now that by his death I am brought into thy
favor, give me all things with him, and for his sake? Who shall lay any
thing to the charg of thine elect? It is thou Lord which iustifiest me. It is
Christ that has dyed for me, yea rather that is risen again for me, who
also is set on thy right hand, and has taken possession, yea, and perpetually
makes there intercession for me, until that joyful day be come, when I shall
have full fruition of the most glorious presence of thy divine majesty, Ephe.
1.
in that kingdom which thou have prepared before the beginning of the world,
but in time (to thy gracious goodness thought best) made known to me, by
giving thy holy spirit into my heart: whereby, when I first (Lord) believed
thy holy word (which is thine own power to save all that believe) I was
sealed, Romans 8.
confirmed, and stablished in the certainty of yt thine everlasting kingdom
and inheritance.

For the which inestimable benefit of thy rich grace (Oh Lord my God) I
beseech thee, even for the love thou bear to Christ Jesus thy son, and thy
mercy thou had on him when he cried on the cross: Matt. 27.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Help, help, I say and inflame my
heart with love so plentifully toward thee again, that I may be even
swalowed up in the joyful feeling of the same, in such sort that I may of
very thankfulness love thee my GOD alone, thee I say my dear GOD, and
nothing but thee, and for thy sake. O holy spirit whose work this is in me,
increase this thy work of thine infinite mercy, and preserve me that I never
become unthankful unto thee therefore, Amen.

A prayer for the sick.
O Most merciful God, which according to the multitude of thy mercies do so
put away ye sins of those which truly repent, that thou remembrest them no
more: open thy eyes of mercy, and look upon this thy sick servant, who most
earnestly desires pardon and forgiveness. Renew in him (most loving father)
whatsoever has been decayed by the fraud and malice of the devil, or by his
own carnal will and frailty. Preserve and continue this sick member in the
unity of thy Church. Consider his contrition* accept his tears, assuage his
pain as shall be seen to thee most expedient for him. And for as much as he
puts his full trust only in thy mercy, impute not unto him his former
sins, but take him unto thy favor, through the merits of thy most dearly
beloved son Jesus Christ.

A prayer to be said at the hour of death.
O Lord, Jesus Christ, which art the only health of all men living, and the
everlasting life of them yt die in thee: I wretched sinner do submit my self
wholly unto thy most blessed will, and being sure that the thing cannot perish
which is committed unto thy mercy, willingly now I leave this frail and
sinnfull flesh, in sure hope that thou will in better wise restore it to me
again at the last day in the resurrection of the just. I beseech thee most
merciful Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will by thy grace make strong my soul
against all tentations, and defend me with the buckler of thy mercy against
all the assaults of the devil.

I see and acknowledge that there is in my self no help of salvation, but al
my confidence, hope, and trust, is in thy rich mercy and goodness. I have no
merits or good works which I may allege before thee: of sins and evil
works (alas) I see a great heap: but yet through thy mercy I trust to be in
the number of them to whom thou will not impute their sins, but wilt accept
and take me for righteous and just, and to be an inheritour of everlasting
life.

Thou merciful Lord wast borne for my sake: thou did suffer both hunger
and thirst for my sake: thou did teach, pray, and fast for my sake: all thy
holy actions, and works thou wroughtest for my sake: thou sufferedst most
grievous pains and torments for my sake: finally thou gave thy most
precious body and blood to be shed on the cross for my sake. Now, most
merciful Savior, let all these things profit me, that thou freely have done
for me, which have given thy self also for me. Let thy blood cleanse and wash
away the spots and fowlenesse of my sins. Let thy righteousness hide and
cover my unrighteousness. Let the merits of thy passion and bloudsheding be the
satisfaction for my sins. Give me Lord thy grace, that the faith of my
salvation in thy blood waver not in me, but may ever be firm and constant:
that the hope of thy mercy and life everlasting never decay in me: that love
wax not cold in me: finally, that the weakness of my flesh be not overcome
with the fear of death.

Grant me merciful Savior, yt when death has shut up the eyes of my body,
yet the eyes of my soul may still behold and look upon thee: and when death
has taken away the use of my tongue, yet my heart may cry and say: Lord into
thy hands I commend my soul: Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

A prayer for a woman with child.
THou art wonderful (O Lord) in all thy works, and what so ever thy good
pleasure is, yt do thou easily bring to pass, neither is there any thing
impossible with thee that thou will have done. And albeit this thy almighty
power shows it self abundantly in all thy works, yet in conceiving, forming,
and bringing forth of man, it shines most evidently.

At the beginning O (Father) when thou made man and woman, thou commandedst
them to increase, multiply, and replenish the earth. If through the subtle
inticementes of Satan they had not transgressed thy commandment by eating
the forbidden fruit, the woman whom thou have appointed to be the instrument
and vessel to conceive, nourish and bring forth man through thy wonderful
workmanship, had without any labor, pain or travel brought forth her frutie.

But that which thy goodness made easy, sin and disobedience has made hard,
painful, dangerous, and without thy special help and succor, impossible
to be brought to pass: so that now all women bring forth their children in
great sorrows, pains, and troubles. Notwithstanding, that which through their
own imperfection and feeblenes, they are not able of themselves to pass, thou
through thine unspeakable power make easy in them, and bring unto a
joyful end.

We therefore being fully persuaded of thy favor and goodness, of thy present
help, and of thy sweet comfort in all miseries and necessities, knowing also
by the testimonies of thy holy word how great and intolerable the pains of
women are that travel of child, if through thy tender mercy they be not
mitigated and eased: most humbly pray thee for Jesus Christ's sake thy son our
Lord, to help and assist this thy servant now in travel and labor, that
by thy almighty power she may safely bring forth that which by thy goodness
she has conceived, and that thy loving kindness may make that easy and
tolerable unto her, which sin has made hard and painful.

Ease (O Lord) the pains which thou most righteously have put upon her and all
women, for the sin and disobedience of our graundmother Eve, in whom al we
have sinned. Be present with her in her trouble, according to thy merciful
promise: Give her strength, and make perfect that which thou have so graciously
begun. Let thy power be showed no less in the safe bringing forth, then in
the wonderful forming and fashioning of that she bears. Make her a glad and
a joyful mother, that she through thy goodness, being safely delivered and
restored to health again, may live and praise thy blessed name for ever.

A psalm to be said in the time of any common plague, sickness, or other
cross and visitation of God.
Psalm. 9 5.
O Come let us humble our selves and fall down before the Lord with reverence
and fear.

For he is the Lord our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

Osee. 6.
Come therefore, let us turn again unto our Lord, for he has smiten us, and
he shall heal us.

Acts. 1.
Let us repent and turn from our wickedness, and our sins shall be forgiven us.

Let us turn, Jonas. 3.
and the Lord will turn from his heavy wrath, and will pardon us, and we
shall not perish.

For we acknowledge our faults, Psalm. 51.
and our sins are ever before us.

We have sore provoked thine anger (O Lord: Lamen. 3
) thy wrath is waxed hot, and thy heavy displeasure is sore kindled against
us.

Thou have in thine indignatiom stricken us with grievous sickness, Esai. 64.
and by and by we have fallen as leaves beaten down with a vehement wind.

In deed we acknowledge that our punishments are less then our deseruinges:
Iudeth. 8 Job. 11. Sapi. 124
but yet of thy mercy Lord correct us to amendment, and plague us not to our
destruction.

For thy hand is not shortened, that thou can not help: neither is thy
goodness abated, that thou will not hear.

Esa. 65.
Thou have promised, O Lord, that before we cry thou will hear us: whilst we
yet speak, thou will have mercy upon us.

Tobias. 3 Job. 5. Oseas. 6.
For none that trust in thee shall be confounded: neither any that call upon
thee shall be despised.

For thou art the only Lord, who woundest and do heal again, who killest
and reuiuest, bring even to hell, and bring back again.

Sapie. 22
Our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.

They called upon thee, and were helped: they put their trust in thee, and
were not confounded.

Psalm. 6.
O Lord, rebuke us not in thine indignation: neither chasten us, in thy heavy
displeasure.

O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth: Psalm. 25.
but according to thy mercy think thou upon us, O Lord, for thy goodness.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord heal us, for our bones
are vexed.

And now in the vexation of our spirits and the anguish of our souls, Baruc.
3. Jonas. 2.
we remember thee: and we cry unto thee, hear, Lord, and have mercy.

For thine own sake, Danie. 9.
and for thy holy names sake incline thine ear and hear, O merciful Lord.

For we do not power out our prayers before thee, trusting in our own
righteousness: but in thy great and manyfold mercies.

Wash us thoroughly from our wickedness: and cleanse us from our sins.

Turn thy face from our sins, and put out all our misdeedes.

Make us clean hearts, O God: and run a right spirit within us.

Psalm. 70.
Help us O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us, and
be merciful unto our sins for thy names sake.

So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever, and will always be showing forth thy praise from generation to
generation.

Glory be to the father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

A psalm of thanksgiving for deliverance from the plague, or any other kind
of sickness, trouble or affliction.
LOrd, thou art become gracious to thy land, Pal. 85.
thou have turned away the afflictions of thy servants.

Thou have taken away all thy displeasure, and turned thy self from thy
wrathful indignation.

For if thou Lord had not helped us, Psalm. 94*
it had not failed but our souls had been put to silence.

But when we said: our feet have slipped, thy mercy (O Lord) helped us up.

In the multitude of the sorrows that we had in our hearts, thy comfortes
have refreshed our souls.

Our souls waited still upon the Lord, Psalm. 62*
our souls hanged upon his help, our hope was always in him.

In the Lords word will we rejoice, in Gods word did we comfort our selves.

For the Lord said: Psalm. 50
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall
praise me.

So when we were poor, Psalm. 40
needy, sickly, and in heaviness, the Lord cared for us: he was our helper and
our deliverer according to his word.

Psalm. 17.
In our adversity and distress he has lift up our heads, and saved us from
utter destruction.

Pal. 33.
He has delivered our souls from death: he has fed us in the time of dearth,
he has saved us from the noisome pestilence.

Psalm. 27.
Therefore will we offer in his holy temple the oblation of thanksgiving with
great gladness: we will sing and speak praises unto the Lord our Savior.

Psa. 106.
We will give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures
for ever.

Psalm. 86. Psa. 103.
The Lord is full of compassion and-mercie, long suffering, plenteous in goodness
and pity.

Psalm. 57. Psa. 108.
His mercy is greater then the heavens, and his gracious goodness reaches
unto the clouds.

Psalm. 103
Like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful unto
them that fear him.

Therefore will we praise thee and thy mercies, Psam. 71.
O God: unto thee will we sing, O thou holy one of Israel.

We will sing a new song unto thee, Psalm. 68
O God: we will praise the Lord with Psalms of thanksgiving.

O sing praises, Psalm. 47.
sing praises unto our God: O sing praises, sing praises unto our king.

For God is the king of the earth: sing praises with understanding.

We will magnify thee, Psalm. 145.
O God our king: we will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Every day will we give thanks unto thee, and praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Our mouth shall speak the praises of the lord, and let all flesh give thanks
to his holy name, for ever and ever.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel Psalm. 72.
for ever: and blessed be the name of his majesty, world without end* Amen.

Glory be to the father, etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

Prayers to be said before meals and after.
AL things depend upon thy providence (O Lord) to receive at thy hands due
sustena^ce in time convenient. Psa. 104.
Thou give to them, and, they gather it: thou openest thy hand and they are
satisfied with all good things.

O heavenly father which art the fountain and full treasure of all goodness,
we beseech thee to show thy mercy upon us thy children, and sanctify these
gifts which we receive of thy merciful liberality, 1. Tim. 4.
granting us grace to use them soberly and purely, according to thy blessed
will: so that hereby we may acknowledge thee to be the author and giver of all
good things: Tim. 2,
and above all, that we may remember continually to seek the spiritual food
of thy word, John. 6.
wherewith our souls may be nourished everlastingly, through our savior
Christ, who is the true bread of life, which came down from heaven, of whom
whosoever eats shall live for ever, and reign with him in glory world
without end. So be it.

An other prayer before meals.
WHether ye eat or drink (says S. Paul) or whatsoever ye do else, 1. Cor. 10
let al be done to the praise and glory of God.

Eternal and everliving God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of thy most
singular love which thou barest to mankind, have appointed to his sustenaunce,
not only the fruits of the earth, but also the fowls of the air, the beasts
of the field, and fishes of the sea, and have commanded thy benefits to be
received as from thy hands with thanksgiving, assuring thy children by the
mouth of thine Apostle, that to the clean all things are clean, as the
creatures which be sanctified by thy word and prayer: grant unto us, so
moderately to use these thy gifts present, that our bodies being refreshed,
our souls may be more able to proceed in all good works, to the praise of
thy holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

An other.
O Eternal God, the very God of peace and all consolation: which broughtest
again from death our Lord Jesus the great shepherd of the sheep, through
the blood of the everlasting covenant: make us fruitful in all good works to
do thy will, and work in us that which is acceptable in thy sight. Sanctify
us throughout, and keep our whole spirit, soul, and body, faultles unto the
coming of thy dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ. Thou art faithful (O Father)
who have promised this, who also shall bring it to pass: to thee therefore be
given everlasting praise, honor, and glory. Amen.

A thanksgiving after meals.
LEt al nations magnify ye Lord, let all people rejoice in praising and
extolling his great mercies: For his fatherly kindness is plentifully showed
forth upon us, and the truth of his promise endures forever.

We render thanks unto thee, O Lord God, for the manifold benefits which we
continually receive at thy bountiful hand, not only for that it has pleased
thee to feeede us in this present life, giving unto us al things necessary
for the same: but specially because thou have of thy free mercy fashioned us a
new, into an assured hope of a far better life, the which thou have declared
unto us by thy holy Gospel.

Therefore we humbly beseech thee Oh heavenly father, that thou will not suffer
our affections to be so entangled and rooted in these earthly and corruptible
things, but that we may always have our minds directed to thee on high,
continually watching for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, what time he
shall appear for our full redemption. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost be
all honor and glory, for ever and ever. So be it.

An other thanksgiving after meals.
Glory, praise, and honor be unto thee most merciful and omnipotent father,
who have fed and daily do feed (of thy most bontifull goodness) all living
creatures: we beseech thee, that as thou have nourished these our mortal
bodies with corporal food, so thou would replenish our souls with the
perfect knowledge of the lively word of thy beloved son Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee and the holy Ghost be praise, glory and honor for ever. So be
it.

An other.
Most bountiful and gracious God, which feedest all flesh, and have promised
that asking of thee, we shall not lack, if we first seek thy kingdom and the
righteousness thereof, we feeling presently the benefit of this thy gracious
promise in feeding our bodies with this corporal food, do render unto thee
most hearty thanks for the same, beseeching thee likewise to feed our souls
with that heavenly food which perishes not, but abides into everlasting
life: so that we being nourished by thy goodness both in body and soul, may be
apt and ready to do all good works which thou have prepared for us to walk
in, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, and made
us kings and Priests unto God his father, be all glory, power and dominion
for evermore. Amen.

An other.
THe God of glory who has created, redeemed, and presently fed us, be blessed
for evermore. Ame^.

The God of all power, who has called from death the great pastor of the
sheep our Lord Jesus, comfort and defend the flock which he has redeemed
by the blood of the eternal testament: increase the number of true preachers:
repress the rage of obstinate tyrants: lighten the hearts of the ignorant,
relieve the pains of such as be afflicted, but specially of those that suffer
for the testimony of the truth: and finally confound Satan by the power of
our Lord Jesus Christ. So be it.

PRAYERS, COMMONly called Lidleys prayers, with certain godly additions.
Before thou prayest, forgive, if thou have any thing against any man, and come
not to GOD with a double heart, but lift up pure hands without wrath or
doubting.

1. Tim. 2.
Almighty and most merciful father, I thy poor creature and work of thy
hands, acknowledge and confess unto thee my manifoulde sins and offenses,
which I from my youth up unto this day, have committed against thee in thought,
word, and deed, beseeching thee for Jesus Christ thy dear sons sake, to have
mercy upon me, and to pardon the same, according to thy great mercy, which
have promised, that At what time so ever a sinner does repent him of his sin,
from the bottom of his heart, thou will put al his wickedness out of thy
remembrance.

O Lord, I confess that I was borne in sin and conceived in wickedness, and
am by nature a Child of wrath: For in my flesh dwells no good thing, and of
my self I am not able to think a good thought, much less to do that thou in
thy law requirest of me, saying: Cursed is he yt continues not in all things
that are written in the law, to do them. Again Thy law is spiritual, but I am
carnal, fold under sin. Therefore, O Lord I come unto thee for grace (which
have said, Ask and ye shall have: seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be
opened you) to prevent and draw my will unto all goodness: for none can come unto
thee except he be drawn: and except we be borne from above, we cannot see the
kingdom of God.

Therefore (O Lord) renew in me a right spirit, that I may receive strength
and ablenes, to do thy righteous will.

Grant that I may ever desire and will that which is most pleasing and
acceptable to thy will.

Thy will be my will, and my will be always to follow thy will.

Let there be ever in me one will and one desire with thee, and let me never
desire to will or not to will, but as thou will.

Grant me that above all things I may rest in thee, and fully quiet and
pacify my heart in thee: for thou Lord art the true peace of the heart, and
the perfect rest of the soul.

Thou know Lord, what is most profitable and expedient for me: wherefore do
with me in all things as it shall seem best unto thee. For it may not be but
well that thou do, which do most justly and blessedly dispose all things
after thy most godly wisdom. Therefore whether it be by prosperity or
adversity, loss or gain, sickness or health, life or death, thy will be
done.

Cast out of my heart, all unprofitable cares of worldly things, and suffer
me not to be led with the unstable desires of earthly vanities: but give me
grace that all worldly and carnal affections may be mortified and die in me.

Grant unto me the strength of thy holy spirit, to subdue this body of sin
with the whole lusts thereof, that it may be obedient both in will, mind and
members, to do thy holy will.

Assist me with thy grace (O Lord) that I may be strengthened in the inward
man, Ephe. 9.
and be armed with thy holy armor, which is the brestplace of righteousness,
the shield of of faith, the hope of salvation for an helmet, and the sword of
the spirit, which is thy holy word, that I may stand perfect in all that is
thy will and be found worthy, through, Christ, to receive the crown of life
which thou have promised to all them that love thee.

Give me grace that I may esteem all things in this world as they be,
transitory and soon vanishing away, and my self also with them drawing
toward mine end: For nothing under the sun may long abide, but all is
vanity and affliction of spirit.

Oh Lord God which art sweetenes unspeakable, turn into bitterness unto me al
transitory and earthly delights, which may draw me from the love of
eternal things: and for all worldly comfortes, give me the sweet comfort of
thy holy spirit: for thou Lord art my joy, my hope, my crown, and my glory:

Blessed are they that for the love of thee, set not by the pleasures of this
world, but crucify the flesh and the lusts thereof, so that in a clean and
pure conscience they may offer their prayers unto thee, and be accepted to have
company with thee, together with thy Angels and heavenly spirits.

O everlasting light, send down the beams of thy brightness, and lighten the
inward parts of my heart.

Open my heart, that I may behold thy laws, and teach me to walk in thy
commandementes.

Behold my weakness (O Lord) and consider my frailenesse, best known unto
thee.

Feign would I clea^e fast to heavenly things, but worldly affections and
tentations pluck me back: they daily rebel, and suffer not my soul to live
in rest.

Which although they draw me not away to consent, yet nevertheless their
assaults be very grievous unto me.

Oh what a life may this be called, where no trouble nor misery lacks? where
every place is full of snares of mortal enemies?

For one trouble or tentation ouerpassed, an other comes by and by, and the
first conflict yet during, a new battle suddenly arises.

Tedious it is to me to live in such battle: but I perceive such conflictes are
not unprofitable for me, whilst I know my self and mine infirmities the
better, and am thereby compelled to seek help at thy hand.

It is good for me (O Lord) that thou have thus exercised and humbled me, that
I may learn to dread thy secret and terrible judgments, which scourgest
every child that thou receiuest, which bring down to the gates of hell, and
bring back again.

I yield thee thanks therefore that thou have not spared my sins, but have
punished me with scourges of love, and have sent afflictions and anguish
within and without.

Of grace and favor it is (O Lord) that thou suffer thy servants to be
troubled and afflicted in this world, because they should not be condemned with
the world.

Thou would that they should here be broken with affliction, that they may
after rise in a new light, and be clarified and made glorious in thy kingdom.

Oh holy father, thou have ordained it so to be, and it is done as thou have
appointed.

Wherefore (O Lord) give me the grace to rest in thee above all things, and
to quiet my heart in thee above all creatures, above all glory and honor,
above all dignity and power, above all health and beutie, above all riches and
treasure, above all joy and pleasure, above all fame and praise, above all
mirth and consolation that man's heart may take or feel besides thee. For thou
Lord art most good, most wise, most righteous, most holy, most just, most
blessed, most high, most mighty, most comfortable, most beautiful, most
loving, most glorious, in whom all treasures of goodness most perfectly rest.

And therefore whatsoever I have besides thee, it is nothing unto me: for my
heart may not rest, nor fully be pacified, but only in theee.

Oh Lord Jesus* who shall give me wings of pefecte love, that I may flee up from
these worldly miseries, and rest with thee?

Oh Christ, the king of everlasting glory, my soul cries unto thee with
continual gronings, and says: how long ^arieth my Lord God to come to me?

Oh, when shall the end come of all these miseries?

When shall I clean be delivered from the bondage of sin?

When shall I Lord, have my mind only fixed on thee, and be merry in thee with
perfect joy and gladness?

When shall that blessed hour come that thou shall visit me, and make me glad
with thy blessed presence, when thou shall be to me all in all?

When shall I come unto thee, and feel and enjoy those sweet consolations
which with thy blessed saints are always present?

When shall I have peace without trouble, peace without, and peace within, and
on every side steadfast and sure?

O Lord Jesus when shall I stand and behold thee, and have full sight and
contemplation of thy glory?

When shall I be with thee in thy kingdom, that thou have ordained for thine
elect before the beginning?

Oh blessed mansion of that heavenly city: Oh most clear day of eternity,
whom the night may never darken.

This is the day always clear and merry, always sure and never changing.

This day shines clearly to thy saints in heaven (Oh gracious God) with
everlasting brightness: but to us here on earth (so great is the darkness of
sin in us) it shines obscurely, and as it were a far off: we see but a
glimmering thereof.

Would to God this day might shortly appear, and shine unto us, and that
these worldly vanities were at an end.

Thy heavenly Citizens know and feel how joyful this day is: but we the
Children of Eve, strangers and exiles here on earth, do lament and bewail the
bitter tediousnes of this present life, short and evil, full of sorrow and
anguish.

Where man is oftentimes defiled with sin, disquieted with troubles,
oppressed with cares, busied with vanities, blinded with errors, ouercharged
with labors, vexed with tentations, overcome with vain delights and
pleasures of the world, and miserably wrapped in many kinds of calamities.

Wherefore, O Lord arise, and help me: comfort mine exile: assuage my sorrow:
destroy the power of mine enemies, the kingdom of sin, Satan, the world,
and my wicked flesh, which always make battle against me, and bring these
conflicting days to an end. So shall I sing praises unto thee (O God of my
salvation) and magnify thy holy name world with out end. Amen.

A confession of sins, and a prayer for the remission thereof.
O Lord God, rich in mercy, and of great goodness, who of thy tender love
toward us, even when we were thine enemies, did send into the world thine
own dear son Jesus Christ to be a slain sacrifice for our sins: so that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting: have
mercy upon me, according to thy great mercies, and according to the multitude
of thy, compassions put away mine iniquities*

For mine iniquities are gone over my head, Psalm. 38.
and as a weighty burden they press me down.

Against heaven and against thee have I sinned, Luke. 15.
O Lord, I am not worthy to be called thy child.

I am ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee, for my sins are ascended up
into thy sight.

There is nothing sound in my flesh because of thy displeasure, Psalm. 38.
neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin.

Behold I am sold under sin, Romans 7.
and in my flesh there dwells no good thing.

For the good which I would do, I do not: but the evil which I would not
do, that I do.

Wash me therefore O Lord from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin.

Psalm. 51.
Purify my heart by the sanctifying of thy holy spirit* and by the sprinckling
of the blood of thy dear son, from the filth of sin and an evil
conscience.

Psa. 51.
Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice.

Create in me a new heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit.

Psalm. 9.
For thou art good to them that trust in thee, and to the soul that seeks
thee.

Psalm. 25.
Al thy ways are mercy and truth, to them that seek out thy covenant, and thy
testimonies.

The fountain of thy goodness is ever full and ouerflowing: thy mercy never
decays.

Thou woundest and healest again, thou killest and reuiuest, bring even
down to hell, and bring back again.

Thou raisest up those that are fallen, thou comfortest the broken hearted.

Thou strengthenest the weary hands and crooked knees: and out of the gulf
of hell thou deliuerest the afflicted.

Out of darkness thou bring light, out of death, life, and out of damnation
thou bring salvation.

Hear me therefore, O Lord, according to thy loving kindness: turn unto me
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

Look upon mine affliction and my Psalm. 2^
travel, and forgive all my sins.

Psalm. 63.
Remember not the offenses of my youth, nor my rebellio^s against thee.

Psalm. 130
For if thou, Lord, should mark our iniquities, Lord, who should be able to
stand in thy sight?

Job. 15.
Seeing thou have found iniquity even in thine Angels, and the heavens are not
clean in thy sight: much more is man abominable and filthy, which drinks
iniquity like water.

Notwithstanding thou have said, O Lord, that as the righteousness of ye
righteous man shall not save him whenever he offends: so shall not the
wickedness of the wicked man hurt him whenever he forsakes his wickedness
and turns to thee.

For thou know thine own handie work: thou remembrest what we are: thou
see that we are but weak and feeble flesh.

Psalm. 83.
Look not therefore upon my sins, O Lord, but look upon the face of thine
anointed.

For he has borne our iniquities, Esai. 52
he has carried our sorrows.

He was wounded for our transgressions: he was broken for our iniquities: the
chastiseme^t of our peace is laid upon him.

He gave his body to be beaten, and his cheeks to be stricken: he bare the
sins of many, and prayed for the offenders.

He came to bring glad tydinges to the poor, Esai. 61.
to bind up the broken hearted, to preach liberty to the captives, to comfort
them that mourn in Sion, and to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of
joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness: that
they might be called trees of righteousness and the planting of the Lord.

For his sake therefore, O Lord, be merciful unto me, and say unto my soul:
behold I am come to thee, thy health and thy salvation.

A prayer for the true knowledge and understanding of the word of God.
^sal. 119
LEt my prayer come before thee, O Lord, and give me understanding according to
thy word.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, teach me thy statutes:

That with my lips I may declare all the judgments of thy mouth:

That I may delight in the way of thy testimonies above all riches:

That I may meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways:

That I may take pleasure in thy statutes, and not forget thy word.

Be good unto me thy servant, O Lord, yt I may live and keep thy word.

Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders which are in thy law.

I am a stranger upon earth, notwithstanding hide not from me thy
commandments.

For my heart languisheth with the desire that it has to thy judgments.

Thy testimonies are my delight and my counselors.

I will praise thee with an upright heart, when thou have taught me the
judgments of thy righteousness.

Show me thy ways, Psalm. 25.
O Lord, and teach me thy paths.

Lead me forth in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art my God and my
salvation, in thee do I trust all the day long.

Make me understand the way of thy precepts, Psalm. 119.
and I will consider thy wondrous works.

Thy hands have made me and fashioned me, give me understanding that I may
learn thy co^mandementes.

That they which fear thee, seeing me, may rejoice: because I have trusted in
thy word.

Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant, and teach me thy
ordinances.

Thou art good and gracious, therefore according to thy goodness teach me thy
statutes.

O Lord, of whose goodness the earth is full, teach me thy ordinances.

O Lord, I beseech thee accept the sacrifice of my lips, and teach me thy
judgments.

The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: grant me understanding
and I shall live.

Deal with thy servant according to thy mercies, and teach me thy statutes.

I am thy servant, grant me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

My lips shall show forth thy praise, when thou have taught me thy statutes.

My tongue shall talk of thy word, for all thy commandments are righteous.

For in thee is a well of li^ing waters, Psalm. 36
and ever flowing, and in thy light shall we see light.

A prayer for the leading of a Godly life.
I Cry unto thee with my whole heart, Psalm. 119
hear me (O Lord) and guide me, that I may keep thy stautes.

I call upon thee: save me, that I may keep thy testimonies.

Let my prayer be directed in thy ^ight as incense, Psalm. 141.
and the lifting up of my hands, as an evening sacrifice.

I have gone astraye like a lost sheep: Psa. 119.
seek thy servant, for I do ^^^^ heaven and earth, and all things therein
contained: Oh incomprehensible unity: Oh always to be worshipped most
blessed Trinity: I humbly beseech thee and pray thee by the assumption and
crucified humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou would incline and
bow down the great depth of thy deity, to the bottomless pit of my vilitie.
Drive me from al kind of vice, wickedness and sin. Create in me a clean heart,
and renew in me a right spirit, for thy holy names sake.

Oh Lord Jesus, I beseech thy goodness, for the exceeding great love which drew
thee out of thy fathers bosom, into the womb of the holy Uirgin, and for the
assumption of man's nature, wherein it pleased thee to save me, and to deliver
me from eternal death: that thou would draw me out of my self into thee
my Lord God, and grant that this my love may recover again to me thy grace
to increase and make perfect in me that which is wanting, to raise up in me,
that which is fallen, to restore to me that which I have lost, and to quicken in
me that which is dead and should live, that so I may become conformable unto
thee in all my life and conversation, thou dwelling in me, and I in thee, my
heart being soupled with thy grace, and settled in thy faith for ever.

Oh my God, loose and set at liberty my spirit from al inferior things. Govern
my soul and so work, that both in soul and body I may be holy, and live to
thy glory, world without end. Amen. I. B.

A prayer necessary to be said at all times.
O Bou^tiful Lord Jesus, O sweet savior, O Christ the son of

God, have pity upon me, mercifully hear me, and despise not my prayers.
Thou have created me of nothing, thou have redeemed me from the bondage of
sin, death, and hell, neither with Gould nor Silver, but with thy most
precious body once offered upon the cross, and thine own blood shed once
for all for a ransom. Therefore cast me not away, whom thou by thy great
wisdom have made. Despise me not, whom thou have redeemed with such a
precious treasure, nor let my wickedness destroy that which thy goodness has
builded.

Now whiles I live O Jesus, have mercy on me: for if I die out of thy favor,
it will be too late afterward to call for thy mercy. Whiles I have time to
repent, look upon me with thy merciful eyes, as thou did vouchsafe to
look upon Peter thine Apostle, that I may bewail my sinful life, and obtain
thy favor, to live and die therein. I acknowledge that if thou should deal
with me according to thy justice, I have deserved everlasting death.

Therefore I appeal to thy high throne of mercy, trusting to obtain thy
favor: not for my merits, but for thy deserts (O Jesus) who have given thy
self an acceptable sacrifice to thy father, to appease his wrath, and to bring
all sinners truly repenting and amending their evil life, unto his favor
again.

Accept me (O Lord) among the number of them whom thou have in Christ elected
and chosen to salvation. Forgive me my sins: give me grace to lead a godly
and innocent life: grant me thy heavenly wisdom: inspire my heart with faith,
hope, and charity: give me grace to be humble in prosperity, patiente in
adversity, obedient to my rulers, in all my doings faithful, dealing truly
with all men, to live chastely in wedlock, to abhor adultery, fornication and
all uncleanness, to do good after my power unto all men, to hurt no man: that
thy name may be glorified in me during this present life, and that I
afterward may atteine everlasting life, through thy mercy, and the merits of
thy death and passion. Amen.

A prayer for grace and remission of sins.
O Lord God merciful father, I poor wretched sinner come unto thee in the
name of thy dearly beloved son Christ Jesus my savior, beseeching thee for his
sake, to be merciful unto me, and to cast all my sins out of thy sight, even
through the merits of his bloody death. Pour upon me (O Lord) thy holy
spirit of grace and wisdom, to govern and lead my body and soul in thy
holy word and commandments. Show thy mercy upon me, and so lighten the
natural blindness and darkness of my heart through thy grace, that I may
daily be renewed by thy holy spirit. Open my hard heart and gross ears, to
hear and read thy word and heavenly voice, and to believe and follow it in
my conversation, and ever to hold fast that blessed hope of everlasting life.
Mortify and kill all vice in me, that my life may express my faith in thee.
Mercifully hear the humble supplication of thy servant, and grant me thy
peace all my days. Graciously pardon my infirmities, and defend me in all
dangers, both outwardly in my body, goods and name, and inwardly in my soul,
against all evil tentations and subtle baits of satan that roaring lion,
seeking whom he may devour. Grant (O Lord) that I and every member of thy
Church in his vocation and calling, may truly and godly serve thee. Grafte in
my heart the love of thy name: increase in me true religion: replenishe me with
all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep me in the same unto the end. Give
unto me the spirit of prayer, true humility, perfect patience, and continual
joy in the holy ghost. I commend unto thy protection (O Father) my house and
all that thou have given me: my whole family, my wife and children: aid me,
that I may well and holily govern, nourish, and bring them up, in thy fear
and service.

And forasmuch as in this world I must always be at war, not with one sort
of enemies, but with an infinite number: not only with flesh and blood, but
with the devil, which is the prince of darkness, grant me thy grace, that being
armed with thy defense, I may stand in this battle with an invincible
constancy against al corruption which I am encompassed with on all sides,
until such time as I having ended the co^bate which during this life I must
sustain, in the end I may atteine to thy heavenly rest which is prepared for
me through Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

A prayer taken out of the first Psalm
Almighty and most gracious God take away from us al evil counsel, and then
our sins: suffer us not to run into an ungodly and wicked life: and finally
keep our minds far from the contempt of godliness and scorning of virtue,
and in the stead of these evils, grant that we may continually be occupied
in thy law and sacred scriptures, that we be not carried about like the wicked,
as light duste and fruitelesse chafe, with every blast of affection and
doctrine: but rather that we as trees planted by the water brooks, indewed
with the life of thy spirit and faith, may also bring forth the fruits of
good works: and that what so ever we take in hand may prosper, and tend to
the praise and glory of thy name and furtherance of our salvation: and at the
last, when the wicked shall fall away in thy judgment* we may stand steadfast
and be made perfect through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Out of the same Psalm.
ALmighty God we are sufficiently taught, that grievous calamities and
miserable plagues do therefore daily vex and trouble thy Church, because we
have not ceased to follow the counsel of the ungodly: which being once known,
we ought to have eschewed. The way also of the wicked we have not shunned: yea
we have not ceased to walk their race by continual transgressing of thy
commandments. we have also of long time, contemned all godly correction and
discipline, and whatsoever has been taught us out of thy word, has bin too
little regarded* yea without all shame neglected and scorned.

Wherefore it is no marvel, if we in the steed of that happiness and quiet
peace, which we (alas) have too long abused, be now compelled to suffer all
heavy, grievous, and most bitter plagues. But now, O God, in humblenes of
heart we flee unto thee confessing our grievous offenses, and we most humbly
and heartily beseech thee, that those evils which we so foolishly and
wretchedly have committed, thou will mercifully forgive us, and frame our
minds wholly to the obedience of thy law, in such wise that our hearts may be
occupied both day and night in nothing else, but in the meditation of thy holy
scriptures, for so shall we giving credit to thy words, bring forth
seasonable and pleasant fruit, and shall not be spoiled of the graces of the
Holy Ghost: yea our doings shall never be without happy success Now we are
tossed hither and thither not unlike to leaves and chafe, with the wind of
adversity and affliction: yet grant (O most merciful father) that our life
perish not with the wicked, but that the cause of the just, may be defended by
thy singular providence and protection: so that in judgment and in the
company of the just we may be able to stand, and not to be confounded: through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Out of the same Psalm.
Almighty God, for as much as we have now learned, that a great part of our
felicity, so long as we live here, consists in this, that we refrain from
ungodly counsel and wicked manners, and also avoid the company of those that
despise and deride all good things: and that in the stead of these evils, we
give our selves to the heavenly study of thy holy law, to be occupied and
exercised therein both day and night, (whereby we do perceive that we have
very much erred and strayed from this way of our salvation, yea we have in
these things most wickedly offended:) therefore we beseech thee, even for thy
mercies sake that thou will pardon our offenses, and that henceforth by the
continual study and exercise of thy word, thou will vouchsafe to make us
fruitful plants, that we may not only bring forth wholesome fruits in thy
Church whiles we live here, but also may be able in the other world to stand
in judgment before thee, who best know the way of the just, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer taken out of the second Psalm.
WE perceive (most merciful and mighty God) that not only Antichrist, but
also the power and strength of the whole world, co^spireth against thee, and
against thy Christ: which think the Gospel and ^ building up again of thy
Church, to be an intolerable bondage and hard yoke. Wherefore they labor by
all possible means, to break a sunder the societies and congregations of the
faithful, and cast away all discipline. But forasmuch as thou sit in
heaven, and (...) not ignorant what the devil or wicked flesh goes about:
laugh thou to scorn their ^aine counsels, and bring their purposes to naught
Let them feel thine anger to bekindled against them, and make them astonished
at the fiercnes of thine indignation, so that they may not be able to destroy
thy Church, over whom thou have appointed Jesus Christ our only savior to be a
governor, that in it he might reign by his word and spirit with inuincibl^
might and power. Wherefore grant unto us although unworthy and shrinking
children, such faith and constancy, that we may find him and also confess him
to be our only king, and that we may nothing doubt, but that we be his nation,
people and heritage, being most assured of this, that he is of such strength
and power, that with his word more strong then iron, he is able to destroy whom
he will, and break them in pieces like earthen pots.

Therefore, O God, turn the Kings and Princes of the world unto thee, that
they may be wise and understand, whereby they may unfeignedly acknowledge,
embrace, and kiss thy son, least when his anger shall once be kindled, they
perish and be destroyed for ever. And when it shall be thy good pleasure, make
them blessed for evermore, which commit themselves to thy governance and
protection, by Christ Jesus our Lord* Amen.

Out of the same Psalm.
Most Mighty and merciful Lord God, though the devil rage, the powers of
the world daily rise up, and the flesh with all her bondslaues conspire against
the kingdom of thine only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord: yet make us
to understand, and with constant faith to be persuaded, that thou deridest and
contemnest al such who^ thou caust in thine anger and fierce displeasure when
thou will, suddenly destroy and bring to naught. In this faith, seeing we are
sometimes so weak; yt being overcome with sundry kinds of terror and dread,
we are not so obedient to thy commandments as we ought to be* we therefore
beseech thee, for thy great* goodness sake to be merciful unto us, and grant
that we may constantly believe thy son our king and our redeemer, to have the
highest power and dominion with thee in all things. For seeing thou have
begotten him, thou have also delivered to him all nations to be ruled by his
power, as his own inheritance. Grant therefore unto us, that yet at the length
we may be wise and understand, in such sort as we may serve thee with all due
fear and worship, that in the last day we be not dashed in pieces as earthen
vessels, with the rod of thine indignation: through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

A prayer which M. John Bradford said a little before his death in smithfeelde.
Mat. 27.
MErciful God and father, to whom our savior Christ approached in his fear and
need by reason of death, and found comfort: gracious God and most bounteous
Christ, on who^ Stephen called in his extreme need, Acts. 7.
and received strength: most benign holy spirit, which in the midst of all
crosses and death did comfort the Apostle S. Paul with more consolations in
Christ, then he felt sorrows and terrors in the world: have mercy upon me, a
most miserable, vile and wretched sinner, which now draw near the gates of
death, deserved both in soul and body eternally, by reason of my manifold,
horrible, old and new transgressions* which to thine eyes (O Lord God) are
open and known. Oh be merciful unto me, and forgive me for the bitter death
and bloodsheading of thine only son, Jesus Christ. And though thy justice do
require in respect of my sins that now thou should not hear me,
contemning thy daily callings: yet let thy mercy which is above al thy works,
and wherewith the earth is filled, let thy mercy (I say) prevail toward me,
through the merits and meditation of Christ our savior, for whose sake it
pleases thee to bring me forth now as one of his witnesses and a record
bearer of thy verity and truth taught by him, to give my life therefore. Of
which dignity I do acknowledge (dear God) that there was, never any so
unworthy and unmeet, no not the thief that hanged with him on the cross. I
humbly therefore pray thee that thou would accordingly aid, help, and
assist me with thy strength and heavenly grace, that with Christ thy son I
may find comfort, with Stephen I may see thy presence and gracious power, with
Paul and al others, which for thy names sake have suffered afflictions and
death, I may find so present with me thy gracious consolation, that I may by
my death glorify thy holy name, set forth and ratify thy verity, comfort
the hearts of the heavy, confirm thy Church in thy truth, convert some yt are
to be converted, and so depart out of this miserable world (where I do nothing
but daily heap sin upon sin) and enter into the fruttion of thy blessed
mercy: whereof now give and increase in me a lively taste, sense, and feeling,
where through the terror of death, the torments of fire, the pains of sin,
the darts of satan, and the dolours of hell, may never overcome me, but may
be driven away through the working of that most gracious spirit which now
plentiously indue withal, yt through the same spirit I may offer (as now I
desire, and am ready to do) in Christ and by him my self wholly soul and
body, to be a lively sacrifice, holy and acceptable in thy sight (dear father)
whose I am and always have been even from my mothers womb, yea even before
the world was made: to whom I commend my self, faith, and name, family and
friends, country and all the whole Church, yea, even my very enemies,
according to thy good pleasure, beseeching thee entirely to give once more to
this Realm of England, the blessing of thy word again, with godly peace, to
the teaching and setting forth of the same. Oh dear father, now give me to com
unto thee: so purge and purify me by this fire in Christ's death and passion
through thy spirit, that I may be a burnt offering of sweet smell in thy
sight, which live and reignest with the son and the holy Ghost, now and
evermore world without end. Amen.

The Letanie.
O God the father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of heaven, etc.

O God the son redeemer of the world, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son redeemer of etc.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the son: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, etc.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy blessed and glorious etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins, spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
Diuel^ from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory and hypocrisy, from
envy, hatred and malice, and all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all fornication, and al other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh, and the Devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from souden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from hardness of heart and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and
circumcision, by thy baptism, fasting and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat. by thy cross and passion* by thy glorious
resurrection and ascension, and by the coming of the holy ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us O Lord God, and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Elizabeth our most
gracious queen and governor.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please the to rule her heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that she may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to be her defender and keeper, giving her the victory
over all her enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops Pastors and ministers of ye
Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both by
their preaching and living they may set it forth and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to indue the Lords of the counsel, and all the
nobility with grace, wisdom and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to give to all nations unity peace and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increase of grace to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth
the fruits of the spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise them up that fall, and finally to beat
down satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to succor, help and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show
thy pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecuters and slanderers and
to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc*

That it may please thee to give us true repentan^e, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to indue us with thy holy spirit, to
amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, we beseech thee, etc.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world,

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

And lead us not into temptation:

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The versicle.
O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The answer.
Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.
O God merciful father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desires of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee in all our troubles and adversities, when soever they oppress
us, and graciously hear us that those evils which the craft and subtlety of
the devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy (...) being hurt
by no persecution (...) evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us* and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David* have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Christ, graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us:

As we do put our trust in thee*

Let us pray.
WE humbly beseech thee (O father) mercifully to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those evils that we
most righteously have deserved, and grant that in all our troubles we may put
our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in
holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory: through our only
Mediator and advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for the Queens Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly father, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords,
the only ruler of princes, which do from thy throne behold all the
dwellers upon the earth: most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to
behold our most gracious sovereign Lady, Que^ne Elizabeth, and so replenish
her with the grace of thy spirit, that she may always incline to thy will
and walk in thy fear, indue her plentifully with heavenly gi^es, grant her
in health and wealth long to live: ^^rength^ her, that she may vanquish and
overcome all her enemies, and finally after this life, she may atteine
everlasting joy and felicity: through Jesus Christ our Lord* Amen.

A prayer for Bishops and Ministers of the Church.
Almighty and everliving God, which only workest great maruels, send down
upon our Bishops and Curates, and al congregations committed to their charge,
the healthful spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please thee, power
upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this (O Lord) for the
honor of our advocate and mediator Jesus Christ.

For rain.
O God, heavenly father which by thy son Jesus Christ, have promised to all
them that seek thy kingdom and the righteousness thereof, all things
necessary to their bodily sustenance: send us we beseech thee in this our
necessity, such moderate rain and showers, that we may receive the fruits of
the earth, to our comfort, and to thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

For fair weather.
O Lord God, which for the sin of man did once drown all the world,
except eight persons, and afterward of thy great mercy did promise never
to destroy it so again: we humbly beseech thee, that although we for our
iniquities have worthily deserved this plague of rain and waters, yet thou
will send us such weather, whereby we may receive the fruits of the earth in
due season, and learn both by thy punishment to amend our lives, and for thy
clemency to give thee praise and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the time of dearth and famine.
O Merciful God and heavenly father, whose gift it is yt the rain does fall,
the earth is fruitful, man and beasts increase, and fishes do multiply,
behold we beseech thee, the afflictions of thy people, and grant that the
scarcity and dearth which we do now most justly suffer for our iniquity, may
through thy goodness be mercifully turned into cheapnes and plenty, for the
love of Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be
praise for ever. Amen.

In the time of War.
Almighty God, king of al kings and governor of all things* whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners,
and to be merciful to them that truly repent: save and deliver us (we humby
beseech thee) from the hands of our enemies: abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devises, that we being armed with thy defense may
be preserved from all perils, to glorify thee, which art the only giver of
all victory, through the merits of thy only Son Jesus Christ our Lord. So
be it.

In the time of any common plague or sickness.
O Almighty God, which in thy wrath, in the time of king David, did slay
with the plague of pestilence threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembering
thy mercy did save the rest: have pity upon us miserable sinners, that
now are visited with great sickness and mortality, that like as thou did
then command thin^ Angel to cease from punishing: so it may now please thee
to withdraw from us this plague and grievous sickness: through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

A prayer for the strength and comfort of the holy ghost.
Almighty and most merciful God, which gives to thine elect people thy holy
spirit, as a sure pledge of thy heavenly kingdom, we most humbly beseech thee
so to replenish our hearts with the grace of thy holy spirit, that he may
bear witness to our spirits that we be thy children, and heirs of thy
kingdom, and that by the gracious working of this thy good spirit, we may kill
all ^a^nall-lustes, vnlaw^full pleasurs concupiscences and evil affections,
contrary to thy most blessed will, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
So be it.

For sure hope and true taste of everlasting life.
O Almighty God, which have prepared everlasting life for all those that be thy
faithful servants, grant unto us sure hope of this life everlasting, that
whiles we be here, in this miserable world, we may have some taste and feeling
of it in our hearts, through the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
So be it.

For the true knowledge of God and his word, and a life agreeable to the same.
Grant unto us (O merciful God we most heartely beseech thee) knowledge and
true understanding of thy blessed will and word, that all ignorance being
expelled, we may know what thy will and pleasure is in all things, and how to
do our duty, and truly to walk in our vocation, and that also we may
express in our living those things that we do know, that we be not only
knowers of thy will and word, good Lord, but also may be hearty and faithful
workers of the same, through our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. So be it.

A prayer for the strength and increase of faith.
O Almighty and everlasting God, which not only give every good and
perfect gift, but also increasest those gifts that thou have given: we most
humbly bes^ech th^e to increase in us the gift of faith, that we may t^^^ly
believe in thee, and in thy promises made unto us in Christ Jesus our Lord, and
that neither by our negligence nor infirmity of the flesh, nor by greeuousnes
of tentations, neither by the subtle crafts and assaults of the devil, we be
driven from this faith in the blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So
be it.

For a godly life.
Almighty God, give us grace that we may cast away ye works of darkness and put
upon us the armor of light, now in the time of this mortal life (in the
which thy son Jesus Christ came to visit us in great humility) that in ye
last day, when he shall come again in his glorious majesty to judge the
quick and the dead, we may rise to the life immortal, through him who lives
and reigns with thee and the holy ghost, now and for ever. So be it.

A prayer for true perseverance and assured hope of eternal life.
BLessed God, which have caused al holy scriptures to be written for our
lea^^ing, grant that we may in such wise hear them, read them, mark them,
and inwardly print them in our hearts, that by patience and comfort of thy
holy word, we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting
life which thou have given us in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So be it.

A prayer for the obteining of our petitions.
Almighty God which have given us grace at this time with one accord, to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise that when two or three be
gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their requests: fulfill now
(O Lord) the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient
for them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world
to come life everlasting. Amen.

The end of the Letanie.
A GODLY INSTRVction, containing the sum of all the divinity necessary for
a Christian conscience:
Made by John Bradford.
A MAN that is regenerate and borne of God (the which thing that every one of
us be, our Baptism the sacrament of regeneration does require under pain of
damnation, and therefore let every one of us with the virgin Marie say: Be it
unto me* O Lord according to thy word, according to the sacrament of Baptism,
wherein thou have declared our adoption, and let us lament the doubting hereof
in us, striving against it as we shall be made able of the Lord) a man (I say)
that is regenerate, consists of two men (as a man may say) namely of the old
man, The old man.
and of the new man. The old man is like to a mighty giant, such a one as
was Golyah, for his birth is now perfect: The new man.
but the new man is like unto a little child, such a one as was David, for his
birth is not yet perfect, until the day of his general resurrection.

Why the old man is stronger then the new.
The old man therefore is more stronger, lusty and stirring then is the new
man, because the birth of the new man is but begun now, and the old man is
perfectly borne. And as the old man is more stirring, lusty, and stronger
then the new man: so is the nature of him clean contrary to the nature of
the new man, as being earthly and corrupt with Satan's seed, the nature of
the new man being heavenly and blessed with the celestial seed of God. In
what respect one man is both an old man, and also a new man.
So that one man, in as much as he is corrupt with the seed of the serpent, is
an old man: and in as much as he is blessed with the seed of God from above,
he is a new man. And as, in as much as he is an old man, he is a sinner and an
enemy to God: so in as much as he is regenerate, he is righteous and holy, and
a friend to God, the seed of God preserving him from sin, so that he cannot
sin, as the seed of the serpent, wherewith he is corrupt even from his
conception, inclines him, yea, inforceth him to sin, and nothing else but to
sin. So that the best part in man before regeneration, in Gods sight is not
only an enemy, but enimitie it self.

One man therefore which is regenerate, How one man may be called always
sinful and alwais just.
well may be called always just and always sinful: just in respect of Gods
seed and his regeneration: sinful in respect of Satan's seed and his first
birth. Betwixt these two men therefore, there is continual conflict and war
most deadly. Why the old man oftentimes prevails against the new man.
The flesh and the old man by reason of his birth that is perfect, does
often for a time prevail against the new man (being but a child in
comparison) and that in such sort, as not only other, but even the children of
God themselves think that they be nothing else but old, The old man so
mightily prevails sometimes against the new man in the children of God, that
the spirit and seed of God seems to be utterly taken from them, whereas in
deed it is not so, as afterward. to their great comfort they find and feel.
and that the spirit and seed of God is lost and gone away, where yet
notwithstanding the truth is otherwise, the spirit and the seed of God, at
the length appearing again, and dispelling away the clouds which cover the
Sun of Gods seed from shining, as the clouds in the air do the corporal
Sun: so that sometimes a man cannot tell by any sense, yt there is any sun,
the clouds and winds so hiding it from our sight: Even so our cecitie or
blindenes, and corrupt affections do often shadow the sight of Gods seed in
Gods children, as though they were plain reprobates. Whereof it comes, that
they praying according to their sense, but not according to the truth, desire
of God to give them again his spirit, as though they had lost it, and he had
taken it away. Which thing GOD never does indeed although he make us to think
so for a time: for always he holds his hand under his children in their
falls, yt they lie not still as other do which are not regenerate. And this is
the difference betwixt Gods children, which are regenerate and elect before al
times in Christ, and the wicked castawayes: that the elect lie not still
continually in their sin, as do the wicked, but at the length do return
again by reason of Gods seed, which is in them hid as a sparkle of fire in
the ashes: as we may see in Peter, David, Paul, Marie Magdalen, and others. For
these (I mean Gods children) God has made all things in Christ Jesus: to whom
he has given this dignity, that they should be his inheritance and spouses.
This our inheritour Christ Jesus, God with God, light of light, coeternall and
consubstantiall with the father and with the holy Ghost, to the end that he
might become our husband (because the husband and the wife must be one body and
flesh) has taken our nature upon him, communicating with it and by it in his
own person, to us all his children, his divine majesty, (as Peter says) and
so is become flesh of our flesh, 2. Pet. 1.
and bone of our bones substantially, as we are become flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bones spiritually: all that ever we have perteining to him, yea even
our sins, as all that ever he has, perteining unto us, even his whole
glory. So that if satan should summon us to answer in our debtes, and
sins, in that the wife is no suitable person, but the husband, we may well
bid him ever his action against our husband Christ, and he will make him a
sufficient answer.

For this end (I mean yt we might be coupled and married thus to Christ, and so
be certain of salvation, and at peace with God in our consciences) God has
given his holy word, which has two parts (as now the children of God do
consist of two men: The law pertains to the old man: and the Gospel to the
new man.
) the one part of Gods word being proper to the old man, and the other part of
Gods word being proper to the new man. The part properly perteining to the
old man is the law: the part properly perteining to the new man, is the
gospel.

What the law is.
The law is a doctrine which commands and forbids, requiring doing, and
avoiding. Under it therefore are contained al precepts, threatenings, promises
upon conditions of our doing and avoiding* etc.

What the Gospel is.
The Gospel is a doctrine which always offers and gives, requiring on our
behalf, not as of worthiness or as a cause, but as a certificate unto us, and
therefore under it are contained all the free and sweet promises of God: as I
am the Lord thy God, etc.

In those that be of years of discretion it requires faith, The conscience
feared and beaten down with the terror of Gods judgment against sin, may not
look upon the law, but fle to the Gospel for relief and comfort.
not as a cause, but as an instrument whereby we our selves may be certain of
our good husband Christ, and of his glory: and therefore when the conscience
feels it self disquieted for fear of Gods judgment against sin, she may in
no wise look upon the doctrine perteining to the old man, but to the doctrine
only that pertains to the new man, in it not looking for that which it
requires, that is, faith, because we never believe as we should: but only on
it which it offers, and which it gives, that is, on Gods grace and eternal
mercy and peace in Christ. So shall she be in quiet when she looks for it
altogether out of her self in gods mercy in Christ Jesus: in whose lap if she
lay her head with S. John, John. 13. When the conscience is quiet and at peace
with God, the law serves only to keep down the old man
then is she happy, and shall find quietness indeed. When she feels her
self quiet, then (in Gods name) let her look on the law, and upon such
things as it requires, thereby to bridle and keep down the old Adam, to
stay the Goliath: from who^ she must needs keep the sweet promises, being the
bed wherein her spouse and she meet and lie together. For as the wife will
keep her bed only for her husband, although in other things she is contented
to have fellowship with others, as to speak, sit, eat, drink, go, etc. so
our consciences which are Christ's wives, must needs keep the bed, that is gods
sweet promises al only for our selves and our husband, there to meet
together, to embrace and laugh together, and to be joyful together. If sin,
the law, the devil, or any thing else would creep into the bed and lie
there, then complain to thy husband Christ, and forthwith thou shall see him
play Phinees part. Thus my dearly beloved, Number. 25.
I have given you in few words, a sum of all the Divinity which a
Christian conscience cannot want.

FINIS.
The Table.
AN introduction to prayer. fol. 17. A meditation concerning prayer. 49. A
meditation upon the Lords prayer. 68. Private prayers for the morning, evening,
and other times of the day 132 When you awake out of your sleep. eod. When
you behold the day light. 134 When you arise. 135. When you apparel your
self. 136. When you are made ready to begin the day vvithall. 138.
Cogitations meet to begin the day vvithal. 139 When you go forth of the
doors. 143 When you are going ann journey. 145 When you are about to receive
your meat. 148 In the meal time. 150 After your meat. 152 When you come hom^
again. 155 At the Sun going down. 156 When the candles be light. 158
When you make your self unready. 160 When you enter into your bed. 161 When
you feel sleep to be coming. 163 A general confession of sins, with other
prayers for the morning and eu^ning, to be used in families and public
assemblies. 165 An other confession of sins. 167 A prayer to be said in the
morning. 169 An other. 172 An other. 173 An evening prayer. 176 An other. 181
An other 183 A prayer for remission of sins. 185 A prayer for the true
knowledge of the mystery of our redemption in Christ. 197 A form of
thanksgiving for our redemption, and a prayer for the strength and increase of
faith. 200 A thanksgiving to God for his great benefits. 202 A prayer for
true mortification. 205 A meditation for the exercise of true mortification.
211 A meditation of the coming of Christ to judgment, and of the revvard both
of the faithful and unfaithful. 215 A meditation of the life everlasting, the
place where it is, and the incomparable joys thereof. 222 An other meditation
of the blessed state and felicity of the life to come* 231 A meditation of the
presence of God. 238 A meditation of the providence of God. 240 A meditation of
Gods power, beauty, goodness, etc. 245 A meditation concerning the sober vsag
of the body that it may be subject and obedient to the soul. 249 An other
meditation concerning the sober vsag of the body and pleasures in this life.
252 A meditation of death and the commodities it brings. 256 A meditation
upon the passion of our savior Jesus Christ. 259 A prayer to Christ
crucified. 267 A Prayer to Christ ascended and reining in glory. 268 A prayer
for true repentance. 272 A prayer for the strength and increase of faith. 273 A
prayer for the true sense and feeling of Gods favor and mercy in Christ. 274
A prayer against our spiritual enemies, the devil, the world and the flesh.
279 A prayer for the present help in tentation. 281 Remedies against sinful
motions and tentations. 284 A prayer for the avoiding of Gods heavy wrath and
vengeance for our sins. 286 An other. 263 A prayer to be said of such as
suffer any kind of cross. 595 A prayer of the afflicted for the profession of
gods word. 299 A prayer to God the father* the son, and the holy ghost. 302
A thanksgiving to God the father, the son and the holy ghost. 307 A prayer
to God, for his heple and protection against the obstinat enemies of the truth.
310 A prayer for the afflicted and persecuted under the tirannie of Antichrist.
312 A prayer to be said before the preaching of gods word. 314 A prayer to be
said after the preaching of gods word. 316 A prayer to be said before the
receiving of the communion. 323 A thanksgiving after the receiving of the
communion. 326 A lamentation of a sinner afflicted in conscience for his
offenses. 327 A prayer for the sick, 338 A prayer to be said at the hour of
death. 339 A prayer for a vvoma^ with child. 343 A psalm to be said in the
time of any common plague, sickness, or other cross and visitation of God.
346 A Psalm of thanksgiving for deliverance from the plague or any other
kind of sickness, or affliction. 350 Prayers to be said before meals and
after. 354 An other prayer to be said before meals. 455 An other 356 A
thanksgiving after meals. 357 An other thanksgiving after meals. 359 An
other. 360 An other. 361
Prayers, commonly called Lidleys Prayers, with certain godly additions.
A Confession of sins. 362 A confession of sins, and a prayer for the remission
thereof. 374 A prayer for the true knowledge and understanding of the word of
God. 380 A prayer for the leading of a godly life. 383 A prayer for the
deliverance from sin, and to be restored to Gods grace and favor again. 387 A
prayer necessary to be said at all times. 489 A prayer for grace and remiss^on
of sins. 392 Prayers taken out of the first Psalm. 395 Prayers taken out of
the second Psalm. 400 A prayer which M. John Bradford said a little before
his death in Smithfield. 404 The Letanie. 409 For the Queens majesty. 420 For
Bishops and ministers of the Church. 421 For rain. 421 For fair weather. 422
In the time of dearth and famine. 423 In the time of war. 423 In the time of
any common plage or sickness. 424 For the strength and comfort of the holy
ghost. 425 For sure hope and tr^^ taste of everlasting life. 426 For the true
knovveledg of god and his word, and a life agreeable to the same. ibid. For
the strength and increase of faith. 427 For a godly life. 428 For the true
perseverance and assured hope of eternal life. 429 A prayer for the obteining
of our petitio^s. 429 A godly instruction, containing the sum of all the
Divinity necessary for a Christian conscience. 431
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Middleton, dwelling in Fleetestreate at the
sign of the Faulcon.


