The golden book of christen matrimonye, most necessary and profitable for all
the^, that entend to live quietly and godly in the Christen state of holy
wedlock newly set forth in English by The odore Basille.

Hebre. xiii. wedlockers honorable among al parsons, and the bed vnde^led But
whoremongers and adu^erers God ^all judge.

Prouer. 5. Be glad with the wife of thy yougthe, a^ with a loving hynde and
frendely roo, Let he^ breasts always satisfye the, and hold the content with
her love. Oh my son, why will thou have pleasure in an harlotte, and embrace
the bosom of another woman?

Prouer. 12. An honest loving and diligente wife is a ^rowne, that is to
say, a great honor and glory, to her husband. But she that behauethe her
self unhonestly, is a corrupcion in his bones.

Prouer. 18. He that fyndeth a good wife, fyndeth a great treasure, and he
shall receive pleasure at the Lor des hand.

Prouer. 19. House and rytches is given a man of his pa rentes, but a wise and
discrete wife is unfeignedly the gift of the Lord.

To his singular good friend master Anthony Gryse, Theodore Basille wysheth
long life, continual health and prosperous felicite.
IF God, which is the Iaco. (...). i. Cor. (...)
alone gyuer of all good things had endewed me with the divine gift of
such and so great eloquence, that I might justly and without any reprehension
have compared with that most excellent Greek Pericles, whose vain of ornate
eloquence either in persuadynge or dissuadynge even of very nature seemed to be
incomparable, and not able of any mortal man to be obtained, nor yet scase ly
in any point so much as a shadow of the same to be expressed: yet I here
freely confess that I might well appear more barbarous tha^ the rude and
gross Garamantes, if I should take upon me to decantate and set forth the
dignite of honorable wedlock according to the deserts thereof, and exalte it
with such encomies, lauds and praises, as it has always ben thought worthy
even of them, that have most floryshed with pregnant wits and excelled with
all kind of knowledge both divine and humayne. Let other praise Chastity
so much as they list, which, they say, would God it were so, fylleth A
comparison between cha stite and wedlock.
heaven, yet will I commend matrimony, which replenysheth both heaven and earth
Let other set for the syngle living with so many praises, as they can
accumulate and tomble one in another neck, for as much as it is void of all
care, trouble and disquietnes, yet will I for evermore commend the state of
honorable wedlock which refusethe no kind of pay^e and trouble, so that it
may bring any profyt at all to the public weal of Christendom. Let other
approve solitarye living, which is pertaker of none of all those burdennes,
that the common sort of me^ do sustain, yet will I prefer that state of
living, which? according to the order Roma. xv. Gala. v^.
of charity, is ready at all times to bear the burdens of other, and to seek
the quietness of other no less than of it self. Let other praise ye kind of
life, whereby mankind decays and in process of time should be utterly
destroyed, yet will I commend that manner of life, which begets and
brings forth to us excelent Kin ges, noble Princes, Pryncelyke Dukes,
puyssaunt Lords, valeaunt Knights, connyng artificers for the mayntenau^ce of
the co^m^ weal learned wits. etc. Let other auaunce that life, whereby
Monarchies, Empyres, and Kyngdo^s be made desolate, barren and vnfruytfull, yet
will I most of all praise that life, which make the Realms to florysh with
innumerable thousan des of people, whereby the public weal is preserved in
safe estate. Let other praise such as may justly seem to be monstures of
nature for their sterrilite and barrennes, yet will I commend them, which
according to their first Gene. ii.
creacion and the natural disposicion, that God from the beginning engraffed in
the^, are fruteful Psalm. c. xxvii
as a plenteous vine. Let other allow the fan sy of those belly Gods, which
for a volupteous, careless and swynysh manner of living, and because they will
not live of the labor of their own hands / and thesweat of their own b^ ow
(...), after the commandment of God, had rather live like abominable
adulterers, stinking whoremongers, unclean fornicatours, detestable Sodomites,
unnatural mo^stures unto the great slander of the Christen religion: and so
to dye as unprofitable cloddes of the earth, the godly to marrye and leave
behind them such fruit, as in time to come might both profytte the common
weal, and also set forth the glory of God, when not withstondyng both ye
law of God, of nature, and of man both suffers and i. Cor. vii. (...)
provoke them unto the contrary, seeing they have not the gift of chastity
given them, and it is better to marry tha^ to burn, as ye Apostle says: Yet
will I commend and praise such as do not digenerate, as Icarus did, from
their natural kind, but enbrace holy wedlock, which Hebre. xiii.
is honorable among all personens, and bring forth fruit according to the
commandment of GOD, because they will not perpetrate nor once attempt any
thing, that should be unclean in the sight of GOD, and a stomblyng stock in
their own conscience. Tobe short* let other praise them, which when they
dye, leave no lyuysihe and quycke testimoni^s behind them, yet will I commend
them, which, when they give over to nature, leave quycke and lyuysh testimonies
behind them, whereby they de clare that they have lived, and not ben vnfrute
full nor unprofitable to the Christen public weal. For can christian
matrimony be any other wise than a thing of great excellency and incomparable
dignite, seeing it was not ordained of Minos, of Creta, nor of Licurgus of
Lacedemonye, nor yet of Solon the Athenian, but of Not man but God himself
instituted ho ly wedlock, yea and that in Paradise
the most high and immortal God him self, and by him, yea by hi^ alone
co^me^ded to mankind in so much that men may seem to be allured, moved and
styred unto this state of living with a certain inspiracion of the holy Ghost? In
Pa radyse also that garden of pleasure was it insti Gene. ii.
tuted, yea and that before any sin reigned in this world, to show that it
bryngethe to man great joy, wealth, felicite and quietness. And syns that time
has it ever ben had in great estimacion* yea and that not only among them
that profess unfeigned faith in the living God, but also among so many as
only were led by y^ instincte of nature, in somuche that it was recounted a
thing of much ignominye, and reproach to live without the state of wedlock
and to be vnfruytfull. Were not the holy Patriarchs Genesis xi. xxiiii xxix. xli.
married men? Did not the Prophettes of God live in the christen state of holy
wedlock? Did not God in the old law both will his Leuici. xxi Ezechi. xliiii
prestes to marry, and also appoint the^, what wives they should have? Was not
Christ borne Math. i. Luke. i. Math. viii. Mark. i. Luke. iiii. i. Cor. ix.
Philip. iiii. Joan. ii. Actu. xxi.
in marriage? Were not the Aposties of Christ married men? Did not Christ
garnysh marriage with the first fruytes of his miracles, when he with his
mother and his Disciples were at a wedding in the City of Cana Galyle? Was
not Ppilippe the Euangeliste a married man, and had four daughters excellently
learned in holy Scriptures: Were not many other Eccle. Histo. Lib in. Capi
tulum xxiiii.
holy men both Bishops and prestes married long after the Apostles time, as
we read in the antentyke Hystories? Does not S. Paul i. Timot. iiii
call the forbyddynge of marryage, the doctrine of dyuelles.

Of these things it is manifest, of how great estimacion holy wedlock has
ever been syns ye first beginning of the world among all degrees of
parsonnes. Who will not now commend The excellen cy of weddelocke.
honorable wedlock, as a thing of great excellency. Who will not thyncke it a
state of li uyng worthy high praise and comme^dacion? Who will not judge that
it ought to be embraced with metyng arms, as they say, seeing that by it so
many noble treasures chaunse unto us, virtue is mayntayned, vice is exchewed,
houses are replenished, cities are inhabited, the ground is tylled, scienses
are practiced, kyngdoms florysh, amite is preserved the public weal is
defended, natural succession remaynethe, good arts are taught, honest order
is kept, Christian dome is enlarged, Gods word promoted, and the glory of GOD
hyghely auaunced and set forth?

But alas, and woe is me for it, the glory of The dishouour of wed lock.
this christen matrimony is now greatly obscu red, yea almoost utterly
extincte and quenched through the abominable whoredom, stynking adultery,
wicked fornicacion, and alkynd of un cleannes, which is used now a days
among us, yea and that freely and without any punish meant. There is no truethe,
there is no mercy, Oze. iiii.
there is no knowledge of God on the earth as the Prophet says, Cursyng,
lyeng; man slaugh ter, theafte and whorehuntyng have ouerflowed the world. Men
now a daye^s hunte ye Stews Hiere. v.
and harlottes houses, as Hieremye sayethe. They are become like wild stoned
horses that run after meares, for every one neyeth at his neighbors wife.
And would God this were the worste.

Matrimony is despised, whoredom is had in price. True wives and faithful
yokefellowes are neglected and set at naught, but whores and harlottes are
embrased, kyssed, kulled and much set by. Honest wives sit at home and
allmoost perish for ho^ger but harlottes are sumptuously fed with al kind of
deyntyes. Matrimony is called an halter, but whoredom is recounted a pleasure.
Wedlock is now taken for a kind of living replete with all misery, care
sorrow, po uerte, wretchedness and beggerye, but to live in whoredom and such
other detestable uncleanness, is recounted to live like a clean and right by
man, like a lusty brute, like a ioly ruffelare, like a fellow, that will not
give his head for y^ washing, yea like such an one, as it would do a man
good, say they, to be in his company, he is such a mynyon and pleasant
fellow, full of his merry conceates and wanton toys. To tarry at home but one
day with their wives, is more than twyfe an hell, but to be dallyenge among
whores, whole days, nyghtes and months, and there to spend all that they
have, is a pleasure for a Pope, and recounted no pain at all. O good God how
long will thou suffer this intolerable abhominacion? How long shall the
head rulars wyucke at this great wickedness? Shall Engelonde never be pourhed of
this fylthy uncleanness and unclean fylthynes? Shall there never be a remedy
found in England for the extyrpacion of this dyuelysh and to much beastlyke
vice, seeing we have had so many occasions given us in times past, and yet
still have daily? Shallwe ever laughe at this great abhominacion, which is
waxed so high, that it can grow up no furthe? Shall this commandment of god
never have place among us Englismen. There shall be no whore among the
daughters Deu^o xx^ii
of Israel, nor no whoremonger among the sons of Israel? Are not we also ye
people of God? Are not we Israelites, and such as be converted from our old
conversation unto true godlynes? Has not God also redeemed us from all (...).
ii.
iniquite, and purified us a peculiare people to himself, that we should be
earnest followers of good works? Ought not so much clennes of ^yfe appear
in us, as it did i^ times past among the old Jews? Has God delivered us
from the power of our enemies, that we should live dissolutely, and not rather
that we should walk before him all the days of our life in holiness Luke.
(...). Ero. xxx. Deuteronomy. v. Math. xi^: i. Cor. vii.
and ryghteousnes? Is not this commandment also given to us: Thou shalt
commit no whoredom: Is it not said unto us, For to avoid fornicacion, let
every man have a wife of his own and every woman an husband of her own? Why
than do we tomble and bury our selves in this fylthy and stynckyng puddle of
uncleanness, and not rather embrase holy wedlock, which Hebre. xiii.
is honorable among all men? Why have we a pleasure to forsake our own wives,
and to run a whorehuntynge after harlottes? Why do we consume, waste and
spend away so vnthriftely all that ever we have among noughty packes, and
leave our poor wives and children at home socoureles and unprovided for? Why
do i. Cor. vi^.
we make of the members of Christ the members of an whore? Certes our final
destruction is nearer at hand than we are ware of* For this pronite and bent
redines unto this fylthy sin of the flesh is an euideut token that the great
and terrible day of judgment is at hand. For among all other Christ
rehearses this token be fore his coming, and says: As it came to Math.
xxi^ Luke. xvii. Gene. vi. vi
pass in the days of Nohe, so shall i^ be likewise in the days of the son
of man. They did eat, drink, marrye, and were married even Gene. xix.
un to the very day, that Nohe entered into the Arc, and the floude came and
destroyed them all. Again as it chanced in the days of Loath, they did eat,
drink, bye, sell, plant and bylde, but the very same day that Loath went
out of Sodom, it rayned fire and brymstone from heaven and destroyedde them
all. According to those things shall the day be, when the son of man
commethe.

To marrye or to be married is no sin, so How it is ^yn to mary.
that it be done according to Gods word, but to marry as they did in the
time of Nohe, that is to say for pleasures sake only, and to be fylthy in
wicked conversation as the Sodomites were in the time of Loathe, this is sin,
this is wickedness, this is high abhominacion, this stin keth before the face of
God, and deseruethe everlasting dampnacio^. What other thing does the most
part of men now days? As I may speak nothing of the fylthy Sodomites, which
^he wicked (...) of (...) ^lenge now (...) days.
alas for pity, are now to common in the world universally, ho^e many n^we a
days contracte matrimony aryght and after the word of God? Who regards not
more the pleasure of ye flesh, than the having of fruit? Who has not a
respect rather to the worldely rytches, than to the honest qualities and godly
virtues of her, whom he entendethe to marrye? Who regards not more the
vanite of beautye, than the honest of conditions, in as much that a common
proverb is risen thereof among us: I will, say they ungodly pro uerb ^s.
have a wife somewhat snowtefayre, though she be somewhat whoryshe. Again,
what pain is it to me, though other good fellows fare well, so that I fare
never the worsse? Item, God save y^ oven, that baketh such bread, that all the
whole house fares the better for it: O extreme abhomi nation. O shameless
beasts. O unnatural mo^ stures. O wicked cloddes of the earth. It shameth me
to think, that they are not ashamed to speak. It shameth me to speak, that
they are not ashamed to do. It shameth me to do, that they are not ashamed to
rejoice of. O very vilions and beastlyke slaves. Who is able to express either
by tongue or pen their wyck^d abhominacio^. Fleshly pleasure before having of
fruit? Riches of the world, before riches of y^ mind? Beauty of face, before
honest qualities and godly virtues? Ah whorysh love. Ah adulterous wedlock,
Ah vain vanite. A fair woman wytheout discrete manners says Solomon, is like
a ryng of gold in a swynes snowte. Again favor is deceatfull and
transitory, and beautye is a vain thing, but a woman that fearethe God, is to
be commended. The lyppes of an harlot, says Solomon, are a droppyng honey
^o^be, Prouer. v.
and her throat is softer than oil. But the conclusion and end of her, is as
bitter as wormwood, and as sharp as a two edged sword. Her feet go down
unto death, and her steps pearse through to hell. And what other thing, I
pray you, is a rytche woman without godly qualiti What a rich woman with out
good qualities is.
es, than an ass laden with a great multitude of treasure? Behold unto what
point theyse whorysh loose bonds, housebo^des, I would have said, are fallen.
This makes them to set so little by their wyue^, and to have harlottes in so
great price. For when they once have that they desired of their wives, when
beauty begins once to decay, when the rytches are consumed, which were the
alone occasion of having their wives, than cast they their wives up for hawks
meat, as they say, tha^ are they weary of their old pasture, and will look for
new bayte.

To much of one thing, say they, is naught. Shyfte of meat is good.
Iucundum nihil est, (...).
nisi quod reficit uarietas. Therefore must there sely poor wives contrary to
the law of nature, God and man, be kept for holy days, teyed up at hard
meat, only bear the name of a wife, and fylthy whores shall be mayntayned with
all kind of felicite, wealth and pleasure. O the preposterous manners of this
world. O the sinistrall judgments of these wedlock breakers. O the great
da^nacio^ y^ ha^geth over these whorehu^ters heads. I leave of to speak of
those abominable Prouoke^ of their wy ues to leudnes.
v^io^s, which provoke their wives wickedly to make their bodies common to
other for lucres sake. Neither will I rehearse here, how there be some
husbondes, which let out their wives to other, even as men use to let out
their hackney horses for money, and be at a composicion with them, what they
shall have for their wives quar terly, and they again shall for their monye at
all times have them not only^ at commandment but also at a beck or wyncke,
yea the husbands them selves will not disdain to bring them. I also let them
pass, which when they se other frequent and use their houses, yea and abuse
their wives even before their faces, wyncke at y^ matter, and fare as though
they knew nothing at al of it, as we read of a certain manne called Galba,
which, when he saw Mecenas, minion Note.
to Augustus the Emperor dallyynge with his wife before his face, kyste down
his head, nodded and fared as though he had been a sleep. O shameful abusion.
Can any greater dishonor chance unto the holy state of honorable wedlock?
Do not theyse things require a redress? Ware it not convenient that the
public magistrates and common head officers with y^ other nobles of y^
christian Realms universally Say not but y^ ye be warned.
should entreat of these things in their Parlyamentes. Assemblyes, Synodes,
Councels. etc that whoredom might once be banyshed, and christen matrimony
truly observed, faithfully kept, and reverently had in honor?

Furthermore as they set naught by their wi ues, so do they neglect the right
institution and Of the necli^ gent bri^yng up of children
bryngyng up of their children, sufferyng them to do what they will. Go they to
God or to the dyuell, as they say, they pass not. Their exam ple leads the
children rather to perdicion tha^ unto salvation. For they hear nothing of
the^ but lascivious words, wanton communicacio^ and bawdy tales, or else
chydyng, scoldyng, brawlyng, fighting, and alkynde of wicked rudenes What can
children learue here? What goodness Whense so great swarms of wicked people a
^yse now a days.
is to be sucked out of the breasts of such ungodly pare^tes Woe worth them,
if they do no^ amend and correct their sinful manners. For here of comes it
to pass, that there are now a days so greateswarmes of wicked lyuers, as
thieves, whoremongers, bloudsoupers, men s^ears, abusers of the most blissed
name of God, false wytnes berers, extorcioners covetous par sons,
dronckardes, glottonnes, feigned fre^des, traytoures, rebellions. etc. How can
they prove otherwise, seeing they are brought up without any fear of God, and
without any knowledge of Gods most blyssed law. It is a common saying,
says Solomon, that a child / when he Prouer. xx^
is old, shall not go away from such things, as he learned in his yougth.

Here may we se as in a clear lamp of Phoebus, how greatly the glorious
beauty of honorable wedlock is defaced? Ah shall not that day once come
again, that holy matrimony shall be restored to her old favor? Ah shall not we
once se that day, that that glysteryng strompet adulterye shall be ashamed to
show her face? Ah shall it not once come to pass, that these whorehunters
shall be ashamed to appear in ye syghte of honest married folk? Grant, O
Lord, grant I most humbly beseech the, that it may come to pass, yea and
that shortly.

But some men peradventure will marvel, The cause^ of the dishonor of wed
lock.
how it is come to pass, that matrimony now a days is so little esteemed, and
whoredom so commonly used, yea and that even of the^: which have wives of
their own, or else may have. Uereiy how it chaunseth universally, I know
not, except it be, that we be more pro^e, ready and bent unto vice tha^ unto
virtue, but of this am I certainly assured, that it is esy to declare some
causes of this great absurdite. First as towchynge Men of nobilite.
men of nobilite, we se daily by experience that they for the most part
marry their children at their pleasure when they are very young, even to such
as will give them most money for the^, as me^ use to sell their horses, ox,
sheep or any other cattle. Who that will give most money, shall be soonest
sped. For all things are obedient to money. They are not certain, Eccle. x.
whyther the parson will prove godly, virtuous, well disposed, wise, prudent,
circu^specte, honest. etc. to whom they marry their young child, and yet are
they streyghtwayes ready to yoke them together, so that money come. They had
rather their children should live ever after in perpetual mi sery, than they
would loose the sale of them, although they be scase sale worthy, they be so
yo^ge. This kind of marryeng has ever ben detested even of the very Ethnyckes,
and of so many as have been illumined with any spark of prudent reason. And not
without a cause. For wha^ they come once unto the perfeccion of age, and se
other whom they could find in their heart to fansy and love better, than many
of them begin to hate one another, be weary one of another, spyte one another,
and curse their parents even unto the pytte of hell for the cowplyng of them
together. Than seake they all means possible also to be divorced one from
another. But if it be so, that they remain still together, what frownig
ouerwhartyng, scoldyng, and chiding is there be^ene them, so that the whole
house is filled f^l of those tragedies even unto the top. One casts another
in the tethe with their blood and ancient stock. Each of them think their
self best at ease, when they be furdest one from another. There is nothing
more displeasaunt than one to behold another. One wyssheth another death One
draws this way, another y^ way. He favors this parson, she that. He
spendethe his goods in this place, she in yt contrary. Each of them is glad
to bryde away from another. Thus goes all to havoc. Nothing remains in
safe estate. What a wicked and he^yke life is this? The baser sort of people
sees this unquiet life, that is used among ye Gentylmen and their wives,
which ought to give an example of all honest and gentle softenes to other,
the go they home, and if any thing, be it never so little, displeases them,
straight are they together by the ears with their wives, so that shortly
after the whole town is an a rore. If any man being of a gentle nature and
sofce heart money sheth his neighbor of his unquietness and rough entreatynge of
his wife, he is also ready to faull out with him, and says, why maynot I punish
my vyfe so well as such and such a Gentle man does? Whom should we follow
but our heads and superiors? If it were not convenient for us so to do, I am
sure they would not do it. O evil example that sowethe discord between manne
and wife. Who so ever offends one of Math. xviii. Luke. xvii.
these little ones, which believe in me says Christ it were better for him that
a mylstone were ha^ ged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
deapth of the sea. Woe be to the world because of offenses. How be it, it can
not be auoy ded, but yt offenses must come. Nevertheless woe be to yt man, by
whom the offense comes. what is the orygynal cause of all theyse tragical
and bloody dissencions, but only the covetous affeccion of those parents,
which for lucres sake so wickedly bestow their children in their youth and
yoke them with such as they can not favor in their age? Were it not better
and more godly to leave them unmarried, until they were of a lawful age, and
than so to bestow them, that all parties should be contented with all, and ever
after live quietly togiter in the Christen state of holy matrimony unto the
virtuous example of the baser sort? At the least by this means ye parents
should be without blame. But it is not so lucrefull, I grant, not to the
covetous parents, yet much more profitable for the children in time to come.
And woe be to that father, which had rather satisfy his own covetous affeccion,
than to procure a quiet manner of living Themisto cles.
for his child. Themistocles although an Emperor and a man of great nobilite,
when men marueled why he married his daughter rather to a good honest plain
man of the contre, than to a great rytche man and one of an aunciente stock,
answered: I had rather have a man without money, than money without a man, meaning
that he which is a man, shall soon get money enough for his necessary uses, but
as for him, ye wants such qualities as belongs unto a man though he has
never so many possessions in store and comes of never so high blood, yet is
he but a ^astard, and shall soon lose, yt has been long in get tynge. Thus se
we that the covetous affeccio^ of certain Gentyllmen, which for lucres sake
mary their children before they come unto any perfect knowledge either of the^
selves, or of other, is one occasion, why holy wedlock is so little esteemed
now a days, and so large a wyndow openned unto whoredom and adultry.

What shall we now say unto them, which at a just and convenient age come
together, yea and that not only by the procuremente of their parents, but also
by their own consent, and yet live wickedly to the great dishonor of
honorable wedlock? Certes here must needs be a great fault, if not on both,
yet on one party. Dissensi on chances many times between such, because How
dissen sio^ chau^ceth many times between mar ryed folks.
one can not be content to forbear another, to give gentle aunswers, louyngly
to cherysh one another, and to be a like minded in all honest and godly
things, but streyghtwayes faull out for every light tryfle contrary to the
bond of matrimony. This engenders much hatred and displeasure between
married folk, in so much that if it be not shortly remedyed by mutual
reco^s^iacio^, it alieneth their minds so far one from another, y^ scasely
there comes ever after any hearty friendship and true love between the^. This is
a great dishonor to holy wedlock.

Some also have such froward and scoldyng wy Froward and scoldyng wy ues.
ues, that they can at no time be in quiet with them, they are so ladylyke,
and high in the ynne step, chefely if they brought any substance with the^,
than they think, yt their husbo^des ought of very duty to give them place, to
forbear them, and to suffer them to have the preeminence, and to do what they
lift. The beasts will not be in subieccion to their husbondes, but rather
take Gene. iii. i. Cor. xi. Ephe. v. Colloss. (...) i. Pet. ^i.
upon the^ to rule, as though not only their goods, but also them selves were
not their husbondes and at his commandment, yea an that by the appointment of
God. This ofte^tymes cau seth the husbonde to give his mind to strange women,
and to break the bonds of wedlock. The woman is not behind, but shapethe
him an hood of the same cloth, and so is holy matrimony miserably rent and
torn.

Some also there be again, which have gen C^rysh hus bonds
tle wives, loving, faithful, honest, obedient, and ready to do, what so ever
their husbondes commands them, so it be reasonable, godly and honest, and
yet will they not be pleased nor contented but like stubble curres, vngentylly
entreat the^ beat them, buffet them, and put them out of the doors, handlyng
them rather like dys^ clowtes, tha^ like honest wives, unto the great slander
and ignominy of wedlock.

All these do much derogate, obscure and deface the dignite and excellency of
christen matrimony, yea and that so much the more, because they profess the
same order of living, and yet live nothing agreeable to the same.

Another sort of people there are, which might Obiecto^ of pouerte
marry, if they would, and yet do they rather chose to live in abominable
whoredom, than they would couple them selves with an honest woman in lawful
marriage. Many obiecte and lay for their excuse, pouerte, and say, yt if they
should marry, they were utterly beggarde for all ever. To whom I answer, If
they be no^ able to healpe for to maintain an honest wife, which will also
labor, work and take pains to get her own living, how are they than able
to Super (...) ^ostes.
maintain their whores, and to away wy the the costs and charges that they
spend in wanton and ryottous company, as I may speak nothing of their
waste money, which they consume on their vain iagged and guarded apparel? Who
ever wanted that lived according to Gods word? O thou wicked and shameless
whorehunter, if thou through the sufferaunce of God haste enough to find the
and to satisfye thy beastelyke affectes and carnal pleasures, why do thou
despair of the blyssyng of God, if you should leave thine abominable
living, and take to the a true and lawefull wife? God leaves no man socourles
that puts his trust in him, and diligently labors for his living
according to his vocacion and calling. Did not Christ turn the water into
sweet wine at a cer ^an. ii^
tayne marriage to show that so many as live in holy matrimony according to his
word, shall never want? The water of the river shall sooner be turned into wine,
and the stonnes of the Mar^ well.
field into bread, than the faithful shall be left socourles. Did not God
feed the people of Israel with meat from heaven? Did he not give Exo. xvi.
Psalm. lxxvii. Exo. xvii. iii. Reg. xvii.
them drink out of the hard rock? Did he not make a crow to bring meat unto
the Prophet Helias twyse on a day, and so wonderfully fed him? Eue^ sowyll he
do with us, if we be faith full, and seake to live according to his word. The
blyssyng of the Lord makes me rytche, Prouer. x.
says Solomon, I have been young, says the Psalmographe, and I am now
old, yet did I ne Psalm. xxxvi.
uer se a righteous man forsaken, nor his seed beg gyng their bread on the
earth. All the time of his life he shows mercy to the poor, and lends to
them that have need, and yet has he goods plenty and enough for his children
that suc cede him. Therefore thou that make thy body common to any woman
without the law of wed A good lesson
lock, cease from thy wyckednes, leave thine abhominacion, get unto the such a
wife, as fereth God, louethe his word, is gentle, quiet, honest, silent, of
few words, seruiseable, obsequious, modest, loving, faithful, obedient, and
ready to do what so ever becomes an honest married woman. Couple thy self
with her, live together in ye fear of God, in concord, love and mutual ami te
Suffer no dissension nor discord to prevail Follow thi^ counsel. Ephe. i^i.
between you. If any displeasure aryseth, reco^cile your selves streyghtwayes
one to another. Let not yt son go down on your wrath. Th^e your selves to be
tha^ most rytch, wha^ most concord, amite, frendshyppe, benevolence, and love
raygneth between you, yea believe this for a suerty, yt ye can not be poor, so
long as one of you love another unfeignedly, and walcke in the fear of God,
but if ye do not agree among your selves, nor love one another heartily, than
shall ye curse of GOD faull upon you, so that all that ever ye have, shall go
to havoc, and be your goods never so manifold, yet shall they come to nogh^
in short space.

Furthermore bring up children in the nurtour of the Lord. Order your family
and house The briging up of children
hold virtuously and according to gods word. Let nothing appear in the and
in thy wife, that may give any occasion of evil to them that be under the.
Remember that God has made the a Bishop in thine own house, and that
therefore Every man is a Bishop in hisowne house. Ezec. iii. and xxxiii.
thou must be a diligent ouerfeare and circumspecte in the governance of them.
For if any of them that be in household with the perysh through thy fault,
their blood shall be required of thy hand at the dreadful day of judge meant.
These things to fore co^sydered, and in thy daily co^uersacio^ practiced,
faull y^ and thy wife to labor, every one of you, as god has called you
Labor
and pray to God yt he will bliss, prosper, fortunate and bring your labors
unto good effect, and doubt thou not, but that God shall so provide for the
and thine, that thou shalt want no good thing, as the scripture says: Taste
and se that Psalm. xxxiii.
the Lord is gentle, blyssed is that man, that true steth in him. Fear the
Lord, O all ye that ar^ his Saynctes, for there is no scasenes to them that
fear him. The rytche have wanted and ho^ gred, but they that seek after the
Lord, shall want no good thing. Age^, Cast thy care on the Lord, and Psalm.
xliiii.
he shall norysshe the. Away therefore with thy whoredom, and marry in the
Lord. Let no pouerte pluck the back from the holy state of ma trimony.

Another sort of wyueles people there are, y^ might marry if they would, and
are of suffici ent habilite, yet do they abstain from marriage only for
plesures sake, because they may y^ more freely run at rouers, defloure
maids, corrupt wynes, defyle wydowes, and live in all kind of carnal
voluptuousnes. For so long as they be single, they thyncke it no great
offense thus to abuse them selves. Therefore to be bound to one woman only, they
recounte it more than twyse an hell, and by this means do they continue in a
damnable s^ate of living. For the Scripture says, neither whoremo^gers nor
adulterers shall (...). Cor. vi. Ephe. v.
enheryte the kingdom of heaven, All those parsonnes aforsayde cause that holy
wedlock is so little esteemed, and that whoredom and adultry is so greatly used
at this day.

Hitherto have I declared how greatly y^ ho nour and renown of holy wedlock
is decayed. and by what means it is come to pass. What remains now but that
some remedy be found? And would God that all men would employe their endeavor
in this behalf. Would God y^ Ephe. vi.
whoredom and adultry were so detested among us, that it might not once be
named, as ye Apostle faith. Would God that all whorehunters and adulterers were
so abhorred among christian me^, that no man would vouchesafe to eat with the^
^i. Joan. i.
nor to keep them company, no nor yet to bydde them God speed. Certes it is a
thing much to be wondered at, that whoredom should grow up into such
heyght, among them that profess How greuou slye adultrye was punisshed in
times paste. The Egiptians.
the fruytes of the spirit. But what marvel is it, seeing that whoredom now
a days is become, but a lusty courageous pastyme of youth and reputed almoost
for nosynne at all. We read, that if a man among the Egiptians had been taken
in adultry, he should openly in the presence of all the people have been
scourged naked with whyppes unto the number of a thousand strypes. The woman
that was taken with him, I would all whores were so served now adays also.
The Arabians.
had her nose cut of, whereby she was known ever after to be an whore, and
therefore abhorred of al men. Among the Arabians, they that were taken in
adultry, had their heads stryken from their bodies. Among the Athenians
adulterers were ponyshed by death without mercy. In like manner is it at this
day among ye Tartari^s, and yet The Athenians. The Tarta reans. The Germaynes.
are they Infidels. If a woman among ye Germai nes in times past, had been
conuicte of adultry, she had all the hear of her head cut of, being stry ped
stark naked, her husband put her out of his doors before his neighbors, and
in ye sight of all the people he scourged her with whyppes about the city or
town, and ever after she was so despised, that no man would wouchesafe to
marry with The turke^
her Among the Turks even at this day, they that be taken in adultry both
manne and womanne are stonned streyghtewayes to death without any mercy. Was
it not so likewise The Israeli tes. Leuit. xx. Deu. xxii.
among the Israelites by the commandment of God?

Thus se we how whoredom and adultry in times paste have been ponysshed, and
yet is in certain nations, Would GOD it were not laughed at even among them,
that most of all ought to maintain the purite and clennes of matrimony. But
the redress of all these most The civil magistrates ought to redres all enor
mites.
grievous enormities partayne unto ye civil magistrates, whose office and duty
it is to provide that all whoredom and adultry be banyshed out of the bounds
of Christendom, that holy wed lock may once again be had in price, and
restored unto her old beauty and pristine glory. How this thing may most
conveniently be brought to pass, the higher powers for their wisdom and
discrecio^, wherwyth they be endewed from above, shall easily consider. I
beseech God prosper Age^ral ad mo^icion.
their most godly trauayles in these and such like enterprises, that virtue
may increase and vice decay. In the mean season it shallbe very expedient
that all men seake to lead an honest, pure, clean and godly life, and not
suffer them selves by no means to be spotted with the fylthy sin of
abominable whoredom, Let the^ (...) folk
that be married seake none other straung company, but let the husbonde be
contented with his own wife, and the wife with her own husbonde. Let them
that be unmarried, and can ^aryed.
not live without ye company of a woman, get the^ wives of their own, and so
live godly together. For it is better to mary, than to burn. And to avoid
fornicacion, says the Apostle, let every i. Cor. vi^.
man have a wife of his own, and every woman Si^gle li^ers
an husbonde of her own. As for such as entende not to entangle them selves
with marriage, but determyn to lead a sole and contine^t life, let them seake
all means possible to mayn tayne the same, as by reading the holy Scriptures,
by godly meditacions, by contynual pray Cupiens ui ta^e Scylla^ incidit in
Charybdin
ers, and such other virtuous exercyses, unless whil they abstain f^o^ ye
art of matrimony. Sa tan our old adversary drawethe them unto all kind of
wickedness, and such vicious vncleann^s, Preache^ Governors.
as may not here with honest be named. Let all preachers also in their
Sermons exhort ye herers unto purite of life. Let all fathers and mothers,
masters and mastresses with all other governors se that none uncleanness be
used among them that are under them. To conclude, let us all seake and deuyse
all means possible, y^ holy wedlock may once again be had in such honor,
that all whoredom, fornicacion, adultry, incest and all other uncleanness may
utterly be abhorred, detested and hated worsse than any ve nemous serpent. And
to encourage all manner of persons in this behalf, I have set forth this
Treatise ensewynge of Christen matrimonye, which teaches so largely all
things that pertayne unto that kind of life, that who so ever reads it and
practices the same. I doubt not, but as he shall be occasioned to forsake all
vnclen nes, and to embrace holy matrimony, so shall he be moved to give God
thanks for the setting forth of this little work in our maternall tongue I
beseech GOD, that it may bring forth no less fruit, than I have intended by
the setting forth of it. For well shall it be with Christ's Church, if they
may once se holy wedlock had again in honor, and whoredom banysshed out
of the boundis of Christendom.

This little Treatise (most gentle master Gryse) for the honest and right hearty
fre^dshyp, that has ever ben between you and me, syns ye first time of our
acquayntau^ce, and for the quiet and godly conversation that I have ever
perceived between you and the virtuous Gentle woman your wife, and for the
godly institucio^ and honest bryngyng up of your children, I dedicate to you,
as a manifest testimony of mine unfeigned love and right hearty a^ite toward
you and all yours, desiring you frendely to ac cepte this my little gift, as
the present of him, which though he be absent in body, and far from his native
contre, yet is he present with you in spirit, and wysheth to you, and to so
many as tender the glory of God, and the promocion of his holy word, all good,
happy, fortunate and prosperous things in Jesus Christ, our Lord and
omnisufficient Savior for all them that repent believe unfeignedly, and walk
according to his word, in whom I bydde you all well to fare. Grace be with
all them, that love the Lord Jesus Christ unfeignedly.

Ame^.
The Author to the Christen Readers.
Among other grievous sins and shameless blasphemies which in this last evil
and perelous time have sore increased, (halas therefore) and prevailed un to a
great number. This is not ye lest, I mean aduoutry with shameless whoredom,
and all manner of uncleanness in vain worcester des and unchaste works. All this now
comes Uices have l^st their (...) mes.
because yt such vices bear no more their own right names, and therefore does
no man esteem the^ as they are in them selves, and in the syghte of God. The
bloudye murderer (I need not here to speak of a rougher name) is called a good
bold man of his hands, The vserer is named a good honest man. To be droncken,
is to be merry. To ^ommit whoredom, is called as much as ^o ex ercyse the
work of man, and to do as young folks that can not lift them selves up unto
heaven. Many there be, y^ boast them selves of adul try, yea many make but a
jest, mockage and sport thereof. To cast out uncleanly words, and to sing
vain songs ofrybaudrye, is called good pastyme, yea in many places (the more
pity) it is come so far, y^ these and such like vices are cou^ ted no sin,
neither is there any thing rekened for sin in a manner, save only to talk of
God and his truth

For no man is despised, reproved and resisted for To talk of god and his
word i^cou^ ted a great offense.
quarellynge, usury, whoredom, swearynge, lyenge, dronckennes, glotonny, vain
songs, worcester des, talkynges and gestures. But if any man speak of God, and
reprove such conversation for a vain and ungodly living, or do sing of God,
or meddle with such songs as are made of (...) gracious work of the holy
Gospel, against falshode, hypocrisy, ydolatry and vice. He may not be
suffered, he shall soon be despised as one that slaundereth honest folks, and
medleth with new strange things. Wherefore seeing y^ such Whoredom now a
days is shameless and common.
vices have lost their own right names? and shame is become honest, we have
this fruit thereof, that the uncleanness of shameful whoredom and aduoutry, is
now become altogether common and shameless in the world. For though some now
only of an evil custom, some through the ignorance of Gods word, resort
after vngrarious company and folysh pastyme, yet for the most part do they
follow whoredom and aduoutrye in ydelnes, even of a shameful wicked purpose.

They also that live in wedlock, and committ (...) Wicked lyuers in wedlock.
neither whoredom nor aduoutrye live yet so miserable in other points, that
through their ^ersacion nyther God is praised, nor them selves set in quietness
of conscience, neither are other men edified thereby. Hereof spryngeth now an
horrible blasphemy in the whole congregation of all esta^es and lives. For the
children that are brought up in such abhominacions, and have seen nothing but
vice (when they also come to marriage and common offices, live as they have
learned, seen, and are accustomed, even fleshely, shamefully, vaynely, rudely,
vnfrendely, unmannerly, vnchristenly, and plant none other thing save only that
which they have of them selves. This commethe also, because that wedlock is
not kept as it ought to be, and because it proceeds evil, even without God,
and against the law of equite.

Many know not who did institute and or Errors about Matrimony.
dayne holy wedlock, nor what wedlock is, nether for what intent it ought
to be embraced. Many have respect only unto goods, y^ they may be rytche,
or come into great frendeshyp and make an hand. Many take wedlock upon them as
another common custom, because that after the course of the world, they will
do as other fo^es.

Truethe it is, that in many places there is earnest preaching against such
abhominacion and vice, but the word of preaching prospers not on every side
For all dominions, cities, countries Why this book was compyled.
and people will not give place to the hole some doctrine of the Gospel. For
as much also as that which is written, endures longer and goethe further than
it that is spoken, therefore have I gatheredde this book concerning holy
wedloke, and sent it out in writing: specially to the confusion, diminys^hyng
and wasting of all the foresaid uncleanness: to the honor, praise, commendacion
and plantyng of true clennesse, for the good instruccion of simple married peo
ple: to the intent also that wedlock may well proceade and be kept, and
that nothing be done amysse, through ignorance or euel custom, or for fault
of doctrine. To the intent also that all virtue and honest may prevail, and
that men may walk soberly according to the com maundement of the Lord. For
this is y^ will and commandment of the Lord (as Paul says) even that we
should be holy, that we should refrain i. These ii ii.
from whoredom and uncleanness, yt every one of us, know, how to keep his vessel
in ho lines and honor, not in the lust of concupiscence, as do the heithe^,
which know not God. For this intent is all our enterprise, y^ true chastity
and clenlynesse may be described unto every man, and that fylthy conditions
may be avoided God grant his grace thereto.

Amen.
The christen state
The beginning and first original of holy wedlock, when, where, how, and by
whom it was ordined and instituted. The first Chapter.


WHa^ our Lord Jesus Christ in the r^r. of Mathewe, was spoken to in ^ertayne
points concerning wedlock, he had a respect behind him in to the old
Testament, and gave answer out of Moses, that he said, how that wedlock at
the beginynge was ordyned of God himself. For as much therefore as I now also
am mine ded to speak of the beginning and first original of holy wedlock, I
^owe no better, tha^ in like manner to stablysh the same out of ye right
excellent Prophet of God Moses, who writes and testifies in the second
Chapter of his first book, yt God made the man Ada^ altogyther perfect, set h^
in the Paradise or garden of pleasure, and after ward said immediately: It is
not good that man should be alone. I will make him a fellow helper to stand
next by him. For when the Lord The p^ate Genesis ii. Playnelye ^ed
had shapen man out of the earth, he brought un to him all manner of beasts,
that he might give every one his right name, how it should be called, and that
he might look upon the^. But among the^ al found he none apt to be joined
unto him self, none that he could set his heart upon, none like him self,
none that he might dwell by as by an helper and conforter. And upon this said
God: It is not good, that man should be alone. And therefore determined he with
him self, to make an help and conforte unto man. In the which process we
perceive already, where holy Wed lock was instituted of God (...) ^aradyse.
wedlock was instituted, namely in the Paradise and garden of pleasure: yea
and when it was ordined, even in the beginning of ye world before the fall of
man in all prosperity. Of whom also it was instituted even of no Aungel or man
but of God himself, doubtless to man's great conforte and healpe. For in as
much as god him self says: It is not good for man to be alone: It follows,
that it is good for man to have his own lawful mate. As for that cu^l which
some time is seen and sound among married parsons, it comes not chefely of
holy wedlock, but of the misusyng thereof, and because men do not as God
commands and as they should do.

Now will we farther consyther, how God did institute holy wedlock, and he
himself made a companion for man, and brought him a wife. It follow the thus
in Moses: Then the Lord God cast a slomber on Ada^, and he slepte. And The
creaci^ of the wom^
he took out one of his rybbes, and instead thereof hefylle^ up the place with
flesh: And thus oydde God make the woman, out of the rybbe that he had taken
from Adam. Of this manner did god make for man a companion, like unto himself,
and mete for him. Here now ought we to consi der the occasion, why GOD made
the woman out of the slepynge man, and not while he was awake. Of the rybbe,
and not as well of the earth, as he had made the man to fore. For all this ser
ueth to the declaracion of our purpose.

First in the sleep of Adam, did he set forth y^ death of Christ, out of the
which (unto the same Lord Christ) there is prepared a pure and holy spouse in
the Fountain of water through the word, as Paul says to the Ephesians y^
fyfte Chapter Of such health and grace of GOD should married folks also have
understanding and knowledge. Moreover his mind is to signifye unto us that in
taking holy wedlock in hand, all te^tacions should sleep. The ordinance
regard, and fear of God, ought to join them together, that are disposed to
marry. The woman was taken from and out of the side of man and not from the
earth, least any man should thyncke that he had gotten his wife out of the
myer: but to considre, that the wife is ye husbondes flesh and bone, and
therefore to love her. yet was she not made of the head. For the husbond is the
head and master of the wife. Nether was she made of the feet (as though thou
mighteste spurn her away from the, and nothing regard her) but even out of thy
side, as one that is set next unto man, to be his help and companion. And as
the bone of the flesh is strong, so ought the husband to be the strength,
healpe and conforte of the wife. Therefore was she also taken and created out
of the ryb or bone, and not out of the flesh.

But in the circumstau^ce that follows, shall every thing be more plain
afterward. For now it follows how God gave the woman unto man, and how that
he received and took her.

God brought the woman unto Adam, and as it is evident in the first Chapter) he
blyssed them and said unto them, grow and multiplye, and Ada^ and Eu^ were
married together.
fill the earth. Out of the which words we may perceive clearly, that God was
the first causer of wedlock, and first did knyt them together, and blyssed
them. Now as soon as the woman was brought unto Adam, and given unto him, he
said immediately: this is once bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. Before
did Adam behold and considre all beasts and living creatures here upon
earth, and gave every one his peculiare name ac cordyng to his kind, but among
all things living he found none, to whom he might bear an heart and mind,
namely to dwell by it, to love it, and of it to procreate one like unto him
self. And therefore is it reason, that with fire they be punyshed unto death,
which against all kind and nature of man, have to do with beasts, and not
only with women.

As soon now as the woman was set before Ada^, he knowledged immmediatly, that
she was Occasion of love and con sent into ma riage.
for his purpose, that he lyked her well, and that he could find in his heart
to love her, as one that was of his own kind, of his own blood, flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone. For though he slepte, and the woman was created
out of his rybbe, yet saw he well that she was like him and such one as he
hitherto had not found among all other living creatures. God also had planted
the^ the kind, the love, the heart, the inclinacion and natural affeccion
that it besemeth the one to have toward the other. Like as Ada^ now had ^yuen
all other beasts their names according to the first original and operacion of
their kind, so gives he now a name also unto the wife, and calls her Ischa,
that is to say, of man, because she was taken out of the man.

The^ follows it farther in Moses. For this cause shall a man leave his father
and mother, and cleave unto his wife, and they two shall be into one flesh. These
words does Adam (or t^s Moses) The knotte and coueuaunt of marriage.
speak yet out of the mouth of God, and thereby de clarethe the dewty knot and
covenant of married folks, namely that the highest love, bond and unite among
them, should be this, that no man separate them asunder, but only death. This
de clareth he with two special points. First, the^ is no man (next unto God)
derer unto us by all reason, the^ is our father and mother. But wha^ they will
make discord between married folks, God commands a man in that behalf to
forsake father and mother, and to keep him to his wife. The love therefore in
marriage ought to be next unto God) above all loves. The second: They two,
says he, shall be into one flesh, that is to say, one body. Now like as
the greatest love, the most excellent and vnpayneful service, diligence and
earnest labor, is in the parts of a ma^s body, one doing for another, one
loving, defendyng, helpyng and forbearynge another, suffe ring, also like
joy and like pain one with another. Even so ought it to be between man and woman in wedlock. And like as the parts of a man's body separate not the^ selves
one from another before death, eue^ so must wedlock be a knot vnlooseable. And
like as the parts of a man's body, when they are sundred one from another
conceive an exceadynge great anguysh, dolor and pain, even so ought it to he
an exceadynge grefe for married folks to be separated.

And thus Moses, over and besides that he declares ye first original of holy
wedlock, lays also the foundation of laws matrimonyal, out of the which all
other statutes are taken. After the fall of Ada^ and Eve, there was nothing
added further unto wedlock, neither altered in those things that were
ordyned, saving that, by reason of the faull and sin, there was sorrow and
pain laid upon the^ both, and upon us all. For unto man it was said: In the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. etc. And unto the woman said God:
I will surely encreace thy sorrow when thou art with child, and with pain
shall thou be delivered, and to ye husband shall thou have respect, and upon
his pleasure depend. Nevertheless through thy unfeigned faith in Jesus Christ,
all these and other grefes are minished in them that believe, and thereby
vnperfectenesse is helped, in so much that they come to a very prosperous
old age many times.

Thus much thought I to show out of Moses that excellent seruau^te of God,
wha^, where, how, of whom, and partly for what intent, holy wedlock was
instituted namely, how that God himself in Paradyse, at y^ beginning of the
world (eue^ in the time of ma^s innocency and prosperity) ordained thus for the
wealth of man, that one man and one woman joined together should be one body,
one to love the other above al things next unto god the one to be coupled to
the other without separacion, one to help and socour y^ other, and in the
f^are of God to bring up their children, And this is in a manner the whole sum
of the one part of this book.

The second Chapter.
What wedlock is.

FOr upon the said foundacyon will I lay (...) set forth all my work
following. And first will I show what wedlock is. Tha^ when I have descrybed
the same, I shall open and declare the articles thereof particularly.

That we call wedlock, is in the Germaynes Wedlock^
tongue called Ee, which as it is a very old word, so is it sometime taken for a
law or statute, some time for a bond or couenau^te. Thus is the old testamente
called the law or the old covenant, the new Testament, the new law or ye
new co uenaunt: because that there in consists not one lie the law that god
gave to the old and new people, but also the couenaunte which he made with
them both. The latinistes call it Coniugi urn, a ioyninge or yokinge together,
like as wha^ two oren are coupled under one yoke, they bear or draw together
like burden and wayghte.

Therefore is wedlock a couenaunte, a couplinge Ayo king together.
or yokynge together. Now if wedlock be not the couplynge or yokynge together
of one thing, the^ must it be excepted, from other knyttinges, and we must give
unto it the own nature and property pertayninge to it self. Namclye that it
is a right knotte unto god acceptable ayokinge together of one manne and one
woman with the good co^sente of them both. Here unto also must we add, why
and wherefore they should and must be yoked together. Even to the intent that
they may live honestlye and frendlye the one with the other, that they may
avoid uncleanness, that they may bring up children in the fear of god, that
the one may help and comfort the the other.

Out of this may we comprehend a short What wed lack is.
descryption of wedlock, and say. Wedlock is a lawefull knotte and unto God
an acceptable yokynge together of one man and one woman with the good consent
of them both, to the inte^te that they two may dwell together in frendeshyppe
and honestye, one helping and confortynge the the other, eschuynge uncleanness,
and bringing up children in the fear of god Or else set it after this manner
following: Wedlock is the yokynge together of one man and one woman, whom god
has coupled according to his word, with the consent of the^ both, from
thence forth to dwell together, and to spend their life in the equal
pertakynge of all such things as god sends, to the intent that they may
bring forth children in the fear of him, that they may avoid whor dome, and
that (according to Gods good pleasure (the one may help and conforte the
other,

The third Chapter.
The declaracion of wedloke thus described.

Now will we plainly open every parcel of the said descripcion from article
to article, and (with testimony of the scriptures) prove and establysh the same,
where need is.

First that wedlock is the couplyng togithe^ Onema^ an^ one woman.
of one man and one woman, not of one man and m^ women, or of one woman and mo
men, the Lord himself affyrmeth it Math. xix. and so is it wtytten also in
the second of Genesis. Now where as some of the holy fathers had more wives
than one, those were but the Acts of certain private men, and not such general
examples, as are thoroughly to be followed.

Again, the private deed of some, or of many men, make no common law. The
Lord in the fore rehearsed place of Mathewe, did allege and renew y^ old
law of marriage again. Therefore he that now will bring in the multitude of wi
ues, shall follow more the rule of Mahumet, the of Christ.

Moreover by yokynge, ioynyng, or couplyng do I understand not only an
outward dwelling together, but also an uniform agremen^ of mind, and a common
participacion of body and goods, for as much as the Lord says plainly: And
they two, shall be into one flesh, that is, one body. But of this we shall
speak further afterward, wha^ we come to treat of the consentyng.

Furthermore, wedlock must not only be a couplyng together, but it must also
be such a cou plynge together as comes of God, and is not contrary to his
word and will. For where as certain men do allege out of the holy gospel
(what God has cowpled together, let not man separate) and conclude thereon,
that when two parsonnes come once together, and the one has taken the other,
it must needs be fast, and no man may break ye band. Such me^ have not so
good respect to the words of the Lord, as they should. For the Lord said
not* what so ever is coupled together, ought not or may not be separated. But
thus he said: What God has coupled together Let not man separate y^ God has
coupled togi there.
let not man separate. Therefore must it be considered not only whether two
parsons come together, but much rather whether it be done with God or no. That
thing is with God, which is not done against his commandment and word.

There be many whom God coupled not to gyther, but carnal lust, money, good,
flattery, dro^ kennes, a fleshely arm and frendeshyppe, where God is not
thought upon, and therefore sin they the more against him. It is written in y^
syxte Chapter of Genesis: The sons of God saw the daughters of men, that
they were fair, and took unto them wives such as lyked the^. Whereby every man
may perceive, that there was love and lust, a consent and couplyng together,
but therefore plesed it not God. The same manner of ^oo ynge does the Lord
recyte also in the. xxiiii. of Matthew, and says: As they were in the days
before the floude, they did eat, they did drink, they married and were
married, eue^ until the day that Nohe entered into the Arc, and they regarded
it not, till the flood came and took them all away. Thus also shall the
coming of the son of man be.

There is no man now so dull, as to thyncke that it is sin to marry.
Therefore was not that reprehended as though it were a sinful and unright
thing to marry, but because they came (...) together after the word of the
Lord, yea rather they followed their own te^tacions as I said before.
Wherefore Esdras did separate diverse marriages, yea eue^ of those that bore a
good affeccio^ y^ one to the other, and were coupled together. Diuor^
For it was not God, but their own tenta cions that joined the^. Esdras ye. x.
chap. The yo king tha^ of married folks together must be fra med right
according to the word and will of god.

The fourth Chapter.
The right couplyng together of Christen folks in marriage.

Certain points now shall I set forth, to the which those faythefull
Christen men must have respect, yt entende to take holy wedlock upon the^,
according to ye will and pleasure of god. First though marriage also concern the
soul and inward man, yet pertayneth it likewise to the outward things, that
are subdued Statutes and laws matri montall made by rulers.
to the higher powers. For where as faithful ru lers have ordained, good apt,
and convenient statutes and civil laws, such ought no reasonable Christen
man to resist, but much rather is he bound to obey them, like as the holy
Apostle Peter has written and taught. i. Petre. ii. Be ye subject (^ayth he)
to all civil ordinances of men for the Lords sake. The higher pow ers have
authorite to make Civil laws in out ward things. And who so withstondeth
such, both wythstonde the ordinance of God, and therefore shall God ponysh
him, as Paul testifyeth. Roma. xiii.

Secondely, the Lord says. Deutero. vii. Religion and faith must be
considred
your daughters shall ye not give to their sons (meaning the unfaithful and
Infidelles) and their daughters shall ye not take for your sons. Therefore in
going about marriage, a christen man must first look that in handfastynge
himself to a woman he make no divorce of the true faith, or bring it into
parell. For it follows in the law. For they shall make your sons to fall
away from me, and to serve strating Gods. And then shall the indignacion of
the Lord wax whotte over you, and destroy you shortly. Nevertheless if
there be no danger of faulyng away from Gods truth, or of hur tyng the
same, then (concerning marriage) it ma keth no matter though the party dwell
among Infidelles, or come of unfaithful fathers and mothers, For Booz,
which was grandefather to Iesse David's father, married a Cananite of Ierico
even ^uth, whom the Evangelist recyteth in the Genelogy of Christ Jesus mat. i.
For she was right faithful, and abhorred al ydolatry.

Else if there be parell present, that the one shall be carried away unto
error, then has not only the law in the old Testamente spoken there
against, but Paul also commands in the second to the Corinthians the sixte
chapter, saying: Bear not a strau^g yoke with infidels. For what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteous? What company has light with
darkness? What concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has the
beleuer with an Infidel? How agrees the Temple of God with Idolles: Ye are
the Temple of ye living God. etc.

Marriage is a common participacion of mind body, and goods. Now says Paul:
What unity can a faithful beleuer have with and infydeler. The unbeliever
cleueth to unrighteousness, to darkness, to ypocrysye, to error, even unto
the deuell and to ydolatry. Again: the faithful beleuer despyseth, abhors
and condemnethe all such things, loves righteousness, the truth of the
Gospel, the light, even the Lord, and has God living in him. How will these
two now draw one yoke, which are of such a contrary mind? To draw one
yoke, is a manner of spekyng and is as much to say, as to have fellow ship, and
to yoke the^ selves together in wedlock To bear a strasig yoke, is it to take
an unfaith What it is to bear a (...) yoke
full mate, or one to give over himself unto such things, as may alienate his
mind from God and his truth. And verily what woman so ever takes an
unbelieving man, must draw after him in unbelieve, yea and do, se, and hear
that which is clean contrary unto faith, and hurteful to her soul. The
children also shall be brought up in in fidelite. And though it come not to
pass while the parents be alive, yet happens it after the death of the
faithful? While such yoked folks also are alive, there is no tranquilite: and
finally the beleuer must be in continual discord with the unbeliever, or else
must he grant unto her and so do against God, against his own soul, and
against his conscience. Therefore must we take good aduisement before hand, leest
we yoke our selves, our fre^des or our children with vnfayth full people, to
the great hurt of our selves and ours

Thou wylt say: For as much now as I have An objection
an infidel to my mate. I perceive that there can be no marriage between him and
me, therefore will I depart from him. To this does Paul The solucio^
answer the. i. Cor. vii. if a brother (that is to say a Christian man) have
an unbelieving wife and she be content to dwell with him, let him not depart
from her. And if an woman have an un beleuyng husbonde, and he consent to dwell
with her, let her not depart from him. For the vnbe leuyng husbonde is
sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband.
Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. But and if the beleuyng
depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is not in subieccion to
such. But in peace has God call led us. etc. We must therefore put a difference
between it that is done already, and it that is yet to do. A wedlock is it (no
doubt) that after the common custom and law is openly and justly celebrated,
of every man esteemed for wedlock. But if in the same there be any error or
blemysh, that error should not be defended or bro ught into other marriages.
Neither ought men therefore immediately to conclude and say: Mine unseemly
marriage is therefore no marriage at al.

Wherefore, while the matter is not yet past, every man ought to beware, that he
nether his be snared in danger. We can note well the blemyshes of the body,
much more ought we to con sidre the blemyshes of the soul. We should take
ensample by Solomon, seeing it is manifest, un to what point the unbelieving
women brought him, although he was the wysest among men upon earth. But when
the matter is done already, let every ma^s mind be to keep that thing y^ God
has called him unto, and do that most convenient is, making faithful
prayer unto God, and followynge the counsel of the holy Apostle Peter,
which (i. Pet. iii.) he gave to the women that have unbelieving husbo^des,
saye^g: Let the wives be in subieccion to their husbondes, that even they which
believe not the word, may without the word be won by the good conversation
of the wives, when they se your chaste living in the fear of God.

It plesed not Paul, that in wedlock al hope should be suddenly cast of for
vnbeleues sake, and vyolence ministered to seperacion. For in ye fore recyted
place to the Corinthians he says after this manner. For what know thou
woman, whyther thou shalt save the man or no? Or you manne, whether thou shalt
win the woman or no?

Wherefore he that is snared in such a case, let him call upon God, and live in
his fear, in faith fulness, in patience, in long sufferynge, in discrecion
soberly and in unfeigned love. Yet let every Christen man take heed, that for
his wives sake ^e consent to none ydolatry, neither defyle him self with the
works of unbelief. Let every man remember the words of the Lord: Who so
loves father or mother, wife or children, sister or brother, land or
substance, more then me, is not worthy of me. But let him always cry upon God
for succoure, counsel, conforte and help. So shall he faythefully not only
show his loving kyndenes, but also find remedy, and declare his healpe.

The fyfth Chapter.
To a right marriage, must children also have the consent of their parents.

Moreover like as God and faith should not be denied or forsaken with ye
marriage, eue^ so they which are next to god (as father and mother ought not
to be neglected and Mark well.
despised. For though God said: A man shall forsake father and mother, and keep
him to his wife, yet those his words in ye same place, are co^cerninge marriage
yt is made already (what duty they ye are married owe ye one to ye other) and are
not touching the contractyng of wedlock, that children may mary, without the
respect, knowledge or consent of their pare^tes, under whose authorite and
iurisdiccion they be. And I wonder what the papisti call books and learned men
did mean, when they taught that the consent only of both the parties does
faste^ the matter, and coupleth the^ together in marriage: The consent of ye
pare^tes also, say they is good with all, but when they two have co^sen ted,
and one has taken the other, ye knot can not be vnknyt, neither may the
parents separate the^ from a sunder Where as laws both natural (divine
specially) and civil, require the pare^tes consent to the chyldrens marriage:
In so much yt they judge the promise to be of no value, which is made without
the knowledge of the parents yea and that also in those children, which as yet
are not come to their years, and are yet under the tui cion of their elders.
Forin as much as the children are not yet come to perfect discrecio^ they ca^
not co^tracte marriage which requires vndersta^ dyng, yea they can nether
counsel nor help the^ selves. So y^ in this behalf y^ consent of their
parents is not only necessary but also good and pro fitable for the^, As for
preuy co^tractes which are not made according to the laws, they have ever been
rejected, neither were they acceptable to any Preuy contractes.
man, save unto such as were ignorant and wicked. For why: for the most
part they are made of some fond affeccio^, yea knavery, falshod and disceate
is commonly the doer, to persuade, and by words to take young folks in the
snare. Many privy co^tractes are brought to pass with flattery, with
dronckennes, with rewards and promises, whereby young ignorant people are
utterly begyled and destroyed. To give liberte and license unto such, is even
as much as to give a mad man a swerd, and a knyfe to a young child, yea a very
slau^ Note.
dering is it and a dishonoring of marriage. Diso bedie^ce of children also
toward their parents and tutours, has ever been reprehended among all
nations. God co^masideth and says: Thou shalt honor thy father and thy
mother. Now does the E^d. xx. Chyldrenne must honor their parents. Isaac.
obedience or disobedience of ye children at no time de clare it self more
than in contractynge of wedlock. Greater honor can thou not show unto thy
parents, than when thou followest the^ herein: neither greater dishonor than
when thou herein resistest them. Esau displeased his pare^tes very sore, in
taking his wife without their consent. Jacob followed their mind and was
co^me^ded. This commandment also of honoring our pare^tes, did our Lord
Christright faithful ly, commit unto us. Math. xv. In the. vii. of Deu. does
God give this charge unto his people say enge: You shall not marry your sons
and dough ters to the unbelievers. By the which words we may well
understand, that the authorite of marryeng young folks, lies in the parents
and not in them selves, Wherefore Abraham before the law charged his servant
Elieser, that concerning the contractynge of marriage between Isaac and Rebecca
he should do his message with Bathuell and not specially with Rebecca her
self. The servant also did his eacande to the parents and not to the
daughter, although he found her alone without by the well side (and had
time, place and occasion sufficient so to do. This law did Sampson observe.
Iudicu^. xiiii. For though he had found and spyed a damsel that Sampson.
pleased him, yet he took her not, but first showed his parents, brought them
with him unto her and took her with the knoweledge and consent of his father
and mother.

In the second book of Moses, the. xxii. Chap Note this precepte.
ter does God command thus. If a man begyle a maid that is not detrouthed, and
lie with her he shall endote her, and take her to his wife. If her father
refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of
virgins. Here does GOD give the father authorite to take his daughter from the
man, to whom she is promised else by the law. Therefore may the parents draw
the children again to their iu risdiccion. For this is a singular great
thing, that the father has authorite, to take his forced daughter from the
man, and to wythdrawe her from him, to whom she was promised by the law. In
the fourth book of Moses the thyrty Chapter it is written thus: If a damsel vow
Children may make no vo we nor promise (...) the parents consent.
a vow unto the Lord, and bind her self being in her fathers house and
unmarried: if her father hear her vow and bond which she has made upon her
soul, and hold his peace thereto, then all her vow and bond which she has made
upon her soul, shall stand in effect. But and if her father forbid her the
same day that he hea reth it, tha^ none of her vows nor bo^des which she has
made upon her soul shall be of ^alue. etc. Although now in these said words
of God, there is no marryage but vows expressed and named, yet is it an
evident testimonye, that no child which is not yet come to his years, and is
yet under the tuicion of his parents, has aucthorite to vow, bind, or
alter it self without their consent, yea if any such vow or alte racion do
chance, that then the parents have a^thorite by the law of GOD, to let and
hinder the same. For in as much as. God permytteth to unbind it, and will not
that it shall be of any effect, which without consent of the parents is
promised to him self, no doubt, he will not that it shall stand immutable
which in disobedience is wylfully done without the pa tents consent.

The holy Apostle Paul in the first Chap, of ye first Epist. to Timo. among
many other grievous sins, rekenethe also the stealing away Me^stealers
of men, which is a shameful vice, when men's children, servants or such
other folks as belong unto them, are carried away or entysed from them, When a
wicked, sotel and shameless woman, entyceth an ygnoraunte young man from his
father, which with great expenses travail and labor has brought him up,
when she blyndeth him with love, and at the last gettethe him away under the
title of marriage: Or when a wanton and fair tongued fellow entycethe a
damesell from her mother, and than (under the title of marriage) conueyeth her
away, what is it else but men stealyng:

Thus I trust it is manifest out of gods word and the law, that to the laweful
marriage of the children, the consent of the parents also is necessary, and
that the children ought not to cast their parents a side: and if they do,
that then the pare^tes may refuse and dysanull the chyldrens promise.

The eyuyle and Imperyall law requyrethe also the consent of the parents, as
it is manyfeste The eiuile law.
libro Pandeet. xxiii. Justinian the Emperor Instit libro. i. tit. xi. writes
after this manner, lawfullye and ordinatelye do they contract marriage one with
another, which come together after the commandments: and laws young men
when they are old enough to take wives, and young women when they are of
conuentent age to take husbo^des: but so that they have the co^se^t of their
pare^tes, under whose auctorite they be. That this shall be so, wyllethe and
chargethe the law eyuyle and natural in so much that the fathers
commandment must go before: These be Justinians words, which are so
manifest and euyde^t, that they need no further declaracyon.

Upon this do some men think, that their ma riage is no marriage, and that the
one of the^ should now be separated from the other seeing it is so long sens
they were contract against the will of their parents. But such persons ought
to considre that their parents did not put the from a sunder and therefore is
their wedlock now a lawful wed lock, inasmuch also as in process of time
their parents were reconcyled. And though it were not so, yet openly
according to the custom of the comen laws were they permitted to mary, and
were solemply received in to wedlock, living honestely together, have had
children, exercysed all duties of marriage. Therefore ought they by reason to
co^tinew still in their matrymony and (...) al points to apply the^ selves to
ye fear of god

Some turn the^ selves another way and says Through such laws are the poor
snared, that they can never come to any rich marriage, for the rytch will not
give their chylore^ to the poor Whereby it may easily be perceived, where the
shoo wringethe them, that resist this aunciente good and reasonable law.
Their harpynge is Note.
upon their halfepeny, their mind is to be rich with marriage: neither are the
satisfied to have taken away the child against the fathers and mothers will,
but against their minds would they have the good also. These take not the
child because of marriage, but for the goods sake.

Thus does iniquite discloose it self, that a man may well perceive, what it
is that some men seake in marriage. A reasonable manne whether he be rytche or
poor will allwaye have respect unto the fear of god, to honestye, to faith
fullness, to labor and virtue, and not to the Themistocles
bag of money. Themistocles desired rather to have a wife, discrete and a
prudent person then one that was rytche. But who so has more respect to
worldly substance, the^ to honestye and knowledge, is a shameful person:
like as he also that hyghly estemeth such a ma^s Virtus post nu^os.
frendshyppe, and desires it for moneys sake.

Now be as be may: Who soever is grieved with this law towchynge the consent
of the pa re^tes, let him lay away his gredye desire, his bragging and his
fond affection, and let him have respect unto god and unto equytye. Let him
consider well the word of the Lord. What thou will not have done unto thy
self, that do not thou to other. So shall the law be more light unto him, and
the more easy to bear.

The syxte Chapter.
The pare^tes ought not to constrayne their children to matrimony, nether to
marry the^ before thyr time.

IN this point also ought not the pare^tes to take to much upon the^ selves
because of their authority, neither to abuse it, or to compel their child,
either because of fylthy advantage or lothesomnes in taking pain) to let him
go, and have no respect unto him. For an ungodly and unhappy thing is it in
the cause of mary age to compel a young man agenst his will, to take such one
as he has no heart unto. For in mari age ought to be the full consent of both
parties, with the consent of their parents. Likewise also A good admonicion.
wha^ a son or daughter are come to their years and full discresion, but are of
their pare^tes in ye me ane season not looked unto, and so afterward with a
good advise and deliberacio^ do honestly mary to gyther. Then ought the father
well to considre, that through his own wrongful and unrighteous demeanor, he
has lost his authorite as towechyng hyndryng and breakyng of that marriage.

For seeing that the parents do not look to the children, nor make such
provision for the^ as parents and tutours ought to do (and therefore are become
nothing less the^ the pare^tes) why would they the^ require of children such
obedience, by the which the children might fall and peryshe in y^ danger and
snare of the dyuel: In such causes ve rely is not a Christen man subject nor
bond, in as much as all the laws of God do extend and serve for the
honest, welfare, and preseruacio^ of man, and not for his destruction. It has
often times been found in deed, that such marriages ^ontracted even against the
wylles of such un faithful and covetous parents, have been prosperous, holy,
and acceptable unto God. Not wtstandyng my purpose is, another to commend the
foolyshe affeccions, nether the wicked and wanton behauoure of certain young
wylfull persons that fear not God. In summa, the measures ought here to be a
like long: even thus, like as the children must have respect to their
pare^tes and not wylfully despise them or cast them of: So should not the
parents without any petie com pell their children to marriage before their time
neither wyckedly neglecte them, nor leave them unprovided for in dew season.
Good laws, just rulers, the fear of God and discrecio^, shall moderate this
matter well enough. Hereof also shall we treat more largely, in the Chapter of
the consenting.

Furthermore the age or years of the children Marriage be fore the time
must well be considered of the parents. For an unnatural and dishonest thing
is it, to mary young folks, which yet have not attained to their lawful and
just years. Many great sick nesses do spring thereof. Yo^ge mothers also have
no just strength, nether to norysh nor to bring forth fruit. And sometime has
it chau^sed that they have dyed of their impotent child. Likewise the children
which were borne of children became sick and feeble: It shall also not be come
ly for Christen men, to have less discresion herein, then the Hethen, which
have had great respect to the age and years. For Plato, Aristotle and
Heseodus appoynte the age of seuentene years to young women. Some there were
that to young men have appointed the age of nynetene or twentye years: for
in those years be the powers somewha^t strengthened, and decreace not then
through marriage, as they do in weak folks. But herein may every manne behave
himself after the best and most honest manner, according as the kind,
complexion and cause requires.

The seventh Chapter.
Of the just consent of both parties into ma riage, and how that marriage
ought to be free and uncompelled.

TO the said points also must every Chri sten man (when he contracteth
marriage) have good respect, namely y^ his wedlock be according to the common
laws that it hyndre not ye true believe that it be done with the know ledge of
his parents, or of them under whose iu risdiccio^ he is, and that he marry not
in the forbidden degrees of consangu inite or affinite. Be sides all this, and
specially is required the free hearty consent of both the parties, as it is
recited in the description. Wedlock must be coupled to gither with the good
consent of both the parsonnes. Concerning the same good consent, will I now
give this short instruccion.

This consent, is that ouergyuyng and grant The consent
of thy heart, when unto thy chosen spouse thou promisest and gyuest thy self
over in wedlock and in the highest love and felawshyp that may be under God.
In the love and consenting of harlots there is also an earnest favor of y^
one love toward the other, but that is carnal and wicked, therefore does the
dyuell knyt that whorishe and unthrifty knot. The consentyng into marriage
spryngeth out of gods ordinance and leans unto honest. For an ordinate and
pure love is it that she bears toward her chosen, by him her desire to
remain with mind body and good (according to the word of the Lord) to
serve him, to show her troth plyghte unto him, to suffer well and woo with
hy^ yke as it follows also in the descripcion. That unto their end they
dwell still together, and spend their life in the equal partakynge of all
such things as God sendethe. Therefore is it God himself that knytteth the
knotte of marriage. And whorysshe, carnal, and affe^tionate will, spryngeth of
vicious lust and vanite, and has not respect to the glory and ordinance of
God, but unto bewty or to other like transitory things. And as soon as the
same faylethe, or if he once myslyke her or se a fayrer, than fails the will
and marriage also. But the will of lawful marriage (as I said before) consydreth
the ordinance of God, regards honestye, and continuethe in love, even in
aduersite as well as in prosperity. Herein also diffreth the consentyng in
marriage from natural inclinacion. A natural thing is it that two parsons
which are of like kind and complexion, of like nature and dispocisio^, of like
manner and occupyenge, should bear more will the one toward the other, than
they do that have no mutual fellowshyp herein. Yet is not this will comparable
to consentyng into marriage.

Notwythstondyng such proporcion in kind helps much (no doubt) to a more
steadfast vnt te and co^sentyng togytherin holy wedlock, and then fore it is
very good for the same. And to be short a matrimonial consent is the same
heart, disposicion and love, that Adam bore toward his Eua. He beheld all
other creatures, and no^e lyked hi. But as soneas Eua was set before him, he
said This same is once bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, that is, she
has my heart, my mind and my blood. etc. as it is said in the first chapter.
For her sake thought he that a man should forsake father and mother and keep
him only unto her He knowledged that she was one body with his, then must it
follow also, that she had like mind heart and will. For never one body has The
will of marriage com meth of god.
two contrary wylles, but one body has one will. And of God himself is the
same will planted and mygtely conceived in man, for it exercises it self
strongly, and preaseth after his like. Therefore was it right spoken of the^ of
the old time how that marriage is prepared of God for all men. Hereof comes
it that many strange mari Maryages are appointed and prepared of god
ages are brought to pass not inordinately through the workyng of god. But are
taken in hand and do not prospere, for God has not so ordined it. In the.
vii. Chapter of Toby does the angel say, y^ Sara the daughter of Raguel
should have Tobias, because she was appointed him of GOD, and therefore dyed the
seven men to Sata.
whom she was promised one after another. In the. xxiiii. of Genesis, When the
father and mother of Rebecca perceauedde the wonderful Rebecca.
work of God through the message of Eliezer, they said: This comes of the
Lord, therefore we can say nothing against the, neither evil nor, good: there
is Rebecca before the, take her, and go thy way with her. etc.

Whereoute it is easy to understand, that marriage ought to come of a free
heart, and neither to be constrained and compelled of the parents, nor of
other men. For in as much as wedlock requires both the parties good consent
which no man can give, but only God, the parents Note well.
may not compel the child, but have re specte to gods ordinance, and to the
right ordinate consent of the parties, and considre whether it be or no.
Bathuel and Labin had respect to the ordinance of God, and when they saw ye
same power before their eyes, yet sent they for their daughter Rebecca, to
know her will also. And when she of her own free mind had said yea, than
was she first sent away unto Isaac her spouse. Thus have we before our eyes
many ensamples, whereby we may learn what mi sery and wretchedness follows out
of an vnwyllynge and compelled marriage. And therefore it were a great deal
better for rulers, to look first that no man should compel his child, then
that they them selves afterward (when the mat ter is almoost past remedy, and
hurt follows up on hurt, should have enough to do with little pro fyt, and yet
with much disquietnes.

Here must the children look also, that they The inordinate affeccio^ of young
follies.
fall not immediately to discord for this matter, and violentlye despisynge
their parents (make has^ to their own great hurt, and persuade them selves
to be endewed with a will from GOD, which of God is not planted in them, but
comes of their own inordinate affeccion. For it happens often times, that a
child takes such a fashyon in hand as ought not to be, and displeases GOD,
and namely he goes about to have such a parson as is not for his honestye. As
when a young woman will neades have a ryottous, wylfull whorehunter and
wayster, or such one as is forsworn and has begyled many other. Or as when a
young man will needs have a vain, wanton, fylthy, etc. (Herein to pre uent the
harm that might come thereof) the parents ought to make obieccion, and to
dispoynte them of their purpose. Yet should they not there fore compel their
children into other marriages to the which they bear no heart nor will, but
discretely inform them, gyuynge them good in struccion, to get that
frowardnes from them but godly to deal with them for their own wealth and
honest.

It chauncethe sometime that the pare^^es the^ The inordinate affeccio^ of
parents.
selves deal not well, neither seake honesty and equite, but only their own
inordinate affeccio^ and wickedness, where as sometime the children are more
reasonable, and make obieccio^ to their parents, comely and with good manner.
It fortuneth also many times that the pare^tes stycke still to their own
frowardenes, to their f^lthy desire of lucre and wickedness, and go about to
deliver their children forth in the bar gayue. The children therefore sometime
(for as Unreasonable pare^tes ought not to have they^ wylles.
much as they are come past their year^s) being constrained by such violence,
do advisedly and in honest provide for the^ selves. In such a case verily
ought not the hyer powers to suffer that such unreasonable parents as fear
not God, should have their wylles.

For like as the inordinate affeccion of the children is not to be permitted,
when they will needs have such parsonnes as be to their own destruction: So
can no equite allow you, O parents, Mark well.
that for your covetous lucre sake, do set your own flesh and blood to
morgage. your opinion is (happily) to make sure provision for them, but seeing
your enterprise commethe not of God, neither leans unto honest, therefore do
ye but sell them away. Let every man therefore have respect to God, to honest
and to the right consent so shall God suffer no man to miscary.

The eight Chapter.
The occasions of wedlock, why and wherefore it should be contracted.

ANd to ye intent that the said consent may yet the better be consydred, I
will yet fur thermore (by the word of God) declare, the occasions of marriage,
why and wherefore it was ordined, and to what purpose it should be con tracted,
that every manne may understand to what thing he consents, when he
grants unto marriage.

The causes of marriage are orderly set and To bring forth children
expressed one aft^ ^other in the descripcion thereof, in the secon^ Chapter:
First of all, they that are faythefull, do marry, to the intent that they may
bring forth and have children togy there. This cause is expressed and grounded
in the words of God followynge: And god made Gene. ii.
man unto his own image, in the image of god made he him, man and woman
created he them And God blyssed the^, and said unto them: Grow and multiply,
and fill the earth. They therefore that are beleuers, do marry to the intent y^
they may have children. They know well also that to be fruitful or barren /
comes of God. There fore do they^ knoweledge that they have not the children of
them selves, but of God. And this What a tresure it is to ^aue fruit.
cause is no small nor light thing. For to have children is the greatest
treasure. For in the chyl dren do the parents live (in a manner) eue^ after
their death. And if they be well and luckely brought up, god is honored by
them, the public weal is auaunced, yea all men (their paren tes also fare
the better for them. They are their parents conforte next unto God, their
joy staff, and vpholdyng of their age.

The unbeliever regards not this cause, but The ungodly hate to be fruitful.
fears he shall have to many children, puts not his trust in God, will not
give himself to labor, and therefore lacks he the honor and good, ye
grows out of thi^te unto the faith full, whose heart and lust, is set with
his marriage to please God, and to plant and bring forth profitable fruit unto
men, yet happenethe it many times, that even they which fear God, are dis
appointed of this fruit, and that verily because that they (not without the
ordinance of God) should have no children together which thing the faithful
also does patiently take at ye hand of God gyuynge him thanks for that in
troublouse time of famyn, battle, persecucio^ and pestilence their cross is
so much more thesyer to carry, as well as he (to who^ God gives children) does
ernestly thank him for making him fruit full. Of all this have we a notable
ensample in the three holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Ia cob, which is
more manifest unto every man, than that we need to speak further thereof. There
fore though this cause fail, so that God will give the no children, yet is
thy marriage right in the syghte of God. For there be other causes also, for
the which wedlock was ordained, and for the which it is contracted.

And namely it is contracted likewise of the faithful, to the entente that
they may avoid To avoid whoredom
whoredom and all manner of uncleanness. This cause also does Paul lay before
the Corinthians in the first Epistle the. vii Chapter and says It is a quiet
and commodious state for a man, not to towche a woman. But to avoid whoredom,
let every man have a wife of his own, and every woman her own husband. He
says it is a quiet state of living for a man not to touch or lie with a woman:
yea if God have granted him and given him the gift, that he may well and
without burning, live chaste and unmarried. But if a man or woman may not so
do. God has given the^ the medicine of marriage, and will not esteem the
work thereof, as sin, whoredom, vnchastite or uncleanness. For he says
plainly let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husbond. To
be their propre own or Note.
peculiar makes ye marriage. As for harlottes and unthrifts, they are not
perculiar propre or own one to another, but borrowed and lent for a time.

It follows yet more plainly in Paul, how The work of martimo ny is no syn.
that he not only vouch saves the work of wed lock to them that be married,
but commands also (ye and takes away the private power of either of them
both therein) and says clearly, that nether of them may deny unto the other
the dew work of matrymonye. Let the husband, (says he) give unto the wife
dew benevolence. Likewise the wife unto the husband. And this with comelye
words expresses he the actual Mark well.
work of marriage which certain of the Corinthians, of a special chosen
holiness and falfe feigned clenlynesse, had utterly denied unto their married
spouses, thinkyng thereby to be very holy clean and spiritual. But Paul
commands the^ to mary the one to give dew beniuolence unto the other no
doubt for the auoydyng of whordo^e and eschui^g of uncleaness. For it follows
in Paul immediately after: The wife has not power of her own body, but the
husband: Likewise the husband has not power of his own body, but the wife.
Whereby he forbyddethe, that nether of the^ shall deny his body unto the
the other. For Math. ix.
they two, says the Lord also, are one body.

Hereof doubtless did the holy and godly learned bishop take the same which
he spoke in the great counsel at Nicea, where as he said, that (...).
it is dennesse also, a man to lie with his own married wife. For Paul in the
same chapter speaking of wydowes and wydowers saiethe that it is good if they
so remain, but immediatelye adds he thereto, saying: Nevertheless, if they
can not abstain, let them mary. For better it is to marye the^ to burn. And
within a little after he says moreover: But and if thou take a wife thou
synnest not. Behold, what could be more clearly spoken: To mary (says the
Apostle) is no sin, then must it follow also that the worckes of marriage are
not sin, not of the^ selves but because of the marriage self and gods
ordinance.

And that more is then all that we have yet Uirginite is and holy and ex
cellent thing.
spoken of, it follows farther in Paul: And if a virgyn mary he or she synneth
not. For every man knows well, how holy and excellent a thing virginite
is, and yet says Pauel, that a vir gyn sineth not if he or she lose their
virginite in marriage. The^ must it follow, that god rekeneth not the work of
marriage for sin and uncleanness But sin and wicked uncleanness is it to com
mytte whoredom. Filthy and abominable is it Deflouryng of virgins.
to force or begyle a virgin. For Paul says furthermore in the. xiii. to the
Heb. Marriage is to be had in reverence and honor among all me^) and the bed
of them that are married, is undefiled. As for harlottes and aduoutrers, God
will judge the^. How much more will he judge them that rauyssh virgyns? Job
says in the. xxxi. Chapter I made a couenaunte with mine eyes, that I would
not look upon a virgyn. For how heuye is the punishment of god from above?
And what inheritance and reward gives the almyghtye from an hy? Destroys
he not such vnchris tes? and casts he not out the^ that meddle with such
wickedn^sse. etc.

The wise man Solomon says Prouer. v. Beglad with thy married wife, whom thou
have taken in thy youth, and love her as a dear chosen hynde. Let her breasts
satisfye the at all times, and rejoice still in her love. For why shuldeste
thou come nigh an harlot (my son) and haunt the bosom of a strange woman? In
the which words, Salomo^ like as Paul also commends and prayseth the love
and work of marriage as clenlynesse, but draws men from whoredom as from it
that is nothing but fylthy. Therefore (doutelesse) marriage was instituted to
avoid whoredom and uncleanness and the work of marriage is rekened of God
for no sin. All which things I have the more largelye spoken of, and proved
and confirmed the same with holy scripture: And though I did not gladlye take
in hand to write of this matter yet have I done all this to help many suared
consciences, which without occasio^thorow the ignorance of gods leave and
law do piteouslye trouble and vex themselves here in. I hope therefore noman
will mysconster me, seeing I have spoken nothing but that which Paul did write
before.

And in all this matter is it well to be considred M^asure and shamefastness.
that like as shamefastneste, comlynesse and te^pe rau^e is good in every
thing, so is it good here also and exceadyng necessary. Wedlock is hono rabble
and holy, therefore must not we as shame less parsonnes cast away good manners,
and become like unreasonable beasts God has given and ordened marriage to be a
remedy and medicy ne unto our feeble and weak flesh, to swage ye dis quietness
thereof, and to the intent that we should be clean and undefiled in spirit and
in body. But if we rage therewith, and be shameless in our words and deeds, then
our miste^ peraunce and excess may make it evil which is good, and defyle
it that is clean. Paul also is content, that as concerning the bed, married
folks upon a due occasion, may ly the one from the other. But so, yt it i.
Co^. (...)
be with the good consent of them both, And yt not always or long, but only for
a time, leest the di uell be busy, and tempte them with whoredom or uncleanness,
or deceive them with aduoutry.

The third cause is this: Eue^ to the intent y^ To auoyd^ solitariness, to
help and co^ fort one ano there.
the one may be an help and conforte to the other according to the will of
God, auoydyng solitariness. Which the Lord expressed with these words. It
is not good for manne to be alone, I will make him an helper to be next unto
him. And within a while after, he says moreover. They both shall be one
flesh, or one body. So that like as in the parts of a man's body there is a
mutual healpe or participacion of the one toward the other. Even so ought it
to be also among married folks. The one ought to be an eye, ear, mouth, hand
and foot to the other* In trouble, the one must be the comfort of the other.
In aduersite must the one be the others refresshyng, yea and in all their life
must the one be the help and socour of the other. And these are the cau ses
why wedlock was ordained, and wherefore they that are faythefull beleuers do
m^rry, and ye occasions whereupon ye ro^sent both leave and rest.

The nynth Chapter.
The end fruit and commendacion of holy wedlock. How blyssed, honorable
and good a thing it is.

BY this now is it easy to understand what is ye end, virtue and fruit of
wedlock, and how holy, profitable and good a thing it is. This is ye end of
marriage whereupon it leans. Not to be aloue, but to have a companion in this
life, that will help to bear wealth and woo, even such one as thou can
find in thine heart to love, and of whom thou art loved again, that by the
same thou may find a medicine and swagynge of the weakness of thy unquiet
flesh, and so void whoredom and all fylthy living, to bring up children
unto the praise of God, and to the public wealth, profyt and conforte of thy
self, and other thy neighbors. etc.

Wherefore the virtue, operacion, effect, and The operacion of wedlock.
fruit now of marriage, is to confort, maintain help, counsel, to cleanse, to
further unto good mann^rs, honest and shamefastnes, to expel un ^lennes, to
auaunce the honor of God and the public weal, and to set up many such
virtues moo.

Hereof comes it that wedlock is a great Wedlock is holy and honorable*
work and holy ordinance of God, which defy leth or vnhaloweth no man, save
him that takes it upon him with an unclean heart. Whom (to say truth (not
the marriage, but his own wickedness defyleth. For it is always holy and right
in it self, and all such as receive it with true hertes, does it allow and
bring to honor. It has ever also been of an excellent estimacion and had a
glorious name of all prudent people, in so much that Paul durst boldly say:
Wedlock is hono rabble among all men, or in all the worth.

For wedlock did God institute by himself* and not by his Angels or holy me^,
as he did other good statutes and ordinances, yea even at the be gynnynge took
he it in hand in Paradise that Mark w^
garden of pleasure, no doubt, for the commodite and not for the grefe of man.
Without Paradise were all other ordinances made, but even in Paradise was
wedlock ordained. And if all ordinances have their propre comme^dacion and
honor of their first begynner of the antiquite, of the place where they were
ma^e, or of y^ pro fytte that they bring. Then verily is wedlock most worthy
of praise and honor, as a thing in stituted of God him self, even in
Paradyse, at the beginning of the world, for the wra^th and commodite of man.

Therefore in marriage lived the holiest, the most virtuous, ye wysest and most
noble me^ upon earth: ye the holy ghost is not ashamed, even in the first book
of the bible, very plainly to ta^ke and write nothing else for the most part,
then of marriages, chylbren, or byrthes, and such other Genes^ The ^
points of housholdyng in wedlock. Ada^ was a married man, so was Enoche,
Nohe, Abraham, Loathe, Isaac, Jacob, Iosaphat, Job, Moses, Aaron: And so were
other Regentes, Judges, Prestes and Kings, Iosue, Gedeon, Phinees, Samuel,
David, Ezechias, Iostas, Os^as, Isaias, and other Prophets ^o. David
commends the state of marriage as a singular blyssynge of God, which he
sends to them that love him, and who^ he loves, and says. Psalm. cxxvii.
Blessed are they all that fear the Lord, and that walk in his ways: for
thou shalt live with the thing that thou have gotten thorowthe labor of thyn
own hands. O how blyssed and happy art thou? Thy wife is as a fruitful vine
that stands by thy house side: Thy children round about thy table are eue^
like Olyue trees newly planted. Lo thus shall he be blissed y^ fears the
Lord. etc. and this is the cause that the wives of the old testament, took it
for a great dishonor and plage, when one of the^ was at any time barren or
unfruitful.

In the new Testament it was y^ good pleasure of our Lord Jesus, to be borne in
marriage, For Math. i. (...)
the virgyn Mary was married unto Joseph of the house of David, yet conceived
she of the holy Luke. i.
ghost, and brought forth her child being a virgyn her self, and remaynyng a
virgin. The first miracle that our Lord Christ did. The same wrought he at
a wedding, and namely such a mi racle as is able to give co^solacion in
marriage, Joan. ii*
that even in things pertaynyng to this tempo rall life) God will not leave
them unprovided for, that mary in the fear of him and in the faith of his
everlasting word: ye that he both can (...) A great (...) married (...)
will turn the unsavory water of all trouble, in to theswete wine of gracious
comfort. The holy apostles and preachers of Jesus Christ had wifes, as Paul
the Apostle. Phil. iiii, reports of him self as Peter and the other
Apostles. (...). Corin. ix. and as Luke. reports of holy. Philippe, Act. xxi.
And Eusebius. Eccles. Histo Lib. iii. cap. ^xx. Paul calls their doctrine
that inhthite and forbid marriage, the doctrine of the deuell, and says. i.
Tim iiii. Thesprete speaks evidently, that in the later times some shall
depart from the faith, and shall give head ^o disceatfull spretes and to
deuelish doctrines: through them that are liars in ypocrisie, and have their
conscyences marcked with an whot yerne, forbidding to mary. etc. Therefore
follows it that the doctrine which does set forth and knowledge wedloke to be
holy, honorable, profitable, necessary and good, is gods doctrine, even true
and good, holy, and undefiled.

The. x. Capter.
How shameful, vycious and abominable, the sin of whordome i^.

ANd to the intent that the praise honor goodness and co^me^dacion of holy
wedlock may the more clearly appear, I will now set whordome right over
against it on the other fyde, and declare how shameful, vycious, and
abominable it is before god and all honestye: That youth may love the honor
of god, and avoid dishonesty: and y^ every one may eschew vycious whordome,
and betake him to holy wedlock.

Paul the chosen man of god writes thus to the Corinthia^s: Fly from
whor^ome. All the Whoredom defylethe the members of Christ which is thy own
body.
sins that a man does, are without his body but who so commits whordome,
synnethe against his own body. And immediately before the said words, he
expressethe the vndersto^ding of this sentence, and says. Know ye not that
your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I than take Christ's members, and
make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Paul then wha^ he spoke those
words (All the sins that a man does, et c.) had repsecte unto wedlock. For
like as wedlok makes of two persons or bodies, one person and one body.
Even so likewise
the spiritual marriage, namely the receauynge of gods grace, in that we are
baptized i^to christ and become Christen makes one body between Christ and us
beleuers, so that we be called and are in deed Christ's members. Now like as
he y^ is married (if he take another beside his wife does sin against his
own body: Even so likewise does that Christen man sin against his own
body, if he commytte whordome. For he dishonors the grace of Christ, and
defylethe the holy covenant made between: Christ and him. For it follows in
Paul: Know ye not, that he which joins himself to an harlot, is be come oue
body For they two says the lord shall be one flesh, or one body. But who so
cleuethe unto the lord, is one spyrite. Nevertheless through whordome is the
sprete banished and excluded. For thy sprete, heart and mind that ought to
^leue unto y^ lord, is joined to ye harlot, with whom thou art one and
incorporated Therefore they that committee whordome, do sin against the
covenant and spiritual marriage, where with we must be joined unto Christ.

Furthermore it follows in Paul: Or know Whroedome robs god of his own.
ye not, that your bodies should be the temple of the holy ghost, which is in
you who^ ye have of god, and y^ ye are not in your own power? For ye are
dearly bought. Whereof it follows constantly that they which commytte whordome,
do dishonor and waist away their own bodies. For they give over their
me^bres, ye their heart and mind unto whordome: And yet Christ for his i. Pet.
i:
honor and our clenlynesse did bye the san^e, and that not with money, but
with his own blood. It follows also, that they which are given unto whordome,
be under the great plage of god. For Paul says here, that Christian men's bodies
are the temple of god the holy ghost. Thus saleth Whoredom ^he ^he (...) of god
he. i. Cori. iii. if any man defyle the temple of god, him shall god destroy.
Is it not an horrible defylynge of gods temple, to set that vycious harlo^
Wenus, eue^ in the place where god should reign with his sprete, and to be
joined and do service unto her with body and soul? Let them come forth now
(...) for^ ^s a ^ous sin.
that will always excuse syngle fornicacion, as though it were not sin (or at
the leest not so great syn) one syngle person to abuse another. Paul the
Apostle of Christ says, that whordome deuydeth us from God, breaks the
couen^unt which we have with God, spoyleth and robs god of that which is
his, mysordreth the m^s of god, maket of christ's me^bres ye mem b^ of an
haclotte, defyleth and vnhaloweth the temple of god, the^ therefore that will
follow whordom^, shall god destroy. If all this be to be esteemed but a small
thing, then do I confess, that whoredom and fornicacion is even as little a
sin, as vy^ious vain people do make it.

It is more then ones also, that Paul him self Whoredom shut me^ out of
heaven.
shuts whormongers out of heaven, who so believes not my words, let him
read. Romans i. i. Co^. v. and. vi, Gala. v. Ephe. v. i. Tess. iiii. To the
Hebrews he says planely, that as for whoremongers and aduoutrers, God will
judge them. What can be more said? If thou not wythstondyng all this, wylt yet
say, that whordome or fornicacion is no sin, then cries the holy Prophet
Esaye that horrible woo upon the and says, Esaye. capit. Woo unto you that
call euel, good. Or do ye not know, that even now in this time, God does sore
punysh whordome as a great vice: Paul says. i. Corin. x. Let us not
commit whoredom, as some of them of old did, and were destroyed in one day
a great no^bre. It is evident what slander and dishonor, Samson brought unto
him self, specially to the glory and name of God among Gods enemies and his,
and among all the children of Israel with his bold and vicious whoredom, and
how shameful an end he made by the means of the same harlot.

In the fyfth of the Proverbs of Solomon say after this manner: The lyppes of
an harlot Whoredom spoylethe a man of his ho neste body (...) good.
are as aswete droppynge honey comb, and her throat is softer then oil: but
her end is bitterer then death, and as sharp as a two edged swearde. Her feet
lead unto death, and her pathe drawethe unto hell. Therefore se that thou go
not in unto her, nether draw nygh to the doors of her house, lest strangers
have thy substance, and left the cruel get thine encreace. With few
words both Solomon describe the short and sweet disceatfulnesse of whoredom,
which yet leaves be hynd it a perpetual vytternes, and brefely he she weth,
how that whoredom destroys in soul, in honor, in body and in good. As
for ensamples, we need not to set forth any there are to many before our
eyes, the more pity. The stories The French pockes, how it ^yrst came
do testify, that the French pockes came of an harlot into the world through
whoredom. How many a man has consumed all his substance and goods with
harlottes, and at the last has been hanged, drowned or headed? etc.

Yet go the shameless harlots forth still into Whorem^ngers have no rest.
their own perdicion, vice and abhominacio^, yea and under take to blaspheme
wedlock, and somewhat to excuse their own mischefe. Therefore talk they of
much trouble that is in wedlock. And as for their whorysh life, it is nothing
else but open vice and abhominacion before God and all honest people. Fylthy
is fylthynes still, although the fylthy swyne delight therein, They speak much
of evil wives, which when some men had taken, they could not be ryd of them
with any fair means. And yet can they not leave their vain crafty and
unfaithful harlottes, of who^ they the^ selves are mocked, and scorned to the
uttermost yea and are feign to suffer more of such vicious and fylthy bodies,
than any man does of his honest wife. They speak much likewise of bryngyng up
of children which are borne in wedlock. And yet they them selves in whoredom
are feign to bring up the bastardes that they have gotten, like as before time
they were wont to bylde ma^met houses and field Chapelles, with collections
and gatherynges of every man.

They speak of much travail and carefulnes, Whores are insa^able (...) have
never enough.
how the household must be brought up and provided for in wedlock. And yet
the dotynge fools them selves are feign to nomysshe those shameful harlottes
with much greater care, and yet be afraid, that when they have done their
best, the gredy sack will not be filled, and that the fylthy strompette will
yet bring forth a greater reckoning upon thy trencher, and all to get the
bag of money into her own hands. Moreover among whores is waystyng and
expenses The end of whoredom is beggary.
most regarded, nether art thou welcome but thy money. No more money, no more
love. I must have the money and purse, says the harlot take thou thy cloak and
thy baggage. Let another come that has more money, for he has been in the
bath, and is dispatched. Thus may he byte his lyppes and cratch his pate, and
take that for his farewell that he gets of hisharlot.

They complain moreover of the cryeng of the children in the nyghtes, and how
that mari ed folks can not stepe, but must watch by the means thereof. And yet
the dotynge fools them selves go all the night long up and down through the
streets, and keep the dyuels watch, with paynefulnes, frost and unrest. Let
no reasonable manne therefore be snared still in whordome by such harlottes, to
the slander and dishonor of holy wedlock. Whoredom (no doubt) ha^he much
more disquietnes, anguyshe and trouble, then has the holy state of marriage.
The pain also that is in marryage, is godly and honest. God gyuethe such
patience, strength and good will unto the faithful, that they can easily
away with all manner of con^gale cares. As for harlottes, they are the
dyuelles martyrs, and have always dishonor and shame.

Where as certain men say: if whoredom Stews.
be so great a sin before God, and bring so much vice and mischief with it,
why do some high rulers and prelates of the world the^ maintain open stews:
To that I answer: Many things are suffered, that ought not so to be, and yet
for suffryng thereof are the suffrers never the bet ter. But let those prelates
and rege^tes of the world make answer unto God for their own act. God has
commanded the and us all: Thou shalt not commit whoredom. Let every Christen
man follow him, what so ever other folks suffer or do. The holy Apostie Paul
says: Let neither whoredom nor any uncleanness be once named among you, as it
becomes Saints. Ephe. v. Chap. Now if among Christen folk as an holy
people that is cleansed through the blood of Christ there may no whordome be na
med, much less no doubt ought vycious stews to be set up and openly
mainteyned, for a plain shame is it and a manifest confusion. Let them
therefore that maynteyne such shameful houses, look well to themselves, how
and what answer they will give unto God for this their act.

They that say they are suffered for avoiding of greater inconvenience, let
them considre whether, they mean to put away a worse thing with an evil, be
a mean that is comely and pleasing unto god? or whether God has at any time
commanded or given license, to suffer and maynteyne open and shameless
whordome, that virgins may be the less forced and defloured or that yet worse
things be not committed of wilful persons? Paulsaieth. Thou ought stnot to
do evil, that thereof might come good except thou will be dampened justly. Roma
iii We find daily by experience, that the same way helps not, and that
there are whore houses and in the mean season the worse thing, not eschued,
And therefore evil with evil, and vice with vice do run together, so that
abominacion and myschefe preuayleth. Wherefore let every reasonable Christen man
cease now from vice, braule who so list: if thou will do that god commands
the, and the thing whereof thou may haur worship and welfare in the sight of
God and honest people, then meddle not with harlottes, ^ether come at the
stews. Maintain the^ not and use them not. But to avoid whoredom, let every
man have his own wife and every woman her own husband.

Ye but it is not mete for every man to mary Many poor marriages make many
beggars. Objection.
There is no man compelled to mary, nether yet before the time, nor when thou
have not a conue nient cause thereto. Only if it be not mete for the to be
virtuous, it shall be no vyceous thing to mary. Now if thou think it will
not frame with the to mary, then leave thine whordome Mark well.
also. And then we are agreed. For gods sake man, keep thy self honest,
sober, pure and clean, until the time that it be mete and expedient for the
to mary. Thou will say: Halas we are but flesh and blood. Iau^swere: were not
our fore fathers flesh and blood also? did they therefore continue still in child
hode? Or hau^ted they harlotrye in the mean time? Behold the example of
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph and other excellent men, which married not till they were
of a good and per fecte age, and yet nevertheless spent their youth virtuously
in clenlynesse of life. Therefore should our youth fear God like wise as they
did, have Gods commandment before their eyes, call upon God for grace, avoid
idleness and all that may provoke to an uncleanly living: but contrary wise,
give them selves ^o labor, and resyst manfully in te^tacion. But now we find
it other wise, for our youth has little respect unto god and his
co^mauudementes, calls not upon God, goes up and down idle, haunteth evil
company and drunkenness, Hereof comes it now that they can not refrain, and
they think that they must needs follow harlottes still, or else have wives, and
yet can they nether labor ^er get their living. And thus came they to naught:
therefore is it their own vnthristynesse and not holy wedlok that destroys
the^*

Does not the hauntyng of harlots make beggars also? Whence come then such
swarms of Marriage (say they) ma^eth many beggars.
beggars and wretched pockye people: Eue^ of whor dome get they that mischefe
for the most part. And this does no man esteem ner considre. But wha^ a good
virtuous young man which is come to his age, does honestly mary, then is the
walet brought before him, to fear him, or else to with hold other me^ from
holy wedloke, and to make the^ co^tynue still in whordome. This ^a^ the sotil
deuell
do. The rych, faithful and almighty God did never fail any man, that seeks
him in true ve Whoredom
leffe, that labors faith fully, and that is virtuous and honest, Let noma^
therefore besnared still in sin. To be short, whordome with dra weth and
separateth the mind from god, makes us to break our couenau^te, dishonors
the grace of God and me^bres of Christ, robs God of that which is his,
vnhaloweth the temple of god, and plucketh us utterly with sprete and flesh
into the mire and into all fylthynesse, makes us of men, beasts defyleth body
and soul, takes from us all our substance, honesty and good, shameth de
stroyeth and caryeth to bell with wrechidnesse, misery and sorrow. Contrary
wise: wedlok delyuereth Wanion cou^ sail.
us ones from all such inconvenience. And therefore is it a miserable thing,
that all this will not be consydred, and that yet also there be old men,
which esteem whordome to be no sin, and talk so lightly and wantonlye there
of before young people, that youth being provoked for ward in their wicked
purpose, are now the more hard hearted and obstinate therein

Dear children, harken ye rather unto Paul the elect servant of god wiche
speaks out of Ephe. vi
the holy ghost these words: Be ye sure, that no whormonger or unclean
person has in heri taunce in the kingdom of Christ and of god. Be not
disceaued with vain words. For because of such things comes the wrath of
god upon the children of unbelief. Mark this well, and remember it. God will
not regard the wanton and vile communicacion of such, so light as they make
it. Wherefore if ye will escape ye wrath of God, then keep your selves from
whordome, and marry at your just age.

The. xi. Chapter.
How shameful and wicked a thing aduoutry is, and how it has of old time
been punyshed hitherto.

ANd like as whordome has ever ben taken for an abhominacion, among all honest
people in ye whole world, eue^ so have they esteemed aduoutry to be a thing
much more shameful and utterly to be abhorred: in so much that all virtuous
rulers, yea and that even among the Hethe^ have punyshed it with ye pain of
death. Ho we God plaged ad^ontry before y^ law c^ written.


Wha^ Abraham came with Sarai his wife into Egypt, and the Egyptians thought
that she had been Abraham's sister, they took her and brought her to the Court
unto king Pharao. But the Lord punyshed Pharao and all his house with great
plages, because of Sarai, and yet committed he no hurt with her, and that he
did was done of ignorance. For when he understood that she was Abraham's wife,
he sent for him, and said? Why have thou dealt thus with me. Wherefore toldest
thou not me, that she A goodly example.
was thy wife? Why saydest thou unto me, that she was thy sister? There have
thou thy wife, take her, and go thy way. And seeing it is thus it may well be
considred, ye God is much more dis pleased with the^ that wyllyngly commit
aduoutry.

In the twentyest Chapter it is written that Mark this well: (...) once be
ashamed ye wyllfull whoremongers.
at Gerar, Abimelech ye king of the Philistines took Abraha^s wife, as Pharao
had done before, and it appeared unto the king in a dream, and was said unto
him: Behold, thou art but a dead man, because of the woman, whom thou haste
taken, for she is another man's wife. And yet had Abimelech committed no
actual ded^ with her, no more the^ Pharao had done before. Therefore said God
also afterward: if thou do not deliver her again vuto Abraham, be sure,
that thou shalt dye the death, and so shall all that thine is. Did not God
with these words declare manifestly, what sentence and judge meant he has
given upon aduouterers? Wherefore Iosephe, when he was provoked of his Lords
wyffe to acco^plysh her will, said: My Lord has committed all things unto me,
saving the only, for thou art his married wife. How should I then do so great
hurt, and sin agenst God? Genesis. xxxix.

Job says in the. xxxi. Chapter: if my heart has lusted after my neighbors
wife, or if I have laid wait at his doors, than let my wife be another man's
harlotte, and let other men lie with her. Herewyth does Job knowledge it to be
reason, that he be measured with such measure as he has given unto other men.
If he had broken his wedlock, which thing yet he did not, sith the punyshme^t
of aduoutry is a meat that every man can not chewe, let every man consydre by
him self, how loathe another man would be thereof: and let hi^ not touch
another ma^s wife, so shall his also not be meddled with all. It follows in
Job: For this is a wickedness and sin that belongs to the Judge, yea a
fire it is that consumethe all together, and plucketh up all a ma^s
substance by the roots. With the which words Job does knowledge, that
aduoutrye is such a vice and wickedness, as partaynethe to the Judge, that is
to say, ought by right to be grievously punyshed of them which be in autho
rite (if they were not aduouterers the^ selves) for it is a fire that
co^sinneth altogyther, both body honest, and good: mind, heart and welfare.
And all this was exercysed and practiced, before the law was given to the
people of Israel by Moses.

And in the law does God appoint a certain pu The punysh mente of ^duoutry in
the law of God.
nyshme^t for aduoutry among other tra^sgressio^s and says. Leui. xx. Who so
commits aduoutry with any man's wife, shall dye the death both y^ manne and
the woman, because he has broken wedlock with his neighbors wife. And Deuteronomy
xxii. is the same law recited again, and confirmed.

Nether was aduoutry so sore punished among How aduou try was punished among
the hethen. Lex Lepre ianorum.
the people of Israel only, but also the Heithen used mortal executious
thereof. This will I now declare out of the histories and credible wri ters.
Wha^ any of the Lepre^a^s were taken in ad uoutry, they were bounden, and
carried three days through the cite, and afterward (as long as they lived)
were they despised, and with shame and confusion, reputed as parsonnes desolate
of all honest. Among the Lo^re^siaus did Zale^cius forbid ad Lex Zalen ci. A
good ensa^ ple for noble men.
uoutry under a great punishment. The transgressors caused he to have both
there eyes thrust out. And when his own son was taken in aduoutrye, he badde
them put out his one eye as Judges and the the other did he himself put out as
a father. In the days of our forefathers, the noble Germaynes (before they came
to Christen Germani,
faith the punyshmente of a woman that brake wedlock, stood in the power and
aucthorite of her husband. And at the lest he might strype her out of her
clothes, thrust her out of his house, and beat her openly with rods in the
City or tow ne, even before her friends. etc. as Cornelius Tacitus makethe
mention, who also wrytethe these words: Among the^ there was none y^ laugh ed
at ye mysdede: and to defyle or be defiled, was na med among the^ to be as much,
as not to do accor ding to y^ course, manner and custom of the world.

Mark now well in how much better case they stood, then we, which laughe at
all sin and vice: ye all abhominacion, as fightinge, warrynge,
whorehuntynge, wedlok breakinge, masking mo^myng, to much drynking, excess
ineatinge, and all uncleanness do we excuse with these words. It is y^ manner
and comen course so to do now in the world. Opilius Ma^rinius the emperor Lex
opil^
of Rome, used to punish aduouterers with fire For the^ who^ he found in
aduoutrye, caused he to be bownd and to be burnte together quycke. This does
Julius Copitolinus write of him. And among the Romans was there a Lex Iulia,
comen law (called lex Iulia), which would, that execucio^ should be done upon
aduoutrers, with the swerd the same law stod in strength in s. Hieroms time,
who writes, that a certain yongeman and a married wife, were judged and put to
execucion with the swearde because of aduoutry. And the same law (called lex
Iulia, de stup (...) adult, did the Christen Emperors receive, and of
Iustinyan it is appointed, lib, iiii. Tit. xo^i. de publicis iudiciis.

This allegacion concerning the punishment of aduoutry I am sure will many
men maruayle Why aduou try was so sore punished
at, and esteem it sore and intolerable. But if they would considre the matter
right, setting affeccion and evil custom aside, and would po^der well what
aduoutry were, and what followethe it, they should not wonder so sore at ^he
punishment. Aduoutry is a destruccio^ and hye what aduou try is.
dishonor of the ordinance of God, a wickedness grown out of the dyuell and
idleness of the flesh, a shameful unfaithfulness, a wylfull truce breaking
and perjury. And that this is so, may every man considre by the Chapters
going before. Wedlock is the ordinance of god, Wedlock.
in the which both ye parties ought so to be knyt the one unto the other, that
they be not divided, Paul says also, that aduoutry is a work of the flesh.
Notwythstandyng, manifest it is that married parsonnes at their entrau^ce do
make a perpetual covenant, and there calling upon God, and taking him to
record before ye whole co^ gregacion, they promise troth and says with Mark
and take heed.
mouth and hand the one to the other: etc. Now if it be but a small trespass
to dissemble, to break to destroy and to tread under foot all this to for
swear troth given before god and the church and no thing to regard honoste
and faith, the^ must I needs confess, that the punishment of aduoutry was to
rygorous in the old time. But if it be a ^ust thing, ernestly to punish
unfaithful per ^ury, the despysing and contemnyng of god and all honesty,
then is also the punishment of adnoutrye right equal and not to sore.

Item, If the loss of a good thing should be valued after the estimacion of
the owner, then (as touching this life, there is no greater damage, then a man
to lose his own body. Now is it certain, that both the parties married, are
but one body, and that (as Paul says) the husband has no power of his own
body, but the wife, nether has the wife power of her own body, but the
husband. Wherefore who so commits aduoutry, the same takes away, steals
and robbethe the other of his own body, even his pryncypall and best good. Or
what honest person had not rather find a thief stealing his treasure and
rather to suffer the loss of ye goods the^ to find an aduouterer by his
married spouse, and to reap dishonor in her.

Both these vices therefore theft and aduoutrye, Aduoutry (...) theft compa red
y^ one toward y^ other by Salomo^.
does Solomon in the si^te of the Proverbs lay upon the balaunce the one
against the other, and shows how that aduoutrye is the sorer and more
tedyous, saying: A thief is not utterly despised, that when he is hongrye,
steals to feed himself, for when he is taken, he must restore seven times
as much, or else all his substance. But he that is so far out of reason as to
break wedloke with another man's wife, both either destroy him self, or else
gets him self strypes and shame, which shame may never be wyped out. For
the wrath of gelousye and of the husband (if he have time to revenge) will not
be entreated: he will not be persuaded with prayer, ye though thou geuest him
rewards he will not receive them. This comparison does every man understand.
For though a ma^s good be stolen, yet if it be restored him again without
hurt, he will be entreated, for as much as it was done (happelye (through pouerte.
But if a man take his wife in aduoutry, he will not be pa cified. For it is a
very beestly and wicked thing.

More over, if a man take a thief with the de mayner yet has he no power to
avenge him sell fe and to slaye ye thief: But if a man find an ad uoutrer at
the deed doing, he may be avenged. And though he do wound, slay or kill the
aduoutrer and the aduoutresse: yet shall he not be punished for the death of
them. Out of all which words every man may planely understood what vice is
most grievous before god and before all indifferent judges. Before these words
also, says Solomon: May a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not
be brent? Or ca^ one go upon whotecoles, and his fete not be hurt* even so,
who so ever goes into his neighbors wife, and touches her, can not remain
vndefi led. Whereby he declares furthermore the danger and greatness of this
vice, threatenyng the^ that thyncke (like fools) to keep their aduoutry
Whoredom shall come to light.
secret, and that they shall never be taken and pu nysshed.

It seruethe to our purpose, that through aduoutry, Alteracions and aliena^i
ons of heretages.
great enheritaunces are altered, and the right heirs disher^ted For often times
it fortuneth, that an aduoutresse has children by an ad uoutrer, and then must
the said children enherite all the substance of their pretenced father, as
lawful children, which yet are unlawful, where by the father leseth his
honor, his kynred, his body and goods. His wife, which is his own body, has
the aduouterer defiled, and the unlawful children take ye goods away. If
this be not great wrong and wyckednes, then wot not I what a man may affirm
to be vicious enough: therefore Aduoutry in womenne is most to be abhorred.
though aduoutry be horrible both in men and women, yet in women it is most
hurtful and detestable. For besides that the aduoutresse alter^th the
inheritance (as I said before) and with false pro mises and shameful
disceate, withdraws and steals it from the right heirs, she ladeth first
her honest poor husband with great shame, great travail, labor, sorrow and
pain, in that he ^is feign to bring up those aduouterous children which are
not his own.

Moreover, she dishonors her father, her mother and kynred: Her children
(even those that are lawefull must be ashamed of her, and be doubted of in the
world, whether they be lawefully begotten or no. Th^rfore when they speak of
their mother, or hear her named, they are abashed and ashamed. Aduoutresses
also make their husbands to be despised and of no reputacion, although they be
virtuous and honest men. They are the occasion, that folks come often together,
which are nigh of kynred. These and such like in What a sea of euylles en sue
outof ad uoutry.,
numerable co^fusions, shame, hurt, dishonor and fylthynesse, follow out of
abominable aduoutry. I pass over now the murders, poysonynges, (...),
ma^slaughters, battayls, and wars, that have ensewed after aduoutrye, and
destroyed both countries and people. This did the ancient and noble men of
old, pondre and considre, and therefore ryghteously and of just occasions
appointed they the punishment of death for aduouterers.

Yet will we hear how aduouterers excuse The defense which adulterers use.
their own vice, and pondre how reasonably they go to work. They say:
Though God have for bydden aduoutry under the pain of death, yet is the same
punishment not executed, performed or practiced. For in no place appearethe
it, that aduoutrers were put to death. For David was an aduoutrer, and yet
received he no punishment therefore, yea the Lord Christ himself did abrogate
and dissolve y^ punishment of aduoutry, for as much as he commanded not the
woman (taken in aduoutry) to be put to death, but b^d her go her way. For
when no man had condemned her, he also let her go. Joan. viii.

To that I answer: God in his law has once expressed, how he estemeth
aduoutry, and how he will have it punyshed. Now if me^ have not done Gods
commandment and according to the same, then is it never the better: yet
endures the law of God immovable and sure. Nevertheless Death was the
punyshement of aduoutry.
they of the old time did punysh aduoutry with the pain of death, as it is
sufficiently proved before out of the stories. The objection therefore that
aduouterers make, is but vain. Now though all sentences and judgments ye
have been executed and practiced because of aduoutry stand not in holy
scripture, it is no maruayle. For the Bible is not a register of unthrifts and
of such, as for their wyck^dnes have been put to execu^ion. Or is it not
evident enough unto you, how it was like to have gone with Susanna? The
aduoutry of david
David committed aduoutrye once in his life, which drew him also and brought
him into great murder, so that he caused not only his faithful servant
Uria, but other noble me^ likewise to be slain. Behold what occasion aduoutry
gives? What comes of it? Truth it is, he was not stonned to death. But what
chaunsed unto him? Even as he had dishonored another man's child, so saw he
shame upon his own children while he lived and that with great wretchedness.
For Amnon defloured Thamar his own natural sister. And they both were David's
children. Yea Absalom did miserably slaye Amnon his brother, for co^mittyng
that wickedness with his sister Tha mar. Not long after, did the same Absalo^
drive his own natural father David out of his Realm, and shamefully lay
with his fathers wifes. Whereupon there followethe an horrible great slaughter,
in the which Absalom was slain, with many thousands moo of the common people
Now let every man ponder w^ll by himself, whether it be not a less thing,
once to meddle, and so to have execucio^ and dye: then to abide the death of so
many, and that so long, with such misery and sorrow. Therefore was David
sorer punyshed, than if he had been but once stoned un to death. And let
every man learn hereby, that no man can escape the hand of God, although the
world lay no hand upon him, God punysheth nevertheless, yea and that much
sorer, when he does not here, but differreth it into another world.

Where as they make Christ ye Lord a maynt^yned of aduouterers, it is plain
and evident The aduoutresse brought before christ
shame. Christ never gauelibertye unto sin. For he says: I am not come to
break the law but to fulfill it. Paul also says: To the right ous is there
no law given, but unto the vnrighte ous and disobedient, to whoremongers, to
periure^ persons, to liars and blasphemers. And to the Galathians he says:
Walk ye in the spirit, so are ye not under the law. Therefore for as much as
aduouterers do walk in ye flesh and not in the spirit, they are under the
law, ne there has the Lord taken the law and punyshe meant from them.

Moreover, as touching the story. Ioh. viii. we must considre that the Lord
said unto the wife: woman, has no man condemned the: And when she had said, no
man, he answered: Nether do I condemn the. For with this answer laid he
before her the sentence of the Judges. And for as much as he was not come now
to give sentence as a Judge, but to save, he would not condemn her, and so
meddled nether with the law nor the act. The Lord was come now to have mercy
upon sinners, and to call them to repentance. Therefore said he also unto this
woman: Go thy way, and sin no more. And with Repentance.
these words does the Lord warn all such as are tangled with aduoutry, to
cease from hensforth and to amend. God happily may have mercy upon them, and
take from them the shame, dishonor, pain and punishment, which they have
greatly deserved. For God has no delight in the destruction of a poor sinner,
but will rather that they co^uerte and live. But yfye will not turn, if ye will
needs be styffenecked and still set forth your shamelles foreheades, then
verily does God watch over youer wyckednes, and says Hieremy. v. In the
desire of uncleanly lust, they are becomel yke old stalla^des: every one neyeth
at his neighbors wife: Should not I punysh this? Wherefore ye aduouterers,
look for none other, but God will plage you for shameless acts of wickedness
and whoredom. For abhominacion, vice, perjury, and shameful matters are they,
that ye go about wythall.

The. xii. Chapter.
^ow one that ente^deth to mary, should chose a mete, honest, and virtuous mate.

ANd hitherto have I declared whence wed lock co^methe, who did institute it,
what it is, how it ought orderly to be contracted, what be the occasions end
and virtue thereof. Item how holy, profitable and good it is. Again, how
horrible, noisome and shameful whoredom and aduoutry is. But forasmuch as in
the occasions of wedlock it is mentioned how y^ wedlock was ordined of God,
to the intent that married folks should spend their life in y^ mutual
participacio^ of al such things as God sends, y^ they may bring forth
children, or they may avoid whordome, or for the eschew^ynge of perellous,
solenes, that the one may be a conforte and help to the other according to y^
will of GOD: And for as much also as in the mean season there lyethe great
importance, and wayght upon it, what manner of companion and mate thou
chosest, how thou may live with him, and (if God give the children) how
thou may bring them up. Therefore in this part of ^y book followyng, I will
treat how a mete honest and virtuous spouse ought to be chosen. Afterward,
how they ought on both the sides to live well and right together, to hepe and
increace the mutual love and troth of marriage, and finally how they must
well and virtuously bring up their children.

For who so coupleth himself with braul^g Ther^ lies much wayght in y^
eleccion of thy ^ate.
folks, and comes to disquietnes, may not complain thereof. Why lefce he
not such co^tencious persons without his house? Who so now will have a
peaceable marriage, must not chose him a restless mate. He that will plant any
thing, A godly and not a ^leensa^ ple:
does first considre the nature of the ground, in the which he entendeth to
plant. Much more should thou have respect to the conditions of thy spouse,
out of whom thou desyrest to plant children, the fruit of honest and
welfare. And like as plantynge and carfulness has great power in all growyng
things: so has it greater virtue and strength, yea and better fruit in the
diligent bringing up of children. Where as marriages and children do sometime
prosper euel the greatest cause thereof, is the fault in chosyng the party,
and in the chyldrens bringing up. Now where as we fail in this behalf, it
comes either of our own fond affeccion which we follow, and are seduced
thereby, or else comes it of ignorance, as when folks wotte not where unto
they ought to have respect, or how to do in the cause. And seeing that in
these points sto^ death the making and marrynge of wedlock, I will first note
in few words the most necessary thing that may be spoken hereof: And first
will I speak of the chosyng of a spouse.

The choosing, is a receauyng or accepting What the elec^ion is.
of such things as we think are mete for our end and purpose. Therefore
every election has a final respect, that it is directed unto. For as much
now as our talking here, is of the eleccio^ of a spouse, we must reduce to our
remembrance, the end of wedlock, that is to say, the causes, why and
wherefore it is contracted. Now have Why mary^ age is co^trac ted.
we heard before, that the causes why it was orde ned* and wherefore it is to be
received of ye two parsonnes, are these, even to the intent that they shall
continually dwell together, and spend their life in the mutual participacio^
of all such thyn ges as God sends, that they may bring forth children, or
that they may avoid whoredom, (for the eschewyng of per^llous solitarines)
that the one may be a conforte and healpe to ye other according to the will of
God.

Therefore thou that will chose, must have respect unto these aforesaid
points, as to the final end and mark, set before the, and must prove
wheth^r the parsonne, whom thou thynkest to ^oyne unto thy self, have these
points, which thou have heard now recyted. And the same shall thou well
prove, if thou note diligently the rytches that are in man, of the which I will
now speak.

Three manner of rytch^ ^re therein man, the Three man^ of rytche^ (...) man.
rytches of the mind, of the body, and of temporal substance. The best and
most precious are the riches of the mind, as they without which the other
two are more hurteful then profitable. The rytches of the mind are, the fear
of God, faith, gods glory, gods service, understanding Rytches of the (...).
or knowledge, prudence, truth, sobernes, righteous nes, liberalite, chastity,
humbleness, honesty and nourtoure, synglenesse and diligence: and such like
virtues. These lie not still, neither hyde them selves, where so ever they be,
but break out diverse ways, so that they may well be spyed, but specially in
talking. For our Lord Christ did say: Out of the abundance of the heart spea
keth the mouth. They of the old time said, that a man's talkyng is the
myrrour and messanger Language.
of the mind, in the which it may be seen without, in what case the man is
within. Therefore who so will know and have experience how a The fear of God.
man's mind standethe, let him diligently note his communicacion, whether it be
joined with the fear of God, manerly, true, earnest honest, sted fast, and
reasonable, or whether it be churlyshe and ungodly, nyce, vayneglorious,
feigned, full of worcester des unsteadfast, dishonest, unreasonable and joined with
lyghtenesse. And of these fruytes than shall thou know the tree and root of
the heart. And though ypocrisy use much disceate in talkyng, yet can no
ypocrite go always so craftily, but he shall sometime stomble and bewray him
self.

But for the more suertye, it is good for the ^ot only to mark his
communicacion, but also other gestures and manners, how the man now behauethe
himself, how he has done hitherto, Reputacion.
what name and fame he has had, and yet has, what opinion otherwise, and
honest men have of him, how he behaueth himself in stondyng and going, and in
all the parts of his body, what raiment he uses, whether it be vain,
whorysh, Garments.
wanton, light, or mannerly and according to his estate, reputacion and
power, that is to say, honest raiment. For raiment does often give cer tayne
and sure testimony of pride, lyghtenesse, wantonness, inconstancy,
unshamefastness, boastyng and of fylthynesse or uncleanness, and other vices
or virtues that are in man. So may Company.
much be spyedalso, by the company and pastyme that he uses. For a man is for
the most part condicioned even like unto them that he keeps company with
all. We se that among beasts wild and tame, like will to like. The education
The bryngyng by.
also gyuethe great testimonye, namely by whom, and how every one is brought
up, whether it were among virtuous parsons or evil, whether the party has
continued in the nurtoure of the virtuous, and showed himself obedient, or
whether he has broke out of his disciplyne, and followed his own wylfulnesse.
For it is but a small matter for the to have dwelte among virtuous men, but
rather herein lies the wayght, how far and how much thou have followed
the^, and been obedient unto them. Judas was among the Apostles, brought up of
the Lord Christ, but for all that was he never the better. For he left not his
wicked pran^es, nether was he obedient.

Through the occasion of all these things, and other like appartaynyng to the
same, ought every one to discern the parsonne, whom he Note:
has chosen to take to marriage, and to se that she be endewed with the said
rytches of y^ mind and that to his purpose she be right, peaceable, honest,
mete and convenient for him to live with all in wedlock, as it besemethe, and as
GOD has iustituted. For like as in the mind there are such virtues as we
have spoken of, so are Froward wicked qua lities of the mind:
there in it also noisome wicked vices and destraccions, as ungodliness,
despysyng of Gods word, mysbelefe, ydolatry, Ma^etrye, ignorance,
churlyshnes, lyeng, falsehood, ypocrisy, unrighteousness, backebytyng,
mistemperau^ce, drunkenness, covetousness, vnchastite, unshamefastness,
mysnurtoure, rashness, furyouse wantonness, pride, presumpcion, vayneglorye,
^hydyng, brawlyng, and vnhandsomnesse. Who so now chosethe him a mate that is
tangled with such noisome vices, seakethe not a spouse for a right peaceable and
good honest life, but a^ hell a paynfulnes, a destruccio^ of all expedient^
virtuous living. Specially there is little good to be looked for, where as is
ungodliness and despysyng of Gods word.

For like as the fear of God draws ye who The des^ysing of gods word.
le garland of ^ertues with it, so bryngethe ungodliness all vice and
abhominacion, ^ea and shuts up the way to amendment. For who so will not
hear Gods word, refuses all good enfourmacion, and therefore is there no
amendment to be hoped for in him. And where as is no shamefastnes, there dare
the shameless person unshamefast ness. Lyeng.
do every thing that lykethe him. Where lyeng, b^astyng and lyghtnesse is,
there can no certaynete be had, there stondethe all in doubt, Pride.
what so ever is spoken and done. Where pride is, there is also rashness,
wylfulnes, presumpcio^, contempt, disdain, murmuryng, and obstinate rebellion:
And where as such be, there is nothing but brawling, chiding, and never one
g^od hour. Wherefore he that will not lack ye right points of marryage, and
of a commodious life, let him have respe^te ^o the riches of the mind, and
chose him such a parsonne, as is endewed of God with such rytches, and not
with a noisome or froward mind. The ryche^ of the body.


After the rytches of the mind, do the riches of the body follow ne^te, as
is a bewtyfull or well favored body, health, a convenient age etc. A bewtiful
body is such one, as is of right form and shape, mete and of strength to
bear chil dren, and to keep an house, even such a person as thou canste
find in thine heart to love, and to be content with all, etc. Of the bewty of
the body (where there is else no good qualite beside) Beautye.
says Solomon, Prouer. xxxi. As for favor it is deceatfull and transitory,
and bewtye is a vain thing, but a woman that fears god, is to be commended.
And Proverb. xi. A fair woman without discrete manners, is like a ryng of gold
in a swynes snowte. Therefore are they all stark fools, that in chosyng them
wives, look only to their bewty, and regard not the rytches of the mind.
Afterward does the same bewty turn them to disquietnes, to pain and trouble.

Health also must be considred in the eleccion, lest thou with all that thou
have, perysh, and lest Health.
thy whole house be poisoned and hurt. Nevertheless I speak here of sore
contagious syckenesses, not of such daily infirmitees and small diseases, that
all men are subdued unto. But I spoke of madness, frenesy, the falling
syckenes, lamenes, leprosy, French pockes, or such like, which every manne
should greatly abhor.

Notwythstondyng where married folks, which Mark well
now are together, be visited with such diseases then must suffer the one with
the other as they that are in one body. As for the due and conueni ent age* we
spoke of it in the syxt Chapter.

To have the goods of temporal substance Rytches of te^porall sub stau^e.
is to be borne of noble parents, or to come of a worshypful stock, to have
rytches, great offices gaynes, or occupienges, and such like. The hiest
nobilite and most worthy comme^dacion, is to be noble in virtues, in good
works, manners and conditions. Who so does come also of noble parents, is
the more to be reputed. But to Nobilite.
be a gentle borne, and to use himself v^gently is even as much as to shame
himself and his. There have been found many, which came of a low birth, but
they garnysshed their kynredde so with virtues and noble acts, that they and
their stock attained to great prosperity. There are many this day that come of
famous houses and noble parents, but they lean to much to their birth, yea
they are wylfull minded, and think, that (because of their nobilite) they may
do what they list, and that their doings become methe them well, and yet are
they so noble (that, is, they so excel) in all vice and abhominacion that they
bring them selves to dishonor, and to contempt and hatred of all men.

Let every man therefore look ernestly to this matter, lest any manne
intending to have the gold, and catchyng the whotte cooles, do burn himself
without recure. For temporal goods sake, the matter miscarieth and is in
danger. Temporal goods.
There is sometime great rytches, but with little honest is it gathered
together. And with the same rytches, will not be al way prosperity, peace and
rest. Many trust to their goods, and nothing will they learn, therefore also
can they do nothing but live deyntely, and with pride, excess and dishonesty,
to wayst it away, that has been long gathered together. Now when Beware or
^ll be spent.
there is all way taken from the heap, and no thing laid thereto, it waysteth
away in process of time, how great so ever it has been. Then follows
pouerte, yea an intolerable and vnpa^ient pouerte. For they that now lasshe
out all together, have had no necessite hitherto, but were in all wealth,
therefore after such a Son shine, there comes ever an intolerable heat,
and thense forth begin they to warm them selves at the bare leaves.

Who so now in his eleccion lookethe to the multitude of goods, and not how
they were won, and whence they come, he has accustomably such a smoky hat
set upon his head, that all
the water of Ryne can not wash away the soo^ thereof. Good without God and
honest, is a deadly poison, and the bodily dyuell himself. Goods and rytches
is in y^ hand of an indiscreet and igno raunt man, is as a sharp knyfe in the
hand of a child, that does no good therwyth, but woun death and destroyethe it
self. Wherefore let every man in the eleccio^, have more respect to discrecio^
and knowledge, tha^ to rytches. Moreover an hand that is occupied, and wynneth
and gets his living godly and honestly, does far excel any rytches Handy
craf tes.
that are won. A rytche man which has great goods in his hand, and yet has
learned nothing wythall (and nothing can learn) when he once loses his
substance and goods, he can win no more, but comes immediately to the
staff and wallet, As for such one as has applied him Wynnyng (...)
occupyenge.
self to learning, he is fytte to some office, he can and is able to occupy
and labor: and though he once or twyse loses that he has, yet can he
win more again.

And though no man with his eleccion should Honest prouisio naught to be
regarded.
have special respect unto temporal substance yet ought no man to behave
himself vncircum spectly, nether lightly to regard honest provision For like
as out of great rytches there follows pride, even so of poverty there
folowethe much evil. Therefore is it not vnryghte, that thou (...) thine
eleccion considre how thou may honestly win thy bread, and whereof thou
may live with thy spouse, and what thy spouses substance and occupyeng is,
and how the same may be an healpe to thy convenient living. If thou now
will not regard the more excellent and better things, but have only
respect unto the goods, than marryest thou not the parson, but the goods?
Whereof if there be not so much as thou would feign have, or if it waste
away, then farewell all the love. For that love which Whotte love is ^one
cold.
commethe through rytches, beauty, or other like small occasions, is even as a
fire that is made of stra^ or tow: it grows soon and is great, but
streyghtewaye it vanysshethe. Even so is that love shortly extincte, which
spryngeth not of durable occasions. If a fire be made of whole strong wood, it
gyuethe a good natural heat, likewise if thou in the eleccion of a spouse,
haste respect unto ye true, godly and honest points, the^ is the love of so
much the longer continuance.

And to be short, let every one with his eleccion, ^he effect of the eleccion.
have first respect unto those points, for ye which wedlock was ordained of
God. Then whether the party (whom thou art minded to chose) be reasonably
endewed with all, or no. And to the intent that the same may well be per Good
lesso^^ for choosing (...) wife.
ceaued, let every man have faithful respect here to the rytches of the
mind, whether the parson be godly, wise, discrete, true, faithful, honest, so
ber, and loving. Item whether she be whole and sound, and not laden with sore
diseases, deformed, sluttysh. fylthy, evil favored, and what her estate is,
what power and possibilite she is of, how, where, and with whom she has been
brought up, whereupon she lives, and what she occupyethe. how fruitful,
handsome, houswyfely, laborious and quycke she is. If beside these, thou
fyndest other great rytches (bewty and such gifts) and come godly and
honestly by them, thou haste the more to thancke God for.

But specially and before all other things, we must faithfully with
feruentnesse and steadfast belefe (without ceasynge) make intercession and
prayer unto God, to whom all hearts are open and known, that he will not
suffer us to go amysse, but as a father, healpe and guide us to a right
marriage, in the which we may live honestly and prosperously, eue^ as we ought
to his honor. For it is God only that prouidethe the marriage, that has the
hearts in his hand, and that gyuethe the will, as it is said in the Chapters
before. But like as in other points and matters the ordinance of God does not
destroy lawful instruments: Even so here in this cause the institucion of
God denies not the ordinate election, but in them that fear GOD they go both
together.

Of this ordinance of God and ordinate eleccion, we have a very fair example,
Gene. xxiiii. A nota^le en (...) of y^ election and (...) and in y^ cause (...)
matr^.
where Abraham sent his servant in his messa ge, to get his son Isaac a wife
in Mesopotamia. The same servant begins his matter with prayer, and says:
O lord god of my master Abraham, send me good speed this day, and show mercy
unto my master Abraham. Lo, I stand here by y^ well of water (for he t^yed
there with his servants and camels without the cyty by a wells side, and the
daughters of the men of this city will come out and draw water. Now the
damsel to whom I say, stoop down thy pitcher and let me drink, if she
say, drink, and I will give thy camels drink, thereby will I know, that she
is the same, whom thou haste ordained for thy servant Isaac.

Behold, in this prayer does Abraham's servant knowledge the ordinance of god,
and that god only prouydeth the marriage, and yet never theles he falls to
prayer, and uses that mean. For it follows in the story, And it came to ^as
that yer he had left speaking, Rebecca came forth, and carried a pitcher upon
her shulder, and she Rebecca.
was a very fair damesell and vnblemisshed virgyn, and came down to the well
to draw water. Then ran the servant unto her, and asked her drink, and she
said: Drink sir. And with that took she down her pitcher, and gave him
drink. And when he had droncken, she said: I will draw water for thy
camelles also, that they may dryn^e. And so she made haste, and poured water
out of her pitcher into the trough and gave the camels drink: But the man
maruayled at her, and marked her well, and hyld his tongue et cete. No doubt, he
had respect to the The proper ties of a maid that should ^e cho sen wit.
riches of the mind and of the body, and percea ued that she was gentle,
seruiseable, lowly, given to labor, quycke in her business, loving toward
strangers, that she was not my ^taughte or nycely brought up, ner a hye minded
or deyn tie veast, but honest and handsome. How she was condycyoned, could he
not know better, then by such token. She was yet an untouched virgin, and
therefore also well nourtoured and no nyce thing.

When she comes to the well she makethe no stop: ner brings a sort of
young fellows with her, nether stands she gasyng and wondryng upon the
strange man, but quyckely and straight goes she her way, and tends her own
business. But as soon as the old honest man (Abraham's servant) speak unto
her, she sheweeth herself very curtuous and gentle. Full reverently calls
she him, sir master or lord and serves him quickly, asks no questions at
him and makethe no moo words. These are right virtues, highely to be
commended in a virgin. Morouer this damsel is praised for her bewtye and
fayrenesse of her body, which was even as much the more excellent, as she
exceaded in ver tuous conditions.

Thou will say, ye but where are the other gifts of god and riches of the
mind, as the fea re of GOD, true belief, et cete? I answer.

The said virtues were not in her without the fear of God and faith. Abraham
also had ta ken an ooth before, of the same his servant, after this manner.
Thou shall swear by the lord of heaven and earth, that unto my son thou
shall take no wife of the daughters of the Cananites among whom I dwell, but
shalt go to my coun tree and kynrid, and thence bring him a wife.

The Cananites were corrupt and lost in The goods of the mind are more to be
regarded tha^ the go^ des of y^ body or of the world.
their faith and manners given to Idolatrye and abhomynacyon, yet were they
mighty and rytche. But they in Mesopotamia (whence Abra ham was) feared God and
were virtuous, not withstandyng they were not of like power and riches.
Nevertheless Abraham followed after the fear of God, and therein leauethe he us
an ensample, that we all should be the gladder to have God, then Mammo^. And
thus haste thou also, that in this marriage, there was great experien ceof faith.

When the seruasit now had with syle^ce consydred the excellent gifts in the
damesell he asks her furthermore: whose daughter art thou? She answers. I
am the daughter of Bathuel and Nahor is graundfather. Then Abraham's servant
took out a ryng of gold and other Jewels Gifts in y^ way of ma riage are ^oth
laufull and commendable. A prouer^
and gave her them. For no vncomlye thing is it to give honest presents to
honest damesels in the way of honest, and so to move their minds unto the
honor and love of marriage. Else (or in other wise, and of suspecious persons,
ought honest damsels to take none. For it is no vntrueprouerbe: She that takes
the pedlers ware, must be feign to have the peddler himself also at the last.
etc.

Moreover, the servant thought he would pro ue, how friendly, merciful,
harbarous, and faithful the damesell was, and said: Have ye rowme in thy
fathers house to lodge in? And she said unto him: We have plenty of lytter and
prouender, and rowme enough to lodge in, yet because she would not take much
upon her, she ran in, and told her brother Laban the matter.

Who immediatelye made ready the stable, goes forth to the well and brings
the servant into the house, and sets meat before him But the servant
said: I will not eat, till I have first done my earand. And so began, and
told how that his master Abraham had one only A form of the ^rande in
marriage.
son: how rich he was, and how he had sent him to Mesopotamia to get his
son a wife.

Then told he how he made his prayer unto god, and came to the well, and how
their daughter Rebecca came to the well also, how she behaved her self and
what she did, by the vohych he understood, that god had prouyd^d their daughter
for his masters son: So that now his request was, that they would give him a
fynall answer, whether they could be cont^t to mary their daughter to his
masters son, or no. Where upon the damsells father and brother answered.
This comes even of the Lord, therefore will we not say against it* etc.

And thus out of the story we learn, that wha^ we have made our faithful
prayer unto God, appointed our election ordynatelye, and used the other
means, we must do our errand unto the parents or tutours of the party, and
how and after what manner we ought to do it. The damesel also is inquired what
her will is, she consents, and there with is the marriage conclu ded. Thus much
I have spoken concerning the choosing of convenient and mete spouse, and of the
earand appertaynyng to the same.

Yet in this thing also must I warn every Truth in co^trac^ynge of marriage.
reasonable and honest person, to beware, that in contractyng of marriage,
they dyssemble not, ner set forth any lie, but rather use truth, and tell how
every thing stands. For they that lie and dyssemble, do afterward cause much
displeasure among them that are disceaued. Let every one remember, how loath he
would be to be disceaued himself, and that it is comenly said: In marriage
ought no man to be begyled.

Every man likewise must esteem the parson to whom he is handfasted, none
otherwise, then Mark this well.
for his own spouse, though as yet it be not done in the church ner in the
streate. For thus is it written. Deuteronomy. xxii. if a maid be handfasted to an
husband, and then a man find her, and lie with her, they shall both he carried
out of the city, and stoned unto death.

The. xiii. Chapter.
Of the weddyng.

ANd to the intent that all inco^uenie^ces for to come which might afterward
grow, either touching the goods or the promy ses) may cyrcumspectlye be
prevented, therefore after y^ handfastynge and making of the contracte y^ church
going and weddyng should not be differred to long, lest the wickedde sow his
ungracious sede in the mean season. Likewise the weddinge (and cohabitacion of
ye parties) ought to be bego^ne with God, and with the earnest prayer of yt
whole church or co^gregacio^. But into this dysh has ye dyuell put his foot,
and myngled it with many wicked uses and custumes. For in some places there is
such a manner, well worthy to be rebuked that at the handefastyng, there is made
a great feast and sup^rfluous ba^cket, and eue^ the same night are the two
ha^dfasted persons brought and laid together, yea certain wekes before they go
to the church. Which is nothing else but a wicked lust, and a plain evidence,
yt thou little regardest the blyssyng, even as did Esau, and that in wedlock
thou sekest nothing but caruall desire.

Christ commaundethe us, that first before Married fol^es go to the church before
they lie togy there.
all things and in all things, we shall seake the kingdom of God. And for
as much as he him self did openly couple the first marriage together, and
blyssed both the parties, therefore the co^ gregacion through the ensample and
spirit of God, has ordained, that the parties shall openly and before all
things, come to the Church, and there declare and confirm their marriage in
the face of the church, and of Gods minister receive the blessyng, and
commit them selves to the common prayers of the congregation, and enjoy the
same. This godly ordinance ought every reasonable Christen man to prefer above
his own fond affeccion, and not first to seake the bancket and the bed in his
marriage, but Gods kingdom, and then first to be wedded and dwell to gyther in
the name of God.

For in the said ordinance we must not only The occasions and commodities
that commethe of this ordina^s.
consither, and note the act and example of God, but also those profitable and
christen poyn tes followyng.

First, with this ordinance is it openly decla i.
red in the sight of all the world, that it is God which knytteth the knot of
marriage. For that the minister of the church does, that doeh he in the name
and according to the ensample of God.

Secondly with this ordinance is testimony given, that wedlock is honorable
and pleasau^te ii.
unto God, an holy work of the light, and no foul work of darckenes. For
the parties dare syghtly come into the open Church (even in the light) where
Gods worckes only are practiced. As for the worckes of whoredom and
dishonestye, that hyde them selfs in the darkness. It is seen also by the
going to the church, who kepith house with God and honest in wedlock^, and
who with the dyuell and shame in whoredom: Not only this, but also what they
be, that among Christen people are to be suffered together as honest persons:
and who, as harl^ttes and unthrifts, are to be expelled and driven from
asunder.

Thyrdly, in this ordinance is every one war iii.
ned, faithfully to keep his promise, made and gi uen to his spouse, before God
and the whole church For if a man have cause to be ashamed, when he promises
ought in ye presence of honest people, and keeps it not: Much more ought
aduouterers to be ashamed, that break their promise, made before God and the
congregation.

Fourthly, God will give his blyssyng to the^ that co^tracte wedlock in the
fear of him, and iiii.
that confirm it according to his ordinance. Which thing the faithful may
assuredly look for at his hand Gene. i.

Fyftely, There is Gods word declared and (...).
taught, how holy a thing wedlock is, how mar ryed folks ought to behave the^
selves. etc. There every man that is married already, is put in mind of his
promise, and they that sometime live well in marriage, are called to
repentance: like as they also that lead an honest life, are co^fermed in all
goodness.

Syxtely. There is made a general prayer of the whole congregation in the name
of Christ, vi.
for those new married folks, and for the whole state of matrimony. Now has
the Lord promi sed, that where two or three are gathered together in his name,
he will be in the mids among the^: therefore is it well to be hoped, that he
will be much rather in such a whole congregacio^s, and hear their prayer: All
these occasion co^sidred, let not the faithful despise Gods ordinance, but
behave them selves so, that dilige^^ly and before all things, they seek the
kingdom of god, and take that in hand, which is honest profitable and good.

But the dyuell has crept in her also, and t^ogh (...) weddynges.
he can not make the ordinance of going to the church to be utterly omitted
and despised, yet is he thus mighty, and ca^ bring it to pass, that y^
or^inau^ce is nothing regarded, but blemyshed with all manner of lyghtnes: In
so much that early in the morning the weddyng people begin to ^xcead in
superfluous eating and drinkyng, where of they spytte until the half sermon be
done. And when they come to the preaching, they are half droncke, some all
together: therefore regard they neither the p^chyng nor prayer, but stond there
only because of the custom. Such folks also do come to ye church with all
manner of po^pe and pride, and gorgiousnes of rayme^t and Jewels. They come with
a great noise of Harpes, Lutes, kyttes, basens and drommes, wherwyth they
trouble y^ whole church, and hyndre them in matters pertaining to GOD. They
come into the Lords house as it were i^to an house of mar^hau^dyse to lay
forth their wares and offer to sell them selves unto vice and wickedness. And
even as they come to the church, so go they from the church again, light,
nyce, in shameful pomp and vain wantonness. What thinkeste thou, faythefull
man, that such church going opteynethe before god? Uerely more indignacion and
displeasure, then favor and grace.

Wherefore let all virtuous and honest people How they ^ught to go to the church
for to be ma ^yed.
take here monicyon, to leave such^ abuse, ye such sinful and vycyous church
going, there as it is yet practysed: And let them take their ho nest
kynsfolkes and neighbors with the^, and in good season soberly discretely
lowlye, as in the syghte of god, without pomp, manerly, and in comely honest
raiment, without pride, without drommyng and pypynge, let them go in to the
house of the lord, and there hear the lords word, make their faithful
prayer unto God with feruentenesse and steadfast beleyfe, receive the blessing,
and then manerly and with silence to go home again.

After the going to the church, is there no less inconvenience used among
many multitudes Sin and excess committed at weddynges.
then in the church going. For when they come home from the church, then
begins e^sse of eating and dryncking. As for the poor, they are out of
remembrance. And as much is waisted in one day, as were sufficient for the
two new married folks half a year to live upon. The days of Noe, mencyoned
in the Gospel, and the parable of the rich man and Lazarus, have there rowme
enough. Let every man look, that with such excess: he pray not also with the
rych man in the pit of hell. O abhominacion.


After the bancket and feast, there begynnethe a vain, mad, and vnmanerlye
fashion. For the bryde must be brought into an open dauncynge place. Then is
there such a rennynge, leaping and flyngyng among them, then is there such
a liftynge up and discovering of the damselles clothes and of other womennes
apparel, that a man might think, all these dauncers had cast all shame
behynd them, and were become stark mad and out of their wits, and that
they were sworn to the^ deuels dance. Then must the poor bryde keep foot
with all dauncers, and refuse none, how scabbed, foul, droncke^, rudeand
shameless so ever he be. The^ must she often times hear and se much wickedness,
and many an uncomely word. And that noise and ro^blyng endu reth even till
supper. At an after supper.


As for supper, look how much shameless and dro^ ken the evening is more then
the morning (so much the more vice, excess, and mysnourtoure is used at the
supper. After supper must they begin to pype and dance again of the new.
And though the young persons, being weary of the babiynge noise and
inconvenience, come once toward their rest, yet can they have no quietness.
For a man shall find unmannerly and A wicked cu stome.
restles people, that will first go to their chamber door, and there sing
vicious and noughty Ballades, that the dyuell may have his whole tryumphe now
to the vttermoost.

But here let every Christian man consider, what an unmannerly and froward
custom this is, and how unmeet a thing it is that such uncleanness should be
practysed among Christen peopel, which ought to be holy. Marriage should be an
inhib^ion and manifest condemnacion of all inor dinate luft, of all excess, of
all wa^to^ and unshame fast living. And yet is the same chaist estate begone
with such vain wantonness and lyghtnesse, with superfluite and royote, to the
great hurt of the bodies, souls, and goods of the young folks. Or is there
any manneso greatly destitute of understanding, that he perceauethe not this?
Why does no man then refourme it? Or will we with vyolence provoke and defy al
mighty GOD? Now go to, though the mire fall upon your heads, we can not do
with all. Thou will say: What? has God then forbidden honest folks to make
merry together or Convenient and honest mirth.
to dance honestly in all good manner: I answer. Wh^t so ever God does not
inhibite and A goodly to enlusion.
condemn to be sin, may not be called sin by any man. As for mirth with
honest, it is a grace and gift of God, and hereof comes it, that they of
old did say: Honest myrthe should none forbydde. Wherefore thought a Christen
man use convenient mirth with nourtour, temperaunce and thankefulnes, he
synneth not. For God has not inhibited man to be merry with ho neste, and in
due season. This is manifest. Hieremy. xxxi. And Solomon says, Ecclesiastes.
lii. There is a time to weep, and a time to laugh, a time to mourn, and a time
to dau^ce: a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embr^ cynge. In
convenient time therefore and place, may faithful Christen men have ordinately
all manner of mirth in instruments with hone stye, at marriages or other joyful
times, when God gives peace, prosperity and fair wether. The abuse, the royot
and excess (against the which only we her^ speak) marrethe all, and
bryngethe inconvenience in theyse and all other things. And so after great
intemperate, and unmeasurable mirth, ther^ follows commonly exceadyng great
and perpetual sorrow. Wherefore let all faithful Christen men take here a
monicion at their weddynges to put away all vnte^peraunce, and with nurtour
and honor to begin that honorable state, so shall God increace his grace in
them, and grant the^ to live in long and honest myrthe: Or else if they fall
into trouble, he shall not leave them without conforte.

The. xiiii. Chapter.
Of the first cohabitacion or dwelling together, and love of married folks.

AFter that we now hither to have brefely spoken of the eleccio^ of a comely
spouse, and of y^ earand in the cause of married folks. church going also, and
of the declaryng and con firmacio^ of the parties in wedlock: I must declare,
how they both may live well and right together, and faythefully keep and
increace the love and dewty of marriage.

And here ye first dwelling together is most ^aunger in the first ^o a
habitacion.
dangerous of all For where folks never came together before, and the one is
not yet accustomed with the other, and where sometime also they are of
contrary conditions and natures among the^ selves. There or ever they can dwell
under one rofe, and before theo ne learneth to know the other: much contencion
happens many times and if the same be not prevented at the beginning, there
spryngeth worsse things thereof.

For the dyue^the enemy of all unite crepeth in here also, and labors fast,
that he may likewise have his portion, and that he may make the married
folks not to agree well the one with the the other. Against whom, they that are
now married, must diligently watch and fight, and give the Dyuell no place,
but remember well, what may follow unto them by such to early discord. And
the same may they learn by this ensample followyng: if two boordes at the
first be not well cowpled and joined the one to the Mark this example well.
other, they never are fastened right afterward. But if the first couplyng and
joining together be good, than can there afterward no violence drive the
boordes asunder, yea the whole boorde does sooner break, the^ the glewyng of
the^ together.

They therefore that are married, must apply their special diligence, that
their first cohabitaci How married folks ought to behave the^ selves when
they first dwell together.
on and dwelling together be loving and frendely, and not separated through any
spytefull contencion, for so shall the whole estate of your marriage prosper the
better, and have the more tran^ilite and rest, as long as ye live. And though
there happen to arise any cloud of discord, yet let them beware, that at the
least there be not to much displeasure, disdain and inconvenience. For if at
the beginning of marriage there chaunse such rudenes and uncomely discord,
then will it always be breakyng out, even as it is with great wounds and
broken legs, which seldom are so thorowely healedde, but sometime hey have
pain at the change of the wether. Eue^ so if married folks behave the^
selves thus unhonestly the one toward the other at the first and if discord be
once begone between them, the old cancker will break again, though it be
scaled afterward. Then come such unseemly words as these be. Thus dyddest
thou serve me also before. It were my part to learn to give little credence
unto the. etc. And after this manner does that to early discord make the whole
life. and the whole state of marriage, bitter and sower.

Let every one consither this aforehande, and How they must behave themselves
at their first be yng together
refrain, forbear and suffer: And if all be not after his mind, let him
remember the words of S. Paul. One bear another burden, and so shall ye
fulfill the law of Christ Let one suffer with another. In the mean season let
each one learn to be acquaynted with the nature and condi cions of the the other,
and to apply him self accor dyng to the same, in as much as they must needs
dwell together, one enjoy another, and the one dye and live with the other.
Remember your selves well on both the sides, that if either of you will be so
styffe minded, and stand so in his own conceate, A good lesson both for the
man and the wife.
ye shall never have good nor good days to gyther. What auaylethe you then
your own noisome conditions? Wha^ thou perceauest thy self to have ought in
the (which does displease thy husband, the best is that thou amend it. If
any thing the^ do displease the, speak thy mind, and that discretely unto thy
husband, to the in te^te that he may leave it, if sensualite go to worcester ke, it
marreth all. With the first can we not op teyne, always, and of every man, what
so ever we would feign have. Contracy wise: Chastening has yet her own dew
time and place. The time also and your dwelling together shall minister much
occasion, so that in process of time many things shall be more tolerable
unto the that at the first you thoughtest rough, and could not suf fre. But
before all things, ye prayer of faith un to god, shall make most peace and
rest. God only has our hearts in his hand, be can bow the^ and alter the^
as he will: Leave not thou now thy call lynge. What soever we desire of God in a
true believe, if it be not against his glory and our salvation, he will give
it us. But this prayer may not cease, as Christ teaches. Luke, xviii.

As for such as in their own inordinate lusts not regarding this our
instruccio^ and war nynge go on still, and as soon as in their first Mark the^
g^odly exa ple.
dwelling together they find ought in their spou se that is against them, do
braule and cry. Noman, but even the deuell himself sent the (unto me, etc.
Those men do, even, like as if one had bought a vyneyarde, and should go into
it before ye time, to prove the grapes, which if they What married folks ow^ one
to another.
were yet hard and sower, that is unseasonable and not ripe) he should therefore
pluck up the vynes, and destroy the whole yard. For like as here the time
must be consydred, so must the one forbear the other in their first commi^g
together. And though the grapes be ripe, yet is not the iewse immedeately wine
at the beginning, but first, is it must, then sweter, at the last wine: ye the
year and age makes it in many places, the longer the better and the more
pleasant. He that will not now tarry the time, but cast out the wine, because
it is not wine by and by, but is must first, and then sweter wine that man must
needs lack wine at his need: Even so if thou wylt suffer no infirmyte ner
blemishe thou must take none to be thy spouse. For alme^ are tempted and every
one has his own special blemysh and fault, over and besides the weakness
and imperfection that we have of our first father Adam. Wherefore let not every
man speak and do here what so ever commethe into his brain, but remember that
we all are men, and that according to the old Proverb. In space comes
grace.

And to the intent that every man in this enfourmacion and in the state of
marriage, may behave himself the more handesomlye and the better, I will now
brefelye declare, what married folks (because of gods commandment) do owe
one to another, namely ordinate ob^dyence, and conjugal love mutual, which
is of all loves, the greatest For who so ever does earnest ly pondre these
things, and consydreth the^ well shall not only behave himself ordinately
and louyngely at their first dwelling together, but through out the whole state
of marriage (as long as he lives he shall spend his time well in unite
quietness, and in all good manner. Touching this obedience and love
matrimoniali, I will all ledge the very word of God, to the intent that this
instruccion may generally take the more of fect, and that every man (not
following here the same, may know, that he synneth openly against god and
against his holy ordinance.

Paul, Ephe. v. says thus: ye wives, submytt The duty and obedience of
wives.
your selves unto your husbands, as unto the lord. For the husband is the
wives head, like as Christ also is the head of the congregation, and savior
of his body. Now as the congregation or church is in subjection unto Christ so
let the wives also be in subjection to their hus bands in all things. First
does Paul speak of the obedience, that married weme^ owe to their husbands.
Let the weme^ says he be in subjection, that is to say, seruiseable and
obedient unto their husbands. And adds thereto, that they must esteem this
obedience none otherwise, then if it where showed unto god himself. Wherout it
fo loweth, that the said obedience extendethe not unto wickedness and evil,
but unto that which is good, honest, and comely. In as much as god deliteth
only in goodness, and forbyddeth evil every where. It follows also, that
the disobedience, which wives show unto their husbands displeases god no
less, the^ when he is resisted himself.

Secondly, Paul does likewise add the occa ^he husband is the head of the
wife.
sion, why women ought to be subieccion to their husbands. Even because the
husbonde is the wifes head. Which, saying he took out of the third chapter
of Gene, where it is written thus: And the lord said unto ye woman. Thou
shall depend and wait upon thy husbands beck, him shall thou fear, and he
shall have aucthori te over the. Thus writes Paul himself. i. Ti moth. ii. I
suffer not a woman to teach or preach or to have dominion over her husband. For
Adam was first made and the^ Eua. And Adam was not disceaued but the woman was
disceaued, and brought in the transgressyon. For as much then as the
mastershippe and taking of auctorite upon her could not well be driven out of
the woman, therefore god to punyshe the sin, humbled her, made her fearful
and subdued her. Such punishment and ordinance of God ought they to regard,
and with a good will (ac cordyng to the commandment of the Lord, to obey
their husbands, leest they fall into Gods wrath and into further punishment.

But to the intent that the husband shall not How y^ husband (...) the head.
turn his aucthorite unto tyrany, therefore does Paul declare, after what
manner and how the husband is the wives head. The husband (says he) is the
wyfes head, even as Christ is the head of his congregation. Now is Christ so
the head of the congregation, that he shewethe unto it the same thing, which
the head shows unto the body. The head sees and hearethe for the whole
body, rules and gydethe the body and gives it strength of life. Even so does
Christ defend, teach and preserve his congregation. To be short, he is the
savior, conforte, eye, heart, wisdom and gyde thereof. Therefore must the
husbands be heads unto the wives in like ma ner, to show them like kyndenes,
and after the same fashyon to guide them and rule them with discresion for
their preseruacion, and not with force and wylfulnesse to entreat them.

Thyrdly, Paul sets an ensample to the wi ues how they must be obedient and
behave the^ sell ues unto their husbands, and says: Like as the church is in
subieccio^ to Christ, so let the women How the wives must obey and behave
them selves.
be in subieccio^ to their husbondes in all things But how is the church in
subieccio^ to ye Lord? She has respect only unto him, and dependethe upon his
word. As for strange and fond husbands, she harkeneth not unto them, but
keeps her self pure and clean (and that continually) unto him in all
faythfulnes: Look what Christ comman^deth her, ye receueth she into her heart,
and does it: Contrary to Christ and without his will and word, does she
nothing. For in every thing yt she goethe about, she seakethe and requires
for Christ's word, she loves Christ only and above al things, she is glad
and wyllyng to suffer for Christ's sake, she does all for the love of him.
Christ only is her conforte, joy and altogether. Upon Christ is her thought
day and night, she lo^ gethe only after Christ, for Christ's sake also (if it
may serve to his glory) is she heartily well content to dye, yea she gives
over herself wholly thereto for Christ's love, knowing assuredly, that her
soul, her houour, body, life and all that she has, is Christ's own. Thus
also must every honest wife submit her self, to serve her husband with all
her power, and give herself over freely and wyllyngly, never to forsake him
till the hour of death: to hold her content with her husband, to love him
only, to harken unto him, and in all things to order her self after his
commandment. etc.

Now follows it in Paul likewise, what The dewtys and love of husbands.
the husbands owe to their wives, and how they ought to love them. Ye
husbands, says he, love your wives, as Christ loved the congregation, and
gave himself for it, to sanctify i^, and has cleansed it. etc. The husbands
dewetye is to love his wife. Now is love gentle and friendly, she is not
disdaynefull, she seeks not her own profyt she is not proud, she is not
pufte up, she is not hastily provoked unto wrath, she takethe not a thing
soon to the worste, she is not loathsome and tedious, but feruente and
seruiseable, and therefore (as we said before) the husband is the wives head,
that is, her defender, teacher and conforte. Yet needs it no farther
declaracio^, for as much as Saint Paul himself shows the manner and fashyon
of the love, that is, how they ought to love their wives, and says: Ye men
love your How men should love their wives.
wives, as Christ loves the congregation. How did Christ love the
congregation. It is written: No man has greater love, than he y^ ieopardeth
his life for his friend. Such love has christ showed to his congregation. For
it follows in Paul: Christ gave himself for it. For what in tent: Even to
sanctify it and to cleanse it.

This is the^ the measure of the mutual love matrimonial, that each party
have nothing to
dear, which he can not be content to give and bestow upon his married spouse,
in as much as it is required of him, that if n^de be, he shall also not spare
his own life for his spouses sake.

And like as Christ thought no scorn of his church, despised her not,
neither forsook her because of her uncleanness and sins. So should no
Christen married man spurn at his wife, nor set light by her because that
sometime she fails or is tempted and goes wrong: but even as Christ
norysheth and teaches his church, so ought the husband also louyngly to
enfourme (...) instruct his wife.

But mark and consyther this well: O ye Christen ^ow holy (...) thing love
matrimonial i^.
married folks, that Jesus Christ the son of God, and the holy Christen
church, and the holy body of them both, are set forth for an ensample or
myrcoure to the state of wedlock and co^gall love. A more excellent, a more
holy, a more goodly and purer ensample could not be showed. Thus truly must
it needs follow, that love matrimonial is highly accepted unto God as an
ordinate, holy, and godly love: Contrary wise it must follow, that
unquietness, hatred and frowardnes in marriage displeased GOD exceadyngly. For
an high love is it that God requires of married folks, therefore sin they
not but do well and right, when they, because of Gods commandment, bear
great frendshyp and love, the one to the other.

It follows moreover in Paul: So ought A man (...) love his wife as his own
body.
y^ husbands to love their wives, as their own bodies. He that louethe his
wife, louethe himself. For no man has at any time hated his own flesh, but
does norysh and cheryshe it For this cause shall a man leave father and mother,
and keep him to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Therefore ought
every man to love his own wife as himself. All theyse are the holy Apostles
words, which have this consideracio^: Wedlock makes of two persons one:
For they two, says the Lord, are one flesh. Therefore must the husband love his
wife no notherwyse then his own body. And as it is a very unnatural thing for
a man to hate his own flesh and blood, eue^ so is it to be esteemed unnatural,
that one spouse should hate the other. All we cheryshe our own bodies and
norysh them. Reason is it then that we cheryshe our wives, and do them good,
for they are our own bodies. And as there is great unite and mutual love among
y^ parts of a man's body, so ought there to be also between them that are
married together. Every member healpeth a another, they are sorry and merry
together, there in not one that check the and obbraydethe another, every one
has his place and office in the body, and does his dewty without grudgynge:
Even so likewise must it be between man and wife. Thus much have I shortly
spoken out of Paul, towthynge that love which is due to be had in wedlock.

The. xv. Capter.
How the love, faythfulnes, and dewty of married folks, may be kept and
increased.

HErein now ought not a married man to be satisfied, that he knowethe what
matrimontall love is, and how he should love his spouse, but he must apply
himself to love her in deed, as y^ Lord has commanded him and not that only,
but also endeavor himself ever more and more, to keep and increace the same
love. For many there be that begin well to love, but they endure not, and
some order them selves after such fasshio^ in their living, that they deserve
rather to be hated, than loved. Therefore will I now speak a little hereof, how
the love, faythfulnesse and dewty of married folk^ may be kept and increa ced.
First, for as much as true love matrimonial The word of God and prayer.
comes of God, and is given of God unto man, there are two special means
(namely god des word and the prayer of faith) that do keep (...) increace it.
For if married folks harke^ ernest ly unto the word of God, and read it, they
learn daily at it, such chynges, as augment comugall love. And if they pray
unto God with a true faith, that he will put away all such things as may
mynysh the love between them, (...) help them unto it that may increace the
same, doubt less God shall hear them. Only let them give them selves to
co^tynuall prayer, and to the hearing and readyng of Gods word.

Secondely. For as much as wedlock m^keth One heart (...) will.
of two persons one, for they two are one flesh, says the Lord, therefore
must they be of one heart, will and mind, and none to cast another in the
tethe with his fault, orto pride him of his gift. If thy wife be not al
together circumspecte and handsome, and God has endewed the with wysdom and
actiuite, than boast not thy self against thy wife, but remember how God
has provided the for her in marriage, to the intent that thou should supple
her imperfection, and that ye both doing your best together, might be one
perfect body. If the wife be rytche, and the husband poor, then let not the
wife boast her rytches against the husband, One castuo^ another in y^ teth.
but considre, that through marriage, her goods are become her husbands also.
For marriage is a mutual fellowship and partakyng of al things. The body like
wise is more of value than the goods. Seeing, then that thy body is thy
husbands, much more are thy goods his. And thus must every one of you judge
in others gifts, yt what so ever the one spouse has more excellent then the
other, the same, through mari age, is his spouses as well as his own.

Thyrdly, it does greatly increase love, when ^eruice and ^wshyp.
the one faythefully seruethe the other, when in things concerning marriage the
one hides no secrets nor priuities from the other, wha^ of all that ever they
obtain or get, they have but one common purse together, the one lockyng up
nothing from the other, when the one is faithful to the other in eating,
drynckynge and all necessite, when the one harkenneth to the other, and when
the one thyncketh no scorn of the other, and when in matters concerning the
rule of the house, the one will be councelled and advised by the the other. But
much discord comes of it, when the one hates and will not suffer them,
whom the the other loves and can not forsake, as namely a man's friend, father,
mother, sister, bro there, and such other like.

Fourthely, let the one learn ever to be obsequious Obsequiou^ (...).
and seruiseable to ye other in all other things And this shall come to pass,
if ye one note what thing the other can away with all, and what pleases him.
And so from henceforth to meddle with the one and eschew the other. Some wives
are so froward, that when their husbands are merry, they are sad: And
contrary wise, there be diverse men, that first desire to meddle with that
thing, which they perceive y^ their wives Things (...) be eschewed
can not away wythal. Some nether can nor will hear their infirmities more
nor less. Some time when the wife is sad and disquietted, then will the
husband have to much sport and pastyme of her. And sometime if the husband
be displeased, than the wife with spytefull words and wanton fashyons
prouokethe him to more anger. Some had rather have their back full of
strypes, than to hold their tongues and forbear a little. But where the
understanding of obsequye and obedience is, then let every one remember that
the other has the nature of mankind in him, and is tempted, let the one
lend to the other somewhat in temptacion, forbear with him, and give him the
place gentylly for a time. And though thy spouse in his displeasure do happen
for to speak an unkind or vnientyl word, yet think that it was not he, but
wrath that spoke it.

Fyfthly. There is no manner of thing, that Humilite (...) gentylnes.
more strongly kepethe and increasethe love matrimonial, then does curtesy,
kyndenesse, playnnesse and gentylnesse in words, manners and deeds. But there
be diverse married parsonnes, among whom is not found a good word, but al way
brawlyng, chidyng and discord. And yet fill they all the world with
complayntes, what a mi serable life they have together. And they them selves
nevertheless are gylty of their own mis chief. Let them leave their churlyshe
fashons, and be frendely and loving one to another, and then shall they come to
rest. And if happily they can not excel in that behalf, yet let them show
a good mind and loving will in their words and deeds, and so shall an honest
virtuous spouse be contented therwythe. For evident it is, that many a man
would feign be endewed with humanite and gentleness. And yet by the means of
imperfeccion, not for any frowardnes, he can not. One man also is of an
heuyer nature than another.

Syrtely, it likewise heapeth and encreasethe They must secretly ke^e no
evil* mine des, but tell their grefe.
love matrimonial, when the parties swell not one against another, and when
either opens to the other their grefe in due time, and with discresion. For
the longer a displeasure or evil will reygnethe in secret, the worsse will be
the discord. The dyuell also sometime makes their hearts so hard and styffe,
that at the last they both become crooked vessels. Therefore (I say) would I
have the due time observed, because that there is some season in the which if
greues were showed, it should make greater debate, as if thou should tell it
thy husband, when he is out of patience, or moved. And specially who so
speaks to a dro^ken man, talks with him that is not at home. Therefore
Abigail perceauyng Naball her husbond to be dronken, would not speak her mind
unto him until the morning. i. Reg xxv. Thus ought every one to wait his conue
nient and due time.

With discrecion, I say, must it be done also for some show their grefes so
unmannerly, so spytefully, and so discourteously, that they make now a greater
discencion, than was before. And if the one, of a good faithful meaning, begin
to speak of the the other, the same shall not only take indignacion at him
without pacient hearing out of his tale, but also begin to make spytefull
rehersals again of the new. Remember your selves well both of you, for if ye
so continue in dissencion, brawlyng and chydyng the one with the other, truly
ye can not have Gods favor. For who so will be forgyuen of God, must and
ought first to be at one with his negh boure, and also to forgive him his
trespass and fault. According to the words of the Lord. Math. v. vi.
xviii. So says Paul. Ephe. iiii. Though ye be angrye, yet sin not Let
not the Son go down upon yourewrathe, neither give place unto the
backehyter. etc. Let all bytternes, fearsnes and wrath, roaryng and cursed
speaking be put away from you. Be courteous one to another, and merciful,
forgyuynge one another, even as God for Christ's sake has for given you.

Seuently children begotten in wedlock, are a very sure bond of matrimonial
love. And Children (...) gotten ^n ma riage
therefore the Latinistes call them Pignora. Now is pignus as much to say, as
a pledge, or gage or pawn. And the children begotten in lawful Pignus.
marriage, are as a pledge and suerty of the love that can not be parted
asunder. For how can thou at any time be divided from the married spouse, by
whom thou haste children: if thou wylt say. Take thou one, and I will take
another yet has each of you in that one child, something which pertayneth to
yourselfe. For certain it is, that the child comes of you both. God also
brings it so to pass, that sometime the children look like the father,
sometime like the mother, sometime they have the condicious and similitude of
you both: And this God ordeyneth that the love may be the greater in marryage.
Now Mark thou wyf^.
when thou wife doste love those your children as thou should, bryngest them
well up, art diligent in lookyng to them, and can take pain with them, then
love thou thy self in thy children, and geueste him also an occasion to love
the better then he did, so that with the pain and travail that thou have
about the children, he is pacyfyed: Like as it is in deed the dewetye of every
married man, not to be vnpaciente with his children, or churlish to his wife,
which has labor and pain enough all ready with the children, al though her
husband were of a gentle nature, and not doggishe.

And those wyfes, which being made fruitful To bring forth children is y^
blessyng of god.
of god, do bring forth many children, and have all their days much great
pain, trauay le labor and disquietnesse with them, may not think (as some
do) that they he more vnhay pie and unfortunate, then those are that have no
children at al. They should rather consydre, that to be fruitful, is in gods
true eternal worcester de, commended as a bl^ssynge of god, and that all such wise
and noble men as feared god have ever esteemed it for a singular prosperyte,
honor and wealth. Item that all holy and famous women of the old testament,
did mourn, complain, and were ashamed of their vnfrutefullnesse. Upon a time
there came a famous woman to Rome, to the noble Corne^ia Grachi, and showed her
her treasure, as namelye her precious Jewels, rings and cheynes of gold,
precious Children are weme^s be^ Jewels.
stones, and ornaments, and required Cornelia that she should show her her
Iewelles also. Then that noble Cornelia brought forth her children, showed her
them, and said, lo, this is my worthy and precious treasure, that all my mind
stands unto, ye the treasure that one ly rejoices me, and is to me dearer
then all the Jewels upon earth.

This did an Heithenish woman, What shul dest thou the^ do, thou christian wife,
which ough test by right to know, that god uses y^ to great honor, wha^ he
causes the to bear children, which afterward may serve him and the whole
country, and may come to be honest folks, and a perpetual commendacion to
the? The holy scripture also says evidently, that a wife is in the work of
God and seruethe him, when she brings forth children, and gydeth them well.
Therefore what so ever she there in does and suffers, she must gladlye do it
and suffer it for gods sake, and put her trust in god, that he which puttethe
her to the pain and labor, can also show her both comfort and help, ye she
may not doubt, but be certayned at gods hand, ye Pains taking about
children: is the cross of the wives.
what soever she faithfully and obedientlye suffers and does with the
children in marriage it is no less good work in the sight of god, then all mes
geuyng, prayer, or mortifieng of the body. For that is her cross which the
lord has laid upon her to bear. Paul says also. i. Timoth ii. The woman
brought transgression into the world, but she shall recover her honor again
by bearyng of chrildren, if she continue in ye faith, in godly love, in the
sanctifieng, and in nourtoure. This should Christian wives remem bre in all
their cross, and to be glad, willing, and of a good courage therein. And who
has showed the O woman) all the grefes, anguysshes (...) troubles, all the
pains and miseries, that those wyfes have which bring forth no children? It
may chance, that they have more myserye and pain in another sort, then thou
have with thy children. And that happily they have here rest and good days, and
yet fynne therein with pride, deyntynesse, voluptuousnes, wantonness, ydel
nesse, nycenesse, and such infirmities, so that here upon earth they get little
honor and worship thereof, and must have eternal pain in the world to come.
This I say against froward and wicked wifes, and not against those that would
be glad to take any pain and labor so that they might have children and to
live mekely, vertuouslye and honestlye.

The women also, which are married unto such men as have had children by their
former Step children and ster^ mothers.
wives, must be ernestly exhorted, to show them selves unto those motherles
children, no steppe^ mothers fre^dshyppe, but a right motherly faith full
kyndnesse. Have co^passio^ (oh Christe^woma^) upon those young innocent orpha^s,
which know not ner have any comfort ner help upon earth, save only the.
Consydre, that god the lord has ordained the (in stead of their own
mother) to be unto the^ a right true mother, and require the the to love the^,
and to do them good. Woe unto the if thou do the poor motherles children harm.
Remember, that they are thine own husbands natural flessh and blood, and
that it is an unnatural Mark well ye Mothers in law.
thing to hate them which on thy husbands behalf pertayne partlye to thine own
body, and are thine own: think upon the word of truth. With what measure ye
meat, with the same shall it be measured to you again. What a great grefe
would it be to thine heart, if thou knew now that thine own children who^
thou bareste i^ thy body, should (after thy death) have a step mo there, which
would be rough and churlyshe unto the^? Doutles those chyldrens mothers that
deed is had in her death no less care for her children.

Therefore as thou would have thine own children entreated (if thou
shouldeste now die) so deal thou also with the^ that were hers and thy hus
bands tegether. Or else look verelye to have of god the same measure that thou
have given. Be sure also, that god will not hear the, wha^ thou prayest thy
Pater noster, for as much as thou will not hear the poor Orphans that cry
un to the. O dear mother. This I say, because expe rience lea^eth, that by the
reason of step chyl dren the love matrimonial is not only ^inyshed, but
even utterly excluded. Neither gendreth it unite, when a man intending to
commend his first wife, does it either out of mesure, or else first of all when
he fyndeth fault in his new wife. For such praise does she co^^ter to be made
to her dishonor and shame. Namely that her husband in commendyng his first
wife, does it to her reproach. I speak not this to the int^nt that a married
man should speak evil of his ho nest wife which is departed, but that every
man which is now married again, may commend his former wife in due season and
with measure, yea and in such a sort, that his present new wy fe have none
occasion to thyncke, that it is done to her disprayse.

Eyghtly. The love matrimonial is excelle^tly Troth and faith must be kept.
well kept and increaced through nurtoure, clen lynesse, truth and faith,
if they be steadfastly observed together. Let the husband content him only with
his wife, and so order himself with words, manners and gestures, that the
wife may perceive, that he holdethe him only unto her. Let the wife keep no
less truth and faith being honest and not shameless toward her husband.
Again, let her give him due beneuole^ce, and be not contrary unto him, nor
brawle with him. For such frowardness gives often great occasion, and
ministers improiment to matrimony. Wh^rfore let every one here remember the
words of S. Paul. For the avoiding of whordome, let every man have his wife.
There has not the wife power of her own body, but the husband. Again, the
husband has not power of his own body, but the wife. etc. as we said before
in the tenth Chapter.

Let every woman also beware of misgouernauuce Clenlynesse.
and sluttyshnesse in rayme^t, yea in every thing, that with uncleanness she
make not her self hated of her husband. Likewise must they both beware of
every thing that prouokethe to aduoutry, or ministers any unfaithful suspi
cion. As it is to be droncken, to have wanton or privy communicacio^, to use
evil company and like pastyme to have fellowshyp with light per Note this well.
sons, to resort unto suspicious places, to sto^d with suspicious folks, to
were wantonne raiment to be ever at light games, to run to every dance, to
play in every street, to tarry little at home, to be less content at home then
any where, to murmour, chyde, and to sygh at home. et cetera.

An honest wife ought not behind her husbands back to haunt any evil
company, to be Conuersacio^
ba^cketted, nether to go any where without her husbands knowledge and leave.
Much less ought she to take upon her any far journey. And if her husband be
gone forth, or be not at home, let her hold her self as a wydowe and live
quietly, and bring no man into the house in the mean season, nether run
out: nor bid gestes, to the intent that there grow no euel name nor fame un to
her therthorow. Nether should the one to the other, boast or show of
suspicious gifts and presents. Nether the husband to commend other wives
before his own or above his own. Nether is it the wives part to excead in
praysyng another woman's husband, lest the one suspecte the other. Thy wife
must take the for fairest, and Good (...)
thy husband must hold the for ye best favored.

And for as much as gelousy is a special evil Gelousy.
disease, and a great noisome plage in wedlock, therefore married persons must
put it away, or at the leest, and as much as in the^ lies tame it and
suppress it: And namely beware thou wife that thou impute not aduoutry unto
thine husband, because he sometime has spoken with ano there woman, or looked
at her. Again, thou husband must not be so sore tempted, as to mysintreate,
to blame or to smite thy innocent wife, nether to lay unto her such things
as she never thought upon. Likewise thou husband may est not deny thy wife to
make conuentent and honest chere with honest folks. For though all Women and
horses must be well gouer ned.
old wise and prudent men would have women and horses kept in good nourtour
and governance, yet may there be to mu^he done herein, as well as in other
things. There is an old Proverb also. The bow will break, if it be to sore
bent. Item, No thing may continue that is not borne up. Therefore an honest
married man should forbid his wife no convenient honest myrthe, but give her
leave, to the intent that she may afterward be the more wyllyng with the
children, and in other travail and pains takynge^

It besemeth no discrete honest husband, to com Boasting or pray^ynge.
mend his wife to much before other men. Collatinus Tarquinius lost his noble
wife Lucre tia, through his inordinate praysyug of her. Yet much less becomes
it the to be shameless in disclosynge the priuities of marriage, as many fylthy
persons use to do. Likewise besimethe it no man to provoke his wife in
bryngyng in naughty persons, or in keeping the^ still there in his house,
nether to cause his wife to be spoken of. If Menelaus had kept Paris without,
he had saved Helena his wife. Nevertheless every honest wife must faithfully
and at all times keep her honest, though her wicked husband give her many
prouocacions. Remember all way the sentence of Solomon. Wha^ a woman Honest
is (...) womans chief treasure.
leaseth her honest, than has she lost her chief treasure, nether has she
any more, but is contempned and despised, as the mire of the streets.

Hereto seruethe it also, that the wife may Behhueours with seruau^ tes.
not make her self to familiare, to friendly, or to pryuy with her servants
or household folks, leest they should be bold to talk, to ieaste, or
without reverence to behave them selves with her, as one serving maid would
do with another. Thou will say: I can not be so ^oysterous nor show my
self so terrible. Now go to, if thou will not be feared in the house as a
dame, yet hold the so unto them, that they may stand in awe of the, that they
be not to rash and to bold of the, but show the reverence, being shamefast
and well manered toward the, as to the mother in the house. For thou ought
A good lesson for wives.
with no man to be so familiare, so frendely, and so homely as with thy
husband. Likewise also must men behave themselves unto their maidens in the
house, and commyt all the rule and punyshme^t of them unto their wives, and not
to meddle with the servants against them, excerte the wife would deal
unreasonably and wylfully with their poor servants. Contrary wise, the wife
must not take upon her the rule or punishment of the men servants. For hereof
comes great unite: Like as wha^ the husband medleth to much with the women
servants, and the wife with the menseruau^tes, there ryseth great suspicion
and discencion among married folks.

The xvi. Chapter.
Of conuentent carefulnes, and just keeping of the house like Christen folk.

IF thy wife be virtuous and trusty, let her be also careful in keeping and
prouydynge for thy house. For such study and ordinate care gendreth great love
and increases thy substance For such study and care is not forbidden. For the
godly Patriarch Jacob thought it necessary for him and his wife to be studious
for their hou should. Paul affyrmynge it, If a man provide not for his own
household, he denies the faith Gene. xxx.
and is worse than an Infidel. Wherefore all that Christ speaks against
carefulnes, he speaks it agenst all inordinate mistrustyng and to much
covetous care and sorrow, that desperately and insa Math. vii.
ciably torme^teth and vexes the mind. Ordinate care expels idle
slouthfulnes and monysheth us of our duty and just vocacion. Which care only
looks unto God, the author and gyuer of all, to him she prays to prosper and
bliss al yt she goes about. Which prayer of faith has her form and Pro. xx.
circumstances te^dyng to Gods glory. Two thin ges I ask of the, o Lord.
remove fro me vanite and lies, give me n^ther pouerte, nor rytches, only
grant me a necessary living, lest I being to full, deny the saying, Who is the
Lord. And lest I constrained through pouerte fall to theft and forswear the
name of my God.

This ordinate care and study must be taken, that ye may have to socoure the
nedye and to Ordinate care
set forth your children, and that your selves want not, and so by your idle
ignauy, ye be onerouse and a burden to other good men. Labor to have
wherwithe to live in age, if God call you to it. Who so has stolen, says
Paul, let him now stele no more, but labor with his Ephe. i ii.
hands some good occupacion yt they may have to healpe the nedy. And as for
them that inordinately care and study to be rytch, and to have more than is
necessary, they fall into the temptacions and snares of the dyuell, and into
many lusts (as says Paul) which drown men into perdicion and damnacion,
suddenly fall these rytch welthy bullockes from their goods and gods, Luke.
xii.
even their evil gotten, worsekepte, and worst of all bestowed mammons.

What so ever is to be done without ye house that belongs to the man, and the
woman to study for things wythein to be done, and to se saved Theoutwar de
business pertaynethe to the man, y^ enward to y^ woman.
or spent conveniently what so ever he brings in. As the bird flies to and
fro to bring to ye nest, so becomes it the man to apply his out ward
busynes. And as the da^me keeps the nest ^atcheth the eggs, and bring forth
the fruit, so let them both learn to do of the unreasonable fowls or beasts
created of God naturally to observe their sundry properties.

The man in his gaynyng and occupieng must be just and faithful, fervent,
diligent and earnest, making all thing substancially surely, and without any
deceyt. For faythfulnes ever abides when unfaithfulness and craftines destroy
themselves: as ye se in the faythefull dealing of Jacob and in the couetouse
disceate of Laban. The word Gene. xxxi.
and promise of an occupyer must be as ferme and fast as the rock of stone,
faith and truth conserueth many men's occupyeng wha^ unjust de lyng bring him
out of credyt.

Let not a man meddle with dishonest occupacions not necessary for a common
weal, but as Paul commands, with such as are good and profitable for the
city or country without deceyte, and every man to meddle with, and in his ^ne
calling, nether sekyng other men's lucre, nor enuieng other men's profyt, but
walk ordinately and quietly labouryng with their own hands, avoiding
vsurye, but doing to other as thou would be done unto thine own self. And
if thou (for all thy true and just dealing) yet prosperoussest not subject to
many euel cha^ ces, whereof the world is full, yet be thou content with Gods
will, for the pouerte of the ryghtous, says Solomon, is better then the
infinite treasures of the ungodly. And a piece of bread or a mess of potage
with quietness, is better then a fat ox with brawlyng. Many men have great
goods with much unquietness and little hon^e, for he has set his soul to
pledge, forsaken God and taken the dyuell to help him to lie and to deceive
that he might be rytch to leave his good to an unknown hayer. David says,
follow not him that does evil because thou see Psalm. xxxvi.
him prosper in his wyckednes: for he shall sone be cut down like grass, and
like the flower faad away. But put thou thy trust in the lord and do right,
dwell in ye Lord and get thy living with truth and just dealing. And freat
not nor be agreued with him that prospers in his own way, and leads a
wicked life. etc. Unto this holy Psalm let every Christen man attend. The
wives worckynge place is wythein her The wives must work wythein the house.
house, there to ouerse and to set all thing in good order, and to beware
that nothing be lo^t, seldom to go forth, but when urgent causes call her
forth. And therefore Phidias that ingenous Phidias.
worckemanne entendynge to describe an honest faythefull housewyfe, did set
her image under the shel of a snayle, signifieng that she should evermore keep
her own house. Necessaryly it is Comonsente^ (...) far the ke ^ng or thy
^ouses.
that she know these common sentences and learn them by heart. Thou must not
regard what thing thou would feign have, but what thou can not lack.
Stretche out thine arm no far there than thy sleaue will reatche. What so ever
thou ne^est not, is to dear of a farthyng. Who so spares not the penny, shall
never come by the pownde. Sparynge is a rytche purse. A thing is sooner spared
then gotten. Spare as though thou never should dye, and yet as mortal,
spend measurably. To spare, as thou may have to spend in honest for Gods
sake, and in necessite, is well done. Thy sparing is but vain, when thou art
come to the bottom. Begin every thing in oue season. What so ever thou
may do to night, dyffer it not till to morrow. Mathe these se^tences well
That which thou cannest do conveniently thy self, commit it not to
another. If thou will prospere, than look to every thing thine own self.
Let it not be lost, that may do any good in time to come. Spend no more
than thou wottest how to get it: when thine expenses and receytes be alyke, a
little loss may overthrow the. Spare for thy age. Take pains in thine yougth.
Bye such things as thou nedest not to repent the thereof. Uyle pedlary
bryngethe beggary. Array thy self honestly. Hold thy children in awe, and
they shall have the in reverence.

Much spending and many gifts, make bare cellars and empty chystes.
Euellfellowshyp and vain pastyme maryeth pouerte and begets a son called
derision, lyuethe gorgiously and costely in excess, and leauethe the a fare
well, whose name is this. In thyn age go a beggyng: Such and many mo godly and
wise sentences are found in Salomons Proverbs, and in the Precher, and in
Jesus Syracke, which an honest housewyfe must take heed unto.

The. xvii. Chapter.
How married persons shall behave the^ selves not only in works of mercy,
but also in the cross and aduersite, and with their servants.

IF Christen married folks through their just labors and Gods blyssyng
obtain riches above necessite. then let them remember Paul's exhortacion,
saying: Command the i. Timo. (...)
rytch men of this world that they be not high minded nor trust in transitory
rytches, but in the living God, which gives us all things abundantly to
enjoy them. Charge them to do good and to be rytche in good worckes, to give
with good will, to distribute, layeng up tresure for them selves against the
time to come that they may lay hand of eternal life. For when Math xxv.
the Lord shall come to judge the quick and dead, he shall say to the
merciful. Come hither, ye blessed of my Father and take the kyngedome prepared
for you from the beginning of the world. For when I was hongrye ye fed me,
I was thyrsty and ye gave me drink etc.

Give alms therefore of thyn nowne substa^^e and turn not thy face away from
the poor Show mercy after thy power. If thou haste much, give plenteously.
If thou haste little give thereof after thy power. For a good treasure shall thou
lay up in store for thy self against y^ day of trouble, yea that small
substance whereof a poor man gives almose pleseth the Lord much better then
when welthye men give their little of their great rytches. Example in s. Luke:
Remember Luke. xxi.
the common Proverb. That thou sparest from gyuyng for Gods sake, shall the
dyuell carry another way. So says Solomon. Some man gives out his goods and
is the rytcher, but the nyggarde having enough will depart from no thing: And
yet is he ever in pouerte. He that is lyberall in gyuynge shall ever have
plenty. God increases love and favors ma ryed folk because they show
mercy and charity to the nedy.

And if God makes the rich man poor, he does well: For he sees that if he
should have riches Affliccio^ tech to know god
he would be to proud and forget God and himself to, with pouerte therefore and
adfliccio^ will he nourtour his children so to teach them his ways, lest in
abundaunce and wealth they run after their own ways and lusts. For
Tribulation is fire and salt.
tribulacion and aduersite are the fire and salt that purge and preserve us
from stynkynge and not destroy us, but they teach us to put our trust in God
and not in our selves nor in no creatures, they draw us from transitory
things to fasten us sure to God, and because we should not be condemned with
the world, he plucketh i. Cor. xi.
us with his Cross from the world. Into the which troublouse state of the
cross, when married cowples be cast of GOD, then have they the most present
co^solacions out of s^riptures to conforte them, and to cause them to rejoice
in their affliccion, as are the holy Psalms of David, we have also the godly
ensamples of the dear beloved faythefull servants of God as were Job,
Abraham, Jacob. etc. Item the words Math. xvi Joan. xvi.
of Christ. Who so will serve me, let him daily take his cross upon him and
follow me. And in Ihon, and Paul is full of conforte in his epistles specially.
Hebreus x. When any of the H^. xi. xii. xiii
married persons be tempted or troubled with syckenes or any other fortune,
then should the to there, conforte him or her with these confortable ensamples,
Psalms and sentences of gods Syckne^
spirit of all consolacion, one suffryng with the the other, for so shall the
affliccion and Cross be the easylyer borne, and love mutual the more
increased. True love shows her self most clearly in trouble and syckenes.
And if the one grudge at the tothers syckenes, he does against Gods will. And
if he reioycethe at her, or she at his affliccion, it is a token of little love
except his rejoice be in the Lord, so to conform him to the similitude of
his son Christ, that he might be like him in glory.

Paul commands you to do to your seruau^ tes, that yt is just and equal,
louyngly and friendly How seruau^ tes must be in treated. Job. xxxi.
using them, remembrynge that ye your selves have a master in heaven, learn
of Job also the same, for your servants are of Gods creacion as well as ye,
derely beloved and his chosen children also, yea and your brothren and systers
in Christ. Let them therefore for their labors have their convenient food and
wages, be not bitter, hard, nor iniuriouse unto them in no wise.

A great offense it is before God to keep the labourynge servants wages from
him. James Iac. v.
says unto such rytch me^. Behold the hyer of y^ laborers that have reaped
down your feldes which hyer ye have kept back by fraud, cries and the
complaynt of the laborers is entered in to the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

Ye have had good days upon earth, and lived at your pleasure and delyghted
your hearts, but it is only against the day of your slaughter. So James says
that the defraudynge of men's wages will be at last a slaughter. Many men use
their servants as slaves and beasts, and therefore is their ertorted service
unprofitable and unfaithful to such cruel masters, more faithful is the
service done of love, than for fear and compulsion.

Again the servants must lay a part all euel conditions,
prydevnfaythfulnes, brawlyng The dewty^ of seruau^te^
and murmuring, pyckyng and tales telling, remembryng Paul's exhortacion,
saying, ye ser uauntes be obedient to your masters with fear and trembling in
singlenes of your heart, as unto Christ, not with eye service as me^ plesers,
but even as the servant of Christ, that ye may do the will of GOD from your
hearts wyth^ good will. Thyncke that ye serve the Lord and not men.

The. xviii. Chapter.
How children should be well and godly brought up.

Great joy and quietness it bryngethe to the Women should ^ourse their own
children
pare^tes to se their children godly and virtue ously brought up. And again,
besides ye sorrow yt evil brought up children bring to their parents, yet
shall they render a straight rekenyng to God for their evil bringing up of
them. The women should noryshe their own children with their own breasts or
else if they may not for weakness, yet ought they to seek honest and godly
nourses of sober living that with their milk they might drinkin also vertewe.
And the pare^tes especially the mother must endeavor to speak first to the
child perfectly plain and ^ncte words, for as they be first informed to
speak so they will contynew. Caius and Tyberius the sons of Caius and Ci
berius.
Cornelia Grachy were ornate and eloquent in their speech for their mother was
eloquent of tongue.

And even from their infancy forth let the parents teach their ^hyldren no
fables nor lies nor no vain nor light communicacio^ but that only which is
godly, honest, grave and fruitful let it be planted in their new hertes.

They must teach them first certain godly sentences, though they yet can not
understand them, yet let them commend them to memory and practyse them in
speech till they may here after the better perceive them, as are these
following.

As certaynely as thou seyst the heavens and Sentence^ to be taugh^ children in
their fyrst^ young age.
the earth: so certainly must thou know, that there is one i^uysyble god, one
alone for all suffycient, having his being of himself, and all creatures there
being of him.

Heaven and earth and all that was made, is of gods own creacyon. God is
the most high goodness. Without God theris nothing good. God needs no
creature to be ioynedde with him in his deeds and cownselles to forgive, dampne
save or healpe. It is he alone that vpholdeth all the wor^ preserves it, and
gives every thing the life and being, which it has. He is loving graciouse
and mercyful to them that so believe and trust upon him.

God is true, and just, and holy in all his works, God loves virtue, and
hates sin (...) vice. It is good that God commands, and evil that he
forbyddeth God punysheth sin and evil. A man must love God above all
things. He may not murmur against god, but be willing and thankful in all
aduersite to bear it. He must call only upon God, and complain to him only
in all his need. And here must the children be taught thus to pray. Our
father The Lorde^ prayer The articles of the fayth^ The ten com ma^deme^tes The
proverbs of Salo mon.
which art in heaven. etc. And to express the articles of our faith
distinctly and perfectely. And in process of time learn the^ truly to
understand them, and the ten Commandments also by heart. Then teach them
the Proverbs of Solomon and the book of the preachet, and such comonsentences
as are these: Virtue excels all things. To lie is the most shamefullvice
of all. Thou shalt hurt no man, but profyt every man. Speak evil of no man.
Backebyte nor curse no man. All men are brethren. And such like godly
sentences, let them be planted into young hearts. Above all things shall the
pare^tes use godly and honest co^uersacio^ in y^ presence of their children,
teach them more virtue and goodness, than their words. For words although
they may do much, yet shall good ensamples of living do more to the yougth.
Let not your children be conuersaunt wytheuell persons and light company, let
them not hear vicious nor wanton communicacion, nor se no sinful sygh tes.
The parents must use them selves before Cato.
them as before GOD and all honest people. Cato the wise Senator of Rome
expelled Ti tus Flaminius out of the counsel, only because that in the syghte
of his young daughter he embrased his wife.

Christen folk should remember the fearful Mat. xviii.
sentence of Christ, saying: Who so ever gives occasion of evil to any of
these young children that believe in me, it were better forhym to be drowned
with a mylstone tied about his neck* Thou must diligently beware, lest any in
thine house give any evil ensample and speak that at naught is in their
presence. And take heed leest thou receive any person into thine house, that
may either by word or deed corrupt thy children or servants. Remember that
evil speech may soon corrupt and destroy that which thou have been long in
plantyng and building. Wanton and evil communicacion (says Paul) conrupteth
good manners. And begin by tymers Begin b^tymes.
to plant virtue in thy chyldrennes breasts: for late sowynge bryngethe a late
or never an apt harvest. Young branches will be bowed as thou lystest^, but
old trees will sooner break than ^ow. And what soever good liquour is put
first into a new ^arthen pot, it will keep the sent thereof ever after, if it
therein stand any ceason.

And as for the years to set the child to the scole, first considre the apt,
sharpenes of wit thereof, for some are apt at five years, and some not
before six or seven years. And what they shall be first taught, it is told
before.

And here must ye chose out discrete, learned and godly masters for your
children, which shall (...) The scole master.
cordyng to their capacities ^ently and wisely enstructe them, as is contained
in their primers in Englysh and dialoges as are there made for them, which
when they can read both prynted and written letters, and can well commyt that
y^ they have l^rned to memory, saye^g it distinct ly and perfectly by heart,
t^e^ let the^ learn to write to cas^ a compte, to ^yfre, add, subtray, etc.
And let them exercise their pen and their tongues Godly council for the
right bryn, gynge up of yougth.
in readyng diverse prynted books pertaining to the holy scriptures, and come
to and hear the true prech^rs of Gods word, and in any wise let them not
hear the papistike preachers, and when they come home from any good sermon
ask the^ what they have borne away, and exhort them to mark diligently
another time and to rehearse it when they come home. Let them say the gra^es
at the tables. Let the^ prepare the table and serve you thereat clenly and
manerly. Let the^ spend all the time in virtuous uses and never be idle, for
the time of yougth is preciouse and Math. x.
passes away swyftly. Be ye circumspecte, o pa rentes in fedyng and
apparellyng your children let the^ not be paumpered up to dilicately with
meats and wines, nor yet arrayed to sumptuously and proudly. Daniel was as well
lyking and as pure of complexion with a mess of potage every day (...) a
draft of water as were they y^ were fedeuery Gorgio^ apparel and deliciou^
fare ought to be exchewed in children.
day of the kings table. Excess of meats and drynckes in yougth and
gorgious apparel is y^ door unto glotony, dronckennes and lecherye, and the
way to pride and al manner of vice never to be pluckte from the^ in age. For the
which enormities and vices, their parents and up bryngers shall give straight
rekenyng unto God, let not thy yougth ru^ne out of thy doors nether by day nor
night without thy license: and take a rekening of their behauyoure in thine
absence. Suffer the^ not to come into any light wanto^ company.

Se that ye correct the^ dewly and discretely for Correction.
their faults, so that they stand in great fear and awe of the, and if words
will not reclayme the^ than take the rod or weapon of correccio^ discrete ly
used. For the rod of correccion ministers wisdom, but the child suffered to
do what he lists, is y^ confusion of his mother. And who so spares the rod
hates the child, but he y^ loves pro, xxix. and xiii. xxii. and xxiii.
him, nourtereth him in time: the childs heart is full of folyshnes, but the rod
of correccio^ drives ^t forth. Better it is that children weep the^ old men.
Se that they pycke not, steal not, nor use no unlawful games, be not to rough
nor to hastye weth them, but so order your selves to them that they may both
love and fear you.

The. xix. Chapter.
Children where unto they be apt, let them learn that science or handye
craft.

COnsyther well whereunto thy child is naturally enclyned. And unto that
occupacion let him be put to: many me^ now a days al be it they se their
children apt unto let ters and good learning having substance enough to find
the^ thereat, yet will they not suffer them to continewe thereat, because the^
selves ca^ not fa uour it, or else they se no advantage worldly f^ low, but
great trouble and ^secucio^, which worldly me^ in thus doing declare the^
selves ungodly destroyers both of them selves their children and of all commonweals and congregacions. For what public weal, town, cite or parysh can be
well governed, without y^ Prince, ruler, priest, or by Why meune now set not
their children to scole.
shop be learned in gods law, Prophets and in his gospel? what is the cause of
all this dissensio^ cruel persecucion, tyranny, evil laws making unjust
actcs, false religion, wicked ordinances and ungodly decrees and institucions,
but only the blind ignoran^ce of unlearned rulers? which mea sure all thing
after their own fond fleshly affectes and reason besides all scriptures: and
would have their own carnal wylles to stand in the stead, yea rather to be
above God and his laws. In times paste, when men saw so many spiritual
promocions unto rytch bysshoprykes, benefices, deanrykes, Abbayes; Pryories,
chauncelershyps. etc, then they did set fast their children to scole, to make
them popysh prestes, ydelly to live by other men's sweates, but now they se
how laborouse and perellouse an office it is to preach and to teach Gods
word purely, freely and faithfully. And how unthankful an office it is to
rule cominalties after justice and equite, and what an heuye intolerable
labor it is to minister justice and judgment after Gods word, lookyng for
no advantage, but to be a common servant for the common wealth sustayning such
intolerable burdens, labors and perels, as the office dewly ministered
askethe, no man is glad to have his child learned unto such unprofitable and
laborouse ends. It was once an holy sacrifyce to God for a man to dedicate
his daughter or son unto Fra^ces, Clare, Benet, Thomas, Austen, Mary. etc.
ydelly to live in all fylthines, wha^ riches, dignites and worldely vain
worship and private profyt followed or rather when they gredely aspired and
followed it. But now when the common labor, godlynes, and the public profit
of all common weals and congregacions depend upon it, no man regards nether
good learning nor virtue, so far of are they now to set their children to
godly sco les. When yougth was nothing apt to good letters, and when there
was no good learning nor no good teachers, then well was he y^ might set his
child to scole. But now when yougth was never so apteto good learning as it is
this day, learning, and good letters never so plenteously floryshyng,
restored and redact into such acompendious clear brifnesse, never so good,
diligent and learned masters, never so plenty of so good and plain books
prynted, never so good cheap, the holy Ghost as it were into men's mouths
mercifully offering his gifts, and yet will there no man open his mouth, his
eyes to se so clear light, nor his ears to hear so pure, manifest and
wholesome doctrine, even the word of their own salvation. For our
vnthanckefulnes, therefore all these infinite heavenly benefits shall be taken
from us, and given to some other nacio^, as to the Turks and Jews, which
shall thanckefullyer then we receive them. And we shall have the popysh prestes
with all papistrye haltered and captiued under hardenecked Pharao in myer and
claye never to be delivered out of that yerney servitude of his intollera ble
bondage.

But now therefore O ye Christen parents seeing that your yougth is now by the
favor An exhortaci on to the chri ^en pare^te^.
of God endewed with so good wits and enclyned unto good letters, let not the
graces and gifts of God be offered you in vain, but exercise them in good
autors both Greek and Latin, and in noble hi^ortes, in Logyke, Rethoryke, and
in the tongues, let them read the holy Bible, and commend it to memory, and so
shall they in time to come be profitable unto the common wealth, whereunto they
be borne.

And such as are apt to handy occupacions, let them b^ set to the^ which be
most profitable and necessary for a common weal, as for payntyng and keruynge
with such like, they are more ^ucyouse than necessary, And consider that
al^ust and true occupacions justly erercysed and used, Gods blessyng makes
them to prosper, and the truedoers and laborers in their calling his blyssyng
make them rytch Every man to put his child to that master which is most ex
cellent and connyng in that craft, it is no need to monyshe, nor to exhort
your children to be true, of few words, faithful in deeds and promises,
diligent and seruiseable to every man obedient to their masters, clenly,
quycke, handsome and wyllyng to do their commaundemen tes.

Now when thou have perfectely learned thy Trauay ling among stran gers.
craft, it shall be profitable for the to travel into straung countries, to se
the workyng and hand lynge thereof among other nations, whereby either thyselfe
may learn both a perfayter practyse and also more experience, or else they of
the may learn the same into thy nowne profit. And in so trauaylynge hold
thy self modeste, still and sobre, medlynge not beyond thyn own facultye. Be
ientle, frendely, faithful and courteous to them, conformynge thy self unto
their honest fashions and godly manners, Beware of evil company and
dronkennes, beware of light and wanton women, learn no vice nor evil manners
of them, but only virtue and such occupacio^s as are profitable, bring home
co^nyng and virtue and no syn nor evil manners, of which thou shalt se to
much, and to little of that good is. Cut clothes and iagged and al to hagged
hosen disfigure and deforme honest persons, and declare light me^ and wantonness
in thy heart.

But before all these experiences seakynge, se that thou prouidest thy children
honest mates (if they desire it) and let the^ rather together live at home, and
not the one to depart any long time from the the other for trauaylynge in
strange countries, bring some young evil disposed per sons into great
inconveniences and noughty living, as it was wont to be said of the Rome
runners never to be good after.

The. xx, Chapter
LEt not your yo^g daughters be to proudly young wem^ apparel.
and costly appareld, but modestly and honestly for this gorgyouse apparel is
not else but a minstrelsy, pypyng up a dau^ce unto al lechery i. Pet iii.
Remember that Peter saithr That the apparel of women may not be vtwarde
inbroydred, out laid hear which is an whorishe fashyon, nor in hangyng on of
gold, or putting on of costelye gorgious flaryng clothes, etc. The vtward
light apparel declares a corrupt proud and sinful inward heart. Let
shamefastnes chastity, modesty, mekenes few words sadness and sobryete be the
young woman's aparell to set forth her bewtye. For after this manner, in the
old time says Peter were holy young women decked of their matro^s, and were
obedient to their housbandes, As was Sara unto Abraham, calling him Lord,
whose daughters ye are as long as ye do well: Let the examples of Rebecca and
Rachell be at your eyes, which godly and fayer women desyryng and seeking
the love of their husbondes were glad to please them, Learn also i. Tim. ii.
of Paul how to tyer your selves: Bewar^ ye wound not your poverty and proud
heart and to precious and sumptuouse apparel, if ye will go forth in your
proud array, so neglecte you the doctrine of god and procure your selves da^p
nation.

But if ye say, ye deck your selves to be the more clenely, and so to please
your husbands, I tell you again, that there is a mean and measure in every
thing, and according to every state and degree theris a comlye apparel,
which comelynes and measure no honest husbond nor honest wife wylbe glad to
tra^sgresse and exceade. Such eccesse and pride may procure the dyshonestye
and harm to thy husbonde.

As for ientle women and such, as are of noble Whether ge^ tle, wemenne ^ay go
so ^y ^ly appa^eled.
birth, whether they may excede in light and wa^ ton apparel, or in apparel
to costly. I will first as^ them whether they be Christen and faithful women or
unfaithful? If they be unbelievers then let them walk as they list. And the
more gorgyouse tenderlynges they be, the better shall they please their head
the dyuyll. And seeing th y have wanto^ proud sprytes, they must needs have
like garments to declare what they b^ within in heart and mind, with these
women I will not wrestle. But if they be Christen faithful women, they may
well know that the holy Apostles Peter and Paul have wryte^ their
erhortacio^s for sober apparel, unto them which have such rich Jewels,
stones, gold and silver, and not to poor women, that have them not. Seeing then
that the word of God is pryncypally spoken to you that be ientle women of noble
parentel which have these riches and Jewels to lay the^ away with all your
po^pe and pride, and wylbe taken for Christen folks, then follow you the
exhortations of the mynysters of Jesus Christ. What (...) y^ true nobil^ te.


Moreover ye should remember what is the very nobilite, and what makes gentle
men and weme^, that it is not apparel, but m^kenes, gen tle behauyour,
discrete conuersacyon, prudence, wisdom, learning and virtue. And they that in
Christ Jesus are baptized, are baptized into one body of Christ, where we are
all one and no difference betwixt noble nor blood, poor nor rich Galat.
iii. And therefore in this respect there is no boast to be made of blood, but
remember y^ ^oble queen Hester, which said: Thou know my state o Lord, and
that I hate the sign of preemynence and worship which I bear upon my head,
what time I must go forth to be seen and that I abhor it as an unclean
clothe, and that I wear it not when I am quiet alone by Why ritche^ be given
to men of no bilite.
my self. GOD therefore has given you riches to dystrybute them to the poor,
and not to mayn tayne your pride therwyth. So were Iewelles bestowed even
among the Heathen, for at Rome was a law called Lex Oppia, whereby all pomp
and excess of raiment was forbodden all honest women, and they were
commanded that none (how mighty or rytche soever they were) should not wear
above an ounce of gold upon their bodies.

Cypriane says that women, albe it they ^yprian.
be rich, yet therefore ought they not to use the more pomp and pride, but to
know those only to be rich, which are ernest in godly works, and helpyng
the poor. A shameful and blasphemous thing it is, to wear silver, gold,
veluets Mark this well o ye ge^ ^il women
and sylkes, and to suffer the poor to want clothes and food. ye she that
proudlye decketh her self, destroys her own soul, and geuethe other folks
occasyon of destruccyon. For she stereth up evil affeccyons and lusts in them
that behold her, ye such one is poison and swearde to the^ that se her.
Nether may such gorgyouse fla ring proud women be judged godly nor honest.
i* Cor. xi.
And therefore said Paul, That every woman coming into the church to pray or
to hear the word preached must be honestly coue red, and especially her
head, for if she come in bare headed or showing any part of her hear Mark
Mala. ii.
(as some say it out, and many have borrowed hear) she dishonest her head
which is her housband: let them therefore be decked and koueredde with comely
veales for the angels which are the^ ministers and messa^gers of God And
what madness were it to come into the church under a pretense of humblenes to
pray to God for gra ce, where by such proud fashyons thou prouokest his heavy
wrath upon the? It were better for such people to be thrust into a sack, with
a myl stone hanged about their necks (as Christ sai eth) drowned, then thus
to offend any one of the least in the congregacyon.

What shame God threateneth unto such proud persons, ye may read Esa.
iii. sayynge: That for their chains of gold the shall have halters of hemp
and fetters and colers of yerne for their musk and pomaunders, they shall have
stynke for their brodred hear every man shall se them balde, and for their
stomachers of gold they shall wear sack, which all with a miserable
destruction of Israhell and Judah by theAssiryans and Babylonites came iustlye
to pass in the days of these kings Ioa chas Ioakim and Zedechias, Wherefore
let xxii. cha. iiii. Lib. Reg. (...). ^o forth.
every honest woman according to her state and abilite be comely clenly and
honestely apparelled avoiding all sluttishnes and vnclennelyenes, and so teache
their children and refrain from all excess and super fluite, that God may be
praised and noman offended at your apparel, ra there garnished with virtue and
vtward honestye the^ with pride which procures you euuye, and it will in
conclusion have a shameful fall.

The. xxi. Chapter.
How daughters and maidens must be kept.

NOw to return to young daughters how (...).
they should be enstru^t in prayer and know lege of their christian religion
according as it is set forth in dialoges and institutions of ye chri stians,
yet shall they not be to busy in teaching and reasoning openly, but there to
use silence and to learn at home, openly to hear, and at home let them
reasone and teach each other. Neither would I nothaue them ever shut up, as
it were in cage, never to speak nor to come forth, but Good counsel for men's
daughters and maids.
sometimes to se the good fasshions and honest behavior of other for to keep
the^ ever in mew is enough either to make the^ starcke fools, or ^lles to make
the^ naughtes, when they shall once come abroad into company. As for this thing,
every discrete parente shall know by the aforesaid rules how to order them,
to avoid all wa^ tonnes and nycenesse in words, gestures and deeds, to eschew
all dishonest games and pass times, to avoid all dishonest loves and occasions
of the same, as dishonest daunsynge, wanton communicacion, company with
rybaldes and fylthy speakers, teach them to auerte their sight and senses from
all such inconveniences, let them avoid ydlenes, be occupied either doing some
profitable thing for your family, or e^es Books of (...) bles of fon^ and light
lou^ women ought not t^ read.
reading some godly book, let them not read books of fables, of fond and
light love, but call upon God to have pure hearts and chaste, that they might
cleue only to their spouse Christ un to him married by faith, which is the most
pu rest wedlock of us all, pure virgins, being both married and unmarried. Evil
words, says Paul, corrupt good manners, uncleanness and covetousness, let them
not once be named among Ephe. v.
you, nor no foolysh rybaldry talkyng, nor light testyng, which are not comely,
but be occupied in prayers and thankesgyuynge. Books of Robyn hood, Beues of
Hampton, Tro^us, and such like fables do but kyndle in liars like lies and
wanton love, which ought not in yougth with their first spettle to be droncke^
in, lest they ever remain in them. If ye delyght to sing songs ye have the
Psalms and many godly songs and books in Englysh right fruitful and sweet.
Take the new Testament in your hands, and study it diligently, and learn your
profession in baptyme to mortify your flesh, and to be reuyued in the spirit,
learn the use of the Lords supper, to re member his death, and to give him
perpetual thanks for thy redempcio^. Mothers must also teach their daughters
to work, to love their husbands and children. And let them lay their
hands to spynne, sewe, weaue. etc, For Learn them to work.
the noblest women, both among the Heathen Romans and Greeks and Hebrews had
great commendacyons for their houswyfly working with their hands, as ye may
read of Solomon, saying: He that fyndeth an honest faithful Pr^. xixi.
woman, she is more worth then precious perles. The heart of her husband may
safelye trust to her. All the days of her life will she seek his profit. She
occupies woll and flax, and labors gladly with her hands, She is like a
merchants ship. et ce. It is expedient that a man handfast not his daughter
before he has good experience of her housewyfrye, and go uerning of an house.
For it becomes her better to have a payer of roughe and hard hands, then
tobe fayer and soft glisteryng with rings Fay^ handed and tender fyngered
women are not to be praised.
or kouered co^tynually with smothe gloves. And let the parents be ware that
they bring them not up to tenderly wanto^ly and delicately or to nycely. And at
dew time let the^ be provided for so that they may govern their own houses
with their own husbands.

Thus much have I spoken concerning holy wedlock according to the Scriptures
of god Desyryng all men, that shall read this little treatise hereby to take
an occasyon to hate and deteste all uncleanness, and godly to embrace holy
wedlock, which is honorable among all persons, and so to lead their life
here in all godlynes and honest, that after their departure out of this
world, they may reygne for evermore in perpetual glory with the Bryde. grome
Jesus Christ, to whom be all honor and praise worlds without end.

AMEM.
Give the glory to God alone.
Here after follows a table where by thou shalt find, in what leaf every
Chapter begins, what is contained in ye same chapter, and also al other
princi pall things contained in this book.
The first Chapter.
WHo instituted wedlock, where and when, for what end, etc. in the first
leaf. The creacion of woman or of man. ii. Adam and Eve were married the leaf
iii. The occasions of love and consent into marriage. The leaf iii. The knot and
covenant in marriage iii.
The second Chapter.
Wedlock what it is. iiii.
The third Chapter.
Contaynyng the declaracion of wedlok. v. No man may separate that God
coupleth. v.
The fourth Chapter.
The just couplyng together of man and wife The leaf vii. Religion and faith
must be consydred. vii
The fyfte Chapter.
Children must have the consent of their paren tes or else the marriage is not
right x. Children must honor their parents xi. Children may not vow nor
promise without their parents consent. xii. Menstealers and women stealers.
xii. Themistocles desired a wise wife rather then a rytche. xiii.
The six Chapter.
The parents may not compel their children to mary against their will nor
before their just time. xiiii.
The seventh Chapter.
Of the just consent of both the parties into wed lock, and how marriage ought
to be fre and not compelled thereto. xv. The consent what it is. xv. The will of
marriage comes of God. xvi. The inordinate affeccio^ of young folks. xvii. The
inordinate affeccion of parents xviii.
The. viii. Chapter.
Wherefore wedlock should be co^tracted. xviii. To bring forth children and to
avoid whoredom. xviii. The work of wedlock is no sin. xx. Deflouryng of
virgyns. xx. Measure and shamefastnes. xxi. To avoid solenes of living, to
help and conforte one another. xxii.
The. ix. Chapter.
The end, fruit and comendacio^ in wedlok. xxii. How blyssed and honorable it
is. xxii. The operacion and end of wedlok. xxii. Wedlok is holy and honorable.
xxii.
The. x. Chapter.
How shameful and abominable whoredom is. xxiiii. Whoredom defylethe the
members of Christ which are thine own body. xxliii. Whordome robs God of
his own. xxv. Whordome defyleth the temple of God, xxv. Whordome shuts men
out of heaven. xxv. Whordome spoyleth a man of his honest, body and goods.
xxvi. Whoremongers have no rest. xxvi. Stews vpholders and mayntayners shall
be punished grievously of God. xxvii. Godly to mary makes no beggars. xxix.
Whordome, wanton counsel. xxix.
The. xi. Chapter.
Contains, how shameful and wicked a thing is aduoutry, and how it has of
old time ben pu nyshed hitherto. xxx. How god plaged aduoutry before ye law
written. The punishment of aduoutrye in the law of God. xxxi. How aduouiry
was punyshed among the Hethen. xxxi. How the Lepreanes, Locrenses and Germans
punyshed it. xxxi. How the Romans punyshed aduoutry. xxxii. The laws
imperial punysh it. xxxii. Why aduoutry was so sore punyshed. xxxii. Aduoutry
compared with theft. xxxiii. Aduoutry alienate heretages. xxxiiii. The defense
that aduoutrers use. xxxiiii. Aduoutry punyshed with death. xxxv. The aduoutry
of David was not punyshed with death. xxxv. The aduoutresse brought before Christ
why she was not stoned to death. Repentance. xxxvi.
The. xii. Chapter.
How one should chose him an apt, honest and virtuous mate. xxxvi. There lies
great wayght in the chosyng of thy mate, what the chosyng is. xxxvii. The manner
of riches in man or of man. xxxviii. The rytches of the mind. xxxviii.
Language and the fear of God. xxxviii. Reputacion, raiment, company, the
bringing up of children. xxxix Froward wicked qualities of the mind. xxxix.
The dispysyng of Gods word. xl. Unshamefastnes, lyeng. xl. Pride, The rytches
of the body, beauty. xl. Temporal rytches, Nobilite. xli. Wynnyng and
occupyeng. xlii. The effect of the eleccion. xlii. Prayer. xliii. A noble
ensample of the eleccion and earande in the cause of matrimony. xliii. A form
of the earand in marriage. xlv. Truth in contractyng of marriage. xlv.
The. xiii. Chapter.
Of the weddyng. rlvi. They must go to church before they go to bed. The
leaf. xlvi. The commodities y^ come of this ordinance. xlvii. The abuse at
weddynges. xlviii. (...) ynne and excess committed at weddynges. xlviii.
The. xiiii. Chapter.
Of the first cohabitacion. l. Danger in the first cohabitacion. l. How they
must behave them selves at first. li. The duty of the married one to ye the other.
lii. The duty and obedience of wives. liii. The husband is the head of the
wife. liii. How he is the head. liiii. How y^ wives must obey and behave the^
selves. liiii The duty and love of husbands. lv. How men should love their
wives. lv. How holy a thing love matrimonial is. lv. A man must love his wife
as his own body. The leaf lvi.
The. xv. Chapter.
How the love, faythfulnes and duty of the married persons must be kept. lvi.
One may not cast another in the tethe. lvii. Obsequtousnes and felawshyp.
lvii. Humanite and ientylnes, keep no secret grudge. The lefe lviii. Children
are the pledges of love. lix. To be fruitful was once ye blessyng of god. lx.
Children are women's Jewels. lx. Step children and step mothers. lxi. Troth
and faith must be kept, clenlines. lxii. Good conuersacyon, avoiding gelousy
lxiii. Bosti^g or praysyng of wives or husbands. l^iii How ye should behave you
against your seruau^ tes. lxiiii.
The. xvi. Chapter.
Of convenient care and just keeping of the house. The lefe, lxiiii. Ordinate
care for our living. l^v. Phidias did set the good houswyfe under ashel. The
lefe. lxvi. Common sentences for the keeping of thy house. The lefe. lxvi
The. xvii. Chapter.
How the married must be mercyful and pacyent in aduersyte, and behave them to
their servants. Affliccion techeth us to know god. Tribulacio^ is fire and
salt. lxviii How servants must be entreted. lxviii. The duty of servants.
lxix.
The. xviii. Chapter.
H^w children should be well brought up. lxix. Catus and Tyberius, why they were
so eloquent. (...). Correction dew and discrete. lxxii.
The. xix. Chapter.
Children must be set to that science and craft where unto they be most apt.
lxxii. Why men now set not their children to scole as thyck, as they were wont.
lxxii Trauellyng among strangers. lxxiiii.
The. xx. Chapter.
Of young wemens apparel, lxxv. Whether ientle women may go so rychelye
arrayed. lxxv.
The. xxi. Chapter.
How daughters and maidens must be kept. The leaf. lxxvii.
The end of the Table.
Imprinted at London in Botulph lane at the sign of the white Bear, by John^
Mayler for John^ Gough. Anno Dn^i. 1543.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per Septennium.


