TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Mr MAYOR of the City of Couentry: and the rest,
Worshipful Aldermen, and Sheriffs of that INCORPORATION: S. B. wishes
increase of grace in this life, and assurance of glory in the life to come.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
WHen I first delivered that small Treatise by word of mouth, it was the
farthest part of my thought, ever to adventure the exposall of it to the view
of any, as considering mine own weakness and the worlds peevishness. But it
fared with this Sermon as with a Meteor, which being gently drawn up by the
kindly heat of the Sun, resides for a time in the Air, and has there
indeed a being, but shines not, till kindled by the Antiperistasis and
circumstant cold of the air: So this my Labor receiving some warmth and
being, by the gentle breath, and undeserved approbation of some, was not yet
seen of the world, until it took fire by some, who being (at the delivery of
it) circumstant, did in their causlesse and undeserved humors, give such cold
entertainment unto both it and me, that I was by the vulgar reported to be
taken by the great Fleet, or at the least shrewdly encountered. Whereupon I
thought it fit (for mine own defense, and satisfaction of others) that the
things before demisla per aurem, should be now, oculis subject a fidelibus,
that what was before in the air and in the ear, should now be in the eye,
that the Christian Reader may judge whether it deserved reproof or censure,
yea, or no: and whether herein I have labored to keep a good conscience
toward God and men, I appeal to the judgments of them, who being clear of
any thing against which I might seem to inueigh, are fittest and the only
competent Judges in this kind. Your Worships can (I trust) bear me witness,
that I never amongst you for these many years, have showed my self any way to
be of a factious and a turbulent spirit, but have always labored and prayed
for the peace of Jerusalem, and hope to prosper the better because I love her.
Now when these forenamed passages had caused me (...), willing, nilling, for my
own safeguard to adiudge this poor book to be pressed (although I might have
seemed wise in choice of some greater patronage,) I thought fittest to
appropriate some part of my labors to this place, where I was borne, brought
up, and have spent my days ever since I was called first to the Ministry, and
so much the rather in regard of your undeserved loves, which I can neither deny
nor conceal lest I should be injurious, and also your godly and religious
dispositions (wherein this City does equal (without flattery be it spoken,)
the most ciuilly governed, or most eminently religious places of this Kingdom.
Such as it is it pleades in my name, and I in the name of Truth, that it may
find acceptance with your Worships and as many as love the truth, and if in
any thing I shall be blamed, I will not be so presumptuous as with Pilate, to
say, What I have written, I have written; but as the Ecclesiastical Historian,
If I have done well, it is that which I desired, but if slenderly and meanly,
it is that which I could attain unto. If hereby any (taking pains to read
is) shall reap any benefit, it shall be a full satisfaction for my labor and
the comfort of my heart. Now the God of love and peace multiply his blessings
upon this City, that it may be happy in government, holy in profession, the
true member of the mystical body of Christ, partaking the promises of
godliness, even those of this life and of the life to come: Even so be it Lord
Jesus. Amen, Amen.

Your Worships in all Christian duties to be commanded, Samuel Buggs.

DAVID'S STRAIT.
2 SAMUEL 24.14. And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait.


THere is a twofold evil whereunto all the sons of Adam are subject as long
as they live in these houses of Clay, malum culpae, and malum poenae, an evil
of sin, and an evil of punishment; Semblable whereunto the whole duty of man,
is comprised in these two words, (...), a patient bearing of the evil of
affliction, and a conscionable forbearing the evil of sin.

In this active and passive life (as all other Saints and Servants of God) so
David a man after his own heart was much exercised, wherein he so carried
himself, that much praise and renown did accrue both to his worthy person, and
holy profession.

In the passive part of his life, Qui hominum patientior, aut qui tolerantior?
Meek as a Dove in persecution, mild as a Lamb in prosecution of his
hate-worthy enemies; especially toward Saul, when God had put him into his
hands, he was so far from touching his person, as that he was content to
sit down with much wrong, and be the sole patient of undeserved hatred. James
3.2.


But for the active part, as In many things we offend all; 2 Samuel 11.4. and
12.9.
so David himself was faulty in two maine matters: for being made King of his
hopes, he offended in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, whom he wronged in his
second self, defiling his wife; and after in his own self, betraying his
life, and slaying him with the sword of the children of Ammon. And now again
is mentioned (to make up his sins a number,) a second sin of numbering the
people, from which sin because by disswasion he would not be hindered, wrath
was gone out from God, and he could not be helped.

Gad the Seer was sent in the morning unto him to propound a hard (and yet
necessary) choice of three, and those most fearful evils: (...), Famine for
three years, War for three months, Pestilence for three days.

By these fearful punishments as by thunder, David being awaked from his
security, and from the wine of selfe-conceipt, 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
wherewith Satan had before intoxicated him, hearing this terrible embassage
opens his eyes, and seeing three such furies of Hell advancing toward him,
cries out in the anguish and bitterness of a perplexed soul, I am in a great
strait.

Which few words, though may seem at the first sight hard as the rock in the
wilderness, yet have I discovered flowing thereout as from Eden, four
several streams; wherein a Christian may wash like Naaman, and be cleansed;
or like the blind man, and return seeing; provided, that wash both hands, and
head, to give attention, and yield practice to the remarkable points herein
contained.

1 Quo peccato incidit: How David came into this strait.

2 Quo animo apprehenderit: How he conceived of this strait.

3 Qua patientia pertulerit: How he bare this strait.

4 Qua prudentia cuaserit: How he gate out of this strait.

The first is for admonition: the second for instruction: the third for
imitation: the fourth for consolation: Every of them being compounded by your
Christian wisdom, as by the Art of the cunning Apothecarie, may either serve
as an Antidote to prevent sin, or a Cordial to such as have surfetted on the
sour grape of Sin.

This text is then a fit place for a Preacher of Repentance, for here is much
water, wherein if I shall wade but shallow, it is not that I fear to wet my
feet, (for to do any good I am yours as you are Christ's,) but I have just
cause to fear that either some storms of your molested patience, or my
fainting heart through mine own weakness, may sink both me and my poor
meditations to the bottom.

How David fell into this strait: Some there have been who as they were
ignorant of the worlds original, Phys. 1.
so also of the rule and government of the same; and did therefore father many
particular passages upon fatal necessity. But Aristotle and the rest which
followed Etiam comite ratione, did soundly confute and worthily explode this
their error, as finding a necessity of the dependence of all effects upon some
certain causes, which yet they being but flesh and blood, discerned only to
be natural. But we who have the true prospectiue glass of the word of God,
may easily discern, though a far off, a supreme power guiding and ruling all
particular occurrences whatsoever, Mat. 10.29.
to the fall of a sparrow from the house, or a hair from our heads, which as
it has an interest in all things, so also in this strait of David: that as
Jacob speaks, Genesis 28.16.
The Lord is in this place and I knew it not; so the Lord had a hand in this
strait, though men be not aware of it.

For war, I know it is oftentimes the cursed issue of boundless ambition, as
it was in Alexander. Vnus Pellaeo iuueni non sufficit orbis
Aestuat infaelix angusto limite mundi. Iuu. Sat. 10.



Or as in the Romans that they might be rerum Domini; or as in the proud race
of Ottoman, now advancing his Moony standards in Polonia.

Or else it may be conceived by the seed of covetousness, as in Pyrrhus the
Epyrote, Philip of Macedon to grow rich by the spoil of others, as though God
and Nature had given them the impropriation of all. Or else this fire may be
begotten by collision of slint and steel, as in Simeon and Leuy to revenge the
rape of Dinah; Genesis 34.25. 1 Samuel 15.
or as in Saul who smote the Amalekites for a former injury proffered to the
wandering Israelites. But at this time there was no war in hand, or if there
had, the arm of Israel and his bow was so strong, that had Almighty God stood
but as an indifferent spectator, the glory could not in all probability have
departed from Israel.

For Famine, it may proceed from the supine negligence of a people who had
rather beg then labor, yea, almost sterue then labor, and so live idly,
quasi per se daret omnia tellus: Ovid.
or else when some shall labor, and others eat the labors of their hands.
Judge. 6.11.
When Gideons wheat without hiding shall feed Midian, or the Chaldaeans and
Sabaeans spoil Job of his Cattle and provision. Job 1.15.17.
Or by the horrible gluttony, drunkenness, and excess of the time by
prodigious and prodigal usage of the good creatures of God, Acts 11.28.
as it came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar, of whom Xiphiline reports
that he was wont indulgere co^uiuiis effusissime. But there was now no Famine,
In vita Claudii.
that for the Gibeonites being stayed by atonement, as appears, Cap. 2 1. The
land now gave her increase, and abounding (as it did) with milk and honey,
might be a sufficient Cornucopia to relieve all the families of Israel. So
that neither nature on the one side, nor men on the other were like to be the
cause of this strait: this by way of probability.

Pestilence, when I consider this last plague and punishment, although there
may be some natural reason of it given, yet this coming so suddenly without
any preuious disposition of air, or bodies; I cannot but conclude that it was
an immediate arrow shot from Gods quiver, Vere opus et digitus Dei. Amos 3.6.
Nor could this kind of evil have been in the City if the Lord himself had
not wrought it.

This makes the measure of David's sorrow before pressed down, now to run
over when he apprehends not only the Stars of heaven to fight against him,
Judge. 5.20.
as they did against Sisera, but even the Lord of heaven with his own hand and
stretched out arm: He whose valor whilome laughed at the stern visage of
Goliath, fear and trembling is now come upon him, and sorrow as upon a woman in
travail: with an enemy he might fight or from him flee, but now seeing it is
God with whom he cannot fight, from whom he cannot flee. Now he is in a great
strait.

But shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Genesis 18.25.
Indeed in Gods eternal predestination and election, no man ought to enquire;
as why Jacob is loved, and Esau hated, Romans 9.13.
because the Potter may do with the clay as he lists. But if the question be
made in this particular, it shall fully appear that God sought no quarrel
against David, nor sought occasion to devour or wast the sheep of his
pasture. Ios. 7.13.
Why was Israel discomfitted at Ai? was there not an execrable thing amongst
them? Why did both wind and water conspire the wrack of Jonah? was not he
profugus, Ion. 1.12.
a runaway from God? Pone poenam supponis culpam. For surely the mercy of God
being so great in pardoning sin when it is committed, may fully persuade us
that he will never punish till it be committed. Propter me haec tempestas,
says Jonah: Jonah 1.12.
Propter me haec pestis, may David say; until man be actor of sin, God is
never author of punishment. Judge. 16.30. Os. 13.9.
The Philistims house falls not upon Sampson unless his own hands pull it
down. Isreal's destruction is not but of her self: Non tellus cymbam tellurem
cymba reliquit, For as Adam had not been mortal, had he not been sinful, no
more should his posterity ever smart but by the sore of sin. When sin is
finished if we have not occasion to glorify Gods mercy in pardoning us we
shall be compelled to acknowledge his justice in punishing us. Theorem. 1.
Hence observe, that preuious sin is always the cause of subsequent misery,
yea, it is proprium, omni, soli (though not semper) to have sin the
prodromus, the forerunner of judgment, and the only prologue to the said
Tragedy of one man, or the general ruin of many: Had not David numbered
Israel, Gad had not threatened it, God had not punished it.

The Heathen themselves could so far justify their supposed gods in this
kind as to confess that when sin prevailed, not before: Hor. Carm. lib. 1.
Od. 3.
-- Macies and noua febrium
Terris incubuit cohors
Semotique prius tarda necessitas
Lethi corripuit gradum.


Had not the old world swomme in security and Epicurisme, Genesis 6.13.
they had not floated in that general deluge. Genesis 18.20.
Had not Sodom been tainted with so filthy sins, they had not felt so
fiery a punishment. Luke 19.42.43.
Had Jerusalem seen the day of their visitation, it had not seen the day of
desolation. Had not David committed some great sin he had never been in
this great strait.

When Pilate heard the people cry out to have Christ crucified, Mat. 27.23.
he asks in the audience of them all, What evil has he done? So reason and
equity may here demand in David's behalf, Quid mali admisit? Why will God thus
vex and perplexe at the heart a man after his own heart: the Text answers
hereunto, verse 1. David had numbered the people.

Numbering of people was used in ancient time by Sergius Tullus the Roman, Liu.
Aul. Gel. lib. 10.
to know how many were fit for war, and the age amongst them was from 17. to
46. and in dangerous times till 50. and our Savior Christ commends a wise
King who will forecast whether he be able to meet his enemy or not. Beside,
Luke 14 31.
they were numbered by Moses, Exodus 38. and again, Numb. 1. why might not then
an action repeated by Moses, and daily practiced by other Princes be as lawful
for David.

Shall David fight Gods battles, and not know the strength of his army? or
go in and out before a people, and not know the number of them? and thus the
verdict of flesh and blood returns ignoramus, We find no fault at all in this
man.

But stay a while fond opinion, and take this in charge, That a thing lawful,
nay, good in it self, may in the manner or end of doing, become unlawful, and
so a sin: For Omne quod non licet est peccatum. Prayer is commanded, and best
if it be done in a corner, that no man may see it; Mat. 6.2.
but if in the corners of the street, that all men may see, it is abominable.
Alms are commended, yet the noise of a trumpet blown before them, drownes all
their worth, and leaves them splendida peccata, and no better. Are things so
good so soon turned bad? How then are (...), things of themselves neither good
nor bad? Fasting is good if it be done to tame the flesh, and bring it in
subjection: but if (...) be admixed, to be seen of men it is hypocrisy. If a
man out of the weakness of his judgment, shall refuse a ceremony or gesture,
as fearing to wound his soul by committing idolatry, I pity his case, his
action being tolerable, but if any stiff-necked or stiffe-hammed Schismaticke
shall do it, out of opposition to the order and discipline of the Church, his
holy singularity is no better then stubbornnes and deep hypocrisy: David's case.
Herein then David failed. First, it was needless, having no war in hand.
Secondly, it was a curious crotchet, ideo numeratur vt numeretur, only to
know. Thirdly, it sauoured of pride to glory in the number of the people, which
three circumstances being weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, proved in
Gods estimation, and David's own confession, verse 10. a sin, a wickedness,
an exceeding folly: nor could he charge God justly of any injustice, for
bringing of him into this great strait.

Thus we see that came not by fate, but from God; it came not unjustly, but
for sin, and this sin by name was, numbering of the people. Now the manner
of David's falling into this strait, stands like a pillar of Salt for our
remembrance and instruction, and he that runs may plainly read this for his
observation.

That a fair Saint may fall into a foul sin, nor can the best man carry
himself so equally with God, but that sometimes by sin he falls into his
lurch, and becomes liable to punishment.

For David's part, were not his heart so candide as to confess the truth, we
may deal with him, obsignatis tabulis, namely Gods faithful Register, the
holy Scripture, which does charge and challenge him of a former, and a fouler
sin in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, 1 Samuel 11.
whose blood (like the blood of Abel the innocent) could witness against him:
But what need we any further witness, seeing we have heard of his own mouth
in that poenitentiary Psalm. 51. wherein he sheds many tears for shedding of
only this man's blood.

But lest I should by one Swallow to prove a Summer, and for one man's sin to
condemn the generation of the just: although I desire not to uncover the shame
of the Saints, yet fith all things are written for our instruction, 1 Cor. 10.11.
give me leave to show some spots and moales which have been no small blemish
to their perfection. Amongst the twelve there was but one Judas, one son of
perdition, but one that burst his bowels with a fall; but none of the rest
escaped without a fall. To omit the ambition of Zebedees sons, Mark 10.37.
John 20.25.
the incredulity of Thomas, the doubting of the two Disciples, come we to the
Papists masterpiece, their Dominicall letter of the Apostles; Peter is
reproved for tempting his Master, Mat. 16.22. recorded for denying him, Mat.
26.70. and all the Disciples seeing their Master apprehended in the Garden, for
fear forsook him and fled, Mat. 26.56.

Nor was this Leprosy a new disease in the Apostles time, or like Ionahs
goord, come up in a night, but if we shall use the Historians optich glass,
we shall discover a far off as in a Landsceipe; Genesis 9.21.
Noah lie drunken in his Tent, and naked too, did not his good sons Sem and
Iapheth cover him, Immersus aqua vino mergitur: Neither did any less happen to
Lot, whose righteous soul was vexed at the unclean conversation of the
Sodomites; 2. Pet. 2.7.
the only man thought worthy to be plucked out of the fire of Sodom; Intactus
igne vrit libidine, and his drunkenness committed a sin, Genesis 19.36.
which (had there been one righteous man in Sodom,) his soul would tremble
to have committed it.

To call the life or wisdom of Solomon in question in me, it were but folly,
and yet no more then he committed, who by the multitude of his Dalilahs
suffered his heart to be stolen away from God. Lorinus praef. in Act.
Tenorius Archbishop of Toledo, making question whether Solomon was saved or
damned, caused his picture to be drawn in his Chapel half in heaven, and
half in hell: this was about his state of glory. But should my rude pencill
delineate him in the state of grace, I would both picture him and all the rest
of Gods people, half in heaven, and half in earth, in heaven by reason of
their holy and heavenly conversation, in heaven by reason of their assurance of
glory and salvation: but on earth by reason of that body of sin and death
which they carry about them, having the flesh pressing with continual fight,
and oppressing with often conquest.

When Nebuchadnezzar made choice of some of the children of the Captivity to
stand before him, he commanded to bring such as were of the Kings seed, and of
the Princes, well favored, and without blemish. Si verbis audacia detur, give
me leave to apply this. God the King of heaven has out of his mere mercy
chosen out of Satan's captivity some to stand before him, they are of the Kings
seed, and of the Princes, sons of God and brethren of Christ Jesus, 1. Cant.
15.
fair they are and pleasant, the chief among ten thousand.

Free from the usual deformities, but only they are sometimes troubled with
the falling sickness, witness the examples before mentioned; and the fall of
David into this great strait; not that the Protoplastes of our spiritual
feature and perfection were the cause of this, but even that original sin
and corruption, which (...) and coeuterine with us, pluckes us by the heel as
Jacob did Esau, and pinches them as the Angel did Jacob in the thigh, Genesis
2.25.26.
that they never claw off this halting so long as they live in these houses of
clay: I learned this lesson of Solomon, that God made man upright, but he
sought many inventions. Adam was taught a trick by the Devil to lose his
happiness: and David who was before at large, is now taught by Satan, and
brought by him into this strait.

Now although by such enormities of the Saints there cannot but accrue
dishonor to God, shame and scandal to their profession, and evil example to
the infecting of others. Yet Almighty God who brought light out of darkness,
life out of death, can also bring good out of evil; and like a wise Architect
can so dispose of every piece, (except those for the fire) as to build a
glorious Temple for the Holy Ghost.

humility in the hearts of men. The aduenturous Christian when he hears of the
two Tables of Gods Commandments, Judge. 16.3. Mat 19.20. and 25.25.
thinks he can carry them as easily as Sampson did the gates of Azzah, and
say, Lord thou have thine own, all these have I kept from my youth. But
finding at the length, like Sampson, that his strength is but as other men's, he
is stricken as low as the Center, and shrinks to an Acome in his own conceit:
Now being brought to this ebb he is a good foundation for God to build upon:
now growing conscious of his own infirmities (like Peter walking upon the
water) he cries, Master save me, now he will no more of his own strength, but
only of the grace of God, which is only sufficient for him. The Swans of
Thames and Po, beholding with a retorted neck their goodly feathers, think
themselves, Rarae aues in terris, but when their black legs and feet are
become the objects of their sight, then they find that they are, nigris Cygnis
simillimae: So when men behold their lives in what they are commendable, or
tolerable, the Pharisee himself is not more proud then they; but when they
look into the glass of the Law of God, then goes the hand to the breast, and
the word from the mouth, O God be merciful unto me a sinner. Luke 18.
The lives of the best men that live upon earth, are like Nebuchadnezzars
image, having feet of clay as well as a head of gold: Here then is Schola and
scala coeli, a School to teach a near way, and a ladder to help up the best
way to heaven: O happy daughter of so unhappy a mother, Now Nathan may be
heard if he reprove, Now Saint Peter may catch fish when the water is troubled,
David before by Satan drawn beside himself, is now by Sin driven out of him
self, As much I conceive of Peter, that his faint heart was now become an
humble heart: and though Petrus was Petra, yet like the rock in the
wilderness, he yielded abundance of water, which makes me give the more
credence to Clemens Romanus affirming of him, that he spent every morning in
weeping, until his eyes were dim with weeping, and deep furrows were
plowed in his face with tears, tam vi, quam saepe cadendo. Oh that it may ever
be seen, that if in the service of God, the Saints miss the first Lesson of
integrity, they be sure to read and learn the second Lesson of humility:
Magis enim Deo placet humilitas ex male factis, quam superbia ex been factis:
He that exalts himself in his good deeds shall be humbled, but he that
shall humble himself for his evil deeds shall be exalted.

casual and unusual, does work in them a cautelous and careful carriage in
the sequel of their lives: danger is the adequate object of fear and
wariness, and sin being an auersion of the creature from the Creator, the
dangerous and miserable effects thereof cannot but deter and affright the
once entangled soul from any relaps or recidiuation into the same. Ictus
piscis sapit. The children of God, who by Satan's malice and ouerreaching
policy, are brought into Sin, and by Gods mercy brought out of it again, do
pass the remainder of their time, and work out their salvation in fear and
trembling. The Turks now inhabiting in that (sometimes) city of Jerusalem,
Timberl. travel.
having an old Prophecy, that the City shall be retaken at the same place
where before it was assaulted and conquered, have in and near that place,
immured all passage, and prevented all probability of entering: in like manner,
if Satan our mortal enemy have heretofore made assault upon our souls, and
like a strong man entered and spoiled us: if at the privy door of our hearts,
by sinful imaginations, let us be sure to keep our hearts with all diligence:
If at the too too open door of our lips by filthy communication, Ps. 141.3.
let us set a watch before our mouth, and keep the door of our lips: If he
shall enter by our ears, which often prove careless Sentinels, by admitting
and entertaining idle talk, filthy and corrupt communication, lying or
slanderous reports, rather become like deaf men and hear not, then ever that
raging and malicious enemy shall foil us at the like advantage.

While thorns and weeds are suffered to cover the face of the sluggards garden
they must needs be an hinderance to the increase and growth of either pleasant
flower or profitable herb, Stella 1. in Luc.
but if thence transplanted, they are placed in the hedge, they serve to fence
the garden that the beasts of the field annoy it not: So, while Sin is
suffered to have root in the heart of man, no increase of good, no herb of
grace can be expected, as our Savior applies it in the Parable, wherein the
thorns are said (...), Now if these thorny and soule-wounding sin be removed
from the heart and affection, and placed in the memory, it will prove in some
sort good to Gods children to have sinned, for having felt the chastisement by
rods, they will tremble to think upon Scorpions, and finding Satan so cruelly
tyrannizing upon a small sin, so unfaithful in a little, they will be loath
to trust so bad a Counselor, or for a great matter, commit their souls to so
bad a Steward.

Can we think but David was now grown more cautelous, or that if he had
again his former freedom, that Satan should again so have inueigled him?
Surely the bought wisdom of the Saints proves good, if not the best: Oh that
we could be made so wise by our sins and the fruits of them, as by one to avoid
many, by smaller to avoid greater, by the pinch of a weesel to avoid the paws
of a Lion. 2 Timothy 2.7.
Consider here what I say, and the Lord give us understanding in things.

Solomon passing by the field of the Sluggard observed nettles and thorns upon
the face of it, and he learned instruction, here is multiplicity of learning.
What came you hither to learn? humility? then behold what thou art without the
preventing grace of God, or if charity judge here of thy falling neighbor as
subject to infirmity, or if further instruction, Phil. 2.12.
for the remainder of thy days, learn here to walk wisely, and work out thy
salvation with fear and trembling.

S. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.20. glorying in Gods mercy and power demands, Where now is
the Scribe? where now is the disputer of this world? And hoping that I may
glory likewise in the truth of this proposed and proved Theorem, I demand,
where now is the Papist? where the Pelagian? what is become of the Saints
perfection in this life? This heresy was bred in North Wales, there was this
(...), first hatched, afterward bred up at West-Babylon.

Pestifero vomuit coluber sermon Britannus. Whereunto I may add,

Pestifero docuit coluber sermon Quirinus. For the Church of Rome having lickt
up the vomit of this Arch-hereticke (as the Poets are fained to have done
Homers) have spit forth the same again, to the infection of many a soul.
Grant we to the Church of Rome (a thing which they can never euince) that Peter
was head of the Church, as Pilate said to the Jews, Behold your King, so say I
to them, Behold your Peter, if his faults and falls were not like unto other
men's; Surely the foundation of the Church being thus shaken and the veil of
the Temple rent asunder; I may easily conjecture what betides the rest, if the
case go thus with the green tree, what shall become of the dry tree? What
cost Peter so many tears? what was the cause of this strait of David, was
perfection? then God is unjust. No, it was imperfection, let God be just and
the Church of Rome a liar: Dangerous then and damnable is their opinion,
causing men so much to dream of perfection that they never labor for it
procul hinc. If we maintain the bondwoman, we must keep her son, if we
maintain perfection, then also merits, and not only that, but another
monstrous bastard with six fingers on a hand, works of supererogation:
certainly for perfection of Romish Jesuits thus much and no more will I ever
grant that they are perfect in the Popish (...), absolute Machiauilians,
absolute traitors, monsters of men and matches for the Devil. I grant them
also to be meritorious but for all the pains they have taken in our English
vineyard, their wages have been such as that the Hangman has been their
play master. Gretserus.
Yea, but the Pope (says Gretserus) must needs be holy, Si non sanctitate
propria, sanctitate tamen officii: and so taller by head and shoulders then his
fellows. But if deposition pluck this stool from under him where lies his
Holiness then? Sure their knowledge is no more then other men's, all knowing
but in part. Indeed some Popes knowledge was not in part, Alphons. de Castro.
for Alphonsus de Castro affirms that some of them knew nothing at all. Their
sanctification no more then others, for though Alexander the sixth were holy by
virtue of his office, yet as he was Alexander he gave his soul to the devil,
and so (by the Schoole-mens help) was damned with a distinction. Whatsoever
the pride of the Church of Rome may conceive, or their insolency dare
maintain, God let me ever be a member of that Church while I have any being,
which (though reformed in other things) may seem deformed in this: that it
acknowledges no particular member of it to be exempt from humane frailty, and
though not subject to the dominion of sin) yet falling many times under
sins usurped government, and have daily need to be renewed by repentance.
Holy David though in the general course of his life a man with whom God was
well pleased, suo laborat naeuo; and the best that lives may semel in anno, nay,
septies in die, fall into a great sin and so by the just judgment of God
into a great strait. I conclude this Theorem with this corollary. That if all
the divine and admirable gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit (as wisdom,
knowledge, sanctification, etc.) were doubled upon the head of one man (be he
no more then a man) may sin of weakness, though not of wickedness, and
offend as grievously though not so frequently as his brethren.

Thus have we seen David's entrance into this strait, now see we the nature of
it, and the manner how he apprehends it.

How David apprehended it: As all misery and sorrow of it self is grievous
unto flesh and blood, so some above the rest (by the just judgment of God) is
more heavy and grievous then other, and does more perplexe the mind of man.
Principally these two.

1 For the matter, if it be such as is intolerable.

2 For the manner, if it be such as is inevitable.

Iaacobs service of seven years for Rachel was inevitable, yet being but a
service, and such a service, it was tolerable.

Isreal's servitude in the iron furnace was intolerable, yet in regard of Gods
promise to visit them, it proved euitable.

But the things here propounded to David, in their nature, were 1. intolerable.
Famine, Sword, Pestilence.

Secondly, God that propounded them makes them inevitable, Choose one: David is
only left happy in this, that though he cannot choose but he must have one,
yet he may choose which one he will have.

That we may the better apprehend the Strait of David, Apoc. 6.
I will briefly open three Seals, where we shall see the three Furies which
Gad the Seer presents to David, to take a hard and hapless choice of either of
them.

Famine, riding upon a pale Horse, killing with hunger and with death.
Sometimes clad in a roabe of immoderate rain and showers, drowning the worlds
plenty, and the earths provision: Sometimes bearing on her shoulders heavens of
brass, and treading under her feet the earth of iron: Sometimes attended with
Caterpillars innumerable, to eat up the fruits of the earth. Pale, and lean
she is, more then the picture of death, Mors in illa, as well as mors in olla;
and which is more, genus miserabile lethi. When God who gives to man the breath
of life, shall deny bread to maintain life: when Winter shall be turned into
Summer, and Summer into Winter: Psalm. 127.2.
when a man shall rise early, and eat the bread of carfulness, and at night
be to care for his bread: when men shall Sow much, and bring in little: Hag.
1.6.
when the harvest shall be little, and the laborers many: when one shall
plant, another water, and God shall deny increase: is not this a great Strait?
And yet all these are but initia dolorum. Ah my Lord (now thinks David) shall
these eyes behold my poor Israel, running and whining like dogs, Psalm. 59
and cannot be satisfied? Shall I see cleanness of teeth, and leanness of
body in all my Land? Can I endure to see an Asses head sold for 80. pieces of
silver, and a cab of doves doung for 20 pieces? Shall I see a birthright
bidden for a mess of pottage, and will not be taken? Shall I behold my poor
people, like Pharaohs lean kine? Shall I hear them cry, Oh give us bread or
we perish for hunger? Shall I see mothers re-womb and re-entomb the fruit of
their body for want of food. Three years Famine have we felt already, and a
second siege will turn flesh and blood into skin and bone; my people must
become meat for worms, as having none for themselves: This punishment is
greater then can be borne; This is too great a Strait.

Seal being opened, forth comes War, riding upon a red Horse, and he
unbridled: A time when all things are carried by force of Arms, and not of
Reason: A time wherein Pyrrhus regards not the aged head of Priam, nor yet the
sacred Altar whereto he flies: A time wherein old Jacobs head is sent with
sorrow to the grave, and that not sine caede and vulnere: A time wherein Rachel
may weep for her children, and will not be comforted because they are not: A
time Paradoxall unto nature, wherein Parents bury their Children: A time when
men must either fight, and so run upon a sudden death; or fly, and so lead
a tedious life: A time of outcries, of Fathers for their Children their lively
images, when Widows weep for their second selves their husbands, when
Orphans lament the loss of Parents their only stays; when old men are
comfortless, widows helpless, children hapless, men, women, and children,
all hopeless.

David himself had been a Man of war from his youth, and had been
eyewitness of the lamentable events of War: 1. Sam. 17.
That he feared it not, witness two hundred foreskinnes of the Philistines,
witness the fall of Goliath, witness the sons of Ammon, whom he put under
axes, sawes, and harrowes: Wheresoever he marched, death and destruction
mustered in his face: Saul has slain a thousand, but David his ten thousand,
this was Vox populi, and very true.

Well then thinks David, I will fight three months with the proudest enemy
that dare set foot upon the land of Israel, and thus having thought he speaks:
Nay but Gad replies, David, thou must not fight, but fly three months. Now
then he is in a wonderful Strait, now his troubled soul cannot but presage
much evil: He used to pursue, Psalm. 18.42.
and now must he be pursued? He did (...) his enemies as small as the dust
before the wind, and now he must fly as dust before the wind: If it were for a
day, he might the better bear it, though the Sun should stand still to
lengthen that day: Ios. 10.
but three months will make the streets of Jerusalem stream with blood, the
people made a heap of dead bodies, and the City a heap of stones, God
despited, the people destroyed, the Temple defiled: Oh then I cannot endure
this wondrous Strait, Pone tertium, O man of God, let me hear the third
evil, that though I have done wickedly, I may choose wisely.

Seal being opened, Pestilence issues forth upon a black Horse killing with
sickness and death. This seems to be the fairest choice, as proceeding from
the immediate hand of God, and being but for three days, and so shortest of
continuance. But yet it is a grievous punishment: Storehouses may serve against
a Famine: David's City walls (or if not those) his living walls his Soldiers,
his Worthies may meet his enemies in the gate, but Pestilence flies by night,
and kills at noone day. One cries, Oh my brother, come not nigh me, for I am
infected: Another, barred in by command, shut up by sickness, and (worse) pend
in by sorrow; cries out at a window, O my Father, O my brother, either now
breathing their last, or by this time dead. Some going (if any so dare) to the
sad funeral of their friends, before they return to their own home, find
their long home. O bellum Dei contra homines: The house may shield men and
cattle from the hayle, flight may save from the Sword, soiourning in another
country may preserve from Famine, but in this contagion, at home our houses
stifles us, abroad the air infects us. Behold now (beloved) David's Strait: If
I should say no more often his subject, this City knows what kind of misery it
is. Etenim pars magna fuit: How was it almost made desolate, and her
merchandise (whilome like that of Tyrus) almost decayed? When he that had
walked by night, was in more fear to have met the dead then the living, A
woeful time, when there shall be more need to weed the pauement then to mend
it; more cries of the Vespillo, Who is here dead? then of the Tradesman, What
do ye lack? O time of desolation, dullness, and discontent! Now I beseech you
again have a regard of David's Strait, and consider if ever sorrow were like
unto his sorrow, wherewith the Lord afflicted him in the day of his wrath. Lam.
1.12.
Never could the irons enter so near to the soul of Joseph, as this sorrow to
the heart of David. See we now these three things propounded, as Solomon said
of the pleasures of the world, Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity, so may
David say of the fruit of sin, death of deaths, and all is death. Saint Paul
was in a wonderful Strait, betwixt two, life and death; David is betwixt
three, and each is death; Famine a pinching death, War a cruel death,
Pestilence a noisome death: Surely, a most wonderful Strait.

Now in the next place that which is vltimus aerumnae cumulus, 2. Inevitable.
and makes David absolutely miserable, that now he is like the Israelites that
saw themselves in an evil case, but they knew not how to help it.

While he is thus ruminating of this hard bargain, Gad tarries for an answer,
and now impatient of further delay, demands a speedy resolution, Verse 13.
that he may return an answer to him that sent him. Thus then at the length
out of the abundant sorrow of his heart his trembling lips and tongue utter
these or the like words of passion. Oh man of God pray for me unto the Lord,
that if it be possible this pride of my heart may be forgiven me: Oh carry God
my sighs and tears, perhaps that sweet incense may appease him. Present unto
my loving God my straightened soul, and see if that will satisfy him: tell him,
my soul cries out of the grate of misery for grace and mercy. My sin has so
engaged my soul unto God, that my heart is broken, and such a sacrifice my God
will not despise. But here the Seer interrupts him. David now leave off
passion, and arm thy self with patience. The decree of God is set down, and
God will never grant decree upon decree, the sentence is past and may not be
reuersed, thy sin was great, Note.
so must be thy punishment. As no counsel (though of thy friend) could divert
thee from the one, so no prayer (though never so carnest) shall auert from thee
the other. Herein was Gad a faithful messenger, but a miserable comforter. The
devil ought Israel a spite and now he has paid it them. When Nathan told
David of his adultery and murder, he presently absolues him (upon his
repentance) The Lord has put away thy sin. Why may not Gad say as much? Has
God forgotten to be gracious? Oh but if we well remember, the child borne of
that adulterous bed dyed for David's sin: and has God forgotten to be just?
Thus is David still in a great strait. Had he been now numbering of his days,
he had applied his heart to wisdom; but now in numbering the people, his heart
gave way to folly. Now not only is he brought to the Logicians dilemma, but
indeed, to Trilemma, as the (...) used in war, cast it any way, and still one
point lies upward, obuious to the face, and hurtful to the foot.

Now I conceive your judicious apprehensions ready to forestall me, and already
to conceive a Doctrine which I shall propound, as a true borne Child, lawfully
begotten from David's case, and my premised discourse.

it is a far easier matter to yield to sin, then to answer for it.

Sampson was bound with seven green cords, and he brake them from his arms
like a third. David is now tied with one twist of a threefold cord, and cannot
get loose. I have heard and read of some Noctambulones, that have left their
beds in their sleep, and have clombe up such dangerous places, that waking,
they could scarce tell how to get down again: So fares it with the wilful
sons of men, who being lulled asleep in sin, questionless dream of great
security; but when their slumber is past, when the word or their conscience
shall awake them, then their voice is the voice of David, Angustior. It may be
said of Sin as the Poets said of Venus; Laeta venire Venus, tristis abire
solet. For sin still presents to men vtile, iucundum, or honestum, which
being by and by apprehended, Satan suggests, man consents, and both their
fingers itch till the fear be wrought, which being once effected, the pleasure
of sin lasting but for a season, is withdrawn and gone. Satan deals as
Ammon did by Thamar, thrusts him out, bolts the door, and takes no notice of
the poor sinner: Then is poor man left to himself, and has no company but a
wounded conscience, and then he finds himself in a strange perplexity, in a
wonderful strait. And what I now (beloved) say concerning one sinner, I say of
all; When neither the voice of reason can revoke them, the bridle of Religion
restrain them, nor the check of conscience move them, they that in the heat
of sin will be like David using the utmost of their liberty, shall in the
height of punishment find themselves like David in a great strait.

But that I may not seem to want proof within the confines of my Text, fix
we but our eyes on David, It Is a brave thing to number the people; it was
indeed: so is a Waspe a pretty thing to see too, but it bears a sting in the
tail. So is Sin Mulier formosa superne, outwardly and vpwardly fair, but
desinit in piscem, whatsoever the premises or the promises of sin may be, the
Sinner may in the end, say to it as dying Agrippa did to his dog, Abi hinc in
malam rem qui perdidisti animam meam. See here what David's numbering or practice
in Arithmetique came too. Addition of sin, Substraction of liberty,
Multiplication of sorrow, Division like the division of Reuben, even great
thoughts of heart.

It is the manner of Worldlings to deal in sin as Prodigals do in expenses
spend, and call, and never mind the reckoning, no, nor their general estate
till poverty come upon them like an armed man. And thus the sinner multiplies
his transgressions never minding the fearful event and dire Catastrophe of
his wickedness, when as indeed he should like the wise builder, sit down and
casts up his reckoning. But Satan like a cunning Sophister, sets the best side
forward, separates the end from the means, as if Sin and sorrow, were of no
acquaintance, and did not use to kiss each other.

S. John did eat the book which the Angel gave him, in his mouth it was as
sweet as honey, but in his belly as bitter as gall. But he that swallows the
bait which Satan gives him, shall find the pleasures of sin to last but for a
season, and in the end, bitterness, bitterness. Eve saw the apple that it was
fair to the eye, but after could have wished that she had never seen it. The
Fox mentioned by Horace, got easily into the Garner of corn, but having eaten
his fill could not so soon get out: The hunters horn, debts lively emblem,
is easily entered, but hard in the egresse. A man falling down with the tide
may easily shoot the bridge, but to return against the stream, hic labor, hoc
opus est. Facilis descensus Auerni: Iunenal.
Dives may slip into hell and misery, without either spoiling his purple
garments, or pinching his well-fed belly. But then there is magnum Chaos, not a
wall but a world of separation betwixt him and happiness.

The unthrifty Tradesman that makes the Tavern his shop, the Playhouse his
Exchange, gaming his traffic, and whores his customers, when need and debt
en-Counter him and his former follies like Spiders poison him that he breaks,
then and not till then is he made sensible of his own misery, then his
letters certify his friends, and his tongue cries out to his Creditors, I am
in a wonderful strait. Had that wealth-famous Croesus had any more then an
after-wit, he had not in his extremity needed to cry, Oh Solon, Solon. Had the
Mariners been ruled by Paul, Acts 27.21.
they had saved the wrack of their ship, and the loss of the wheat. As Martha
said to Jesus, Lord if thou had been here my brother had not died: so may I
say of this and the like case, had Prometheus been there, a wisdom to
foresee, and foresight to prevent, neither would any men at other time, or
David at this time have fallen into this great strait.

Oh how the denunciation of Gods judgments does amaze and perplexe the souls
of Gods servants when they find no expiation or atonement for sin! Call me
now no more David beloved, call me no more happy, but hated.

What hard hap had David that Gad the Seer was not a Pope? If some Christian,
especially Antichristian Prince, should have the conscience to be troubled or
wounded for such a sin as this, a Romish Bishop (though neither Prophet nor
Seer) would have taught him a trick to have avoided this strait. Gad had no
Commission to pardon, but to tell David of his sin. But now Omnia Romae
vaenalia, ipsa etiam venia est vaenalis: Gad would not free David for an Altar
built in the flower of Araunah the Iebusite. Rome will nullify a sin, and
deifie a devil for a contribution to a Jesuit: and what? Such a sin as
numbering the people? Nay, murder, adultery, incest, rebellion, and what not?
Surely then a Subsidy of Peter Pence throughout all the Land of Iudaea would
have freed them from this punishment. If this be so that pradons are so
frequent, I must entreat his Holiness to pardon me one thing, namely, in that
I condemn and abhor the sour leaven of the Church of Rome: and lest for
want of judgment and experience of their iugling, my tongue may be thought no
slander, let any man with sounder judgment and mature deliberation, perpend
their practices, and he shall ex vngue leonem, make an easy conjecture, that
all their Religion is superstition, their practices, cleanly cosenage, deep
hypocrisy, and horrible abomination.

My senses now tell me that many hear this, and my Conscience tells me that I
care not who hears it: what is seated in my heart, were it written in my
forehead, I vow that I have lost the use of that hand that should ever wipe it
out, and let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if (upon just occasion)
I spare or fear to tell the Church of Rome of their monstrous enormities, and
their strong delusions, wherewith they fill, the Popes coffers with gold, their
Clergy with glory, and the understanding world with wonder. Durst Gad bless
when God did curse, or pronounce peace, when God proclaimed war: but this is
the impiety of that man of sin, to exalt himself not only as Lusifer, to
make his seat with the most high, but to make his Apostolical seat above
Christ, and to exalt himself above all that is called God. Ego and Rex meus
argued in the proud Cardinal little policy; but Ego and Deus meus, argues in
that Romish Prelate but little piety. If ever any man grow weary of that
Christian liberty wherein Christ Jesus has placed him, I wish him no other
servitude then a Romish yoke: or if any man will cancel his sense and reason
so far as to be ruled by them, I dare pawn my hand that too much learning
will never make him mad. I conclude this point with a Tridentine phrase Forma
Tridentina Materia Angelicana.
, Whosoever shall believe that the Pope of Rome has any more power of
pardoning sins, but only ministerial, (that is, where God has first
pardoned and given warrant by his word to have it pronounced by the Minister,
Anathema esto. The position is true according to our doctrine, the conclusion
shall be theirs that made it; I hope not for ours, but rather for their own
use. Concerning the point thus much. Fumo pereant qui fumum vendunt. S. Peter's
keys are now abused by popish pick locks, if these men belong to God, I
beseech him pardon them effectually for pardoning so many, for so much, to so
little purpose.

The third general point: How David took it, Quantapatie^tia pertulit. When
Gad had brought this message to David in the morning next his heart, we cannot
but think that he took it much to heart; but yet he so demeaned himself,
that though the message was grievous yet the messenger was welcome. He deals
not like the impious son of Nebat, 1. Reg. 13.4.1. Reg. 22.8.
to bid lay hands upon the Prophet, nor does he hate him as Ahab did Michaiah,
because he prophesied evil and not good, but considers him as the voice of a
crier, and the messenger of the high GOD, not imputing so much to Gad as the
troubling of Israel. And though David was not Timon-like, to be (...) as
desirous to see misery and mortality amongst men, yet he thought this word
(though harsh of it self) to be good as being the word of the Lord, he
neither can nor will challenge God as unjust, nor the Prophet as unfaithful in
his message, but to show himself a man after Gods own heart, in saying
nothing he seems to consent unto God as Eli did, 1. Sam. 3.18.
It is the Lord let him do what seems him good. O just God, O faithful Gad,
O patient David!

Now could I wish that this patient spirit of David were doubled upon all the
sinful sons of this generation, who are so far from patient hearing of
Gods judgments denounced, that their ears are grated, if not stopped at the
Rehearsal Sermon of their sins: Surely, if reprofe vex them to the heart,
as it did Ahab; tidings of judgment will break their necks, 1. Sam. 4.18.
as it fared with old Eli. Is it not from hence that men are of that impatient
and gun powder humor, because they love not to hear of their faults? Is it
not hence that the Ministers of God are so much discouraged? Is it not hence
that like Jonah, men had rather turn mariners then Ministers? Without any
further question, hence comes impenitence, even from impatience: hence custom
and obduration in Sin: (hence in a word) comes that which a religious soul
cannot but see the Land deserves to mourn for. Some Seers are so choakt with a
Church and a Steeple, that they cannot of all other language, pronounce Sin
in a Patron. Some dare not adventure to displease a great one, yea, whosoever
shall dare (like Tarquin) to strike at the heads of the tallest poppies, 1.
Sam. 15.
or like Samuel, at the head of Agag, at their greatest sin, shall in the wise
censure of some, be thought to babble beside his Text, or be enrolled in the
black book, never to have favor at their hands. A true Aristotelian will
never wonder at the irregular motion of the Orbs, if the Intelligences fail
in their moving office; nor can I wonder at the inordinate actions of this
sublunarie world, when Gods Intelligencers dare not tell Israel of her sin,
Isa. 58.1.
and Judah of her transgressions.

Now if I durst adventure, I could put some into a wonderful Strait, and bring
some souls before the justice of God, whom the opinion of the world has
openly quitt.

Should I say that Simon Magus is turned a great Patron of Benefices amongst
us, and that his bosome-seruant Quid dabis were a disposer of Livings, I know
not how this Age would take it: Should I say that some gallants wear Vicars
clothes, or spend the Clergies books in yellow ruffes, they may perhaps, have
pepper in the nose, as well as Cloves in their bands. Or should I condemn the
general Apostacy of the world, from that good estate and plight wherein our
Fathers have known it, some Stoicall Athenian may justly, as his wisdom
thinks, ask what will this babbler say? If they or any of them will needs
know, then this I say (and yet not I, but others whose shoe latchets I am not
worthy to loose) that for the particular sin of Sacrilege, all that is so
gotten, is aurum Tholossanum, and that all the bread at such Patrons tables are
cheat loaves. And for the general estate of the whole world (as one said
bitterly of Rome) probabilius est strui nouam quam emendare antiquam, more like
to have a new Rome built, then the old to be amended: so I say of the world,
that it is more probable sooner to see it changed in substance then in manners;
in regard that (so far as I see) the world is likely sooner to cease to be,
then to be wicked: and hence is nostri mundi calamitas, that men had rather ten
times commit one sin, then once hear of ten sins.

David took all in good part that Gad spoke, though it were never so harsh,
and blamed none but himself for being brought into this Strait: I would that
all that hear me this day were herein not almost, but altogether such as
David, then would Herod hear the reproof of John Baptist gladly, then would
every man so hear the word, as to amend his life according to the word, then
would God be honored, his Ministers comforted, and the World well amended.

But if the dease Adder will not hear when we charm the world with zeal and
discretion happily united, then the Lord commands to cry aloud and spare not,
to lift up our voices like a trumpet, Luke 18.1:
and to deal as that oppressed widow, move them with incessant preaching, and
to be bold as Lions in Gods cause. Let Peter tell Simon Magus plainly, Act.
8.23. Acts 13.10.
that he is in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity: Let Paul
tell Elymas the sorcerer that he is the child of the devil, if he be full of
all wickedness; We must learn of Gad, not spare to speak, though we spare to
speed. And all godly and conscionable hearers must learn of David to hear
with quietness, to bear with patience, and to mend with willingness.

David chides not with Gad, so he quarrels not with God; and though (as our
Proverb goes) losers must have leave to speak; yet he (though (I suppose) his
heart waxed hot within him) never spoke with his lips to justify himself.
Psalm. 39.
Thus might his Pharifaicall thoughts have suggested: Ah my Lord, I have a long
time gone in and out before this thy people: O Lord thou know that I love
thee, and have with all my heart sticken to thy testimonies, I have had so
great a care of my ways, as not to offend in my tongue: O thou Lord, good and
gracious, full of mercy and compassion, is thy mercy clean forgotten? or shall
all the former passage of my life be too little to expiate one small sin?
Thou made proffer of mercy to five Cities, for ten righteous, and will thou
not spare one man for one sin? Thou that pardonest such a number of sins to
thy people, will thou not pardon such a sin as numbering of the people? Thus
might David seem to have pleaded for himself. Apud. Linium.
Tullus an interpreter of the Law having pleaded for the life of Horatius (who
had murdered his Sister) and not prevailing, the Father of this Horatius
demands of the Romans, whether they could lead his son to death, but his own
demerits and valiant acts would even give a dumb show to have his life saved:
So might humane judgment (had it now been Advocate have pleaded for David,
but it would not have prevailed, nor have been a sufficient bail, to have
freed David from this unsuspected Sin, and unexpected sorrow.

Now he that has an ear to hear, a heart to consider, and a memory to
remember, cannot in sense but hear, in reason he must understand, and (unless
he will forget himself) remember this for his instruction, That the weight of
man's merit is not sufficient by many grains to counterpoise the burden of one
wilful sin if God be extreme to enter into judgment with the Sons of
men, though they be such as are indeed the Sons of God.

How fair soever the preceedent part of their lives have been both in their
public and private callings, yet that great King of heaven who can epsy one
man amongst many without a wedding garment: can in his omniscience, and may,
and does often in his justice enter into judgment for the commission of one
sin, especially if wilful, as was this of David: as we see in the Church of
Ephesus, Reu. 2.2.
though laudable for her works, her labor, her patience, and perseverance,
yet there is a something that God has against her for which he will remove the
Candlestick out of his place except she repent.

Many plankes well pind and calkt, make the Ship to float: one and but one
leake will sincke it. One wound may strike Goliath dead as well as three and
twenty did Caesar. Sam. 17.
Sueton. Judge. 16.18.
One Dalilah will do Sampson as much spite as all the Philistims. One wheel
broken spoils all the whole clock. One veins bleeding will let out the
vital spirits as well as more. One fly will spoil a whole box of ointment.
1 Reg. 49.
One herb Colloquintida spoils all the pottage. One Apple lost Adam the
pleasant Paradise. 1 Samuel 14.27.
One lick of honey endangered the life of Jonathan. One Achan was a trouble to
all Israel. Ios 7.25.
One Jonah, if faulty, Jonah 17.
is lading too heavy for a whole Ship. And one sin is enough to procure
Gods anger, and too much for a man to commit.

Iam. 2.10.
hear what S. James auerreth, That he that fails in one point, is guilty of
all.

A stone cast into the midst of the water, troubles every part of the water,
even to the very bank.

But I speak not this as if any man having committed one sin, should in a
desperate mood, adventure the committing of more, because when he has done
all, he can but be found guilty, and so punished. God forbid that any man
should hear like Malchus, with his left ear only. But this is my drift (if it
were possible) to deter and affright the hearer from countenancing, or giving
the least entertainment to the least sin whatsoever, or the least motion of
that sin.

As it was spoken in another case, Ex pessimo genere ne catulus quidem
educandus: So I say, in regard of the purity of God, who can abide no sin, and
his justice, which may punish every sin, let us not give way to any sin. And if
God thus take account of one sin, let us take heed of all sin: as being
accomptable for in Gods sight. One sin, a small sin in man's judgment, may
procure and provoke God to send a heavy judgment.

Secondly, we may here observe the impartial hand of God: may not David be
spared for a sin? true it is, veniam laeso numine nullus habet. Conijah if he
offend, though he were the Signet on Gods right hand, Ier. 22.24.
God will cut him off. Never was any sin committed, but must be punished,
either in the sinner, or in the Savior: and though it be quoad aeternam
poenam, pardoned and punished in the Saniour, yet it stands with the justice of
God, temporally to punish a little sin in a great Saint, yea one only sin,
though in his own children. David is noted but for one sin before, and for
that one his one child borne in adultery died. Which kind of proceeding in
almighty God, though it may seem harsh and bitter as the waters of Marah, yet
hence it does receive its dulcoration, in that it proceeds from a blessed
trinity of attributes in almighty God, his justice, his holiness, his
wisdom, Justice punishing one sin, his holiness brooking no sin, his
wisdom preventing many sins, all concurring in one act of punishing.

Holiness, that holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath requires holy thoughts,
holy words, holy actions, and therefore any thing that is unholy, must needs
grieve his holy spirit: and that not only in Cain, Saul, Judas, Julian, etc.
vessels of wrath, and sons of perdition, but also in the vessels of honor and
the heirs of grace; nay further, taking indeed the matter more hainously at
their hands. As we read of Caesar, who of so many wounds given him at his
death, complained of none but of Brutus, (...) and thou my son! So for
Jerusalem to play the harlot, the holy City become a cage of vncleant birds, he
will never endure.

As one good motion and inclination in the young Man made Christ begin to love
him, Mat. 19.
and the sparks of goodness shining were wel-pleasing unto him (though the
young man were not right.) So on the contrary, one evil admitted and
perpetrated by a child of God, makes God in his holiness dislike and distaste
(though not absolutely and finally the person, yet the sin) by whomsoever
committed, nor can there be any peace betwixt a righteous God and a wretched
sinner.

wisdom who (seeing sin the daughter of impunity, and the fruitful mother
of such a damned brood,) does principiis obstare, killing this Cockatrice in
the egg, and preventing this dangerous and farre-creeping fire before it run
too far and rage too sore, dealing as a wise father with his child, who
breaks him of his untoward disposition before it grow to a settled habit: men
are of that disposition which God complains of, Psalm. 50.15. These things have
thou done, and I held my peace, and thou thoughtst I was even such a one as thy
self: and therefore it follows, I will reprove thee, and set before thy face
in order the things that thou have done. If he should not aurem vellere, and
make his judgments the remora's of sin, either the God of Jacob would be
thought not to regard it, or the revenging arm to be shortened, or else that
God laying aside his holiness, did in part begin to approve those of which his
soul has said heretofore I hate them. The least of which three gaps being
laid open, the Gadarens Swine ran not so fast and headlong into the Sea, as
men would poast and precipitate themselves to the bottomless gulf of Hell.

Justice, who though he love his Saints with an Eternal love, yet is not bound
to the tolleration of the least, nor the conniuencie at any sin: but on Gods
part, that he may declare his justice, and on their parts, that they are
Sons, and not bastards, Heb. 12.8.
does afflict, correct, and chastise them: and though (...) a final and
destroying punishment be properly the portion of the wicked, yet his judgments
(...) for instruction, and (...) for warning and example, are no more often
then justly let loose upon his own Children; and albeit God has promised to
spare them, yet he will but spare as a man does his Son, not to free from a
fatherly correction, but from scourges and whips, which are only for the backs
of fools; and wounds, which are for the hairie scalpes of such as go on in
their wickedness: Psalm 68.21.
So then, his holiness, his justice, and his wisdom being the moving causes
of this action, we must in such a case with Job, lay our hand upon our mouth,
and with old Eli, rest contented: It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good.

Now if judgment begin at the house of God, 1. Pet. 4.17.18. Psalm. 130.3.
and if the righteous shall not be spared, what shall become of them, what
shall be their end that obey not the Gospel of God? Psalm. 116.15:
If thou Lord be extreme to mark what is done amiss: yea by thy Saints so
dear and precious in thine eyes: yea the very apples of thine eyes: Oh what a
fearful expectation is it of judgment and fierce indignation, Heb. 10.27:
which shall destroy the adversaries of God? If David fell into this great
strait for one Sin, what shall be done to Edom, Moab, and Tyrus, Amos 1.9.12.
and 2.2.
for three transgressions and for four? but fire, a destroying fire, which
shall consume Teman of the Edomites, Kerioth of the Moabites, and the walls of
Tyrus? If David be avenged seuen-fold, surely the ungodly that drink in sin
like water, and draw iniquity with cords of vanity, shall be avenged seventy
times seven fold. If this be done to a green tree, what shall be done to a dry
tree? Consider, and I beseech you again consider and remember this, you that
forget God: you whose lives are nothing but a continual rebellion, and
grieuing of the spirit of God. To you I speak quorum etiam laudabilis vita
damnabilis est, si cum Dauide conferatur: those whose most laudable part of
their lives are odious if any way paralleld with David. If no sighs, or
tears, or prayers could expiate his sin, or divert Gods justly conceived
displeasure, I say to them and yet not I, but the spirit of God himself, that
albeit they shall hide themselves in dens, Reu. 6.15.
and in the rocks of the mountains, that neither rocks nor mountains (though
they should fall upon them) shall be able to hide them from the face of him that
sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. If the meditation of
this were seated in the hearts of ungodly and wicked men, although no son-like,
yet even a slavish fear would curb and bridle the untamed colts of the world,
when they shall consider how in every sin, they do but heap up wrath against
the day of wrath, Romans 2.5.
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. This being duly considered,
he that is unjust, would scarce continue unjust still; nor he that is filthy to
be filthy still: But he that is holy would be holy still, De libero arbitrio,
lib. 3. cap. 15
he that is righteous would be righteous still: For as Augustine, Qui non
reddit Deo faciendo quod debet, reddet ei patiendo quod debet. Whosoever does not
what he should, shall suffer what he would not.

But lest while I keep David in this strait, I should run too much at large,
I come now in the last place, to the bailing of this prisoner out of the
tedious little-ease, and to show unto you in the fourth circumstance
propounded, how he freed himself, and with how much wisdom. Qua prudentia
euaserit? Redimit se sapiens captum quam queat minimo. When Julian was opposed
by the hand of heaven, he was so obdurate in his Sin, that Vicisti Gelilaee
and his blood came out together; this was horrible obstinacy. 1. Sam. 31 4.
When Saul was in a Strait, he fell on his own sword and dyed, that was
desperation: 2. Chron. 28.22
When Ahaz felt the hand of God, he sinned more and more; this was flat
rebellion. Plutarch.
None of these courses like or please David, but as Theseus in the Labyrinth,
gate out by the help of Ariadnes Clew; so David by the guidance and direction
of the Spirit of God, and by spiritual Wisdom, freed himself from this
great Strait.

Some Hebrews imagine, (...)
that the last word of Gad in propounding, gave David some hint and direction
for his choice, because the same word Dabhar, with some changing of points,
signifies the Pestilence, which in Gads speech signifies indeed only, What
word shall I carry him that sent me: Dr Willet in locum.
and this by a reverend and learned Divine of our own is worthily refused;
because David was a prudent and wise man, and needed not any direction for such
a choice. But now David being hard put to it, thinks with himself: As I have
done foolishly in committing the sin, I would feign deal wisely in the choice
of the punishment. As he that is immured within some high wall, will make
choice of the lowest part to leap over.

Thus then he resolves; I am indeed straited, Lupum auribus ^eneo: Now as ex
duobus malis minus, so ex tribus minimum est eligendum. If I choose War, I
fear many enemies to offend me: now melius est timere vnum quam multos. If I
choose Pestilence I fear but one. If I choose Famine, the poor will pay for
it: If War, the weakest go to the walls. Now Gad I am resolved, tell the Lord
that sent thee, this is my answer: Let us now fall into the hands of God, for
his mercies are great, and not into the hands of men.

In which choice we cannot but observe; first, David's Charity, secondly his
Piety, thirdly his Wisdom.

Charity: Oftentimes (yea and too often) delirunt Reges, plectuntur Achiui.
David had now offended, these poor sheep of Israel, what had they done? He
offers himself, and his fathers house, verse 17. for a peace offering: but
since it is commune malum, by Gods immutable decree, he chooses that evil
wherein he may be socius doloris, willing indeed to bear a part in this
doleful Tragedy, never desiring like the Mariners, to escape a general danger
in a cock-boat, Act. 27.30.
but offering himself to be a sharer in the present danger, by choosing an
evil which does aequo pede pulsare pauperum tabernas, Regumque turres. We read
of Cardinal Albert, Ioh. Petit. hist. Netherlands. Iuven. Sat. 10.
that at Newport battle in Flaunders, he forsook his army, and fled to
Brussels: and of Xerxes, that he fled vix vna naue, cruentis fluctibus, etc.
but David more charitablie stays the brunt, and equals his weal or woe with
his subjects, whom his Sin had brought to this extremity.

Piety: War would without resistance, have proved but a massacre: and this
(now French-tricke) would have made the field a shambles, and turned the
flourishing cities of Israel into Golgotha, a place of skulls, and into Aceld
ama, a field of blood. And the insulting enemy would have spread their banners
in defiance of the Lord: this would have cut David to the heart, to have seen
not only the place of his honor made a reproach, but also (...), his own
honor into shame: for though his enemies had been but the rod of Gods fury,
they would have ascribed their victory to the power and mercy of their gods (as
once the Philistims did to Dagon) and so have robbed God of the honor due unto
his Name: which David most dearly tendering, Iud. 16.24.
chose rather to have God the auenger of his own quarrel, then to have the
daughters of the uncircumcised either revel in the ruins of Israel, or take
away the glory of God, which he will give to none other.

Wisdom: not grounding his choice upon Sands, as a foolish builder, or upon
stat pro ratione voluntas, like an vntuterd moralist; nor yet upon a bare
Theorie or contemplation, as the naturalist; but upon a settled and grounded
experience of the mercies of God: Which he knows so well, that his knowledge
does apprehend them, and his tongue dare boldly pronounce them, that his
mercies are great, or (as the Original) in the discrete quantity, they are
many. Nor does he choose to fall into the hands of God, because his judgments
are few, but because his mercies are many. David of Gods mercies, when God is
now bent to punish? and it seems, has forgotten to be gracious. Because that
God in the very act of administering justice, and punishing his children, does
show and set forth no small measure of his goodness and mercy. If any shall
demand (as Nicodemus in another case) how can these things be? do but see,
and you shall understand; do but observe, and you will consent, That the motto
of the most afflicted soul may be, The mercies of our God are great. The
rather for these reasons following:

punishing, God punishes a little, and pardons a great deal, not suiting
his plagues according to our deserts, for then we should be consumed: but as a
loving and merciful Creditor, when the debtor owes an hundred, bids him take
his pen and write fifty, or at the most, four score: nay indeed not taking
so much as five in the hundred of his debtors, cutting off only the hemme of
our garment, or the skirt of our raiment, when we owe unto him our souls as
forfeit by reason of our transgression. Any sin committed against our
infinite God, deserves an infinite punishment: If God therefore shall abate
eternity, and send us punishment, is not his mercy great? If when we deserve
many stripes, he gives us but stripes, is not his mercy great? for man in this
kind, would have had the utmost farthing.

In the end of punishing, far is it from God to aim at the destruction of
his people; nay he aims at their instruction, that they might learn to keep
his Statutes and Commandments. And whereas an enemy would funditus delere
nocentem: that his name, Esa. 55.8.
nor the name of Israel might be had no more in remembrance, Gods ways are not
as men's ways.

God indeed sometimes destroys the body that he may save the soul; he
punishes his children with the world, that they may not be condemned with the
world: Others take vengeance out of hatred, God out of his love, Castigans non
quod odio habeat, sed quod amet. The original of this action being so far
different, must of necessity suppose a contrary end. A great Armada
prevailing, kills up all. A Powder Treason undiscovered, blows up all: Ab vno
intenditur ruina, ab altero doctrina. God means good, man means mischief.

punishing, Gods mercies are great. Albeit the justice of God be moved, and
his patience provoked: and though with men, Laesa patientia vertitur in
furorem, Patience provoked turns to fury: and yet not furor breuis, a short
fury, but an irreconcilable hatred: Yet God (though offended) will not
always be chiding, Psalm. 103.9.
neither keeps he his anger for ever: yea, although he whet his sword, and
bend his bow, and make ready his arrows, yet a poor soul may have a present
appeal, a Deo irato, ad Deum placatum, being so appeasable and facile, unto
such as shall upon the bended knees of their souls sue out grace and pardon,
by renouncing of their sins, and relying upon his great mercies. Nay, the
Lord himself of himself, in this present plague, without any entreaty (to the
comfort of penitent sinners I speak it) did command the destroying Angel to
hold his hand, as grieuing to see the misery of his people: and that so soon,
that David had not time to offer any sacrifice propitiatory, but at the
ceasing of the plague, a freewill offering gratulatory, for the remouall of so
heavy a judgment.

in all his ways, and holy in all his works, and had he now decreed that
whatsoever was left of the famine, the sword should destroy, and whatsoever was
left of the sword, the pestilence should destroy, and so have sent althose
three furies of hell at once to have assailed Israel, what cursed Atheist durst
have said or thought, but the Lord is just: but now hehold him also merciful,
he opens but one Seal, sends but one punishment. Nor is that positiuely set
down, or called out by name, to enter combat with Israel, but left arbitrary to
David: Choose one: It is much if beggars may be chusers, more if sinners. Traian
intending the death of Seneca, bade him make choice of the manner of his death:
Traian was cruel in his decree, though kind in such a proffer. God not cruel,
but merciful unto all his works, makes David here pronounce the sentence of
judgment. Choose one: Is not here great mercy? Now Seneca in his wisdom
chose the easiest to bleed to death in a bath: and David now having considered
the mercies of God, great of themselves, but yet greater, if compared with the
mercies of men, chooses to fall into the hands of God, who is just and
merciful in the act of punishment, gracious and merciful in the end of
punishment: patient and merciful in his manner of punishment, and lastly,
exceeding merciful in this very punishment. As the great mercies of God may
justly provoke our admiration, so David's wise choice may be justified (as
Christ did that of Mary) he chose the better part, Luke 10.42.
to fall into Gods hands, whose mercies are great. Can we now but wonder at
David's choice when (all things considered) ipsa iustitia Dei sit misericordia.
Foolish and unfortunate was the ingresse into this sin, but most prudent and
happy the evasion out of it.

Apostle (to affright from Sin) determines and defines It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God? Heb. 10.31
After that I have served necessity in the reconciling these two places, I must
obey the time. Thus then briefly.

Apostle speaks, Willet vbi supra.
namely, of those that tread under foot the Son of God, that count the blood
of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and have despited
the spirit of grace, as appears verse 29. But David's case and theirs are not
alike: his was a Sin, but of a child of God; it was a Sin, but of
infirmity: Theirs are Sins, but Sins of reprobates: theirs are Sins, but
of that nature, that the first is intolerable, the second is like unto it,
abominable, and the third as Christ the truth it self has pronounced,
impardonable, either in this world, or in the world to come: That is (saving
Bellarmines patience) they shall not have any sense or feeling of pardon in
this world, Explic. locus Mat. 12.32.
or benefit of remission of sins in the world to come: or (as our Church) in
shorter terms, never. Here then is the case; It is one case to appear before
a temporal Judge as a malefactor in wrong or violence to my neighbor, which
may be answered and avoided by some legal means: or if not, the punishment
may extend to loss of goods or good name, and not touch life. It is another
case, when a man shall appear as guilty of that roaring sin of Treason against
his Sovereign (a monstrous sin, worthy ten thousand deaths, if a malefactor
had so many lives) what a woeful and fearful case is this? So it is one thing
to sin, and another thing to sin with so high an hand, and herein it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

temporal judgment but eternal. Now in eternal judgment, it is a most
fearful thing indeed, in regard of the unlimited power of God, Luke 12.5.
Mat. 10.28.
who is able after he has killed, to destroy both body and soul in hell fire:
yea I say again, him fear: but as for temporal judgments, it is far better
to put our selves upon God, then upon our country: For there is mercy with the
Lord. Homo is called homini lupus, but God is homini Deus: But because
contraria iuxta se posita, clarius elucescunt, see we in a word, what the
mercies of men are: I remember their dealings, dashing of Infants brains
against the stones: I remember (and that with amazement) ripping up of women
with child: Joseph.
I remember the lamentable siege of Jerusalem, when the glory of the Land the
holy City, the glory of that City the Temple, the glory of the Temple Sanctum
Sanctorum, was utterly ruined and wasted by the hands of merciless Romans.
Franc. Petit. hist. Netherlands
I remember that French Captain Bordett chose rather to be shot by a
Muskettier of his own Company, then to fall into the hands of the bloody Duke
of Alua.

But now hoping that all this Christian Assembly came hither to learn: I
beseech you learn these two things of one whose face perhaps few of you have
seen before, and it may be never shall see hereafter, especially in so public
a place as this holy Mount where on I stand.

First, to suffer for our sin, let us say to God as Zeba and Zalmanna did to
Gideon: Judge. 8.21.
Fall thou upon us, for as is the man so is his strength. So Lord if we must
suffer, fall thou upon us, for as is the Lord so is his mercy. England is
encompassed with the Sea, which for the most part is beneficial, though
sometimes hurtful: encompassed with Gods mercies, which are always helpful,
never hurtful: encompassed with enemies, always hurtful, never helpful. If
the Sea break in, the worst is death, and no more: if our enemies break in, if
they prevail, what proud insulting, what cruel tormenting? what shall be
wanting to make us miserable? Lord we have sinned with our Fathers, and have
deserved the vialls of thy fierce wrath: But O Lord do thou correct us, for
thou will not do it in thine anger, nor chasten us in thine indignation: but
never give us over into the hands of men.

Adam, and that we have deserved Gods heavy judgments as well as others, Oh
now, seeing God has withheld his revenging hand so long, let us learn that
counsel of Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.24.
to break off our sins by righteousness, and our iniquity by mercy, and let
there be an healing of our error. Let us in the name of God turn before it be
too late, lest we repent when it is too late. Lord open our eyes that we may
see the day of our visitation, and prevent that fearful doom of having these
good things hidden from our eyes. O fortunatos nimium bona si sua nossent
Britannos, we distaste the enjoying of that whose loss our Christian neighbors
bewail. The Christians in Polonia cry out for aid: The Protestants in Bohemia
groan under a heavy and intolerable burden: The Protestants of France send
many sighs to heaven for peace or bare security. Happy Britains, we sit
under our own Vines, and our own Fig Trees (God of his mercy continue it.)
Let us not cut off our welfare by our wickedness. We have not Famine, but
Plenty; not War, but Peace; not Pestilence, but Health and Soundness. Now in
a word, as the Romans dealt with Victory, clipping of her wings, that she might
never fly from them again, so let us do with our happiness, Happiness it
self! Seeing it may (God knows how soon) be hidden from us, stay her flight
by thankfulness and obedience. If there be amongst us that think happiness
absent, I wish them to prepare her way and make her paths straight, that she
may come in and dwell with us. Or if she be amongst us (as the God only wise
and immortal knows that (...)


