A SERMON PREACHED before His Majesty At Whitehall, March 22. 1617. being
Passion-Sunday, Touching Prostration, and Kneeling in the worship of GOD.

To which is added a Discourse concerning Kneeling at the Communion.

By JOHN, Bishop of Rochester.

DAT MANVS SVPERESSE MINERVA printer's device of John Bill

LONDON Printed by JOHN BILL, M.DC.XVIII.

PSALM. 95. VERSE. 6. Venite, adoremus, and procidamus, and ploremus ante
Dominum qui fecit nos.

Venite, adoremus, and procidamus, and genuflectamus ante Dominum qui fecit nos.

O come, let us worship, and fall down, and kneel, (or weep) before the Lord
our Maker.

Venite, etc.
THe Author of the Psalm is David: Hebr. 4.7.
The Type is Joshua that gave the rest of body in the land of promise: And the
truth is JESUS, that gives the rest of Soul in the Kingdom of Heaven; to
whom David made this Psalm. It begins with rejoicing, Venite exultemus; O come
let us sing unto the Lord, or exult: that is, show some part of that joy, which
is so great, that well it may be testified with our voices, but it can never be
fully expressed by our words.

The first verse is, Venite ad exultationem, A call to exultation, and that is
no way fit for this time: for what has Music to do with mourning? or a Song
of Sion, Psalm. 137.
with the day of captivity? or a Text of mirth, with a day of greatest sorrow,
that is Passion Sunday? or a Theme of joy with this time of Lent, the seed
time of Repentance, in which the seeds of contrition must be sowed with
tears, that in the harvest of Heaven shall be reaped in Joy?

But this Verse is Venite ad humiliationem, A call to humiliation, which must
have Adoration, and Prostration, and kneeling, or, as the Ancient out of the
Greek of the Septuagint read it, weeping before the Lord our Maker. Luc. 15.5.
and us as lost sheep on his shoulders. Hebr. 5.7.
with strong cries, and tears to redeem us. And this is indeed a word in
season.

FIrst then here is David's call: Venite, Come, let us go together to Gods
worship. Latria, divine Adoration: Adoremus, Let us worship with the inward
devotion, and sacrifice of the heart. Seruitus, Service or outward worship of
the body: Procidamus, Let us prostrate our bodies together with the inward
intention of our Souls. Contritio, Contrition and sorrow: Genu flectamus, or
ploremus, Let us kneel and weep for our sins, that have lifted up our heads
and taken delight in the pleasures of our sins. Maiestas, or mayor status, The
majesty or greatest state, to whom this worship and repentance is due; Coram
Domino qui fecit nos, before the Lord our Maker, who so dearly loved this
workmanship of his hands, that he gave the Son of his own substance for
his redemption.

None can be absent from God in place, Venite, Come, and draw near to God.
Adoremus. Come, let us pay him the Rent of Sacrifice and adoration. Sin has
an elevation in it self, Procidamus, Let us have a deiection, and willingly
fall down in humiliation, as we have wilfully cast down our selves headlong by
our pride. He that bends the knees of his soul, Genu flectamus, or ploremus,
let us kneel in humility, and weep in grief. And all these as undivided
companions: the Lord our Maker, to whom all the rivers; and brooks of our
duty, and service must run, as into the Sea of all goodness.

The first thing is the Call of David the King, Kings Call, or The Kings Text.
For the King is first among men, and next, or second to God; neither Pope nor
people stand between God and the King: Romans 13.4.
For he is Gods Minister, not man's: He is superior, and above all men, and
inferior, and under God only. He has no equal in earth, and no superior,
Tertull. Apologet. cap. 30.
but in Heaven; greater then all men, and solo Deo minor, Lesser then God
only, from whom he immediately receives his power over all men, and all sorts
of men, Priest and people, in all causes Civil and Spiritual.

For he is Custos and vindex vtriusque tabulae, Deuteronomy. 17.19.
both the keeper and revenger of both Tables of the Law; as well the first,
that concerns Religion and worship of God, as the second, that concerns
justice and conversation among men. He only has power of life and death, and
he only puts men to death without the sin of murder, because he bears the
sword, and executes vengeance in Gods stead, that only can give and take away
life: And this he does as well upon the Atheist, and Heretic, and Idolater,
and blasphemer, Number. 15.35, 36.
and Sabbath breaker, as Moses did, which are against the first Table; as upon
the Traitor, and Rebel, and Murderer, and the like, which are against the
second Table: And that in the Priest, as well as in the people; or else
impunitie must be granted to the Priest, Deuteronomy. 13.5.
and the false prophet, could not be put to death, as the Law commanded.

And this the King does, Qua Rex, non qua Propheta, by the ordinary power of a
King, not by the extraordinary power of a Prophet. For it was so ordered in the
Law by God himself; who foreknew that all Kings should not be Prophets; and no
Prophet ever took power of life and death upon him, no not Jeremy, whose
commission was largest, vt euellas, and destruas, Ierem. 1.10.
to pluck up and destroy: who most certainly understood, and executed his
office, but it was, Prophetando, not sententiando, by prophesying and preaching
down Idolatry and sin, and planting Religion and virtue, but not by
sentence or judicial power, either of Popes Tribunal, or peoples Co^sistorie,
to dispose any kingdom, or take away the life of any, were he King or
Subject, as his life and practice declares.

The Priest has his call, venite ad nuptias, Matt. 22.4.
come to the marriage; but it is venite directiuum, non coactiuum, a call of
direction, not of external coaction, as the Kings is. Saint Paul says, These
things command and teach, 1. Tim. 4.11.
command them that know; teach the ignorant. Imperamus and nos, In Oratione ad
praesidem natu^.
said S. Nazianzene, we in the Pulpit command also on Gods behalf. Luc. 14.23.
And the Priest has his compulsorie also, Compelle intrare, Compel them to
come in, but it is, verbi potentia, and censuris, by the power of the word, the
sword of the spirit, not Caesar's word; and by the censures of the Church
wherewith she is armed to revenge all disobedience; which are sanatiuae, 2.
Cor. 10.6.
and not eradicatiuae; healing, 1. Cor. 5.5.
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord, not eradicatiue, to take
away life, as the censure of the Civil power does.

So then, as the Church calls by the word and censures thereof, so the King
calls, first, verbo, by his word or law Civil: secondly, exemplo, by his
practice and example. His word is not Ite, Go ye, and serve the Lord, but,
venite, come, and go with me to serve God, Joshua 24.15.
I and my house will be first; He is first in place before all men, that he
may be first among men in the service of God: and the greater his power and
graces are, the greater is his obligation to adore God, that placed him above
men, and near to himself. And thirdly, Gladio, He must call by his own civil
sword, by temporal punishments, not spiritual, to which all Recusants of all
sorts must be subject: He must co^pel all men to enter into Gods house.

Now there is a threefold venite; Singular, particular or singular in every
particular man; for man is a little World, or City, or Kingdom in himself.
The spirit is to rule, and all the powers of soul and body must obey. Memory
must record all Gods blessings, and our own duties; Reason must apprehend and
believe them; Will must choose, and love them; and affection must desire them.
The senses must be shut up, that they wander not, but ascend and behold; The
eyes must see Gods beauties, not gad after vanities, and send tears as
Ambassadors; The ears must attend truth, not leasings; The tongue must sound
forth the Sacrifice of prayer, and praise; The hands must be lifted up as an
evening Sacrifice, to entreat pardon, and bestow alms; And the knees must be
bowed, that God who resists the proud, may behold the humble afar off; Iam.
4.5. 1. Pet. 5.5.
and the whole man must be offered up as a living sacrifice to God, vt totus
hic sit, and totus in Coelo offeratur, that the whole man being in the Temple,
may at the same instant be presented to God in Heaven.

The second is, Priuatum; Patria potestas, that fatherly power that was placed
by God immediately in Adam over all the families that issued from him. In which,
as David said, Psalm. 101.7.
No deceiptfull person shall dwell in my house: so every Master must say, No
Recusant in Gods worship shall rest within my doors. If he will not go to Gods
house, and adore his Maker, and receive his blessed body and blood, Non
habitabit in domo mea, He shall not hide his head in my house, if he be
ashamed to show his face in Gods houses. Our most religious David, that sits
upon the throne of this Kingdom, and suffers none to serve him, a King on
earth, unless he will also with him serve the King of heaven, may be a
singular light, a pattern to all Masters in this kind. And surely he can
never be a true servant to a man in earth, that is not a devout and religious
servant to God in heaven; If he be false to God, he will never be true to him
that is but the Image, and represents the person of God on earth.

The third is, Publicum, the public call, when he calls all, who has
authority to call all; that is the Kings call: to which every one that is a
part or member of the great family, and receives protection and direction from
him must be obedient; and not only one family, or one Kingdom, but as many
families or kingdoms as are subject to his dominion. All his Kingdoms must be
obedient to his venite, and join together, not only in vnitate, in the unity
and substance of Religion, and worship of God, but also in vniformitate, in
uniformity of outward order and ceremony of Gods service, if possibly it may
be; especially in all the parts of my Text, of Adoration, and Prostration and
kneeling, which are not ceremonies, Romans 13.4.
but parts of Divine worship; and for disobedience must be subject to his
coercion, who bears not the sword in vain.

The Kings word is not, venite adme, come to me, Matthew. 11.28.
I will refresh you: his office is not Reficere, but Ducere; not to refresh us,
but to lead us to refreshing; that is proper to God, and Christ, who is both
Shepherd and food, Pastor and pasture of our souls. Neither is the Kings
word, venite per me, Joan. 14.6.
Come by me, I am the way, and the truth; that is true only of Christ; For
no man comes to the Father, but by me: and the King is not via, but Dux in
via, Not the way but the guide of the way. But the Kings word is Venite mecum;
Come with me, I am both a sheep of the flock, Psalm. 78.71.
and a Shepherd as David was. Let us go together as one man to worship God.

And therefore when God calls us to come to him, he is our end: And Christ
calls us to come by him, he is the way; And the King calls us to go with him,
he is our Chieftaine; And the Prophets and Priests teach us to go in the way,
they are our directors: And the Saints of God are our companions, and the
Angels of God are our assistants in this way to go to God, Passibus and mentis
and corporis, with the steps of our souls and bodies. Who will refuse to go by
such a way as Christ is, under such guides as Kings and Prophets are, with such
companions as Saints and Angels are, unto such an end as God is, who is life
and blessedness it self?

But strepitus est in anima; Part. 2, 3.4.
there is such a confused cry in the soul, that David's cry is not heard. The
proud man calls none; for he cannot endure either superior or equal, but must
be singular and alone. And the covetous man calls none; for he can abide no
partner; and he denies that most to himself, that he gets from others: these
in their silence, stop the cares against David's call.

The voluptuous calls, Venite, perfruamur; Wisd. 2.6.
to fill himself voluptatibus, he might have said morbis, with pleasures, or
rather with diseases of the body, and the worm of conscience in soul. For
while he labors not to loose the flower of his youth, he spends his life, and
ends in that, which he hates most, that is corruption and rottenness.

The malicious calls for revenge, Iere. 18.18.
Venite cogitemus, percutiamus, lingua, and occidamus: Let us devise, there is
their conspiracy: Let us wound with our tongues, there is their practice; let us
wound or murder his good name: Let us kill him, there is their end; he is the
heir, the inheritance shall be ours: But this is a cursed wrath that kills the
enemies body, and withal kills, and eternally condemns their own souls.

The Ambitious man calls to his own faction, without which he cannot aspire,
Venite aedificemus, Gene. 9.4.
Let us build a Tower to clime to heaven: but it is Babel, a Tower of
confusion: and ambition that pleases all, torments all; and it lifts to the
highest, that it may give the greater and more headlong downfall.

In this confusion of calls, this Religious call, Venite adoremus, Come let us
worship God, is scant heard or regarded.

In which, give me leave to join these three, Adoration, Prostration and
Kneeling together: because in truth they should never be separated.

And first I observe. Venite, audiamus, Come let us hear, as those do that
turn Oratories into Auditories, and Temples into schools, and all adoration
and worship into hearing of a Sermon: As if all, soul and body, were turned
into an ear: or, as if all Religion and sacrifice that must be sent up to God,
were only this, to know the message that God sends down by his Servants. Luke
10.42 Romans 10.17.
Hearing, indeed, is a good part of Christianity, but it is but a part: And
faith comes by hearing, but faith, hope, and charity, Justice, and Religion,
are not hearing, but the fruits of hearing: And therefore no man may think
that he has given God his due worship, if he have heard God speak by his
Minister: as if a man had observed the Sabbath well, if they have heard
reverently, as some Catechismes teach: much less may they think, that they
have done all their duty, that have slept or talked out a Sermon, or heard
it, but not regarded it. For in this Psalm, there is a difference between
hearing and worshipping, Verse 8.
Hodie si vocem eius audiueritis, To day if you will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts. The Jews heard Gods voice in the Mount, their Audire was not
obedire; Their hearing was not obeying. They heard, but they worshipped not
God, but the golden Calfe: And therefore David after hearing, calls for
worshipping; so, hearing is not all.

2. The Adoration here called for, Publica and solennis, public and solemn:
and so much the Call proves, for it is of all the whole multitude of the
people. And likewise the place, for it is not Praeueniamus ipsum, Let us come
before him, Verse 2.
for that may be done in every place; on the way, in the field, in the chamber,
in the bed, in the closet, and every where, when we are most retired and
alone; but it is Praeueniamus faciem eius, Let us come before his face, or his
presence, with thanksgiving. His presence is his Tabernacle, or his Temple,
the place which he has chosen to dwell in; And then, as the adoration is
complete and solemn, so it must have all the parts, and duties thereof
performed to God.

In solemn and complete Adoration, two or three here mentioned, must be
offered to God; First, internal Adoration, that is, the devotion of the heart,
and inward worship: and next outward worship, that is, Prostration, falling
down, or bending of the body, and kneeling, which is a kind of falling down,
and may well be included in it. In all adoration, the inward devotion and
sacrifice of the heart in prayer, and praise, is always required and accepted.
In sacrificijs externis semper desiderantur interna, Aug.
In external sacrifices, God always calls for the inward; Prou. 23.26.
My son, give me thy heart: and God cares not for the outward, nay, he
loathes it, if the inward be wanting. Matt. 6.
If the heart do not fast and pray, and give alms, the rest is no better,
then the stage playing of a fast, Isay 29.19. Matthew. 15.8. Marc. 7.8.
or a prayer, or a Maundie: when our lips draw near to God, and our hearts
draw far from him, God cries down the Sacrifices that himself did
institute, with, Isa. 1.11, 12.
Quo mihi multitudinem? and quis requisiuit? Why do you load me with these
loathsome and abominable sacrifices? or who requires them? And of this outward
Adoration, there is no doubt, but it is received and allowed by all, though not
performed by all.

But in public and solemn Adoration, not only the inward devotion and
prostration of our souls, and the bending the knees of our hearts is to be
tendered and offered up to God, but also the outward prostration and kneeling
of our bodies is required at our hands.

And this external worship of kneeling is opposed by those, that love their
ease more then their duties, and therefore cannot endure to kneel, or stand,
but must sit at their devotions, which is contrary to all discipline, and sit
at the Lords Table, as if they were equal guests with him, else we shall be
Idolaters. Good God! Is it Idolatry to kneel at Gods Table, or at our prayers,
when as no man without the brand of irreuerence, and ill manners, makes his
suite, or asks a pardon, or receives a great benefit from a mortal King
without this bowing or kneeling? And the universal custom of the purer Church
was, that no man did receive the flesh of Christ, Nisi prius adoret, but first
he did adore; August. in Psalm. 98.
I do not say, the Sacrament or element, but Christ himself, and it was the
practice of all the Saints and holy men to adore with bowing and kneeling.

For the Patriarchs, we have Abraham, Genesis 17.3, and 17.
the father of the faithful in the law of nature, Cecidit pronus in terram,
He fell on his face. For the Judges, we have Moses, Procidi in faciem sicut
prius, Deuteronomy. 9.18.
mark that word, sicutprius, I fell on my face as at the first. It was Moses
custom so to do. For the Kings, we have David a man after Gods own heart,
and the Elders with him in sackcloth, Proni in facies ceciderunt, 1. Paral.
21.17
they fell down on their faces, and prayed to stay the plague; and here David
calls all to bowing and kneeling. And likewise Solomon that built and dedicated
the Temple, Flexis genibus, and leuatis manibus: 2. Paral. 6.13.
He kneeled down, and lift up his hands at the dedication. The word is,
stetit, in the 12. verse; and likewise 2. 1. Reg. 8.21.
Reg. 8. He stood: and this verse by way of Parenthesis, is a declaration, or
explication of the manner of his standing; so standing among Jews is there
expounded to be kneeling. For the Prophets, 1. Reg. 18.42.
we have Elias and Daniel; Elias fell on the earth, and put his face inter
genua, between his knees, lying double as a child in the womb. Dan. 6.10.
And Daniel prayed in his house; that was private adoration, genibus flexis,
kneeling thrice in a day. All these in the old Testament witness, that
prostration and kneeling are parts of divine worship.

Come to the Gospel, and there we shall find like patterns, and examples. The
wisemen from the East used prostration, by the light of nature; The Leper; The
man that prayed for his dumb son; Iairus; The woman with the bloody issue;
The possessed with the Legion of devils; The Ruler; The young rich man; Saint
Peter, when he was called to be a fisher of men; Mary Magdalene, and others.
All these used this external adoration of falling down and kneeling unto our
Savior Christ, who accepted this honor, and never reproved it in any that
offered it unto him. Matt. 8.18.
In which I observe, that of Iairus, S. Matthew says, Mar. 1.22. Luke 8.41.
Adorauit, he worshipped him; S. Mark and S. Luke say, Cecidit adpedes, He
fell down at Jesus feet. So external worshipping or falling down is all one
with kneeling in the Gospel.

But some will say, these were nouices in Christ's school. Act. 9.40.
Let us come to the Captains: S. Act. 20.36.
Peter kneeled and prayed when he raised Dorcas. S. Paul kneeled at his
prayers at Ephesus, Acts. 21.5.
and on the shore at Tire. S. Acts 7.60.
Steven the first Martyr, kneeled down and prayed for them that stoned him,
and when he laid down his life, he would not lay down his External
adoration. Sic pastores, sic ergo grex, the chief leaders and sheepheards thus
kneel, the whole flock must follow their example.

But what do I insist in servants, when we have the example of the Master
Christ that is above all Example? He fell on his face in the garden, says S.
Matthew, and S. Mark; Matthew. 26.39. Mark. 14.35. Luke 22.41.
He kneeled down, and prayed, says S. Luke: So falling down, and kneeling
is all one. Sic Caput, sic medicus: sic ergo membra, sic aegrotus, The Head
kneeled that was without sin, much more must the poor members kneel, that
are nothing but sin. The sound Physicion kneeled to cure us, and therefore
the sick patients must kneel also when they receive Calicem salutaris, 1.
Cor. 10.16. Psalm. 116.13.
the Cup of blessing, and the Cup of Salvation, the greatest benefit of soul
and body, with the greatest humiliation of soul and body: for that is received
with Invocation, which should have outward worship with it.

I would be loath to grieve the Michalites of our time, and therefore I omit
those mockers that clothed our Savior in Kingly roabes, Matthew. 26.29.
and then bowed the knee to him, though they denied his Kingdom and Deity;
and these confess him to be both King and God, Phil. 2.10.
and yet will not kneel to him, to whom all knees are bowed in Heaven, in
earth, and under the earth. These profess to adore our Savior, and will not
kneel before him; Mark 3.11.
and yet the very devils did bow to him, whom they do not adore. But one thing
I must needs say: there is no remission at Gods hand, except we with the
indebted servant, do fall at our Makers feet, Matthew. 18.26.
and pray for patience and pardon. For though I say not that God has aures in
pedibus suis, ears in his own feet; yet his eyes and his ears are in pedibus
tuis, set upon our feet, to hear their prayers that offer up unto him humble
souls, and humbled bodies.

God swear it with an oath, Isai. 45.23.
Omne genu flectetur mihi, Every knee shall bow to me. And all Religion by God
himself is called by the name of kneeling. 1. Reg. 19.18.
I have left me 7000, Qui non curuauerant, which have not bowed their knees to
Baal. I fear, these Elephanti, Elephants that have no joints in their knees,
have sworn and vowed that they will not kneel to God, and his Christ, that
they may make it known that they esteem their own fantasy more then they
do the oath of God, who cannot repent.

The ready way then, to incline the heavens to us, is to incline our selves to
the earth. Will thou say to God, Psalm. 144.5.
Bow down the heavens and come down? Thou must first say to thy self Inclina
^eipsum and decende, Bow down thy self, soul and body, and descend; that the
Lord that resists the proud, may behold thy humility. Do thou seek an
hill to pray on, Aug. in Psalm. 94.
Vt Deo sis proquinqui^r, that thou may be nearer to God? He that dwells
in the highest, Psalm. 113.6.
is nearest to the most lowly. Therefore Descend vt ascendas, descend in soul
and body, that treading down thy self, thy prayer may the better ascend to
heaven. And, if thou be bareheaded in sign of reverence, and kneel in sign
of humility, the lifting up of thy hands shall be unto thee a sign of hope,
that thy devotions are acceptable to God.

A Doration, Devotion, and in the attention thereof is called Piety: Fidei
ostendentis, of faith that shows both the object, God, who only is to be
worshipped; and the manner how, that is, as himself has prescribed. 2.
Charitatis informantis, of Charity that animateth us to give divine worship to
him, that is our greatest and last good. 3. Iustitiae reddentis, of Justice
that pays that debt to God to whom only it is due. And 4. Latriae
exhibentis, of divine and religious worship, that is exhibited in recognition
of supreme dominion unto God; and so, as in man the heart is first framed, and
then the outward parts; so grace first offers the heart and soul in devotion
to God, and then tendreth the body in bowing and kneeling in his service.

THis Prostration and kneeling is not so much a ceremony, our Savior that
kneeled in the garden, Luke 22.41.
did not kneel at his prayers on the Cross, because he could not kneel. And
I conceive I have good reason for it.

For first it was used by Abraham and the Wise men, Genesis 17.3, 17. Matt. 2.11.
who only knew the Law of Nature. Secondly, Exodus 20.5.
In the negative, Thou shall not bow down to them, there is the outward
service, nor worship them, there is inward adoration, both forbidden to be
bestowed on any false god. In the affirmative, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God; there is the inward adoration of the
heart by devotion, and him only shall thou serve: and the body only can
serve, the soul is free; there is the outward bowing and kneeling. And the Law
of Nature, and the Moral Law touch not Ceremonies: so Prostration or kneeling
is a duty.

3. August. retract. lib. 2. cap. 37.
Ceremony is named a Carendo, of Want; because the soul that wants other
means to express it self, does it by signs and gestures. And in heaven
where grace and glory are received immediately without any Sacrament or
Ceremony at all, there can be no Ceremony: and yet the Elders in Heaven cast
down their Crowns and fall down, Apoc. 4.10.
and worship him who sits on the Throne, and therefore kneeling or bowing is
a duty which may not be omitted as an indifferent thing in the solemn
worship of God.

SO then in this service, Naturae totius debitum, the debt or duty of the
whole man; for God created soul and body by his divine power, and Christ
redeemed our souls by the agony of his soul, and our bodies by the death of
his body; and the holy Ghost sanctifies our souls and bodies in such sort,
that our bodies are members of Christ body, and our souls and bodies are
Temples of the holy Ghost; 1. Cor. 3.16. and 6.15, 19.
and therefore soul and body must join in Adoration of him that made us, and
restores us, and sanctifies us for himself. Excitatio mutua, mutual
excitation: for the soul does always excite the body, as the Musician
strikes the instrument, and the body does sometimes call home and awaken the
soul that wandreth and is heavy in the service of God; and, as an instrument
with a sweet melody, does quicken the soul in this harmony of Gods Religion.
The third is offensio mutua, Ingressus cum reuerentia, progressus cum
adoratione. Let our entry try be with reverence, and our progress with
Adoring, and then Egressus cum benedictione, our departure shall be with a
blessing.

Now, Ploremus.
where the Hebrew reads Genu flectactamus, let us kneel, the Septuagint, the
Vulgar, and most of the ancient have Ploremus, let us weep: In which
difference I resolve nothing, I only relate that which the Learned in those
tongues observe, which is, that the little deflection of Niucha, which is, Genu
flectamus, let us kneel, from Niurecha, Ploremus, let us weep, may be the
occasion that the Hebrew and the Septuagint do differ: and likewise (...), let
us kneel, and (...), let us weep, may be the cause of this variety. And the
conjecture is not improbable; for David first saying Procidamus, let us fall
down (which implies the prostration of the whole body) it is not likely that
in the next words he would add Genu flectamus, let us kneel, which is but a
part, and included in falling down. Howsoever, since Christ and the Apostles
so often follow the Septuagint in some Textes that differ from the original, I
hope I may pass without blame, who make use of both.

And surely, Verse 1.
in this Psalm, as Exultemus and Adoremus are well joined, let us rejoice, and
let us adore; sing for our deliverance, and adore our Deliverer; (for praise
without adoration is to give God our tongues, but not our service and
obedience; and adoration without exulting, is to do God service and not to
give him thanks for his benefits.) Verse 6.
So Adoremus and Ploremus are as well joined, let us adore him for his dominion
or Lordship, and let us weep before him to entreat pardon for our
transgressions. For adoration without tears, is to look with the Pharisee so
much on Gods graces and our own virtues, that we forget our own sins. Luke
18.11.
And tears without invocation is so much to look on our own sins, that we
forget the mercies of God that forgiueth sin, and so are swallowed up in
despair. So that as we must praise God for his goodness, and adore him for
his greatness, so we must weep before him to wash away our sins, and
deplore and prevent our present and future miseries.

And surely, if we pluck away the veil of fig-leaues that covers our
shame, rather then cures our wounds, we shall discern that all our state and
being, is a lamentable and miserable being; For the natural man Plorandus quia
non plorat, is most to be pitied, because he laments not his sin and misery,
because he sees it not; as the sick man is most desperate, whose wounds are
past cure, because they are past sense; and the spiritual man, Non plorandus
quia plorat, is therefore not so much to be lamented and pitied, because he
does in such sort lament and deplore his own sins and miseries, that his
whole life is nothing else but a continual repentance and contrition for his
sins: always sorrowing for his sin, and ioying in nothing but only in
this, that he is truly contrite for his sin. For why? The spiritual
Pharaoh, Satan with all his army, will never be drowned, but in the red Sea of
tears, which may well be called red, for they are Sanguis animae, the blood
of the soul. The fire of concupiscence will never be quenched, but in this
water of tears: and the spots, and deformities of the soul will never be
washed away, but in the Soap or Lie of tears and compunction.

Will thou then O wretched man, know the weight and greatness of sin? Look
upon the Cross of Christ, which this * Passion Sunday.
day represents unto thee, and there thou shall learn, that none could bear
it, but the Son of God: there thou shall read the depth of sin, that
pierced not only his hands and feet, but his heart also; in which he offered
up prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears that he might
overcome the clamor of our crying sins: Heb. 5.7.
and Christ offered nothing for our redemption, but that which was necessary,
and therefore tears must concur as a part of our ransom. And if our Savior
wept for us, the Redeemer for the redeemed; we have much more reason to weep
for our selves: and let none be found so profane amongst us, that when the
Son of God wept and suffered for our redemption, we should laugh and make
merry at our condemnation, as if we were senseless of our own confusion.

First then hearken what Christ says to us from his Cross, Vide quae pro te
patior, Behold, O man, what sorrow Christ suffered for thee upon his Cross;
and let his sighs and tears move thee to compunction. And if this will not
prevail, then hear what he says in heaven to all impenitent and wilful
sinners, Vide quae a te patior, Behold thou obdurate sinner, how great
reproaches Christ suffers at thy hands, who by thy wilful impieties do
crucify again to thy self the Lord of life; and then resolve that as Christ's
hands and feet, and head, yea, and every little pore and passage of his body
was a fountain of mercy that runs in his blood, so thy heart must be as a
spring of sighs and groans, and thine eyes must be as fountains of tears
to wash, with Magdalene, Luke 7.38.
not so much Christ's feet as thine own soul.

Now interest Cui, Coram, to whom this internal devotion and outward
prostration, and this contrition is to be tendered: And my Text says, Coram
Domino quifecit nos, before the Lord our maker: Adoration is due to Lordship or
Majesty, and that by many rights. 1. Potestatis, quia principium creans,
First, by reason of his power; He is the principle and author of our creation
in whom we live, and move, and have our being; Act 17.28.
who made us not according to the image of Angels, Genesis 1.26.
or beasts, but according to his own Image; And therefore this worship must be
given only to God, quifecit, and sic fecit, who made us, and made us by no
other stamp or pattern, but his own Image.

2 Bonitatis, quia principium conseruans, fountain of our preservation in
being in nature, and restorer to our well being in grace, and that by no other
means, then the Incarnation, and death of his only begotten Son. And
therefore this worship must be exhibited only to God, Qui refecit, and sic
refecit, who restored us, and so restored us by the blood of his own Son: as
the Captive ever honors him that ransomed him, and the sick man his
Physician, and the condemned man going to execution, ever reuerenceth him that
procures his pardon.

3. Felicitatis, quia principium beatificans; by reason of his felicity, he is
the only principle of man's eternal blessedness: For all the perfection and
fullness we look for at Gods hands, is God himself. And the blessed Trinity
has thus divided; The Son gave himself in pretium, for our price and
ransom; The holy Ghost gave himself in arrhabonem, as an earnest or pledge:
And the Father reserueth himself in praemium, as our exceeding great reward;
Gene. 15.1.
and therefore all service and worship is due to the Lord, qui beatificat and
sic beatificat, who blesses us, and so blesses us, with no less then the
fruition of himself. So that now, Nec aliud pro illo, nec aliud cum illo; we
may neither adore another in stead of God, nor any other together with God; for
he is sole and supreme Lord, to whom all divine and religious Adoration is
due, Propter Dominum, for his Lordship.

Natural, Moral and Civil reverence or adoration is due to them, to whom God
has communicated some parts or branches of his power: 1. Reg. 1.16, 23.
as unto Kings, as Bathsheba and Nathan adored David: to parents, who as Gods
instruments bring us to a natural being: and to Priests, who are Gods tongues
and hands in our spiritual being; and to others that have any eminency and
excellency of Gods graces.

And this duty is derived from Religion and the worship of God, and is done
only for Gods cause; yet it is not properly religious in the strict sense, but
Civil and humane: For man's Lordship and dominion is not absolute and supreme
in respect of Gods, but under God, and limited and coarcted by his Law. It is,
ab illa, sub illa, and in illam, from Gods power, he is the author of it;
under Gods power, and subject to his coercion; He is judge of it; and for Gods
power, subordinate and directed to him; He is the end of it: And therefore all
powers on earth must give this divine and religious service only to God, whose
Lordship is only supreme and absolute in heaven and earth.

Angels and Saints have no part in this divine worship: because, though they be
in possession of the Country, and have more excellency of nature, grace and
glory then men have, yet they have no dominion; they have Administrationem and
custodiam, administration under God, for they are ministering spirits: Hebr.
1.14. Dan. 10.13. and 12.1.
and have custody of whole countries, and perchance of particular men; yet they
have not dominium, Lordship or dominion over men, Apoc. 19.10. and 22.9.
but profess themselves to be fratres and conserui, brethren and fellow
servants, and not Lords, and therefore forbid men to adore them.

And it is certain and clear, no man ever offered sacrifice to any but to
him, Aug. de Ciuit. lib. 10. c. 4.
Quem Deum aut sciuit, aut putauit, aut finxit, whom he knew, or thought, Tho.
secunda secundae. q. 85. art. 2.
or fained to be a god. And external sacrifice is due only to God, because it
is a sign or testificatio^ of the inward sacrifice of the heart, in which none
has any part but God only. And yet these later times have placed much
devotion in the worshipping of Angels and Saints, offering to them the inward
and outward sacrifices of prayer and praise, and their goods, in vows and
pilgrimages: and not only distinguishing temples, and Churches by their names
(which is lawful) but also dedicated them unto them, together with God, at
least in practice, whatsoever their booke-doctrine be. But, Qui Deum colunt,
nolunt se coli pro Deo. Angels and Saints will not be worshipped as gods upon
earth, because they do truly adore God in Heaven, and excite us to do the
like with them. Quaest. in Genesis lib. 1. q. 111. Genesis 4.61.


It is true, S. Augustine notes upon those Words of Deuteron. 6. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, Et illi soli seruies, and him only shall thou serve:
That the word Soli, is added to the latter, but not to the former, as if it
were lawful to adore others besides God, but it were not lawful to serve any
but God. But S. Augustine speaks there of civil reverence and adoration,
such as Abraham did to the children of Heth; Gene. 23.7.
but not of divine adoration, such as the Angel for bad S. John to give him:
For, says he, the Angel appeared such to S. John, that he might be taken for
God himself, and therefore Corrigendus adorator, the adorer was to be
reproved; And thus it comes to pass, that too much humility, or pestiferous
flattery, does communicate that to creatures, which is peculiar to the Creator,
God blessed for ever.

Now, some are called gods, quos fecit homo, whom man's superstition, and folly
has deified; and these are no more to be adored, then devils: and some are
called gods, quos fecit Deus, whom Gods power and grace has made gods, and
these will not endure to be adored with divine worship. But we must adore him
with kneeling and weeping, who is not Deus factus, but factor, not a god made
by opinion or superstition of man: but him that is a God in truth, and being,
and the maker of all things, who gives being and blessing unto men. And it is
no small assurance unto us in our invocation, and adoration, quiafecit, that he
made us; for the Creator loves his creature, as the Artificer is in love with
the child of his own brain: and he reaches out the right hand of power to
create, and grace to sanctify, Job 14.15.
and glory to crown the work of his own hands.

We are the sheep of his hands; Ve^se 7.
man buys sheep he makes them not; we are Gods sheep, quas fecit, and quas
emit, He makes us by his power, and bought us with the blood of his Son.
His blessings are finite to us, for we are not capable of Infinity; but his
nature is infinite in himself: as the light of the Sun is great, though the
illuminatio^ in us be little. The action quam agit, which he performs for us,
and in us, is created, and therefore finite; but the affection qua agit, out of
which he creates and blesses us is infinite, that is his power and goodness.

In which we must consider not quantum, how much it is that he does for us
(though that exceeds all merit and capacity) but rather a quanto, how
incomprehensibly great he is that does all this for us. And because God has no
need of us (our adoration is no increase to him) and it is impossible to
return to him quod aequale, Psalm. 16.1.
that which shall equal his grace and goodness; much less come near to that
immesurable love wherewith he loves us (for the creature can never requite his
Creator, nor the child ever recompense his parents, either in nature or
grace:) let us endeavor to do that which only remains in our power, that is,
quod possibile, all that is possible for a creature to do, that is, offer to
God the sacrifice of our souls and bodies in Adoration, and Prostration, and
Kneeling, and Contrition; Ex toto, with all our hearts, and minds, and power,
Luke 10.27.
and strength. And if we thus obey David's venite, Come, let us worship and fall
down, and kneel, and weep before our Lord and maker, in this life; when this
life shall be ended, we shall be partakers of Christ's Venite, Come ye blessed of my
Father, Matt. 25.34.
receive the kingdom prepared for you. Which God grant, etc. Amen.

A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING KNEELING at the Communion.
THis is the general doctrine concerning kneeling in the worship of God, as it
is a transcendent, and to be used in all the parts thereof, to express the
humiliation of our outward man, as well as the humility of the inward. And at
that time when I spoke thereof, I proceeded no further. Since, being occasioned
to descend to the particular of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I have added
this ensuing discourse; giving such reasons to others as most moved my self,
and (as I conceive) the whole Church, to tender this duty of kneeling to God;
to whom all duty and service of soul and body is always due, but most
specially to be guien when we are more nearly conjoined to God, and
participate most of his graces. And the Sacraments are Canales gratiae, The
channels and conduits, wherein Gods mercies and graces do run, and are
conveyed to us; Exhibent quod signant, They exhibit that to us, which they
signify, and represent.

For John Baptist says, Mark 1.8.
I baptize you with water, but he (that is Christ) shall baptize you with the
holy Ghost. The grace of the holy Ghost is there signified, and there
exhibited. Else he would have said, ille dabit, not ille baptizabit, he will
give you the holy Ghost, which may be given otherwise then by Baptism: not, he
will baptize you with the holy Ghost; so the holy Ghost that is signified by
Baptism, is given in baptism: and therefore Baptism exhibiteth that which it
signifies. Mark 16.16.
And he that believes and is baptized shall be saved; and salvation is the
consummation of grace; and Baptism by water and the holy Ghost, makes a
passage or entrance into the kingdom of Heaven; Joan. 3.5.
Acts. 2.38.
and obtains remission of sins, Repent and be baptized for remission of
sins. By which Christ does cleanse his Church in the lauer of regeneration
by the word. Ephesians. 5.26.
Ephesians. 5.26.

The Mileuitan Council said well, C. 2.
Paruuli, qui nihil peccatorum in semetipsis adhuc committere potuerunt, ideo
in peccatorum remissionem veraciter baptizantur, vt in eis regeneratione
mundetur, quod generatione contraxerant. Little children, who as yet could not
commit any sin in themselves, are there truly baptized for remission of
sins: that, that may be cleansed in them by regeneration, which was
contracted by generation: In Symbolo Niceno. 2. C. 25.
As the Councels of Nice and Constantinople said, I believe one Baptism for
the remission of sins. And Concilium Arausicanum said, Hoc etiam secundum
fidem Catholicam credimus, quod accepta per baptismum gratia, omnes baptizati
(Christo auxiliante and cooperante) quae ad salutem pertinent, possint and
debeant (si fideliter laborare voluerint) adimplere. We believe that by grace
received in Baptism, all the baptized (Christ helping, and working with them)
may and ought, (if they will labor faithfully) fulfill those things that
pertain to salvation. Cyprian says, Sacramenta quidem, etc. The Sacraments
(as much as in them is) cannot be without their own virtue, neither does the
divine Majesty absent himself from the mysteries by any means. Cyprian de
Coena Dom. Hom. 14. in Luc. 2.
And Origin says, Sordes natiuitatis, per baptismi Sacramentum deponuntur. The
uncleanness or spots of our Nativity, are laid down by the Sacrament of
Baptism. Caro abluitur, vt anima emaculetur; Tertul. de Baptismo.
Caro corpore Christi, and sanguine vescitur, vt anima de Deo saginetur. The
flesh is washed or Baptized, that the soul may be made clean or without
spot; the flesh is fedd with the body and blood of Christ, that the soul may
be fed, and fatted with God. Optatus says, Lib. 5. contra Parmentum.
Baptisma Christianorum, Trinitate confectum, gratiam confert; si repetatur,
facit vitae iacturam. The Baptism of Christians, given in the Name of the
Trinity, conferreth grace; (mark that word) and, if it be iterated, it
effects loss of life. It was S. Tract. 80. In Joan.
Augustines question, Vnde tanta virtus aquae, vt corpus tangat, and cor
abluat? Whence comes this force to the water, that it should touch the body
and cleanse the soul?

And surely if this Sacrament consist of two things, the sign, and the thing
signified, it must necessarily follow, that grace, which is the thing
signified, must be exhibited in, with, or by the sign, or else it will cease
to be a Sacrament, for it shall have but one part. And therefore Calvin out of
S. Lib. 4. Instit. C. 17. Sect. 35.
Augustine makes this collection, where he says, Sacramenta in solis electis
efficere quod figurant, that, The Sacraments do effect that which they figure
only in the elect. Ib.. 10.
And his judgment is clear in the point, Fateor sane fractionem panis
symbolum esse, non rem ipsam; verum hoc posito, a symbolitamen exhibitione rem
ipsam exhiberi, rite colligemus. Nisi enim quis fallacem vocare Deum volet,
inane ab ipso symbolum proponi, nunquam dicere audeat. I truly confess, that
the breaking of the bread is the symbol, and not the thing it self: but this
being granted, we rightly gather from the exhibiting of the symbol, that the
thing it self is exhibited. For unless a man will call God false or
fallacious, he will never dare to say, that God proposes unto us an empty
sign or symbol. And thereupon he proposes a rule to be held by all godly
men, that so often as they see the signs or symboles instituted of God; Illic
rei signatae veritatem adesse certo cogitent, ac sibipersuadeant: They should
certainly think and persuade themselves, that the truth of the thing
signified is there present. And again, Dico igitur in coenae mysterio, per
symbola panis and vini Christum vere nobis exhiberi, adeoque corpus, and
sanguinem eius. I say then, that in the mystery of the Supper, by the signs
and symboles of bread and wine, Christ is truly exhibited unto us, his body
and his blood.. 5.
And again a little before, Vbi idipsum intus complet, quod exterius designat.
Where (that is in the Sacrament) he does inwardly fulfill that which he does
outwardly design.

Now the spring is on high, Grace is desursum, Jacob. 1.17.
from above, from the Father of lights: the channels or conduits are deorsum,
from below, and run in the valleys of humility, that is, in humble souls, and
humbled bodies; so that the Sacrament must be received with reverence,
adoration and kneeling.

Again the Sacraments are, vasa consecrationis or dedicationis, the vessels or
instruments of our consecration, in which we are offered up, and dedicated to
God and his service. In Baptism we are offered up and dedicated to be
Christians and members of Christ. In the Lords Supper we are offered up and
dedicated as living and holy Sacrifices to God; And things consecrated,
dedicated, and sacrificed, must be offered up with all humility of soul and
body, because in them both our souls and bodies are offered up to God.

Now before I come to the reasons themselves, it shall be needful to clear
one point, that much troubles many weak consciences: who out of an affected
tenderness, refuse to kneel in the worship of Christ, for fear they should
commit Idolatry with the sanctified creatures. But we are so far from
worshipping or adoring the bread and wine after consecration, as the Church of
Rome does, that we hold it to be no better then Artolatry and Idolatry.

It is true, the hypostaticall union of the deity and humanity in the person
of Christ is such, that divine worship is due, and was ever tendered to the
humanity of Christ: Lignum nudum non est tactui inaccessibile: atqui igni
coniunctum, and carbo factum, non propter seipsum, sed propter coniunctum
ignem, inaccessibile fit: and caro, secundum sui naturam, non est adorabilis:
adoratur autem in incarnato Deo Verbo, non propter seipsam, sed propter
coniunctum ipsi secundum hypostasin Deum Verbum. The wood, says Damascen, may
be touched of it self, but being set on fire, it cannot be touched; and the
flesh is not to be adored for it self; but being the flesh of Christ, and
joined in hypostaticall union with the deity in one person, we adore not bare
flesh vt creatura est, as it is a creature, Damas. lib. 4. Fidei ortho. c. 3.
but carnem Dei, and Deum incarnatum, the flesh of God, and God incarnate. Yea,
we dare not but adore Christ's manhood, because it is inseparably assumed by his
Deity into the unity of his person. But in the Sacrament there is no
impanation, nor incorporation of his deity with the bread and wine, as the
Godhead dwells bodily with the manhood in his incarnation: and therefore it
is most easy to make a manifest separation between the adoration of Christ's
humanity, as he is God and man, which is to be done every where; and the
adoration of the Sacrament, where Christ's flesh and blood is exhibited and
received by us; which may never be done to the Elements, though it must
always be given to Christ himself: because there can be no such union of the
Godhead with the Elements, that they should make one person, that is, God
blessed for ever. Adoramus Deum in mysterijs, non mysteria; in Sacramentis, non
Sacramenta. P. Mornay. de Miss. l. 4. c. 7.
So then though we do adore Christ when we receive the Sacrament, as
antiquity did, yet we do not adore the species, or Elements, as our
superstitious adversaries do; because there is no color of proof that ever
the ancient Fathers of the Primitive and purest Church, Vide Beza inter Epist.
Caluini Epist. 309.
did give any such adoration to the Sacraments, or external signs. The
questions of curiosity de modo, of the manner of Christ's presence: of Con, and
trans, and sub, and cum, or in, and the like, which now vex all Christendom,
were not then hatched, and simple faith then believed that God performed his
word, without doubting or disputing: whereas now Magnae scientiae est esse
Christianum; It is a matter of great knowledge, to attain to all the
subtilties and niceties that are imposed as articles of necessity.

And surely in this point, those men must not only be accounted nescire, to
be ignorant and know little in point of faith, that cannot distinguish
between the worship of God and Christ; when we receive the Sacrament, and the
worship of the Sacrament or elements; but rather, after so many and so clear
resolutions and demonstrations, they must be concluded, Nolle scire, that it is
a wilful and affected ignorance in them, that accuse our Church of Artolatry
and Idolatry, which so fully and so plainly professes that she gives
adoration and worship to God and Christ only, to whom it is due at all times
and in all places, and dares not give any worship to the bread and wine, to
which it can never be lawfully given.

For why? Do we not daily worship God in his holy Temple, and yet not worship
the Temple it self? The high Priest in Sancto Sanctorum, in the holy place
worshipped God before the Mercie-seat and the Cherubims, but he did not worship
either the Mercy-seat or the Cherubims, or the holy place. And we worship
Christ at his table or Altar, and at the receiving of the Sacraments, but we
utterly renounce the worship, either of the Altar or Sacraments; We do not in
imitation of the superstitions of Rome, use any elevation of the consecrated
mysteries. We hold them, after they are blessed by the words of Christ, to be
reverend and sacred mysteries, so consecrated for use, not for Adoration; to
convey the flesh and blood of Christ to the believing soul, not to the carnal
teeth or belly. We remember the words of our Master, Accipite, comedite, hoc
est corpus meu^: and we wonder and admire the order: First, accipite, and
comedite, take and eat, and then, hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, and
blood. And we worship Christ when we receive his Flesh and Blood: but we
destroy not the nature of the Sacrament, to make a conversion of the substance
of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, or to annihilate the
substances, the accidents still remaining and hanging in the air, without any
subject: Neither do we give that rent and tribute of divine worship to the
creature, which is proper only to the Creator: we deal not with the
Sacrament, as they of Rome do with their Images; which they adore perse, and
propter se, by themselves, and for themselves: We worship God and Christ, when
we receive the Sacrament, and we hold a most reverend opinion of the holy and
reverend mysteries; but we worship them not, neither by themselves, nor for
themselves.

And we pray our Brethren, members of the Church of England (as we are) to
conceive so charitably of their mother, that she will never give any the least
approbation of the worship of the Elements of bread and wine: since the
superstitious Papists, who brought in, not the adoration of God at the
receiving of the Sacrament, (for that is much elder then the new doctrines of
the Papacy) but the adoration of the Sacrament, are ashamed and disclaim this
superstitious worship of the elements or species (as they call them). I produce
one of the greatest and learned Jesuits, Suares: his words are, In
Eucharistia mente discernendus est Christus a visibili signo; and Christus
quidem adorandus est, non tamen Sacramentum, quia species illae sunt
resrceatae, and inanimes, and consequenter incapaces adorationis: neque enim
satis est vt Christus sub illis sit, quia etiam Deus est in anima tanquam in
templosuo, and tamen adoratur Deus, and non anima. Tom. 3. Quest. 79. Art. 8.
did. 65. Sect. 1. In the Eucharist, Christ is to be discerned by the mind,
from the visible sign, and Christ truly is to be adored, but not the
Sacrament, because those Elements are things created, and without life, and
consequently incapable of Adoration; for it is not enough that Christ is under
them, for God also is in the soul, as in his Temple, and yet God is
worshipped, and not the soul.

Ratio prima, quod sit pars cultus diuini.
THe first Reason then is this: It is Pars cultus Dei, a part of divine
worship; In which I understand not the worship of God in a large sense, for
every act that concurreth in the worship of God: but in a more near and
proper sense, as it does exhibit and offer up somewhat to God. I know that
all antiquity in their orderly Liturgies did intermingle many things which may
not be properly called divine worship; in which respect they had both Sermons,
and readings of Scriptures, which go as parts of divine service; and this also
is still observed by them that have no Liturgy, nor order in the worship of
God, but what every private man's fancy does dedicate unto him.

And therefore they that brought all ad nudum nomen, to the bare name of
worship, and left nothing of reverend antiquity, but a Psalm, a Chapter, and
a Sermon, admit somewhat, if not all, into the worship of God, that may not
properly be called divine worship. For reading and preaching are Doctrina
cultus, not cultus ipse, the doctrine that teaches, and the way that leads
to Gods worship, but not properly the worship it self: For worship offers
and sends somewhat upward to God, and these do only bring somewhat downward
from God to us, and serve to feed the understanding, and stir up the
affection: but the offering of our hearts and souls in some one kind or
other, that is indeed, the worship of God, Ascensus mentis ad Deum. When God
speaks or sends to us, Colit, he does till and dress us, as the husbandman
does his field, or vineyard; but when we speak and offer to God, then we do
indeed Colere Deum, worship and adore God by our devotion and service; in which
respect the wisdom of the Church has so ordered that all the worship of God
should not be prayer and praise only, least too much intention should weary
out the soul, as too much and too long bending the bow does make it slagge,
and grow weak; in which respect reading is mixed with praying: nor yet all the
worship of God should be reading, lest the bow standing still unbent, should
not shoot at all, and so send up no prayers, not so much as short eiaculations
into heaven: In which respect, all the Liturgy is not spent in reading.

And the reason is, that in Gods worship, these three might ever be joined,
Lectio, meditatio, oration; reading, as the food of the soul; meditation, as
the ruminating and digesting of it; and prayer, as the force and strength that
presents it unto God. Lectio docet, meditatio praeparat, oration adorat; reading
teaches the duty of worship; meditation applies and prepares the heart to
worship; and prayer offers up and tendereth the worship it self unto God.
Now the Sacrament is a part of Gods worship: not as reading or meditation is:
but as prayer, and the like, which properly offer divine adoration to God. For
why? The Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace; in which, as God
offers to us his Son in his death and passion, and the graces of the holy
Spirit; so we offer to him our selves.

In Baptism the Sacrament of Spiritual generation, the water washes the
body; and the Blood of Christ washes the soul: there God becomes our Father
by adoption, and we offer up our selves, and our children, to be sons of God
by grace; Aug. Tract. 2. in loan.
Dedit vnicum, vt non esset vnicus, God gives his only Son to us, that he
might no longer be an only Son, but make many brethren unto himself, and
sons and heirs to God. Christ gives himself to us to be our head, and we
consecrate and dedicate our selves to Christ to be his members; God becomes
our Lord, and we become his servants: we offer our selves to fight as soldiers
under his colors; and he receives us into his army and protection, and arms
us by his grace to fight his battles; so that Baptism is as a mutual or
reciprocal covenant, that he should be our God, and we should be his people,
consecrated and sealed to his service.

The like is done in the Eucharist, the Sacrament of increase; there the Flesh
and Blood of Christ, the meat and drink of our souls is given to us for our
growth, and we there give and offer up our whole selves a holy and living
sacrifice acceptable to God, which is our reasonable service of him. The first,
of regeneration, is done of us being children, when we are not able to promise
for our selves; in this of nourishment, we do contract by our selves that he
shall be our God, and we will be his holy Temple; that he shall be our head,
and we will be his living members, that having received life from his life, and
spirit from his Spirit, we will no more live to our selves, but unto him; that
so we may say with the Apostle Viuo ego, iam non ego, I live, yet not I, Gal.
2.27.
but Christ lives in me: we cease to live the life of sin, that we may
altogether live the life of grace. In which respect, the fathers call this
Sacrament Latreiam, divine worship. Cyril. Epist. ad Nectar. Actor, Council.
Ephe. Tom. 1 c. 14 apud Biunium page 714.
Dum vnigeniti filij Dei, hoc est, Jesus Christi mortem, and ex mortuis
resurrectionem annunciamus, eiusdemque in Coelum assumptionem, profitemur
incruentum in Ecclesia Dei cultum nos obire, mysticasque benedictiones adire,
eaque ratione sanctificari, vtpote sacrae carnis, and pretiosi sanguinis
Christi omnium saluatoris participes effecti: While we do show the death of the
only begotten Son of God, that is Jesus Christ, and his resurrection from
the dead, and his assumption into heaven, we profess to perform the unbloody
worship of God in the Church, and come to the mystical blessings, and by that
means to be sanctified, as being made partakers of the sacred flesh and the
precious blood of Christ the Savior of us all: Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. c.
4.
so says S. Cyrill. And S. Augustine says, Hinc nos seruitutem quae latria
graece dicitur sieve in quibusdam Sacramentis, sieve in nobis ipsis debemus, We
do owe to God that service, which in Greek is called divine worship, either in
certain Sacraments, or in our selves. Again, the oblation of sacrifice
pertains Ad cultum Latreiae to divine worship. August. contra Faust. Man. l.
20. cap. 21.
And again, Sacrifice is divine worship. Aug de Trinit. l. 3. c. 10.
And again, Infantes non nouerunt quod in altari ponitur, and peracta pietatis
celebratione consumitur, Infants know not that which is set upon the Altar, and
performed in the celebration of piety: where this Sacrament is called piety.

But in my judgment Calvin does best express this point, for he defines a
sacrament thus: Instit. lib. 4. cap. 14.. 1.
It is, Testimonium diuinae in nos gratiae, externo signo confirmatum, cum
mutua nostrae erga ipsum pietatis testificatione, A testimony of divine grace
in us, confirmed by an external sign, with a mutual testification of our
service or piety toward him. And that this piety is to Godward, it appears
in the word erga ipsum; And again, when he says, That as God does seal the
promises of his benevolence to our consciences, by these external symbols, so
we in like sort do testify our piety to him, as well before him and his
Angels, as in the sight of men. So the Sacrament is an action of our piety to
God: and piety is the inward devotion, or adoration of the soul.

And therefore Viguerius in his institutions, which are a brief of Schole
divinity, collecteth thus, That, Viguerius cap. 16. ver. 8.
Gratia Sacramentalis ad duo ordinari videtur, videlicet ad tollendos defectus
peccatorum praeteritorum in quantum transeunt actu, and remanent reatu; and
iterum, ad perficiendam animam, in his quae pertinent ad cultum Dei, secundum
religionem Christianae vitae. Sacramental grace is ordained for two ends, 1.
to take away the defects of sins past, in as much as they be past in act,
and remain in the guilt. 2. to perfect the soul in those things that
appertain to the worship of God, according to the Religion of Christian life.
And ver. 3. He says, Dicitur signum datum ad sanctificandum hominem in cultum
and honorem Dei, that it is a sign given to sanctify man, to the worship and
honor of God. And after, In vsu Sacramentorum duo possunt considerari, Cultus
diuinus, and sanctificatio hominis; In the use of the Sacraments two things may
be considered: The worship of God, and the sanctification of man.

As in the Law, Circumcision did consecrate and seal the seed of Abraham to
God; and the Passover did prepare them to the sacrifice of God in the
wilderness; Yea, and this Passover is called Religio, Religion; What is this
service? Exodus 12.26. and Victima transitus Domini, ver. 27. the sacrifice of
the Lords Passover. And Exodus 13.10. Custodies huiusmodi cultum, thou shall
observe this ordinance or form of worship: so in the Gospel, Baptism does
regenerate, and consecrate us to God; and the Eucharist does offer us up in
sacrifice to him. And this Sacrament may better be called an Act of Religion or
piety, and the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, since that was Typus agni
paschalis, a type of the Paschal Lamb, and here are offered membra agni
Paschalis, the members of the Paschal Lamb.

And this offering up of our selves to him, is indeed the true and daily
sacrifice of the Christian Church, which being the mystical body of Christ,
cannot offer Christ's natural body, which Christ offered once for all upon the
Cross; but offers his mystical body, that is her self, by Christ her high
Priest and head, unto God, as S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 2.5. of which I shall
speak more in the next reason.

To this I add the confession of the Adversaries of kneeling at the Lords
Table, which call it a will worship, and addition to the worship of God. I omit
all others, and instance in one only, that would seem to have collected the
force of all his fellows; one that wrote an answer to D. Spark, D. Couell,
M. Hutton, and M. Rogers; whose arguments you shall find confuted in the end
of this discourse) his fifth argument is this, page 38.

To perform private worship during the time and act of the public, is the
doing of that which is unlawful.

He that kneeleth at the instant of receiving the Sacrament, performs
private worship, during the time and act of the public.

Therefore he that kneeleth at the instant of the receiving the Sacrament,
does that which is unlawful.

Here it is assumed and confessed, that the receiving of the Sacrament is an
act of public worship, and kneeling is a private worship in a public. So
this first Proposition is clear and manifest, that this Sacrament is a
principal part of Gods worship: wherein we our selves, and not others for us,
with a full and free consent of understanding and will, do offer our greatest
offering to God, that is our whole selves, and Qui scipsum dedit, nihil sibi
reliquit.

The second Proposition is; In public and solemn Adoration, the devotion of
the soul, and the worship, bowing, and kneeling of the body; the bending of
the knees of the soul, and the bending the knees of the body; humility of the
soul, and humiliation of the body, are required. And this is proved out of
the words of the Psalm, where David calls to Adoration, Psalm. 95.6.
and Prostration and kneeling; and by many examples of Scripture, and reason,
that both soul and body must concur in the pacifying of God, as soul and
body concurred in the offense of God: that soul and body must pay this rent
and tribute to their Maker, especially in the Sacrament where they receive
their Maker; and the soul must inform, and animate the body in grace, as well
as in nature, and the body must mutually excite the soul in the actions of
piety, as well as of civility: and to kneel to God with the body, and not to
kneel and be humble in soul, is to play the hypocrite, and to dissemble with
God; and to bow the knees of the soul in humility, and not to bow the knees
of the body in public like and solemn Adoration, is to be ashamed of God, and
to deny to profess him before men.

The conclusion is necessary out of these premises; therefore, in the act and
instant of receiving the Sacrament, in which we offer up our selves to God, we
must kneel in all humiliation.

It is true that in our Liturgies we stand up at the saying of the Creed, and
reading of the Gospel, and we sit at the reading of the Psalms and Chapters:
For, besides that there must be some variety in so long an action for the ease
of men, who would sometimes sit, and sometimes stand, and also an uniformity
must be observed in that variety, the very gestures fit, and may seem to
proceed Ex natura rei, out of the nature of the thing it self. For hearers do
sit, as the Preachers have Cathedras Chaires, so the hearers have Subsellia
Pewes or seats. And we stand at the Creed, for it is gestus Confessorum; the
gesture of Confessors and soldiers that fight the good fight of faith, in
token that in the strength of this faith only we shall stand in the presence
of God, and tread all our spiritual enemies under our feet: State in fide. 1.
Cor. 16.13.
We stand at the reading of the Gospel: it is Gestus expectantium, the gesture
of those that expect the glad tidings of the Gospel of peace; as if we did with
all cheerfulness lift up the ears of our bodies, as well as our souls at
the happy news of our salvation: Ephesians. 6.14.
State, succincti lumbos. But when we pray, and offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, then we kneel: for it is Gestus petentium
and offerentium, the gesture of suitors and petitioners that desire to receive
and of those that offer, and desire to be received and accepted at Gods hand.
And if in the receiving of this Sacrament we be petitioners for the greatest
graces, and offerers of that Sacrifice that God will only accept, that is,
Nos, 2. Cor. 12.14.
not Nostra, nothing of ours but our selves; and God will not accept any thing
of ours, unless he first accept our selves, though it might be tolerable in
some part of our prayers and Petitions not to kneel, yet in this great and
most weighty part of our devotion, and piety, it is a matter of great weight
and moment to kneel most devoutly, and piously before the Table of our most
bountiful and gracious Father, who in Justice does resist the proud, with all
severity.

Ratio secunda, Sacrificium est.
THe second Reason, it is Sacrificium, or Congeries Sacrificiorum; a sacrifice,
or rather a collection, and gathering together, a sum or Epitome of all the
sacrifices of Christianity. And sacrifice was ever to be offered with all
humility of soul, and body, and therefore with kneeling, the true gesture and
representation of humility.

I would not be mistaken, as if I spoke in favor of any external daily
sacrifice of the Church, such as the Jews had in time of the Law; for the one
Sacrifice of Christ, once offered upon the Cross, has made a full and perfect
redemption, and needs no new Sacrifice, nor reiteration of the old to perfect
it. Hebr. 9.12
By his own blood, he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us. He must not offer himself often, says S. Paul,
Heb. 9.25. For then he must have often suffered. If Christ be often offered,
he must often suffer; that is the Apostles rule, verse. 26. (so no suffering,
and therefore no offering:) Once in the end of the world has he appeared, to
put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. And again, v. 28. Christ was
once offered to bear the sins of many. Again, Hebr. 10.10.
By the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ, once for all. And verse. 14. By one offering he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified.

The Church, according to Christ's commandment, keeps the memory of this
offering in this Sacrament. Do this in remembrance of me: but she does not
reiterate the action, or take upon her to offer the body of Christ: for though
it be, De meo, flesh of our flesh, and Meum, ours, given for us on the Cross,
and to us in the Sacrament, yet it is not given to us ad sacrificandum, but ad
recipiendum; not to sacrifice the natural body of Christ; for that is proper
to Christ to be Hostia and Sacerdos, the Sacrifice and the Sacrificer; and no
man may offer that in sacrifice that is not his own; 2. Sam. 24.24.
As David would not offer sacrifice till he bought it, though Araunah offered
to give it to the King freely, as a King. And the word of the Psalm applied
by the Apostle is, Corpus dedisti mihi, Hebr. 10.5.
thou have given me a body, which is only to be offered by him whose body it
is. And the Apostle exhorts, Offerte corpora vestra, Romans 12.1. It is not
Corpus Christi, offer up your own bodies, whereof you have power, not Christ's
body whereof he only has power. Joan. 10.18.
Ego ponam animam meam and nemo tollit; I lay down my life and no man takes
it from me: but it is given to us to receive it, and therewith all the fruits
and benefits of his death and passion. And the word, Hoc facite, is not
properly Hoc sacrificate, do this, Luc. 22.19.
that is, sacrifice this: he must sacrifice it, and we must commemorate and
represent it; for it is hoc facite, do this, not simply sacrifice, but do
this that I have done, that is, Take bread and wine and bless and consecrate
it, and receive it as my body and blood; and Christ did not sacrifice his body
there, but on the Cross. The Evangelists say, Effunditur, my blood is shed;
but it is Praesens pro futuro; the present tense for the future; a phrase most
common and familiar in Scripture, because of the certainety of it: or else,
Effunditur virtute, effundetur actu, it is shed in virtue, Hebr. 13.8.
Christ yesterday, to day, and the same for ever; but to be shed in act: else
it must needs follow that Christ's blood was not in his body, but shed on the
earth, before it was shed by the whips, and thorns, and nails, and spear,
and so he suffered before he suffered, yea, he suffered when he suffered not.

In which respect I cannot sufficiently marvel at Bellarmins subtlety,
Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa. C. 2.
that will have this Sacrament to be an external proper sacrifice, not only
as the name sacrifice does signify rem sacrificatam, the thing sacrificed,
that is, Christ crucified, which is there truly given and received; but also
as it does signify actionem sacrificij, or sacrificandi, the action of
sacrifice: so that the action of Christ's sacrifice on the Cross, and of the
Priests in the Host, must be one and the same action. For if they be diverse
and many in number, then Christ must be offered, and so suffer often, which is
directly against the Apostle. And Christ and the Priest must be one high
Priest: and the same action must be bloody and unbloody; and have sufferings
and no sufferings in it. For the number does vary the action; and two diverse
agents, must produce two diverse actions, and blood and no blood, passion and no
passion must necessarily make many and diverse actions in number, and so Christ
must suffer, and offer often.

And as absurd is his other conceit; Bellarm. ibid. C. 1.
That one and the same Action, should be Res and Repraesentatio rei, the thing,
and the representation of the thing; As if he should say, that one and the same
man is homo viuus, and homo pictus, a living man, and the image and statue of a
man; that the Picture and the thing pictured is all one; that a sound Logitian,
and a subtle Sophister is all one. Surely in this conceit Bellarmine is a
plain Sophister, and no Logitian; for he does instance only in this
particular of this Sacrament, that it is the representation of Christ's
sacrifice upon the Cross, as Christ and all antiquity call it, and the very
sacrifice it self or action of the sacrifice; and he cannot give an instance
in any thing else in the whole world; in no creature, no not in the Creator.
For the Son, Heb. 1.3.
that is the brightness and Image of his Father, though he be one in essence
w^^h the Father, yet is not one person with the Father; so that, if the
Sacrament be the representation of the true, proper, and external sacrifice of
the Church, then it cannot be the sacrifice it self.

And the truth is, that the Church has ever offered true sacrifices, and that
in this Sacrament; but, as Saint Peter speaks, 1. Petr. 2.5.
they be Hostiae spirituales, spiritual sacrifices, acceptable unto God, per
Iesum Christum, by Jesus Christ; so the Church offers her daily spiritual
sacrifice, not Iesum, but per Iesum Christum, not Jesus Christ, he only has
power to offer himself, but by Jesus Christ her high Priest, by whom they are
presented unto, and accepted of God. But although this Sacrament be not an
external proper sacrifice, as our adversaries would make it, yet it has in it
spiritual sacrifices of diverse sorts, all which require all humility of soul
and body in the offerers. For to say nothing of the Elements, that were in all
times and ages brought by the people in sportulis, in little baskets, and so in
a sort offered up to be consecrated for the use of the congregation, which is
now done by public charge; there are besides diverse other spiritual
Sacrifices in the whole action of the ministration of this Sacrament.

First then, God; Secondly, as they were communicated and eaten by those men
that offered them: so this Sacrament of the Lords supper, which conteines a
commemoration of Christ's one and only all-sufficient Sacrifice, consummated
upon the Cross, and never more to be reiterated by any man, has the same
double respect in it; and therefore as it is represented to God by our
consecration, so it may well be called Sacrificium repraesentatiuum, or
commemoratiuum, a representative, or commemoratiue Sacrifice. And that is
warranted in the words of our Savior, Do this, in mei co^memorationem, Luke 22
19.
in remembrance of me, or of my death; and so expounded by the Apostle, so
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, 1. Cor. 11.26.
Annunciatis mortem Domini, ye show forth, or represent and commemorate the
Lords death till he come. And as it is received by us, it may be called
Sacrificium communicatiuum, a communicatiue sacrifice, or the communication or
application of that sacrifice that was offered for us on the Cross: and that
is most plain in the Apostle; 1. Cor. 10.16.
The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? So that though there be not idem sacrificium, the same sacrifice, as it
denotes the action of sacrificing or offering, which is here done only by way
of representation, yet it is Idem sacrificatum, the same thing sacrificed;
Christ crucified, that is, represented to God, and communicated to us.

And surely every one that does desire to be heard, and therefore concludes
his prayers with these words, Per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, does represent and offer Christ crucified to God, and
entreates remission and grace, through his death, and passion. And Christ our
high Priest that sits at the right hand of God, does at that instant execute
his office, and make intercession for us, by representing his wounds or scarres
to his Father. In Baptism, in like manner, when we do consecrate and dedicate
our selves to Gods service, we do as it were offer up Christ crucified by way
of representation, as if we did explicate and unfold the passion of Christ, at
that time desiring to be accepted for his sake. And that made S. In exposit.
incho. Epist ad Romans Tom. 4.
Augustine to say, Quodeo tempore quisque prose offert, pro peccatis suis, quum
eiusdem passionis fide dedicatur; at that time every one offers the sacrifice
of Christ's passion, for his sins, when he is dedicated in the faith of that
passion: and the manner he explicateth with Quodammodo offert, he offers in a
sort, not properly, but by way of representation, and application. And this is
made good by the words of the Apostle; Romans 6.3.
Know you not that as many of us as are baptized into Christ Jesus, are
baptized into his death? And again, v. 4.
Consepulti per baptismum in mortem, buried with him by baptism into death.
And again, v. 5.
Complantati similitudini mortis, planted together in the likeness of his
death; so our Baptism is a representation of Christ's death. But this Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ, as a more ample and perfect image, does more
fully represent Christ's death, and by way of memorial offer it to God, as
being instituted and commanded for a representation and commemoration thereof.
And this is generally received of antiquity, and so allowed by the Romish
Sacrificers, though they proceed further without ground or reason.

For why? De Trinit. lib. 4. cap. 14.
S. Augustine said well, Ipse, cui offert, qui offert, quique offertur: these
be proper to Christ, to be the Godhead to whom he offers, to be the Priest
that offreth, and the Sacrifice that is offered up to God. The true Sacrifice
that is due only to the true God is that, Contra Faustum lib. 20. cap. 18.
Quo eius altar solus Christus impleuit; with which Christ only filled his
Altar. As for Christians, vnde iam Christiani peracti eiusdem sacrificij
memoriam celebrant sacrosancta oblatione, and participatione corporis and
sanguinis Christi: They celebrate the memory of this sacrifice, performed on
the Cross, by the sacred oblation and participation of the body and blood of
Christ. So Christ's sacrifice is the truth, and ours the representation of that
truth. Aug. Epist. 23.
And in his 23. Epistle, Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in seipso, and
tamen in Sacramento nonsolum per omnes Paschae solennitates, sed omni die
populis immolatur? He was once offered in himself, and yet in the Sacrament
he is not only offered yearly at the solemnity of the Passover, but also
every day. And he gives a reason, Sienim Sacramenta quandam similitudinem
earum rerum quarum Sacramenta sunt non haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent.
Ex hac autem similitudine plerunque etiam ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt:
Sacraments have a similitude of things whereof they are Sacraments, else they
were not sacraments. And by this similitude they borrow the names of those
things whereof they are Sacraments.

Hoc sacrificium exemplum est illius; Chrisost. ad Heb. 10.
this sacrifice is an example or imitation of that sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross. So Christ offered, and we offer, sed hoc quod nos agimus, recordatio
est sacrificij; but that which we do, is a commemoration of a sacrifice.

Again, S. Augustine says, Aug. quest. 61. inter. 83.
Dominus noster Jesus Christus, ostenditur Rex noster: ipse est etiam Sacerdos
noster in aeternum, secundum ordinem Melchisedec, quiseipsum obtulit
holocaustum pro peccatis nostris, and eius sacrificij similitudinem celebrandam
in suae passionis memoriam commendauit: He is our King for ever after the
order of Melchisedech, who offered himself a sacrifice for our sins, and he
commended the similitude of this sacrifice in the remembrance of his passion.

These and many other sentences of the Fathers, Lomb. lib. 4. Did. 12. G.
made the Master of the sentences to rest in this; that this Sacrament is a
representation, or memory of that Sacrifice performed on the Altar of the
Cross; and further went not the divinity of his time. And Thomas, that lived
long after him, knew no other doctrine. And he gives only two Reasons why it
is called Immolatio Christi, the sacrificing, 3. qu. 83. art. 1.
or immolation of Christ. First, because it is Imago quaedam passionis Christi.
It is a certain Image or representation of Christ's passion: as Images are
called by the names of those things whereof they are images, as S. Augustine
says. And when we look on a painted wall or table, we use to say, this is
Cicero, this is Salust, and the like. So the celebration of this Sacrament, is
a representative image of Christ passion, which is the true immolation of him,
and therefore it is called the Immolation of Christ; and there he produces
Chrysostomes words cited before.

The second Reason is, Quia participes efficimur fructus Dominicae passionis;
Because by this Sacrament we are made partakers of the fruit and benefit of
Christ's passion, therefore it is called, the sacrifice of Christ; so Thomas
goes no further then representation, and participation. I descend no further:
for by this it is plain, who are Veteratores and Nouatores, the corrupters of
antiquity, that removed the ancient bounds, and the Authors of Novelty, that
not only speak old Divinity, noue in new words and forms, but also bring in
noua, new and strange doctrines, and Articles never heard of. That this
Sacrament is the only proper external daily sacrifice of the Church, without
which the other two relatiues cannot stand; viz. that there is no Religion
without Priesthood, nor Priesthood without sacrifice; here it is manifest where
the house began to run to decay, and where the enemy sowed Tares: For as
Thomas says, The Altar is the representation of Christ's Cross, and the Priest
bears the image of Christ our High Priest; and so his sacrifice is but a
representation of Christ's sacrifice, exemplum illius, as before.

Again, The. Qu. 73. Art. 4.
compare this Sacrament with three times, and it will have many names: Respectu
praeteriti, concerning the time past, in as much as it is a commemoration of
the Lords Passion, which was the true Sacrifice, Secundum hoc nominatur
sacrificium, in this respect it is called a sacrifice. Respectu praesentis, in
respect of the time present, that is the unity of the Church, because men are
united and gathered together by this Sacrament, it it is called Communio or
Synaxis, a Communion. Respectu futuri, in respect of the future time, Viaticum,
our spiritual food that gives us strength to attain it.

It is called Eucharistia the Eucharist, or good grace of God; because the
grace of God is eternal life; or else because it really contains Christ,
that is full of grace: So it is called Metalepsis or assumptio, an assumption,
because by this we assume or are made partakers of the Deity of the Son.
Again, in his answer, It is called a Sacrifice, in as much as it represents
the Passion of Christ; And it is called Hostia an Host, because it contains
Christ, who is the oblation and sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God,
Ephe. 5.

This was the received doctrine of the fathers, and ancient School. And that
this offering of Christ's death by way of representation, cannot be the proper
external sacrifice of the Church, I prove by these Reasons.

First, Externum propter internum; as God first looked upon Abel, Genesis 4 4.
and then upon his Sacrifice, not upon Abel for his Sacrifice, but on the
Sacrifice for Abels sake. First he offered himself a Lamb to God, and then he
offered his Lamb, de adipibus, a well chosen Lamb of the best and fattest,
none was too good for God. First God accepts the man, then the gift, not as
men do, that so accept the man as they like and feel his gift. If then
Christ's Sacrifice be external and offered by us, it follows that Christ's
Sacrifice must be accepted, for the inward Sacrifice of our hearts, and so we
are more acceptable to God then Christ is: which is an horrible blasphemy.

Secondly, Sacrificium propter sacrificantem: therefore if we offer Christ to
God, Christ's Sacrifice is not acceptable for it self, but for our sakes that
offer it.

Thirdly, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 10. c. 5.
therefore if Christ's Sacrifice be the outward visible Sacrifice, it is but a
Sacrament, or sacred figure, a type or figure, the truth or substance is the
inward sacrifice of our hearts: So Christ is turned to a figure or shadow, who
is indeed the truth and substance of all figures, and shadows. So then it is
manifest that this Sacrament is no proper external Sacrifice, but only
commemoratiue, and communicatiue of the all-sufficient Sacrifice of Christ. In
which I have been the larger, because Bellarmine is pleased to find fault with
Kemnitius, who takes it Prosacrificio commemoratiuo, for a commemoratiue
Sacrifice, though he finds not that word in Scripture. But, says he,
Kemnitius admits that sense to elude the places of the Fathers, in which the
Mass is called a Sacrifice, Caeterum haec acceptio arbitraria est and
conficta, this acception is arbitrary and fained: for neither the Scriptures,
nor Fathers call this a Sacrifice, which is only a figure or commemoration of
a Sacrifice: which I must refer to the judgment of the judicious Reader, to
resolve whether it be not most plain in the Fathers, and in Lumbard, and in
Thomas, that it is called a Sacrifice, because it is a memory or representation
of Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross.

This Sacrament is called a Sacrifice, our selves, Verba Litur.
our souls and bodies to be a living Sacrifice unto God, which is our
reasonable service and worship of him, as the Apostle calls it. Romans 12.1.
And it is also warranted by S. James, Jacob. 1.18.
Of his own will he begat us by the word of Truth, that we should be
Primitiae, the first fruits of his creatures. In the Law they gave unto God
Primitias agri, the first fruits of their cattle, and of their field. In the
Gospel we offer not the corn of our ground, nor the first borne of our
cattle, but Primitias aenimae, the first fruits of our Souls; our selves to
be first fruits and Sacrifices unto God. And this indeed is the daily
Sacrifice of the Church; for Christ, the head, offered himself as the only
propitiatory Sacrifice for sin; and the Church offer themselves as the
members of such an head to be consecrated by Christ our High Priest, as living
Sacrifices to God; In which as God gave Christ, and Christ gave himself for
us, so we give our selves to God.

Our Savior Christ in the form of God, August. lib. 10. De Ciuitate Dei. cap.
20.
receives Sacrifice with his Father, with whom he is one God; yet in the form
of a servant he chose rather to be a Sacrifice, then receive Sacrifice, least
by this occasion any should think that we might sacrifice to any creature. By
this, he is the Priest, he is the offerer, and he is the oblation. Cuius rei
Sacramentum, voluit esse quotidianum Ecclesiae Sacrificium, quae, cum ipsius
capitis corpus sit, seipsamper ipsum discit offerre. Of which (his Sacrifice)
he would have the daily Sacrifice of the Church to be a Sacrament: which
Church, being the body of the head himself, does learn to offer herself, by
him. Where I pray you observe these two things: natural, but mysticum, not the
natural, but the mystical body of Christ; And the Church offers not Christ's
natural body, but the mystical body of Christ, that is her self, and this is
the daily Sacrifice of the Church.

Again, Cuius in cordibus nostris inuisibile Sacrificium nos ipsi esse
debemus: Whose invisible Sacrifice in our hearts we our selves must be.

But the cleerest and fullest place is in the sixth Chapter. The true Sacrifice
(says S. Augustine) is every work done to adhere by a holy society to God,
referred to that end of goodness, by which we may be truly blessed. Whereby
it comes to pass that mercy it self (that is preferred before Sacrifice) by
which we relieve man, is not a Sacrifice, if it be not done for Gods sake; and
although it be done and offered by man, yet Sacrifice is a divine thing,
whereby man himself consecrated to the Name of God, and devoted to God, in as
much as he dies to the world, and lives to God, is a Sacrifice; for this
belongs to that mercy that man does to himself. Our body, the servant, and
instrument of the soul, is a Sacrifice, if we chastise it by temperance for
Gods sake, Romans 12.1. much more our soul referred to God, inflamed with the
fire of his love, etc. shall be a Sacrifice. Since then works of mercy toward
our selves, and toward our neighbors referred to God, are sacrifices, and
works of mercy are done that we may be freed from misery, etc. it is
certainly effected, vt tota redempta ciuitas, that the whole redeemed City
(that is the Congregation and society of Saints) Universal sacrificium
offeratur Deo per sacerdotem magnum; may be offered up an universal sacrifice
to God, by that great Priest, who also offered up himself in his Passion for
us, that we might be the body of so great an head, in the form of a servant;
for, this he offered, and in this he was offered: because according to this
(nature) he is a Mediator, in this he is a Priest, and in this he is a
Sacrifice.

Whereas then the Apostle had exhorted us, to offer up our bodies, a living
sacrifice, holy and pleasing to God, which is our reasonable service of him:
and that we should not be conformed to this world, but reformed in the newness
of our mind, to prove the will of God, which is good and well pleasing and
perfect, Quodtotum Sacrificium nos ipsi sumus, all which Sacrifice we our
selves are; I say (says he) by the grace of God which is given to me, to every
one that is among you, not to think of himself more highly then he ought to
think, but to think soberly or to be wise to sobriety, as God has dealt to
every man the measure of faith; for as we have many members in one body, and
all the members have not the same office, so we being many, are one body in
Christ, and every one, members one of another; having diverse gifts according to
the grace that is given to us: Hoc est Sacrificium Christianorum, multi vnum
corpus sumus in Christo; Quod etiam Sacramento altaris fidelibus noto,
frequentat Ecclesia; vbi ei demonstratur, quod in ea oblatione, quam offert,
ipsa offertur; This is the Sacrifice of Christians, many are one body in
Christ; which Sacrifice the Church does frequent in the Sacrament of the
Altar, known to the faithful; where it is demonstrated to her (the Church)
that in that oblation which she offers, herself (that is the Church) is
offered. In which passage of S. Augustine, it is most plain, that in this
Sacrament the Church offers the proper Sacrifice of Christians, not the
natural, but the mystical body of Christ, that is herself, or our selves,
our souls, and bodies in particular, and all the whole Church in general, by
our great high Priest Christ Jesus. And this is the universal Sacrifice of the
Church. And this place of S. Augustine may serve as an interpretation of the
Fathers authorities, that speak of the offering of the body of Christ, which
are to be understood of the offering of his natural body by way of
representation, or commemoration, or else of his mystical body (the Church)
which offers her self as a daily sacrifice to God.

Again, S. Augustine, Lib 22. cap. 10 De ciuitat. Dei.
giving a reason why we build not Temples to the Martyrs as unto gods, but
rather memories to dead men, whose Spirits live with the Lord, says, Nec
ibierigimus altaria in quibus sacrificemus Martyribus, sed vni Deo, and
Martyrum and nostrorum sacrificium immolamus: ad quod sacrificium, sicut
homines Dei, qui mundum in eius confessione vicerunt, suo loco and ordine
nominantur, non tamen a Sacerdote qui sacrificat inuocantur: Deo quippe non
ipsis sacrificat, quamuis in memoria sacrificet eorum; quia Dei Sacerdos est,
non illorum: Neither do we there erect Altars in which we should sacrifice to
the Martyrs: but we offer the Sacrifice to that one God, that is our God, and
the God of the Martyrs. At which sacrifice the Martyrs are named in their
place, and order, as men that have overcome the world in the confession of God,
but they are not inuocated or called upon by the Priest that sacrifices: for
he Sacrifices to God, and not to them, though he Sacrifices in the memory of
them. And then he adds, For he is the Priest of God, and not of Martyrs,
Ipsum vero sacrificium corpus est Christi, quod non offertur ipsis, quia hoc
sunt and ipsi: And the Sacrifice it self is the body of Christ which is not
offered to them (that is the Martyrs) because they also are this body; And
surely the Martyrs are not the natural body of Christ, which was offered upon
the Cross, De natal. Dom. Sermon. 3.
but his mystical body. Non elegit Deus, nec speciem tuam, nec oleum tuum, nec
ieiuniu^ tuum, sed hoc, quod te hodie redemit, ipsum offer, id est animam tua^,
says S. Augustine; God regards neither thy beauty, nor thy oil, nor thy
fasting, but this that he redeemed thee; offer thy self, that is thine own
soul. And in his 45. Epistle to Armentarius, Tertul. de Idol.
Ei te restitue a quo institutus: Restore thy self to him, of whom thou have
thy being: Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things
that are Gods; the image of Caesar, that is the money to Caesar, and the Image
of God, that is the man to God: Caesari pecuniam, Deo te ipsum, thy money to
Caesar, and thy self to God. Hierom. ad Luciu. Epist. 28.
To lay down our gold is the work of beginners, not of those that are
perfect, so did Crates the Theban, and Antisthenes; Seipsum offerre Deo,
proprie Christianorum est and Apostolorum: It is proper to Christians, and
Apostles to offer themselves to God, says S. Hierome; And after; The first
faithful offered or laid their money at the Apostles feet: Sed Dominus magis
quaerit animas credentium, quam opes; but the Lord more seeks the souls of
believers, then their goods: Te, non Tua, God would have thee offer thy self,
not thine. The Apostles left all for Christ: what was that, but their Netts,
and Ships? yet by the testimony of him that is the future Judge, they are
crowned, Quia offerentesse, totum dimiserunt quod habebant, because offering
themselves, they left all they had. Chrysostom said, Non oues offerebat,
Chrysostom. lib. de laud. S. Paul.
aut boues, sed semetipsum immolabat, propter quod confitendo dicebat, ego enim
iam immolor: neque vero his tantum sacrificijs contentus fuit, sed quia seipsum
consecrauerat Deo, etiam orbem vniuersum studuit offerre: S. Paul offered not
sheep and oxen, but himself: that made him say, Iam immolor, I am now ready
to be offered: and he was not contented with these Sacrifices, but because he
had consecrated himself to God, he studied to offer up the whole world also.

I have been too long in setting down these places of S. Augustine, who is
the most doctrinall among the ancient Fathers; and therefore I content my self
with him, and some few more: only I add Eusebius, who joins both these;
that is, the commemoratiue sacrifice, and the sacrifice of our selves together,
with other sacrifices, concurring in that action. Sacrificamus nouo more
secundum nouum Testamentum, Eusebius. de Demon. Euang.
hostiam mundam; and sacrificium Deo spiritus contritus dictus est: we
sacrifice after a new manner, according to the new Testament, a pure sacrifice;
and a contrite heart is called a sacrifice to God. A broken and contrite heart
God will not despise. Iamque etiam incendimus propheticum illum odorem in omni
loco, and offerimus ei been olentem fructum omni virtute abundantis Theologiae,
hoc ipsum orationtbus directis adeum facientes: quodsane ipsum alius quoque
docet propheta, qui ait, fiat oration measicut incensum in conspectu tuo: igitur
and sacrificamus and incendimus alias quidem memoriam magni illius sacrificij,
secundum ea quae abipso tradita sunt, mysteria celebrantes, and gratias Deopro
salute nostra agentes, religiososque hymnos, and orationes sanctas illi
offerentes, alias nos ipsos totos illi consecrantes, eiusque Pontifici, ipsi
vtique Verbo, corpore, animoque dicantes: And now also we burn that
prophetical sweet odor in every place, and we offer to him that sweet
smelling fruit of divinity, abounding with all virtue, doing this with prayers
directed to him; which another Prophet teaches also, who says, Let my prayer
be as incense in thy sight, therefore we do but sacrifice and offer incense,
alias celebrantes memoriam, sometime celebrating the memory of that great
sacrifice, according to those things which are delivered by him, and giving
thanks for our salvation, and offering to him religious hymns and sacred
prayers, alias nos ipsos totos illi consecrantes, and sometimes consecrating
out whole selves to him, dedicating our selves in body and soul to his high
Priest, even to the Word himself. Here is both the commemoratrue sacrifice,
and the sacrifice, or offering of our selves, our souls and bodies, beside the
sacrifice of prayer, and praise, and contrition which I am now to speak of;
all joined in this one sentence of Eusebius.

To proceed then with this collection of sacrifices, in this one sacrifice,
Sacrificium non pecoris trucidati, sed cordis contriti, as S. Augustine calls
it, The sacrifice not of slain beasts, but of broken and contrite hearts, by
repentance and sorrow for sin. And this is collected out of the words of the
Apostle, Probet seipsum homo, ^. Cor. 11.28.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him ear of that bread, and drink of
that cup, for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his
own damnation, not discerning the Lords body. And this probation is a
judicial act, for so it follows, If we would judge our selves, w^ should
not be judged. And these are the acts of Penitents; first to accuse and
confess, or bear witness against themselves; next to judge and condemn
themselves, and thirdly, to execute and do vengeance on themselves, by true
sorrow and co^trition for their own sins, that so God may spare them. And no
man ought to approach the Lords Table, till he have first washed and cleansed
his soul, by his repentance from all his sin, that so it may be a fit house
for the Lord to enter under the roof thereof, and a fit Temple for the holy
Ghost to dwell in, and to make his mansion or standing habitation.

So, contrition and repentance, to put away sin past, and to put on a
resolution against sin to come, is a necessary preparation before the
receiving of the body and blood of Christ; lest we come to these holy mysteries
with foul mouths and polluted hearts, and so eat and drink our own
damnation. Luke 15.18.
And so the prodigal son came: First, Peccaui in coelum, I have sinned
against heaven, and before thee, and I am unworthy to be called thy son;
make me one of thy hired servants: by which sacrifice of contrition he was not
only received as a servant, or hireling, but as a son; and admitted to his
fathers kiss, and embracing, and adorned with a robe, and a ring; and then at
last, tanquam conuivae, as a guest at the Lords Table, he was fed with the fat
calse that was slain for him. And so the adopted son of grace was fed with
the flesh of the natural Son of God, the Son of his own essence and
substance. And Saint Augustine said well, In Psalm. 21.
Quotiens Pascha celebratur, nunquid totiens Christus moritur? Sed tamen
anniuersaria recordatio quasirepresentat, quod olim factum est, and sic nos
facit moueri tanquam videamus in cruce pendentem Dominum: does Christ die as
often as the Passover is celebrated? But yet, says he, the anniuersary
recordation of it does as it were represent that, which was long since done,
and does make us to be moved or affected, as if we now saw our Lord hanging on
the Cross. And after he adds, Tempus lugendi estcu^ passio Dominicelebratur,
tempus gemendi est, tempus flendi, tempus confitendi, and deprecandi: When the
passion of the Lord is celebrated, it is a time of mourning, a time of sighing,
a time of confessing and begging of pardon. Cyprian de Coena Domini.
In huius praesentia non superuacuae mendicant lachrymae veniam nec vnquam
patitur contriti cordis holocaustum repulsam: In his presence, says S.
Cyprian, tears do not beg pardon in vain, and the sacrifice of a co^trite
heart never receives repulse. Quoties te in conspectu Domini videosuspirantem,
Spiritum sanctum non dubito aspirantem, cum intueor flentem, sentio
ignoscentem: As often as I see thee sighing in the sight of the Lord, I doubt
not but the holy Ghost is breathing upon thee; so often as I behold thee weeping,
so often I perceive God pardoning. And the holy Ghost chooses the poor in spirit
to this ministry, and loves them, and he detesteth their worship that thrust
themselves Pompatice and gloriose, pompously, and gloriously to the holy
Altars; and who come more pompously, and gloriously, then they that will sit as
coheires and fellows, as if they were Christ's equals? And S. Moral. li. 2. c.
1.
Gregory upon these words, Let a man first examine himself: Quid est hoc
locose probare? What is it, says he, to examine himself, but first
euacuating or purging the wickedness of his sins, to offer himself tried and
pure at the Lords Table? And therefore let us daily run to the lamentation of
repentance, who sin daily. And I hope these things should not be publikly and
solemnly done, without kneeling. Although at all times we ought to acknowledge
out selves to be sinners, yet then chiefly must we confess, Alcui^us ^e
Diuinus officijs.
cum illo sacro mysterio, etc. when by that sacred mystery the grace of
remission, and the indulgence of sins is celebrated.

I proceed to the fourth, for I shall have occasion to speak of this again;
and that is Sacrificium orationis and laudis, the sacrifice of prayer and
praise. And here I cannot sufficiently wonder at those, who would have this
Sacrament administered and received without all manner of prayer or praise at
all, according as it is barely delivered to be instituted by our Savior Christ
a little before his death. As if the Church should meet only to hear a
Sermon, that is, an exposition of some Text, chosen by the Preacher (of which
form of Preaching there is scant a pattern to be found in all the word of
God: and why then should that be called Preaching that is without Example?)
and that ended, without any prayer, or thanksgiving, or preparation, or
premeditation to proceed to accipite, comedite, take and eat, this is my
body, this is my blood, and so farewell; for more is not to be found in the
institution. And yet in the very institution where we read (...), Benedixit,
he blessed or consecrated, many Greek Copies have, (...), gratias egit, he
gave thanks, which should work much with them that value not Consecration
much; and both words of consecrating and thanksgiving being in the Text, I
hope no man dates put thanksgiving out of the celebration of the Sacrament,
when Christ used it in the Institution. And after the very Institution there is
further Hymnodicto, when they had said Grace, or sung an Hymn or Psalm;
surely that was thanks and praise to God for his graces and blessings. And it
is worth observation, that this form of thanksgiving or Hymn, or Psalm of
praise, is principally, if not only mentioned in the institution of this
Sacrament, to show, that though it may, and ought ex naturae dictamine, by
natures rule and direction, be always used to repay Gods goodness and bounty
with the tribute of our thankefulnes, yet it should never be omitted in this
Sacrament, where if it be not instituted, surely it is most clearly recorded;
and the greatness of the benefit requires the greatest measure of
thankfulness.

As for prayer; 1. Tim. 4.5.
if all creatures be to be sanctified by prayer, and the word of God; why
should we think that this heavenly spiritual food of our souls should not
first be sanctified with prayer, as well as consecrated by the word; since it
is a greater work to sanctify the food of the soul, then of the body? I
ever thought that our Savior, before he offered his all, sufficient Sacrifice
on the Cross, Heb. 5.7.
did offer up prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears, and he
was heard for his reverence. And his action being out institution, we should
follow his steps, and offer our prayers and supplications with strong cries and
tears before we did presume to present Christ sacrificed to his Father, or
receive him our selves, or offer up the sacrifice of our souls and bodies, and
the whole Church, which is the daily sacrifice of the Church. I ever took it,
that the Apostles knew best how this Sacrament was to be received, 2. Cor. 16.
and that they meeting on the Lords day (which is out Sunday, or the first day
of the week) to make collection for the poor, did continue in prayer and
breaking of bread: which I think is more ordinarily understood of the
Communion of the body and blood of Christ, then of the distribution of Alms.
And in the 13. Act. 13.2.
of the Acts, the Church at Antioch, before they sent out Paul and Barnabas,
they ministered, fasted, and prayed; here is fasting, and prayer, and it is
likely it was not without the Lords Supper; for that which we read ministering,
is translated by Erasmus to be sacrificing, Sacrificantibus illis, and
sacrificing did surely imply the representation of Christ's sacrifice: and the
word is (...), offering of divine worship: And so there was then a Liturgy; and
all Liturgies had this Sacrament in them: so Prayer went through with this
Sacrament. And if the Apostles joined prayer and alms, with breaking of bread,
I know no reason why our Church may not be bold to follow their example, and
join prayer, and breaking of bread or the Sacrament together, under the
protection of their practice; especially, since without all doubt the
succeeding ages did follow their example: Apol. 2. ad Antoninum.
as is clear in Iustine Martyr and others, Surgimus and comprecamur, upon
Sunday or the Suns day, we arise, not we stand (it seems from reading and
hearing) and pray, and then (that is, after prayer) Precibus peractis, panis
offertur, and vinum and aqua: Prayers being ended, bread, and wine, and water
is offered. And Praepositus (quantum pro virilisuo potest) preces, and
gratiarum actiones fundit, and populus fauste acclamat, dicens Amen: and
distributio communicatioque fit eorum, in quibus gratiae actae sunt, cuique
praesenti. The Bishop or Priest (that was chief in that action) does power out
prayers and praises, with all his might, and the people do joyfully cry,
Amen, and distribution and communication is made to every one that is present,
of these things that are blessed, or for which thanks were given: and all
antiquity relate the same.

Origin says, L. 8. contra Celsum.
Nos qui rerum omnium conditori placere studemus, cum precibus and gratiarum
action pro beneficijs acceptis oblatos panes edimus, corpus iamper precationem
factos sanctum quoddam, and sanctificans, vtens eo cum sano proposito, We that
study or endeavor to please the Creator of all things, do eat the offered
bread with prayer and thanksgiving for the benefits that we have received,
being made Corpus quoddam sanctum and sanctificans, a certain body (mark that
word) holy (in it self) and sanctifying (others) by prayer, using it with a
good intent, etc. Origin contra Celsum. lib. 8. In this sacrifice, says S.
Augustine, Aug. Epist. 120
there is thanksgiving and commemoration of the flesh of Christ, which he
offered for us; And again, Hinc gratias agimus Domino Deo nostro, quodest
magnum Sacramentum in sacrificio noui Testamenti. Chrysostom. Hom. in Matthew. 26.
And Chrysostom, Gratiestote, optima quippe beneficiorum custos est ipsa
memoria beneficiorum, and perpetua gratiarum actio; propterea and reuerenda ac
salutaria illa mysteria, quae in omni certe Ecclesiae congregatione celebramus,
Eucharistia (id est gratiarum actio) nuncupatur; Give thanks; for the memory of
benefits, is the best keeper of benefifits, and a perpetual confession of
thanks: and therefore the reverend and healthful mysteries which we celebrate
in every Congregation, are called the Eucharist or giving of thanks.

So in those times, prayer and praise were always joined with the Eucharist,
though it be not expressly mentioned in the institution of Christ. And there is
all reason for it. For why should any man think that the Eucharist should be
without praise and thanksgiving, when as it is the Eucharist, or a Sacrifice
of thanksgiving, for the greatest blessings that ever God gave to man? Or why
should any hold it unfit to use contrition and prayer in the ministration of
this Sacrament, when as for the preparation thereunto, nothing can be more
needful then these two things? 1. That we should be fit and worthy for so
great mysteries, which we can never obtain at Gods hand, but by prayer, which
is the means that draws down all Gods graces to us. 2 That God would give
us Panem super-substa^tialem, the supersubstantiall and heavenly bread of our
souls, that is the Body and Blood of Christ, which we ask in the Lords
prayer, Give us this day (...), our supersubstantiall or heavenly bread, the
bread of our soul, which is more needful, and therefore more to be asked, as
well as our daily bread, the bread of the body, which is earthly and
transitory: and if there be cause to ask Panem corporis, the bread of the
body, there is far greater cause to ask of God Panem animae the bread of the
soul, the Body and Blood of Christ.

S. Gregory notes that, Mox post precem, straight after prayer ended, we say
the Lords prayer, Quia mos Apostolorum fuit, Greg. Mag. l. 7. Indict. 2. ep. 63
vt ad ipsam solummodo orationem oblationem hostiae consecrarent: For it was
the custom of the Apostles, that they consecrated the Host of the oblation,
with that prayer only. So then there were other prayers, and the Lords prayer
before the consecration. And that made S. Hierome say, Malachies oblation is
contained in prayers. Epist. 59 Qu. 5.
S. Augustine in the sanctification of the Eucharist, and distribution thereof,
finds out al these, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of
Thanks, mentioned, 1. Tim. 2. Supplications he calls those which we make in
the celebration of the Sacraments, before that which is set on the Lords table
is begun to be blessed: Prayers he calls that, when it is blessed and
sanctified, and broken for Communion, which whole petition, almost all the
Churches conclude clude with the Lords prayer. And then disputing whether (...)
be votum or Oration, he adds, all things are vowed which are offered up to
God; chiefly the oblation of the holy Altar: in which Sacrament another of our
greatest vows is preached, Quo nos vouemus, in which we vow our selves to be
mild or meek in the band of Christ's body. Postulationes, Intercessions are
made when the people are blessed. In which the Bishops or advocates do offer
up to the most merciful power, Susceptos suos, their Christened or confirmed,
by imposition of hands. And these things being done, and the Sacrament being
parricipated, gratiarum actio, thanksgiving concludes all: so in those times
the sacrifice of prayer and praise, were joined with the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. August. de spirit. and lit. c. 11.
And in his book De spiritu and litera, he says, Theosebeia porro, si ad
verbi originem Latin expressam interpretaretur, Dei cultus dici poterat; qui
in hoc maxim constitutus est, vt anima ei non sit ingrata. Vnde and in ipso
verissimo and in singulari Sacrificio Domino Deo nostro agere gratias
admonemur. Theosebia, that is piety to God, if it be interpreted according to
the express deriuation in Latin, may be called the worship of God, which
does chiefly consist in this, that the soul should not be unthankful to God;
and therefore in the most true and singular Sacrifice, we are admonished to
give thanks to our Lord God. As for the necessary use of prayer, hear
Tertullian de Oratione, Neque enim propria tantum orationis officia complexa
est, vel venerationem Dei aut hominis petitionem, sed omnempene sermonem
Domini, omnem commemorationem disciplinae: vt reuera in oratione breuiarium
totius Euangelij comprehendatur: It does not only contain the duties of
Prayer, the worship of God, and the petition of man, but also almost all the
word of God, and all commemoration of discipline; insomuch, that in truth, in
this prayer there is contained a breuiarie of all the Gospel. So that out of
this it may well be inferred, that there can be no act of divine worship and
Religion, without prayer. And surely since the Jews that had no form of Gods
worship prescribed for them, did frame to themselves a form of Liturgy, which
they daily used; and among Christians there be many Liturgies or forms of
divine worship, that bear the names, some of the Apostles, others of the
ancient Fathers; which whether they be theirs, whose names they bear, I
cannot say, but surely by all men's confession they are very ancient: It is a
strange novelty, and indeed most monstrous in the Church of Christ, that there
should be no prescribed forms of Prayer, and administration of Sacraments,
but every man left to his liberty, or rather license to worship God after his
own fancy: and under the name of forbidding willworship, to set out nothing
but will worship in the Church, and indeed as many will-worships, as there be
wills, and so set up Altar against Altar, and worship against worship, and make
the Church that is acies ordinata, a well ordered Army, or house, or kingdom,
to be no better then Babel, a Tower of confusion.

And either the Church must have power to ordain and order Liturgies and Gods
worship, or else I know not why any private man may be so bold as to frame a
worship or Liturgy to himself. For if the whole Church have not this power,
where was it committed to any private man, or any part or member of the Church?
And I know the Apostles desired Christ to teach them to pray; And Christ taught
them only the mother prayer of all prayers, by which all prayers must be ruled
and squared: and so it shall be lawful only to use the only prescribed
prayer, that is the Lords prayer: when you pray, pray thus. And then I know
there be other precise Brethren that stand at their elbowes, and tell them
that the Lords prayer was not made for that use, to be said publicly or
privately: but only to be laid up, as a rule, an Idea, or exemplar to make
other prayers by, and so it comes to pass that we must admit aut omnes, aut
nullos, either all prayers that every private spirit that will reject the
Apostles rule, and not be subject to the spirit of the Prophets, that is the
Church, shall frame: or else we must in effect admit no prayer at all, because
there is but one prayer prescribed by Christ and the holy Ghost, and that is
very short, that may be used. And if you will believe the purest reformers (or
rather de formers) it must not be used, but laid by as a Pattern to fashion
the like.

I come to the fife Sacrifice that I find in the Lords Supper, and that is
Sacrificium Eleemosynarum, the Sacrifice of Alms: and that as it was chiefly
appointed to be done on the Lords day, or the first day of the week, 1. Cor.
6. so it is apparent that the Lords Supper being then celebrated, and the
Apostles continuing in breaking of bread and prayer, this Sacrifice of Alms
was ever a companion of the Lords Supper, of prayer, ministration or divine
worship, and indeed a true Sacrifice in it self. For when David said, Psalm.
51. If thou would have had Sacrifice. I would have given thee; but thou
delightest not in burnt offerings: a troubled spirit is a Sacrifice to God:
August. deciuit. Dei lib. 10. cap. 4.
a broken and contrite heart God will not despise: Intueamur quemadmodum vbi
Deum dixit, nolle Sacrificium, ibi Deum ostendit velle sacrificium: non vult
ergo Sacrificium trucidatipecoris, sed vult sacrificium contriti cordis. Mark,
says S. Augustine, where David says, God would not have Sacrifice; there he
plainly shows that God would have Sacrifice: God would not have the
Sacrifice of slain beasts, but he would have the Sacrifice of broken and
contrite hearts. And his reason is good. Illa enim Sacrificia nonrequirit Deus,
quibus significantur haec Sacrificia, quae requirit Deus: God does not require
those Sacrifices (carnal and external) by which those Sacrifices (internal
and spiritual) are signified, which God does require. Christ says, Matthew.
9.13.
I will have mercy an not Sacrifice, in which words, nothing else is to be
understood but this, Sacrificium sacrificio praelatum, that one Sacrifice is
preferred before another, for that which of men is called Sacrifice, is a sign
of the true Sacrifice; and then he applies all this to Alms: Porro autem
misericordia verum est sacrificium, Heb. 13.16.
Mercy indeed is a true Sacrifice. And so it was called by the Apostle, To do
good and to distribute forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is pleased, or
pacified; and so it is true, which the same Father says elsewhere of Prayer,
and Praise, and mortification, and Alms, and the like, that they are Pro
Sacrificijs, and Prae Sacrificijs, in place of Sacrifice, and to be preferred
before all Sacrifices: for the outward Sacrifice receives life from the inward
Sacrifice of the heart. So then, he that lays his money or goods at Gods
Table, or at the Apostles feet, that they may be put into the bosoms of the
poor, he does indeed lend them to the Lord, and delivers and sends them by
their hands to be stored up with him, who is a most faithful keeper and
bountiful rewarder, who will become a debtor to thee for them. And whereas thy
goods were earthly and transitory, Dando, coelestes fiunt; by this giving,
thou shall make them heavenly, and purchase heavens kingdom with them. De
oratione Dominica.
And that made S. Cyprian to say, Inefficax petitio est cum precatur Deum
sterilis oration; when a barren prayer beseeches God, that Petition is
unfruitful. The reason is, because the hand does not pray as well as the
tongue; and the hands voice is louder, and will be further heard then the
tongue. Hom. 29. inter 50.
And S. Augustine says, The Sacrifice of the Christian is Eleemosyna in
pauperem, Alms to the poor: for then he offers a charitable heart to God;
as in prayer he offers a devour heart; in praise he offers a thankful
heart; and in contrition, and mortification he offers a broken heart. And
these Sacrifices are all accepted of God in Christ, but in several degrees:
the broken and contrite heart is accepted with non despicies, Psalm. 51.17.
God will not despise it; Heb. 13.16.
The charitable heart is accepted with Placatur Deus, with such Sacrifices God
is pleased, and pacified; Psalm. 50.23.
and the grateful heart is accepted with honorificabis me, he that offers
me praise, he honors me.

Monseiur du Plessis, De sacrificio Miss: l. 3.
a pillar of the French Church has joined all these together, whom I
principally allege, because he recites them all: Eccui mirum, quod Patres
sacram coenam Sacrificium appellarunt, in quam vnam tot sacrae actiones
confluant? tot proinde sacrificijs conspicuum? vbisacrum officium, sacrificij
in cruce peracti commemoratio, verbi diuini propositio, expositio, oration
feruens, humilis simul and sublimis, tum peccati nostri, tum gratiae diuinae
meditatio: inde vero cordis contritio, corporis, animique Deo consecrandi
votum, viscerum quasi suorum in fratres, Christi cohaeredes expansio, effusio?
Quae omnes vtique and singulae actiones cum scripturis and Patribus,
oblationum, and sacrificiorum nomine insigniuntur; Can it seem strange to any
man that the Fathers have called the sacred Supper a Sacrifice, in which one,
so many sacred actions do meet together, and therefore is conspicuous with so
many Sacrifices? where there is the sacred office (or Liturgy,) a
commemoration of the Sacrifice finished on the Cross: a proposal of the word
of God, and exposition thereof, fervent prayer, an humble, and withal an
elevated meditation both of our own sin, and Gods grace; also the contrition
of the heart, and a vow of consecrating of soul and body to God; an enlarging
and pouring out of our bowels in Alms toward our brethren, the coheires of
Christ, which all and singular actions, are called by the name of Sacrifices
and oblations in the Scriptures and Fathers.

Veteres, De vnico Christ. sacrificio cap. 5. Resp. 5.
says Sadeel, S. Domini Coenam sacrificium appellarunt: Primum, quia in hoc
mysterio fit commemoratio vnici illius sacrificij quod pro nobis in cruce
factum est, atque haec commemoratio coniunctam habet gratiarum actionem, adeo
vt sit sacrificium (...), and gratiarum actionis, ac propterea inter
spiritualia Christianorum Sacrificia recensendum. Deinde quia in sacro hoc
mysterio, siquidem a nobis cum vera fide, sincerisque animis celebretur, nos
ipsos totos Deo consecramus, quod est spirituale sacrificium nobis imprimis ab
Apostolo commendatum. Denique, quia id fuit elim in more positum, vt cum S.
Coena celebraretur, tum fideles offerrent Eleemosynas: The Fathers called this
holy Supper of the Lord a Sacrifice: First, because in this mystery there is
made a commemoration of that one only sacrifice, which was made for us upon
the Cross, and this commemoration has thanksgiving joined with it, that it
may be an Eucharisticall sacrifice of thanksgiving, and therefore it is to be
reckoned among the spiritual sacrifices of Christians. Again, because in the
sacred mystery, if it be celebrated by us with true faith, and sincere minds,
we do consecrate our whole selves to God, which is the spiritual sacrifice,
chiefly commended to us by the Apostle, Romans 12. And to conclude, because it
was the ancient custom, that when the sacred Supper was celebrated, then the
faithful did offer Alms, which is a kind of spiritual sacrifice, Heb. 13.
It is sufficiently manifest by the name of Eucharist (which signifies
thanksgiving) that the Fathers had a respect to this, Sadeel in Resp. ad fid.
profes. a Burdegalen. Act. 14. P. 140
when they called the Eucharist a Sacrament. And again, Propterea veteres
Patres Coenam Domini vocarunt Sacrificium, quod in ea fit commemoratio
sacrificij Jesus Christi: ac proinde est Sacrificium laudis: Add quod ibidem
nos offerimus Deo vt ei consecremur, quost est rationalis noster eultus:
Denique propterea quod antiquitus in celebratione Coenae Domini Eleemosynae in
pauperes conferebantur, quae omnia dicuntur Sacrificia in sacris Literic: The
ancient Fathers therefore called the Supper of the Lord a Sacrifice, because in
it there is a commemoration of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and therefore it
is a sacrifice of praise. Add to this, that there we offer our selves to God,
that we may be consecrated to him, which is our reasonable worship of him. And
to conclude, therefore also it is called a sacrifice, because anciently in the
celebration of the Lords Supper, alms was bestowed on the poor: all which are
called Sacrifices in holy writ. Calu. l. 4. c. 17. S. 43.


Calvin mentions public prayers, and a Sermon, and then a Prayer again:
afterward the Elements were set forth upon the Table, that God who had given us
his aliment, would make us fit and worthy to receive it: then there should be
Psalms sung, or somewhat read, and so the people should communicate decently.
After the Supper ended, there should be an exhortation to the sincerity of
faith, and charity, and good life, beseeming Christians: And lastly, there
should be thanksgiving and praise sung to God.

This is then plain, that in the ministration and receiving of the Sacrament,
there are these five kinds of sacrifices.

And this will appear the more plainly if we consider the meditation and
behavior of sacrificers. And that will be the more manifest if we do but
remember, that which all ancient Liturgies have, and we retain, Leuate corda
ad Dominum, Lift up your hearts, says the Priest; the people answer, We lift
them up unto the Lord. Videte quid, and ad quem, so S. Augustine observes;
Consider what you lift up, your hearts; and to whom you lift them up, unto God;
and as God is pure, so be sure to lift up pure hearts, to him that is the God
of all purity. And it may pass as probable, that the bodily gesture of those
that come to the Lords Table was very humble in those times, because they
called on them, Leuate corda, lift up your hearts, though your bodies be
humbled and cast down: and let not your souls be fixed on these sacred
Elements here below, but lifted up to heaven.

And surely if we remember, 1. the greatness of God before whom we stand: and
2 the greatness of the sin, which stands out against us, which we there
confess; and 3. the vileness and baseness of us poor silly creatures, dust,
and ashes, that there present our selves, and stand out before him, Tantus,
tantillos, tantum, so great a God and Creator as the Lord is, to whom none can
be comparable, because he is singular above all; and so unworthy and
contemptible creatures, worms, and no men, nay worse then worms, (for the
poorest worm never sinned against God, and we never did any thing but sin
in his sight;) and yet that so great a God should so infinitely love us, vile
creatures, and foul polluted sinners, that he should give the Son of his
Substance for us, the rebellious workmanship of his own hands: whom he loved
so dearly, that he spared not his only, and dearly beloved Son, that he
might spare us most disobedient and wicked servants: that is love above all
loves, and measure without all measure. To which, when we reckon, that we are
no way able to make any recompense or satisfaction, as having nothing to pay
(for Plus diligit and prius, he loves us first, and he loves us most) how can
it be, but we, which are the worst of all Gods creatures, (for no creature
below man is a sinner, but man) when we presume to sacrifice and offer up our
selves (most unworthy and unfit for so great grace,) to that God, who is
holiness it self, and cannot endure nor admit any uncleanness, when we
adventure to press into his presence, and not only approach to his Table as
Communicants, but also exhibit our selves as Sacrifices on his Altar, but we
should then (I say) tender our selves with all humility of soul, and
humiliation of body; since both soul and body are there offered unto him, in
mental and corporal adoration, and prayer, and praise, and alms, and the
like; in which, the work of the hand and the tongue, is but an idle sound,
without the word of the heart, and the soul; and the word of the heart is but
empty and barren, without the obedience of the hand.

So the person to whom we Sacrifice, and the person that offers himself a
Sacrifice, require our humility of soul, and humiliation of body; this is the
Sacrificers meditation, and other it ought not to be: for finiti ad infinitum
nulla est comparatio: there is no comparison between God that is infinite, and
man that is finite: because they differ, Plusquam genere, more then in kind;
And therefore dust and ashes that appears before his Creator, must appear in
his own kind, as dust and ashes, nearest to the earth: since sin has placed
man in this Earth, in the vale of misery. Now, what is the behavior of
Sacrifices? Gene. 22.9.
Isaak was a living and reasonable Sacrifice; and no doubt, holy; and therefore
acceptable to God in Christ, as much as the state and condition of man would
permit: and he was bound, and laid at the Altar to be Sacrificed; there was
neither sitting, as if he were equal with that God that called for him to be
Sacrificed: nor so much as standing, either in his innocence, or his hope, and
expectation; And therefore being the type, both of Christ the propitiatory
Sacrifice, and of the Christians Eucharisticall Sacrifice, we, as bound by the
chain of our own sin, and unworthiness, and laid, and nailed (as it were)
on the Altar of Christ's Cross, with the nails of contrition, of devotion, of
prayer, and praise, and of compassion, must present our selves in the gesture
and behavior of those that are to be offered up as Sacrifices to God, in all
deiection and humility of souls and bodies; kneeling with Solomon, 1 Reg.
8.12. 2. Paralip. 6.13.
in the consecration and dedication of the spiritual Temple of our souls and
bodies, as he did when he consecrated the material Temple unto God. Where, I
pray you, let it never be forgotten, that it must needs be, that the thoughts
of Isaak the Sacrifice, could be no other when he lay bound at the Altar, then
this, that he was Ia^ iam Sacrificandus, and therefore moriturus, even now in
an instant to be sacrificed and die. And he was then to die the natural death
of the body, and we at the Lords Table, die the spiritual death to sin in
mortification and newness of life: and therefore there is no great likelihood
that he then thought of the gesture and prerogatives of a guest, and a table,
as if he were equal to that just and severe God, to whom he was to be
sacrificed, and so presented himself to him without all fear, and reverence.
S. Stephen the first Martyr, and therefore the first Sacrifice among
Christians, Acts. 7.56.60.
prayed and kneeled: and though he were partaker of the vision of God, which
is the Supper of the Lamb, and that without Sacrament (for he saw the heavens
open, and the Son of man sitting at the right hand of God) yet Deposuit
vitam, ne deponeret obedientiam, he never laid down his obedience, till he
laid down his life, but persisted in kneeling, till he fell into his last
sleep. And why should not the gesture of a Martyr be a fit gesture for a
Communicant at the Lambs Supper, since both are Sacrificers of themselves, the
one in body, the other in soul and spirit?

And this was in the time of Nature. Let us look on Moses Law, concerning
Sacrifices. In Leuiticus it is often repeated, Leuit. 1.4, 4.24.
that the Priest, when he offered for himself, or the people, and every
private man that offered his private Sacrifice, Imponet manum super caput, He
shall lay his hand upon the head of the Sacrifice: How. 1. in Leuit.
Origin expounds it allegorically of Christ, Imposuit peccata humani generis
super caput suum: Christ laid his hand upon the head of the Sacrifice, that is,
laid all our sins upon his own head: But in the letter, there are two
reasons given of it. 1. Vide Tostat. in Leuit. cap. 3.
Vt renuntiaret proprietati, sieve iurisuo, That the private man might surrender
up all his right and propriety that he had in the Sacrifice, when he delivered
it up to the Priest, to be Sacrificed to God: 2. Vt poenas peccatorum in caput
animalis transferret, quas inflicturus erat offerenti, That he might transfer
the punishment of sins due to the offerer, upon the beast that was to be
sacrificed; In which it is manifest, that every man that presents his
Sacrifice at the Altar, stands as a condemned man ready to be executed, that
entreats and beggeth of God, that the punishment due to him by his demerits
may be laid on the Sacrifice, that is upon Christ that bears our punishment
and curse upon his Cross, and heals us by his stripes: As the death prepared
for Isaak, was transferred from him to the Ram, that was hanged in the
bushes, that is Christ crowned with thorns, and nailed on the Cross. And he
that feelingly considers this state, will easily resolve of the humble
thoughts, and humble gesture of such a Sacrificer as deserves the death that
the Sacrifice suffers for him, and deprecateth pardon for his sake, whose
Sacrifice makes atonement for the sins of man. In this case when we thus
condemn, and execute our selves, can any thoughts be too lowly, or any gesture
too humble to entreat pardon? So this carriage of the carnal sacrificer
tells us, what our carriage must be in the offering of the spiritual
sacrifice of our selves. Our prayers, that sue for grace and remission, must
show humility in soul and body, because we seek indulgence to soul and
body. And when we confess we are most worthy to die in our selves, and for our
selves, both soul and body; and desire to receive grace, not for our selves,
but for Christ's sake; must we not testify this unworthiness with the
deiection of both soul and body?

Yea, our very praises and thanks for all Gods mercies must be offered, with
all outward and inward humility: since as it is in the second Psalm, Psalm.
2.11.
it becomes us not only to serve the Lord infeare, but also to rejoice to him
with reverence, cum tremore, (as the vulgar reads it) with tremor or
trembling. For as the goodness of God causes confidence and rejoicing, so the
greatness and justice of God, and our own guiltiness and sin, cause
trembling and humility. So our very sacrifice of praise and glory requires
humility and kneeling: as the examples of those in heaven (who being freed
from all wants, and therefore never needing to pray, but only to give praise
for their ouerflowing and fullness of glory at the well head) does show: Apoc.
4.10.
who cast down their Crowns, and fall down and worship him that sits on
the Throne, and the Lamb.

And surely the Gospel, in the offering of spiritual sacrifices, differs not
in duties of Nature and Religion, and chiefly in humility, which is virtus
Christiana and Euangelica, the Christian and Evangelical virtue, unknown and
contemned by the heathen, and taught only in the School of Christ. And
therefore our Savior Christ might teach all sacrificers how to behave
themselves, when he entered into his agony in the garden, which was the entry
and beginning of his sacrifice, (for there he did sacrifice himself,
voluntate, in will, as he finished it upon the Cross actu, in act) Positis
genibus orauit, Luke 22.41.
he prayed upon his knees, to teach all spiritual sacrificers to use the same
kneeling in their devotions, and prayers, and sacrifices, which he began in the
propitiatory, and all-sufficient sacrifice for sin. Wherein, because that
wherewith God is worshipped does profit man, and not God, (for no man does good
to the fountain, if he drink of it, nor to the light, if he see by it; and
if man come to God, God is not increased by it, but man; and if he depart from
God, God loses not by it, but man:) it behooves us in all Gods worship so to
carry our selves, that our sacrifice, and our selves, and our worship may be
accepted of God. And nothing is more offensive to God, then pride, and
presumptuous carriage, and nothing more pleasing, then our humility, and the
plea of our unworthiness. For as Kemnicius says, In Examine. Council. Triden.
part. 2. de ven^rat. Sacram.
Externa irreuerentia signum est prophanae mentis, sicut Paulus dicit,
Corinthios non dijudicare Corpus Domini, quia illud in Coena Dominica non
maiori reuerentia tractabant, quam vulgares concoenationes: External
irreuerence is a sign of a profane mind, as S. Paul said, that the
Corinthians did not discern the Lords body, because in the Lords Supper they
handled it with no more reverence then they did their ordinary suppers. And at
the common suppers they did sit, and therefore some other gesture does befit
that high Feast. And Bishop Jewel said well: It is (without doubt) our duty
to adore the body of Christ, in the word of God, in the Sacrament of Baptism,
in the mysteries of the body and blood of Christ; and to conclude, wheresoever
any footstep or sign of it appears: but chiefly in the holy mysteries, in
which we have a living express image of all Christ's peregrination in the
flesh: And I assure my self, this Reverend Bishop and d^fender of the Church
and Liturgy of England, was no enemy of kneeling at the Sacrament, though he
most stoutly denied all adoration to the Elements, or Species themselves, as we
all do.

In the worship of God, non sum dignus is the best argument: and surely there
is no argument more forcible, or more worthy in Gods sight, then the
acknowledgement of our own unworthiness: nor no fitter gesture to express
this acknowledgement, Hom. 8. in Coena Dom. ad poenit.
then this kneeling or casting our selves down to the earth. S. Eligius
Episcopus Nouiomensis says, Let this sentence be pronounced by the soul, that
a man judge himself unworthy of the participation of the body and blood of
Christ. And again, Biblioth. S S. Pat. Tom. 2. p. 1506.
Lactuca quoque agrestis valde amara est, and in viris luxuriam reprimit:
significat autem hoc, vt quando ad Corpus Christi, (qui verus agnus est)
sumendum accedimus, quamuis de Redemptione laetemur, amaritudinem tamen ex
recordatione peccatorum habeamus: The wild Lettuce is very bitter, and does
repress lust in men: and it signifies this, that when we come to receive the
body of Christ, who is the true Lamb, although we rejoice of our redemption,
yet we should have bitterness in the remembrance of our sin. Idem hom. 14.
de esu vtriusque agni paschalus.
And again, Certe Redemptor noster consulens nostrae fragilitati, tradidit
nobis hoc Sacramentum: vt quia ipse iam non potest mori, and nos quotidie
peccamus, habeamus verum Sacrificium quo possimus expiari a peccatis nostris.
Quocirca cum timore and compunctione mentis, omnique reuerentia debemus
accedere ad altar, and ad mensam corporis and sanguinis Domini, and dicere
humiliter cum Centurione, Domine, non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum meum: Our
Redeemer delivered to us this Sacrament, providing for our frailty, that since
he can die no more, and we sin daily, we might have a true Sacrifice, by
which we might be expiated from our sins: Therefore we must come with all
fear and compunction of heart, and all reverence (I hope this is reverence of
body as well as of soul) to the Altar and Table of the Body and Blood of our
Lord, and say humbly with the Centurion, Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should enter under the roof of my house. And S. Basil of Seleucia says,
Orat. 19.
Vidi Centurionem prouolutum ad vestigia Domini, Eusebius Emissenu, Hom in Dom.
2. in Epipha.
I saw the Centurion falling down, or kneeling at our Lords feet. Eusebius
says, Quando vero ad Christi Sacramentum accedimus, and fragilitatem nostram
consideramus quid aliud dicat vnusquisque nostrum, nisi non sum dignus, vt
intres sub tectum meum; non sum dignus vt corpus and sanguinem suscipiam in ore
meo: When we come to the Sacrament of Christ, and consider our own frailty;
what should every one of us say but this? I am not worthy that thou should
enter under my roof: I am not worthy to receive thy Body and Blood into my
mouth.

For why? Matthew. 8.8. Luke 7.6.
this Centurion that thought not himself worthy, under whose roof Christ
should enter, received a high favor for his lowly thought, that Christ, though
he entered not under the roof of his house, yet entered under the roof of his
heart. Matthew. 3.11.
And John Baptist that professed himself unworthy to vnty the latchet of
Christ's shoe, was admitted to that high favor to baptize Christ's head. Luke
7.38.
And the woman that in the sense of her own unworthiness, began at Christ's
feet with her tears, Mark 14.3.
proceeded to the anointing of his head with precious oil, John 20.16.
and was the first that saw him after his Resurrection. This is indeed the
great Fisher S. Peter's art: He put Christ away from him with this word, Luke
5.8.
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, that so he might draw nearer to him,
and become a chief Fisher of men: and the first among the Apostles.

After which examples, if we stand afar off with the Publican, and confess
our own unworthiness, with the devotion of our souls, and deiection of our
bodies, we shall be sure to draw the nearer to God, and procure the more easy
acceptance of the Sacrifices of our selves, and our souls and bodies, and
Prayers, and Praises, and Alms.

So then this Sacrament has many Sacrifices in it: and nothing makes
Sacrifice so acceptable to God, as the hearty acknowledgment of our own
unworthiness, to offer to him any Sacrifice at all: This acknowledgment
consists in the humble piety, and devotion of the heart, and the voluntary
deiection, bowing or kneeling of the body: therefore this Sacrament must be
received with a reverend kneeling. All which I conclude with the words of S.
Bernard; S. Bernard. Sermon. 3. de Purificat. B. Virginis.
Quid fratres nos offerimus, aut quid retribuimus Christo, pro omnibus, quae
retribuit nobis? Ille pro nobis obtulit hostiam pretiosiorem quam habuit,
nimirum, qua pretiosior esse non potuit: Et nos ergo faciamus quod possumus,
optimum quod habemus offerentes illi; quod sumus vtique nosmetipsi; Ille
seipsum obtulit, tu quis es, qui teipsum offerre cuncteris? Quis mihi tribuat,
vt oblationem meam dignetur maiestas tanta suscipere? Duo minuta habeo Domine,
corpus and animam Dico, vtinam haec tibi perfect possim in Sacrificium laudis
offerre. Bonum enim mihi longeque gloriosius atque vtilius est, vt tibi magis
offerar, quam deserar mihi ipsi. Nam ad meipsum anima mea conturbatur, in te
vero exultabit spiritus meus, si tibi veraciter offeratur: What do we, O
brethren? Do we offer? or what do we give to Christ, for all these things
which he has given to us? He offered for us the most precious Sacrifice that
he had, then which none can be more precious: and let us do what we can, and
offer to him the best that we have, which is our selves: he offered himself
for us, and who art thou, that delayest to offer thy self to him? who shall
procure for me, that so great majesty shall vouchsafe to receive my oblation?
(And then he tells what he has to offer, not his soul only, but his body
also.) Lord, I have two mites, a body, and a soul; Oh would I could perfectly
offer them to thee, as a sacrifice of praise: for it is good, and far more
glorious and profitable to me, that I should rather be offered to thee, then
forsaken by my self; for in my self my soul is troubled, but if it be truly
offered to thee, my spirit shall rejoice in thee.

Thus have I been long in this second reason of Sacrifice, because it
contains at least five several sacrifices. I will be short in the rest, as
occasion shall permit.

Ratio 3. a Donorum magnitudine.
THe third Reason is Donorum magnitudo, the greatness of Gods gifts, and
graces, which are heaped up in this Sacrament. And the greater the person is
that gives (that is, God) the greater the gift is that is given, which is,
Christ, and the holy Ghost: and the more vile and base the Receiver is, that is
mortal and sinful man, the greater must be the humility of him, that
receives so great gifts from so great a God: even the lowest humility of
soul, and humiliation of body, De Purificat. B. virginis Sermon. 3.
in prostration or kneeling. And even now out of S. Bernard we heard, Hostiam
pretiosiorem, quam habuit: He offered to God the most precious sacrifice that
he had: and what he offered to God for us on the Cross, that he offers to
us in this Sacrament; that which he gave for us, he gives to us. So God loved
the world, Joan. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son that as many as believe in him should
not perish but have life everlasting: And how gave he him? Animam in precium,
carnem in cibum: Joan. 6.55.45.51.
he gave his life for our price and ransom, and his flesh for our food: And
his flesh is meat indeed; and his blood is drink indeed; and he is the
bread of life; that living bread, Luc. 14.16.
that came down from Heaven. A certain man made a great supper, and bade
many, says our Savior: A great supper; for, Magnus qui fecit: He is great
that makes it, no less then a King: nay, Matt. 22.2.
no less then God himself. And that must needs be a great feast, which is
made by the God of all greatness and Majesty, who in all other his works is
great, but in this his grace, is greater then greatness it self, and his
mercy appears above all his works and gifts. A great supper, quia serui
magni, the servants and attendants are great, Patriarchs, and Prophets, and
Apostles, and Bishops who succeed the Apostles, pro patribus filij, Aug. in
Psalm. 44.
Sons in stead of Fathers, Bishops in stead of Apostles, who are Princes in all
lands: yea, Christ the Son ministers unto us. A great supper, quia
coenaculum magnum; the marriage chamber is great, not Judea, not a corner, or
conuenticle, but the world, or rather, the Church over all the world. Expulsus
ab vrbe, ab orb recipitur; Christ that was excluded out of the city
Jerusalem, and crucified on Mount Caluarie, is received in the whole world.
Leo de passione Hom. 1.
Merito foli non habent, quod omnibus perire voluerunt, says Leo, The Jews
only, have not Christ by their desert, whom they would have lost to all
others: and the whole earth is become his inheritance: and there is a greater
in expectation, the Kingdom of heaven, when that is consummate, which is now
begun. And a great Supper, for Conuiuae magni, the guests are great, Kings
and righteous men, and learned, and noble, and wise, and rich, and poor, and
ignorant, Piscator, Imperator, Orator: the ignorant fisher, the potent
Emperor, and the learned Orator, all bow their necks under the yoke of Christ:
And a great supper, Quia apparatus magnus, for the preparation is great: the
book of Creatures, and the book of Scriptures: the volume of Nature, and the
volume of Grace: the Dictats of earth, and the Oracles of Heaven: the Paschall
Lamb, and the fat Calfe: the Son of man, and the Son of God: the Word
vncreat, and the word incarnate: Charity uncreated, that is the holy Ghost;
and created Charity, that is the gifts of the holy Ghost, and all things else
whatsoever God is pleased to give us with his Son, and for his Son.

In a word it is Refectio in via, Psalm. 17.16.
a refreshing in the way, and therefore it is called a dinner of grace. Matthew.
22. Come to me, I will refresh you, Matthew. 11.28. And it is Possessio in
patria, the possession in the Country; and therefore it is here called, A
Supper of glory, I shall be satisfied with thy glory. In the School, it is
Coena doctrinae Euangelicae, a Supper of Evangelical doctrine, that teaches
faith. In the Church it is Coena Eucharistiae, the Supper of the Eucharist,
that does nourish and augment faith, and grace. And in heaven it is Coena
gloriae, a Supper of everlasting glory, that crowns Gods own graces in us.
He that makes the Supper, is God the Father; he that is the meat of this
Supper, is Christ the Son; and he that prepares and provides this Supper is
the holy Ghost. Christus sponsus, spiritus Sanctus Pronubus, Pater Rex. The
bridegroom at this marriage Feast is Christ, not the servant, nor the kinseman,
but the Son of God: the chief Minister or Vicar that calls and orders
the Feast, and the guests, is the holy Ghost: and the man, for his humanity or
mercy; and the King for his power, and riches, and severity, that makes this
Feast, is God the Father, that gathers a Church to be a spouse to his own
Son. Now (as it is said of God) Non tam habet, quam est causa amoris, God
has no cause of his love, but is indeed the cause of his own love, or rather
is Love it self; so in this case, Nontam facit, quam est: Christ does not so
much make, as he is indeed, this Feast: For the Feast and fullness, that we
look for at Gods hands, is not aliquid Dei, but Deus; not somewhat of God, but
God himself, to whom it is proper to be the Physician and the Physic, the
food, and the Feeder of our souls.

So then, although all Gods gifts and graces be great, and like to himself,
yet here in this Sacrament, he gives not simile but idem, not somewhat like
himself, of a like substance to himself, but he gives himself, and the
Son of his own Substance. And then, quantus Deus, qui dat Deum? How great,
how good and gracious is God the Father to us, that gives us no less, nor no
other, then God himself; his only Son to be the meat of our souls, and the
holy Spirit to be our Comforter, and refresher in this Sacrament?

The Elements, or Signs, after the words of Consecration, are not bare
accidents, or signs, and species, but true substances; and in that respect
they are by Christ, and the Evangelists, and Apostles called Bread and Wine:
but the thing signified is the Body and Blood of Christ. It is not figur a
tantum: though the Sacrament be a figure, it is not a figure only, but the
truth and substance: and God does not now feed us with shadows, because the
truth and substance is there received: and this Sacrament does exhibit this
which it signifies. Neither is it Efficacia tantum, that is a very weak and
short exposition. Hoc est corpus meum (1.) efficacia corporis mei, This is my
body, that is, this is the efficacy and virtue of my Body: This is my blood:
that is, this is the efficacy or effect of my Blood: for that were to divide
the Body and Blood of Christ from the force and virtue thereof; But this is
indeed the Body and Blood of Christ, not in any gross, or carnal, or
corporal manner, but in a spiritual manner; a manner best and only known to
him, that performs that which he promises: Calvin. instit. l. 4. c. 17..
and as Calvin, and Sadeel, and others teach, a manner above our capacity and
understanding; Experior magis, quam intelligo, which we prove rather then
understand: and therein are happy, that we find it to be so, in deed and
truth, though it surpass the capacity of man's wit, and be known only to
God.

In which we do imitate the blessed Apostles, who believed Christ's word, and
received it with faith, Cyril. in Joan. lib. 4. c. 13.
without once doubting or asking the Jewish question full of infidelity,
Quomodo? How can he give us his flesh? Chryfostome says, Hom. 26. in matthew. 8.
Etsi enim paruum aliquid fuerit quod datum est, fit magnum tamen de honor
dantis: immo nihil exiguum est, quod illo largiente confertur; non solum etiam
quia datur a Deo, sed quia tale est quicquid ille confert, vt dici non mereatur
exiguum: vt enim alia vniuersa praeteream, quae multitudine sua numerum
exuperant arenarum, quidnam poterit ei, quae propter nos facta est
dispensationi conferri? Quod enim erat apud eum omnibus pretiosius, vnigenitum
pro nobis filium dedit, and quidem cum adhuc essemus ipsius inimici; nec dedit
solum, sed and nostram illum fecit esse mensam: Although it be little that is
given, yet it is made great by the honor of the giver; yea, nothing is little
which is conferred, God giving it, not only because it is given of God, but
that whatsoever he gives, is such, that it deserves not to be called little;
for to pass all other things, which with their multitude exceed the number of
the sands, what can be preferred before that dispensation that is made for us?
For that which was more precious to him then all things, he gave his Son for
us, and that truly when we were his enemies; neither did he give him only,
but also he made him to be our Table.

Nec Moses dedit nobis panem verum, Hieron. ad Heb. d. qu. 2.
sed Dominus Jesus ipse conuiua, and conuiuium, ipse comedens, and qui
comeditur, illius bibimus sanguinem, and sine ipso potare non possumus, and
quotidie in sacrificijs eius de genimine vitis verae, and vineae sorec, quae
interpretatur, Electa, rubentia musta calcamus, and nouum ex his vinum bibimus
de regno Patris: Moses gave not us this true bread, but the Lord Jesus, says
S. Hierom, he is the guest, and the banquet; the feeder, and the food; we
drink his blood, and without him we cannot drink: daily in his sacrifices
we tread those chosen, red, sweet wines, out of the fruit of the true vine,
and vineyard, sorec: and out of those we drink the new wine of the kingdom
of the Father. Cuiusda^ Sermon. d^ Coena Domini inter opera Ber.
In coena illa munerans, and munus, Cibans, and cibus, conuiua, and conuiuium,
offerens, and oblatio: He is the giver, and the gift, the feeder and the food,
the guest and the feast, the offerer, and the oblation: In which respect the
Eucharist, Dion. Areop. c. 5 de Hier. Ecclesiast.
by Dionysius is called, Omnium Sacramentorum consummatio, or, perfectissimum
Sacramentum: The consummation of all the Sacraments, or the most perfect
Sacrament. Medicamentum immortalitatis, antidotum non moriendi, sed viuendi,
per Iesum Christum in Deo, Catharticum expellens malum: It is the Physic of
immortality; the antidote or preservative against death giving life in God by
Jesus Christ, the medicine purging of all vices, or driving away all evils, so
Ignatius. It is Cibus inconsumptibilis, Epist. ad Ephesians.
vnconsumable meat, so Cyprian: De Coena Dom.
Pignus salutis aeternae, tutela fidei, and spes resurrectionis: It is the
pledge of eternal salvation, the defense of faith, and the hope of
resurrection, so Optatus.

S. Cyrill goes further: Lib. 10. in Joan. c. 13.
Considerandum est non habitudine solum, quae per charitatem intelligitur,
Christum in nobis esse, verum etiam and participatione naturali. Nam
quemadmodum si igne liquefactam ceram, aliae cerae similiter liquefactae
miscueris, vt vnum quid ex vtrisque factum videatur, sic communicatione
corporis and sanguinis Christi ipse in nobis est, and nos in ipso: Consider
(says he) that Christ is in us, not only by an habitude, which is understood
by charity; but also by a natural participation: for as wax, if it be
melted by the fire, is so mingled with other melted wax, that it makes one
wax of both; so by the communication of the body and blood of Christ; he (that
is, Christ) is in us, and we in him. And he proves it out of S. Paul; The
bread that we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? De fide
orthodox. lib. 4. c. 14.
And Damascen explaining those words, says, Communicamus, and per ipsum
Christo, and participamus eius carne and diuinitate, and quia communicamus, and
vnimur inuicem per illam: nam quia ex vnopane partipamus omnes, vnum corpus
Christi, and vnus sanguis, and inuicem membra efficimur, concorporati Christo
existentes: We communicate with Christ by the Eucharist, and participate his
flesh and Deity; and because we communicate, we are united among our selves
by it: for because we all participate of one bread, we are made one body of
Christ, and one blood, and members one of an other, being incorporated with
Christ.

S. Conf. lib. 7. c. 10.
Augustine said excellently well in the person of Christ, Cibus sum grandium,
cresce and manducabis me, nec tu me in te mutabis, sicut cibum carnis tuae, sed
tu mutaberis in me: I am the meat of strong men, grow and thou shall eat
me, neither shall thou change me into thee, as thou do the meat of thy
flesh, but thou shall be changed into me. De passione Domini Sermon. 14.
And S. Leo in like sort, Non aliud agit participatio corporis and sanguinis
Christi, quam vt in id quod sumimus transeamus: The participation of the body
and blood of Christ, works nothing else but this, De Sacram. lib. c. 4.
that we shall become that which we receive. S. Ambrose says, Qui vulnus
habet, Idem Aug. de verbis Domini Sermon. 28.
medicinam requirit; vulnus est, quia sub peccato sumus, medicina est coeleste
and venerabile Sacramentum: He that has a wound let him require physic; the
wound is, that we are under sin, and the medicine is the heavenly and
venerable Sacrament.

But why do I trouble my self with many authorities? When as it is confessed
by all, that in this Sacrament we receive the Body and Blood of Christ,
Instit. l. 4. ca. 17
as Calvin does most fully prove; and Beza in an Epistle to Calvin, Epist. 309.
Ad secundum vero non ponimus, inquam, pro re significata in Sacramentis, ipsum
tantum meritum passionis Christi, sed ipsissimum corpus cruci affixum,
sanguinem ipsissimum in cruce effusum pro nobis. In summa, Christus ipsemet
verus Deus and homo, nobis significatur per illa signa, vt attollamus corda
nostra, ad illum contemplandum spiritualiter fide, in coelis, vbi nunc est:
atque ita communicamus cum omnibus ipsius bonis, and thesauris in vitam
a^ernam; idquetam vere, tamque cervo quam verum ac certum est, nos naturaliter
videre, accipere, edere, bibere, signa illa quae videntur a nobis, and sunt
corporea: To the second; for the thing signified in the Sacraments, I say, We
put not the merit of Christ's passion only, but the same body that was nailed
on the Cross, and the same blood that was shed on the Cross for us. In sum,
Christ himself, true God, and man is signified unto us by those signs, that
we may lift up our hearts, to contemplate him spiritually by faith, in the
heavens, where now he is, and so we communicate with all his goods, and
treasures unto eternal life; and that so truly and certainly, as it is true
and certain, that we naturally see, and receive, and eat and drink those
signs, which are seen of us, and are corporal. And after, Inter. Epist.
Caluius.
he adds the words of the Queen to the Cardinal: Audisne Domine Cardinalis,
non aliam esse Sacramentariorum opinionem, quam eam ipsam, quam nunc ipse
approbasti? Do you hear Sir Cardinal, that the opinion of the
Sacramentaries, is but the same, which you have approved?

Add to this, that Christ never comes alone, but is ever attended with a
train of graces: and as the Father sends the Son, God of God, and Light of
light, to redeem us: so the Father and the Son send the holy Ghost, to
sanctify us. Romans 8.32.
If God has given us his Son, how shall he not with him, freely give us all
things, says the Apostle? And that this Sacrament is a Communion or
participation of Christ's Body and Blood, it is apparent in the Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 10. And whereas we participate of Christ's Body, and Blood, in the
preaching of the word, and in Baptism; yet this only Sacrament is called
Communio, the communication of the Body and Blood of Christ, there must be some
special reason of it, namely, a more lively and near conjunction of our selves
to Christ, that we should indeed be living members, incorporated into his
mystical body, that live no longer by our own spirit, but by the Spirit of
Christ, who is the spirit of our spirit, the soul of our souls, and the very
life of our lives. He is the Sun, from whose beams we receive the light of
grace; the Fountain, from whom we, as rivers receive the water of life; The
Root from whom, we as branches, receive the sap of increase; and the Head,
from whom, we as members receive being and life. By the force and effect of
this Sacrament, we receive power against sin, and Satan, and ability to
serve God in holiness and righteousness, and the neglect thereof, gives
advantage to our spiritual enemies, whereby we are entangled in many
temptations, and fall into many sins.

S. Donatiuitate Christi.
Cyprian says, Sacramentorum communicatio per quam illius corporis sinceritati
vnimur, nos in tantum corroborat, vt de mundo, and de Diabolo, and de nobis
ipsis victoria potiamur, and Sacramentali gustu, viuificis mysterijs
inhaerentes, vna caro, and vnus spiritus simus, dicente Apostolo: Qui adhaeret
Domino, vnus spiritus est: The Communication of the Sacraments, by which we are
united to the sincerity of his body, does so far forth corroborate us, that
we obtain victory over the world, the devil, and our selves; And by this
Sacramental taste, adhering to the life-giuing mysteries, we are one flesh, and
one spirit, as the Apostle says, He that adhaereth to God, is one spirit with
him. Again, Panis hic azymus cibus verus and sincerus, per speciem, De Caena
Domini.
and Sacramentum nos tactu sanctificat, fide illuminat, veritate, Christo
conformat: and sicut panis communis, quem quotidie edimus, vitaest corporis, it
a panis iste supersubstantialis vita est animae, and sanit as mentis: This
unleavened bread, the true and sincere meat by a show or Sacrament, sanctifies
by the touch, illuminateth by faith, and by truth conformeth to Christ: and as
common bread, which we eat daily, is the life of the body, so this
supersubstantiall bread is the life of the soul, and the health of the mind.

S. Ambrose says, Venias ad cibum Christi, In Psalm. 118. Sermon. 15.
ad cibum corporis Dominici, ad epulas Sacramenti, ad illud poculum, quo
fidelium inebriantur affectus: vt laetitiam induas de remissione peccati, curas
seculi huius, metum mortis, solicitudinesque deponas: Come to the meat of
Christ, to the banquet of the Sacrament, to that cup with which the affections
of the faithful inebriantur are drunken, that thou may put on joy of
remission of sins, and put off the cares of this world.

And Chrysostom says, Hom. 24. in 1. Cor.
Vt frigida ad Eucharistiam accessio, periculosa est, it a nulla mysticae
illius Coenae participatio, pestis est, and interitus: ipsa namque mensa, anima
nostrae vis est, nerui mentis, fiduciae vinculum, spes, salus, lux, and vita
nostra: As the cold coming to the Eucharist is dangerous, so no participation
of this mystical Supper is a plague, and death it self: for this Table is the
strength, and force of our soul, the sinews of the mind, the band of
confidence, our hope, our health, our light, and our life. In Joan. homil. 45.
Again, Hic mysticus sanguis Demones procul pellit, angelos and angelorum
Dominum ad nos allicit: Demones enim cum Dominicum sanguinem in nobis vident,
in fugam vertuntur, angeli autem concurrunt; his sanguis effusus vniuersum
abluit orbem terrarum: This mystical blood drives the devils afar of,
draws the Angels, and the Lord of Angels to us: for the devils when they see
the Lords blood in us, they are turned to flight, and the Angels come unto us;
this Blood being powered out, does wash the whole earth. And again, In Psalm.
22.
Qui veniunt ad mensam potentis, considerantes ea quae apponuntur eis, accipere
cum timore, and tremore, and tribulationes fiunt consolationes, auferuntur ea
quae sunt carnis, infunduntur ea quae sunt spiritus, and ex mensa praeparat a
proficiunt contra eos, quitribulant eos: To them that come to the Table of the
mighty, considering to receive those things that are set before them with
fear and trembling; (fear and trembling, is the gesture of Communicants, with
S. Chrysostom, not familiarity and equality of heirs that boast of the
Prerogatives of a Table) to them tribulations, are consolations, those things
that are of the flesh are taken aaway, and those things that are of the spirit
are powered in, and by this prepared Table they profit or prevail against them
that trouble them. This made him say, Ad Popul. Antioch. homil. 61.
Tanquam Leones ignem spirantes, ab illa mensa recedimus, facti Diabolo
terribiles; As Lions that breath fire, we depart from this Table, made terrible
to the devil, etc. And after: Parents quidem alijs sepe filios tradunt
alendos, ego autem (inquit) non ita: sed carnibus meis alo, meipsum vobis
appono, vos omnes generosos esse volens, and bonas vobis praetendens de futuris
exspectationes: Parents often deliver their children to others to be nourished,
or brought up: but I do not so, says the Lord, but with mine own flesh I
nourish them, and set my self before them, willing to have them all noble, and
pretending good expectations to them of future things.

This made S. Cyprian to say, Epist. 54.
Non infirmis sed fortibus pax necessaria est, nec morientibus sed viuentibus
communicatio a nobis danda est, vt quos excitamus and hortamur ad praelium, non
inermes, and nudos relinquamus, sed protectione sanguinis and corporis Christi
muniamus, etc. Peace is necessary, not only to the weak, but to the strong,
the Communion is given by us, not to the dead, but to the living, that we may
not leave them unarmed, whom we excite and exhort to the battle, but arm
them with the protection of the Blood and Body of Christ. And, whereas the
Eucharist is ordained for this end, that it may he a defense to the receivers;
Let us arm them with the muniment of the Lords saturitie, whom we desire to
be safe against the adversary; For how do we teach, or provoke them to shed
their blood in the confession of Christ's name, if we deny to them, going to
fight, the Blood of Christ? Give them the Cup of Christ, that are to drink the
cup of Martyrdom. Sermon. de Bapt. in Coena Dom.
I conclude this point with S. Bernard; Duo illud Sacramentum operatur in
nobis, vt videlicet, and sensum minuat in minimis, and in grauioribus peccatis
tollat omnino consensum: si quis vestrum non tam saepe modo, nontam acerbos
sentit iracundiae motus, inuidiae, luxuriae, aut caeterorum huiusmodi, gratias
agat corpori, and sanguini Domini, quoniam virtus Sacramenti operatur in eo:
and gaudeat quod pessimum vlcus accedat ad sanitatem: This Sacrament (says he)
works two things in us, it diminishes sense in small faults, and in great
sins it altogether takes away consent: if any of you feel not so often, nor
so sharp motions of anger, or envy, of luxury, or the like, let him give the
thanks to the Body and Blood of Christ, for the power of the Sacrament works
in him: and let him rejoice, because the worst soar draws near to health.

Now, Luke 15.
what shall I say more? The Son of God, as the Shepherd, seeks us, and
carries us to the fold of the Church; The holy Ghost, as the woman, lights
the candle of knowledge, and sweepeth the house by obedience, and sanctity;
and there remains but one only greater gift, the vision and possession of
God the Father, who is our exceeding great reward. The two first, of the Son,
and the holy Ghost, pertain to grace; the third, of God the Father, belongs
to glory. The two first are in the way, the third in the Country in the end of
the way. What greater gifts could God give us, then those, that he has given
in this Sacrament, that is, not creatures, but the Creator, the second and
third person in the Trinity, the Son and the holy Ghost? Quem horum
contemnitis? which of these two can we despise? The Son, whose members we
are? or the holy Ghost, whose Temples we are? If God had given us the best of
his creatures, we ought with all reverence to have received them, and kneeling
had been decent and necessary, Respectu doni and dona^tis, both in respect of
the gift it self, which far surmou^teth all proportion of desert in us: but
much more of the giver, whose incomparable and infinite greatness, and love,
more then infinite, requires all reverence of body and soul, of us vile
wretched sinners, who deserve punishment, and receive remission, and life
everlasting. But when he gives Creatorem, the Creator, the Son, and the
eternal Word that made all things, and the holy Ghost, who is Charitas
increata, uncreated and essential charity; and Donum, the gift, that is, both
the gift of God, and God himself, can any devotion or adoration of the soul,
and prostration, and bowing, or kneeling of the body be too humble, nay,
humble enough when we come to the Table of the Lord, there to receive, not
Panem Domini, the bread of the Lord alone, as Judas did, but Panem Dominum, the
Lord himself, the bread, and meat, and drink of our souls? The people of
Israel who were a stiffenecked people, when Moses told them the law of the
Passover, Exodus 12.27.
Incuruatus adorauit, bowed themselves and worshipped or adored: and that was
but Typus, the Type, and Lex, the Law of the Passover, and not the true
Passover: But this Sacrament contains Christ, the true Passover: and shall
we not much more bow down and kneel, when we receive this truth, and
substance? If the King that is but a mortal man, whose breath is in his
nostrils, give us a pardon, or some great gift and office, who is so proud but
he will stoop and bow down his head, and kneel, nay kiss his feet? And
the greater the Kings grace is, the greater will be the receivers humiliation.
And shall we deny that to God, which we every day tender to man?

So then, as Religion taught men natural and civil duties, to Parents, to
Kings, and to Priests, and benefactors, to kneel, and to bow the head in
reverence, when we receive natural and civil gifts: so let nature and
civility, as Rivers, return their streams to the Sea of Gods goodness,
whence they take their beginning, and teach men the duties of Religion and
devotion; to bow the head, and the body and the knees with all reverence and
humility to God, who gives not only natural, but also supernatural and
divine graces, and glory it self: nay, that gives himself, and his Son,
and his holy spirit for us, and to us, in this Sacrament. And let Fathers and
Masters on earth learn, even of their children, and servants on Earth, to do
their duty to their Father that is in Heaven. Thou bowest and kneelest to thy
Father, thy Master, thy Prince, thy ghostly Father in earth, who are but
instruments, and vnder-agents of thy being, and conservation in nature, and
grace, and therein do but thy duty: And will thou not much more kneel,
and bow to thy Master, and King, and Father, and God in Heaven, who is the
first, and supreme Author and cause of our natural and supernatural being,
in grace and glory? If thou do it to Gods Image, much more do it to God
himself: for Gratiam, Psalm. 84.12.
and gloriam dabit Dominus, grace, and glory are both the gifts of God: and
because they be the greatest gifts, they must be received with greatest
reverence and humiliation, and therefore with kneeling.

Ratio 4. Tremenda mysteria.
I Come to the fourth Reason, and that is, Mysteriorum dignitas, the dignity
of the mysteries. And that surely is great, since they exhibit Christ unto us:
for as it appears in the former Reasons, in this Sacrament God gives his Son
Christ; and Christ gives himself to be our food. And therefore since we
receive the bread of Heaven, and the soode of Angels, we may well think the
Church to be another heaven unto us, where God feeds us with his Son, and
the Angels assist and minister in this feast. And in that respect, all
humility of soul and body, and consequently kneeling, is most fit for this
holy action of consecration, and participation of this heavenly and Angelical
food.

Moses beheld a burning bush in the wilderness, Exodus 3.5.
and he might not come near it, until he had put off his shoes; the reason
is, because, Locus in quo stas, terrasancta est: the place whereon thou stand
is holy ground: and is not this sacred mystery as holy, if not more holy then
this burning bush, since it has vim Sanctificantem, a sanctifying power in all
them that receive it with true contrition, and faith? When God appeared to
Jacob at Bethel, Genesis 28.16, 17
Jacob said, Surely God is in this place, and I knew it not, and he was
afraid, and said, Quam terribilis est hic locus? How dreadful is this place?
This is none other but Domus Dei, Genesis 31.13.
and Porta Coeli; the house of God, and the gate of heaven; and God calls
himself the God of Bethel. But this mystery goes further; It is not Domus, but
Mensa Dei, not the House only, but the Table of God; not Porta, but Cibus
Celi; not the gate only, but the food of heaven; yea, Christ that is God and
man, is here offered, and received; and therefore as that was Locus terribilis,
a dreadful place, so this is, Actio terribilis, an action, not of familiarity,
which breeds presumption, and presumption begets contempt, but of dread and
reverence; and therefore to be undertaken with all devotion of soul, and
humiliation and kneeling of body. And if holiness do become Domum Dei, Psalm.
93.6.
the house of God for ever, much more does holiness become Deum Bethel, the God
of Bethel, the God of that house. If holiness become the material house, or
Temple, much more does it become the spiritual house, and table of the Lord,
in which we offer our souls and bodies, to be spiritual Temples to the Lord.

And this holiness must make a difference of the Lords body, from other
meats: 1. Cor. 11.29.
for some eat and drink their own damnation, because they discern not the
Lords body. And what is it to discern the Lords body? Does he discern or
make a difference of the Lords body, that comes to this Sacrament with no
more respect or reverence then he comes to his ordinary supper? Does he
discern the Lords body, that adoreth and kneeleth to the Elements, and gives
the worship to the creature, which is due only to the Creator? Does he
discern the Lords body that comes to this Sacrament, Pompatice, and
gloriose, pompously, Cyprian de Coena Dom.
and gloriously, without all contrition and sorrow for guiltiness of sin,
without all praise, and thanks for the great blessings he is to receive,
without any prayer, that he may worthily receive those great mysteries? Does
he discern the Lords body that comes to these mysteries rashly, and
presumptuously, as if he were coequall, and hailefellow with Christ, when as
we should indeed come cum timore and tremore, Chrysostom.
with fear and trembling, in respect of Gods greatness, and our own
unworthiness, to receive these sacred mysteries: So then these holy mysteries
by their dignity and greatness, should strike an awe and reverence in us,
when we come to the Lords Table, and procure adoration and kneeling: not to
them, for they are but creatures, consecrated to an holy use; but to the
Creator, that feeds us in such holy, yet fearful manner.

In which respect the ancient Fathers spoke of these mysteries with great
reverence; Hom. 24. in 1. Cor. 10.16.
chiefly S. Chrysostom, who expounding the words of S. Paul, The cup of
blessing which we bless, etc. says, Quid dicis O beat Paul? volens auditori
pudorem suffundere, and reuerendorum mentionem faciens mysteriorum:
benedictionis Calicem vocas illum terribilem, and maxim formidandu^ calicem?
certe, inquit, non est enim paruum quod dictu^ est. Nam quando dico
benedictionem, explico omnem thesaurum beneficentiae Dei, and magna illa dona
in memoriam reuoco. Nam nos quoque ad calicem recensentes ineffabilia Dei
beneficia, and quaecunque sumus adepti, it a ipsum offerimus, and communicamus
gratias agentes, quod ab errore liberarit hominum genus: What say thou
blessed Paul, when thou will confound the Auditor, mentioning the dreadful
mysteries? thou call that fearful cup horroris plenum, full of horror, the
cup of blessing: It is true, for it is no small thing that is said: for when I
call it blessing, I call it the Eucharist, and calling it the Eucharist, I open
the treasure of all the benignity of God: for with this Cup we reckon the
unspeakable benefits of God, and whatsoever we have obtained; So we come to
him, and communicate with him, giving thanks to him that has freed mankind
from error. And mentioning elsewhere this Sacrifice, horrore and reuerentia
plenissimu^, most full of horror and reverence he says, Per id tempus, Lib. 6.
de Sacord.
et angelisacerdoti assident, and coelestiu^ potestatu^ vniuersus ordo clamores
excitat, and locus altari vicinus, in illius honorem, qui immolatur, angeloru^
choris plenus est, id quod credere abunde licet, velex tanto illo Sacrificio,
quod tum peragitur: At that time (the time of the Consecration of the
Sacrament) the Angels stand by the Priest, and the universal order of the
heavenly powers do raise up cries; And the place near the Altar is filled with
the quires of angels, in the honor of him that is immolated: which may
abundantly be believed, by that great Sacrifice which is then performed. Lib.
3.
Again in the third book, Dum conspicis Dominum immolatum, Sacerdotem
sacrificio incumbentem, ac preces fundentem, tum vero turbam circumfusam
pretioso illo sanguine in tingi, ac rube fieri, etiamne te inter mortales
versari, atque in terra consistere censes? ac nonpotiuse vestigio in coelos
transferri? While thou beholdest the Lord offered up, and the Priest
sacrificing, and the present multitude to be dipped, and made redd with that
precious Blood, do thou think that thou do converse among mortal men on
earth? Or rather that thou art suddenly translated into heaven? And after he
infers, Hoc ergo mysterium, omnium maxim horrendum, verendumque, quis
tandem qui sanus in idem minime sit, quique e potestate non exierit, fastidire,
ac despicere poterit? What man that is not madd and out of his wits, can
despise or loath this mystery, of all others most dreadful, and fearful?
And S. Cyprian long before him said, Cyprian. de C^na Dom.
Sanguinem sugimus, and intra redemptoris nostri vulnera figimus linguam, quo
interius, exteriusque rubricati, a sapientibus huius seculi, iudicamur amentes:
We suck his Blood, and put our tongues into the wounds of our Redeemer, with
which being made redd within, and without, we are judged to be madd by the
wise men of this world. S. Augustine interpreting the words of the Lords
prayer, Give us this day our daily bread, understands (...),
supersubstantiall bread to be the Eucharist, which is called daily bread;
Augustinus de verbis Dom. sermon. 28.
And then he adds, Si quotidianus est panis, cur post annum, illum sumis?
accipe quotidi^, quod quotidie tibi prosit, sic viue vt quotidie merearis
accipere: Idem habet Ambrosius.
qui non meretur quotidie accipere, non meretur post annum accipere: quomodo
sanctus Job, quotidie pro filijs offerebat sacrificium, ne forte aliquid vel in
cord, vel in sermon peccassent. Ergo tu audis, quod quotiescunque offertur
sacrificium, mors Domini, resurrectio Domini, eleuatio Domini significetur, and
remissio peccatorum; and panem istum vitae nostrae quotidianum non assumis? Qui
vulnus habet, medicinam requirit: vulnus est, quia sub peccato sumus, medicina
est coeleste and venerabile Sacramentum: If it be daily bread, why do thou
receive it once in the year? receive it daily, that it may daily profit thee:
Live so that thou may obtain to receive it daily; he that obtains not to
receive it daily, obtains not to receive it after a year. As holy Job
offered Sacrifice daily for his sons, lest perchance they should offend in
thought, or word: Do thou hear that as often as the Sacrifice is offered,
the death of the Lord, the resurrection of the Lord, and the ascension of the
Lord is signified, and remission of sin? and do thou not receive this
daily bread of life? He that is wounded seeks physic; Now thy wound is
sin, and the medicine is the heavenly and venerable Sacrament. I cannot stand
to reckon all the titles at large, that the Fathers give to this Sacrament: I
add S. Chrysostom, for he is most copious in these amplifications, Chrisostom.
Homil. 24. in 1. Cor.
and exaggerations upon these words, Calix benedictionis, the Cup of blessing
which we bless. Valde fideliter dixit, and terribiliter, hoc est autem quod
dicit: Id quod est in Calice, est id quod fluxit e latere, and illius sumus
participes: Calicem autem benedictionis vocauit, quod eam habentes in manibus,
sic eum hymnis, and laudibus prosequimur, admirantes: Caeleste donum stupentes,
benedicentes, bonisque verbis prosequentes, quod eum ipsum effudit, ne
maneremus in errore; and non solum effudit, sed etiam eum ipsum nobis
impertijt: Quamobrem si sanguinem (inquit) cupis, non aram Idolorum, brutorum
caede, sed meum altar, meo cruentum sanguine: quid est hoc horribilius? quid
autem amabilius? He speaks very faithfully, and terribly, and this is that
which he says: That which is in the Cup, is that which issued out of his
side, and we are partakers of it. And he called it the Cup of blessing, because
having it in our hands, we do, admiring, follow him with hymns, and praises,
wondering at his ineffable gift, blessing, and setting forth with good words,
that he has powered it out, that we should not abide in error; and not only
he has powered it out, but also given the selfsame to us: wherefore (says
he) if thou desire this Blood, not the altar of Idols, bloody with slain
beasts, but my Altar bloody with mine own Blood: what is more horrible, and
yet what more amiable then this? And again, Ad populum Antiochenum. Hom. 61.
Hic sanguis effusus est, and coelum facit accessibile, horrenda scilicet
Ecclesiae mysteria, horrendum altar. This Blood is shed, and makes heaven
accessible, that is to say, the dreadful mysteries of the Church, and the
dreadful Altar. And in the same place: Tu vero petens Sacrificium quod horrent
Angeli: When thou go to the Sacrifice which the Angels dread; and in the
next words he calls this Sacrament, Tribunal Christi, the Tribunal of
Christ; And after, Considera, quaeso, mensa Regalis est apposita, Angeli mensae
ministrantes, ipse Rex adest; and tu adstas oscitans? sordescunt tibi
vestimenta and nihil est tibi curae? at pura sunt, igitur adora, and communica:
Consider I pray you, a Kingly feast is provided: the Angels minister at the
Table: the King himself is present, and stand thou gaping? thy garments are
foul, and take thou no care? but thy garments are pure: Adore then and
Communicate. Quo non oportet igitur esse puriorem, tali fruentem Sacrificio?
quo solari radio non splendidiorem manum, carnem hanc diuidentem? os quod igne
spirituali repletur: linguam quae tremendo nimis sanguine rubescit? What shall
I say then, but that he must be cleerer then the Sun beams, that distributes
this flesh, and have a mouth filled with heavenly fire, and a tongue red with
this fearful blood, that will duly receive this reverend Sacrament: for it
is not man, but God that feeds us, and it is not earthly, but heavenly food,
wherewith we are refreshed.

And therefore I marvel not, 1. Cor. 11.10.
if the Apostle say, that women must be covered in the Church Propter Angelos,
for the Angels: Genesis 28.12, 13
When God (as on Jacobs ladder) stands and beholds, and the Angels are
present, and ascend and descend, and the Priest does represent the person of
Christ, in the consecration, and the people be as the Apostles, that receive
these dreadful mysteries. For be it, that the Angels be there understood,
Angels per naturam, by nature and creation, as the blessed Angels that are Gods
ministering spirits, or Angels per officium, by office, that have the power of
consecrating these dreadful mysteries; All reverence is due to that sacred
work whereof God is the giver, Christ the gift it self, the holy Ghost
supreme agent, the Angels assistants, and the Bishops and Priests, Angels by
office, are instruments; and the mysteries themselves so dreadful and reverend,
that the lowest of humility, is scant lowly enough, for so great graces: Since,
Dial. lib. 4. c. 58.
as Gregory speaks, Quis fidelium habere dubium possit, in ipsa immolationis
hora, ad Sacerdotis vocem Coelos aperiri in illo Jesus Christi mysterio,
Angelorum choros adesse, summis ima sociari, terrena coelestibus iungi, vnu^
quiddam ex visibilibus atque inuisibilibus fieri? What faithful man can doubt,
that in the hour of immolation, at the voice of the Priest, the heavens are
open, the quires of Angels are present in those mysteries of Jesus Christ, the
highest are sociated to the lowest, earthly things are joined to heavenly
things; and some one thing is made of things visible and invisible.

And may this conjunction of heaven and earth, spirit and flesh, Christ and our
flesh, be made without the greatest humility on our part? May we presume to
eat the bread of heaven, and forget the duty of sinful and earthly men, that
are but dust and ashes? No surely: Reverend and dreadful mysteries, must have
receivers that come with reverence and dread, and such as our action is, such
must be our affection; that is, to receive that, with fear and trembling,
which is so fearful and dreadful in it self. And men in fear fall to the
ground, in horror and confusion, and we out of humility, must prostrate our
selves, and bow and kneel on the ground, when we consider that we are but
earth and ashes, in comparison of the reverend mysteries: of which we may well
say, Quis ad haec idoneus? Lord who is fit for these things? So then, though we
kneel not, nor adore those reverend mysteries, because they are but creatures;
yet we ought to adore and kneel at the receipt of these mysteries, since we
receive the body and blood of Christ, and Christ himself, God and man, to whom
all adoration and prostration and kneeling is due.

I conclude this Reason with Chrysostomes words; Terram tibi Coelum facit hoc
mysterium, In 2. Cor. 10. hom. 24.
Aperi ergo coeli portas and perspice, vel potius non coeli, sed coeli
coelorum: and tunc videbis quod dictum est: nam quod illic est omnium
preciocissimum, and maxim honorandum, hoc ostendam tibi situm in terra: sicut
enim in regia, id quod est omnium magnificentissimum, non sunt parietes, non
tectum aureum, sed corpus Regis sedens in solio: sed hoc tibi nunc licet videre
in terra: Non enim Angelos, nec Archangelos, neque coelos, and coelos coelorum,
sed ipsum eorum ostendo Dominum; vidisti quemadmodum, quod est omnium
praestantissimum, and maxim honorandum vides in terra; neque solum vides, sed
etiam tangis, sed etiam comedis, and eo accepto domum reuerteris. Si tibi Regis
filius cum mundo, and purpura and diademate traditus esset ferendus, quaecunque
sunt in terra abiecisses: Nunc autem non hominis, Regis filium accipiens, sed
ipsum vnigenitum Dei Filium, dic rogo non extimescis, et eorum quae ad hanc
vitam pertinent, non omnem expellis amorem? This mystery makes the earth to be
heaven unto thee; open then the gates of heaven, or rather of the heaven of
heavens, and behold, and then thou shall see that which is spoken: For that
which is of all others, most precious, and most to be honored, this will I
show thee upon earth: as in the Kings Court, that which of all others is most
magnificent, is not the walls and golden seeling, but the body of the King
sitting in his Throne: And that thou may now see on earth: for I show thee
not Angels, nor Archangels, nor the heaven, nor the heavens of heavens, but the
Lord of them. Thou see then that which is the best, and most honorable in
earth, and thou do not only see him, but touch him, and feed on him, and
having received him thou returnest to thy house. If the Kings son, and his
robe, and his Diadem had been committed to be carried by thee, thou would
have cast away all other things on earth. But now thou have received, not the
Kings son, that is a man, but the only begotten Son of God: tell me, I
pray thee, do thou not fear, and cast off all the love of the things that
appertain to this life?

The conclusion then, in short, is this; These dreadful and reverend mysteries
may be as Tutors and Schoolemasters to imprint the same dread and reverence in
the souls and bodies, of the receivers, which they carry in themselves: great
and reverend dreadful mysteries, must be received with great and dreadful
humility of soul, and humiliation of body, of which kneeling is a part, and
therefore in the action of participating, and receiving, we must kneel, that
it may appear in the sight of God, and his Angels, and men, that we do
homage and reverence to him that feeds us, by these reverend mysteries, with
the heavenly and divine food, whereon the blessed Angels and Saints ever feed,
and ever desire to feed. Inhiantes semper edunt, and edentes inhiant: their
eating does not fill, but increase their appetites: and they ever say, Joan. 6.
Lord evermore give us this bread.

Ratio 5. Praxis Ecclesiae Militantis.
THe fifth Reason is, Praxis Ecclesiae militantis, the practice of the Church
militant, which is the best interpreter of the Churches doctrine, in point of
outward gesture and Ceremony: as in the old Testament, Praxis Prophetarum, was
Interpres Prophetarum, the Prophets practice, was the best expounder of the
Prophets. In which, because it is not altogether clear, what Christ and his
Apostles did in the first institution, we must be content to proceed a
posteriori, and from the nearest succeeding ages, to collect what they learned
from their predecessors, even from the time of the Apostles.

And first, although it please them that are the favorers of sitting at the
Receiving of the Comunion, to take it as granted, that Christ administered, and
the Apostles received this Sacrament Discumbentes, sitting, or lying on one
side, or leaning on one arm, as the custom of that time, and Country was;
yet the grounds of that conceit are not so clear as they take them to be.

First then, it must be observed, that in this night, in which this Sacrament
was instituted, there was Triplex Coena, Paschalis, Vulgaris, Eucharistica, the
Paschal supper according to the Law, Exodus 12. The vulgar supper, of common
meats, if the Paschal did not suffice: and the Eucharisticall, which is the
very institution of this Sacrament. And of the Paschall, and Eucharisticall
there is no doubt; The figurative Paschall Lamb was to continue until the
true Paschall Lamb Christ was to be offered, and then in presence of the
Substance, the shadow was to cease, and in the presence of the Truth, the
figure was to be removed: Leo de Passione Domini, Sermon. 7
Vt ouem figuratiuam vera ouis remoueret; hostia in hostiam transit, sanguis
sanguinem excludit, and legalis festiuitas, dum mutatur, impletur: The true
Lamb Christ that takes away the sins of the world, took away the figurative
Lamb; one Sacrifice was translated into another Sacrifice, the blood of Christ
excluded all other blood, and the legal festiuitie, while it is changed, is
indeed fulfilled.

And Christ was to make his Will and Testament before his death, that he might
seal it with his Cross, and confirm it with his Blood; so Christ's death was
the end of the figurative Passover, and the beginning of the true Passover,
that was then offered for us. And that there were three Suppers, Euthim. in 26.
Matt. cap. 63.
Euthimius shows in these words; De modo autem manducandi, verisimile est
quod stantes primum manducauerunt Pascha, secundum legem, deinde discubuerunt
and coenauerunt: For the manner of eating, it is very likely, that first they
did eat the Passover standing, according to the Law, then they sat down and
did suppe. And the same will further appear out of Chrysostom and Theophylact.

I observe this to this end, to show how uncertain this point of sitting at
the celebration of the Eucharist is, when they that ground it upon the gesture
of the Apostles, which they take to be an eternal law, or rule, to all their
successors, are forced to make it up with verisimile est, or non constat, it is
very likely or probable, that they sat, or there appears no other gesture
but sitting, when they received this Sacrament; For why? Matthew. 26.20.
S. Matthew says, Now when the even was come, Discumbebat, he sat down with
the twelve: but this is plain to be spoken of the Paschal Supper: for the
disciples say to Jesus, Where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the
Passover? Verse. 17. and 19. And the disciples did as Jesus appointed them, and
they made ready the Passover; And then follow the words, When the Even was
come, he sat down with the twelve: so this Discumbebat was in coena Paschali,
this sitting was at the Paschal Supper; And the Eucharistical Supper was
begun after the end of the Paschal Supper, Luke 22.20. 1. Cor. 11.25.
as it is plain in S. Luke, and S. Paul, Et postquam coenasset, and after
Supper he took the Cup: And two several Suppers, might have two gestures.
And it is a very poor argument to conclude thus, Christ sat with his Apostles
at the Paschal Supper, and likewise at the vulgar supper, if there were any:
therefore he sat also at the Eucharistical Supper. For though S. Matthew say,
Matthew. 26.26.
Coenantibus illis, while they did eat, Luke 22.20. 1. Cor. 11.25.
Christ took bread and blessed it, and brake it, etc. Yet S. Luke, and S. Paul
expound his meaning to be postquam coenauit, after Supper, or in the end of
Supper, between Supper, and rising to go to the Mount Oliuet. Calvin. harmo.
Euangel. in Matih. 26.
And Calvin says, Finita coena, sacrum parem and vinum gustarunt, they tasted
the sacred Bread and Wine, Supper being ended.

S. Mark has the same narration of the preparation of the Passover, and then
adds, In the evening Jesus came with the twelve, Mar. 14.17, 18.
and as they sat and did eat, our Savior told them, that one that did eat
with him, should betray him. And in the 22. verse, he says as S. Matthew did,
Manducantibus illis, as they did eat, Jesus took bread, etc. But S. Luke
makes it most clear: for after the phrase of sitting down with the twelve,
he describes two Cups, one of the Paschal, or common Supper, of which he
said, Diuidite inter vos, Take this, and divide it among your selves; the other
of the Evangelical Supper, Luke 22.14.17.19.
in the 19. Verse, He took bread: And in the 20. Verse: Likewise after Supper
he took the Cup. And lest any, out of the former words should gather, that
only the Clergy should taste of the Cup, and the people should be debarred of
the Blood of Christ, because, of the Paschal Cup, he had said, Diuidite inter
vos, Divide it among you; Of the Eucharistical Cup he says in S. Matthew,
Matthew. 26. ver. 27.
Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drink you all of this; all for whom my Blood is powered
out.

S. John omitteth this Eucharisticall Supper, or the institution of this
Sacrament, as being fully related by the other Evangelists: but he mentions
his rising from Supper, and the washing of his Disciples feet; And then he
adds, So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and
was set down again; He said unto them, etc. So it seems this sitting was,
ad pradicandum, to teach them the use of washing their feet, and to discover
the traitor Judas: and then to fall into that excellent divine Sermon, equal
to that in the Mount, continued in the 14.15.16. and 17. Chapters. So then it
is clear, that they sat at the Paschal or common Supper: but of the Sacrament
here is altum silentium, not one word in particular in all the Gospel.

Secondly, it is not clear, that the word discumbebat in the Evangelists,
does necessarily enforce sitting: For why? Discumbere, in the strict letter of
the Text, must be understood of the manner of the sitting, usual in that
Country at their Feasts; which was partly lying on the ground, and partly
leaning on one side, or arm, as the Poet said, Strato discumbitur ostro. And
it is the more probable, because it is clear in the Text, that S. John leaned
on our Saviors breast, which he might easily do in this lying, or leaning,
but hardly in sitting. And then, if the Apostles gesture in receiving this
Sacrament, be a perpetual rule, and pattern for us, we must neither stand,
nor kneel, nor sit, but lie on the ground, or on pilowes, or beds, and lean
as the custom then was. So that it does not necessarily enforce Gestum
actionis, but actionem ipsam, not the gesture of the action, which is lying, or
leaning, but the action it self: that is Discumbebat, (i.) Coenabat, he sat
down, that is, he went to Supper.

Besides, there is yet a further difficulty, which is not easily removed, that
arises our of the strict sense of this word: For if Christ's Discumbere, be
sedere, if this supping be sitting, I would be glad to receive an answer, how
our Savior can be excused from the breach of the Law of the Passover: For
though it be not expressly said in the Text, Exodus 12. Comedetis stantes, you
shall eat it standing; yet all the circumstances of the Text are strong, and
pregnant, that they did stand at the Passover. The manner is described thus,
the word sic comedetis, you shall eat it thus, does imply the manner to be
kept inuiolably, until Christ the true Passover, should be offered up. For
this is the Law of the Passover, and an ordinance for ever, which they must
teach their children: and therefore to be kept not only by them, that were at
the first institution, but to continue to all posterity; and not to be changed
nor altered by the Jews at any time, no not by our Savior Christ himself,
who came not to dissolve one title of the Law, but to fulfill it, that therein
he might fulfill all righteousness.

First then, accingetis renes vestros, you shall eat it, with your loins
girded; that was no way fit for sitters, or leaners: for why should they have
their loins girded, that were to take their ease, and rest? As if it should be
said, that he that goes to his rest, should put on his armor: since loose
garments are fittest for repose and rest, and girt garments are fittest for
them that minister, or travail; that they may be light and nimble in the way,
or in their service. So the girding of their loins is a preparation to setting
out in a journey, for which we are most ready when we stand on our feet, as
S. Peter when he was led out of prison, Act. 12.8.
was commanded by the Angel to gird himself.

Next it is, calceamenta habebitis in pedibus; you shall eat it with your
shoes on your feet: and the Jews custom was to put off their shoes at
their coming into the house, Luke 7.44.
and wash their feet, and then to eat or repose themselves. Act. 12.8.
And S. Peter was bidden to bind on his Sandals when he was led out of the
prison by the Angel: so that it seems they put not on their shoes until they
were ready to set forward on their journey.

Thirdly, it is Baculos tenentes in manibus, you shall eat the Passover with
your staves in your hands; and nothing is more cumbersome in a feast, then a
staff in ones hand; there is more need of a knife, or a cup at a supper,
then a staff.

And lastly, comedetis festinantes; you shall eat it in haste, for it is the
Lords Passover. In haste? then there is no leisure to sit, nor is it fit to
lose so much time as to arise from the bed, or ground; standing is fitter for
such haste, the^ lying or sitting: and what should upper garments, girt upon
us, do in such hot Countries, at a feast? or foul shoes to pollute the beds?
or staves in our hands, to trouble our eating? And when there is such haste
that we are in doubt to be thrust out, if we go not of our selves, standing
in all reason is the fittest site, or position of such posters. And therefore
though the word standing be not in the Text, yet all the circumstances do
convince, that the Jews stood at the Passover.

And it seems, the Apostle had a relation to this gesture of the Passover, in
the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.14.
when he said, state succincti lumbos, stand therefore with your loins girded
with the girdle of truth, and your feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace; standing is the fittest gesture for Soldiers and trauailers:
so long as they stand, they are on their way; so the reason of the Text speaks
for standing at the Passover, although the letter have it not. And then since
the Evangelists use the word Discumbebat, he leaned, or lay down, as the
propriety of the word imports, of the Paschall supper, this sitting, or
leaning, or lying, must be standing, or else Christ must be a breaker of the
law of the Passover, which were great wrong once to think of him, that did
many things that were not needful for him to do, that he might fulfill all
righteousness.

Again, De sacrificijs Abel and Cain.
Philo Iudaeus that knew best the practice of the Jews, allegorizing those
other circumstances of girt loins, and shoes on their feet, and staves in
their hands, says plainly, stentque recti firmatis pedibus, let them stand
upright, their feet set or fixed: whereby it appears to be the custom of the
Jews to stand at the Passover, Hom. 60. ad popul Antioch. habet, and verba
eadem hom 83. in Mattheum.
by the testimony of a Jew of great credit among Christians. S. Chrysostom is
of the same judgment. Nam si Iudaei stantes, and calceamenta manibus
gestantes, and baculos, agnum cum festinatione comedebant te multo magis
oportet esse solertem: If the Jews standing, and carrying shoes and staves in
their hands, did eat the Lamb in haste, it becomes thee to be much more
diligent. Hom. 82. in Matth^u^.
And again he asks this question, Quomodo autem si pascha comedebant,
aduersus legem recu^bentes comedebant? If they did eat the Passover, how is
it that they did eat it sitting, or lying, or leaning, contrary to the Law?
And he answers himself: Sed dicere possumus, quia postquam comederant Pascha,
ad coenandum recubuerunt: We may say, that after they had eaten the Passover,
they sat, or lay, or leaned down to supper. So there was a vulgar supper,
after the Paschall, besides the Eucharisticall; and S. Chrysostomes judgment
is clear, that the law commanded standing at the Passover, and that sitting,
lying, or leaning at the Passover was against the Law of God.

Theophylact is of the same judgment: In matt. 26.
Ex hoc putant quidam, quod hoc anno, Pascha non comederit Dominus: Dicunt enim
quod stantes comedebant agnum, Christus autem recumbens tradidit suum
Sacramentum: Upon this occasion some think, that our Lord this year did not
eat the Passover, for they say that they did eat the Passover standing, and
Christ lying, or leaning, In Marc. 14.
did deliver his Sacrament. Again, Quomodo accumbebat, cum lex praeciperet a
stantibus comedendum Pascha? Verisimile igitur primum est, post perfecta ea
quae sunt legis, deinde recubuisse proprium Pascha traditurum: How did they sit
or lie, when as the Law commanded the Passover to be eaten by standers? It is
likely that first, they did perfect those things which were legal, and then
Christ sat, or lay down when he delivered his own Passover. In Luc. 22.
Again, Pascha olim stantes comedebant: quomodo igitur Dominus recumbere
dicitur? Dicunt itaque quod postquam comedit legale Pascha, recubuerunt more
vulgari, comedentes alios quosdam cibos: In former times they did eat the
Passover standing, how then is our Lord said to sit, or lie? They say that
after he had eaten the legal Passover, they sat, or lay down, eating
certain other meats, after the common fashion. In all which you see
Theophylact is clear, that they did ever eat the Passover standing, and that
our Savior and his Apostles did eat it standing, according to the Law. And
though he says, in S. Matthew and S. Mark that he delivered his own supper
sitting or lying, yet here he says, they sat at their vulgar, or common
supper; and Euthimius says, Quodque lex stantes edere iuberet? To these I may
add two great learned men of this later age, although our adversaries, Ioannes
Maldonatus, In Matt. c. 26.
and Lucas Brugensis upon the 26. of S. Matthew. So then this word,
discumbebat, which without all doubt was spoken of the Paschall Supper, cannot
signify the gesture of sitting, or lying, unless we will grant that Christ
brake the Law of the Passover; but only imports, Accessit ad mensam, or
Coenauit, he came to the Table, or Supper, and then it remains, that it is
altogether uncertain what gesture the Apostles used at the receiving of this
Sacrament.

To this I add one word more, The words of standing, and sitting, and the like
in Scripture, do not always conclude a certain gesture. Luke 7.38.
It is said of Mary Magdalene, Stans retro secus pedes eius, she stood at his
feet behind him: Behind, for there her sins placed her: and behind him,
because if she, being a City sinner, that is a known and marked sinner over
all the city, must appear before God her Judge; she would be sure to put Christ
between God, and her, that if God did see her, he might also see and behold
the face of his Anointed Christ, and for his sake be reconciled to her. Now the
word is stetit, she stood; but it must needs be Prouoluta ad pedes Jesus: she
stood, that is, she fell down at Jesus feet, groueling on the earth, else
she could not wash Christ's feet with her tears, nor wipe them with the
hairs of her head, nor kiss, nor anoint them. So standing in this place
cannot express her gesture, or her site or position, but only her coming to
Christ: she stood, that is, she came behind him to his feet, and washed them
with her tears.

In like sort it is said of the Pharisee and Publican, Luke 18. Pharisaeus
stans, orabat apudse, Luke 18.11.13.
The Pharisee stood and prayed with himself, and Publicanus stans a long The
Publican standing afar off: but the Pharisees standing was rather in superbia
cordis, then Erectione corporis, in the pride of his heart, then the erection
of his body: in which he said, Non sum sicut caeteri, I am not as other men, or
as this Publican: Bonus sum, and solus bonus sum, I am a good man, and the
only good man, no man is equal to me: But the Publican stood afar off,
Long loco, quia long dissimilitudine, far from God in place, further in
dissimilitude, by reason of his sin. He stood afar off, not presuming to
come near the Arc, but as he was lowest in the humility of his soul, so he
took the lowest place in the Temple for his body; And he that would not, or
durst nor, so much as lift up his eyes to heaven, it is more then probable,
that he did cast down his body to the earth. And the rather, because the
Jews custom was to pray kneeling, not standing, as appears by Solomon, 1.
Paral. 6.13. Genesis 17.3. 1. Paral. 21.17. 1. Reg 18.42. Dan. 8.10. Luke 22.41.
Acts. 7.60.
in whom standing, is interpreted to be kneeling: and by Abraham, and David,
and Elias, and Daniel, and others; And by the practice of our Savior, the
Apostles, S. Stephen, and others in the Gospel, who in this point made no
alteration from the practice of the Jews. So standing does not always
express the gesture of the body, but the action it self: and therefore no
sound argument can be grounded in every place of Scripture, from those words of
standing, and sitting, or leaning, or lying, to enforce a necessary gesture at
all times in the service. So it remains most doubtful, what gesture the
Apostles used at the receiving this Sacrament: because there is the word
discumbebat, he sat or lay down, used of the Paschall Supper, but of the
Eucharisticall there is nothing said at all. And this word discumbebat, does
not signify the gesture of the body in that place: for then our Savior and
his Apostles, cannot well be excused from the breach of the Law of the
Passover.

I come to the third point, a posteriori may bring us to the Apostles gesture,
which may be a rule unto us. And here I cannot conceal the objection, made by
the adversaries of kneeling, which carries a great show of probability with
it, but when it is well examined, it is not so much as verisimile, a
resemblance of the truth; The objection is, that Diebus Dominicis, and a
Paschate ad Pentecosten: All Sundays in the year, and likewise from Easter to
Pentecost, the Christians did stand at their prayers, and not kneel, in
memory and honor of the Resurrection of Christ. The 20. Canon of the Nicene
Council is clear, Quoniam sunt in Dominica die, quidam ad orationem genua
flectentes, and in diebus Pentecostes, propterea vtique statutum est a sancta
Synodo, quoniam conson^, and conueniens per omnes Ecclesias custodienda est
consuetudo, vt stantes ad orationem, vota Domino reddamus: Because there are
some that kneel at prayers on the Lords day, and the days of Pentecost,
therefore it is decreed by this sacred Synod, because an uniform and
convenient custom is to be kept in all Churches, that we shall pay our vows
to God, standing at prayer.

To the same purpose are cited some other later Councels and Fathers, to prove
that which no man denies, that the Primitive Church used to stand at prayers on
the Lords day, and from Easter to Pentecost, in remembrance of the resurrection
of our blessed Savior; of which I shall say somewhat in their proper place.

In which allegations, I pray observe a plain repugnancie between the
witnesses, and the author that produces them: for they do directly cross and
confound his purpose; for he makes the gesture of the Apostles to be in a
manner essential to this Sacrament, in diverse respects. For why? 1 the time,
after supper; 2 the element, unleavened bread; 3 the place, a private chamber;
and 4 the preparation of the receivers, fasting, or full, may and are changed
by the practice of the Church, upon good reason; but this gesture of sitting,
may not be changed for any reason: so it must be of the essence of the
Sacrament. And again, it is repugnant to the Law of nature to change this
gesture of sitting, because it does agree with a feast or banquet, and the
prerogatives of a table, Ex natura rei, out of the nature of the thing, that is
a feast, a banquet, and a table; and the behavior of guests at such a feast.
Now all the witnesses produced; Fathers, and Councels, give evidence for
standing, which is as repugnant to the Law of nature, as kneeling is: and so
this learned Logitian proves standing to have been used in the Primitive
Church, and concludes, Ergo, we must sit at the Lords Table.

Besides all the Fathers, and Councels, that mention standing in time of
Prayer, on Sundays, and from Easter, until Whitsuntide, do approve of this
gesture of standing, as it were, Ex priuilegio contra legem publicam, by the
way of Privilege or private law, for a particular reason or cause, against the
public law of Prayer, which by consent of all, should be made kneeling, in all
humility. And all privileges are derogations to the common Law, and rule of
right. And therefore it is a very poor kind of arguing, to dispute, out of a
privilege, to overthrow the public rule of the gesture of prayer: For the
Fathers decreed standing for Sundaies, and from Easter to Pe^tecost, non ex
natura orationis, not out of the nature of prayer, which ought not to be made
standing; but rather in honorem resurrectionis Domini, in honor of the
resurrection of Christ, which as that day, the first of the Creation, wherein
light was severed from darkness, Apoc. 2.
as Iustine Martyr reasons, arose from the dead, and made that day to us, the
first of our Recreation, and regeneration, or resurrection from sin; wherein
all the darkness of sin, and death, and ignorance, and types, and figures,
and shadows was dispelled, the power of Satan, the Prince of darkness was
vanquished, and so discovered to be vanquished; and we were brought into the
clear light of the Gospel, that has not so much as a cloud of doubting, no,
not of our resurrection, to obscure this glorious light: in as much as Christ,
that died for our sins, arose again for our justification, 1. Cor. 13.20.
and so became Primitiae mortuorum, the first fruits of the dead; and vbi
primitiae, ibi alij fructus: where there are first fruits, there are other
fruits; the first have relation to other, or second fruits that will follow.
And Christ as he arose solus, alone, never to die more: others that were
raised by Christ, did rise to die again, as Lazarus and others did: so he
arose Totus, All Christ, that is, all the members of Christ; and all that have
the same manhood with Christ shall arise after him: the faithful from the
death of sin, in this life, which is the first resurrection: and all men from
the death of nature, in the life to come.

And in this respect, the day of rest, after creation in nature, was changed
from the Jews Sabbath, to the day of rest, of Recreation in grace, and
honored with the name of Lords day, because the work of Redemption, from
which Christ rested at his resurrection, is a greater work, and much more
beneficial to us, then the work of Creation: For Creation gives us being;
but Redemption restores us to that being, which was lost by sin; to the well
being of grace; and gives us a right by the free gift of God to the best and
blessed being of glory.

And here I cannot omit this one thing, that the Author of these reasons, cares
not to make all the Fathers, and Councels, and the greatest of all Councels,
next to the Apostles Council, the great Council of Nice of 318. Bishops,
sinners against the law of Nature, so he may say somewhat against kneeling:
though therein he said as much and more against himself, then indeed he does
against kneeling. For if sitting at the Lords Supper be essential to the
Table and feast, and banquet of Christ, and the behavior of guests and
coheires: the Fathers and Councels are guilty of the violation of this Law of
Nature, who used and decreed standing at prayer on Sundays: And therefore as
this man most weakly would infer, at the Lords Supper also: which in those
times it seems was seldom, or never omitted on the Lords day; and so all his
witnesses, as they testify against him that produces them, so they are
tainted with the breach of the Law of Nature, which is in effect the Law of
God, and so no way to be credited. And if any credit be to be given to them,
certainly they are good witnesses against him that produces them, and
therefore they do in effect argue thus against him.

Standing at Prayer, and the Lords Supper was in use in the Primitive Church,
by the testimonies of Fathers, and the decrees of Councels: Therefore, Sitting
is not the gesture of the Commucants at the Lords Supper. To which if we add,
that the Fathers of those times and Councels best knew the practice of Christ
and his Apostles, whose example they proposed to themselves, as their rule and
institution, one of these things will follow, that either standing is the
essential gesture, which Christ and his Apostles used, and not sitting; or else
the Fathers and Councels changed the gesture of sitting, used by Christ and his
Apostles, into standing, upon particular reason of the resurrection of Christ,
and then the present Church may upon as important reason of humility (which is
indeed the lesson that Christ taught, verbo and exemplo, by word and example)
change sitting, and standing, into kneeling; or that which is the truth, the
Fathers, and Councels, that upon the particular of Christ's resurrection decreed
for standing prayer, might, and did (as it will appear) use kneeling at the
Lords Table; according to the general rule of Prayer, at all other times and
occasions: and according as they then used to do in the participation of those
great and reverend mysteries of the Body and blood of Christ.

Now among all these observations, this must not be omitted in general, before
we come to the particular, that all those Fathers, who upon particular reason
of Christ's resurrection, speak for standing prayer on Sundays, and from
Easter to Pentecost, and at other times, according to the Common Law, or rule
of prayer, require kneeling and humility with prayer; yet in the matter of this
Sacrament, either they are silent, and say nothing; or if they speak of it,
they reject both sitting, and standing, and speak only for adoration and
kneeling. And so here be Testes, but not Testimonia, names of mute witnesses;
whose depositions, or dictats, are nothing against kneeling, but rather plead
for it, both by their silence, and their reason.

For, concerning their silence, it is more then probable, that they, who for
the resurrection of Christ, and our hope and expectation of our own
Resurrection, did in a manner violate the Law of Prayer and humility, and
ordain standing on the Lords day; and from Easter to Pentecost, as a testimony
of our joy and confidence, and expectation thereof, and dispense against the
general Law of kneeling at Prayer; would also have added the like express
declaration in a matter of so great consequence as the Lords Supper is, and
said plainly, that for the same reason, we ought also to stand at the Lords
Table, when we receive the Body and Blood of Christ: since these reverend
mysteries require as reverend gesture and behavior, as prayer does: because
in this Sacrament, we receive all that which our prayers can ask, and receive
in this life, that is Christ with all the benefits of his death and Passion,
and the holy Ghost, with all the whole train of his gifts and graces; and the
greater Gods gifts are, the greater should be our humility and reverence in
receiving them.

And the Argument is good, Quod hominem, though it be defective in the Fathers
sense, which is this: The Fathers and Counsels decreed for standing at Prayer
on Sundays, and from Easter to Pentecost: But in the celebration of the
Eucharist, according to Christ's institution, there was not, neither should be
now, any prayer at all, as these men suppose. Therefore the Fathers and
Councels that decreed for standing at Prayer on Sundays, and from Easter to
Pentecost, spoke nothing of the Lords Supper, in which there ought to be no
prayer at all.

So then the silence of the Fathers in point of the Lords Supper, is an
argument that they spoke only of standing at Prayer, and not at the Lords
Supper.

Come to the Reason, and it will appear more plainly: For besides that private
Laws are stricti iuris, and therefore to be restrained to the strict letter,
and no further; And as the Lawyers say, Exceptio firmat regulam, the exception
does make the rule more strong, and firm: the exception of Sundays, and
between Easter, and Pentecost, concerning standing at prayer, makes the rule
strong, that we should not stand at any other time, and the exception of Prayer
on Sunday, makes it strong, that at other parts of divine worship, whereof the
Sacrament is a principal and most eminent part, we should not stand, but use
the gesture that the nature of the action requires, which is humility, and
kneeling. The reason which the Fathers give, is the memory, and celebration of
the resurrection of Christ, and the confidence that we have, of our part, in
the first, and second Resurrection. Now what is this Reason to this Sacrament,
which is Commemoratio, not Resurrectionis, but Mortis, a commemoration, not of
the Resurrection, but of the death and Passion of Christ? 1. Cor. 11.26.
The Apostle says not, as often as you eat this bread and drink this Cup,
Annunciabitis resurrectionem, you shall show forth the resurrection: but
Annunciabitis mortem Domini, you shall show forth the death of the Lord: So
then the reason of the Fathers is quite turned against this disputer.

The Christians did stand at prayer on Sundaies, and from the Passover to
Pentecost, upon a particular reason, that is, for the memory of Christ's
Resurrection, and the joy and confidence of our Consurreximus, our rising with
Christ, Phil. 3.10.
and the power of his Resurrection in us; We come to this Sacrament, not to
celebrate the memory of Christ's resurrection, nor our confidence of rising
together with him, but in remembrance of his death, and Passion; in which we
must die to sin, as he died to nature: Therefore, though we stand at Prayer
to celebrate Christ's resurrection, yet we ought to kneel in all humility, at
the receiving of this Sacrament, in remembrance of his death, and Passion: for
the Passion of Christ is as forcible to procure sorrow and humility for our
sin, that delivered him to death, as the Resurrection of Christ, is able to
procure joy and confidence for our redemption, and deliverance from sin, and
death.

And of the oxen and fatlings Christ said, Matthew. 22.4.
Tauri mei, and altilia occisa sunt; mine oxen, and fatlings are killed: and
Christ was slain, not only that he might be to Godward Pretium, the price of
our ransom: but also that he might to usward be Cibus, our food; Wherein
because man does altogether abhor to eat living flesh, our blessed Savior
was put to death, that so he might be the food of our souls. So then the
reason of the Fathers, which moved them to decree standing at Prayer on
Sundays, and from Easter to Pentecost, does prove a contrario, that when we
celebrate the memory of Christ's Passion in the Eucharist, which moves
compunction and humility, we should then kneel, in token of our contrition,
and humiliation, as they did stand in the joy, and confidence of Christ's, and
their own resurrection. Whereby it appears, that the Fathers who join
tears, and contrition, and confession, and prayer with this Sacrament, meant
not to alter the humility in the receiving thereof, though they change the
ordinary gesture of kneeling at Prayer, upon Sundays, and from Easter to
Pentecost, for the joy and confidence they received of our Saviors
Resurrection.

Thus have we passed the example of our Savior and his Apostles, and have not
yet found any solid proof for sitting at the Sacrament, but rather left it
doubtful, what gesture they used, whether standing as at the Passover, or
kneeling, or lying, or sitting. Now after the time of Christ's Ascension, unto
the time of Justin Martyr and Tertullian, and Dionysius of Alexandria, there is
no Author produced, that says any thing concerning the gesture of
Communicants: only there is a coniecturall argument made to prove sitting.
Christ and his Apostles sat at the institution, the words (...) and (...),
importe so much: In which assertion there is neither Grammar, nor reason: no
Grammar; for the proper signification of these words is not to sit, but to lie
down, as it is well known to all that are skilled in the original. Nor no
reason: for if these words do signify sitting, this Discumbere was at the
Passover, as appears most clearly in the Gospels: and there might be great
difference of gesture, at the Paschall and vulgar supper, and the institution
of this Sacrament.

It is confessed, that their sitting, was both a sitting, and a leaning: I
rather take it to be lying and leaning, then sitting and leaning: But I make
no controversy about words: I say resolutely, the word of sitting, or leaning,
or lying is used of the Paschall Supper, or the vulgar supper, if they had any;
but whether they continued the same gesture at the Evangelical Supper, it does
not appear; and it is more probable, that they did not, if Christ, between
these Suppers did arise, and wash his disciples feet.

Now for the practice of the Apostles, after Christ's Ascension, there are two
other conjectures used; first, it is probable that the Apostles departed from
that gesture, used by themselves, at the institution: and this is not easily to
be gainesayd; but it does no where appear that they sat, either at the
first institution, or at any time after the Ascension. And all that is said of
sitting, is spoken of the Paschall Supper. So this conjecture comes far
short.

Secondly, 1. Cor. 10.21.
the Apostle compares Christ's Table with the table of devils; You cannot
partake of the Lords Table, and of the table of devils: and this cannot be
denied; but withal, it does not appear by the name of a Table, what gesture
was used at Corinth, at the feasts of Idols: and I think it not unlikely, that
their Tables were such as were in use at those times: and so it is likely to be
lying on the ground, and leaning on pillowes.

As for the Lords Table, I conceive by S. Paul's words, that there was more
reverence to be used, then at either the feasts of Idols, or other common
feasts or eatings of Christians; such as their loue-feasts were: for else why
does S. Paul say, that there must be an examination, and probation of our
selves, before we come to the Lords Table? Why does he say, that they which
eat this bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty
of the Body and Blood of the Lord, and eat and drink damnation to
themselves, not discerning the Lords Body? If this Supper may not be received
without due probation, and worthiness, which was not required at the tables of
Idols, nor at the ordinary feasts of Christians: why should any man presume to
make a comparison between the Lords Table, and the tables of ordinary
Christian feasts? why should any be so profane, among Christians, to compare
Christ's Table with the tables of devils? As if he would have us in our coming
to this Sacrament, to use no more reverence then the Idolatrous heathen did at
the feasts of their Idols. If Church gesture must be ruled and squared out by
the Idolatrous worship of devils, why do we not send Christians to the
Idolatrous Priests of the heathen to be tutored, and disciplinated by them?
Nay, if we must be schooled in Gods worship, to carry our selves at the Lords
Table, as we do at our ordinary tables, why does S. 1. Cor. 11. verse. 21, 22.
Paul reprove the eating of Christians, out of order, in such sort, that one
is hungry, and another is drunker? what? (says he) have you not houses to cate
and drink in? or despise you the Church of God, and shame them that have not?
The Church was for the Lords Table, the house was for ordinary tables; they
that eat in the Church, in such irreuerend fashion as they eat in their
private houses, they despise the Church of God. Then surely there was more
reverence to be used at the Lords Table, then at ordinary tables; there must
be a discerning of the Lords Body, from common eatings: and how shall this
discerning be discerned? by the inward affection and devotion of the heart,
which is known only to God? This S. Paul could not reprove in the
Corinthians, for he was not the searcher of the heart and reins: therefore he
must discern their hearts by their hands, and their intentions by their
actions, that is, by their gestures: and so it will necessarily follow, that
whereas at common tables there was society and equality, and nothing but
civil reverence, (which must not be denied at common eatings) between the
Feaster and his guests; yet at the Lords Table there must be more then civil
reverence, and that must necessarily be divine worship to God, who makes this
Feast, with whom there can be no equality at all, as hereafter more at large
shall be showed.

Now I come to the authorities that are alleged in this cause.

The first that is produced is Dionysius Alexandrinus, Anno 157. before Iustine
Martyr and Tertullian: I think because he only comes near to the purpose,
he placed him first; for he only speaks of the Lords Table, Enseb. l. 7.
hist. c. 9.
the rest of prayer. He writes to Xistus the Bishop of Rome, concerning one
that desired rebaptization, because he had been baptized, as he said, with a
Baptism full of impiety, and blasphemy; whom he durst not rebaptize,
although troubled in his mind about it, because his often communicating did
suffice him, who had heard thanksgiving in the Church, and said Amen with
others. Mensae astitisset, (...), he stood at the Table, and reached out his
hand to take that holy food: This phrase, He stood at the Table, in this man's
conceit, proves standing to be the gesture of Communicants in that age. But
if he had considered the propriety of the word that signifies, Prope vel
iuxtasistere, vel adesse, to be present, or near to the Table, he might have
conceived, that Dionysius spoke nothing of the gesture of Communicants, but of
his presence at the Communion: For Ruffinus reads it thus; Quod tamdiu in
Sacramentis nobis iamparticeps fuerit: Because he had been partaker of the
Sacraments so long with us. And again, Neque audet vltra ad mensam Dominica^
accedere, he dares not come any more to the Lords Table: so Ruffinus
understands (...), of the action of receiving, not of the gesture. And the
force of his answer is not placed in his standing, but in his presence, and
partaking of the Communion: he need not to be rebaptized, and begin at
regeneration; Why? because he had often received the Communion, the Sacrament
of increase and perfection.

This authority is grounded in Grammar, or rather Criticisme, not in reason;
which I the rather conceive, because I find the like words used by Chrysostom
in his 61. Homil. ad populum Antiochenum, and in his 3. Homil. ad Ephesians. In
vain is the daily offering, Frustra stamus ad altar: In vain stand we at the
Altar; others read it, Frustra assistimus ad Altar: his reason is, Nullus qui
co^municetur, none comes to the Communion: surely when there was no
Communion, there was no kneeling, but standing, or being at the Altar,
expecting Communicants. As for Chrysostom, he is clear, that we should kneel
at the Communion, as his following words ad populum Antiochenum show; At pura
sunt, igitur adora, and communica, but thy garments are pure, therefore adore,
that is kneel, and communicate: as he elsewhere shows, by the comparison of
the Wise men, that kneeled to our Savior in the manger, as I will show in his
place.

In like sort, says this Author out of Chrysostom, The Deacon slandeth up and
speaks to the people, Let us pray altogether; Had the Deacon stood up, and
said, Stemus and communicemus, Let us stand up, and Communicate, it had been
some what to the purpose: but the Deacon stood up, not to communicate himself,
but to call on the people to pray; he stood up, that he might be the better
heard of all the people. So this standing of the Deacon is no gesture of
standing at Receiving, but of calling to prayer. And it is usual in those
Churches that retain kneeling, that the Minister, or some other stands up,
and calls to the people, Let us pray: and yet the people pray kneeling. And
this Author might have remembered, that the Deacon in the time of Liturgy,
stood up, and called to the people at Prayer and Receiving, Flectamus genua,
Let us kneel, which is more to the purpose, then this standing up to call to
Prayer. Centur 3. cap. 6. de ritibus circa Coenam.
And whereas he alleges, that the writers of the Centuries collect, out of
this Epistle of Dionysius, that the rite and custom of the Church in that age
was, that the Communicants did stand at the Table, and reach out their hands to
receive the holy meats: the Centurie writers say, it is peruetustus mos, an
ancient custom, used in many Churches, that they did reach out their hands to
receive the Bread and Wine; and not expect to have it put into their mouths:
which they prove out of Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromatum lib. 1. p. 2. But of
standing, they bring no custom of any other Church, but only use Dionysius
word in the plural, Mensae assisterent, not adstarent, which he speaks only
in the singular, Mensae adstitisset, which rather signifies his presence, then
his gesture: therefore this testimony is little to the purpose.

The second is Justin Martyr, Anno 150. Apo. 2.
Praesidens (which he reads, the Pastor) with his Oration, instructs the
people, and exhorts them to the imitation of so beautiful things, and then
adds, Sub haec surgimus communiter omnes, and precationes profundimus, after
this, we arise altogether and power out our prayers, and then proceed to the
Eucharist. This witness had need of some help, for in himself he says
nothing for them, and nothing against us: and therefore he helps him with a
false translation, and a false collection. First he reads it, we arise and
pray, and that is the truth of the letter, which implies the leaving of their
former gesture of sitting or reading, but no way designs a new gesture in
particular that followed after sitting: and therefore to help him out, he
after adds; there it is plain, Page 76.
the people sat at the hearing of the word, and rose up to stand at prayer,
but after he plainly peruerteth the reading, and says; After that they stood
up and prayed: here rising is turned to standing. But the Collection is, they
arose and prayed; therefore they received the Sacrament standing: which has no
coherence: for they might arise to kneel, as well as to stand, and they might
stand at some of the Prayers, and yet kneel at the receiving of the Body and
Blood of Christ. But, whatsoever may be judged of this Collection, sure I am,
this does necessarily follow out of this testimony: they arose and prayed, and
after they received, therefore they did not receive sitting, which according to
this new doctrine, is the essential gesture of Communicants.

The third is Tertullian, De corona militis: who says, Anno 203.
Of prayer on the Sunday, and from Easter to Pentecost, Die Dominica ieiunium
nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare: we hold it not lawful to fast on the
Lords day, or to pray on our knees. This is not to be denied; But no one of the
Fathers is more resolute against sitting at prayer, De oratione.
then Tertullian is, Siquidem irreuerens est assidere sub conspectu, contraque
conspectum eius quem quam maxim reuerearis, ac venereris: quanto magis sub
conspectu Dei viui, Angelo adhuc orationis astante, factum istud
irreligiosissimum est: nisi exprobramus Deo, quod nos oration fatigauerit: It is
irreuerent to sit in the sight, and before the face of him whom thou do most
reverence and honor: how much more is that actio^ most irreligious, (to sit)
in the sight of the living God, the Angel of prayer being present, unless we
exprobrate to God, that our prayers have wearied us. As for that Collection,
that, as they prayed, so they Received standing, as if they had used the same
gesture at the Sacrament, which they did at prayer; Hear what Tertullian
says, of the receiving the other Sacrament of Baptism: De Baptismo in fine.
Ingressuros Baptismum orationibus crebris, ieiunijs, and geniculationibus, and
pervigilijs orare oportet: They that were to be baptized, ought to pray with
often prayers, and fastings, and kneelings, and watchings. Kneeling was joined
with the Sacrament of Baptism, which was given on the Sunday as well as the
Eucharist. So the collection is not good, they stood at prayer, therefore they
received the Eucharist standing, for at the same time they stood at prayer, and
yet received Baptism kneeling.

But in the word of station, he is egregiously deceived: For, says he,
Tertullian de oratione puts the word statio, standing, for prayer; and
calls the Lords days, Dies stationum, the days of station, or standing; For
it is clear in Tertullian, that Dies stationum, the days of station were
never made on the Sundays; and his words are plain, De corona militis.
Iam and stationes aut alij magis faciet quam Christo, aut die Dominico, quando
nec Christo: He shall make his stations to another, rather then to Christ, or
else on the Lords day, and so not to Christ. So it is plain, that in
Tertullians time, there were no stations on the Lords day: and so the Lords day
is not called the day of station, because on that day they stood at prayer. And
station properly is nothing else, but a diurnall watching in the time of
solemn prayer: in which they did watch in prayer, 1. Pet. 4.7.
as the Apostle said, Vigilate in orationibus: so this station was not so named
for standing at prayer. And Tertullian says, Their station shall be more
solemn, Si steteris ad aram Dei, if thou stand at Gods Altar. This is to be
understood of the stationary prayer made at the Altar, which being made on the
week days, was made keeling, and therefore stare here is genuflectere,
standing is kneeling. And this sentence is full and complete in it self: and
then he adds, Accepto corpore Domini, and reseruato, the body of the Lord
being received, and reserved, both is saved, both the participation of the
Sacrifice, and the execution of our office: And surely it is probable, that
they received the Sacrament kneeling, as well as they prayed kneeling.

S. Cyprian is the fourth; who affirms less then his Master Tertullian: Anno
250.
he only says, Cum stamus ad orationem: when we stand at Prayer; and he
says nothing of the Lords day, and from Easter to Pentecost: whereby I
conceive, he knowing that at all other times they prayed kneeling; and
speaking in general of Prayer, his word stamus, must not so much express the
gesture of Prayer, as the action of Prayer: which whether it were standing or
kneeling, it must, as the next words are, be vigilant, vigilare, and incumbere
toto cord ad preces debemus: we ought to watch, and intend our prayers with
our whole heart: and then he adds that which is used in our Liturgy, sursum
corda, lift up your hearts; to which the people answer, We lift them up unto
the Lord: by which we are admonished to think of nothing but of God, and to
shut our hearts against the adversary. As for S. Cyprian, I take it, his
opinion is, that they did bow or kneel at the receiving of the Sacrament, as
in his place it will appear.

The fifth is S. Basil; his words are, In primo Sabbati erecti perficimus
deprecationes, Anno 370. De spiritu, and litera.
sed rationem omnes non nouimus: upon the first day of the week we pray
standing, but all know not the reason. He gives two, 1. the Resurrection of
Christ. 2. that day is Imago seculi futuri, the Image of the world to come,
which shall never have end, that knows no evening, nor gives place to a
succeeding day. But speaking afterward of kneeling, he says: Insuper and
quoties genua flectimus, and rursus erigimur, ipso facto ostendimus, quod ob
peccatum in terram delapsisumus; and per humilitatem eius qui creauit nos, in
Coelum reuocati sumus: As often as we kneel and stand up again, by this deed
we show, that for sin we are fallen to the ground, and by his humility
that created us, we are called back to heaven: In which it appears that
confession of sins, which always goes before the Communion, requires
kneeling, that we may fall to the earth by humility, as we fell to the earth
by sin.

S. Hierome is the sixth; his words are, On the Lords day, and throughout the
Pentecost, Anno 390. Contra Lucifer.
(by the tradition and authority of the Church) we do not adore on our
knees, nor fast: The word (we hold it not lawful) is not in Hierome, but it
seems this Author added it, out of Tertullian: In which I mark one thing,
which this Author might have observed in all his authorities; that the Church
has authority to change a gesture, from the natural and prescribed gesture,
upon particular reason: And why then shall not the Church have power to
prescribe a gesture at the Lords Table, most suring with the memory of Christ's
death, and the carriage of humble and contrite Communicants? In which case I
pray you hear what Hierome says upon those words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.
Flecto genua: Haec aute^ spiritualiter expone^tes, non statim, iuxta literam,
orandi consuetudinem tollimus, qua Deum genu posito suppliciter adoramus, and
fixo in terram poplite, magis quod ab eo poscimus impetramus: legimus enim and
Paulum in littore sic orasse, and geniculationes in oratione praeceptas: sed
illud aedificat supplices, sicut veram geniculationem esse docemus in anima;
quia multi corporale flectentes genu, animae nequaquam poplitem curuauerunt:
and contra, alij erecto Deum corpore deprecantes, magis se animo curuauerunt:
Expounding these things spiritually, we do not presently take away the custom
of praying, in which we adore God, humbly upon our knees, and obtain that of
him which we most desire, setting our knees to the earth: for we read that S.
Paul prayed thus upon the shore, and kneeling was commanded in prayer. But this
does edefie the simple, as we teach, the true kneeling to be in the soul:
For many, bowing their corporal knees, do not bow the knees of their soul:
and on the contrary, many praying to God standing upright, have more bowed
themselves in soul. In which words I observe: 1. when we kneel, then we
adore God suppliciter, humbly in the fashion of supplicants. 2. By kneeling
magis impetramus, we prevail more in our Peticions. 3. Kneeling is not only
grounded upon imitation and example, but praecepta, It is commanded. So S.
Hierome, though he permit standing at prayer upon a special reason, yet he
holds kneeling to be sub praecepto, and of greater force in the sight of God.

S. Chrysostom is the seventh; his words are, Anno 398.
Frustra stamus ad Altar, in vain do we stand at the Altar, expecting
Communicants; and none come: and that is common with us to stand until the
people draw near, and then kneel; whose words I have answered before in
Dionysius Alexandrinus.

S. Augustinus is the eighth, who says, Propter hoc and ieuinia relaxantur,
and stantes oramus, Anno 420. Epist. 119. cap. 15.
quod est signum resurrectionis, For this cause we remit our fasts, and stand
at prayer, which is a sign of the Resurrection: which is no more then is
granted. And yet in the end of the 17. chapter, he concludes of it, Vtrum
vbique seruetur, ignoro, I know not whether it be observed every where. There
is a reason added out of S. Augustine in the same 15. Chapter, which I accept
of, though I find it not there; that kneeling is a gesture of a Penetentiary,
and of such outward humiliation, as is wholly disagreeable with the solemnity
of rejoicing, on the Lords day. S. Augustine indeed mentions rest and
rejoicing, and then adds, Propter hoc: for this cause we fast not, but stand:
wherein I see no reason but a man may have rest, and reioyceing for Christ's
Resurrection, and yet have sorrow, and contrition, and humiliation for his
sin, without which no man can be duly prepared for the Lords Table. And as
standing at prayer may agree with rest and reioyceing, so compunction and
humiliation is most suitable to a Penetentiarie; and all Communicants must first
be penitents, and examine themselves, and discern the Lords body, before they
receive it. And therefore they that rejoice at Christ's Resurrection, and so
stand, must be contrite, and humble, and so kneel when they participate of
Christ's Body and Blood. And I presume it will be plain, that S. Augustine
required kneeling at the receiving of the Body and Blood of Christ.

And here I pray you observe, what a vast hiatus, gulf or space, this Author
makes; From S. Augustine, he descends per saltum or rather praecipitium, he
leapeth, or rather casts himself down headlong to Anselme, our Archbishop
of Canterbury: a long leap from the beginning of the five hundredth year,
unto eleven hundred years at one iumpe. It seems, in all that time of 700.
years, he could not find one writer, except a Council or two, that spoke for
standing at Prayer. And S. Augustine, though he allow the custom of the
Church, in standing at prayers for certain days, yet he doubts of the
success of the decree of the Nicene Council in that case, Epist. 119. cap. 17.
in his last words, Quod vtrum vbique seruetur ignoro: which, whether it be
every where observed, I know not; and he would not have made the doubt, if he
had not known, that it was not every where observed. And if it were doubted
whether it were observed in S. Augustines time, who lived about an hundred
years after the Nicene decree, I should have thought it had bin quite
discustomed, long before Anselme, but that it was held in life by some after
Councels: yet from the last Council unto Anselme, there passed about 300.
years, in which time there is not found one word in favor of standing at
prayer.

Now this Author from S. Augustine, cites no other, till he come to Anselme,
who lived near 700. years after him: yet this gesture of standing is
mentioned in Beda, and Alcuinus, and I find it in Hugo de sancto Victore, who
lived near 60. years after Anselme. But in this I observe; That this standing
was not, during all the Liturgy, but only at a part; not at the Eucharist.

For Hugo de sancto Victore observes, that they stood at prayer, until the
Collect, Domine Deus Pater, qui nos ad principium: O Lord God, and heavenly
Father, which have safely brought us to the beginning of this day: which is the
last Collect in our first Service, in the Liturgy of the Church of England. I
say the first Service, for it is still in use in some Cathedral Churches in
England: they have the first Service on the Sunday morning, and then go out
for a time, and come in again, and begin at the Lords Prayer, ten
Commandments, or second Service, and so go to the Communion: and the first
Service is said in the ordinary place, but at the second the Priest goes up to
the Communion Table, or Altar, and there proceeds to the Communion. And in
some Churches, the Sermon is between the first and second Service. Yea in some
Parish Churches, though they go not out, to come in again, yet they make a
pause, and knoll a Bell, to give warning of the beginning of the second
Service. De diuinis Officijs.
And I find in Alcuinus, somewhat recorded to the same purpose: His finitis,
omnes exeunt; this being ended (and in this there is no mention of the
Eucharist,) all go out.

And Hugo de Sancto Victore, speaks in the fame place of so much of the
Liturgy, De Officijs Ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap. 2.
as he there reckons; Et haec omnia in Dominicis diebus, and caeteris festiuis
diebus, stando dicuntur, propter memoriam Dominicae resurrectionis; cum quo
omnes sanctispe consurrexerunt: And all these prayers are said standing on
Sundays, and other festiuities, for the memory of the Lords Resurrection:
with whom all the Saints are risen in hope. And hitherto he has not one word
of the Eucharist. After, Cap. 4 Hugo makes a difference, Inter preces, and
orationem, which must be expounded by some that are better skilled in their
Masses, and orders, then I am: His words I will relate, and leave them to the
judicious Reader to be further scanned; Dum preces dicuntur, Sacerdos, qui
peccator est, cum peccatoribus prostratus est: sed quia vicem tenet Christi,
stando dicit orationem, vt resurrectionem recolat eius, cuius vicem tenet:
While the prayers are said, the Priest, because he is a sinner, kneeles, or
prostrates himself with sinners, but because he bears the place of Christ,
he says the prayer standing, that he may remember his Resurrection, whose
place he bears. Here be preces, prayers, many in number, which both Priest and
people, all sinners, say prostrate or kneeling: and here is oration, one prayer,
in the singular, whether the Lords prayer, or some other singular prayer, made
for the celebration of the Resurrection, I cannot resolve, but must leave it to
the Readers more mature judgment. But the argument is very probable, because
Hugo designeth some prayers that were said standing, which are no part of the
Communion; therefore the special prayers, used at the receiving of the
Eucharist, were not said standing, but kneeling; according as the Deacon called
to the people; Flectamus genua, Let us kneel; and as we in our Liturgy still
observe at the confession, before the Eucharist: Make your humble confession to
Almighty God, meekely kneeling on your knees.

And surely Anselme upon those words, Cap. 4. ad Coloss.
Instate in oratione, says little for it: for in the place cited, he only
says. It becomes all to be instant in prayer. And he does well to command to
watch in prayer, vt cum stamus ad orationem, that when we stand at prayer, all
carnal and worldly thoughts may be banished: Cumstamus ad orationem, is no
more, but cum oramus, when we stand at prayer, is no more, but when we pray:
and so much his reason shows: for we must watch in prayer, be it on Sunday,
or any other day: and drowsy and sleepie prayers are never acceptable unto
God: and the word of the Text is, Instate in oratione, be instant in prayer,
and watch in the same with thanksgiving, and Instare in oratione, and astare
ad orationem, to be instant in prayer, and to stand in prayer, are of one
extent, to be used at all times, Sundays, and other days: and this watching
in prayer, with thanksgiving, is as much required in kneeling, as in standing:
and we must shut out all worldly and fleshly thoughts in all our prayers.
Wherein, because Anselme does not mention this private law of standing at
prayers on Sundays, and from Easter until Pentecost, as the Fathers do, but
spoke generally of Prayer; we must understand him to speak according unto the
common law of prayer, of that position, which prayer in the nature thereof does
require, which is kneeling; of which Anselme elsewhere speaks very largely,
lest we seem to make him contradict himself.

Now the same Anselme, upon the words, Flecto genua, Ephesians. 3. For this cause I
bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus; Per flectionem genuum,
intelligimus humilitatem supplicantis: nam ad hoc solent in oratione flecti
genua, vt humilitas interior denotetur, and humiliori supplicatione affectus
orationis commendetur: By the bowing of the knees, we understand the humility
of a supplicant: for to this end knees are bowed in prayer, that inward
humility may be declared, and the affection of prayer is commended by the more
humble supplication. And then he varieth the words thus, I bow my knees, that
is, I supplicate humbly in prayers; so that humble prayer, and kneeling at
prayer, are equivalent with Anselme. And humble prayer is effectual prayer:
and then, as it is true, humilis oration penetrat coelos; humble prayer pearceth
heaven; so kneeling prayer must have the same effect, that it enters heaven,
and is accepted of God.

Now I come to the Councels. And first, Cap. 20.
the Fathers of the Nicene Council decreed for standing at prayer on the
Sundays, and the days of Pentecost, but give not their reason, as the Fathers
before had done, but they labor for the uniformity of one custom in the
external form of Gods worship: which was not a form prescribed by the word of
God, nor agreeable to the nature of prayer, but yet decreed by those Fathers,
whose names are glorious in Gods Church unto the worlds end. And therefore they
thought they had authority to ordain, establish, and confirm external
worship, and ceremonies in Gods service, and those repugnant to the nature of
the thing they had in hand; which if they grant to be used in the Communion,
as they affirm without proof, either these Patrons of standing, must confess
the Churches power to be so great, to alter the gesture used by Christ and his
Apostles, which is essential to the Sacrament it self, and upon private
reason, to place another in the stead thereof, repugnant to the nature of
prayer; or else, they must lay a foul aspersion upon that most reverend and
venerable Synod, of greatest note and authority, that Christianity has
known, since the Apostles lived; that is, that they violated an essential
part of this Sacrament, when they turned sitting into standing at prayer, and
ministration of this great mystery.

Now as concerning this custom: it was not begun by those Nicene Fathers, but
reduced to unity and uniformity, (a thing which these sitters cannot endure,
but desire to be left at liberty, enery man to use what gesture and fashion he
likes best) but it was, as all customs are, and should be, so ancient, that
it was beyond all memory of man: (for how can that be called a custom, whose
beginning is known by them that style it by the name of a custom?) and
therefore no one witness, or Father produced for standing at prayer, speaks
other of it, then as of a received custom, In moribus hominum, in the manners
of men before his time. Justin Martyr is the first: he says, we rise up and
pray, he says only surgimus, we arise, it is factum, a thing not now begun,
but done before; not decretum, not now decreed to be done. Tertullian says,
Nefas ducimus, we hold it unlawful to kneel at such times; this custom was
grown old of great strength, not to be resisted, it was become natural unto
them: and prescription was another law to them: to cross which custom he
said, we hold it unlawful. So though this age testify of it, yet must it be
much elder, and take beginning from the Apostles, or succeeding Apostolical
men. And this custom is only confirmed and decreed in this Nicene Council,
because as it seems, Christians liked not altogether the reason of it; for
there may be joy in him that kneeleth, as well as sorrow in him that stands:
so though it were ancient, and had some color of reason for it, yet it
seems, because there was greater reason for kneeling then for standing, it
began to grow out of use, and that was the cause of this decree.

Now that this decree for standing reaches only to Prayer, and not to the
Sacrament, it may appear by another decree, not of the first twenty that
Ruffinus has: but those other set out by Gelasius Cyzicenus l. 3. wherein,
because in those times it seemed they were too humble at the Sacrament, they
thus decree, Ne humiliter intentisimus ad propositum panem and poculum, sed
attollentes mentes, fide intelligamus situm in sacra illa mensa, agnum illum
Dei, tollentem peccata mundi, incruente a Sacerdotibus immolatum, and pretiosum
ipsius corpus and sanguinem nos vere sumentes, credere haec esse resurrectionis
nostrae Symbola: Let us not be humbly intentive to the Bread, and Cup set
before us, but lifting up our minds, let us by faith understand, that the Lamb
of God, that takes away the sins of the world, and is slain vnbloodily by
the Priests, is set upon that holy Table, and that we truly receiving his
precious Body and Blood, do believe those to be the Symbols of our
Resurrection. It seems somewhat was amiss, that the Council by this Canon
would redress; and it must be in the humble intending to the Elements; That
must be either in the inward thought, and opinion of the Bread and Wine, and
then the Council should not have said, humiliter intenti, but reuerenter
intenti, not humbly intentive, as if they thought too basely or humbly of them,
but rather reverently intentive, as thinking too highly of the Elements or
creatures; or else it must be in the outward carriage and behavior, and then
the Canon would redress the outward gesture, which might incline unto too much
honor of the Elements, and so detract from the humble reverence that was due
to God, whom we do worship and adore more specially in this Sacrament. And so
it will appear, that they were too humble at the receipt of the Eucharist, and
therefore received it with kneeling; for so much the Canon does imply, a
contrario sensu, Ne humiliter intenti simus ad propositum panem and poculum,
Let us not be humbly intentive to the Bread and Cup set upon the Table, Ergo
humilite intenti erga Deum qui corpore and sanguine agni nos pascit, Therefore
let us be humbly intentive toward God, who feeds us with the Body and Blood
of the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world.

The next is the sixth Council of Carthage, Canon 20. which is no other then
the former of the Nicene Council in effect; Quoniam sunt quidam qui die
Dominico, and in diebus Pentecostes, flectunt genua, placuit de hoc sanctae and
magnae Synodo, cunctos in omnibus locis consonanter and consentienter stantes,
Deum orare debere; Because there be some that bow their knees upon the Lords
day, and the days of Pentecost, it has pleased this sacred and great Synod in
this point, that all, in all places ought to pray to God standing, consonantly,
and with one consent. In which I observe nothing, but that the continuance of
this gesture at this time began to decay; belike, because it declined from the
natural gesture of prayer, which should be kneeling with all humility; and
therefore they in Africa made this Canon to keep life in it. For, as it is
said before in S. Augustine, there was some doubt of the observation of it, in
all places; and in this Council it is last mentioned plainly, and
affirmatively. And after S. Augustine, there is no author produced until
Anselme. And after this Council, there is little mention of it in plain
terms, until the Council of Turon, about Anno 800. except the Quinnisext
Council of Constantinople; and these will appear to be but cold testimonies for
it.

To the third, which is the Roman Council, held under Hilarious the Pope, there
needs no answer, for they do only decree the observation of the Nicene
Canons in general words; without any particular mention of standing at Prayer
on the Lords day, and in the days of Pentecost. Vt diuinae legis praecepta,
and Nicenorum Canonum constituta, that the precepts of the divine Law, and the
co^stitutions of the Nicene Canons, be not violated. This is all, and it may be
this 20. Canon about standing at Prayer, was not much thought of in particular,
by those 48. Bishops in that Council.

The Canons of the Council called Quinisextum, which were made at
Constantinople, mention and approve this standing at Prayer, and withal limit
it, Canon 90. that Post vespertinum ingressum, After the evening ingresse to
the Altar on Saturday, to the next evening, no man should kneel, and after
that evening they should kneel again. In which that appears which was
before said, that this was but a dispensation, or a private Law, which does
derogate from the public, upon special reason, and therefore it did easily
return to the prime institution.

The fourth and last Council, is the Council of Turon, under Charles the
great, and Leo the third: I will set it down at large. Sciendumest, quod
exceptis diebus Dominicis, and illis festiuitatibus, quibus and vniuersalis
Ecclesia ob recordationem Dominicae resurrectionis, solet stando orare, fixis
in terram genibus, suppliciter Dei clementiam nobis profuturam, nostrorumque
criminum indulgentiam deposcendum est: cuius rei in Euangelio ipse Dominus
nobis dedit exemplum: sed and Stephanum Martyrem, and Apostolum Paulum eadem
fecisse, Liber Actorum Apost testis est. Ex quibus intelligi datur, oportere
Christianum humiliter ad terram prosterni, ne forte illi dicatur, Quidsuperbis
terra est cinis? We must know, that except the Lords days, and those
festiuities in which the Universal Church, for the remembrance of the Lords
Resurrection, used to stand at Prayer, we ought to pray (not we may pray, as
this Author renders it) or entreat Gods mercy profitable to us, and pardon of
our sins humbly, with our knees fixed on the ground: of which kneeling in
prayer) our Lord himself gave us an example in the Gospel: and the Acts of the
Apostles are witness, that S. Stephen the Martyr, and S. Paul did the like. By
which it is given to understand, that Christians ought (not may) cast
themselves humbly on the earth, lest it be said to them, Why art thou proud,
that art but dust and ashes? The Canon does not say, Nefas ducimus, as
Tertullian did, we hold it unlawful to pray kneeling on Sundays, and in the
days of Pentecost, but resolutely decreeeth for kneeling in prayer, and by way
of privilege only permits standing at prayer on the Lords day, and other
festiuities, celebrated in the Church, by way of exception out of the general
rule. Whereby it appears, that the general rule is, that we must kneel at
prayer, and therefore prayer being joined with the celebration of the
Sacrament, and not excepted, we must also kneel at the receiving of the
Eucharist. So this Council is the last that speaks for standing at prayer,
and that by way of exception: for Anselme says nothing to the purpose: and
therefore there passing 300. years from this Council to the decree of
Honorius, it is very probable, that kneeling at Prayer was received long before
Honorius, the third his time: And kneeling at the Communion is as old, as the
eldest witness produced against it, as I presume shall appear in the
testimonies that ensue.

I come now to this man's Verbum grande, his great and grand, and loud word,
that I say no more of it; that is, that until Honorius the third (about the
year 1120.) made a decree for the adoration of the Sacrament, the Eucharist
was ever received standing, and not kneeling: And kneeling is Antichristian,
brought into the Church for the adoration of their Breaden god, in honor of
Transubstantiation, and (as he calls it) Real presence: which opinion was
first hatched by Damascen, and then fostered by Innocent 3. and now honored by
Honorius the third. I would this man had studied his Masters, Calvin and Beza a
little better, he would peradventure have learned a great difference, between
Transubstantiation, and the Real presence: and no less then Inter rem ipsam,
and modum rei, between the thing it self, and the manner of doing of it. And
surely Calvin and Beza do allow a true and Real presence, if I understand
them; that is, that we in the Eucharist receive the true Body and Blood of
Christ: which all antiquity do collect out of Christ's words; This is my
Body, This is my Blood. But they renounce this new found manner, by way of
Transubstantiation, found out against Berengarius: whereby they thought to
quench the flame that was then kindled, but it was Igne maiori, they put out
the lesser, with a greater fire, and not only filled their books with a
number of curious, idle, and philosophical questions; and so corrupted
divinity with philosophy, but also for this new fangle of Transubstantiation,
and the maintenance of the Popes vast and unlimited transcendent power, made
the rent, and division of the Church incurable, desperate, and past all hope:
because the Popes will never renounce and disclaim their boundless ambition;
and the School will never give over to adore this their Idol of
Transubstantiation: which the more they labor to make plain, the further they
inuolue themselves with a world of difficulties: Which no doubt is the
occasion, that most of the wise and understanding Papists, who see how great
evil has fallen to the Church by it, and how much blood has been shed in the
cause, do wish in their hearts, though perchance they dare not profess it,
that the decree had never been decreed.

In which assertion, I take it, this man is palpably deceived, and would
deceive others. For I take it to be plain, that kneeling and adoration, was
not brought into use by Transubstantiation, but rather Transubstantiation was
collected out of the Adoration and kneeling, that was used in the receiving of
the Eucharist: as I shall show by and by out of Algerus, who infers
Transubstantiation, out of kneeling and Adoration. As for Honorius decree, I
do not find kneeling expressly named in it. Sacerdos frequenter doceat plebem
suam, vt cum in celebratione Missarum eleuatur hostia salutaris, se reuerenter
inclinet: Let the Priest often teach his people, that when in the celebration
of the Mass, the healthful Host is elevated, they bow themselves reverently.
The word is, reverent bowing, not kneeling; and it is to be done at the
eleuatio^, not at the receiving. I could wish that the whole decree were to be
seen, for then somewhat would be manifest, that now is obscure. But the first
words of the Chapter, Sane cum olim, do imply somewhat more ancient: and it is
very probable, that Honorius did not make a new decree, and establish a new
form of Adoration at the Sacrament, never used before, but explane and
confirm an old, which was bowing or kneeling; and peradventure in particular,
to design in special, when it should be done, namely at the elevation. And it
is most certainly testified, that some hundred years before this Honorius was
borne, the Deacon did call at the Mass, Flectamus genua, Let us kneel; so
that kneeling, and bowing was generally in use before, but elevation was
unknown to the Fathers: and after it had gained ground, and began to be in
request, then this decree of Honorius did honor that particular action of
elevation, with a reverent bowing, by those perchance which received it not:
which does no way prove, that kneeling was not used before Honorius time, but
rather those three words, set before the decree, do lead us to apprehend that
some reverence, and humility of bowing, or kneeling was anciently in use; out
of which practice or pretense of antiquity, Honorius did ground his decree.
And it is a gross non sequitur to infer thus: Honorius made a new decree,
that at the elevation of the Host, men should reverently bow themselves:
Therefore before this decree, men did not receive the Eucharist with reverent
bowing or kneeling. For they might, and did kneel at receiving the Communion,
in the times of the ancient fathers, and yet this elevation, and
circumgestation of the Sacrament, be but a new devise, that made way to much
superstition and Idolatry.

Now, although it be hard to find out the beginning of every outward gesture,
used in the worship of God, and the Administration of the Sacraments, yet as it
falls out with the shadow on the Dial, we discern it not moving, but we
easily discern, that it has moved; So we cannot easily discern and point
out the first beginning of this gesture, of kneeling in the Eucharist, though
after it has passed some lines and degrees of time, we may easily discover by
the later use and custom, that it fetches his pedigree from the Apostles, and
Apostolical men.

The Fathers of the first age, being in continual conflict with persecutors
without, and heretics within, had little leisure to delineate and describe
every gesture they used in the Liturgy: yet surely they that so strictly
required an examination, and probation of our selves, contrition and
compunction, and prayer, and praise, and alms, and humility, and reverence in
this part of the worship of God, in such sort, that they held none to come
worthily, nor be admitted to the Lords Supper, but those that used this
probation, and preparation of themselves, though their words speak not of
kneeling, yet their reasons do enforce it. And the very discerning the Lords
body, did require as well an outward, as an inward difference, between the
Lords Table, and other common tables: and therefore an outward gesture
beseeming the presence of the Eternal God, which must be suitable to the
greatest humility, and that must needs be kneeling. And therefore this Author
that speaks, and writes so tediously against kneeling, is forced to dash out
all humility, and reverence in his Communicants, lest if he had granted
humility, he must also have been forced to admit kneeling, the most proper
and significant gesture of humility.

Now, as all the Fathers, cited by this Author, that speak for standing at
prayer, are clear witnesses against sitting, which he makes essential, as
being used in the first institution; and most of their reasons are for
kneeling: so many of them, as also many others, speak manifestly for adoration
and kneeling.

To omit then, that at the delivering of the Law of the Passover, Exodus 12.
the people Incuruatus adorauit, bowed themselves and worshipped; and Christ
the true Passover, Luke. 22.
in his Agony before his Passion, fell on his face, and flexis genibus orauit,
prayed on his knees: I come to the Authors.

And, to say no more of Justin Marten, it is clear that his words are against
sitting: Post haec surgimus communiter omnes, and preces profundimus; these
things added, we all arise and pray. There it is manifest, they left sitting.

I come to Tertullian, who is most resolute for standing at prayer: De oratione.
for he says, Nefas ducimus, we hold it unlawful to kneel at prayer on
Sundaies, etc. it is irreuerent to sit in the sight, and before the face of him
whom thou do reverence and honor, how much more is that action most
irreligious (to sit) in the sight of the living God, the Angel of Prayer being
present, unless we will exprobate to God that our prayers have wearied us? If
Tertullian will have reverence and humility at prayer to God, whom we most
reverence and honor, why should he not more require it at this Sacrament,
which is the greatest and most eminent part of Gods worship?

Again, Tertullian that speaks so boldly for standing at prayer, does require
kneeling at Baptism: for speaking of the set days of Baptism, De Baptism. in
fine.
as Easter day, he says, Caeterum omnis dies Dominiest, omnis hora, omne
tempus habile Baptismo: si de solennitate interest, de gratia nihil refert.
Ingressuros Baptismum orationibus crebris, ieiunijs, and geniculationibus, and
peruigilijs orare oportet, and cum confessione omnium retro delictorum, vt
exponit etiam Baptismum Ioannis: tingebantur, inquiens, confitentes delicta
sua: Every day is the Lords day, every hour, and every time is fit for
Baptism, though there be difference of solemnity, there is no difference of
grace: they that are to be baptized, must pray, with often prayers, and
fastings, and kneelings and watchings, and with confession of all their sins
past, as John's baptism shows; they were baptized confessing their sins. So
it is apparent by Tertullian, that they which stood at prayer on Easter day,
the most solemn day, the day of Christ's Resurrection, they kneeled at
Baptism. And if they came to baptism confessing their sins, they ought to
come to the Eucharist with the like confession of their sins: for there is as
great necessity of confession of sins in the Eucharist, as in Baptism; as
confession auricular was more enjoined before the Eucharist, then before
Baptism: And there was greater reason of kneeling at the Eucharist, then at
Baptism, because we come nearer to Christ in this Sacrament of increase, then
in the other of regeneration. And of confession of sins, which was never
omitted before the Eucharist, De poenitent.
Tertullian says, Itaque Exhomologesis prosternendi, and humilificandi hominis
disciplina est: Confession is the discipline of casting down, or prostration,
and humbling man; So no Eucharist without confession of sins to God: no
confession without casting down, and humbling by kneeling, therefore no
Eucharist without prostration, and kneeling; so Tertullian, that speaks most
confidently of standing at prayer on Sundays, for the memory of the
resurrection of Christ, speaks very thoroughly for kneeling at Baptism, and by
consequent, at the Eucharist.

The 2. is Origin, about 220. years after Christ, upon Numbers: his words are;
Sed and in Ecclesiasticis obseruationibus sunt nonnulla huiusmodi, quae omnibus
quidem facere necesse est, nec tamen ratio little omnibus patet; Nam quod (verbi
gratia) genua flectamus orantes, and quod ex omnibus coeli plagis, ad solam
orientis partem conuersi orationem fundimus, non facile cuiquam puto ratione
compertum: sed and Eucharistiae sieve percipiendae, sieve eo ritu quo geritur
explicandae, vel eorum quae geruntur in Baptismo, verborum gestorumque, and
ordinum, atque interrogationum, atque responsionum, quis facile explicet
rationem? In the Ecclesiastical observations, there are some such things,
which it is needful all should do, yet the reason is not manifest unto all:
For example sake, that we pray kneeling, and power out our prayers, from all
parts of the world, toward the East, I think it is not easily known to every
one by reason: And who can easily express the reason of receiving the
Eucharist, and explicate the Rite with which it is performed, or of those
things that are done in Baptism, the words, and gestures, and orders, and of
the interrogations and answers? This witness is little favorable to these
sitters, for he mentions interrogatories in Baptism, which they cannot well
brook; and of kneeling, in prayer; and presently orders the rites of the
Eucharist, which, if they had been different, he had reason to have set down.
And so the Argument is concludent: They kneeled at prayer; and therefore at the
prayer in the Eucharist: so the Eucharist in Origens time was received with
kneeling. But in his fifth Hom. In diuersos, he speaks more fully; discoursing
upon the words of the Centurion: Quando Sanctum cibum, illudque incorruptum
accipis epulum, quando vitae poculo and pane frueris, manducas and bibis corpus
and sanguinem Domini, tunc Dominus sub tectum tuum ingreditur, and tuergo
humilians teipsum, imitare hunc Centurionem, and dicito, Domine non sum dignus,
vt intres sub tectum meum: vbi enim indigne ingreditur, ibi ad iudicium
ingreditur accipienti: When thou receiuest that Sacrament, and that vncorrupt
banquet, when thou enioyest that bread and cup of life, and eatest and drinkest
the Body and Blood of the Lord, then the Lord enters under thy roof; thou
therefore humbling thy self, imitate this Centurion, and say, Lord I am not
worthy that thou should enter under my roof: for where the Lord enters
unworthily, there he enters to judgment to the receiver. This is most plain:
humilians teipsum must be in body and soul, else it were humilians partem
tui: humble thy self, thy whole self, not a part of thy self, in body as
well as in soul: The Centurions humility appears in soul, in his words, and
in his sending by others, as thinking himself unworthy to come by himself.
And all the Ancient think, that at his coming he humbled himself in body,
as Basil of Seleucia said; Vidi Centurionem ad pedes Domini prouolutum, I
beheld the Centurion fallen at our Lords feet. Therefore in Origens time
humble kneeling was in use, at the receiving of the Eucharist.

The third is S. Cyprian, in his book De oratione Dom. he says, The word and
prayers of them that do pray, let it be with discipline (every man may not
do what he list, and pray in what fashion he lift) Continens quietem and
pudorem, expressing rest (or peace) and shamefastness or modesty; that is not
to stand upon the prerogative of coheires, and a table without all humility;
certainly shamefastness will cause humility, or confusion: Let us think we
stand in the sight of God: and then he adds, Placendum est diuinis oculis,
and habitu corporis, and modo vocis, We must please the eyes of God with the
habit of our body (that is not sitting) and the tune of our voice. And in his
book of the Lords Supper, he comes nearer to the point, Sacramento visibili,
ineffabiliter diuinase infundit essentia, vt esset religioni circa Sacramenta
deuotio; The divine essence does ineffably infuse it self into the visible
Sacrament, (though our Transubsta^tiators know the manner of it) that Religion
might have devotion about the Sacrament. Devotion is sometimes the inward
Adoration of the heart, but in Gods solemn worship, outward Adoration is
required with it. And again, having described the sighs, Number. 13.
and groans, and tears of those that come to this Sacrament, he says,
Gemitus illos pietas excitat, it is piety that sends forth those sighs: and
after, Inter data and co^donata se diuidens, affection dividing it self,
between graces given, and sins forgiven, Fletibus se abluit, and lachrimis se
baptizat, washes it self with weeping, and baptizeth it self with tears. Is
not this the very highest, or rather the lowest of humility? And why should
not the body be as humble in kneeling, Number. 14.
as the soul in tears? And then he adds, Pauperes spiritu eligit, and
diligit Spiritus sanctus, and eorum, qui pompatice and gloriose sacris se
Altaribus ingerunt, obsequia detestatur, The holy Ghost chooses those that are
humble in spirit to this mystery, and he loatheth them, and he hates their
obsequiousness, that thrust themselves to the sacred Altars pompously, and
gloriously. What is this pompous and glorious coming to the Altar? Is it not
to come proudly without humility? For I must leave the school of divinity,
if I do admit any medium, between Theological contraries: every man either
humbles himself, or exalts himself: every man comes to the Lords Table
either pompously and gloriously without humility, as if he were coheire, and
coequall with Christ, or else humbly in all humiliation of soul and body. And
though the holy Ghost know the secrets of all hearts, because he is God, yet no
man can know the heart of another man, and therefore we must judge them to
come pompously, and braggingly that will not kneel, but will sit, as equal
with the eternal God, without all outward humility, when they are but dust
and ashes. Again, in the 17. Number. Ad haec intra sacra mysteria ad gratiarum
actionem conuertitur, and inclinato capite, munditia cordis adepta, se
intelligens consummatum restitutus peccator, sanctificat am Deo animam, quasi
depositum custoditum fideliter reddit: After in the sacred mysteries, the soul
turns to thanksgiving, and bowing the head; the restored sinner having
gotten pureness of heart, understands himself to be consummated, and
restores his sanctified soul, as a thing committed and faithfully kept, unto
God. Here we have almost all the Sacrifices spoken of before, Contrition,
Prayer, Thanksgiving, and the offering of our selves; and this is done with
the exterior gesture, not only of the bowing of the knee, but the head also.
So that in Cyprians time, humility of the body, and kneeling, was in use at
the receiving of the Eucharist.

The 4. is Cyrillus of Jerusalem, In catache^^ mystagogica. 5.
who describes the whole order of the Liturgy, in the celebration of the
Eucharist, the water in which the Priests did wash, the kiss of
reconciliation, the words of the Liturgy, Lift up your hearts, the
thanksgiving, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Saboath, the prayer at the
consecration, the Lords prayer, and the like, which he there mentions: then
first he describes the ministering of the Bread, and Body of Christ, and the
manner of the receiving of it; at last he comes to the Cup, and then he
says, Tum vero post communionem corporis Christi, accede and ad Calicem
sanguinis illius, non extendens manus: sedpronus adorationis in modum, and
venerationis, dicens, Amen: Then after the Communion of the Body of Christ,
come also to the Cup of his Blood, not reaching out thy hands, but falling on
thy face in manner of Adoration, and worship, say, Amen. I hope this testimony
is so plain, that malice it self cannot invent a cavil to avoid it.

The 5. is S. Gregory Nazianzen, 370.
in the oration for his sister Gorgonia. He does not indeed describe the
celebration of the Eucharist, for it was in the night, when she was alone, and
neither Priest, nor consecration: but only she carried with her, some of the
consecrated mysteries, which she had reserved, as the fashion of those times
was: and then in the stillness of the night, when her disease gave her a little
truce, Ante altar procubuit: she kneeled, or fell down at the Altar, and
called on him, whom she worshipped, with a loud voice, and all her endeavor;
after, she leaned her head on the Altar, and with cries, and tears, like to
the woman with the bloody issue, she touched herself with those mysteries: and
the conclusion is, she was made whole. This, Gregory Nazianzen reueileth as a
secret, and approoueth and commends it. And I relate it only to this end,
not to judge of the miracle, but to observe in this, the custom of
Communicants: which was, Procubuit ad altar, to fall down and kneel at the
Altar. For surely she did now in her sickness, as she and all others did in
their health, when they come to the Lords Table, that is, fall down and kneel.

The 6. is S. Ambrose, 374. Cap. 12.
in his third book De spiritu and litera: who expounding the words of the
Prophet, Psalm. 98.5.99.
according to the vulgar, Adorate scabellum pedum eius, exalt you the Lord our
God, and worship at his footstool, for he is holy; He discourses that God
has no body, and needs no footestoole, that the earth is a creature, and may
not be worshipped, and then remembering that Christ's flesh is earth, he says,
Perscabellum terra intelligitur, per terram caro Christi; quam hodie quoque in
mysterijs adoramus: and quam Apostoli in Domino Jesus, vt supra diximus,
adorarunt: By the footstool the earth is understood, and by the earth the
flesh of Christ, which we also adore in the mysteries this day; and the same
which the Apostles did adore in our Lord Jesus, as I have said before. This
testimony is plain, and cannot be eluded with that idle shift of adoring in
soul, or by any other means then kneeling: for his comparison is plain of
external adoration by kneeling, in the Apostles, who did adore Christ at his
ascension with external, singular, and visible worship, Luke 24.52. for with
internal devotion they did always adore him. But this special worshipping
must be understood both of soul and body; so we must adore in soul and body,
and that must be with kneeling, at the receiving of the Sacrament. And in the
Comment that goes under his name, 1. Cor. 11. Deuoto animo, and cum timore
accedendum ad communionem docet: vt sciat men's reuerentiam se debere ei, ad
cuius corpus sumendum accedit: he teaches, that he must come to the Communion
with fear, that the soul may know that she owes reverence to him, whose
body she comes to receive: this reverence must be external, as the devotion
is internal; and that appears in the words following, Quem cum disciplina
nos accipimus: which blood we receive with discipline: that discipline
certainly is the exterior order, and carriage prescribed by the Church: so
prostration, and kneeling was in that time an ordinance of the Church, at the
Lords Table: not equality in coheireship, and prerogatives of a Table.

The seventh is Gaudentius Brixensis, who speaks not of this Sacrament of the
Eucharist in special, but of the other of Baptism, or of both; and there is
much more reason to kneel at the Lords Table, De manducat. Agntpaschalis
Sermon 9.
then at Baptism. His words are, Lectiones diuinas aure percipimus, ore
Dominum confitemur, laudamus, benedicimus, obsecramus, manus supplices ad
Coelum tendimus, pedibus ad Ecclesiam currimus, and vnam Trinitatis Deitatem
flexis ad terram genibus adoramus: We perceive the divine reading with our
ears, we confess the Lord with our mouths, we praise him, we bless him, we
beseech him, we stretch out our suppliant hands to heaven; and kneeling on our
knees on the earth, we adore the one Deity of the Trinity. He speaks in
this Sermon much of Baptism, but the Title is, De manducatione Agnipaschalis,
of the eating of the Paschall Lamb: so it may well be applied to both
Sacraments.

The eighth is S. Chrysostom, Hom. 61. Adpopulum Antiochenum: Considera
quaeso; mensa regalis est apposita, Angelimensae ministrantes: ipse Rex adest,
and tuastas oscitans? Sordescunt tibi vestimenta, and nihil est tibi curae? at
pura sunt: igitur adora and communica: Consider, I pray thee, The Royal table
is set before thee, the Angels minister at the Table, the king himself is
present, and do thou stand gaping? Be thy garments foul, and thou take no
care? but thy garments are pure: then adore, and communicate. So adoration
goes with receiving; and that this is external adoration and kneeling, Hom.
24. in 1. Cor. c. 10.
he will show elsewhere; Hoc corpus etiam i^cens in praesepi reueritisunt Magi,
and viri impij, and barbari, patria and domo relicta, and longam viam
confecerunt, and cu^ venissent, cum multo metu, and tremore adorarunt: Imitemur
ergo vel barbaros, nos Coelorum ciues. Nam illi quidem cum and in praesepi
vidissent, and in tagurio, neque tale quidpiam vidissent, quale tu nunc vides,
cum magna accesserunt reuerentia: tu autem non in praesepi vides, sed in
altari: non foeminam eum tenentem, sed sacerdotem adstantem, and spiritum cum
magnacopia, ea quae sunt proposita superuolantem. Non solummodo hoc ipsum
corpus vides, sicut illi: sed nosli eius and virtutem, and dispensationem, and
nihil ignoras ex ijs quae per ipsum facta sunt; vt qui in omnibus mysterijs sis
exact, and accurate initiatus. Nos ergo ipsos excitemus, and formidemus, and
long maiorem, quam illi barbari, oste^damus reuerentiam: ne sitemere, and
inconsiderate accesserimus, in nostrum caput ignem congeramus: The Wise men did
reverence this body, lying also in the manger, and these wicked and barbarous
men, leaving their houses and Country, finished a long journey, and when they
came, they adored with great fear and trembling. Let us therefore, the
citizens of heaven, imitate those Barbarians: for they truly when they saw him
in the manger and in the Cottage, neither had they seen any such thing as thou
now see, they came with great reverence; But thou see him not in the
manger, but in the Altar; not a woman holding him, but the Priest present, or
standing by, and the Spirit in great plenty, flying over those things that are
set forth; neither do thou only see his very body as they did, but thou
know both his power and dispensation, and thou artignorant of nothing done
by him, as being exactly and accurately initiated in all mysteries. Let us
therefore excite our selves, and fear, and show much more reverence then those
Barbarians did; lest if perchance we should come rashly and inconsiderately,
we should heap fire on our own heads. This restimony is most plain, the wise
men adore Christ in the manger, falling to the ground, or kneeling; we must
imitate them, we must show much more reverence then they did; therefore we
must kneel when we receive this Sacrament. The like he has in Matt. Hom. 7.
Imitemur nos saltem deuotionem Magorum, Let us at least imitate the devotion of
the wise men. And after, Et siforte Magussis, nihil te ad hunc regem introire
prohibebit, modo vt adoraturus, and honoraturus Dei filium, and non
quasiconculcaturus aduenias, modo vt honorem ipsum cum gaudio, ac tremore offer
as: possunt enim vtraque haec pariter conuenire: sed cave ne Herodi efficiaris
similis, and dicas, vt and ego veniens adorem eum, cumque veneris, interimere
coneris: huius enim similes sunt, qui indigne abutuntur communione mysterij:
And if thou be a wise man, nothing shall hinder thee to go in to this King, so
as thou come to adore and honor the Son of God, and not to tread him under thy
feet; so as thou offer this honor with joy and trembling, for those two may
well stand together: But take heed thou prove not like Herod, and say, that I
also may come and worship him; and when thou come, thou endeavor to kill
him; for such like are they that unworthily abuse the Communion of this
mystery. And after, speaking of the tyranny of Satan, he adds, Hic enim in
homines tenere imperium gestit, suosque Cultores simulat, and mittit ad
Christum, vt specie quadam adorare videantur, quantum vero inipsis est,
interimunt eum, quem adorarese simulant: Timeamus igitur, ne quando
speciemsupplicum, atque adorantium geramus, opere vero inimici existamus;
Igitur adoraturi Christum, cuncta proijciamus e manibus: Satan does desire to
hold the Empire over men, and he makes his worshippers counterfeits, and
sends them to Christ, that they may seem to worship in show, and, as much as
in them is, kill him, whom they counterfeit to adore. Let us therefore fear,
lest when we take upon us the show of suppliants, and adorers, in work we be
found his enemies: therefore when we go about to worship Christ, let us cast
all things out of our hands. And this word of Adoration is often used in this
7. Homily, which I must pass over, and refer the Reader to some other
places, as the Homily De Proditione Iudae, and his Sermon De Eucharistia in
Encaenijs; by all which it is most plain, that Adoration, and kneeling at the
receiving of the Eucharist, was in use in Chrysostom, and those other Fathers
time, some 700. years before Honorius, that is made the first Author thereof.

The 9. is S. Augustine, In Psalm 98.
whose place is known to this Author, and he labors to elude it against the
hair, as also he does S. Ambrose, who uses the word of Adoration, as before
you have heard. S. Augustine expounding the words of the Psalm, Adorate
scabellum pedum eius, as the vulgar reads it, worship at his footstool: or
his footstool; and alleging the other Psalm, Heaven is his Throne, and the
earth his footstool, and knowing that we must worship the Lord our God, and
serve him only, he makes a question how we may worship the earth without
Idolatry, and says: Anceps factus sum, timeo adorare terram, ne damnet me, qui
fecit terram: Rursus timeo non adorare scabellum pedum Domini mei, quia Psalmus
mihi dicit, Adorate Scabellum pedum eius. Quaero quid sit Scabellum pedum eius,
and dicit mihi Scriptura, Terra scabellum pedum meorum: fluctuans conuerto me
ad Christum, quia ipsum quaero hic, and inuenio, quomodo sine impietate
adoretur terra; sine impietate adoretur scabellum pedum eius: Suscepit enim de
terra terram; quia caro de terraest, and de carne Mariae carnem accepit: Et
quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit; and ipsam carnem nobis manducandam ad salutem
dedit: nemo autem illam carnem manducat, nisi prius adorauerit, inuentum est,
quemadmodum adoretur tale scabellum pedum Domini, and non solum non peccamus
adorando, sed peccamus non adorando: I become doubtful, I fear to adore the
earth, lest he condemn me that made the earth: Again, I fear, not to adore
the footstool of my Lord, because the Psalm says to me, Adore his
footstool. I question what is his foot stool; and the Scripture says to me,
that the earth is his footstool: wavering, I turn my self to Christ,
because I seek him hear, and I find how the earth may be worshipped, without
impiety, and his footstool may be adored without impiety: For he took
earth of earth, for flesh is of the earth; and he took flesh of the flesh of
the Virgin. And because he walked here in the flesh, and gave that flesh to be
eaten by us to our salvation; and no man eats that flesh, unless he first
have adored, it is found out how such a footstool of the Lord may be adored,
and we shall not only not sin in adoring, but sin in not Adoring.

In these words S. Augustine speaks of the receiving of the Sacrament; and he
says in effect, that the custom, and gesture was universal over all the
world. Nemo manducat, no man eats that flesh, but first he Adoreth: not the
Sacrament, but the flesh of the Son of God, which without reason, our
Adversaries wrest to the Adoration of the Sacrament. But this must not be
omitted, that S. Augustine says, That it was so far from sin to Adore the
flesh of Christ, that it was sin not to Adore it: so the omission of this
Adoration, or kneeling is a sin in S. Augustines judgment. And S. Augustine
speaks generally of all Adoration, spiritual, and corporal, external, and
internal, for else we may deny spiritual Adoration, as well as external in
the receiving of the Eucharist: and that this Author does acknowledge; and
then I marvel he can deny corporal, where he grants spiritual.

For why? May we worship, and adore God at the receiving of the Eucharist, with
our hearts, and refuse to worship him with our bodies, and our knees? If we
give him our hearts and spirits, shall we deny him any thing that the heart,
and spirit does command? Shall we give him the greater, and better part of
our self, (our Soul) and deny him the less, the bowing of the knee? So, S.
Augustine speaking of Adoration in the solemn, and complete worship of God,
must be understood of inward, and outward Adoration, when both may be given.
Besides, it is a frivolous exception that this man makes; that what S.
Augustine speaks of the flesh of Christ, must be understood spiritually:
Spiritualiter intelligite quod loquutus sum, understand that spiritually which
I have spoken; for he particularly speaks it of the flesh of Christ. Non hoc
corpus quod videtis, manducaturi estis; You shall not eat this body which you
see, nor drink that Blood which the Crucifiers shall shed; I have commended
unto you a certain Sacrament, being spiritually understood, it shall quicken
you, or give life; and though it be necessary to celebrate it visibly, yet
notwithstanding it must be inuisibly understood. So S. Augustine says, that
those words of the flesh of Christ, must be spiritually understood; the flesh,
that is the fleshly understanding profits nothing: but though the flesh be
understood spiritually, yet there is no syllable, that the Adoration should be
only spiritual. And because I will not trouble my self with this man's
dotage, it is his own word, that Adoration must not always mean kneeling, no
more then the name Man, does signify Socrates: Let him give me a reason, why
Adoration should not signify both inward devotion and outward bowing, and
kneeling, always, except some circumstance, or necessity do restrain it
only to inward worship, when both inward and outward may, and ought to be
tendered.

But S. Augustines Text is plain, for external bowing, and kneeling: Ideo and
ad terram qua^libet cum te inclinas et prosternis: Therefore when thou do
incline, or bow down, or cast down thy self to the earth, behold it not as
earth, but as that holy one, whose footestoole thou adorest, for him thou
adorest. So S. Augustine speaks of such adoration, wherein there is inclining,
bowing down or kneeling: and therefore this gesture of kneeling was the
universal custom of the Communicants in S. Augustines time. I pass that
over, that S. Augustine does call this Sacrament, honorandum, honorable, as you
may see in his 118. Epistle, ad Ianuarium. c. 3. Only see wherein he (yea, S.
Paul in his judgment) places the abuse of the Sacrament; Apostolus indigne
dicit acceptum ab eis, qui hoc non discernebant a caeteris cibis veneratione
singulariter debita: The Apostle says, that it was unworthily received of
them, who distinguished it not from other meats, by yielding it that worship
which is especially due to it.

The tenth is Theodoret, Dial. 2. Neque enim signa mystica post
sanctificationem recedunt a natura sua: manent enim in priori substantia, and
figura, and forma, and videri, and tangi possunt, sicut and prius intelliguntur
autem ea esse quae facta sunt, and creduntur, and adorantur, vt quae illa sunt,
quae creduntur: The mystical signs after sanctification, do not depart from
their nature, for they remain in their former substance (there the substance
of bread and wine remains in the Sacrament) and figure, and form, and may be
seen and touched, as before; but they are understood to be those things, which
they are made, and are believed, and adored, as being those things which they
are believed. So in Theodorets time there was adoration at the receiving of the
Eucharist, and that external: for creduntur, they are believed, implies the
inward (as this Author would make S. Augustine to speak) and then Adorantur,
must extend to the outward, which does consist in the bowing, prostration and
kneeling of the body.

Again, Dialogo 3. answering how a body might procure our salvation, he
says, Not the body of a man alone; but of our Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God. And if that seem small and vile to thee, Quomodo eius
typum, ac figuram venerabilem, ac salutarem existimas? cuius autem typus est
adorandus and venerandus, quemadmodum est ipsum exemplar archetypum vile, and
aspernandum? How do thou esteem the type and figure of him to be venerable
and salutiferous? for how is the Archtypal examplar, vile, and to be despised,
whose type is to be adored and worshipped? Here it is clear, that there was
veneration, and adoration of Christ in the receiving of the Sacrament; the very
elements are sacred, and dreadful after consecration; then Adoration is not
due to them, being creatures; but to Christ, whose flesh is the type, and
covering or veil of his Deity.

The 11. is Eusebius Emissenus, Homil. in 2. Dominica post Epiphan. his words
are: Quando vero ad Christi Sacramentum accedimus, and fragilitatem nostram
consideramus, quid aliud dicit vnusquisque nostrum, nisinon sum dignus vt
intres sub tectum; non sum dignus vt corpus and sanguinem tuum suscipiam in ore
meo? when we come unto Christ's Sacrament, and consider our own frailty, what
else does every one of us say, but this; I am not worthy that thou should
enter under my roof, I am not worthy to receive thy body and blood in my
mouth? He speaks not plainly for kneeling; but the opinion of the ancient is,
that this Centurion, Prouolutus adpedes Domini, fell down, or kneeled at
Christ's feet, and then he meant this acknowledgement to be with kneeling.
And, sure I am, this testimony confounds this man, that denies any humility to
be used in receiving the Eucharist: for his confession of his unworthiness
argues his humility, and his humility is the first link, or moouer of
kneeling: so he that requires inward humility of soul, may well be
understood of outward humiliation of body, in the public, solemn and highest
act of Gods worship.

The 12. is Caesarius Arelatensis, Homil. 12. Biblioth. SS. Pat. Tom. 2. p. 107.
Ideo qui vult missas ad integrum, cum lucro suae animae celebrare, vsque quo
or atio Dominica dicatur, and benedictio populo detur, humiliato corpore, and
compuncto cord se debet in Ecclesia continere: He that will celebrate the
whole Mass (or Liturgy) with the gain of his own soul, ought to contain
himself in the Church, with an humbled body, (that is kneeling) and a contrite
heart, until the Lords prayer be said, and the blessing be given to the
people. And he spends almost an whole Homily, the 34. of this title, De
genibus flectendis in oratione, vel de verbis otiosis: in which he persuades,
that while they pray at the Altar, or the Deacon calls on them to pray, they
should bend, not only their hearts, but also their bodies faithfully; and then
he makes an observation, that when the Deacon calls, flectamus genua: let us
kneel: he marked most of the pleople, erectos sicut columnas stare, to stand
upright like pillars: and therefore those words, flectamus genua, are very
ancient, since it is remembered by him as a thing received in use, and not
newly brought into the Church: of which he says, Obedientibus in remedium,
inobedientibus in testimonium: it is a remedy to the obedient, and a
testimony to the disobedient. After, he says, The Publicane by his humility,
obtained mercy of God, that lifted not up his eyes to heaven, but hanging, or
inclining down his head, smote his breast. Again, he does not believe his
sin to be heavy, who does not prostrate, and kneeling, seek the cure of his
soul. Again, he says, I would know of them that will not kneel, nor
incline their heads; if they should sue for any needful thing of the Judge, or
any potent person, whether they would supplicate stantes, standing, and holding
their hands upright. We ask temporal things of earthly men, and we incline
and bow our selves humbly, even almost to the earth: and we ask remission of
sins, and eternal rest of God, and vouchsafe not to bow and incline our
heads.

Again, did our Savior want nothing for which he should supplicate in this
sort? he wanted nothing, but he prepared for us, by his example, the remedies
of prayer: Orat misericordia, and non orat miseria? orat charitas, and non
humiliatur iniquitas? orat prostratus in terra medicus, and non inclinatur
aegrotus? orat innocentia, and non orat nequitia? Mercy prayed (kneeling,) and
shall not misery? charity prays, and is not iniquity humbled? the Physician
lay prostrate upon the earth, and does not the sick man bow? Innocence
prays, and does not guiltines pray? He that sinned not, neither was there
guile found in his mouth, prays; and does not he cast himself on the earth,
that is obnoxious to many sins? the Judge prays, and desires to spare, and
does not the guilty person pray, that he may obtain pardon? Orat qui
Iudicaturus, et orare dissimulat iudicandus? he that is to give judgment
prays, and does he that is to be judged dissemble to pray? And after, he
compares the Church to a living spiritual fountain of living water, and no
man can drink of an earthly spring, unless he stoop or bow down; and no man
can drink of Christ, the living fountain, and the River of the holy Ghost,
unless he will incline in all humility. I omit many other things, which the
Reader shall there find; and the Homily is worth the reading.

The 13. is, Eligius Nouiomensis: Homil. 15. Quocirca cum timore, and
compunctione mentis omnique reuerentia debemus accedere ad altar, and ad
mensam corporis, and sanguinis Christi, and dicere humiliter cum Centurione,
Domine, non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum meum: Wherefore we ought to come
to the Altar and Table of the Body and Blood of Christ, with fear and
compunction of heart, and all reverence (then of body, and soul) and say
humbly with the Centurion, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter
under my roof.

The 14. is venerable Beda: in 1. Joan. 1. upon those words; And the Blood of
Christ purges us from all sin. Humiliter quotidie nostros confitemur
errores, cumsanguinis illius Sacrament a percipimus: We do humbly confess
our errors to him daily, when we receive the Sacrament of his Blood: and
Confession (as Tertullian says) is the discipline of kneeling.

The 15. is Damascen. de Orthodox. fid. li. 4. c. 14. Proinde omni cum timore,
and conscientia pura, and indubitabili fide accedamus, et omnino fiet nobis
quod credimus non dubitantes, et veneremur ipsum omni puritate animi et
corporis: Therefore let us come with all fear, and a pure conscience, and
faith without doubting, and altogether it shall be done to us as we believe,
not doubting, and let us worship him with all pureness of mind and body. Here
is express veneration, and worshipping in the receiving of the Sacrament, and
worship of body, as well as soul, and therefore Kneeling.

The 16. is Albinius Flaccus Alcuinus, de diuinis officijs: He first shows
that it was received in the Leiturgie, or the Mass, that the Priest says,
Oremus, Let us pray: and the Deacon calls, Flectamus genua, Let us kneel.
And a little before he says, Pro periculis huius vitae, and pro haereticis,
and per omnes alias orationes genua flectimus, vt per hunc habitum corporis,
mentis humilitatem attendamus, excepto quando pro perfidis Iudaeis oramus: for
the perils of this life, and for Heretics and Pagans; and in all other our
Prayers we kneel, (and this was on Easter day) that by this habit of the
body, we may attend the humility of the mind, except it be when we pray for
the perfidious Jews. And he gives his reason: For they bowed their knee to
our Savior, doing a good work ill, because they did it mocking him: we, to
demonstrate, that we ought to avoid those works that are done in
dissimulation, avoid kneeling for the Jews.

And after, Licet omni tempore peccatores nos esse ex cord cognoscere
debeamus; tunc quam maxim confitendum est, cum illo sacro mysterio celebratur
remissionis gratia, and indulgentiapeccatorum, and cum humilitate, and cordis
contritione dicendum, etc. Although we ought at all times to acknowledge from
the heart, our selves to be sinners; yet it must be most confessed, when in
that sacred mystery the grace of remission, and indulgence of sins is
celebrated, etc. Lay these two places together, and it will be most manifest,
that kneeling was used. For in the former place he says, in all other our
prayers we kneel; here he says, tunc quam maxim, then chiefly, when we
pray for remission of sins: that is in the Eucharist, with humility and
contrition: therefore kneeling was then in use, both at all prayers, and in
this Sacrament, and that in the very day of the Resurrection it self.

The 17. is Haimo. in 1. Cor. 11. Cumtimore and compunctione cordis omnique
reuerentia debemus accedere, recolentes quanto amore dilexit nos, qui pro nobis
seipsum obtulit, vt nos redimeret: as often as we come to consecrate or
receive this Sacrament, of his eternal gift, which the Lord before his
Passion, left to be held by us in his memory, we must come with fear and
compunction of heart, and all reverence, (if all, then of body as well as of
soul, and so of kneeling, because that, of all other, is most reverent,)
meditating with how great love he loved us, who gave himself for us to redeem
us. And after, Cum timore and tremore debemus accedere ad illud Sacramentum
terribile; vt sciat men's reuerentiam se debere praestare ei, ad cuius corpus
sumendum accedit: We ought to come with fear, and trembling to that terrible
Sacrament, that the soul may know, that she ought to perform reverence to
him, whose body she comes to receive.

The 18 is Ioannes Climacus, who is said to live in the six hundredth year:
he relates a story of one, that, it seems, was possessed, and brought to the
Communion, and there blasphemed; whereupon he says, Nam si mea sunt turpia
illa and scelerata verba, quid est quod donum caeleste suscipiens adoro?
quomodo possum vna and benedicere and maledicere? If those foul, and wicked
words are mine, how is it that receiving the heavenly gift, I adore? how can I
at once both bless, and curse? Lib. 1. cap. 117.


The 19. is Honorius; if he be the Author of that Book called Gemma animae,
extant in Bib. SS. P. De diuinis officijs: In Quadragessima ideo in Missa,
(Flectamus genua) dicimus, quia corpus, and animam in paenitentia humiliare
innuimus, etc. In Lent therefore we say in the Mass (Let us kneel,) because
we show that we humble our souls and bodies in repentance. Whereof he
gives three Reasons; 1. because we adore Christ in the flesh; 2. because we
call to mind that we, that stood in Paradise with the Angels, do now lie on
the ground with the beasts; 3. because he that stands, is equal to other men
that stand in their righteousness, as reasonable creatures: but after our fall
into fleshly desires, welye in the dirt with the beasts, as unreasonable. And
he deriueth this gesture from Abraham, and the Prophets, and the Apostle, that
said, I bow my knees to the Lord.

The 20. is Algerus: he lived about an hundred years before Honorius; De
Sacramentis, Lib. 2. cap. 3. Cassa enim videretur tot hominum assistentium, vel
adorantium vener and a sedulitas; nisi ipsius Sacramenti long mayor crederetur
quam videretur, veritas, and vtilitas: Cum ergo exterius nulla sint, quibus
tanta impenduntur obsequia; aut insensati sumus, aut ad intima mittimur magnae
salutis mysteria: The venerable sedulitie of so many men assisting or adoring,
might seem vain, if the truth, and utility of the Sacrament it self, were
not believed to be much greater then is seen. Seeing therefore outwardly they
seem nothing, to which so great duties of worship are given, either we are
insensible, or else we are sent to the secret mysteries of the great Salvation.

I will not descend any lower, Authen. Coll. 8. de Nauti. vsur. Nouel. 109.
nor trouble the Reader with any other testimonies: only I take it, there is a
Civil Constitution in the Authenticks, against women's Dowries, that shall not
hold the Orthodox faith, Nec percipientes sacrosanctam and adorabilem
Communionem, nor receive the holy, and adorable Communion: which penalty of
loosing of Dowries, and portions, if it were in force among us, we should
peradventure have fewer stiffekneed sisters, that are forcible Otors, to draw
many to the present irreuerence, that is used in the worship of God, and the
celebration of the Sacraments.

By these it is manifest enough, that Kneeling at the Sacrament, was in use in
the second hundred years after Christ, and so continued unto Honorius Decree:
and that may be the reason that he made no mention of the receiving of the
Sacrament, but only of the elevation of it. And this I hope may satisfy any
reasonable man, that regards the practice of the Church militant, and
believes the Fathers, if not as Doctors, that teach Quid faciendum, what ought
to be done; yet as Historians, that truly relate Quid factum, what was done
in their times.

And if it were received as a custom in the Church, in the second hundred
years; why may we not ascend to the first, and so to the Apostolical Church,
and say, the second age learned it of the first, and the first of the Apostles,
since no beginning can be found of the custom, though we may perchance find
the first writer of it? And then the rule is, If it be a custom of the
Primitive Church, the founder and Author whereof is unknown; referendum est
ad Apostolos, it must be ascribed to the Apostles that used it in their times:
And so it may well be concluded, that it was not a late Antichrist, but the
Spirit of Christ in the Apostles and Apostolical men, that first brought
kneeling into the worship of God in the receiving of the Eucharist: For if the
beginning and use were good; the abuse, which is pretended for the abolishing
of it, because it was turned to Idolatry, must be reformed and brought to the
first institution: as the Church of England has done, which kneeles to God and
Christ at the taking of this Sacrament, though we utterly detest the gross
superstition of those, that do adore the Elements and species themselves, if
any be found so palpably blind: for the learned among them do disclaim this
point in their booke-learning, whatsoever their practice be.

Now hear, I pray you, the force of this kneeling, how able it is to appease
wrath: Petrus Blesensis says of it; Nihil facilius frangit iram, quam
genuflectio: nothing more easily breaks anger, then kneeling, for it
provoke him that suffers the injury to pardon, and him that does the
injury it leads naturally to tears. For there is a certain Sympathy, inter
oculos and genua, between the eyes, and knees: for, as they say that are
skillful in the nature of things, the child in the mothers womb, oculos habet
genibus superpositos: has his eyes placed over his knees; and thence some
think, that genua, the knees, are called, a genis, of the cheeks that are
over them, therefore the eyes naturally break out into tears when we kneel,
as answering by a natural affection tanquam collectaneis suis, as it were to
those with whom they were nourished.

But I will not say what it may be in man: sure I am, if the Emperor Marcus
his narration be true, when he and his Army were in distress for want of
water, and he had called the Christians in his Army, to pray to their God to
supply their extreme necessity, the Christians presently Proijcientes se in
terram, casting themselves on the earth, fell to their prayers: and as soon as
they had fallen to the earth, and called on God by prayer, the Lord sent rain
from heaven, that saved the Emperor and all his Army: there kneeling procured a
most gracious rain: and so no doubt, but it is powerful to draw down all Gods
graces upon us.

I conclude with S. Augustine, De cura pro mortuis, cap. 5. Nam and orantes de
membris sui corporis faciunt, quod supplicantibus congruit, cum genua figunt,
cum extendunt manus, vel etiam prosternuntur Solo, and si quid aliud
visibiliter faciunt, quamuis little inuisibilis voluntas, and cordis intentio
Deo nota sit, nec ille indigeat his indicijs, vt humanus eipandatur animus, sed
his magis seipsum excitat homo, ad orandum gemendumque humilius atque
ferrentius: and nescio quomodo, cum hi motus corporis fieri, nisi motu animi
praecedente non possunt, eisdemque rursus exterius visibiliter factis, ille
interior inuisibilis, qui eos fecit, augetur; ac per hoc, cordis affectus, qui
vt fierent istapraecessit, quia facta sunt, crescit: For they that pray, of the
members of their body do that which agreeeth with suppliants, when they
kneel, when they lift up their hands, or when they prostrate themselves on the
earth, or if they do any other thing visible, although their invisible will,
and intention of their heart be known to God, and he needs not any of these
signs, that man's mind may be laid open before him; but by these (gestures)
man does excite himself to pray, and sigh more humbly and more fervently. And
I know not how (it comes to pass) when these motions of the body cannot be
performed, unless the motion of the mind go before them; yet again by these
external gestures visibly done, the internal invisible intention which
stirs them, is increased, and by these the affection of the heart, which
preceded, that these (gestures) might be performed, does increase, because
these are performed.

Ratio 6. Praxis Ecclesiae Triumphantis.
THe sixth Reason is, Praxis Ecclesiae Triumphantis: the practice of the
Triumphant Church in heaven; and this admits no refusal: for heavenly things
are the exemplars and patterns, to which earthly things must be conformed. Is
there a Tabernacle to be made on earth? must not the model thereof be taken
from heaven? Secundum formam in monte; Exodus 25.40.26.30.
thou shall make it according to the form showed thee in the Mount. Is there a
form of life to be prescribed to men on earth? Is it not to be guided by the
rule of heaven? Matthew 6.10.
Thy will be done, Sicut in coelo, sic in terra, In earth as it is in heaven;
the obedience of earth, must be squared by the line of heaven: and then, though
our bodies be on earth, yet our conversation is in heaven. Phil. 3.20.
The earth is the prison, or place of man's banishment; the out-house, and
suburbs, in comparison of heaven, the City, and palace of the great King. The
earth is the place of Pilgrimage, and the valley of misery; and heaven is the
Country of rest, and eternal felicity. In earth all things are imperfect,
and only inchoate: in heaven all things are consummate and in absolute
perfection. Man's ambition by the subtlety of the Serpent, Gen 3.5.
was Eritis sicut Dij: you shall be as gods: but man's greatest exaltation after
his fall is, Eritis sicut Angeli, you shall be as the Angels. And if it be true,
that the Church-gouernment, the nearer it comes to the Hierarchy of heaven,
the more perfect, and absolute it is; it will also be true, that the nearer the
worship, and Adoration of the Church militant resembles the exact, and
absolute pattern of the Triumphant Churches worship in heaven; the more
pleasing and acceptable to God it must needs be. For surely this Sicut in
coelo, reaches principally to the worship of God: So that this is an
undeniable proposition which must necessarily be granted: Such, as is the
Adoration and gesture of the Saints, in the worship of God, and of the Lamb,
at the supper of the Lamb in Heaven: such must be the Adoration and gesture of
the Saints in earth, in the worship of God, at the Supper of the Lamb on
earth. But the Saints in the worship of God, and of the Lamb, do use the
Adoration of falling down and kneeling, at the Supper of the Lamb in Heaven.
Therefore the Saints must use the Adoration of falling down, or kneeling, in
the worship of God, at the Supper of the Lamb on earth.


For that there is a Supper in via, in the way, there can be no doubt to him,
that reads Christ's words, Luke 14.16.
A certain man made a great Supper, and bade many. And that there is a Supper
in patria, in the Country and kingdom of Heaven; there can be no doubt, to
him that believes S. John, Apoc. 19.9.
that pronounces them blessed, that are called to the Supper of the Lamb. The
first Supper is sub Sacramentis, under Sacraments: for so long as we live here
in this vale of misery, and our soul is clad about with sinful flesh, we have
need of Elements, which God has ordained to convey his graces to us; and
because we cannot see, but as in a glass, or dark speaking, all vailes are
not taken from us. But when we shall see, as we are seen, face to face, we
shall be admitted to that Supper, which is sine Sacramentis, without all
Sacraments: and as we shall be sicut Angeli, as the Angels of God, so we shall
be fed, sicut Angeli, as the Angels of God, without the means of any
creature, or Element at all.

Now, if they at the marriage Supper of the Lamb consummate in Heaven, do bow
down and kneel, much more must we, that are only admitted to the marriage
Supper, that is the contract and espousals, that is made by the holy Spirit, in
the Church militant in earth, bow and kneel. And so much the rather, because
the blessed Saints that bow and kneel in Heaven, do only make Confessionem
Laudis, confession of praise, and give glory and honor to God, in sign of
their Joy, which is so absolute, that all tears are wiped from their eyes. And
therefore the Saints on earth that make Confessionem peccatorum and miseriae,
confession of their sins and miseries, in token of their sorrow and
contrition, ought much more to bow down, and kneel, to pacify the anger of
God.

Now that the Saints in heaven do bow down, or fall on the ground and kneel,
when they worship (in body if their bodies be there, or else in soul and
spirit) and adore God, and sing praise to him tha^ sits on the Throne; it is
apparent in many places in the Revelation of S. Ioh. Cap. 4.10. The four and
twenty Elders fall down before him that sat upon the Throne, and worship him
that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne. And
cap. 5, 8. the four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb: and ver.
14. the four and twenty Elders fell down and worshipped him that lives for
ever and ever. And C. 7. ver. 9. having put a certain number for an
uncertain, twelve thousand of every one of the twelve Tribes: A great number
clothed in white robes, and Palms in their hands, cried, Salvation to our God,
which sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb. And all the Angels stood
round about the Throne, and about the Elders, and the four beasts; and fell
before the Throne on their faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen: Blessing,
and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might,
be unto our God for ever and ever, Amen. And that these are Saints in glory,
appears after, ver. 14. These are they that come out of great tribulations,
and have washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb:
therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his
Temple: and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them: They shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them,
nor any heat; For the Lamb which is in the midst of them shall feed them,
and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes.

Now these are the Endowments of another life; we are in great tribulation, as
long as we are in this life; these came out of great tribulation: we do now
wash our selves in the blood of the Lamb, and while we live we cannot get out
all the spots of sin and lust; these have washed their Robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb. This life is, Esuries and sitis Iustitiae: the
hunger and thirst of righteousness; the life to come, has no hunger nor
thirst, because they live at the well head, and sea of all goodness; and their
cup does always ouerflow. I omit other circumstances: for these prove
sufficiently, that the Saints which the Apostle describes, are Possessors in
the Kingdom of glory, not Travelers in the way of grace. And the Text says,
Verse 17.
The Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them: that must
necessarily be, Coena gloriae, the Supper of glory; the vision and
contemplation of God and Christ, face to face without all Sacrament.

And in all this worship; that the consummated Saints give to God, it is said,
that the Angels, and the Elders, Cap. 7.7.11.
and the beasts did fall down before the Throne on their faces, and worship
God: So in heaven there is no worship without prostration and kneeling.

In like sort, the twenty four Elders, which sat before God on their seats,
fell on their faces, and worshipped, c. 11.16. And in the 19. Verse 4.
Chapter, where the great whore is judged, the four and twenty Elders, and the
four beasts fell down and worshipped God, that sat on the Throne; saying,
Amen: Alleluia: And in the ninth verse it follows: Blessed are they that are
called to the marriage Supper of the Lamb. So at the marriage Supper of the
Lamb, there is falling down, or prostration and kneeling.

If all this worship be given to God, that sits on the Throne, and to the
Lamb, by the Angels, and Elders, and Beasts, and Saints, when they worship
God, and are feasted at the Supper of the Lamb, in glory in heaven; why should
not their practice be a warrant to the Saints in earth, to use like falling
down, or kneeling, in the worship of God, at the feast of the Lamb in grace,
on earth? since the practice of the Church Triumphant may well be received as a
pattern, and guide by the Church militant, whose example so long as she
follows, she can never err; whose imitation is her readiest way to
perfection?

If any shall reply, that this is not the practice of the Church Triumphant,
which S. John describes in the Revel. but rather, that under the name of the
Church Triumphant in heaven, the Militant Church is described in earth, though
I doubt not, but it may very well be collected out of the pregnant
circumstances of the Text, that many of those passages cannot well be
understood of the Church Militant in earth, but only of the Triumphant Church
in heaven; as in part appears before; yet I will not greatly contend with
him, that shall gainsay in this point.

For suppose St. John, under the name of the Throne, and the Angels, and
beasts, and Elders, and heaven, do only understand the Kingdom of heaven, and
the Throne of Christ in the Kingdom of grace, in this Life: yet to my purpose
it is all one: For be it, the worship here spoken of, be of the Saints in the
Church militant; it is worship with outward Adoration, prostration, or
kneeling, which worship is principally performed in the Eucharist. And be it
that the feeding, and supper of the Lamb, be the feeding by the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, which is the supper of the Lamb in the way (For at the feeding
by the preaching of the word, no man calls for kneeling) they must necessarily
grant my Conclusion: That at the receiving of this supper there must be
prostration, falling down, and kneeling. And if Saint John saw this; then in
Saint John's time kneeling was the received gesture of Communicants at the
Supper of the Lamb. So whether Saint John spoke of the Supper of grace, or the
Supper of glory, kneeling or prostration is the gesture of Communicants at the
Lords Table.

The perfection of the Triumphant Church imposes a necessity of our
imitation: if it be done in heaven, it must be imitated on earth; if it be
done in confession of glory, it must much more be done in confession of sin:
if it be done in the sacrifice of praise, it must much more be done in the
sacrifice of contrition, and prayer: if they that have no want, nor no
imperfection, do thus fall down and kneel, how much more must they cast
down themselves in all humility, that abound in nothing, but only in wants
and imperfections, whose greatest perfection is Agnitio imperfectionis, the
acknowledgement of their imperfections: and whose greatest glory is the
ingenuous confession of their own unworthiness.

And surely Saint John, Apoc. 9.10.22.8.
that wrote this Revelation, is twice reproved by the Angel, because he would
have given divine worship to the Angel: but the faul^ (...) in obiecto, not in
modo adorationis: in the object of his adoration: For he would have given that
to the Angel, which was peculiar only to God; but it was not in the manner of
his adoration: he fell at his feet and worshipped him: divine worship must
have falling down, or prostration, or kneeling, but divine worship may not be
given to any Angel or Saint, or Sacred, or consecrated Creature; but only to
God, to whom only it is due.

The sum therefore of this reason is short, and punctual: The Church
Triumphant worshipeth and feasteth at the Lambs Supper, with prostration or
kneeling: Therefore the Church Militant, that must learn of the Church
Triumphant, must worship with prostration or kneeling, at the feast of the
Supper of the Lamb. For the earth must learn of heaven: and he that refuses
such guides, as the Saints in heaven, in the worship of God; it is to be feared
that he is turned over to worse Tutors on earth: and unless he repent, and
return to the right way, and follow their footsteps that are gone to heaven
before him; he will hardly attain to the great City, whereof they are admitted
as Citizens and Saints: And sure I am, the very Habendum and Tenendum: the
having, and holding, the right, and possession of our inheritance, is, as
Christ said: Vade and fac similiter; Luc. 10.37.
go, and do thou likewise. They kneeled, and prostrated themselves, when they
adored God; and were admitted to the feast of the Lamb on earth; they do so,
as S. John says, now in heaven; and they that rest from all their labors,
rest not from this labor, of Adoration, and prostration; and we must follow
them in the way, that we may be crowned with them at the end of the way, in the
Kingdom of glory.

I Come now to the reasons for sitting, for the Authorities are for standing.
Now before I come to handle them in particular, give me leave to strike at the
root of them all in general; and that is in short, Pride, and Presumption.
You will marvel much, that I should say, the Foundation of all these Reasons
is, Presumption, and Pride: and I cannot but marvel at it my self; but I must
much more marvel at the Author of these Reasons; that bearing the name of a
Christian, and perchance a Minister, he should give me cause to say as I do:
For I know no mean or medium in Theological contraries: when we come to the
Lords Table, either we must be humble, or else we must be presumptuous, and
proud: Luke 11.23.
He that is not with me is against me, says our Savior, and he that
gathers not with me, scatters. Either a good man, or a bad man; either
faithful, or unfaithful; either a good servant, or a bad servant; either
borne of God, and the child of God, or borne of the devil, and the child of
the devil: either we do righteousness, or we do unrighteousness; either
we love the Brethren, or we love not the Brethren; either a good tree, and
good fruit; or a bad tree, and bad fruit. And although a good tree cannot but
bear good fruit, and a bad tree cannot but bear bad fruit; yet, Mala arbor
fieri potest bona; a bad tree may be made a good tree: and the change must be
first in radice, and then in fructu: first in the Root, we must be grafted
into Christ; and then it will follow in the fruit. Yet in all these there is
no mean; there is none to be found, but either he is good or bad: so there is
none that comes to the Lords Table, but either he is humble, and comes in
humility with the Publicane, or else he is presumptuous, Luke 18.10.
and comes in pride with the Pharisee.

Now, that I may not be accused to mistake this Author, I will relate his
words: Kneeling is not only disagreeable with the joyful Page 85.
carriage, which in the judgment of the said Fathers, the solemnizing of the
Lords day requires throughout every part of Divine Service, but also repugnant
in particular, to the person sustained by each Communicant, and to the nature,
and intendment of the Lords Supper. The Lords Supper being a Sacrament; not of
humbling our selves after the manner and guise of suppliants, and
penitentiaries; but of spiritual feasting and rejoicing on our parts, not
only for the Lords Resurrestion, and our own, in his person, but for all
other favors and dignities, purchased for us by his death. And Page 84.
Kneeling, which is a gesture of humiliation, and of him that bewrays his
sins, and submissiuely sueth for the pardon of them, is altogether unsuitable,
and repugnant to rejoicing and cheerfulness, etc.

Good God, Is there any action of a Christian, that may be done without
humility? May man, that is but dust and ashes, present himself at any time,
in Gods sight, without humility? That is, with Pride: for these admit no
mean; either humble, or proud. May we have the affection of humility, and
not have the gesture of humility? Did not the Fathers that stood at their
Prayers in honor of Christ's Resurrection, stand in all humility? surely they
stood in confidence of Gods grace, and in hope of their own Resurrection; but
they stood in all humility, because they could not forget their own frailty,
confident in God, but humble in themselves.

So the Fathers that laid down the gesture of humility, for a particular
Reason, did never lay down the affection of humility; because that is against
all reason, to cease to be humble, when Christ said, Discite ex me, quia
humilis, Learn of me, to be humble, and meek: learn of me, not to create
the world, not to redeem the world: not to feed five thousand with five
loaves, nor to feed the whole world with a few seeds; not to raise from the
dead, nor to keep men that they die not, by curing all diseases: but learn of
me to be humble, and meek.

And may it suffice to be humble in confession of sin, and supplicating for
pardon? or will it suffice to be humble in asking petitions, for supply of
wants, and not be humble in giving of thanks? will it suffice to be humble in
the Examination of our selves, and preparing our selves before we come to the
Lords Table: and at the very coming, and receiving, to cease to be humble, and
take state upon us? Did we by our humility attain to be in a measure fit,
and worthy for those great mysteries, that so we may lay down humility, and
come Pompatice, and gloriose, Cyprian. de Caena Domin.
pompously, and gloriously, as if we were haile-felow, and equal with God? No:
It was humility that prepared us to come to the Lords Table; and it must be
humility that presents us at the Lords Table. And, Eadem sunt principia
constitutionis, and conseruationis; Humility was the first principle of
Constitution, to make us Christians: and humility must be the same principle
of conservation, to keep us Christians: and when we leave humility, we leave
to be Christians: for humility is Proprium quarto modo: no Christian without
humility: And therefore Christ saying indefinitely, Learn of me, for I am
humble and meek, says universally, because humility is necessary to
Christianity; Learn of me to be humble in all actions of Christianity.

Christ says not, Learn of me to be humble in the way, and to be proud, and
presumptuous in the end of the way: he says not, Learn of me to be humble in
confession of sin, and then to be proud in confession of praise: he says
not, Learn of me to be humble in your private prayers, and be proud at your
prayers in the Temple, and corners of the streets: he says not, Be humble,
and come by weeping Cross in your preparation to the Eucharist, and then be
proud, and presumptuous at the Eucharist, as if you were equal with Christ,
coheires with Christ, and owed him no reverence at his Table: No, the Lesson is
Catholic and universal: Be humble in all actions, and duties of
Christianity.

And surely this Man never learned this Lesson of the Fathers, but does indeed
father his untruth upon them: For they never discerned kneeling, the gesture
of humility, to be vnsuteable, and repugnant with rejoicing and
cheerfulness: their standing at Prayer was as full of humility, as of Joy,
and cheerfulness; and they well knew, that rejoicing was joined with
reverence, As it is in the 2. Psalm, Exultate cum tremore, so they read it,
Rejoice to him with trembling. They knew, Abraham that feasted the Angels, or
the Son of God, did adore them; And yet his feast was not without Joy. And
had this man read, and observed the Fathers well, he should have found, that
they never thought humility it self, or the gesture of humility, to be
unsuitable, and repugnant to the Joy of Communicants.

S. Cyprian says, that we must come, Cum lachrymis nectareis, and suspirijs
contemplationis; with tears, sweeter then Nectar, and sighs of contemplation:
Fletibusse abluendo, lachrymis se baptizando, washing and baptizing our selves
with tears. Chrysostom says, we must come, Cum timore and tremore, and
horrescendo, with fear, and trembling, and a certain horror. Ambrose says,
Cum cordis contritione and lachrymarum font, with contrition of heart, and a
fountain of tears: with a devout heart, with fear, with reverence and
trembling, with chastity of body, and purity of soul. S. Augustine says,
Cum veneratione singulariter debita, with singular veneration, with adoration,
and prostration, and kneeling, as Ambrose, and Augustine, and many others of
the Fathers speak. We must come confessing our selves to be sinners, with
fear, and a pure conscience, with fear and compunction of heart, with humbled
bodies, and contrite souls, with due reverence and vigilancie; and many the
like phrases, most common in their writings, as the Reader may in part see in
the fifth Reason.

I hope all these phrases prove sufficiently, that the Fathers no way thought
the gesture of humility, to be altogether unsuitable or repugnant, to the Joy
and cheerfulness of the guests at the Lords Table. They knew well enough,
that this is a Sacrament of humbling our selves, after the guise and manner of
suppliants, and penitentiaries, though it were a spiritual Feast, and
rejoicing. For the more humble we are in soul and body, when we come to this
Feast, the more Joy we shall have in our selves: Joy in the Feast of God, and
the participation of the Body, and Blood of Christ, and an increase of Joy,
because we have increased our sorrow, and contrition for our sins past, and
sent up our sighs, and tears to procure our pardon, and acceptance of our
selves, our souls, and bodies, to be living Sacrifices, holy, and acceptable
to him, which is our reasonable service of him; and the greater was our sorrow,
the greater is our Joy, for the treasure that is sought in sorrow, is found
with Joy: Matthew. 13.44.
and the blessed Virgin, and Joseph that sought Jesus, sorrowing, found him
with Joy in the Temple. Luke 2.48.


But why do I trouble my self, and the Reader, with this Unchristian
doctrine, that excludes all humility of soul, and humiliation of body, from
the Feast of the Lords Supper? Surely I make this one use of it; that I
presume, if the words of this Author were well observed, by all his absurd
favorers, and followers, they would renounce that profane or civil gesture
of sitting, which dasheth out one of the most glorious and eminent virtues of
Christianity, that is Humility, out of the greatest, and principal part of
Gods worship, that is the Eucharist, which assuredly the more humble it is, the
more acceptable it is in the sight of God, and brings in stead thereof, that
same Luciferian Pride, that was so odious in Satan, that presumed to say, Esaias
14.13.
Sedebo in monte testamenti, I will sit upon the Mount of the Congregation: O
thou impudent Lucifer, Bern. Sermon. de S. Bened.
when thousands of thousands, and millions of millions stand and minister about
him, and fall down and worship him; Tusedebis? will thou sit, as if thou
thoughtest thy self equal to God? Cast down thy self then, O thou miserable
soul, at the feet of Jesus, that thou may cease to be miserable: and bow
thy knees to him, Phil. 2.10.
to whom all knees are bowed, of things in heaven, in earth, and under the
earth; and know, that all Christian virtues without humility, can never make
up the wedding garment, without which thou shall never be suffered to abide at
the marriage Feast, but be cast out into outward darkness, where is weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

Now the first Reason is Ius cohaeredis, Gal. 4.1.2.
The heir so long as he is a child differs nothing from a servant, but is
sub Tutoribus, under Tutors and governors, until the time appointed of the
Father. Surely, though we have put off the beggarly rudiments of the world,
and be Sons of grace, and no servants of the world; and have put away
disciplinam naturae and legis, the discipline of nature, and Moses Law, and the
discipline of servitude and fear: yet we have not put away Disciplinam
Euangelij and charitatis, the discipline of the Gospel of charity. Christians
are under the discipline of charity, as well as Jews were under the
discipline of the Law: and we have Tutors and governors in the Gospel, as well
as they had in Nature, and in the Law: And so, as we are the sons of God, so
also we are the servants of God: not Serui timoris, but Serui charitatis, Romans
6.18.
and serui Iustitiae, not servants by fear, but servants by love, and servants
of righteousness, and bound to the Laws of Love, and the Laws of Children;
And then, as children, when they ask a blessing of their fathers, they kneel;
so we, when we ask pardon, or grace, and chiefly when we ask the greatest
grace, that is Christ, in the Eucharist, we must kneel.

And suppose we be Cohaeredes, coheires, ioyntheires, or heirs annexed with
Christ, yet we are not aquales, equals to Christ, that we should sit with him:
for our part comes far short of Christ's part. Does this Author think,
that we are equal to Christ in grace, when he received the Spirit without
measure, Psalm. 45 8.
Praeconsortibus, and Pro consortibus: above, and for his fellows; and we in a
scant measure? or shall we be equal to him in glory, who sits at the right
hand of God?

Besides, Christ, Qua homo, is Cibus: as man, he is the meat of this Feast; and
Qua Deus, as God, he is the maker of the Feast: and though there may be some
color of equality, Qua homo, as he is a man; yet, as God, there can be no
equality, nor proportion at all. So, though we may be equal to the meat we
receive, the flesh of Christ, yet we can never be equal to the Master of the
Feast, that is, the Deity of Christ, and God himself. And therefore though
our Coheireship may give us some boldness, in respect of Christ's humanity,
yet our vileness, in respect of his Deity, should cast us down as low as the
earth, when we think that dust and ashes, is admitted to the Lords Table.

And the Coheires that we now speak of, are but coheires inspe, in hope: but
the Coheires in re, in deed, and in possession, the Saints and Angels in
Heaven, that feed at the Supper of the Lamb without all Sacraments, they do
fall down or kneel, and worship him, that sits upon the Throne, and the
Lamb, and cast down their Crowns before the Throne. We have only Ius
adrem, a right to our inheritance, but are out of possession; the Saints have
Ius inre, right in the inheritance, that is right and possession also: and yet
they kneel. So the Saints in glory are humble, and fall down or kneel, and
worship: and the Saints in hope are proud, and sit; as if they were equal
with God, to whose Table they are admitted.

Besides, this Argument is drawn from the common place of all sects; that is
Pride. Now consider whither it tends; for it trenches deep, and reaches almost
to Arianisme, to deny all worship to Christ. For the Proposition being
general, will bear many Conclusions: We come to the Lords Table as Coheires
with Christ. Ergo, we must not knele nor humble our selves to Christ.


In like manner.

We come to Gods worship as Coheires with Christ. Ergo, We may not worship, or
pray to Christ, he is but our Coheire.
For if we may pray to him, and worship at all times, and in all places; then
we may kneel to him at all times, and in all places; and so at the Lords
Table. And if we give him inward devotion and worship, we cannot deny him
outward Adoration, prostration, and kneeling: So the Argument either denies
all worship to Christ; or else grants kneeling at the Eucharist.

The second Reason is not worthy to be called a Reason; Certitudo Cohaeredum,
the assurance of our Coheireship.

Kneeling at the Eucharist crosses our assurance of our Coheireship with
Christ.

Therefore we may not kneel at the Eucharist.

And why does Kneeling cross our assurance of our Coheireship with Christ?
For my part I know nothing, that more crosses the assurance of Coheireship
with Christ, then Pride and an assurance without ground: And nothing does more
assure the soul of a Christian, in his inheritance in heaven, then this
humility. For presumption and pride overthrows all Theological and Christian
moral virtues, as appears in the Pharisee: and humility is Basis and
fundamentum, the base, or foundation of all Christian virtues: and the deeper
the foundation of humility is, (so it be joined with hope, and not with
despair) the more strong and assured is the building, that reaches up to
heaven: so that this proposition is utterly false, That Kneeling, which is an
Act of humility, does weaken, or shake, or cross our assurance of Coheireship
with Christ. For nothing does more strengthen this assurance, then this inward
humility, and devotion of the heart, testified by the outward gesture of the
Kneeling, and prostration of the body.

And no man can have any assurance of his Coheireship that comes not duly
prepared by repentance, and contrition, by prayer, and praise, all which are
odious in the sight of God, if they be not joined with humility. For God
hates and abhors the prayer, and the thanks of the proud, and presumptuous,
their sacrifices are abominable in his sight: 1. Pet. 5.5.
he respects the humble, and resists the proud.

Suppose Judas did sit at the Lords supper, at the first institution: what
assurance of Coheireship had he? The Fathers and Christians in the Primitive
Church, as appears by the testimonies cited in the fifth Reason; did adore,
and kneel at the receiving of the Eucharist, what did their kneeling cross
their assurance of Coheireship with Christ? Nay, did not their humility and
kneeling increase their assurance? this false principle then must necessarily
produce a false conclusion, like unto it self: For kneeling does direct us,
not to an apprehension of disfellowship, but rather of fellowship (if that be
not too familiar) and unity with Christ.

As for that profane word, Page 22.
that kneeling does import subjection and disfellowship with Christ, and the
person of a guest and Coheire does import equaelitie and society with him;
and therefore it is not to be used in the receiving of the Eucharist; it is a
most odious speech, becoming a Pharisee, better then a Christian: for though
we have fellowship with Christ, yet we shall never have equality with him,
neither in this life, nor in the life to come: there may be equality in
nature, as he is a man; but there can never be equality in the endowme^ts,
either of nature, grace, or glory. And if the words of the Prophet be true;
Psalm. 8.6.
Omnia subiecisti sub pedibus eius: 1. Cor. 15.27.
thou have put all things in subjection under his feet, how is it that they
which profess themselves to be the Saints, Heb. 2.8.
the holy Brethren, and the kingdom of Christ, should deny subjection to him
in any action of Christianity? Luc. 19.14.
Is not this to say, Nolumus hunc regnare super nos: we will not have this man
to reign over us: we will do no act that shall import subjection, and
disfellowship with him, to whom it is performed.

He is our Brother and Coheire: and that is in effect to say; He is no more
but our Brother and Coheire; that is, he is a man, and no more but a man: For
if they did acknowledge him to be God, they would yield humility and
subjection to his Deity, though they claymed Coheireship, and Fellowship with
his humanity.

So then the Reason is turned thus against them:

It is the Son of God that feeds us in the Eucharist with his flesh and
blood. All worship and Adoration, and Kneeling is due unto the Son of God in
sign of humility and subjection to him. Therefore all worship, Adoration, and
kneeling, is due to him that feeds us in the Eucharist with his flesh and
blood in sign of humility and subjection to him.
If any shall say, Because they have society with the Son of man, therefore
they will not be subject to the Son of God; they are fitter to be chastised
with Lucifer, then confuted with Reason: and so I pass to the third Reason,
which is as reasonlesse as the two former are.

The third Reason is Prerogatiua mensae and conuiuarum: and a guest: his reason
is this:

Not to partake with Christ in the Liberties, and Prerogatives of a Table in
the Eucharist is a sin. Kneeling in the Eucharist does debar us from
partaking with Christ in the Liberties and prerogatives of a Table. Therefore
to kneel in the Eucharist is unlawful, and may not be performed without
sin.
All this Reason is drawn from the rules of Tables, and Feasts amongst men:
wherein this man is as gross and carnal, as in the two former Reasons he was
absurd, and smelt of Arianisme. A civil Symposiarch admits all his guests to
sit with him at his Table; therefore all must sit with Christ at his Table.
This is the force of this Argument; as if he should say: Christ is tied to the
rule of ordinary Feast-makers, and must do as they do. It is a Table, and a
Feast, and they are guests; and therefore all liberties, and prerogatives of a
Table, and a Feast, and guests; and so sitting, equality, and society, without
humility and subjection, is due unto them, as their liberty and prerogative.

The word of the Apostle was never truer then in this case: 1. Cor. 1.14.
Animalis homo non percipit ea quaesunt Dei: this carnal man understands not
the things of God: For what greater ignorance can there be, then out of the
fashion of Tables, and gestures of guests at Feasts amongst men, to gather a
necessary Conclusion, That because the Lord has a Table, and admits guests to
that Table; therefore men may demean themselves with like gesture at Gods
Table, as they do at the feasts of men.

But this man might have remembered that the Eucharist is as well called
Sacrificium, and Cultus Dei, as Caena; a Sacrifice, and the worship of God,
as well as a Supper: and then Kneeling, and Prostration, and Adoration, are more
fitter gestures for sacrificers, and worshippers, then sitting is for guests at
the Table of the Lord of all power and Majesty.

And therefore as in S. 1. Cor. 10.21. Heb. 13.10.
Paul there is Mensa Domini; the Table of the Lord. So there is, Habemus
altar: we have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the
Tabernacle. And the word Altar in the Fathers, is more common then the word
Table: so that as the name of Table may plead for sitting; so the name of
Altar enforces worship, and Sacrifice, and that implies Adoration and
Kneeling.

But his grand error is, that he infers, that the gesture, used by guests
at the feast, or table of a man, is, and must be essential at the Lords
Table. For why? Suppose the greatest Monarch or King, should feast the meanest
of his Subjects, and admit him to sit at his Table, is it an Argument a pari;
to conclude therefore, We must sit at the Table of the Lord? why then will it
not follow thus? The King suffers his subject to sit at his Table with him
covered, or his Hat on, (for this is one of the liberties and prerogatives of a
table, and used ordinarily at all great feasts) therefore we must come, and sit
covered, or our Hats on our heads, at the Table of the Lord. But the true
difference is this; The King and the Subject, though different instatu, in
state; the one is to govern, as Gods Viceroy; the other to be governed: and
the King has power of life and death over his Subject, according to Justice
and Law; yet they are equal in nature and condition; both men, created
according to one stamp or Image, the Image of God; both borne by one way of
generation; both living, and dying after one fashion; and the grave knows no
difference between the ashes of the King, and his meanest vassal. And they
are equal in grace, both bought with one price, the blood of Christ; both
regenerate in one Lauer of Baptism; both sanctified by one holy Spirit; both
fed with one and the same bread, the Word of God, and the flesh and blood of
Christ; both equal in hope of eternal glory: so there is inequality in one
thing, that is, in state; but there is equality in three for it, that is, in
Nature, Grace, and Glory.

But between God, ever blessed, and ever to be adored; and man, whose
greatest blessing is to be admitted, ever to bless, and adore God, there is
no equality at all: For it is proper only to the eternal Son of Gods own
substance, to be aequalis Deo sine rapina; equal to God without robbery. Men
are called Gods, but they are Gods only in name, Psalm. 82.6.
Dixi Dijestis; I have said, ye are Gods; Job 10.34, 35.
because the word of God was sent to them; and can never be equal to God; and
it is gross saeriledge, that any man who is a God by grace, or name only,
should account himself Gods equal, or fellow, as this man does account
himself, and all his coheires to be equal to Christ: For God and man do
differ infinitely, because God is infinite, and man is finite; and between
eternity and mortality, the Creator and the creature there can be no
comparison, at all.

And in this Sacrament, Christ as man is our food, and Christ as God, and the
whole Trinity, do give this food: yea Christ, not only Qua homo, but also
Qua homo mortuus, not only as he is a man, but also as he is dead for us, is
our food: and therefore this Sacrament does represent, not vitam, but mortem
Christi, not the life, but the death of Christ; So Christ as man, does not
make this Feast, but Christ as God makes this feast, and Christ as man is the
meat of this Feast. And though there were equality between Christ and us, as
he is man, and our elder Brother: yet between Christ, and us, as he is God,
there is no equality, but all subjection on our parts; and therefore all
submission of soul, and body is to be tendered to him by us, when we come to
receive his Flesh and Blood. And it is a plain fallacy, and no good reason to
infer, We sit at the Kings Table, therefore we must sit at the Lords Table.
And therefore we may not claim that liberty, and prerogative at Gods Table,
that we take at the tables of men, unless we will flatter our selves, that no
more reverence, and worship, and Adoration, and kneeling is due to God, then
unto man.

The fourth Reason is, contra Ius naturae, contrary to the Law of nature;
Kneeling at a feast or banquet, is against the Law of nature: therefore it is
unlawful to kneel at the Feast or Supper of the Lord.

Here I would be glad to know where this Law of nature is written, or to be
found. If by the Law of nature he understand the Morrall Law, I find bowing
down, or kneeling, commanded there in the worship of God. Exodus 20.5.
Thou shall not bow down to them, (that is to Idols) therefore thou shall bow
down, or kneel to God. For where the one contrary is forbidden, there the
other contrary is commanded. And this Sacrament is a principal part of Gods
worship; If he means the natural Law, found out by the light of natural
Reason, Genesis 17.3.
then Abraham, and the Wisemen, Matt 2.11.
worshipped God with prostration or kneeling. If he mean the law of Nature,
that is, the nature of the thing or action, Vt naturarei, sit Lex naturae: that
the nature of the thing, should be the Law of Nature, then kneeling is most
agreeable to the nature of the action, or thing done, that is the Eucharist:
For it is altogether an action of subjection, and humility, and therefore
kneeling is most suitable to it. It is Cultus Dei, the worship of God, and a
most eminent and principal part of it. It is a Sacrifice commemoratiue: It is a
Sacrifice of our selves, our souls and bodies: It is a Sacrifice of contrition
offered by penitentiaries, a Sacrifice of Prayer, offered by suppliants; and
kneeling is most fit for Sacrificers: It is the Eucharist or Sacrifice of
praise: and in the Revelation, where it is often said, That the Elders did fall
down and worship, there is seldom or never any prayer made for want, but
honor, and glory, and praise for that which was received. So kneeling is most
suitable to Thanksgiving. And in this Sacrament we receive the greatest
blessings at Gods hand, that this life is capable of; and the greater Gods
graces be, the humbler should we be at the receipt of them: as men use to
receive the greatest goodness of Princes, upon their knees.

So that, besides the practice of the Church in Heaven, and earth; all reason
pleads for kneeling, and all Reason pleads against sitting. For what is
more repugnant to the nature of worshippers, of Sacrificers, of penitentiaries,
of suppliants, of thankesgiuers, then society, and fellowship, and equality,
and sitting? so this Reason is well retorted.

Sitting is repugnant to the nature of Communicants, that worship, that
sacrifice, that are contrite, that are suppliants, and receivers: therefore
sitting is not to be used by the Communicants at the Eucharist, as being
repugnant to the law of Nature, or natural reason, or the nature of the thing,
or action that is in hand.

The fifth Reason is, Cultus priuatus in publico: Kneeling at the receipt of the
Eucharist, is a private worship, in the time and act of public worship:
therefore kneeling is unlawful.

This Reason I understand not, or else it is false and frivolous: false; for it
is utterly untrue, That it is unlawful to perform private worship, during the
time, and act of Gods public Service. As if he should say, It is unlawful
for a Christian to make his private prayers, in the time of public prayers,
for his own wants and necessities; then, which nothing is more absurd. For
why? 1. Sam. 1.10.
was it unlawful for Samuels mother to ask a son of God in the Temple, in
the time of divine, and public worship? Or was it unlawful for Naaman the
Syrian, 2. Reg. 5.18.
in the time of the public idolatrous worship in the house of Rimmon, to make
his petitions to the God of heaven? Was it unlawful for the Apostles, Acts.
3.1.
S. Peter, and S. John, to ascend to the Temple at the hour of prayer, the
ninth hour, and there worship and make their private petitions after the
manner of Christians, for their own wants and necessities, in the time of the
public worship of the Jews? Is it unlawful for the Preacher, in the time of
divine and public worship, to make his private prayer, for Gods assistance, in
the discharge of his duty in that work?

But the secret of this proposition is; This man meant to make some show or
color for the profane fashion of some of his Brethren, who in time of Divine
Service, come into their seats, and there squatt down, and never vouchsafe
once to kneel, or make any prayer to God; under pretense that they must join
in public worship and so neglect their own private occasions and duties.

It is frivolous: For how can any worship be called public, unless it be
also the private worship of the particular men there present? as the universal
does consist of many particulars: Now this worship has the name of public,
because it is performed by the particular men there present, though
peradventure successively, as the capacity of the place will permit: As first
the Minister kneeles, and receives; then he stands up, and goes, and
delivers the Sacrament to the Communicants kneeling in order. It may be they
do not all kneel together, because they do not all come together, but yet
every man's private kneeling, by succession, makes the public worship and
adoration. And so, that this worship may be public and general, it is
necessary that every man, by his own private worship, do make the whole
Service, to be the public worship of God. And if by the private, there be any
disturbance, or difference in the public worship of God: the fault is in
those refractary spirits, that out of the humor of contradiction, rather then
reason, refuse to kneel with the rest of the congregation; that so there may,
neither be unity in heart, nor uniformity in gesture in the Service of God.

The 6. Reason is Sessio, prior and potior genuslectione: Ratio 6.
sitting is more ancient, for it is the practice of Christ and his Apostles;
and it is better then Kneeling; therefore we must sit at the Eucharist and not
kneel.

It is true, Prior tempore, potior iure, he that is first in time, has the
better right: This Reason stands on two grounds, Antiquity, and goodness. The
first is doubtful, and was never proved, but only assumed. The second I take
to be plainly false: For the Antiquity, I see little reason, for why? there
is no record of Antiquity for sitting, produced since Christ's time; and
therefore though it may have a writ of right, yet I am sure it has been out of
possession, ever since the Apostles times: and this Author cannot deny it, nor
lay the fault upon the reformed Church of England, for making an entry, and
dispossessing this sitting at the Sacrament: For he proves standing at prayer,
and thereupon presumes, standing also at the Sacrament to have been a received
custom in Tertullians time. And I have proved kneeling to be in use in the
Sacraments, in Tertullians time. So it was the Primitive Church, that changed
the old, and first, and best gesture at the institution, into a newer, and a
worse, if this man say true. Besides, at the Paschall supper Discumbebat,
Christ sat, or lay, and leaned with the twelve: but what he did at the
Evangelical supper, it is not known: so the practice of Christ, and his
Apostles is most imitable if it were known what it were. And Discumbebat, is
not, he sat, in the propriety of the word and gesture, for then Christ and
his Apostles did break the Law of standing at the Passover: so the first part
of purity is doubtful.

The second, of goodness, is false: Sitting is not so decent, and comely a
gesture for Communicants, that are worshippers, and sacrificers, and
penitentiaries and suppliants, and praysers, as Kneeling is. For kneeling is a
gesture of humility and subjection, and best suteth with Christian piety and
devotion: and sitting is an action of society, and equality, which can never
be granted between the eternal God, and man that is mortal. Kneeling agrees
well with Saints in heaven, and therefore best suits with Saints on earth:
Therefore kneeling is the better gesture. So this Argument is partly doubtful,
and partly false.

The 7. Reason is, Idololatria est: Ratio 7.
Kneeling before a consecrated creature in the act of Divine service, with a
religious respect of it, is Idolatry.

Here I observe a fine trick, that is; that with this man, it is all one, to
bow down before a consecrated creature, and to bow down to a consecrated
creature. The first may be done, and was ever done, the second may never be
done lawfully: For example, He that kneeleth at the Lords Table, at his
prayers, or in a Temple, he boweth down, Coram, before a consecreated
creature. The Priests in Salomons Temple, bowed down before the Altar, and
both Temple and Altar were consecrated. The high Priest once every year entered
into the Holiest, and bowed before the Altar, the Mercie-seate, and the
Cherubins: And the Tabernacle, and the Altar, and the Mercie-seat, and the
Cherubins were consecrated: yet none of these committed Idolatry therein;
because, though they bowed before consecrated creatures, yet they bowed not to
the consecrated creatures; but to that God that ordained such consecrated
places, and such consecrated creatures for the better performing of his own
worship and service.

And if these Jewish Priests, and the high Priest, were not Idolaters, though
they bowed before these consecrated creatures; no more shall it be Idolatry
in us, to bow down and worship God, before the consecrated Bread and Wine, so
long as we give no part of Gods worship to those consecrated creatures.

Philip Mornay could easily distinguish between the worship of God, De Sacr.
Miss. 1.4. Page 7 32.
before consecrated creatures; and the worship of consecrated creatures
themselves, upon S. Ambrose his words, Adoramus in mysterijs, non mysteria; in
Sacramentis, non Sacramenta; Creatorem in creatura sanctificata, non ipsam
creaturam: We adore in the mysteries, not the mysteries themselves; in the
Sacraments, not the Sacraments themselves; the Creator in the sanctified
creature, not the creature it self.

And the truth is, that God does so far forth value consecrated Temples,
and Churches, and Tables, and Altars, that he does the better approve, and
receive the Sacrifices, and Prayers, and praises of his people, only in this
respect; that they are offered in Templo, or versus Templum; in the Temple, or
toward the Temple: As no doubt God does receive our Petitions more readily,
because they are made in the style of heaven, in the words that Christ
himself taught, When you pray, pray thus.

So it is one thing to worship God in a consecrated place, or before
consecrated creatures; and it is another thing to worship, or give any part of
divine worship unto the consecrated creature. And he is a plain Sophister,
that shall argue thus: We may, or do worship God in a consecreated place, or
before, or in the presence of consecrated creatures; therefore we may, or do
worship the consecrated place, or consecrated creatures themselves: So this
Author, in this Reason, does make an adversary to himself, and then shootes
his arrows at him, but never comes near the practice of the Church of
England, that as resolutely denies all Adoration of any consecrated creature,
as she readily offers all divine worship and adoration to God, to whom only
it is due.

The 8. Reason is, Praxis Ecclesiae, Ratio 8.
the practice of the Church: Christ and his Apostles sat, and the Church, for
eleven hundred years, prayers on Sundays, and from Easter to Pentecost, and
on those days they administered the Eucharist: therefore they stood at the
Eucharist; so sitting or standing is preferred before kneeling; which came in
with Honorius 3. decree inhonour of their Breaden god.

This is answered before in my first Reason, and there largely confuted: In
which let these things never be forgotten: ergo, at the other. 2. Christ did
not break the Law of the Passover, which was to be eaten standing; and
therefore Discumbebat, does not infer the gesture of sitting, but only the
action of supping. Eucharist, as standing was at prayer. And there is kneeling
used in divine worship in heaven, by them that are admitted to the Supper of
the Lamb. So the practice of the Church is for kneeling at the Eucharist, and
never for sitting.

CONCLVSIO.
THus have I, at large set down the Reasons for Kneeling at the Eucharist, and
briefly refuted the Reasons that are urged for sitting, passing over many
slight passages in them, that are of small or no moment. Now it remains I say
somewhat of the Authority by which this gesture of Kneeling is established,
and required in the Church of England. And surely the Prince and Prelates of
this Church, proceeded to the reformation of superstitions and abuses, crept
into the worship of God by the corruptions of Popery, according to some rule,
or Canon: and proposed to themselves, to go by an even way: that is, so to
reform, that they might withal restore the Church to her ancient purity. In
which respect they endeavored to take away the multitude of idle, and
superfluous Ceremonies, that made the state of Christianity more intolerable,
then the state of the Jews was; and to retain such gestures, and Ceremonies,
which they found truly ancient and reasonable.

Their meaning was not to make a new Church; but to reform according to the
first, and primitive, and Apostolical institution: for that which is first,
that is true. Their purpose was not to take the crooked staff, and bow it so
far from one extreme to another, that from superstition, they would
presently decline to profaneness: but thought it fit to make a stay in the
golden mean, neither retayning all Ceremonies, lest Religion might seem to be
nothing else but external pomp, and gesticulation; neither rejecting all,
lest Religion having lost all external majesty, might appear naked, and
soon decay at the heart.

Among those Ceremonies retained, this Prostration, and Kneeling is one: as
being ancienter then Popery, and fetching his pedigree from the first Fathers,
and Martyrs in the Church, and grounded upon good and sufficient reason, as
being a duty to be performed by the body, in that eminent part of divine
worship, that is the Sacrament, as Devotion and Piety is the duty, which at
that time is to be tendered by the soul. Either of which two, whosoever will
leave out in the celebration of this holy mystery, he must withal, strike out
all subjection, and humility out of this service; and come pompously,
glorioussy, and Pharisaically, as if he were fellow, and equal with our
blessed Savior, the eternal Son of God, and the blessed Trinity, that is
the Maker of this great Feast.

For if Christ be God, why should he not be adored in his Word, in his
Sacraments, in his Worship, and in all parts of Christian duty? And if the
Jews Synagogue had power to turn standing, into sitting at the Passover, as
some think, (though I be not of their opinion) they did after the captivity:
why has not the Church of Christ power to change sitting, or lying, and
leaning into kneeling, which is the fittest gesture to represent subjection and
humility?

So the Church of England, reforming by the rule of the Primitive Church, has
learned, and practiced by her example, to prostrate and kneel at the receipt
of those great and sacred Mysteries. In which I dispute not, whether it be a
duty of necessity, or a Ceremony of indifferency; I conceive upon reason,
in mine own Judgment, that it is a duty, or part of Gods worship, not to be
omitted in public and solemn Adoration, but in case of evident necessity.
If any man take it to be only a Ceremony of in differencie, I will not be
contentious: sure I am, if it be a duery, there is sufficient power in the
Church to declare it; and punish the refractary, and disobedient. If it be a
Ceremony of indifferency, there is sufficient power in the Church, upon good
reason of decency and order, to establish it, and bring all her members in
obedience to it.

If there be not a power in the Church to declare Articles of faith, and
duties of Religion, then will it be free for every man, without control, to
believe, and do what he lift, no man shall have power to correct him for his
erroneous conscience. If there be not a power in the Church to institute and
restore Ceremonies of decency and order, and to remove indecent, and
disorderly gestures, then will it be free for every man to worship God after
his own fashion; and then, so many men, so many worshippers: and every private
man shall have more power, then the whole Church has, to institute what
Ceremonies he list, and then to be Lord Paramount, subject to none, no not to
the whole Church.

S. 1. Cor. 11.34.
Paul said, Caetera cum venero disponam: the rest I will dispose when I come.
He had delivered the whole substance and essential parts of this Sacrament
before, to which no man may add, from which no man may detract any thing, no
not the whole Church, though she have power of declaration, and interpretation
in it. And somewhat he delivered about Ceremonies, as of fasting, and eating
before they came to the Lords Table; of the time, before, or after Supper; and
the place, the Church, not the private eating house. There remained some other
Ceremonies, never delivered by the Apostle, concerning this Sacrament. In this,
either the Church has power to institute, and establish, as the Nicene
Council did for standing at Prayer; C. 20.
or else all things shall not be done decently and in order, much less in
Unity and Uniformity. 1. Cor. 14.40.


So then, the Church that has a power to institute and establish Ceremonies in
matters of decency and order, has appointed this gesture of kneeling; that
does most fully express the subjection and humility of Communicants, of
Worshippers, of Sacrificers, of Penitents, of Suppliants, and of Praysers, to
be fit and decent, and orderly, in the receiving of this Sacrament; and if the
spirits of the Prophets were subject to the Prophets, among us, 1. Cor. 14.32.
as in right they ought to be, every private man should lay down his own
self conceit, and submit himself to the more mature, and ripe judgment of
the Church, wherein he lives. If any man will still be contentious, he is
worthy to undergo the censures of the Church; and if that discipline be not
strict enough, it is fit he should be brought into order by the severe
castigation of the Civil Magistrate; who even in Church causes bears not the
sword in vain. Romans 13.4.


For the King, as the keeper of Gods Law, of the first Table of Religion, as
well as the second of Civility, in those things which are commanded by God,
and taught by our Savior Christ, he is Iudex and vindex, not Legislator, Iam.
4.12.
he is no Lawmakers, (that is Gods Office) but he is the Judge, not of the Law,
but according to the Law: and the revenger to execute wrath upon them that do
evil: and no man neither Priest nor people, is exempt from his sword, if he
fail in the performance of his duty.

In things indifferent, the King with his Church, is first Legislator, then
Iudex, and then Vindex: first a Lawmakers to ordeine, and institute, and
establish Ceremonies of decency, and order in the worship of God, and the King
only has power to give life and strength to them by the mulcts, and penalties
of his Civil power. Next, he is the Judge and revenger, ciuilly to punish all
refractaries and sectaries, that will not endure to be enclosed within the
bounds of decency and order. Who, though he be forced sometimes with much
grief, and sorrow, to cut off, or cast out, or shut up some rebellious
Absalons, and headstrong Sectaries, and Seperatists, yet Luget filium, August.
Epist. 50.
laet atur de pace, he lamenteth the loss of a Son, and a Subject, but he
ioyeth in the peace of the Church and Kingdom.

And although they that suffer in this case, not for righteousness, but for
faction; flatter themselves that they are the persecuted Church, yet let them
remember, that Sara, who corrected her saucie proud handmayd Agar, was the Type
of the true Church, and Agar that was corrected, the type of all proud
Heretics and sectaries: yea let them know, Agar magis persequitur Saram
superbiendo, quam illam Sara coercendo, Sectaries, and Seperatists, and
refractaries do more persecute the true Church, and the governors thereof, by
their pride, and contempt, and mocking, then the governors of the Church can
persecute, or punish such refractaries, by correction and Justice.

S. Augustine compares the Laws of Emperors against the Donatists, unto the
Lions, that devoured Daniels accusers, In illos Leones, in hos Leges; they were
cast to the Lions, the Laws were made against these. And severe Laws are like
to good Physicians, they burn, and cauterize, and lance, and the like; but
all for love to save the sick, and to reduce the disobedient: and though the
patient cry, burn not, lance not, correct not, punish not, persecute not;
yet Clamat vulnus, ure, seca; the wound cries, burn, and cut, and punish, and
correct, and cease not, till health be recovered.

But what need I to speak of severity of Laws, Number. 12.13.
in the days of him that is another Moses, meek or mild above all the men
that are upon the face of the earth; whose greatest care is to draw all men by
love and patience, to Unity, and Uniformity: Ducit, non cogit; he had rather
lead all his children, and subjects by the cords of Love, then compel them by
the severity of Justice. The better part will be led by Love, and Goodness;
but the greater part must know that there is Law and power. And he teaches
them by his Pen, as a great and learned Bishop, or ouerseer, among and over his
Bishops; so Constantine said, Vos intra Ecclesiam, Eusebius. de vit. Constant.
Lib. 4 c. 24.
Ego extra Ecclesiam a Deo Episcopus constitutus sum? and he goes before them
by his practice, as a General, and Leader, before his Army, first submitting
himself to those Orders, and Ceremonies, which he imposes upon others,
equal to many Kings of his own rank, for his practice; but singular above
all of his order, for the maturitie of his Judgment, and dexterity of his
Pen. The way by precept is long, and somewhat about; the way by example is
short, more effectual, and more easy: In our gracious Sovereign, that you
may know, that he is a true Disciple of the great Savior of the world, who
begun first to do, and then to teach; these two, Precept, and Example are both
joined: he teaches, and commands subjection, humility, and kneeling to
Christ, Nemo doctius, no man more learnedly, no man more admirably by his Pen;
he goes before, or leads us by his own example, Nemo deuotius, no man more
religiously, no man more devoutly.

Hunc non sequi pudor summus, assequi gloria summa: Not to follow his religious
steps it is most shameful, and dishonorable; eternal confusion attends the
disobedient: to follow, and attain to his perfection, it is the greatest glory
that any subject may hope for in this life. And because our great Master and
heavenly Doctor, taught and went that way of humility and kneeling, in his
Agony in the garden, it is the readiest way to glory and immortality in the
life to come, to follow the footesteps of the eternal King of Heaven, and our
gracious King in earth: which God of his goodness grant to all that are humble,
and meek in heart, for Jesus Christ's sake.

AMEN.
Page Lin. Errata. Corrige. 12 23 outward inward 20 10 Niucha genuflectamus
Niurecha genuflectamus ibid. 11 Niurecha ploremus Niucha ploremus 147 20 It is
probable It is not probable 157 3. in marg. De spir. and lit. De Spir, Sancto
176 25 Justin Marten Justin Martyr ibid. 28 added ended 178 25. in marg.
addatur Homil. 5. 202 22 Otors Orators 204 4. in marg, addatur Sermon. 11. in
Quadrages. ibid. 19 Collectaneis ^ellactane is 205 11 serrentius seruentius 237
29 consecreated consecrated 237 2 purity prioritie 240 5 first fifth 244 1
worshippers worships

LONDON Printed by JOHN BILL, M.DC.XVIII.


