CHRISTIAN Prayers and holy Meditations, as well for Private as Public
exercise:

Gathered one of the most godly learned in our time, by Henry Bull.

Whereunto are added the prayers, commonly called Lidleys prayers.

PSALM. 55. In the Evening and Morning, and at Noone, will I pray unto the
Lord, and he will hear my prayer. AT LONDON, Printed by R. Robinson, for S.
Waterson. and N. Ling. 1596.

January has XXXI. days.
1 A The circumcision of Christ. On which day Noe being in the Arko upon the
waters, began to see the tops of the high mountains. 2 b 3 c 4 d 5 e 6 f The
Epipheme Or apparition of our Lord Jesus. 7 g 8 A 9 b 10 c The 10.
Nebuchadonosor besieged once again Jerusalem. 2. reg, 15 11 d 12 e 13 f 14 g
15 A The mid-winter after (...). 16 b 17 c The 17. the good prince Scanderbeg
king of Epirus, a ^courge to the Turk, as upon this day died. 1 4 66. 18 d 19
e 20 f 21 g 22 A The 22. the Duke of Somerset as upon this day was beheaded.
1552. 23 b 24 c 25 d 26 e 27 f The 27. Saint Paul as upon this day of a
persecuter was connerted, as he is arneyed unto Damascus. Act. 9. 3 28 g 29 A
30 b 31 c

February has XXvii^. days.
1 d 2 e The purification of Marie. As upon this day Christ our Savior was
offered unto the Lord in the temple at Jerusalem, and his mother the virgin
Marie was purified according to the Law. Luke. 2. 22. 3 f 4 g 5 A 6 b 7 c 8 d 9
e 10 f 11 g The 11. Noe, forty days after he^ had seen the tops of the
Mountains, sent out the Raven, and after that, the Dove which returned. Genesis
8. 12 A 13 b 14 c 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g The 18. day. Noe put out once again the
Dove. which brought an Olive branch. 19 A 20 b 21 c 22 d 23 e Mathic Apostle.
24 f 25 g The Dove was sent the third time. and returned no more. 26 A 27 b 28
c

March has XXXI. days.
1 d 2 e 3 f The third day the temple of Jerusalem was wholly finished and
consecrated, 1. Esdras. 6. 4 g 5 A 6 b 7 c 8 d 9 e 10 f The 10. as upon this
day, Christ being on the other side of Jordan, was advertised of the sickness of
Lazarus. Ioh. 11 11 g 12 A 13 b The 13. the feast of Hester was celebrated,
because that day was appointed to put the Jews to death. 14 c 15 d 16 e The
16. Lazarus was raised up again Ioh. 11. 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 b The 20. Christ
made his entrance into Jerusalem. 21 c 22 d 23 e 24 f The 24. he made his
Supper. 25 g Annuntiation of Marie. The 25. was taken. 26 A The 26. was
crucified. 27 b The 27. he rested in the Sepulcher. 28 c The 28. he rose again
from death. 29 d 30 e 31 f

April has XXX. days.
1 g Noe uncovered the Arc. Genesis 8. 2 A The tabernacle was prepared by Moses.
Exodus 40. 3 b 4 c 5 d Jesus Christ the eight day after his resurrection,
appeared again to the Apo^tles which were assembled, where Saint Thomas was
present. 6 e 7 f 8 g 9 A 10 b The 10. the people of Israel went over Jordan dry
footed. Joshua. 3. 4. 11 c 12 d 13 e The 13. Assuerus gave out proclama^tion to
put all the Jews within his kingdom to death. Hest. 3 14 f The 14. was the
celebration of the passover. 15 g The 15. the people came out of Egypt Exodus
22. 16 A 17 b 18 c The 18. the people went over the red sea dry footed, and
Pharao was drowned with all his host. 19 d 20 e 21 f 22 g The 22. the people
came to Mara, the waters whereof they could not drink, Exodus 5. 23 A Mark
Euaugelist. 24 b The 24. the revelation was made to Daniel of that which
should come to pass, from the time of the kings of Persia unto Christ, and
from thence until the end of the world. Dan. 10. 11. 12. 25 c 26 d 27 e 28 f
29 g 30 A

May has XXXI. days.
1 b Philip and Jacob. 2 c 3 d The ascension of Christ into heaven fourcie
days after his resurrection. Mark. 6. 4 e 5 f 6 g God commanded Noe to carry
victo als into the Arc. Genesis 6. 7 A 8 b 9 c 10 d 11 e 12 f 13 g 14 A The 14.
Ezechias did first celebrate the Passover. Par. 30. 15 b The 15. the children
of israel murmured after flesh, and God sent them plenty of Quails. This was
the thirty day after their departure from Egypt Exodus 16. 16 c The 16. day God
made Manna to rsine down. Exodus 16. 17 d The 17. Noe carred into the Arc.
Genesis 7. 18 e 19 f 20 g The 20. day the people departed from mount Sina. Number. 9
21 A 22 b The 22. Fire from above consumed a part of the host of Israel. Number.
11. 23 c 24 d 25 e 26 f 27 g 28 A 29 b 30 c 31 d

June has XXX. days.
1 e This day the children of Israel came to mount Sina, and went thence the
third month, where they carried almost a year. 2 f 3 g 4 A 5 b 6 c The 6. the
temple of Diana in Ephesus was burned, the year before Christ, 54. 7 d 8 e 9 f
10 g 11 A 12 b 13 c The 13. day of this month, king Assuerus gave out
proclamation in favor of the Jews against Haman and his conspiracy. Hest. 8.
14 d 15 e 16 f 17 g 18 A 19 b 20 c 21 d 22 e 23 f 24 g John Baptist. 25 A 26 b
27 c The Ark of Noah was lifed up the 27 day by the waters of the flood. Genesis
28 d 29 e 30 f Peter the Apostle.

Julie has XXXI. days
1 g 2 A 3 b 4 c 5 d 6 e The 6. day of this month, the Josias of our age,
Edward the sixth, king of England died. Anno 1553. 7 f 8 g Dog days begin. 9 A
The 9. of this month the city of Jerusalem assieged by the space of eighteen
months was finally taken by the king of Babylon. Ier. 39. 10 b 11 c 12 d 13 e
14 f 15 g About this time the great sweat began in England. Anno. 1552. 16 A 17
b 18 c 19 d 20 e 21 f Marie Magdalen. 22 g 23 A 24 b 25 c James Apostle. 26 d
27 e As upon this day, the Athenians received a great overthrow in Sicilia, of
the Syracusians. 28 f 29 g 30 A 31 h

August has XXXI. days.
1 c Aaron died in the mountain of Hor, being 123, years old, 40. years
after the coming out of Egypt. Number. 20. and 33. 38. (...). 2 d 3 e 4 f 5 g 6 A
7 b 8 c 9 d 10 e The 10. the temple of Jerusalem was set on fire by the
soldiers of Iitus, and has not since been builded again. Josephus, lib. 6.
cap. 26. 11 f 12 g 13 A 14 b 15 c 16 d 17 e 18 f Dog days end. 19 g 20 A 21 b
22 c 23 d 24 e Bartholmevv Apostle. 25 f 26 g 27 A Religion as on this day was
reformed, according to Gods express truth in the most renounced city of
Geneua. an. 1535 28 b 29 c 30 d 31 e

September has XXX. days.
1 f 2 g 3 A 4 b 5 c 6 d 7 e Our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth was borne upon
this day at Greenwich, Anno. 1532. 8 f 9 g The 9. of this month, Jerusalem was
put to fire and sword, and wholly overthrown, as Christ foretold them,
Josephus, lib. 7. cap. 26. 10 A 11 b 12 c 13 d 14 e Chrysostom being chased
out of his Church of Constantinople, as upon this day died. 15 f 16 g 17 A 18
b 19 c 20 d 21 e S. Nathevv Apostles 22 f 23 g 24 A 25 b The 25. Nehemias did
finish the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem. An. 1444 before Christ. Nehe,
6. 5 26 c 27 d 28 e 29 f S. Michael. 30 g

October has XXXI. days.
1 A The Jews fasted and wept for Godolias, Iere, 41 and 42. 2 b 3 c 4 d 5 e 6
f 7 g 8 A 9 b 10 c The 10. day was the feast of conciliation, which was the
only day that God ordained to fall. 11 d 12 e 13 f 14 g 15 A 16 b 17 c ^ The
17. day, which was the 150, after the beginning of the floods, the Ark rested
upon the mountain Ararat in Armenia. Genesis 8. 18 d Luke Evangelist. 19 e 20 f 21
g 22 A 23 b 24 c The 24. Titus gave forth 3000. Jews to the wild beasts. Anno.
73. 25 d 26 e 27 f 28 g Simon and Jude. 29 A 30 b 31 c

November has XXX. days.
1 d All Saints 2 e 3 f 4 g 5 A 6 b 7 c 8 d 9 e 10 f The 10. This day happened
the woeful slaughter of Verna, where Ladislan king of Hungary was slain by
the Turk. an. 1444. Also as upon this day Martin Luther was borne. 11 g 12 A
13 b 14 c 15 d 16 e 17 f The 17. day of this month Queen Elizabeth began her
reign. 18 g 19 A 20 b 21 c 22 d 23 e 24 f 25 g The 25. day was the counterfeit
fealt by Jeroboam, after he had withdrawn the ten tribes of Israel from the
obedience of Roboam their lawful king, the which be ordained in Dan and Bethel,
after he had set up the the golden caluer to the intent the people should go
no more to worship in Jerusalem. 1. King. 12. 26 A 27 b 28 c 29 d 30 e Andrew
Apostle.

Decembber has XXX. days.
1 f 2 g 3 A 4 b 5 c The shortest day. 6 d 7 e 8 f 9 g 10 A 11 b 12 c 13 d 14 e
15 f The 15. day the year before the nativity of Christ 165. Antiochus the
gretset up an idol upon the altar of the Lord in Jerusalem, Match. 1. 16 g 17 A
18 b 19 c 20 d The 20. day, Esdras gave forth proclamation to the Israclites,
to for sake their strange wives that they had married, and to send them away.
1. Esd. 9. 21 e Thomas Apostle. 22 f 23 g 24 A S. John Evangelist died in
Ephesus, being of the age of 89. years under Iraian. 25 b The natiu^tie of
Christ. 26 c S. Stephen. 27 d S. John Evangelist. 28 e Jnnocents. 29 f The
Emperor, about 30. years after the destruction of Jerusalem. 30 g

A Rule to know when the Term^^ begins and ends.
HIllarie Term begins the three and twentieth of January, if it be not
sundaie, if it be, then the next day after, and ends the twelfth of February.

Easter Term begins seventeen days after Easter, and ends four days
after the Ascension.

Trinity Term begins the next day after Corpus Christi day, and ends the
Wednesday fourthnight after.

Michaelmas Term begins the ninth of October, if it be not Sunday, and
ends the seven and twentieth of November.

Eight days before any Term begin the Exchequer opens, except Trinity
Term, which opens but four days before.

An Almanacke for ten years.
The year of our Lord. The Prime. The Epact. Sondaies letter Leap year.
Ashwednesday the first day of Lent. Easter day. VVhitsonday. 1596 1 11 D C Mar.
1. April. 11. May. 30 1597 1 22 B Ma. 5. Marc. 27 15 1598 3 23 A 12 April. 61.
June. 4. 1599 4 4 G Mar. 4. 8 May. 27 1600 5 15 F E Feb. 17. Marc. 23 11 1601 6
26 E 8 April. 12. May. 31 1602 7 7 D 28 4 23 1603 8 18 B 13 Apr. 24. June 12
1604 9 29 A E Mar. 5. April. 8 May. 27 1605 10 11 G Feb. 24. Mar. 31. May. 19

AN INTRODVCTION to Prayer.
FOrasmuch at of our selves we are destitute of all good things, and utterly
void of all necessary helps to salvation: the Lord our God of his own free
mercy and goodness^, offers himself to us in Christ, and in him he gives
unto us, in the steed of our misery, all felicity: in the steed of our
poverty, the unspeakable riches of his grace: he opens unto us in him the
treasures of heaven, that our faith might wholly behold him, and our hope be
fully sixed upon him. In whom it has pleased him that the fullness of his
grace should dwell, that from thence we might all draw (as out of a most
plen^ifull fountain) the waters of eternal life, This secret and great
mystery is revealed to such only, whose eyes the Lord has opened, to see
light in his light. Therefore since we are taught by faith that whatsoever we
have need of, and is wanting in us, the same is laid up with God for us in
Christ: it remains that we seek it in him, and with prayer crave it of him.
Romans 10.
The Apostle therefore to show that true faith cannot be separate from the
invocation of Gods holy name, has set this order, that as faith comes by
the gospel, so by the same faith our hearts are stirred up to call upon the
name of God, and therefore he says that the spirit of adoption, which seals
in our hearts the witness of the Gospel, raises up our spirits that they
dare with boldness show forth their desires: it stirs upon us unspeakable
gronings, and causes us to cry with confidence; Abba Father. By the benefit
of prayer therefore we attain to those riches which God has laid upon store
for us: for thereby we have familiar access to God, and boldly entering into
the sanctuary of heaven, we put him in mind of his promises: so that now by
experience we feel and find that to be true indeed, which by the word we did
before but only believe: now we enjoy those treasures by prayer, which by
faith we did before but only behold in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus.

Now how necessary and profitable this exercise of prayer is, appears, in
that the Lord himself witnesses our whole salvation to consist in the calling
upon his name, whereby he is wholly present with us: namely by his providence
and fatherly care by the which he watches over us: by his power, by the which
he sustaineth and succoureth our weakness, being every moment ready to
perish: and by his goodness and mercy, by the which he receives us into
favor, being miserably laden and pressed down with sin. And hereby grows
singular rest and quiernesse to our conscience. For when we have disclosed to
him our necessity, herein we find most joyful and perfect quietness, that
none of our evils are hidden from him, whom we are persuaded to bee-both most
willing and also most able to help us.

Now that our prayers may be made in such wise as it ought to be, first we must
see that we be in heart and mind no otherwise prepared, then be comes those
that enter into talk with God, as we are taught, Eccl 28 Before thou pray
prepare thy self, and be not as one that tempreth God.

We must consider therefore when we pray in whose presence we stand, to whom
we speak and what we desire. We stand in the presence of the almighty
Creator of heaven and earth, and all things therein contained: to whose eternal
Majesty innumerable thousands of Angels do assist, serve, and obey: we speak
unto him, who knows the secrets of our hearts: before whom nothing is more
odious the hypocrisy and dissimulation: we ask those things which be most to
his glory, and the comfort of our consciences. We must therefore diligently
endeavor our selves to remove all such things as may offend his divine
Majesty. And first, that we be free from all worldly cares and fleshly
cogitations, whereby our minds are carried hither and thither, and being drawn
out of heaven, and from the pure beholding of God, are pressed down to the
earth.

And here let us call to mind how irreverently we abuse the great goodness of
god, calling us into familiar talk with him, whe^h we have not that reverent
fear of his sacred Majesty, that we would have of an earthly creature, or a
worldly prince: but suffering our hearts to be carried away with wandering
thoughts and worldly imaginations, are otherwise occupied, and forsake him in
the mids of our prayer.

As God is a spirit, so will he be worshipped in spirit and truth: that is,
in the inward affections of the heart, and with a true, faithful, and unfeigned
kind of worship. And therefore as at all other times he requires the heart,
so specially, in the time of prayer, when we show our selves in his presence,
and enter into communication with him: and thereupon when he promises to hear
all those that call upon him he makes a restraint and says, that call upon
him in truth. Seeing therefore that the chief duty of prayer consists in the
heart, we must with our whole heart pour out our prayers unto God the searcher
of hearts, and with a sincere, unfeigned, and ardent affection and opening of
our heart before god call upon him, or else we shall not find him.

Let us know therefore, that none prepare themselves rightly to prayer, but
such as have a reverend fear of Gods Majesty, which they cannot have that
come not to i^ unburdened of earthly cares and affections And this is it that
is meant in the Scriptures, by the lifting up of hands, that we should
remember our selves to be far off from God, unless we lift up our hearts and
minds also on high. And therefore it is said in the Psalm. ^sal. 25
To thee have I lifted up my soul. (...) Scripture uses also this manner of
speech, To lift up prayer: that they which des^^e to be heard of God, should
not have their minds carried away with earthly cogitations and vanity. And
though it be hard to be so bent to prayer, but that we shall find that many
by-thoughtes will creep upon us to hinder our prayer: yet the more hard it is,
the more earnestly we must wrestle to overcome al lets, and hindrances, and
labor withinward groaninges unto the Lord, that he will link our hearts fast
unto him, and not suffer us to be led away from him, Psalm. 86.
by the vain suggestions of Satan, who at all times compassing us about, is
never more busy, then when we address our selves to prayer, secretelie and
subtillie creeping into our breasts, and calling us back from God, so that
oftentimes, when we with all reverence should speak to God, we find our
hearts, talking with the vanities of the world, or with the foolish
imaginations of our own hearts.

Finally, we must be in christian charity, love and concord with all men seeking
unfeigned, hearty and brotherly reconciliation, if we have offended any man,
before we enter into prayer, or else God will not hear our prayers: yea they are
otherwise execrable, and full of damnable hypocrisy in Gods sight. And this
that is spoken of prayer, may be said also of hearing of Gods word, or any
other service of God.

We must therefore lay aside all malice, envy, wrath, grudge, contention,
wrangling, dissimulation, all guilefull, crafty, and subtle dealing, 1 Pet. 2.
and with a single heart do to other, as we would they should do to us,
Peter wills, that such as have once tasted how good and bounteous the Lord
is and are become new creatures by the heavenly regeneration, through the
doctrine of the gospel, should like holy and innocent babes, lay aside all
such works of the flesh, which do deprive a man of the kingdom of God, Galat.
5.
And Saint Paul commands us, that laying aside those cursed works of
darkness, we should in the steed thereof, put on (even as the elect of God,
holy and beloved) tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any have
a quarrel to another, as Christ forgave us, end above all these things (says
he) put on love, which is the bond of perfection, and let the peace oh God
rule in your hearts when ye shall stand and pray (says S^. Mark) forgive,
Mark, 11
if ye have any thing against any man, that your Father also which is in
heaven, may forgive you your trespasses^ for if ye will not forgive, your
father which is in heaven will not pardon you your trespasses.

Moreover, we must have such a feeling of our own misery and wretehednes, as
may work in us an earnest sorrow and vexation of mind for the same. Example
whereof we may see in the dear servants of God, when they say, that out of
the deep deepenesse, and out of the mids of the jaws of death, they utter
unto the Lord a sorrowful voice. He that desires mercy must have a feeling of
his own misery. And therefore says David: Heal my soul O Lord, for I have
sinned against thee. There is nothing in my flesh (says he) because of thy
displeasure, neither in there any rest in my bones, because of my sin.

This anguish and sorrow stirs up in Gods children a fervent desire to
obtain comfort, help and succor at Gods hand, and therefore such as f^ele
themselves oppressed with great calamities, having by the help of man no hope
of deliverance, do cry unto God with afflicted hearts, as David did in his
distress: My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: and, as the
heart being vvounded brai^th for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after
thee, O God.

This is that godly sorrow which S. Paul says, works in Gods children
repentance to salvation. The Lord is nigh to them (says David) that are of a
contrite heart, and will save all such as are afflicted in spirit. To him
will I look, even unto him (says the Lord) that is afflicted and broken
hearted, and trembles at my words. Therefore David calls the time of
trouble, the fit and convenient time for the faithful to fly unto God by
prayer. And albeit they be not at al times in like distress or continually
groaning under the burden of present evils: yet must they needs be ever in
dread of new dangers, and carefully ^ffraid of further troubles to follow. As
trouble and fear therefore are the very spurs to ^ir them up to hearty and
fervent prayer: ^o by occasion thereof they have more free access unto God, as
though he did thereby call them unto him.

This godly sorrow for sin, and fervent desire and longing for Gods loving
mercy and favor, comes not of our selves, but of the special goodness of
God: for we are of our selves dull and without al lust to pray, ^ea, so great is
our imperfection, that we know not how to pray as we ought, and therefore
the spirit helps our infirmities, inst^ucteth us what is right, and guides
our affections. He makes intercession for the Saints (says (...). Paul)
according to the will of God, and that with Vighes and gr^anings which
cannot be expressed: that is, he stirs up our he arts, gives us a desire
and boldness to pray, and causes us to mourn when we are by any means
hindered from it, and feel not our selves moved thereunto with such fervent
zeal and affection as we should be.

Now although we know that it is the only work of the holy Ghost, thus to
mo^e and incline our hearts to prayer, notwithstanding we may not be negligent
and slothful to dispose and stir up our selves thereunto, but rather
contrariwise, so often as we feel our selves cold, and not disposed to prayer
as we ought to be, we must make our supplication unto the Lord, that it
would please him to inflame us with his holy spirit, whereby we may be framed
to pray with such feruencie of mind, as we ought to do.

When we are cast down by the sense and feeling of our own infirmity, sin
and misery: Yet must we pray (notwithstanding) in sure and steadfast hope to
obtain our requests. These be things in deed contrary in show, to join with
the feeling of the just vengeance of God, sure affiance of favor, which things
do yet very well agree in that it is the goodness of God only that raises
us up being oppressed with our own evils, from the which of our selves we
cannot rise. For as repentance and faith are knit as companions together,
(albeit the one drives us down with fear, and the other lifteh us up again
with comfort) so in praying they must needs go together. And this agreement
David expresses in few words. Psalm. 5.
I will (says he) in the multitude of thy mercies enter into thy house, and
in the temple of thy holiness I will vv^rship thee with fear.

Therefore when we are once touched with true repentance and feling of our own
misery, we must withal have such a persuasion of Gods favor and mercy
toward us in all our prayers, that they shall be accepted of God so far forth
as it shall be necessary for ^s. 1. John. 5
This is the assurance* says S. John, that we have in God; that if we ask
any thing according to his will he hears us. If we have not a sure ^rust
and confidence in the mercy and promises of God, it is impossible to make our
prayer to him aright: and whosoever doubts whether God hears his prayer,
that man obteineth nothing: to such prayers God has made no promise. But
contrariwise he says, whatsoever ye shall a^ke in prayer, if ye believe,
Matt. 21
ye shall receive it. And again, Whatsoever ye desire, Mark. 11
believe that ye shall obtain it: and it shall be done unto you. Ask, says
Saint James, in faith and waver not, for he that vvauereth, Iame. 1
is like to the waves of the sea, which are tossed of the vvind and carried
away. And why should we waver or doubt seeing the holy scriptures testify
of God, that he is faithful, just and true in all his words and promises,
saying. The Lord is faithful in all his words, he will ever be mindful
of his covenant: the truth of the Lord endures for ever*

And although our faith be not so strong, and therefore our prayer so hearty and
zealous as it ought to be: yea, though our faith be faint and cold, yet let us
hold fast this principle, that our prayers are not frustrate or in vain.

For our comfort herein we have an example in the father which brought his
son first to the Apostles and afterward to Christ and said. Psalm. 51.
If thou can Lord, help: and yet afterward he acknowledged the weakness
of his faith, and desired to be made strong. I believe, Lord (says he) help
my vnleefe. How often do the children of God complain of this imbecillitie
and weakness of faith? Such as are exercised in true prayer do feel, that in
craving of God the forgiveness of their sins, they bring scarslie the tenth
part of that sacrifice which David speaks of, where he says: An acceptable
sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit: Mark. 9
a broken and an humble heart, O God, thou vvilt not despise. Many times they
are driven to wrestle with their own dullness and coldness in prayer: Many
times their minds slip aside and wander away in vanity: Many times they
feel not their own lack and misery to prick them sharply enough to
prayer: yea, and many times they are so beaten down with the sense and feeling
of their own sin and misery as though they were forsaken of God, and their
faith utterly extinguished.

In what horror and anguish of heart was David when he said unto the Lord?
Why loest thou reject my soul? Psalm. 88.
Why hidest thou thy ^ace from me? Psalm. 39.
And again, Cease from me until I go away and be not. Whereby it might
seem, that he (like a desperate man) desires nothing else, but that the hand of
God ceasing, he might rot in his evils: but it is not so. For he says it not,
for that he would have God to depart from him, as the reprobate do: but only
he complains, that the wrath of GOD was too heavy for him to bear. A hard
temptation is it when the faithful are compelled to cry: Psalm. 80.
How long ^vilt tho^ be angry against the prayers of thy servants? Lamen. 3
As though their very prayers made God more angry, So when Jeremy says, The
Lord has shut out my prayer, no doubt he was shaken with a vehement pang of
temptation.

These are the imperfections of Gods children, which even in believing and
hoping, do oftentimes utter some unfaithfulness, and in the very remedies
fall into new diseases: for there is no prayer they make, which the Lord would
not woorthily loath and abhor, if he should not wink at their spots and
imperfections. And such example are common in the Scriptures.Whereby w^ see
that the Lord oftentimes suffers his to be grieuouslie tempted and afflicted,
and ^ideth from them the comfort of his spirit, a^ though they were clean
forsaken, but to their great consolation in the end.

This is the school wherein the wisdom of God nurtureth and tries her
children, (...) we may see, Ecclesi. 4. First she will vval^ with them
(says) he by crooked ways, and bring them unto fear and dread, and torment
the^ with their discipline, until she have tried their souls, and have
proved them by her judgments then vvil she return the straight way uni^
them, and comfort them, and show them her secrets, and heap upon them the
treasures of knowledge and understanding of righteousness. Thu^ we see the
state of Gods children, th^^ when the Lord has showed them what the^ are of
themselves by the fight and horror of their sins, and terror of Gods
judgment for the same: then will he show them what they are in Christ as
Esaias says For a time, a little while I have forsaken th^^ but I vvil gather
thee together in wonderful mercies. In a short time of wrath I hid (...)
face a while from thee, but I will have mercy ^n thee for ever, says the
Lord thy redeemer Such is the loving kindness and mercy of God toward the
afflicted, when they are sorry for their sins, lamenting and mourning in
their hearts, to be delivered from the same that they might serve God in the
freedom of conscience.

This is that mourning, this is that hunger and thirst that Christ speaks of:
Blessed are they that mourn, Math. 5
for they shall be comforted: blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

God for his truth sake, will put the righteousness of christ on them, and
wash their unrighteousness away in his blood. Esai. 42.
The bruised Reed will he not break, and the smoking Flax vvil he not
quench. The afflicted, the heavy and broken hearted, the vveake and feeble
will he not forsake: Yea, be they never so feeble and so frail, yet so long
as this lust, desire and mourning to be delivered from their sin and
misery, remains in them, God sees not their sins, reckneth them not, nor
lays them not to their charge, for his trueths sake and love to Christ, he
is not a sins in the sight of God, that would be no sinner. He that would
be delivered, has his heart loosed already, his heart sins not, but
mourns, repents, and consents to the law and will of God, and justifies
God, this is, he bears record that God which made the law is righteous and
just: and such an heart trusting in Christ's blood, in Christ's righteousness,
is accepted for righteous, and his weakness, infirmity and frailty is
pardoned, and his sins not looked upon, until god put more strength in him:
the increase whereof he shall daily feel in such sort, that at length he shall
in all troubles be able to say with David: Psalm. 23
If I should go through the shadovv and dangers of Death, I vvil not fear
whatsoever happen.

Now to stir up our hearts in consideration of our great misery and
necessity, to a more fervent prayer, the Lord himself has commanded us to
call upon him for help ^and succor. Therefore let us have the commandments
of God always in our sight touching prayer, and whiles we pray let (...) call
them to our remembrance. Ask, seek knock, Math. 7
vvatch and pray. Call upon me ( says god) in the day of thy trouble.
Psalm. 50.
Pray alvvay vvit^ all manner of prayer and supplication, Ephesians. 6.
and vvate^ thereunto with all diligence. Rejoice alvva^^ pray continuaellie,
1. Tim, 5.
in all things be thankful, (...) this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
tovvard^ you. Col. 4.
Continue in prayer, and vvatch in the sa^ unto thanksgiving. Philip. 4
Let your requests be shevved unto God in prayer and supplication, vvi^^ giving
of thanks.

And this we are also no less bound to do by the commandment, whereby we
are forbidden to take the name of God in vain. For in that we are there
forbidden to take the name of God in vain, we are commanded also to take and
to use it to his glory, giving unto him the praise of all goodness, help,
and succor, whilst we ask and look for the same at his hand. Wherefore
except we ^lie unto him in our trouble and necessity, except we call upon him
for releese and succor, we provoke his displeasure no less, then if we should
make unto our selves Idols, or worship strange gods: for in the contempt of
every one of the commandments, we show like contempt and disobedience to the
will of God, and all those sentences which command us to call upon God, do
appertain unto this commandment: Thou shall not ^ake the name of the Lord
thy God in vain: and so prayer is a work and chief service belonging to this
commandment. We may not therefore think that there are no sins but
Idolatry, murder, theft whoredom, and such like, but that it is undoubtedly
a great sin also, not to render this service to GOD, that is, not to pray, not
to ask, not to look for help from God in our necessities, not to render
thanks for the benefits we have received.

Therefore if our unworthiness at any time do cry out against us, stop or fear
us in such ^orte that our consciences are astonished and fly from God: if we
doubt whether God has respect to our paiers groannings and tears, we must set
before our eyes, how that we are commanded, though we be never so unworthy, and
our sins never so many and great to pray for reconciliation, Gods favor,
and forgiveness of our sins. For else, whereas God commands us to abstain
from theft, murder, whordome, etc. we may in like sort excuse our selves and
say, that we are unworthy to obeie Gods commandments: great is our iniquity,
and manifest is our contempt and despising of God, when we neglect and delaie
to call for his help. Such as fly unto God therefore, to call upon him in
their necessities, obeie his will, and find therein no small consolation,
knowing that thereby they do unto him most acceptable service, for as much as
he pronounces that nothing is to him more acceptable, then obedience to his
will and commandment.

As we are commanded of God boldly and without all respect of our own
unworthiness, to come unto him as a merciful father, and one that knows our
necessity, and pittieth our misery: so has he promised very graciously to
hear us, and grant our requests. And hereof rises yet a far more
comfortable and greater consolation, wherein con^isteth our whole co^^idence and
trust of obtaining succor and mercy at Gods hand. Wherefore he allureth us
with many sweet promises to call upon him. Mat. 7
Ask, says he, and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you: ye shall cry unto me, Iere. 25.
and I will hear you, ye shall seek me, Psalm. 50.
and ye shall find me. Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 145.
and I will deliver thee. The Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him,
that call upon him in truth: he does the vvil of them that fear him, Psalm. 91
and he will hear their prayers. He shall call upon me, and I will hear
him: I will be with him in his trouble, I vvil deliver him and glorify him.
Esaias. 65.
At the voice of thy cry he will certainly have mercy on thee, Romans 8
when he hears thee he will answer thee. He that is lord over all, Psalm.
145.
is rich and bountiful toward them that call upon him. He will fulfill
the desire of them that fear him, Esai. 6^
he vvil hear their cry, and will save them. And God to declare his
readiness in hearing of sinners, says: Before they cry I will answer, and
vvhiles they are yet thinking what to speak, I vvil hear.

Among many sweet promises of GOD, though these might be sufficient to provoke
us to fervent and hearty prayer, yet there be certain other notable and most
comfortable promises, which we should specially hauein remembrance, Luke. 12.
as these: If ye which are evil can give good gifts to your children, havv
much more shall your heavenly father give the holy Ghost to them that desire
him? ^ccle. 2.
Consider the old generation, and mark them well? was there ever any
confounded that put their trust in the Lord? or who has continued in his
fear and was forsaken? or whom did he ever despise that called upon him? And
of all other that is the most notable, which by the Prophet Joel is added
immediately after, the prophecy of that horrible destruction that was at
hand, saying; Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

Here let us consider the order of promises, which pertain either outwardly
to the body or inwardly to the soul. Which part (the soul I mean) because
it is much more precious than the other, we must first crave such things as
properly belong to the salvation thereof. But first of all confessing our
sins unto God with most humble and penitent hearts, let us set before us the
promises of remission of the same. For this sentence is true: God hears no
sinners: that is, such as delight and continue in sin. Wherefore in all other
prayers, yea when we be about to ask any other things, whatsoever they be,
let us first think of the remission of sins, having always in our sight some
comfortable promises thereof as this: If we confess and acknovvledge our
sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive our offenses, 1. John. 1
and to cleanse us from all iniquities. And hereunto let us crave the light of
the holy Ghost, to kindle and confirm in us the true knowledge of God. Let us
pray for the continuance of Gods holy word and Gospel among us; for the
enlarging of his kingdom, and the advancing of his glory. Let us beg the gift
of faith, repentance, fear, patience, prayer, hope, love, joy, peace of
conscience, with such other fruits of the spirit, and for everlasting life.

And here also we must remember that we do not only call our selves
continually to account for our new sins, craving at gods hand mercy and
forgiveness of the same, but also for those sins which might seem to have
been long ago forgotten; Psalm. 51.
as David having confessed an heinous offense, by that occasion returns even
to his mothers womb, wherein he had gathered the infetion heaping together the
sins of the whole life. Even so in another place when he asks another thing
he says, Remember not the sins of my youth: remember me according to thy
mercy, Psalm. 25
for thy goodness sake, O lord. Again, Look upon mine affliction and
travel, and forgive all my sins.

When we have thus prayed for things pertaining to the soul, and to the
kingdom of God, we must pray also for corporal benefits, as well common as
private, as peace and tranquillity of those Countries which give harbrough to
the true professors of the gospel and godly congregations, being in this life,
as Daniell in the mids of the Lions, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, says
David, Also for defense from misery, Psalm. 88.
deliverance from trouble, for happy success in the works of our vocation,
for health, living, protection of life, goods, name, etc.

And although the Lord knows before we ask what we have need of, and is
ready to give liberally, yea and does give oftentimes undesired* and
furthermore has promised, that seeking first the kingdom of god and the
righteousness thereof all other things should be given us: yet he commands us
to ask corporal benefits, and that for three causes.

First, that we should know that he is the author and giver thereof, and
therefore should not only be thankful for the same, but also stirred up
thereby to seek, love, and worship him.

Secondly, that we should be well persuaded of his good providence toward us,
Joshua. ^1.
when we understand that he does not only promise that he will never fail
us, but also has his hand always streched out to help them that call upon him.

Thirdly, that our faith of reconciliation and forgiveness of sins should be
exercised through the asking of those corporal things.

And herein we must specially and above al things seek the glory of God, and
therefore we must pray for these corporal things in such sort, that we may
offer therewith our obedience unto God. Here of we have examples of Christ when
he said, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless
not as I vvil, but as thou vvilt. with this obedience to the will of God spoke
David, when he desired to be brought again into his kingdom saying, If I shall
find favor in the sight of the lord, he will bring me again: ^^ Reg. 15
but if he shall say unto me, thou do not please me, Job. 3.
I am ready let him do as it seems good. And Job says, Though he kill me yet
will I put my trust in him.

Therefore for as much, as we do know that it is the lot of Gods children to
be alwa^e under the cross, and therefore concerning those corporal benefits,
we know not how, or what to ask as we ought: we must herein offer our
obedience unto God, abiding his good will and pleasure so long as it shall see
me good unto him to exercise us in the want thereof, who suffers us sometime
to be afflicted for our chastisment, and for the probation of our countenance,
and also that we may receive with greater gladness (if to his divine wisdom
it seem expedient for us) that which with ardent desire we long looked for. S.
Paul says: When we are judged, 1. Cor. 15
we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the
world. But when we pray for spiritual things we must ask them absolutely and
without condition: for hereunto do pertain the chief promises of the
gospel, of the which God would have us most assured. Verily verily I say
unto you (says Christ) he that believes in me, John. 6.
has everlasting life. As sure as I live (says the Lord) I will not the
death of a sinner, Eze. 33.
but that he return and live.

To the promise of God we must join examples, whereby we learn that God has
hard and helped those that call upon him. For all deliverances, whether they
be of other (whereof the scripture are full) or of our selves (whereof we have
experience) are examples of Gods promises. Hereby did David comfort himfelfe in
the anguish and heaviness of his heart, Psalm. 77
saying: I will remember the works of the Lord, and call to mind thy
vvoonders of old time. Thou have mightily delivered thy people, Psalm. 31.
even the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Again, I will be glad and rejoice in
thy mercy: for thou have seen my trouble, thou have known my soul in
adversity. And thus being warned both by promises and examples, let us learn
to cast our care upon the Lord, to call upon him, and to look for help at his
hand. So shall our faith by little and little be more firm and certain, and
our heart shall rest in hope and exspectation of Gods help.

But for as much as of our selves we are unworthy to appear in Gods sight,
whose terrible Majesty coming once into our mind, it is impossible but that
we should fly from him as a fearful Judge: therefore he has given unto us, a
Mediator, even our Lord Jesus, that he being a mean between God and us, might
change the throne of dreadful glory into the throne of grace, and that we by
his merits having access unto God, might have assured trust to find grace in
his sight. 1. Ioh. (...).
If any man sin, says S. John, we have an Advocate with the father, Jesus
Christ the just, Acts. 10
and he is the Reconciliation for our sins. To him, says Saint Peter, bear
all the Prophets witness that through his name at that believe in him shall
receive forginenesse of their sins. Ephesians. 5.
By whom, says Saint Paul, we have boldness and enteraunce in all
confidence through faith in him. Heb. 4.
And again. We have not an high priest which cannot have compassion on our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, sin excepted:
let us go 'boldlie therefore unto the throne of his grace, that we may
receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

And as we are commanded to call upon God, and have a promise also to be
heard: even so we are commanded to make our prayers unto him in the name, faith
and confidence of this our mediator, and we have no promise to be heard
without him: in whom are all the promises of God yea and Amen, 2. Cor. 1.
confirmed and fulfilled. Luke. 11
And no man comes to the father but by the son.

For he is our mouth whereby we speak to the father, he is our eye whereby
we see the father, and he is our right hand whereby we offer ourselves to the
father. Whatsoever therefore we ask in his name, we have a promise to
obtain it. John. 16.
Verili^, verili^, (says Christ) I say vntoyou whatsoever ye^ shall ask the
father in my name, he shall give it you: in my name, that is, for my sake:
your high Bishop praying for you. Hitherto ye have not asked any thing in my
name: John. 14.
ask and ye shall receive. In that day ye shall ask in my name, and what
soeuerye ask, I vvil do, that the father may be glorified in the son.

Of prayer there be two parts, petition and thankesguing. By petition we pour
forth out desires before God, requiring first those things that may set forth
his glory, and then such benefits as are profitable and necessary for us. By
giving of thanks, we praise and magnify his benefits bestowed upon us,
acknowledging that whatsoever good things we enjoy, we have received the^ of
his free goodness and liberality. Therefore David joined those two parts
together in one verse, when he says, Call upon me in the day of necessity:
Psalm. 50.
I will deliver theeand thou shall glorify me.

The scripture commands us to use both, and that continually. For our
necessity is so great, our life is so full of troubles and calamities, and so
many dangers hang over our heads every moment, that we have all cause
enough, yea, even the most holy with sighs and groanings continually to fly
unto God, and call upon him in most humble wise. But this we may better
perceive in things pertaining to the soul.

For when shall so many great sins, whereof we know our selves guilty, suffer
us to be without care and not to crave pardon of God for the same? when will
Satan give us rest and quietness? when will he cease to range about seeking
whom he may destroy? when shall our tentations give us truce, so that we shall
not need to hasten unto God for help? Finally, the desire of the kingdom and
glory of God ought to draw us wholly unto it, not by fits, but continually,
that all times should be fit and convenient for us to pray. Wherefore not
without cause we are so often commanded to pray continually. And though we
be not driven with like necessity at all times to pray: yet in this case S,
James teaches us what we ought to do. If any man be heavy or afflicted,
says he, let him pray, that is, let him crave Gods help and comfort: and
who so is merry, let him sing, that is, let him praise God.

Moreover, the benefits and blessings of God, are large and plentiful
toward us, which way soever we turn us, that we can never want matter and
occasion of praise and thanksgiving. And seeing we ought to acknowledge God to
be the author and giver of all good things, we should always receive the same at
his hand with thanksgiving: for to that end God continually bestows his good
blessings and benefits upon us that we should continually show forth his
praise, and be thankful unto him for the same and so we render unto him his due
honor. And S. Paul, when he says, that they are sanctified by the word and
prayer, signifies, that to us they are not holy and clean without the word
and prayer, and therefore David says, when he had felt the liberality of the
Lord, that there was put into his mouth a new song, that is a new occasion of
praise and thanksgiving. Whereby he signifies, that it is a wicked silence if
we pass over any of Gods benefits without praise, seeing that as often as he
does good unto us, so often he gives us occasion to speak good of him. We
should therefore continually, that is, as much as is possible, at all times, in
all places, and in things as occasions are continually offered unto us, lift up
our prayer unto God in craving help at his hand, and confessing his praise,
whereby we may both obtain of him all good things, and also praise and
magnify his name for all.

How this perseverance in prayer is required of us, Christ himself teaches
us by the parable of the three loaves, Luke. 11 18
and of the widdowe, and wicked Judge. VVherby we are taught to continue in
peaier, with all earnestnes and fervent supplication, and never to faint or
give over, until we be assured in our spirit that our prayers be heard.

The prayer of the humble ( says the Son of Sirach) goes through the
clouds, ^ccl. 35.
it cease not until it come near, and it will not depart until God the
most high God have respect thereto. Behold ( says David,) as the eyes of the
servants look unto the hand of their masters, Psalm. 123.
and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress of our eyes wait
upon the Lord our God until he have mercy upon us. And thus must we not
cease to do, until we may boldly say also with David: The Lord has heard
the voice of my weeping, the lord has heard my humble petition, the lord
has received my prayer.

Now concerning the form and manner of praying, least we should follow our
own fantasy, being of our selves so blind that we know not how to pray,
or what is meet and expedient for us: The Lord him self has sufficiently
instructed us: who as he has taught us throughout the whole Scripture, how
and for what things we ought to pray, so has he set forth one manner of
prayer, in the which he has briefly comprehended all such things as we
ought, yea, or in any wise may ask of God. Wherein he has expressed what
is due, pleasing and acceptable to him, what is necessary for us, and what he
will grant: so that there is nothing herein omitted, that might be thought
upon to the praise and glory of God, or come into the mind of man for his
profit and commodity. And this is that prayer that our Lord Jesus Christ
taught his Disciples: when they asked of him how they should pray.

Whosoever therefore shall ask any thing that is not contained in this prayer,
they presume to add some thing of their own to the wisdom of God, they are
not obedient to his will: Mat. 9.
and they pray without faith, Luke. 11.
having no word of God to warrant them, and therefore they shall obtain
nothing. This prayer, says Tertullian, is the doctrine of the wisdom of God,
wherein he has taught whatsoever he willed, and willed whatsoever was
needful. Albeit we are not so bound to this form of prayer, that we should
not use any other kind of words then the Lord himself herein has used.
For there are elsewhere set forth in the scriptures, many prayers far
differing from this in words, and yet written by the same spirit, and very
profitably to be used of us. And many prayers also are continually vttred of
the faithful by the same spirit, which vary from the same in words. But this
is required of us, that none should look for, seek or ask any other thing at
all, then that which is briefly comprehended in this prayer, and which, though
it differ in words, yet differs not in sense and substance: like as it is
certain that all the prayers which are found in the scriptures, and which do
continually proceed from the heart of the faithful are referred by the direction
of Gods spirit unto this prayer, howsoever they differ in the variety of
words.

Many good and godly men, even in our days well exercised in prayer, have
left unto us most worthy examples and testimonies hereof, furnished with ample
and large matter to form holy and true prayers, and full of power to inflame
the heart to a fervent invocation of Gods holy name: whereof we have given
here some taste to the Godly, and specially to the simple, not yet well
exercised.

Read them, meditate, and pray, and ye shall find comfort in your souls.

A Meditation concerning prayer.
THe mind of men has so large roomth to receive good things that not king in
deed can fully sit it, but only God, whom thou the mind fully possesses,
when it fully knows him, fully loves him, and in all things in framed
after his mill.

They therefore (dear Lord God) that are thy children, and have taken somewhat
of thy goodness, do perpetually sigh, that is, do may until they come
thereto: and in that they love thee also above all things it wonderfully
wounds them, that other men do not so, that is love thee, and (...) for thee
with them.

Whereof it comes to (...), that they are inflamed with continual prayers
and desires, that thy kingdom might come every where, and thy goodness might
be both known, and in life expressed of every man

And because there are innumerable many things, which as well in themselves,
as in others, be against thy glory, they are kindled with continual prayer
and desire, sighing unspeakably in thy sight, for the increase of thy spirit.
And sometimes, when they see thy glory more put back, than it was wont to
be, either in themselves, or in any other, then are they much more disquieted
and vexed,

But because they know, that thou do rule all things after thy good will,
and that none other can help them in their need, they oftentimes do go
aside, al business laid apart, and give themselves to godly cogitations and
talk with thee, complaining to thee as to their Father, of those things that
grieve them, begging thereto, and that most earnestly, thy help, not only for
themselves, but also for others, specially for those whom singularly they
embrace in thee, and often do repeat and remember thy gracious benefits both
to others, and to themselves also: where through they are provoked to render to
thee hearty thanks, theirby being inflamed, as well assuredly to hope well
of thy good will toward them, and patiently to bear al evils, as also to
study and labor to mortify the affections of the flesh: and to order all
their whole life to the service of their brethren, and to the setting forth of
thy glory.

This they know is that prayer which thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord
commanded to be made to thee in the chamber, the door being shut. In this
kind of prayer he himself did watch often, even all the whole night. He^rein
was Paul frequent as all the Saints b^. This kind of prayer is the true
lifting up of the mind to thee. This stands in the affections of the heart,
not in words and in the mouth. As thy children be endued with thy spirit, so
frequent they this talk with thee. The more thy spirit is in theme, the more^
are they in talk with thee Oh give me plentifully thy spirits, which thou have
promised to power out upon all flesh, that thus I may with thy Saints talk
with thee night and day, for thy only beloved Sons sake, Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

Moreover, thy Saints, to provoke them to this kind of prayer, do use first
there necessity, which they consider in three sorts: inwardly concerning
their souls: outwardly, concerning their bodies: and finally concerning their
name and fame: whereto they add the necessity of these that he committed to
them: the necessity of thy Church, and of the common weal.

Secondly, they use thy commandments, which require them under pain of sin,
to pray to thee in all their need.

Thirdly, they use the consideration of thy goodness, which art naturally
merciful to young Ravens calling upon thee, much more then to them, for whom
Ravens and all things else were made: for whom thou have not spared thy dear
son, but given him etc.

Fourthly, they use the (...) sweet and free promises made to hear, and help
all them that call upon thee in Christ's name.

Fifthly, they use examples ho we that thou which art the GOD of all and rich
unto all them that call upon thee in Christ's name, have hard and helped others
calling upon thee.

Sixthly, they use the benefits given them before they asked, thereby not only
provoking them to ask more, but also certifying their faith, that if thou wast
so good to grant them many things vnaskt, now thou will not deny them any
thing they ask, to thy glory and their wealth.

Last of all, they use the reading and weighing of Psalms and other good
prayers, because they know that thereby peculiarly, besides the other
Scriptures* there is no small helpe^ as may appear by Paul Ephesians. ^. whereby
he wills the congregation to use Psalms, hi^^es, and spiritual songs, but
so that in the heart we would sing and say them. Not that thy children do
not use their tongues and words in praying to thee: for they do use their
tongues, speech, and words, to stir up their inward desire and feruencie
of the mind, full well knowing that else it were a plain mocking of thee, to
pray with lips and tongues only. Oh that I might feel now the spirit so
to affect me, that both with heart and mouth, I might heartily and in faith
pray unto thee.

Now concerning the things that are to be prayed for, thy children know, that
the prayer taught by thy son most surely and plainly does contain the same,
and therefore they often use it, first asking of thee their heavenly father,
through Christ, that thy name might every where be had in holiness and
praise: then, that thy kingdom by regeneration and the ministry of the
Gospel might come: and so thirdly* that willingly, perfectly, and
perpetual, they might study to do, yea do indeed, thy will with thy holy
and heavenly Angels, and spirits. These things they seek and pray for, namely
thy kingdom and thy rig^hteousnesse, before any worldly benefit.

After which petitions, because all things, yea even the benefits of this
present life do came, from thee, they do godly desire the same under the name
of daily bread, being instructed of thy wisdom, that after spiritual benefits
to ask corporal, is not unseemly unto thy children which know both spiritual
and corporal to come (...) thy mercy.

In the other petitions they prair for things to be taken from them,
beginning with forgiveness of sins, which were impudentlie prayed for, if
that, their hearts were not so broken, that they could forgive all things to
al men for their part. They add their profession, that is, charytie, whereby
they profess, that they have forgiven all offenses done to them.

How be it because it is not enough to have pardon of that which is past except
they be preserved from new offenses they pray thee, not to kind them into
temptation, by permitting them to the perverse suggestions of Satan, but
rather to deliver them from his importunity and power: understanding Satan
the author of all evil: Oh (dear God) that thou w^uldest endue me with thy
spirit of grace and prayer with thy children accordingly, to make this prayer
always whenever I do pray.

As for outward evils, so long as they do not (as it were) enforce thy people
to sin, in that Christian perfection does account them amongst thy
benefits. Thy Son has not taught thy Church to pray for the taking away of
them in their prayer: for here he has contained but those things for the
which all Christians generally and particularly may of faith pray at all times.

It often comes to pass, that exterior evils, because they be not evils
indeed, that is, they be not against Gods grace in us, therefore they cannot
of faith be prayed for, to be taken away: for thy children that have faith,
do always prefer thy judgment, before their own. The which judgment when
they know by that which happens to them, they submit themselves thereto wholly:
although the spirit make his unspeakable gronings to help their infirmities by
prayer, not to have them taken away, but that they might have strength, and
patience, to bear the burden accordingly. Which burden, if it be too heavy
in the bitter sense end feeling thereof, they in their preiers do complain
some thing, rather than pray to have it taken away, as our Savior did in* he
garden when he added to his complaint: Not my will, but thy will be done.

So do thy people in all their complaints add, Not as we will, but as thou will: For they are taught by thy spirit, no otherwise to pray for the taking
away of corporal evils, either from themselves, or from others, unless they
by the same spirit do certainly see the same to make to thy glory: as (...)
Apostles and scr^^ntes, when absolutely and without condition they did ask
health or miracle for any, when they healed or raised the dead^ by prayer: for
they knew nothing can be better than when it is according to thy will. Oh
that I might always know thy will in all things, and for ever apply myself
thereto.

Hereof it comes that thy saints and dear children, which love their
neighbors as themselves, do yet notwithstanding in their prayers ask
vengeance of some (as we may read in the Psalms of David) because in praying
and talking with thee, they see by thy holy spirit (for without it is no true
prayer) sometimes thy judgments upon some, which they perceive to sin to
death and therefore ought not to be praised for: because thy glory cannot die
for f^^th as it should be, without their destruction.

Thy will is always best, and the thing whereto they frame (...) their
desires. Therefore, when they perceive that it is decreed with thee, such and
such by their destruction to set forth more mightily thy glory, ^owe should
they but desire and pray for the same, and write as David has (...), that the
godly in reading and we^ing such prayers, might receive comfort, and the
ungodly be afraid: else* (...) that they perceive not so manifestly the
determined judgment of God, they in their prayers do most heartely pray for
them, (...) Samuel did for Saul, Moses for the Israelites, and Abraham for
the S^domite^* Oh good father, for thy merits sake, give me the (...) love of
mankind, but yet so that I may love (...) thee, and in thee, (...) always
prefer thy glory above all things, through Christ our Lord.

Now though thy children do know that thy will cannot but be done, and
nothing can be done, but that thou of thine own will have determined to do,
although no man should desire the same, yet are they earnest and frequent in
prayer: first to render obedience to thee: which requirest prayer as a
spiritual service to thee: secondly, because thou have ordained prayer to be
as an instrument and mean, by the which thou workest things with thee
already decreede and determined.

Thy children do use prayer to offer thee their service, if it shall please
thee to use the same: and as they do eat and drink, which is a mean
ordained of thee for the conversation of their life, not looking thereby to
lengthen their days above their bounds, which already thou have appointed,
but as it becomes them, to use the means, which thou have ordained to serve
thy providence: so do they (as men herein not curious to know thy providence
further than thou reuealest it) use prayer as a mean by the which thou art
accustomed to work many of thy childrens desires, that according to thy good
will, thou may use the same.

They do not think a mutability in thee (for thou art God, and art not
changed: with thee there is no variableness) and therefore they pray not as
men which would have thy determination and ordinances (which are in most
wisdom, and mercy) to be ^^tered, but rather that they might submite their
wills to thine, and make them more able to bear thy will and pleasure,

They know thou have promised to help them calling upon thee: wherefore they
doubt not, but so thou will do, and therefore pray accordingly.

They love thee heartily, and therefore they cannot but desire much to talk
with thee, that is, to pray: even as a well manered and loving wife will not
take upon her to ask any thing of her husband at all, but that she hops he
will take in good part, and do of his own free will, although she had spoken
nothing thereof.

When she knows what her husbands will is in things she gladly talks with
him thereof, and according as she sees he is disposed to do, she will often
desire him to do it. Even so thy children (I say) which heartily love thee,
in that they know thy wisdom and will is best, how can they but often talk
with thee, and desire thee to do that which they know is best, which they know
also thou would do, if none should ask or pray for the same?

Thy children use prayer, as a mean, by the which they see plainly thy power,
thy presence, thy providence, mercy and goodness toward them, in granting
their petitions, and by prayer they are confirmed of them al. Yea thy children
use prayer to admonish them, how that all things are in thy hands. In prayer
they are (as it were) of thee put in mind of th^se things which they have
done against thee, their good Lord. By reason whereof repentance ensues, and
they conceive a purpose to live more purely ever afterward, and more
heartily to apply themselves to all innocence and goodness.

Who now considering so many great commodities to come by reason of prayer,
would marvel, why thy children are much in prayer, and laboring to provoke
others thereunto. For as none that is a ^^ter to any other will use any thing
which might offend or hinder his suite* so no man that uses prayer, will
flatter himself in any thing that should d^^please thee to whom by prayer he
moves suit, whenever he prays: so that nothing is a more provocation to
all kind of godliness than prayer is.

As concerning outward things which thy children pray for, although they know
thy will and decree is not variable, and thy purpose must needs come to pass,
yet do they receive by their prayer no small commodity. For, either they
obtain their requests or not. If they do obtain them, then prove they by
experience that thou do the will of them that fear thee, and so they are
more kindled to love and serve thee. And in deed for this purpose thou art
wont, when thou will do good to any, to stir up their minds to desire the
same good of thee, to the end that both thou and thy gifts may and be so
much the more magnified and set by of them, by how much they have been
earnest ^uters and petitioners for the same. For how can it but inflame them
with love toward thee, to perceive and feel thee so to care for them, hear
them, and love them?

If they do not obtain that they pray for, yet undoubtedly they receive great
comfort, to see that the evils which press them, and whereof they complain
still, do not oppress and overcome them, and therefore they receive strength
to bear the same the better. O good father help me that I might heartily love
thee, complain to thee in all my needs, and always by prayer to power out my
heart before thee, Amen.

John Bradford.

A meditation upon the Lords prayer.
Our Father. Exodus 1.
THou good Lord, which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that is
therein, Genesis 3.
together with thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, Genesis 12. 22. 23. 24. 25.
and with thy holy spirit, thou the same God which openedst thy self to Adam
by thy promise: Exodus 13. 14. 15.
thou the god of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: thou which broughtest thy people of
Israel forth of Egypt with a mighty hand, Exodus 19. 20.
and a stretched out power: thou which give the Law upon Mount Sinai: thou
which spakest by thy prophets: and last of all in these latter days. by thy
dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, Heb. 1
whom thou would should be made a second Adam, 1. Co. 15
that as by the first we are children of wrath, Romans 5.
carnal and full of concupiscence, so by him we might be made children of
grace, and spiritual by communicating with him the quality, merits, virtues
and grace of his flesh, through the operation of his holy spirit, as he
communicated with us the substance of our flesh, in the womb of the Virgin
Marie, in the operation of the same holy spirit, Math. 1.
being that blessed seed which was promised to Adam, Luke. 1
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Ge. 3. 12 26. 28
and David, which should bruise the serpents head, Psalm. 89.
which should bring the blessing on all nations, 2 Reg. 1
which should reign ^uer his house for ever, Luke. 1.
and mightily ^uercome Psalm. 110
thine and out enemies, as in deed he did by his incarnation, nativity,
circumcision, Romans 8.
exile, baptism, fasting temptation, doctrine, miracles, workings, agonies,
bloody prayer, passion, death, resurrection, and ascension, Mat. 24
and yet he still does by his mediation and intermission for us, 2 Cor. 15
and at the length will on all parts fully accomplished by his com ming to
judgment which will be suddenly in the twinckeling of an ^ie, 1. These. 4
in the blast of a trumpet, 2. Cor. 5.
and shoute of an Archangell, Exodus 32 33.
when he shall be seen with thousands of Saints, Joel. (...).
and innumerable thousands of Angels, Psalm. 15.
all the whole world being on fire and all the people that ever were, Genesis 6.
are: or shall be, then standing before his tribunal or iudgmente seat, to
render an account of that they have done in this body, be it good or bad: Thou
(I say) this God which are holy, righteous, true, wise, pure, chaste, mighty,
merciful, good, gracious, an hater of sin, and a re^enger of unrighteousness,
etc. Our heart is by nature so c^rrupt and vnserchablie evil, that out of it
springs all wicked concupiscence, so that the inclination thereto is pro^e to
evil, ever from (...) birth up: and our mind and understanding is so darkened
that of our self we cannot perceive those things that be of god as is all the
wisdom which we receive from Ad^m naturally or otherwise attain by labor or
study be fore regeneration. Causes ^o c^fort our faith that God is our father.
would that I which am borne in sin, and conceived in iniquity, which by
nature am a child of width, and in whom dwells continual enmity against
thee. that I which (...) nothing but sin: and one that does evil always
before thee, should call thee and believe thee, this God and Father of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to be in ve^ie deed my father: that is thou
would I should be most assured, that thou of thine own good will which thou
barest to me wards before I was, yea before the world was, have in Christ
chosen me to be thy Child^, and through him art become my most loving Father,
from (...) I should ^ooke for all good things, and be most certainly per^^^aded
that look how much thou art more than a man, so much thy love and fatherly
providence toward me, passes the love and prouidance of any father toward
his child, in loving me, caring how to help me, providing for me,
nurturing me, and helping me in all my needs. So certain thou mouldest have
me to he of this, that to doubt of it does most displease thee, and
dishonor thee, as though either thou were not true, or not able to do these
things, (...) else becamest not my father in respect of thine own goodness
in Christ only, but also in respect of my worthiness and descrets.

And that I should not (...) or doubt of this that thou art my dear Father,
and I thy child for ever, through Jesus christ, it (...) required in the first
(...) says: I am the Lord thy God, thou sha^^ have none other Gods but me.

Again, thy son does here command me to call the by the^name of father.
Moronuer in the first article of my belief: I profess the same, in saying: I
believe in God the Father almighty. Besides this, there are many other things
to confirm me he erein, as the creation and government of the world
generally, and of every creature particularly, for all is made and kept for
man, and so for me, to serve me for my commodity, necessity, and admonition.
Again, the creation of me, in that then have made me after thy things, having
a reasonable soul, body, shape, etc. where thou might have made me a Toad,
a Serpent, a Swine, deformed, frantic etc. Moreover, thy wonderful
con^etuation, nourishing and keeping of me (...) in my infan^^, (...), etc. An
these (I say) should confirm my faith in thy fatherly love.

But of al things, the opening of thy self by thy word and promise of grace
made after man's fall, first to Adam, then to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and so to
other, being published by the Prophets from time to time, and last of all
accomplished by thy dear Son Jesus Christ, in whom thy promises are yea and
Am^n: the opening of thy self thus (I say) in and by Christ, is the most
thief and sure certificat, that thou art my father for his sake: and I thy
dear child, although of my self I am most unworthy. For thou according to thy
promises, have not spared thy dear Son Jesus Christ, but given him to the
death of the Cross for my sins Thou would he should he made flesh of our
flesh, and blood of our blood, in the womb of the Virgin Marie, by the
operation of thy holy spirit, that we by the working of the same spirit,
through the merrits of his flesh and blood, might be made flesh of his flesh
and blood of his blood: that is, as he has the substance of our flesh and
blood: men so we might have and for ever enjoy in him and through him the
qualities, virtues, and gifts of righteousness, holiness, innocence,
immortality, and glory, wherewith he has endued our nature in his own person
for us all, that as now in faith and hope we have the same, so in his coming,
we might fully enjoy them in very deed: Phil. 3.
for then shall our bodies now vile, be like to his glorious body.

Herein appears thy love, 1. Ioha. 3
not that we loved thee, but that thou louedst us, and have given thy Son for
us. Herein eocst thou commend unto us thy love, that when wet were yet
sinners, Christ thy dear son died for us, Romans 5.
so that nothing should separate us from thy love in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
neither affliction, anguishe, Romans 5.
persecution, famine, neither life nor death, etc. For when we were enemies,
we were reconciled unto thee by the death of thy son, much more we being
reconciled, shall be saved in this life.

And that I should not doubts hereof, but certainly be persuaded all this to
pertain to me where I might have been borne of Turks and infidels, lot thou
would I should be borne of Christian Parents, What Baptism is and what
it requires
brought into thy Church by Baptism, which is a Sacrament of adoption and
requires faith as well of remission of my sins, as of sanctification and
holiness, to be wrought of thee in me by thy grace and holy spirit.

Where I might have been bo^e in an ignorant time and Region, thou would I
should be borne in this time and Region, wherein is more knowledge reueales,
than ever was here, or any place is.

where I might have been of a corrupt judgment, and entangled with many
errurs, lo, thou of thy goodness, as thou have reformed my judgment, so
do thou keep it, and now for the same judgments sake, do^st vouchsafe,
What is the effect or fruit that comes of this certain persuasion, that
God is our father.
somewhat by the Cross to try me. By all which things I should confirm my
faith of this, that thou always have been, art and wilt be for ever my dear
father.

In respect whereof, as I should be certain^ of salvation, and of the
inheritance (...) heaven for (...) should I be thankful, cast my whelt cant
on thee, trust to thee, and call on thee, with comfort and certain hope for
all things that I want.

For in that thou have given to me this benefit to be thy child, undeserved
and undesired on my behalf, simply and only in respect of thine own
goodness and grace in Christ, least at any time I should doubt of it how
should I but hope certainly that nothing profitable to me can be denied, in
that thy power in infinite? For as thy good will is declared in adopting me, so
nothing can be finally wanting in me, which may make for my weal, for then
should not thy power be almighty: and theref^re my belief requires that I
should believe in thee the father almighty.

In consideration whereof I should in all things behave my self as a child,
rejoice in thee, praise thee, trust in thee, fear thee, serve thee, love thee
call upon thee, etc.

But alas, how heaui^ hearted am I? Now unthankful am I? Now full of
unbelief, and doubting of this thy rich mercy: Now little do I love thee,
fear thee, call upon thee etc.

Oh be merciful unto me, forgive me good Father for thine o wne sake, and
grant me the spirit of thy children to reveal thy selte unto me, and Jesus
Christ thy dear Son our Lord, by whom we art made thy children, that I
may truly know thee, heartily love thee, faithfully, hang upon thee in all my
needs, with good hope call upon thee, tender faithfully this honor to thee,
that thou art my God and Father, and I thy dear Child through thy grace in
Christ, and so always be endued with an assured hope of thy goodness, and a
faithful obedient heart in all things to thy holy will.

At thy hands and from thee, as I must look for allthings, so come I unto
thee, and pray thee to give me these things, which thy dear children have,
and thou requirest of me that I may come and ask them of thee, as now I do,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

As by this word ( Father) I am taught to glory of thee and in thee, and all
that ever thou have (for thou art wholly mine, my Lord, my God, my father:) so
by this word ( Our) I am taught to glory of all the good that all and every of
thy servants that ever were, are, or shall be, had, have, or shall have. For now
I am taught to believe that thou have called me into the communion of thy
Church and people, whom hereby I perceive th^^ host commanded to be as
careful for me, as for themselves, and in all their prayers to be as mindful
of me, as of themselves.

Again, as by this word ( Father) I am taught to remember and render my duty I
ow to thee wards, faith, love, fear, obedience, etc. So by this word ( Our) I
am taught my duty toward thy people, to be careful of them, and to take
their sorrow, poverty, affliction, etc. as mine own, and therefore, to labor
to help them in heart and hand after my vocation and ability, utterly abhorring
all pride, self love, arrogancy, and contempt of any.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament, and to rejoice. To lament,
because I am so far from consideration, much more from doing my duty to
thy, people in thoughts, words and deeds. To rejoice, because I am called of
thee, and placed in the blessed society of thy Saints, and made a member and
citizen of the heavenly Jerusalem: and because thou have given in commandment
to all thy Church, to be as careful for me as for themselves.

But alas, how far am I heerefrom? As I am guilty of unthankfulness for
this thy calling me into the blessed communion of thy dear son and Church,
yea of thy self: so I am guilty of self love, unmercifulness, pride,
arrogancy, forgetfultnesse, and contempt of thy children: for else I could not
but be otherwise affected, and otherwise labor than I do.

Oh be merciful unto me good Father: forg^ue me and grant for Christ's sake,
that as my tongue scundeth this word Our, so I may in heart feel the true joy
of thy blessed compassion, and the true love and communion which thy children
have and feel toward* their brethern: that I may rejoice in all troubles in
respect of that joyful communion: that I may deny my self to honor thy
children upon earth, and endeavor my self to do them good for thy sake,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. I come only to thee, to give me that which I
cannot, nor must not elsewhere have, and thou requirest it of me, that
therefore I should as thy child, come and crane it to thy glory.

Which art in heaven. AS by these words Our Father, I am taught to glory and
rejoice for the blessed communion which I am called to with thee, dear Father,
with thy Christ, and with thy holy Church: so also am I here taught by these
words, which art in heaven, to rejoice in respect of the place and blessed
joys whereunto at the length in thy good time I shall come. For now I may
perceive, that as heaven is thy home, so is it mine also, being, as I am, thy
child through Christ, although here for a time I am bodily on earth and in
misery.

Again, by these words, which art in heaven, I am admonished, not only to
discern thee from earthly Fathers, and to know how that thou art Almighty,
present in all places, and of most purity to confirm thereby my faith, to be
provoked the more to fear thee, to reverence thee, etc. But also I am
admonished to judge of thy fatherly love, by heavenly benefits, and not by
corporal, simply and alonely: for oftentimes the wicked prosper more in the
world and have more worldly benefits then thy children. So that by this I see,
thou would pull up my mind from earth and earthly things, to heaven and
heavenly things, and that I should see further by corporal benefits thy
heavenly providence for me. For if thou place me thus on earth, and thus
bless me as thou do, and hitherto have done from my youth up, in that thou
art nothing so careful for my body, as for my soul: how should I but think
much of thy providence, for it is thy home where is such glory as the eye has
not seen, etc. Of which things these corporal benefits of thine given me on
earth, should be (as it were) inductions, and the taking of them away,
admonitions to be more mindful of permanent things and less mindful of
transitory things.

By reason hereof I have great cause to lament and to rejoice. To Lament.
because I am so earthly minded, so little desirous of my home so unthankful
for thy providence and fatherly protection here on earth.

To rejoice, because of thy home and the great glory thereof: because thou
do so provide for me here because thou do so cortect and chasten me, etc.
But alas, I am altogether a wretch, earthly, and unthankful, not only for
these corporal benefits, health, riches friends, fame, wisdom. etc. for thy
fatherly correction, sickness, temptation, etc. but also for thy heavenly
benefits, for Christ Jesus, for the promise of thy spirit, for thy Gospel,
etc. yea, even for heaven it self and thy whole glory, Psalm. 106.
as the Israelites were for the land of Canaan, and therefore never enjoyed
it, but perished in the wilderness, I am proud in prosperity and forget
thee, waxing secure and careless. I am impatient in thy cross and too much
consider worldly discommodities.

Oh dear father, forgive me for thy Christ's sake all mine unthankfulness,
love of this world, contempt and oblivion of the heavenly benefits, and grant
me thy holy spirit to illuminate the eyes of my mind with the light and
lively knowledge of thy presence, Col. 3.
power, wisdom, and goodness in thy creatures, Phillip. 3
but specially in Christ Jesus thy son, and so by the same spirit inflame
mine effections, that I may desire nothing on yarth but thee, and to be
present with thee, that my conversation may be in heaven continually, from
whence grant me still to look for the Lord Jesus, to make this my vile
body like unto his own glorious and immortal body, according to his own
power by which he is able to do all things. As thou have given me to be thy
child: so I pray thee, give me these things which be the properties of thy
children, given from thee in thy good time.

Hallowed be Thy name. Thy name is that whereby thou art known, for names
serve to decerne and know one thing from another. Now, though thou art known
by thy creatures, yet is this our corrupt estate, they serve but to make us
excuselesse. Romans 1.
Therefore most properly, lively, and comfortablie thou art known by thy holy
word, and specialy by thy promise of grace, and freely pardoning and receiving
us into thy favor, Psalm. 84. 138.
for Christ Jesus sake. How Gods name is hallowed.
For the which goodness in Christ, thou art praised and magnified, according
to thy name, that is, so much as men know thee in Christ, they magnify thee,
and praise thee, which here thou call hallowing or sanctifying. For that
thou art the more holy, not in respect of thy self, but in respect of men, who
the more they know thee, the more they cannot but sanctify thee, that is, they
cannot but as in themselves by true faith, love, fear, and spiritual service
honor thee: so also in their outward behavior, and words, they cannot but
live in such sort, as other seeing them, may in, and by their holiness and
godly conversation, be occasioned, as to know thee, so to sanctify thy name
accordingly: and therefore thou set forth here unto me, what is the chief
and principal wish and desire of thy children and people, The chief desire
of Gods children^
namely, that thou in Christ might be truly known and honored, both of
themselves and of other inwardly and outwardly: as by the contrary a man may
castlie perceive, The greatest grief of Gods people.
that the greatest sorrow and grief thy people have, is ignorance of thee,
false service or religion, and wicked conversation. Against the which they pray
and labor diligently after their vocation, as they for the obtaining of the
other, both to other and to themselves, do take no small pain in prayer,
study, and godly exercise.

By reason hereof I see, Our ignorance.
that I am far from this desire and lamentation which is in thy children, I
see mine ignorance of the true knoweledge of thee and thy name: for else it had
not needed thee so by thy word to have revealed thy self. I see also mine own
ignorance of the excellency of the same: for else would thou not have
toulde me, that the sanctifiyng of thy name is the chiefest thing thou
requirest of every man.

Again, I see my great want of holiness: Our great need
for else thou need not to teach me to seek and pray for that I want not.

Moreover, I see my great peruersitie, which would not seek at thy hands for
sanctification, although I see my need thereof. For the which thou would
not have commanded me to pray, if I seeing my want, would have prayed unto
thee for the same.

Last of all, Gods love.
I see thy wonderful goodness, which wilt undoubtedly give unto me
sanctification and holiness: for thou would not that I should ask for that
thing, that* thou will not give me.

So that I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because I am so
far from this desire and lamentation which thy children have. Also because of
my ignorance, poverty, peruersitie, unthankfulness, etc. But most of all,
because thy holy name, word and religion is so blasphemed both in doctrine and
in living of many, especially in this realm.

To rejoice I have great cause, for thy exceeding goodness and mercy, which
would so disclose thy self by thy works, word and Gospel: which would
open these things thus unto me, and so give unto me and others sanctification
in thy sight by faith, and in the sight of men by pureness of life, and godly
conversation. But alas, I do heartily neither the one nor the other, that is,
lament or rejoice, as thou father, which searchest my heart, do right well
know.

Oh, be merciful unto me, and forgive me, yea, give me of thine own pity,
thy holy spirit to reveal and open to my mind effectually my miserable estate
and condition, my ignorance, peruersitie, and my carelesnes for thy true honor
and dishonor? in such sort, that I may heartily lament these evils, and have
them pardoned and taken from me, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Again, good father, give me the same thy holy spirit, to reveal to me thy
name, word and Gospel, that I may lively know thee, vnfaynedlie ^^oue thee,
heartily obey thee, and above all things desire and labor by all means
lawful, that all godliness in doctrine and conversation may be exercised both
in me and in all others for whom thou would I should pray.

Here think upon the state of religion, and the life of the professors of the
Gospel, that thou may lament some, pray for some, and give thanks for some.

Let thy kingdom come. THy Kingdom is in two fortes to be considered: Gods
kingdom in respect of his power.
universally and particularly, universally, according to thy power, wherewith
thou gouernest al things every where in earth, heaven, hell, devils, Angels,
men, beasts, fowls, fishes and all other creatures.

Of this kingdom spoke David when he said: His kingdom rules over all. Psalm.
104
Particularly thy kingdom is to be considered according to thy grace,
wherewith thou raignest only in thy Church and elect people, Gods kingdom in
respect of his grace.
ruling and governing all and every member of thy Church, to thy glory and
their eternal comfort. Not that out of this Church I exclude thy power, (for as
there with thou defendest thy people, so thou punished^ thy enemies:) but
because thy grace is specially considered being (as it were) the very keeper
that keeps and guides thy people. Gods kingdom in respect of his glory.


The time will be when this kingdom of grace and power, now being as
dinstinct, shall be united and made one kingdom of glory: which will be when
Christ shall give up his kingdom into thine hands, that is, in the
resurrection. How Gods kingdom is here considered and enlarged
When death the last enemy shall be subdued, and th^^^ shall be all in all.

In the mean season, this kingdom of grace is miraculously and mightiely
propagated, enlarged, and gonerned by the true Ministry of thy word and
sacraments, through the working of thy holy spirit: and this is the mean and
way whereby, as thou did first plant, so do thou enlarge, amplify, and
preserve the same.

This kingdom of grace begun, continued, and enlarged by the true preaching
of thy Gospel, and ministration of thy Sacraments, is the thing which Christ
teaches here thy children to pray for, that it might come, that is to say,
that thy Gospel might so mightily, purelie, and plenteouslie be preached
(maugre the head of all thine enemies) that the number of thine elect might
be brought in, and so the kingdom of thy glory might appear. So that as I
see thy children desire, pray, and labor that thy Gospel might be truly
preached, heard, and lived in themselves and in others: so they lament the not
preaching and refusing the not lining and not believing thy Gospel: yea, they
lament the lingering of ye coming of thy Christ: for in his coming they know
they shall be like unto him, and having this hope, they purify themselves as
he is pure. By reason hereof I see, first, that I am far from this desire
and lamenting, which thy children have: I see my ignorance of thy kingdom and
power every where: also of thy grace in thy Church only, and of thy glory when
all the enemies of thy grace shall be cast down, and thy glory and power shall
embrace each other. I see my ignorance, how acceptable a service to thee is
the true preaching, and the hearing of thy Gospel, for else thou had not
needed to have placed this petition next to the petition of the sanctifying of
thy name.

Again, I see here mine vnableneesse to enter into thy kingdom, and to
attain to it: for else what need should I have to pray for that to come from
thee, which otherwise may be achieved?

Thirdlye, I see my peruersity and contempt of thy kingdom and grace: for
although I see my want, Our peruersitie.
yet I would not desire thy kingdom to come, if thou did not command me
so to pray: and if I would have prayed for it, thou would not have
commanded me.

Last of all, Gods goodness.
I see thy goodness, which wilt bring thy kingdom, and that as generally, by
sending forth ministers to preach truly: so particularlye, by regenerating me
more and more, and by giving me as grace here, so glory elsewhere: for thou
would not I should pray for that which thou will deny.

So that I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because of my
miserable state and condition, because of my sin, ignorance rebellion,
peruersity, Satan's power, contempt of thy grace, thy Gospel, and ministry
here or elsewhere. To rejoice, because of thy goodness and great mercy which
have brought me into thy Church, keep me in it, and wilt do so still. Also
because of the ministry of thy word and sacrame^acute;ts, by which the holy
Ghost is and will be effectual: and finally because of the great glory
whereunto thou have called me, and which now thou will give unto me asking
the same.

But alas how unthankful I am and sorrowlesse, Lord thou know, for my
heart is not hid from thee. Oh be merciful unto me and forgive me good father,
and gra^nt me the spirit of thy children, to reveal unto me my ignorance of
thy kingdom, my poverty and peruersitie, that I may lament the same and daily
labor for thy help and thy holy spirit, to suppress the kingdom of sin
in my self and in others.

Again, grant me that same thy holy spirit to reveal to me thy kingdom of
power, grace and glory, to kindle mine affections, to regenerate me more* and
more to reign in me as a piece of thy kingdom, to give to me to desire, to
pray and to labor for thy kingdom both to my self and to others effectually
to thy glory, and to assure my conscience of thy goodness that thou will give
me grace and glory, etc.

Here call to mind the state of the ministry and ministers, the light and
life of Gospellers, Gods omnipotent will unknown and unrevealed
the errors and heresies which men be entangled withal.

Thy will be done. AS thy power is infinite, so is thy wisdom accordingly.

Whereby, as we may perceive that nothing is, or can be done against thy
power, or otherwise than by it: so is there not, nor cannot be any thing done
against, or otherwise then by thy omnipotent and secret will, which is always
(as t^ou art) good, holy, and just, how far so ever it seem otherwise to
our foolish reason and judgment: and therefore here we are taught to pray
that thy will may be done here without sin on man's behalf, as it is on the
Angels behalf in heaven.

Again, for as much as thou art incomprehensible of thy self, as well
concerning thy power, Gods will reveled and known,
as concerning thy wisdom: we may not according thereto search thee, but
rather adore and worship thy majesty, and tremble at thy judgments and works,
and therefore pray always, we may be content with thy will, and be buxomr and
obedient thereto.

And for as much as thou have revealed unto us so much of thy will in thy word
writtenas is necessary for us in this life to know, yea, as we can attain
unto, and a little further: we ought to take al things done against the same,
as ^^nne and transgression, although thou can use the same sin, to serve
thy preuidence: of the which providence we cannot, nor may not judge further
than thou have and shall open it unto us.

So that this petition, Thy will be done is not simply to be understood
concerning thy omnipotent will unrevealed, against the which nothing is nor can
be done, but rather concerning thy will revealed in the law and Gospel, the
which thou here teach me, that we should desire not only to know it,
but also to do it, and that in such perfection and willingness, as it is in
heaven. The which thing I perceive hereby, that thy children do desire daily
in and for themselves and othrs, and do la meant the contrary, Psalm. 1^
in whom so ever it be so that often their eyes gush out with rivers of tears,
because men keep not thy laws.

By reason hereof I see that I am far from the sighs and tears of thy people.
I see my ignorance of thy will if thou had not opened the same by thine own
mouth. Our ign^^rance.
I see my ignorance, how acceptable a service obedience to thy will is, and
therefore do est thou place this petition among the first and continual
desires of thy children.

Again, I see my poverty in godly obedience, Our necessity.
which had need to be taught to pray for it, thereby to signify unto me my
want and inability to attain it but by thy gift.

Thirdlye, Our diso^bedienc
I see my disobedience for else never would thou have commanded me to have
prayer for the doing of thy holy wit, if I seeing my want, Gods goodness
would have prayed so.

Last of all, I see thy goodness, which wilt give to me, and others, to obey
thy will, that is, to love thee with all our hearts, to love our neighbor as our
selves, to die to our selves, to live to thee, to take by our cross, and to
follow thee, to believe, to repent, etc. for else thou would never have
bidden us to pray for a thing which we should not look for.

So that I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament because of my
miserable estate and condition, because of my sin, ignorance, poverty, and
peruersitie: and because thy will is every where either not known or contemned,
and Satan's will, the will of the world and of the flesh, readily obeyed.

To rejoice I have great cause, for that thou have opened thy self and will
unto mankind: for that also thou peculiarly have taught me these things and
because thou will grant me grace to do the same. But alas, how unthankful I
am, and how hard hearted thou Lord do know.

Oh be merciful unto me, and forgive me: I beseech thee, gracious God. Grant
me thy holy spirit, to reveal to me my ingnorance of thy will, my poverty
and peruersitie, that I may heartily be watle it, etc. and by the help and
working of the same spirit, may suppress the will of the flesh. Again, grant
me thy holy spirit, to reveal to me thy will declared in thy law and
Gospel, that I may truly know the same, and inflame so my affections, that I
may will and love the same in such sort, that it may be my meat and drink to
do thy will.

Here call to mind the ten commandementes of God particularly or generally,
what therein herequireth, and pray for the same particularly as you see your
need, and that not only for your self, but also for others.

Pray for patience to suffer what cross soever God shall lay upon, and pray
for them that be under the cross, that they may be patient: pray for
spiritual wisdom in every cross peculiar or public, that you may see and
love Gods will.

Give us this day our daily bread. BY Bread the food of the body, Bread.
are understood all things necessary for this corporal life, as meat,
drink, health, s^ccesse in our vocation: etc. Give.


By this word Give, we should understand, that not only spirtuall things,
but also corporal benefits are Gods free gifts, a come not for our worthiness
or travel taken about the same although our travels be of tentimes means, by
the which God does give corporal things. Daily.


By daily we understand the contented minds of thy children, with that which
is sufficient for the present time as having hope in thee that they shall not
want, but daily shall receive at thy hands plenty and enough of all things.

By this word Our, Our.
are as well understood public benefits, as peace in the common weal, good
Magistrates, good laws, reasonable weather. etc. also particular benefits,
namely children, health, succes in the works of our vocation, etc. And besides
this, by it we should see the care, even for corporal things which thy
children have for others, as well as for themselves.

So that here I may learn how far I am from that I should be, and that I
see thy children are come unto. I see my ignorance also, how that, as
spiritual things do come from thee, so do temporal things: and as they
come from thee: so are they conserved and kept of thee: and therefore thy
children are thankful and look for them as thy mere gifts, notwithstanding
the means which they use if they have them: howbeit they use them but as
means, for except thou work therewith, Psalm. 127
all is in vain.

Again, here I am taught to be content with that which is sufficient for the
present time, as thy children be, which have the shortness of this life
always before their eyes: and therefore they ask but for daily sustenance,
knowing this life to be compared to a day, pea a watch, a sound* a shadow, etc.

Moreover, I may learn to see the compassion and brotherly care which thy
children have one for another, Last of all, here I may see thy goodness,
which as thou will give me all things necessary for this life (or else thou
would not bid me ask, etc.) so thou command all men to pray and care for
me, and that bodily, much more then, if they be able, they are commanded to
help me both in body and soul.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because
I am not so affected as thy children be, because of my ignorance, my
ingratitude, my peruersitie and contempt of all goodness, and of the necessity
of thy people, which (alas) be in great misery, some in ex^^e, some in prison,
some in poverty, ^^cknesse. etc.

To rejoice I have great cause, because of thy goodness in teaching me these
things, in commanding me to ask whatsoever I want, in giving me so many
things unasked in keeping the benefits given me, in commanding men to care
for me, to pray for me, to help me, etc.

But alas, how far I am either from true lamenting or rejoicing, Lord thou
know. Oh be merciful unto me, and help me, forgive me, and grant me thy
holy spirit to reveal to me my need, ignorance, great in gratitude and
contempt of thy mercies and thy people, and that in such sort, that I might
heartily lament and be wail my misery, and through thy goodness be altered
with thy people, to mourn for the miseries of thy children, as for mine own,

Again, reveal to me thy goodness, dear father, even in corporal things,
that I may see thy mercy, thy presence, power, wisdom, and righteousness in
every creature and corporal benefit, and that in such sort, that I may be
thoroughly affected truly to reverence, fear, love, and obey thee, to hang
upon thee, to be thankful to thee, in all my need to come unto thee, not
only when I have ordinary means, by the which thou commonly woorkest but
also when I have none, yea, when all means and helps are clean against me.

Here remember the state of your children and family: also your parents,
neighbors, kinsfolks: also your friends, country, magistrates, etc. as you
shall have time thereto, and by Gods good spirit shall be provoked.

Forgive us our debts, as we forgive them that are debtors unto us. BY Our
debts we understand, not only the things we have done, but the omission and
leaueing undone of the good things we ought to do. Debts.


By Our we understand not only the particular sins of one, Our
but also generally the sins of all, and every one of the church.

By Forgiveness we understand, Forgiveness.
free pardon and remission of sins, by the merits and deserts of thy dear
son Jesus Christ, who gave himself a ransom for us.

By Our Forgiving of other men's offenses to us ward, Our forgiving.
we understand thy good will, not only that it pleases thee that we should
live in lou^ and amity, but also that thou would have us to be certain of
thy pa^^doning us of our sins. For as certain as we are, that we pardon the^
that offend us, so certain should w^ be that thou do pardon us: whereof the
forgiving our trespasses is (as it were) a sacrament unto us.

So that by this petition I am taught to see that thy children, although by
imputation they be pure from sin, yet they acknowledge sin to be and remain
in them, and therefore do they pray for the remission and forgiveness of the
same.

Again, I am taught hereby to see how thy children do consider and take to
heart: not only the evils they do, but also the good they leave undone: and
therefore they pray thee heartily for pardon.

Moreover, I am here taught is for that thy children are careful for other
men, and for their trespasses, and therefore pray that they might be pardoned in
saying: Our sins, and not my sins.

Besides this, I am taught here to see how thy children not only forgive all
those that offend them, but also pray for the pardoning of the offenses of
their enemies, and such as offend them: So far are they from maliciousness
pride, reuengement, etc.

Last of al, I am taught to see how merciful thou art, which will have us to
ask pardon (whereof thou would that we should in no point doubt but be most
assured, that for Christ's sake thou hear us) and that not only for our
selves, but also for many others: for thou do not command us to ask for
any thing which thou will not give us.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament,
because of my miserable estate, which am so far from these affections that
are in thy children: which am so ignorant and careless of sin, not only in
leaving good undone, but also in doing evil, and that daily, in thought, word
and deed* etc. I speak not of my carelesnes for other folks sins, as of my
parents, children, family, magistrates, etc., neither of the sins of them to
whom I have given occasion of sin.

To rejoice I have great cause, because of thy mercy in opening to me these
things, in commanding me to pray for pardon, in promising me pardon, and
commanding others to pray for me. And surely I ought to be persuaded of thy
mercy, though my sins be innumerable: for I see not only in this, but in
every petition, how that every one of the Church prays for me, yea Christ
thy son, who sits on th right hand, prays for me etc.

Oh dearey father, be merciful unto me, and forgive me all my sins, and of
thy goodness give me thy holy spirit to open mine eyes, that I may see
sin, the better to know it, the more truly to hate it, and most earnestly
to strive against it, and that effectually, both in my self and others.

Again, grant me the same thy holy spirit, to reveal unto me the remedy
of sin. By Christ only, and to work in me faith to embrace the ^ame by
Christ, and thy mercies in him, that I may henceforth be endued with thy holy
spirit, to begin to obey thy good will more and more, and to increase in the
same for ever.

Here call to mind the special sins you have committed heretofore. Remember,
if you have occasioned any to sin, to pray for them by name. Remember that
Gods law should be so dear unto us, that the breaking thereof in others,
should be an occasion to make us to lament with tears, etc.

Lead us not into temptation. BEcause of our continual and great infirmities:
because of the great diligence and subtilties of our enemies: and because thou
art wont to punish sin with sin (which of all punishments is the greatest
and most to be feared) in this petition thou would have thy children to
have the same in remembrance, and for a remedy hereof thou have appointed
prayer, so that the only cause why any are overcome and led into temptation,
to see that they forget what they desire in the petition going before this,
which should never be out of their memory, to provoke them to be more
thankful to thee, and more vigilant and heedy hereafter for falling into the
like perils.

For which to be avoided, thou do most graciously set forth a remedy, in
commanding us to pray ofter pardon for our sins past, and for thy grace to
guide us so that we be not lid into temptation, but might be delivered from
evil. And because thou would have all thy children to hang wholly upon thee,
to fear thee only, and ouly to love thee, noht do not teach the^ to pray.
Suffer us not to be led, but lead us not into temptation, that (I say) they
might only fear thee, and certainly know that Satan has no power ouerso much
as a pigge, but whatsoever thou give unto him, and of thy secret, but most
just judgment do appointe him to use, not as he will (for then we were all
lost) but as thou will, which can will nothing, but that which is most just:
as to give them to the guiding of satan, which will not be guided by thy
grace, as then did Saul, etc.

Occasions to evil are in two sorts: Occao^sis to evil in two sorts
One by prosperity and success: an other by adversity and the cross, etc.
The evils coming of success, commonly are unthankfulness, pride, security, and
forgetting of our selves, forgetting of others, forgetfulness of God, of our
mortality, etc. The euls coming of adversity, commonly are impatiencie,
murmuring, grudging, What tentations are to the go^ly, and what they are to
the wicked.
dispairing, contemning of God, flattering of men, stealing, lying, with many
other evils, whereto tentations will entice a man that is left to himself:
whereas to one that is guided with Gods spirit, temptations are but trials to
the glory of GOD: comfort of the tempted, and edyf^ing of thy Church. But (as
I said) if a man be left alone, tentations entice even to the devil himself:
and therefore thy children pray to be delivered from evil, understanding
thereby Satan himself, the sower of and supporter of all evil. And this thy
children do as well for others, as for themselves. So that I may learn hereby
many good things: First to remember often our infirmity and weakness, and
the dangerous estate we stand in, in respect of our flesh, of the world
which is full of evil, of Satan which seeks to sift us, and as a roaring
Lion to destroy us, and of our sins which deserve al kind of punishments and
correction, that I might with thy children fear thee, watch, pray, and desire
the day of redemption and deliverance from all evils.

Again, I may learn here, that to avoid all dangers and evils, is not in
the power of man, but only thy work. By reason whereof, I should consider
thy great goodness, which hitherto have kept me from so many evils both of
soul and body, yea of name, goods, etc. as thou have done in my infancy,
childhood, youth middle age, etc.

Thirdly, I may learn here that I should be careful for others, both that
they might be delivered from their evils, and that they might be preserved
from temptation, and from being overcome in the same, and th^rfore thou
teach me not to pray, Deliver me from evil simply, but, Deliver us from
euiil.

Last of all, I am taught thereby to see thy goodness toward me, which will
deliver me from evil, and from being overcome in tentations: for thou
would not have me ask for that which I should not certainly look for at
thy hands. By reason whereof thou would have me to be in a certainety of
my salvation for ever. For else I cannot believe my prayer to be heard, if
that finally I should not be delivered from evil: and therefore thou ioynest
hereto a giving of thanks, which with thy Church I should say: For thine is the
kingdom, thine is the power, thine is the glory, for ever.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and to rejoice, To lament,
because of my corruption, infirmity, weakness obliu^ on, and carelessness
for thy people, ingratitude etc. because of Satan's power vigilancie and
prudencie, which hat^ overcome most grave, wise, and hol^ men, whereof some
never recouerc^ as Cain, Came, Achitophel, Saul, Judah (...) To rejoice, because
of thy goodness, which teaches me this, a^ show me the remedy,
commaundest all thy church to pray for me, and wilt at length deliver me from
all evil, and give me glory. But alas, I am altogether careless and
miserable. Oh be merciful unto me dear father, and for Christ's sake for give
me all my sins: grant me thy holy spirit to reveal to me mine infirmities,
weakness, perils, dangers, c. in such sort, that as I may heartily lament my
miseries, so I may ask and obtain thy grace to guide me from all evil for
evermore.

Again, grant me the same thy holy spirit to reveal to me thy love and
kindness toward me (and that in eternity, in such sort, that I may be
thoroughly persuaded of the same, become thankeful unto the, a daily expect and
look for the revelation of thy kingdom, power, and glory, as one that for ever
shall have the fruition of the same, through thine own goodness and mercy in
Christ, prepared for me before the beginnings foundation of the world was
laid.

Here call to mind our security, satan's vigilancie: our negligence, his
diligence: our infirmity, his ability: our ignorance, his craft and subtlety
etc.

Again, call to mind, how that he has overthrown for a time, many of the
dear saints of God, to whom we are to be compared in nothing, as Ada Eve,
Lot, Judas, Thamar, Moses, Aaron, Myrian, Samson, Gedeon, Ely, David, Solomon,
Ezechias, Josias, Peter, Thomas and innumerable more.

Also call to mind the goodness of God, and of our sheepehearde Christ, which
has kept us hitherto, keeps us still, and teaches us here to know that he
will keep us for ever: for he would not have us ask for deliverance from
evil, if that he would not we should certainly look for the same. If thou
doubt of small perseverance, thou dishonourest God. Be certain therefore,
rest in hope, be still in his word. See also how he has commmaunded his
whole church, and every member thereof, to pray for thee all well as for
themselves, in these and all other things.

Now and then go about to reckon how many and diverse kinds of evils there
be, and thereby as you may know you are delivered from none but by Gods great
goodness: so may you see that the number of evils, that you have, are nothing
to be compared to the multitude of evils, wherewith if your Christ were not,
the devil would all to beray you, infect and corrupt you.

But what are all the miseries and evils that can be, to be compared to ^he
least joy prepared for us in heaven? Oh think of those joys, and pray that
when the tide of death comes we may hale forth of the haueh of this flesh,
and this world joyfully.

In praying this petition, call to mind the evils you have been in, the evil,
you are in, and the evils you may fall into, if God should not preserve you,
that you might be stirred up the more to thankfulness, to prayer, to trust in
God.

For thine is the kingdom, thine is the power, thine is the glory, for ever. AS
in the beginning of this prayer by these words ( Our father which art in
heaven) thy children an excited and stirred up to a full confidens of obtaining
the petitions following and all things necessary: so in the latter end thou
have added for the same p^^^pose these words ( For thine is the kingdom,
thineis, etc.) Wherein I (...) taught these many things, First that i^ prayer I
should have such consideration of thy kingdom, power, glory, and eternity,
that my mind should be stricken with an admiration of the same, Secondly, that
I should so consider the^, especially in prayer that I should not doubt, but
that thou workest, rulest and gouernest all things every where, in all persons
and creatures, most wisely, justly, and mercifully. Thirdly, that in prayer al
my petitions should tend to the setting footh of the power, of thy kingdom, and
of thy glory.

Last of all that in prayer I should in no wise doubt of being heard, but be
assured that thou, which have commanded me to pray, and have promised to hear
me, do most gratious^e for thy mercies sake, and truths sake, hear my
petitions, according to thy good will through Jesus Christ thy dear son our
Lords and only Savior.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament,
because I consider not these things in prayer, in such sort as should move
me to admiration, and gratitude: because I consider not thy power and wisdom
generally in all things: because I am so careless for thy kingdom, and
because I am so full of dubitation and doubting of thy goodness. To rejoice I
have great cause: because thou reuealest these things unto me on this sort:
because of thy power, kingdom and glory, which makes to the hearing of my
prayers, and helping of me, because thou will use me as thine instrument to
set forth thy kingdom, power, and glory: and because i^ pleases thee to
hear my prayer and assuredly wilt save me for ever.

But alas how far am I from these lamentings and reioycinges? By reason
whereof I deserve damnation. O be merciful unto me, and forgive me, and of
thy goodness grant me thy holy spirit, to reveal to me my blindness,
oblivion, and contempt of thy kingdom, power, and glore, with the greatness of
my doubtings, that as I may heartily, lament them, so have them pardoned and
taken from me, through the merits of Jesus Christ thy son.

Again, give me thy holy spirit to reveal to me in such sort, thy kingdom,
power, glory, and eternity, that I may always have the same before mine
eyes, be moved with the admiration thereof labor effectually to set forth the
same, and finally, as to have the fruition thereof after this life so to
increase in an assured, certain, and lively expectation of the same, that I
may always and in all things rejoice in thee, through Christ, and give
lauds, thanks, and praises perpetually, unto thy most holy name: Oh blessed
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three persons and one God, to whom be all
honor and glory, world without end.

H^ere think that if the kingdom, power, glory, and eternity be Gods,
which is our Father, what our dignity is, which be his children. If the power
be our fathers, of whom should we be afraid? Let the devil be subject to
the Lords power and kingdom (as he is) how can the subject have power over us
which be sons and heirs, in that he has not power over po^kets, without the
proudence and permissio^ of God. Therefore full well should we pray, (...)
power is the Lords, and the Devil has none, but that he has of Gods gift. No
he were not able to receive power, if God did not make him able, although the
execution of it, is rather of Gods permission.

Give al thanks, praise, and glory, to God our Father through Christ our Lord
and Savior, So be it.

John Bradford.

PRIVATE PRAYERS for the Morning and Evening, and for other times of the day.
When you awake out of your sleep pray thus.
MOst merciful God and Father of our Savior Jesus Christ, I most humbly
thank thee for the sweet sleep and comfortable rest which thou have given
me this night past: beseeching thee, that like as thou have now awaked my
body from sleep, so thou would awake my soul from the sleep of sin and
darkness of this world: and that which thou have new awaked out of sleep,
thou would after death (whereof this sleep is but an image) restore and
rail again to life everlasting. O gracious God, make my body, I heartily
pray thee, such a companion, or rather a minister of godliness to my soul,
this day, and all the time of this present life, that in the life to come it
may be partaker with the same of everlasting happiness, through Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall show light
unto thee. Ephesians. 5.

Occasions to med^tate.
Here call to mind the great mirth and blessedness of the everlasting
resurrection. Also remember to muse upon that most clear light, that bright
morning and new clearenesse of our bodies after the long darkness which they
have bin in. All then shall be full of unspeakable joy and felicity.

When you behold the dailight, pray.
O Lord God, thou most glorious and true light, from whence this light of the
day and sun does spring and shine unto us: O light which lightenest every man
that comes into this world: O light which know no night nor evening, but
art al way a midday most clear and fair: without whom all is most horrible
darkness, and by whom al things are most clear and bright: O thou wisdom
of the eternal father of mercies: lighten my mind, that I may see those
things only which pleasethee, and may be blinded to all other things, Grant
me so to walk in thy wa^^s by the light of thy holy word, that nothing else
may be light and pleasant unto me.

Lighten mine eyes, Oh Lord, that I sleep not in death, least mine enemies
say, I have prevailed against him Psalm. 30.

Occasions to meditate.
Muse a while, how much the light and eye of the mind and soul is better than
of the body. Also how much more we ought to care for the soul, that it may
see well, than of the body. Moreover, that beasts have bodily eyes as well as
men, but men only have eyes of the mind, and that such as are godly wise.

When you arise, pray.
OUR first parents cast down themselves from a most excellent, high, and
honorable state, into shame and misery, and into the deep sea of all
wickedness and mischief but oh Christ, thou putting forth thy hand, did
raise them up again. Even so we except we be raised up by thee, shall ly still
for ever. O good Christ, our most gracious Redeemer, as thou do mercifully
raise up now this my body, even so I beseech thee, raise up my mind and heart
to the true knowledge and love of thee, that my conversation may be in heaven
where thou art.

If thou be risen with Christ, think upon those things that be above. Col. 3

Occasions to meditate.
Think how foul the fall of Adam was by reason of sin: and so every one
of us from the hight of Gods grace. Again, think upon the inestimable
benefit of Christ, by whose help we daily rise again from our fallings.

When you apparel your self, pray.
O Christ cloth me with thine own self, that I may be so far from making
provision for the flesh to fulfill the Iustes thereof, that I may clean put
off all desires, and crucify the kingdom of the flesh in me. Be thou unto me
a garment to keep me warm, and to defend me from the cold of this world. If
thou be absent (dear Lord) all things are cold, weak, and dead: but if
thou be with me, all things are warm, fresh, and cheerful, etc. Grant
therefore, that as I compass this my body with this garment: so thou would
cloth me wholly (but specially my soul) with thine own self.

Put upon you as the elect of God, bowels of mercy, meekness, love, peace,
etc. Col. 3.

Occasions to meditate.
Call to mind a little how we are incorporate into Christ. Again, how he
does cloth us, govern and nourish us, and under his wings, protection and
providence, preserves us.

When you are made ready, to begin the day withal, pray:
O Almighty God and most merciful father, thou know and have taught us also
something to know, that the weakness of man and woman is great, and that
with out thy grace they can neither do nor think any good thing. Have mercy
upon me. I humbly beseech thee, thy most weak, frail, and unworthy Child.
Lighten my mind, that I may with pleasure look upon good things only Inflame
my heart with the thereof, that I may carefully court them, and at the last by
thy gracious conducting may happily attain them, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. I distrusting altogether mine owke weakness, commend a offer my self
both soul and body into thy hands.

Thy loving spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness.

Cogitations meet to begin the day withal,
Think first that man consists of soul and body, and that the soul is from
heaven heavenly, firm and immortal, but the body is from the earth earthly,
frail and mortal.

Again, think that though by reason of sin wherein you are conceived and
borne, the parts of the soul which do understand and desire, be so corrupt,
that without special grace to both parts you can neither know nor love any
good thing in Gods sight, much less then do that is good: yet this
notwithstanding, think that you are regenerate by CHRIST'S resurrection,
(which your Baptism requires you to believe) and therefore have both those
parts some thing reformed, both to know, and to love, and therefore, to do
also some good in the sight of God through Christ, for whose sake our poor
doings are accepted for good, the evil and infirmity cleaving thereunto, not
being imputed through faith.

Think that by faith, which is Gods seed (for they which belief we are borne
of GOD, and made Gods children) given to those that be ordained to eternal
life: think ( I say) that by faith you receive more and more the spirit of
sanctification, through the use of Gods word and sacraments, and earnest
prayer, to illuminate your minds, understanding, judgment and reason, and to
bow, form, frame, and inflame your affections with love and power to do that
which is good, and therefore use you the means aforesaid accordingly.

Think that by this spirit, you are through faith coupled to Christ, as a
lively member, and so to God, and (as it were) made one with him: and by love,
which springs out of this faith, you are made one also with all that be of
God, and so you have fellowshippe with GOD and all good men that ever were or
shall be, in all the good that God and all his saints have or shall have.

Think that as by faith, and love through the spirit of GOD you are now
entered into his communion (the blessedness whereof no tongue can express) so
after this life, you shall first in soul, and in the last day in body also
enjoy for ever the same society most perfectly, which now is but begun in
you.

Think then of your negligence, that do so little care for this your happy
estate.

Think upon your ingratitude to God, for making you, redeeming you, calling
you, and solouingly adopting you.

Think upon your folly in fantasing so much earthly and bodily pleasures.

Think upon your dea^nee and blindness, which hear not God nor see him he
calling you so diligently by his works word, and sacraments.

Think upon your frowardnes which will not be lead of God, and his spirit.

Think upon your forgetfulness and in consideration of your heavenly estate,
how your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, your members are the members of
Christ, the whole world, and all things there in are your own. Therefore say
unto your soul, O my soul, arise, follow God contemn this world, purpose
well and pursue it long for the ^ords coming, be ready and (...) And
for so much as you must live to Gods pleasure, see the vocation and state of your
life whereunto God has called you, and pray to God for grace, knowledge and
ability, to take the most profitable things in hand, well to begin, better to
go on, and best of all to end the same, to Gods glory, and to the profit of
your brethren, and think that time lost wherein you speak not, or do not, or
at the least think not something to Gods glory, and the commodity of your
brethren.

When you go forth of the doors, pray.
NOw must I walk among the snares of death, stretched out of Satan and of his
mischievous ministers in the world carrying with me a friend to them both,
and a foe to myself, even this body of sin and sinful flesh. Oh graund
captain Christ, lead me and guide me, I beseech thee. Defend me from the
plagues and subtilties, whereof I am in danger. Grant that I may take al
things that happen, as I should do, and setting mine eyes upon thee only, I
may so go on foreward in thy ways, as by nothing I be hind red, but rather
furthered, so that all my doings may tend to thy glory.

Show me thy ways (O Lord) and teach me thy paths. Psalm. 25.

Occasions to meditate.
I Consider, how vainelie the most part of men are occupied: how many ways
they trouble and cumber themselves, thereby much alienating their minds from
the knowledge and cogitation of that which they should most esteem, and so
become a let and an offense to others. As in going abroad you will see that
your apparel be seemly in the sight of men: John 6 John. 4
so see how seemly you appear in the sight of God.

When you are going any journey, pray.
THis our life is a pilgrimage, From the Lord we came, and to the Lord we
make our journey: howbeit through dangerous and perilous ways, which our
cruel the enemies have and do prepare for us, being now more then star^^
blind by reason of sin. O Christ, which ar^ a most true loades man and
guide, and also most expert, faithful and friendly, put thou ou^ thine hand,
open mine eyes: make thy high way known unto me* which thou did first
enter into, out of this corruptible life, and have prepared the same for us to
immortality. Th^^ art the way, lead us unto the father by thy self, that all
we may be one with him, as thou and he together be one.

Show me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee
Psalm. 124.

Or pray thus.
Merciful father, thou art wont to send to thy servants and men of simple
hearts) thine Angels to be their keepers and (as it were) guids, as elder
brother to watch upon thy weak children: So did thou to young Tobias, to
Jacob, to Abraham's servant, to Joshua, etc. O gracious GOD, though we be much
unlike vntothem (so many are our sins) yet for thine own goodness sake, send
thine holy angels to pitche their tents about us, to hide us and defend (...)
from Satan and his slaves to carry us in their hands, that we come not into
further danger that thou will delmer us out of, for thine own sake.

His angels are ministers for them that are heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.

Satan sleeps not but seeks al ways to destroy us. 1. pet. 5.

Occasions to meditate.
Think some thing how we are strangers from our country, from our home,
from our original, I mean from God* again, think upon our madness, that
do linger and loyter so gladly in this our journey and pilgrimage, also how
foolish we are to fantasy things which we cannot carry with us, and to
condemn conscience, which will always be a companien to us, to our joy, if it
be good but to our shame and sorrow, if it be evil and corrupt. Finally how
vnnatuturall we are, which so little desire to be at our home, to be with our
only father, master, fellows, and friends.

When you are about to receive your meat, pray thus.
THis is a wonderful mystery of thy work (O maker and governor of the world)
that thou do sustain the lives of men and beasts with these meats. Surely
this power is neither in the bread nor food, but in thy will and word, by
which word all things do live and have their being. Again, how great a thing
is it that thou art able continually to give sustenance to so many creatures
This is spoken of by the Prophet in setting forth thy praises: All things
look up to thee, Psalm. 45
and thou give them meat in due season: thou openest thy hand, and fillest
with thy blessing every living thing.

These doubtless are wonderful works of thine almightinesse. I therefore
heartily pray thee (O most liberal Lord and faithful father) that as thou by
meat, through thy word do minister life to these our bodies, even so by the
same word, with thy grace thou would quicken our souls, that both in soul
and body we may please thee, til this our mortal carcass shall put on
immortality, and we shall need no more any further food but thee only, which
then will be all in all.

Taste and see how good the Lord is Psalm. 14.

Bless the Lord (O my soul) which feeds and fills my mouth with good
things. Psalm. 103.

Occasions to meditate.
Think a little how great Gods power is that made us. Also think how great
his wisdom is to preserve us. But most of all, think how many things are
given to our use, how won^derfull it is to give us life, but most of all to
propagate and advance to immortality the life of the soul by his only beeke.
Last of all think that God by his providence for thy body, would have thee to
confirm thy faith of his providence likewise for thy soul.

In the mean time pray.
O Most liberal distributer of thy gifts which give us all kind of good
things to use, and being pure, give pure things, being holy give holy
things: grant to us grace, that we misuse not these thy gracious gifts
given to our use and profit. Let us not delight in the things, but let us
delight in thee from whom they come, as necessary for us for a season, till we
come unto thee. Grant us to be conversant amongst the gifts, soberly,
purelie, temperately, and holily, because th^^ art so. Then shall we not turn
that to the poison of our souls, which thou have given for the medicine of our
bodies: but using thy benefits thankefully, we shall find them profitable,
both in soul and body.

Occasions to meditate.
Think that the meats and drinks set before you, are given to you to use and
not to abuse. Think that they are given to profit and not to hurt you.
Think that they are not given to you alone but unto others also by you. In
eating and drinking think that you do but feed the worms. Remember the
poor prisoners, the sick, the afflicted, etc. as though you were in their
case.

Think upon the food of your soul, Christ's body broken, and bloodshed,
desire the meat that lasts for ever: labor for it, Christ's meat was to do
his fathers will.

After your meat, pray.
BY corporal meats thou do sustain our corporal daily life, ready
otherwise to perish. The which surely is a great work: but yet this is much
greater, more profitable and more holy, that thy grace (O Jesus Christ) does
preserve us from the death of the soul. For this life we ought much to thank
thee: and because thou dorst prolonge it with thy good gifts we most heartily
praise thee. How be it this life is but the way to eternal life, which we
beseech thee for thy deaths sake that thou will give us, and so shall we not
only give thee (as we may) thanks for a time, for temporal things: but also
eternal thanks for eternal things. O grant to us these our desires, for thy
mercies sake Amen.

Occasions to meditate.
Think now that God has given thee this his blessing of food and sustenance
and thereto time, that thou might, as repent, so seek his glory, and the
commodity of thy brethren: therefore go there abouts: but first pray for
grace well to begin. Again, consider how thou have been partaker of other
men's labors, as of the Husbandmans, the Milners, the Bakers, the Bruers, the
Butchers, the Cooks, etc. See therefore that thou be not as a drone Be, but
rather such a one as may help the hiue. If God have thus fed thy body which he
loves not, but for thy souls sake: how can it be then, but that he will
be much more ready to feed the soul: Therefore take a courage to thee, and go
to him for grace accordingly.

Cogitations for about the midday.
As thy body is now compassed on every side with light, so see that thy mind
may be also. As God gives thee thus plentifully this corporal light, so
pray him that he will give thee the spiritual life. Think that as the Sun
is now most clear, so shall our bodies be in the day of Judgment. As now the
Sun is come to the highest, and therefore will begin to draw downward: so
is there nothing in the world so perfect and glorious, which when it is at the
full, will not decrease and so wear away.

When you come home again, pray.
THere is nothing (O Lord) more like to thy holy nature, than a quiet mind.
Thou have called us out of the troublesome disquietnesse of the world, into
that thy quiet rest and peace, which the world can not give being such a peace
as passes all men's understanding. Houses are ordained for us, that thereby we
might be defended from the injury of the weather, from cruelty of beasts, from
disquietnesse of people and rest from t^yles of the world. O gracious father,
grant that through thy great mercy my body may enter into this house, from
outward actions, but so that it may become ^uxome and obedient to the soul,
and make no resistaunce against the same, that in soul and body I may have a
godly quietness and peace to praise thy holy name, Amen.

Peace be to this house, and to all that dwell in the same, Math. 10.

Occasions to meditate.
Think what a return and how merry a return it will be to come to our
eternal, most quiet, and most happy home, then will all grief and sorrow
cease. Whatsoever here is pleasant and joyful, the same is nothing but a very
shadow in comparison of that which is to come.

At the Sun going down pray.
How unhappy are they, (O Lord) from whom thy Sun goes down and gives
no light, I mean thy grace which is always ^^eare as the midday? Dark night
unto them is the midday, which (...) part from thee. In thee is never night but
always day light most clear. This corporal sun has his courses now up,
now down: but thou dear Lord, if we love thee, art always one. O that
this black and veil of sin were taken away from me, that there might be
always clear day in my mind.

Occasions to meditate.
Think that as we are not sorry, when the Sun goes down, because we know
it shall rise again: even so we should not sorrow for death, This is meant of
the bloody time of Qu. Marie
where through the soul and body do part a sunder: for they shall eftsoons
return and come together again in most glorious wise. So long as the Sun is
^p, wild beasts keep their (...), Foxes their burrowes, Owls their holes,
etc. But when the Sun is down, then come they abroad: so wicked men and
hypocrites keep their dens in the time of the Gospel, but it being taken
away, then swarm they out of their holes like Bees, as this day does ^each.

When the candles be light pray.
MOst thick and dark clouds do cover our minds, except thy light (O Lord)
do drive them away. Thy sun (O most wise worker) is as it were a firebrand
to this world. Thy kingdom whereby light comes both to the soul and body,
is a firebrande to the spiritual world. After day when the night comes,
thou have given for the remedy of darkness a candle. After sin, for the
remedy of ignorance, thou have given thy doctrine, which thy dear son has
brought unto us, O thou that art the author and master of all truth and the
true light make us to see, that the dimnesse of our minds may be driven clean
away.

Lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, and send us joy and
gladness into our hearts. Psalm. 4.

Thy word is a lantern to my feet: and a light unto my paths. Psalm. 1^9.

Occasions to meditate.
Think that the knowledge which God gives unto us by the candle light
(whereby we see those things in this night of our bodies which are expedient
for us) should make us to wish much more for this doctrine of God and
spiritual light of our souls, and when we get it, the more to esteem it,
and diligently to embrace it. Again, that as all would be horror without
candle light, so there is nothing but mere confusion, where Gods word takes
no place.

When you make your self unready, pray.
THis our life and weake-knit body by occasion of sin, by little and little
shall be dissolved, and so shall be restored to the earth from whence it was
taken: then will be an end of this vanity, which by our folly we have wrought
to our selves. O most meek father, so do thou unite me (for thou art he that
has knit these our weak members together) that I may perceive my self to be
loosed and dissolved, and so may remember both of whom I was made, and also
whither I must go, least I be had unprovided unto thy tribunal seat.

Put off the old man with his lusts and concupiscences, Col. 3. Ephesians. 4.

Be content with Joseph to put off thy prison apparel, that thou may put
on new, Genesis 4. 1.

Occasions to meditate.
Think that we do willingly put off our garments, because we shall receive
them again when the night is past: so we should willingly forsake our bodies
when God by death shall call us, because we shall receive them again, in the
resurrection of the just.

When you enter into your bed pray.
THe day now ended, men give themselves to rest in the night, and so this
life finished, we shall rest in death. Nothing is more like this life than
every day: nothing more like to our grave, then our* dedde. O Lord our keeper
and defender, grant that I now laing me down to rest, being unable to keep
my self may be preserved from the crafts and assaults of the Wicked enemy:
and grant further, that when I have run the race of this life, thou would
of thy mercy call me unto thee, that I may live ^ watch with thee for
evermore. And now gracious God give me to take my rest in thee: and bring to
pass, that thy goodness may be given in sleep before my eyes that sleeping I
be not absent from thee, but may have my dreams to draw me unto thee, and so
both soul and body may be kept pure and holy for ever.

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, etc. Psalm. 4.

Occasions to meditate.
Think that as the troublesome day is now past, and night come, and so rest,
quietness, and pleasant sleep, which makes most excellent princes and poor
wretches alike: even so after the tumults, troubles, temptations, and tempests
of this life, they that believe in Christ, have prepared for them an haven and
rest most pleasant and joyful. As you are not afraid to enter into your bed
and to dispos^ your self to sleep, so be not afraid to die, but rather
cheerfully prepare your self thereunto.

Think that now you are nearer your end by one days journey, than you were in
the morning.

When you feel sleep to be coming, pray.
O Lord Jesus Christ my watchman and keeper, take me into thy protection.
Grant that my body sleeping, my mind may watch in thee, and be made merry
by some sight of that celestial and heavenly life, wherein thou art the King
and Prince, together with the father and the holy Ghost, where the Angels and
holy souls be most happy citizens. Oh puri^^e my soul, keep clean my body
that in both I may please thee, sleeping and waking for ever, Amen.

A GENERAL CONfession of sins, with other prayers for the Morning and
Evening, to be used in families and public assemblies.
O Most merciful and loving father whose love is infinite, whose mercy
endures for ever, we sinful creaturs, trusting in thine unspeakable
goodness and love toward us, do appear this morning before thy divine
majesty, most humbly confessing our manifold sins and inn^merable
transgressions of thy commandments and fatherly will. Against thee only,
against thee (O Lord) have we sinned, we acknowledge our offences^ we accuse
our selves unto thee (O merciful Lord) and will not hide our unrighteousness.
We find in our selves nothing, but ignorance of thy will, disobedience,
mistrust, doubtfulnesse in thy goodness, and incredulity, hatred, and contempt
of all spiritual things selfeloue, confidence in our selves, and fervent
lusting after carnal things of this world: and this tree of our corrupt
nature, brings forth continually in us none other fruits but rotten and
unsavory works of the flesh, in thoughts, words, and doings unto condemnation.

Wherefore we humbly beseech thy fatherly goodness, even for thy son Jesus
christ's sake, (whom thou have set forth for a purchaser of mercy to us
through faith in his blood) make our hearts clean, take away our stony
heart, and give unto us a true and lively faith, working in us unfeigned
repentance and amendment of our sinful life. (Have mercy upon us, and
forgive us our sins for thy sons sake: certify our consciences of the
remission of the same, by thy holy spirit: by whose operation so mortify in
us our old man, the whole body of sin, that we continually dying unto sin,
may walk in a newness of life, to the glory of thy holy name, through Jesus
Christ our Savior, Amen.

Another confession of sins.
O Eternal God most merciful father, we confess and acknowledge here before
thy divine majesty, that we are miserable sinners, conceived and borne in
sin and iniquity, so that in us there is no goodness: for the flesh
evermore rebelleth against the spirit, whereby we continually transgress thy
holy precepts and commandments, and to purchase to ourselves through thy just
judgment, Gal. 5.
death and damnation. Notwithstanding (O heavenly father) for as much as we are
displeased with our selves, Romans 2
for the sins we have committed against thee, Iere. 32.
and do unfeignedly repent us of the same, Esaie. 20
we most humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to show thy mercy upon
us, to forgive us all our sins, and to increase thy holy spirit in us, that
we acknowledging from the bottom of our hearts our own unrighteousness, Col.
3
may from hence forth not only mortify our sinful lusts and affections,
Rom 6.
but also bring forth such fruits as may be agreeable to thy most blessed will,
Ephe. 45
through Jesus Christ our only Savior: 1. Pet. 2.
whom thou have already given an oblation and an offering for our sins, and
for whose sake we are certainly persuaded that thou will deny us nothing that
we shall ask in his name, accor^ding to thy will. For thy spirit does assure
our consciences, that thou art our merciful Father, and so love us thy
children though him, that nothing is able to remove thy heavenly grace and
favor from us. To thee therefore with the son, and the holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory, world without end, So be it.

A prayer to be said in the Morning.
O Eternal GOD and heavenly Father, seeing that by thy great mercy we have
quietly passed this night, grant we beseech thee that we may bestow this day
wholly in thy service, so that all our thoughts, words and deeds, may redounde
to the glory of thy name, and good example of our brethren. And as it has
pleased thee to make the Sun to shine upon the earth, to give us bodily light:
even so vouchsafe to illuminate our understanding with the brightness of thy
spirit, to direct us in the way ofrighteousnes, so that what thing so ever we
shall apply our selves unto, our special care and purpose may be to walk in
thy fear, and to serve and honor thee, looking for all our wealth and
prosperity, to come from thy only blessing, and that we may take nothing in
hand, which shall not be agreeable to thy most blessed will.

Furthermore, that we may in such sort trauail for our bodies, and for this
present life, that we may have always a further regard: that is, to the
heavenly life, which thou have promised to thy children: and in the in mean
seasone, that it way please thee to preserve and defend us both i^ body and
soul, to strengthen us against all the temptations of the devil, and to
deliver us from all perils and dangers that may happen unto us, if we be not
defended by thy godly power.

And for as much as to begin well, and not to continue, is nothing: we beseech
thee to receive us not only this day, into thy holy protection, but also for
the time of our whole life, continuing and increasing in us daily thy good
grace and gifts thereof, until thou shall bring us to that happy state, where
we shall fully and for ever be joined unto thy Son Jesus Christ our
Savior, which is y^ true light of our souls, shining day and night
perpetually.

And to the end that we may obtain such grace at thy hand* vouchsafe (most
merciful Father) to forgive and forget all our sins, which we have
heretofore committed against thee, and for thine infinite mercies sake to
pardon the same, as thou have promised to those that ask of thee with unfeigned
heart, for whom, as for our selves we make our humble petitions unto thee in
the name of thy son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in such sort, as he
has taught us saying: Our Father, etc.

Another prayer to be said in the Morning.
O Almighty and most gracious God, we heartely thank thee for the sweet
sleep and comfortable rest, which thou have given us this night past: and
forasmuch as thou have commanded by thy holy word that no man should be idle,
but all occupied in godly and virtuous exercises, every man according to his
calling: we most humbly beseech thee, that thine eyes may attend upon us,
daily defend us, cherish, comfort, govern us, and al our counsels, studies and
labors, in such wise that we may spend and bestow this day according to thy
most holy will, seting thee always before our eyes, living in thy fear,
working that may be found acceptable before thy divine majesty, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, So be it.

Another prayer for the Morning
WE humbly and heartily give thanks unto thee (O heavenly Father) through thy
dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, that to thy innumerable benefits, hither to
powered upon our souls, and upon our bodies, thou have kept us this night past
from many evils, both spiritual and corporal, and (...) of thy mercy do
offer and give us time to repent and amend our lives, so that we might live
henceforth, not as we will, but as thou will: and as our bodies do draw
continually nearer and nearer their end (the grave I mean:) so our souls
might approach to their end, that is, heaven and not hell: for in one state we
stand not still, but either we are nearer y^ nearer and happy state of life,
or else the unhappy condition of death eternal.

Wherefore we beseech thee to be merciful unto us good Father, and as of thy
goodness thou give us time to repent and live godly, so of ye same thy
goodness in Christ, we humbly beseech thee to give us thy gracious gift of
true, holy, perfect, and perpetual repentance, that we may more and more
lamente our former sinful life, trusting unfeignedly in thy rich mercy,
through the merits of Jesus Christ, for the pardon of all ^ur sins, and that
we may unfeignedly purpose, and effectually labor to amend our lives this day,
and so long as we have to live. in all our doings and words, and even in our
very thoughts, to the praise of thy holy name, and good example of our doings
and words, and even in our brethren.

And for as much as thou know our weakness, our ignorance, and great
untowardness, to carry any great cross or affliction: we beseech thee our
sweet Father, so temper and order all things toward us this day and for ever,
that we be never further proved and tempted, than thou will make us able to
bear, and so to help us in the same, as may be most (...) thy glory and our
salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

An Evening prayer.
O Lord God Father everlasting, and full of pity, we acknowledge and
confess, that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much less to
present our selves before thy divine majesty, with confidence that thou will
hear out prayers and grant our requests, if we consider our own wretched
deseruings. For our consciences do accuse us, and our sins witness against
us, and we know that thou art an Upright Judge, which do not ^ustifie the
sinners and wicked men, Exodus 20
but punishest the faults of such as transgress thy commandments. Ye^ most
merciful Father, since it has pleased thee to command us to ca^^ upon thee
in all our troubles and adversities, Psalm. 15.
promising even then t^ help us, Psalm. 18
when we feel our selue^ as it were swallowed up of death (...) desperation,
we utterly renounce al^ wordly confidence and trust, and fly to thy sovereign
goodness, as our only stay and refuge, beseeching thee not to call to remembrance
our manifold sins and wickedness, whereby we continually provoke thy wrath
and indignation against us: H^. 9. 10.
neither our negligence, nor our unkindness, which have either worthelie
esteemed, nor in our lives sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of thy holy
Gospel revealed unto us: but rather to accept the obedience and death of thy
son Jesus Christ our Lord, who by offering up his body in sacrifice once for
all, Psalm. ^ 9
has made a sufficient recompense for all our sins.

Have mercy therefore upon us (O Lord) and forgive us our offenses, Teach us
by thy holy spirit that we may rightly weigh them, Ps. 9. 10
and earnestly repent us for the same: and so much the rather (O Lord our God)
because that the reprobate, Psalm. 8.
and such as thou have forsaken, Psalm. 5
cannot praise thee, nor call upon thy name: but the repenting heart, the
sorrowfnl mind, the conscience oppressed, hungring and thirsting for thy
grace, shall evermore set forth thy praise and glory.

And albeit we be but worms and dust, yet thou art our creator, and we be the
work of thy hands: Psalm 22.
yea thou art our father, 1. Co. 6
and we thy children: thou art our shepherd, and we thy flock: thou art our
redeemer, Iere. 10.
and we thy people whom thou have dearly bought: Psalm. 6.
thou art our God, and we are thine inheritance.

Correct us not therefore in thine anger (O Lord our God) neither according to
our deserts do thou punish us, Eccl. 18
but mercifully chastise us with a fatherly affection, that all the world may
know, that at what time so ever a sinner does repent him of his sin from
the bottom of his heart, thou will put away all his wickedness out of thy
remembrance, as thou have promised by thy holy Prophet.

Finally, forasmuch as it has pleased thee to make the night for man to rest
in, as thou have ordained him the day to travel, grant (O dear father) that
we may so take our bodily rest, that our souls may continually watch for the
time that our Lord Jesus Christ shall appear for our full deliverance out of
th^^ mortalll life, Luke 12
and in the mean season that we be not overcome by any fantasies, Math. 6.
dreams, Luke 22.
or other temptations, but may fully set our minds upon thee, love thee, fear
thee, and rest in thee, in such sort that our very sleep also may be to the
glory of thy holy name.

Furthermore, that our sleep be not excessive or overmuch, after the
insatiable desire of the flesh, but only sufficient to content our weak
nature, that we may the better be disposed to live in all godly conversation
to the glory of thy holy name, and profit of our brethren, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: in whose name we make our humble petitions unto thee, as he
has taught us.

Our Father which art, etc. Almighty and everliving God, vouchsafe we beseech
thee to grant us perfect continuance in thy lively faith, augmenting and
increasing ye same in us daily, until we grow to the full measure of our
perfection in Christ, whereof we make our confessior, saying: I believe in God
the father etc.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us, and
be merciful unto us* the Lord ^urne his favorable countenance toward us,
and grant us his peace.

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the
holy Ghost be with us, and remain with us for ever. So be it. 2. Cor. 9. 13.

An other Evening prayer.
MOst merciful God and tender father, which besides thine inestimable mercies
declared and given unto us in the making of the world for our sakes, in the
redeeming of us by the death of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, in the calling of
us to the knowledge of thy blessed word, in keeping of us hitherto in thy
holy Church, and in thy most gracious governing of us, and all things
hitherto for our singular wealth and commodity, have also most fatherly cared
for us, and kept us this day from all dangers both of soul and body, giving
us health, food, apparel, and al other things necessary for the comfort and
succor of this poor and miserable life, which many other do want: for these
and all other thy good gifts and gracious benefits, which thou of thine own
goodness only and fatherly providence have hitherto powered upon us and do
presently power upon us and many other, we most humbly thank thee and praise
thy holy name, beseeching thee, that as all things are now hidden by means of
the darkness which thou have sent over the earth, so thou would vouchsafe
to hide and bury all our sins, which this day or at any time heretofore
we have committed against thy holy commandments, and as now we purpose to
lay our bodies to rest, so grant the guard of thy good Angels to keep the
same this night and for evermore: and whenever our last sleep of death shall
come, grant that it may be in thee good father, so that our bodies may rest
both temporally and eternally, to thy glory and our joy through Jesus Christ
our lord. So be it.

Another Evening prayer.
O Eternal God and most mercifull-father, who this day, and all the time of our
life have graciously defended, nourished, and preserved our souls and bodies,
and made such fatherly provision for us poor sinners, that of thy loving
kindness we have rich portions, not only in the creatures of heaven and
earth, but also in that plentiful redemption which thy most dear Son Jesus
Christ has purchased for us: grant unto us (O merciful father) the assistance
of thy grace and holy spirit, that as our bodies shall now take their natural
rest, even so our souls and minds, at the beholding of thy goodness toward
us, may quiet themselves in thee, and conceive such inward pleasure and
heavenly sweetness in thy love, that whatsoever we shall from henceforth, either
think, speak or we, it may be all to the honor of thy holy name, through
Jesus christ thy dear son our Lord and only Savior, Amen.

Thy mighty hand and outstretched arm (O Lord) be still our defense, thy
mercy and s^^ing kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear son, be our salvation:
thy truth and holy word out instruction: thy grace and holy spirit our
comfort and consolation unto the end, and in the end.

A prayer for the remission of sins.
O Almighty and ever living Lord God, the dear father of our Savior Jesus
Christ, which have made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is,
which art the only ruler and governor, conseruer and keeper of all things,
together with thy dearly beloved Son Christ Jesus our Lord, and with the
holy Ghost our comforter: O holy, righteous a wise: O strong, terrible, mighty
and fearful Lord God, governor of the whole world, judge of al me^^ O
exorable, patient, and most gracious Father, whose eyes are upon the ways of
all men, and are so clean'^ that they cannot abide impiety: thou searchest the
hearts, and triest the very thoughts and reins of all men, thou hate
sin, and abhorrest iniquity.

For sins sake thou have grievously punished ma^kinde, thy most dear
creature, as thou have declared by the penalty of death laid upon all the
children of Adam: by the casting of Adam and his offspring out of Paradise: by
the cursing of the earth: by the drowning of the world: by the burning of
Sodom and Gomor: by hardening the heart of Pharao, so that no miracle could
convert him: by the drowning of him and his people in the red sea: by the
overthrowing of the Israelites in the wilderness, so that of fire hundredth
thousand there were but two that entered into the land of promise: by rejecting
King^ Saul: by the punishments upon thy servant David, notwithstanding his
hearty repentance: by grievously afflicting Solomon in himself and his
posterity: by the captivity of the ten tribes: and by the thraldom of the
Jews, wherein until this present day they continue a notable spectacle of thy
wrath to the world, against, and for st^ne.

But of a^^ spectacles of thy anger against sin, the greatest and most
notable is the death and bloody passion of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus
Christ. Great was thine anger against sin, when in heaven and earth nothing
could be found which might appease thy wrath, save the bloudshedding of thine
only and most dearly beloved son, in whom, was and is all thy delight.
Great was the sore of sin that needed such a salve: mighty was the malady,
that needed such a medicine. If in Christ, in whom was no sin, thy wrath was
so fierce for our sins that he was constrained to cry: My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? How great and importable then is thine anger against us,
which art nothing but sinful? They that are thy children, through the
contemplation of thine anger against sin, set forth most evidently in the
death of Christ, do tremble and are afraid, lamenting themselves upon him,
and heartily crying for mercy: whereas y^ wicked are altogether careless and
conte^ptuous, nothing lamenting their iniquities, or crying to thee heartily
for mercy and pardon. Amongst whom we are rather to be placed, than amongst
thy children, for that we are so shameless for our sins, and careless of
thy wrath, heaping daily sin upon sin, so that the measure has ouerflowed
and ascended up to heaven, and brought thy heavy plagues upon us, which are but
earnest for geeater to ensue: therefore to us pertains shame, and nothing
else is one but confusion.

What shall we do? what shall we say? who shall give us penitent hearts? who
can open our lips, that our mouths might make acceptable confession unto
thee, Alas of our selves we cannot think any good, much less wish it, and
least of all we it. As for Angels, or any other creatures, they have nothing
but that which they have received, and they are made to minister unto us. So
that where i^ passes the power of the master, the minister must needs want.
Alas then, what shall we do? Thou art holy, and we unholy: thou art good and
we nothing but evil: thou art pure, and we altogether impure: thou art light,
and we most dark darkness: how then can there be any agreement betwixt us?
O what now may we do? Despair: No. for thou art God, and therefore good: thou
art merciful, and therefore thou forgiuest sins: with thee is mercy and
propitiation, and therefore thou art worshipped.

When Adam had sinned, thou gave him mercy before he desired it: and will thou deny us mercy which now desire the same? Adam excused his fault and
accused thee: but we accuse our selves and excuse thee: and shall we be sent
empty away? Noe found favor when thy wrath abounded, and shall we seeking
grace, be frustrate? Abraham was pulled out of Idolatry, when the world was
drowned therein: and art thou his GOD only? Israel in captivity in Egypt was
graciously visited, and delivered: and dear God, the same good Lord shall we
always be forgotten?

Now often in the wilderness did thou defer and spare thy plagues at the
requests of Moses, when the people themselves made no petition to thee? and
seeing we not only now make our petitio^s unto thee through thy goodness,
but also have a mediator for us, far above Moses, even Jesus Christ, shall
we (I say) dear Lord depart ashamed? So soon as David said, I have sinned,
thou did forthwith answer him, that he should not die: thou have taken
away his sins: and gracious God, even the self same God, shall not we, not
we which now with David gladly confess, that we have sinned, shall we (I say)
not hear by thy good spirit, that our sins be pardoned? O grant that with
Manasses we may find favor and mercy.

Remember that thou have not spared thine own only dear Son Jesus Christ,
but given him to die for our sins, to rise for our righteousness, to ascend
for our possession taking in heaven, and to appear before thee for us for
ever, a high priest after the order of Melchizedech, that through him we might
have free access to come to thy throne, now rather of grace, than of Justice.
Remember that thou by him have bidden us ask, and promised that we sho^lde
receive saying: Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and
it shall be opened unto you. O dear God, and most meek and merciful father,
we heartily beseech thee to be merciful unto us, for this thy Christ's sake,
for his deaths sake, for thy promise, truth, and mercies sake. Have mercy
upon us, pardon and forgive us all our sins, iniquities, and trespasses,
whatsoever we have committed against thee, in thought, word or deed, ever or at
any time hitherto by any means. Dear father, have mercy upon us. Though we be
poor, yet our Christ is rich: though we be sinners: yet he is righteous:
though we be fools, yet he is wise: though we be impure: yet he is pure and
holy: for his sake therefore be merciful unto us.

Call to mind how thou have promised that thou will power out of thy clean
waters, and wash us from our filthe, and cleanse us from our evils. Forget not
that thou have promised to take from us our stonye hearts, and to give us soft
hearts, new hearts, and to put in the midst of us right spirits. Remember
thy covenant, namely that thou will be our God, and we shall be thy people:
that thou will put out of thy memory for ever al our unrighteousness, and have
promised to write in our minds and hearts thy law and testimonies.

Remember that thou do straightly charge us to have none other Gods but thee,
saying, that thou art the Lord our God. O then declare the same to us all, we
heartily now beseech thee. Forgive us our sins, forget our iniquities,
cleanse us from our filthiness, wash us from our wickedness, power out thy holy
spirit upon us. Take from us our hard hearts, our stony hearts, our
impenitent hearts, our distrusting and doubtful hearts, our carnal, our
secure, our idle hearts, our impure, malicious, arrogant, envious, wrath full,
impatient, covetous, hypocritical, and epicurall hearts: and in place thereof
give us new hearts, soft hearts, faithful hearts, merciful hearts, loving,
obedient, chaste, pure, holy, righteous, true, simple, lowly, and patient hearts
to fear thee, to love thee, to trust in thee for ever.

Write thy law in our hearts, grave it in our minds, we heartily beseech
thee. Give us the spirit of prayer: make us diligent and happy in the works
of our salvation, sake into thy custody and governance for ever our souls
and bodies, our lives and all that ever we have. Tempt us never further, than
then wilt make us able to bear: and whatsoever thou know we have need of
in soul or body (dear God and gracious father) vouchsafe to give us the same
in thy good time: and always as thy children guide us, so that our life may
please thee, and our death praise thee, through Jesus christ our Lord: for
whose sake we hartilye pray thee, to gra^nt these things thus asked, and all
other things necessary for soul and body, not only to us, but to all others
also, for whom thou would that we should pray, specially for thy children
that be in thraldom, in exile, in prison, misery heaviness, poverty,
sickness, etc.

Be merciful to the whole realm of England, and grant us all true
repentance, and turn from us the evils that we so wickedlie have deserved.
Pardon our enemies, persecutors, slaunderers, and if it be thy pleasure, turn
their hearts. Be merciful unto our parents, brethren, and sisters, friends,
kinsfolks and familiars, neighbors, and such as by any means thou have
coupled and lincked to us by love or other wise: and unto us poor sinners here
gathered together in thy holy name, grant thy blessing and holy spirit to
sanc^fie us, and dwell in us as thy dear children, to keep us this day and
for ever from all evil, to thy eternal glory, and everlasting comfort, and
the profit of thy Church, which mercifully maintain, cherish and comfort
strengthenning the^ that stand, so that they never fall, lifting up them that
be fallen, and keep us from falling from thy truth, through the merits of
thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ our only Savior, which lives and
reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, to whom be al praise and honor, both
now and for ever, Amen. I. B.

A prayer for the true knowledge of the mystery of our redemption in Christ.
O Almighty God, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by him also our
Father, the Father of all mercy, and God of all consolation, have mercy upon us
and hear our prayers. we most humbly beseech thee, for thy dear son
Jesus christ his sake, for his merits and cruel death which he suffered to
deliver us from eternal death, and the power of darkness send into our
hearts the spirit of truth, to work in us a true, lively, and steadfast faith,
that the clear light and brightness of thy Gospel, the glory of Christ, may
shine unto us, and lighten our minds, that we may learn and understand the
wonderful and unspeakable riches of ye mystery of our redemption in Christ
and by Christ. Ephesians. 2.
O Father of glory, give unto us the spirit of wisdom, and bring us unto the
true knoweledge of this thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, and the knowledge of
thy self. Open and lighten the eyes of our minds and understanding, that we
may know what the hope is whereunto thou have called us, and how rich the
glory of thine inheritance is upon thy Saints, and the exceeding greatness of
thy power toward us: that by trne faith, by understanding and knowledge of
thine eternall-wisedome (which is Jesus Christ) we may be indeed, as we are
called, true Christians, and unfeigned professors of thy holy name, to worship
thee in spirit and truth, and to set forth the glory of thy grace given unto
us in Christ Jesus our lord, Amen.

O dear father, write in our hearts love of thy law, hate to al sin,
thankfulness of heart, and continual heat of thy holy spirit, for thy son
Jesus Christ's sake: To whom with thee and thy holy spirit be al honor,
majesty, glory, thanks, rule* empire, and dominion, for evermore, Amen.

A form of thanksgiving for our redemption and prayer for the strength and
increase of faith.
Lord incr^ase our faith. Luc. 17.
Eternal praise and thanks be given unto thee, dear God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4
which have blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things by
Christ, in that thou have chosen us in him before the foundation of the world
was laid, that we should be without blame before thee through him, by whom we
have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins: in
whom, after we heard ye word of truth, the Gospel of our salvation, wherein
we believed, we are sealed with the holy spirit of promise which is the
earnest of our inheritance, which spirit has and does bear witness unto our
spirits, Romans 8
that we are thy children and therefore cries into our hearts: Abba Father. And
thus (most gracious father) when thou have once given the earnest penie of our
salvation into our hearts, thou do not repent of the gift and calling,
neither will thou at any time break thy covenant of race and mercy in Christ
thy sons merits, confirmed in us by that seal and love token. For what
though we be weak in our belief, Romans 8
shall our unbelief make thy promise of no effect? No, thou will always be
found true, but all men are liars. And yet Lord, thou do most graciously
behold and accept, Mark. 9
be it never so little a spark of faith. We say therefore and cry unto thee,
with one ye wept and said: I believe, Lord, help my unbelief. Yea, that
little, be it never so little, is thy mere gift also. The which as thou have
begun, so (most merciful Lord) increase the same more and more to the peace and
comfort of our conscience, and the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ,
Amen.

A thanksgiving to God for his great benefits.
Honor and praise be given to thee (Lord God almighty) most dear Father of
heaven, for all thy mercies and loving kindness showed unto us, in that it
has pleased thy gracious goodness, freely and of thine own accord, to
elect and choose us to salvation before the beginning of the world: and even
like continual thanks be given unto thee, for creating us after thine own
image, for redeeming us with the precious blood of thy dear Son, when we
were utterly lost, for sanctifying us with thy holy spirit in the revelation
and knowledge of thy sacred word, for helping and succouring us in all our
need and necessity, for saving us from all danger both of body and soul,
for comforting us so fatherly in all our troubles and afflictions, for sparing
us so long, and giving us so large a time of repentance. These benefits (O
most merciful Father) like as we do acknowledge that we have received of thy
only goodness, even so we beseech thee for thy dear son Jesus Christ his
sake, to grant us always thy holy spirit, whereby we may continually grow
in thankfulness toward thee, be lead in all truth and comforted in all
adversity.

Strengthen our faith, O lord: kindle it more and more in feruentnesse and
love toward she and our neighbors for thy sake. Suffer us not (most dear
Father) to receive thy word any more in vain, but grant us always the
assistance of thy grace and holy spirit, that in heart, word, and deed, we
may sanctify and do worship to thy holy name: that we may help to amplify
and increase thy kingdom, and that whatsoever thou sendest, Thy kingdom come.
we may heartily well be content with thy good will and pleasure. Thy will be
done.
Suffer us not to lack the thing (O Father) without the which we cannot serve
thee: Give us this day etc.
but bless thou so all the works of our hands, that we may have sufficient,
and not to be chargeable, but rather helpefull unto other. Be merciful, O
Lord, unto our offenses: For give us etc.
and seeing our debt is great which thou have forgiven us in Jesus Christ, make
us to love thee and our neighbors so much the more. Lead us not into temptation.
Be thou (O father) our captain and defender in all temptations: hold thou us
by thy merciful hand, that we thereby may be delivered from al
inconveniences, But deliver us from evil.
and end our lives in the sanctifying and honoring of thy name, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer for true mortification.
O God my creator, preserver, and everlasting defender, where first in my
creation I was made like unto thine own likeness, the devil (alas) has since
by Adams fall made me ugly, monstrous, and evil favored, like to him self.
For what are now, Lord, mine earthly members but as thine Apostle writes
adultery, Colo^. 3
whoredom, uncleanness, unnatural lusts, evil concupiscence, covetousness
(which is the worshipping of Idols) and such other, for the which thy wrath is
wont to come upon the children of unbelief? Nevertheless, Lord of thy great
mercy and goodness, against this so great a mischief, a much greater remedy
thy fatherly providence has or dayned: for thou have sent Jesus Christ thy
dear and only natural son into this world, the vale of miseries, to loose
the works of the devil, 1 John. 3
and to take away my sins.

Therefore Satan has now nothing to brag of, for through Christ, all that
believe in thee, 1. John. 5
and so become thy children, do overcome the world, the flesh, and the devil,
And this is the victory which ouercometh them al, even our faith. That faith I
mean, which is persuaded, that whosoever believes in Christ, 1. John 3
shall not perish, but have everlasting life. John. 5.


That faith which believes the testimony to be true which thou God the father
do testify of thy son, so making thee no liar: and this is y^ testimony
that thou have given us eternal life. That faith which believes that thou
Father, Romans 8.
who raisedst up Christ from death, shall also quicken our mortal bodies,
through thy holy spirit dwelling in us. That faith which believes it to be
true which thy Son Christ affirmed with a double oath, saying: Verily, velily
I say unto you, John. 14.
he that believes in me, the works that I do, the same shall he do, and
greater works than these shall he do, because I go to my Father. John. 15
And finally, that faith which believes that now Christ has been lift upon
the cross, he shall draw all things unto him. This faith (I say) is the
victory which overcomes our enemies, the devil, the world, John. 12
and our flesh.

Thou therefore dear father which have promised to give whatsoever I shall ask
in thy dear son Jesus name, 1 John. 3
for thy great mercy and infall^ble truethes sake, do now in me ye thing that
he came for: loose in me the works of the devil, and take away my sins, I
beseech thee, make steadfast my faith and confidence in thy promised mercies,
and merciful promises: so that I assuredly believing in thee, may have as
(thou have promised) everlasting life, and making thee (dear God) no ^i^r, may
believe, feel and know in my heart and conscience, that the same everlasting
life is thy mere and free gift unto me, yea all ready of thy great goodness
undoubtedly given me, being now traslated from death to life.

Of a thankfulness whereof Lord, Romans 8.
cause me now daily to mortify my earthly members: yea, dear father ^^th
thy spirit which raised up christ from death, dwells within me, do thou (who
raisedst Christ from death) quicken my mortal body through thy spirit so
dwelling within me, I beseech thee: yea Lord Jesus, according to thy promise
(because thou art now gone to thy father) make me work this wonderful great
work that thou speak of, John. 14
I mean make me being of my self but a lump of sin, and a monster most
ugly, (as the vices whereon the members of my earthly body are above declared
to be compact, Col, 3.
do proone) make me, I say, yet through thy grace, to hate, abhor, flee and
subdue all adultery, whoredom, uncleanness, vnnaturrall lusts, evil
concupiscence, inordinate desires, wantonness, tenderness, delicateness,
idleness, drunkenness, gluttony, slothfulness, distrust, despair,
ignorance, weakness wilfulness, idolatry, superstition, hypocrisy, herese,
error, sects, variance strife, wrath, envy, slanders, lying, swearing,
cursing, vaineglory, pride, covetousness, theft, deceit, flattery, and
whatsoever else, O Lord, fights or reblelleth against thy holy spirit: and
then (O Father) I will boast and make vant against mine enemy the devil, that
I have done greater works than thy dear son Jesus did, at what time he
spoke these words among the Jews, because albeit he vanquished Satan, yet in
as much as he himself was utterly without sin, the victory seemed the more
easy. But I to vanquish Satan being my self altogether sinful, pea contrary
to my most sinful nature to subdue sin, the devil, and mine own flesh, it
seems a more victory and a greater work than the other. For the which
nevertheless I will with all submission acknowledge unto thy divine majesty,
that the whole victory, Lord, Indeed is thine, and thy holy spirit the
beginner and finisher both of the will and the works.

Now therefore (Lord Jesus) strengtheN me with thy grace and might, that thou
may by me a most sinful wretch, draw all these my earthlye members and
horrible vices before rehearsed, under my feet, that I may not only fight
against them, but also subdue them: Romans 8
so that they may all turn to the best for me, John, 12.
as meet matter whereon I may exercise my faith, power forth my hearty prayer,
and give thee most hearty thanks, for victory: whereby I may learn and have
experience that thou have in me drawn al things unto thee, insomuch as thou
thus (Lord) of thy divine power drawest both the diued and the sin that
dwells in me, to set forth thy honor and glory, which thing for thy mercies
sake bring to pass, O God my creator, preserver, and everlasting defender.

A meditation for the exercise of true mortification.
HE that will be ready in weighty matters to deny his own will, and to be
obedient to the will of God the same had need to accustom himself to deny
his destres in matters of less weight, and to exercise mortification of his
own will in trifles. For if that our affections by this daily custom be not
(as it were) half slain, surely, surely, when the plunge shall come, we
shall find the more to do. If we cannot watch with Christ one hour, (as he
says to Peter) we undoubtedly can much less go to death with him.
Wherefore, that in great tentations we may be ready to say with Christ: Not
my will, but thy will be done (for as much as this commonly comes not to
pass, but where the roots of our lusts, by thy grace dear father, are
almost rotten and rooted out by a daily denial of that they desire) I humbly
beseech thee for Christ's sake to help me herein.

First pardon me my cherishing, and (as it were) watering of mine affections,
obeying them in their devises and superfluous desires: where through, in that
they have taken deep root, and are too lively in me. I secondly do beseech
thee to pull them up by the roots out of my heart, and so he^ceforth to order
me, that I may continually accustom my self to weaken the principal root,
that by the roots and branches they may loose all their power, Grant me (I
beseech thee) that thy grace may daily mortify my concupiscence of pleasure
in things, that is, of wealth, riches, glory, liberty, favor of men, meats,
drinks, apparel, ease, yea, and life it self, that the horror and impatience
of more grievous things may be weakened, and I made more patient in adversity.

Whereunto I further l^stre and pray thy goodness, dear father, that thou will ad this: namely that I pray for ever become obedient and ready to do thy
good will in althings, heartily and willingly to serve thee, and do whatsoever
may please thee. For doubtless although we accustom our selves in ye
pleasant things of this life, to a mortification and denial of ourselves, yet
we shall find enough to do, when more bitter and weighty crosses come. For
if thy Son our Savior (ever wont to obey thy good will) prayed so heartily
and often Not my will, but thy will be done, (whereby he declares himself to
be very man) how can it be, but we, whose nature is corrupt, not only in
nativity, but in the rest of our whole life also, shall find both our hands
full in great and grievous temptations, wholly to resign our selves unto thee?

Grant therefore dear father, for thy Christ's sake to me a most miserable
wretch, thy grace and spirit to be effectual in me, that daily I may accustom
my self, to deny my will in more easy and pleasant things of this life, that
when need shall be, I may come unto thee with a resigned will, always
steadfastly expecting thy mercy, and in the mean season continually obeying
thee with readiness I willingness, doing whatsoever may most please thee,
through Christ our Lord, who lives with thee, etc.

A meditation of the coming of Christ to judgment, and of the reward both of
the faithful and unfaithful.
OH Lord Jesus Christ, the son of the euerlluing GOD, by whom al things were
made, are ruled and governed: as of thy love for our redemption thou did
not disdain to be our mediator, and to take upon thee our nature in the womb
of a virgin purely and without sin, by the operation of thy holy spirit, that
both thou might in thine own person wonderfully beautify and exalt our
nature, and work the same in us also, first abolishing the guiltines of sin
by remission, then sin it self by death, and last of all, death by raising
up again these our bodies that they may be like to thine own glorious and
immortal body, according to the power wherewith thou art able to subject all
things unto thee: as (I say) of thy love for our redemption thou becamest man,
and that most poor and afflicted upon earth, by the space of three and thirty
years at the least, in most humility, and paiedst the price of our ransom by
thy most bitter death and passion: (for the which I most heartily give thanks
unto thee) so of the same thy love toward us, in thy good time thou will come
again in the clouds of heaven, with power (I great glory, with flaming fire,
with thousands of saints, with Angels of thy power, with a mighty cry, shout
of an Archangel, Math. 24
and blast of a trumpe, suddenly as a lightening which shines from the East,
etc. when men think least, even as a thief in the night, when men be asleep,
thou will so come, Math. 15
I say, thus suddenly in the twinkling of an eye, all men that ever have
been, be, or shall be, with women and children, appearing before thy
tribunal seat, to render an account of all things, which they have thought,
spoke, and done against thy law openly and before all Angels, Saints, and
devils, and so to receive the just reward of thy vengeance, if they have not
repented and obeyed thy Gospel, and so depart from thee, to the Devil and his
Angels, and all the wicked which ever have been, be, or shall be, into helfire,
which is unquenchable, and of pains intolerable, easeles, endless, hopeles,
even from the face of thy glorious and mighty power.

But if they have repented and believed thy Gospel: if they be found watching
with their lamp, and oil in their hands: if they be found ready
apparelled with the wedding garment of innocence: if they have not hardened
their hearts, and hourded up their treasure of thy vengeance in the day of wrath
to be revealed: but have used the time of grace, the acceptable time, the time
of salvation, that is, the time of this life, in the which thou stretchest out
thy hand, and spreadest thine arms, calling and crying unto us to come unto
thee, which art meek in heart and lawlie, for thou will ease all that labor
and are heavy laden: if they have visited the ^^^ke and prisoners, comforted
the comfortless, sedde the hungry, clothed the naked, lodged the
harbourlesse: if they have not laden their hearts with gluttony and surferting
and carelessness of this life: if they have not dug and hid their talent in
the ground, doing no good therewith, but have been faithful to occupy thy
gifts to thy glory, and have washed their garments in thy blood by hearty
repentance: then shall thy Angels gather them together, not as the wicked which
shall be collected as faggots, and cast into the fire, but as the good wheat
that is gathered into the barn: then shall they be caught vpto meet thee in
the clouds: then shall their corruptible body put on incorruption: then shall
they be endued with immortality, and glory, then shall they be with thee,
and go whither thou go: then shall they hear: Come ye blessed of my
father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning, etc. The^
shall they be set on seats of majesty, judging the whole world: then shall they
reign with thee for ever: then shall God be al in all with them and to them:
then shall they enter and inherit heavenly Jerusalem, and the glorious
restfull land of Canaan, where it is always day and never night, where is no
manner of weeping, tears, infirmity, hunger, cold, sickness, envy, malice,
nor sin: but always joy without sorrow, mirth without measure, pleasure
without pain, heavenly harmony, most pleasant melody, saying and singing:
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, etc.

Finally the eye has not seen, the ear has not hard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man, that they shall not inherit and most surely
enjoy, although here they be tormented, prisoned, solicited of Satan, tempted
of the flesh, and entangled with the world, where through they are in forced
to cry: Apo. 22
Thy kingdom come: Come Lord Jesus, etc.

How amiable are thy Tabernacles. Like as the Heart desires the water brooks,
Psalm. 4, 5.
etc. Now let thy servant depart in peace. I desire to be dissolved and to
be with Christ. Romans 8.
We mourn in our selves, waiting for the deliverance of our body, etc. Oh
gracious Lord, when shall I find such mercy with thee, that I may repent,
believe, hope, and look for these things with the full fruition of those
heavenly joys which thou have prepared for all them that fear thee ^^rest
with thee for evermore.

A meditation of the life everlasting the place where it is, and the
incomparable joys thereof.
THat there is an everlasting life, none will deny, but such as will deny
God. For if he be true and just, (which he must needs be, or else he is not
God) then can there not be but an eternal life. That he has both spoken it,
and promised it, in Math. 25. 1. Cor. 15. Heb 4. 11. 13. 1, Pet. 1. it
plainly appears, and elsewhere in very many places. So y^ to deny an
everlasting life is to deny God, to deny Christ and all that ever he did:
also to deny al piety and religion, to condemn of foolishness all good men*
Martyrs, confessors, Evangelists, Prophets, Patriarchs. Finally the denial of
eternal life is nothing else but a denial of the immortality of the soul,
and so a plain making of man nothing better then beasts. If it be so, let us
then eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. 1. Co. 15
Lord preserve us from this Saduceall and Epicuriall impiety, and grant us for
thy mercies sake dear God, that we may be assuredly persuaded, that there is
indeed an eternal life and bliss with thee, for them that put their trust in
thee: amongst whom account me for thy mercies sake.

Again this eternal life, Where this et^^^nall life is.
and the place appointed for them that be thy servants, all men do grant to
be with thee. Albeit they do not think that because thou art every where.
therefore eternal life is every where, For they by thy word do know, that in
as much as no man can see thee and live, which eternal life and thy blessed
presence is most pleasant and had in fruition, John. 4.
after in another world, whereunto by corporal death they do depart and are
translated to a place above them, 1. Tim. 6
where thou dwell in a light whereunto no man can approach. Abraham's bosom
(they read) was above, as the place of the wicked was below and beneath.
Helias was caught up into heaven, and thy dear Son our Savior prayed that
where he is, those also might be which thou had given him, John. 17
and might see his glory. Now he (dear father we learn by thy spirit) was
ascended and taken up in his very body into heaven, Act. 7.
whither Stephen looked up and saw thy Christ standing on thy right hand, to
whom he prayed. O Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. Grant I beseeeh thee,
gracious God and father, that I may have a clean heart more and more to see
thee, and so in spirit to see and look often upon this place: whither bring
me at the length in body also I humbly pray thee.

Now what a thing this everlasting life is, no man is able to conceive, much
less able to utter: For the peace of God which is eternal life, passes all
understanding. 1. Cor. 5
The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither can man's heart
conceive those things which thou (dear God) have prepared for them that love
thee. What so ever therefore can be spoken or imagined of thy kingdom, of the
cleerenesse, joy, and felicity of the same, is nothing in comparison, as we
may see by the Prophets: which (because they could not otherwise) under
corporal things have shadowed the same, What knowledge may.
So that the confidence of eternal life, what a thing it is, can in no wise
be told. Howebeit, somewhat we may be brought to some sight of it by earthly
things to think on this sort. be had in this life of the life euerla^^ing.
If GOD have given here so many things in a strange place, how many are ye
great good things yt be at home: If in prison are so many mercies, how many
are they in the palace? If ye wicked have so many benefits, what is the store
prepared for thy servant, Oh Lord? If thy children find such comforts in the
day of tears and mourning what shall they find in the day of the marriage? If
with beasts men being, have yt use of innumerable blessings, Oh how many are
the blessings which they shall enjoy with thy Angels, and with thy self) O
dear God) when they shall see thee and have the fruition of thee: in whom is
fulness without lothing of al good and fair things, so that nothing can be
more desired, and that for evermore?

This thy children do not see as they now believe it: I say that even in their
bodies they shall see it for ever: as Job said, They believe that they shall
see thee, and their own eyes be hold thee when these our corporal eyes, our
bodies being raised, shall do their duties. Such a knowledge of thee they
believe to have, Job. 15.
as shall not be only intellectual and by faith, as now it is, but even a
full sight and fruition, yea, a conjunction and fellowship with thee. 1. Co. 13
Now they see but as in a glass, even in a dark speaking: but then they shall
see thee face to face. Heb. 11.
For faith, though it be the substaunee of things hoped for, and a certain
dark sight of thee: yet it may not be compared to the reward of faith and
glorious sight which we shall see in the life to come, 1 Ioh. 13
when faith and hope shall cease.

Now, thy children know that they be thy sons, though it yet appear not
what they shall be. We know (say they) that when our christ God and man shall
appear, then shall we be like unto him, for we shall see him even as he is. Oh
great prerogative to see Christ, as he is: which is not to be considered, so
much for ye manhead, as for the Godhead it self as Paul does also write, 1.
Co. 15
that when all things are subject unto the Son, then shall he be subject unto
thee dear Father also, that God may be all in all. And therefore Christ our
savior prayed for us, that we might know thee the only true God: Not that
our Christ thy Son is not with thee: the true, coequall, and substantial
God, but that we might know how that after the Judgment such a mystery of
his mediatorship shall not be in heaven, as is now in earth.

Then thou blessed Trinity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost shall be al in all: thou shall be the end of our desires: thou shall be
looked upon without end: thou shall be loved without lothing: thou shall be
praised without weariness. Although loath somnesse be wont to follow
fullness: yet out fullness in the contemplation of thy pleasures shall bring
with it no kind at all of loathsomeness. Satietie of joys shall be in the
beholding of thee. Psalm. 16
pleasures are on thy right hand forever, We shall be satisfied when we arise
after thine Image, Psalm. 19
I mean in the resurrection.

O dear Father, show thy self unto, us, and we ask no more. Oh grant us
with thy Saints in everlasting life, to praise with perpetual praises thy holy
name. Happy then and happy again were we, if that day were come that we
might sing with the Angels, Elders, and innumerable thousands, a new song, and
say: Thou Christ Jesus which wast slain art worthy to receive power, and riches,
and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.

In this blessed life all kind of maladies, griefs, sorrows, and evils be
far away, and all full of al kind of mirth, joy, and pleasure. Oh that we
might see now a little with saint John, that holy City new Jerusalem,
descending from heaven, prepared of God as a bride trimmed for her husband. Oh
that we might now something hear the great voye speaking out of the throne:
Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people, and he shall be unto them their GOD, he will wipe
away all ^eares from their eyes, and death shall be no more, nor weeping, nor
crying, nor sorrow, for the former things are gone. I. B.

Another meditation of the blessed state and felicity of the life to come.
THis body is but a prison, wherein the soul is kept, and that verily not
beautiful nor bright, but most foul and dark, disquiet, frail, and filled
up with much vermin, and venomous vipers, (I mean it concerning our
affections) standing in an air most unwholesome, and prospect most loathsome,
if a man consider the excrementes of it by the eyes, nose, mouth, ears, hands,
feet, and all the other parts. So that no Bocardo, no Little ease, no
Dungeon, no Bishops prison, no Gatehose, no sink, no pit, may be compared in
any point to be so evil a prison for the soul, as the bodies for and of the
soul: wherethrough the children of God have bin occasioned to cry and lament
their long being in it. Oh says David, How long shall I lie in this prison, Oh
wretch that I am (says Paul) who shall deliver me out of this body of
sin: Which is in heavy burden to the soul, as the wise man says. And the
godly cry: Luke 2
Now let thy servant depart in peace. Psalm. 1 43
Oh that I were dissolved and had put off this earthly and frail Tabernacle.
Take me unto thee, and bring my soul out of this prison, that it may give
thanks unto thee, O Lord, for so long as we be in this body, we cannot see
the Lord: yea, it is as an heavy habitation, and depresseth down sore the
spirit from the familiarity which it self should have with God. This word and
life is an exile, a vale of misery, a wilderness of it self, being void of
all virtues and necessary for eternal life, full of enemies sorrows,
sighing, sobbinges gronings, raiseries, etc. In danger to hunger, cold,
heat, thirst, sores, sickness, tentations, trouble, death, and innumerable
calamities, being momentanie, short, unstable, and nothing but vain, and
therefore is compared to a warfare, a woman's travail, a shadow, a smoke, a
vapor, a word, a storm, a tempest, in the which Gods people feel great
molestations, griefs, and troubles, now of satan himself, now of the world,
now of their own flesh, and that so wonderfully, diversely, dangerously; and
contrarily, that they are enforced to cry: O Lord, when shall we come and appear
before thee, when shall this misery end? when shall we be delivered out of this
vale of misery, out of this wilderness, out of these continual afflictions
and most perilous seas.

But where thou art (Lord and dear Father of mercy) there is not only no
prison, no dolours, no sorrow, no sighings, no tears, no sickness, no
hunger, no heat, no cold, no pain, no tentations, no displeasure, no malice,
no pride, no uncleanness, no contention, no torments, no horror, no sin, no
filth, no stinch, no dearth, no death, no weeping, no tears, no misery, no
mischief: there is (I say) not only no such thing, or any evil, noisome, or
displeasant thing, but all liberty, all light, all pleasantness, all joy,
rejoicing mirth, pleasure, health, wealth, riches glory, power, treasure,
honor, triumph, comfort, solace, love, unity, peace, concord, wisdom,
virtue, melody, meekness, felicity, beatitude, and all that ever can be
wished or desired in most security, eternity, and perpetuity, that ma: be
thought not only of man but of Angels, and Archangels, yea above all thoughts.
The eye has not seen the like, 1. Cor. 2
the ear has not heard, nor no heart is able to conceive in any point,
any part of the blisseful beatitude which is with thee most dear Lord and
savior, most gracious God and comforter.

Where thou art, O blessed GOD, the Archangels, Angels, Thrones, Powers,
Dominations, Cherubines Seraphins Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Virgins, Confessors, and righteous spirits cease not to sing night and day:
Apo. 4
holy, holy, holy Lord God of Hoasts, honor, majesty, glory, power, empire,
and dominion, be unto thee. Oh God the creator, O Lord Jesus the redeemer, O
holy spirit the comforter. Apo^ ^


In recordation of this, O how thy children rejoiced How contemn they the
pleasures of this world? How little esteem they any corporal grief or
shame? Psalm. 84
How desire they to be with thee? How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord GOD
of hosts, say they? My soul has a desire to enter into the Courts of the
Lord my hearty and my soul rejoices in the living GOD: blessed are they that
dwell in thy house, that they may be always praising thee: For one day in
thy Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere. I had rather be a doorekeeper
in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of ungodliness Psalm. 42
for the Lord God is a light and defense. And again, Like as the Heart desire
the water brooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God. My soul is a thirst
for God, yea even for the living God. When shall I come to appear before the
presence of God? My soul thirsts for thee, Psalm. 63
my soul also longs after thee, in a barren and dry land where no water is.

They (thy children I mean O Lord) desire the day of that their redemption.
Romans 8
Still they cry, Let thy kingdom come. Apoc. 12
They cry, Come Lord Jesus, Phil. 3.
They lift up their heads looking for thy appearing, Oh Lord which wilt make
their vile bodies like to thine and own glorious and immortal body. For when
thou shall appear they shall be like unto thee. Thy Angels will gather them
together, Mat. 24.
and they shall meet thee in the clouds, and be always with thee. They
shall hear this joyful voice: Come ye blessed of my father, possess the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning.

Then shall they be like to thy Angles. Then shall they be like unto the Son
in thy kingdom. Mat. 13.
Then shall they have crowns of glory, Apoc. 7,
and be endued with white garments of innocence and righteousness, having
palms of victory in their hands. Oh happy is he that may but see that immortal
and incorruptible inheritance, which they shall enjoy for evermore, Amen. I. B.

A meditation of the presence of GOD.
THere is nothing that makes more to true godliness of life, than the
persuasion of thy presence (dear father) and that nothing is hid from thee,
but all to thee is open and naked, even our very thoughts which one day thou will reveal and open either to our praise or punishment in this life: as thou
did David's faults which he did secretly. 2. Keg. 12. or in the life to
come Matthew, 25. for nothing is so hid that shall not be revealed? Therefore does
the Prophet say: Woe to them that keep their secret thoughts to hide their
counsel from the Lord, and do their works in darkness, saying, who sees
us?

Grant me therefore dear God, mercy for all my sins, especyallie my hid
and close sins. Enter not into judgment with me, I humbly beseech thee,
give me to believe truly in the Christ, that I never come into judgment for
them, and that with Da^id I might so reveal the^ unto thee, that thou would
in thy great mercy cover them. And grant further, that henceforth I may
always think my self continually conuersane before thee, so that if I do
well, I need not to pass of the publishing of it, as hypocrites (...): If I
think o do any evil, I may ^^^th with know that the same shall not always be
hid from men.

Grant me that I may always have in mind that day wherein the hid works
of darkness shall be illuminated, and also that sentence of thy son, that
nothing is so secret which shall not be revealed. So in trouble and wrong I
shall find comfort, and otherwise be kept through thy grace from evil, which
do thou work I humbly beseech thee for Christ's sake. I. B.

A meditation of the providence of God.
THis ought to be unto us most certain, that nothing is done without thy
providence, God works all in all, maruellously justly and holilie.
(O Lord) that is, that nothing is done, be it good or bad, sweet or sour
but by thy knowledge, that is, by thy will, wisdom, and ordinance, (for all
this knowledge both comprehend^^ in it) as by thy holy word we are taught in
many places: that even ye life of a sparrow is not without thy will, nor any
liberty or power upon a porket have all the devils in Hell, Mat. 10.
but by thy appontment and will: Math. 8.
which will we always must believe most assuredly to be al just and good
howsoever otherwise it seem unto us: for thou art marvelous and not
comprehensible in thy ways, and holy in all thy works.

But hereunto it is necessary also for us to know no less certainly, God
works by means without means and against means.
that though all things be done by thy providence, yet the same providence
has many and diverse means to work by, which means being contemned, thy
providence is contemned, also. As for example, Meat is a mean to serve thy
providence for the preservation of health and life here, so that he which
contemns to eat because thy providence is certain and infallible, the same
contemns thy providence.

In deed, if it were so that meat could not be had, then should we not tie
thy providence to this mean, but make it free as thou art free, that is, that
without meat thou can help and give health and life, for it is not of any
need that thou use any instrument or mean to serve thy providence. Thy
power and wisdom is infinite, and therefore should we hang on thy
providence, even, when all is clean against us. But for our crudition and
infirmities sake, it has pleased thee by means to work and deal with us
here, to exercise us in obedience, and because we cannot else (so great is our
corruption) sustain thy naked and bare presence.

Grant me therefore dear Father I humbly beseech thee for Christ's sake, that
as I something now know these things, so I may use this knowledge to my comfort
and commodity in thee: that is, grant that in what state soever I be, I may not
doubt but the same does come to me by thy most just ordinance, yea, by thy
merciful ordinance: for as thou art just, so art thou merciful: yea thy
mercy is above all thy works.

And by this knowledge grant me that I may humble my self to obey thee, and
look for thy help in time convenient, not only when I have means by which
thou may work and are so accustomed to do: but also when I have no means,
but am destitute thereof, yea, when al means be directlye and clean against
me: grant I say, that I may yet still hang upon thee and thy providence, not
doubting of a fatherly end in thy good time.

Again, least I should contemn thy providence, or presume upon it, by
vncoupling those things which thou have coupled together: preserve me from
neglecting thy ordinary and lawful means in all my needs, if so be I may
have them, and with good conscience use them, although I know thy providence
be not tied to them further than pleases thee: and grant that I may with
diligence, reverence and thankefulnes, use them and, thereto my diligence,
wisdom, and industry in all things lawful to serve thereby thy providence,
if it so please thee: howbeit so that I hang in no part on the means or on my
diligence, wisdom, and industry, but only on thy providence: which more and
more persuade me to be altogether fatherly and good, how far soever
otherwise it appear and seem, yea, or else is felt of me. By this I being
preserved from negligence on my behalf, and despair or murmuring toward
thee, shall become diligent and patient through thy mere and alone grace:
which give and increase in me, to the praise of thy holy name for ever, through
Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen. I. B.

A meditation of Gods power, beauty, goodness, etc.
BEcause thou lord would have us to love thee, not only do thou will,
entice, allure, and provoke us, but also do command us so to do, promising
thy self unto such as love thee, and threatening us with dam nation if we do
otherwise. Whereby we may see both our great corruption and naughtiness, and
also thine exceeding great mercy toward us.

First concerning our corruption and naughtiness, what a thing is it, that
power, riches, authority, beauty, goodness, liberality, truth, justice (all
which thou art good Lord) can not move us to love thee? Whatsoever things we
see fair, good, wise, mighty, are but even sparkles of that power, beauty,
goodness, wisdom, which thou art. For to the end thou might declare thy
riches, beauty, power, wisdom, goodness, etc. thou have not only made, but
still do conserve all creatures to be (as David says of the heavens)
declarers and setters forth of thy glory, and as a book to teach us to know
thee.

How fair thou art, the beauty of the Sun, Moon, Stars, lights, flowers,
rivers, fields, hills, birds, beasts, men and all creatures, yea, the
goodly shape and form of the whole world does declare.

How mighty thou art, we are taught by the creation of this world even of
naught, by governing the same, by punishing the wicked mighty Giants thereof,
by over throwing their devises, by repressing the rages of the sea within her
bounds, by storms, tempests and fires. These and such like declare unto us
thine invisible, almighty, and terrible power, whereby thou snbduest al things
unto thee.

How rich thou art, this world, thy great and infinite treasurehouse, does
well declare. What plenty is there not only of things, but also of every
kind of thing? Yea, how do thou yearly and daily multiply these kinds? How
many seeds do thou make of one seed? Yea what great increase do thou bring
it unto? These cannot but put us in remembrance of the exceeding riches that
thou have. For if to thine enemies which love the not (as the most part in this
world be) if to them thou give so plentifully thy riches here: what shall we
think that with thy self thou have laid up for thy friends.

How good thou art, all creatures generally and particularly do teach. What
creature is there in the world which thou haste not made for our commodity? I
will not say how that thou might have made us creatures without sense or
reason, if thou had would. But among all things, none does so teach us
thy great love toward us, as does the death of thy most dearly beloved
son, who suffered the pains and terrors thereof, John, 15.
yea and of Hell it self. for our sakes. If this thy love had been but a small
love, it would never have lasted so long nor Christ should never have died.

I. B.

A Meditation concerning the sober usage of the body, that it may be subject
and obedient to the soul.
THis our body which God has made to be the tabernacle and mansion of our
soul for this life, if we consider it accordingly, we could not but use it
otherwise than we do: that is, we would use it for the souls sake being the
guest thereof, and not for the body it self, and so should it be served in
things to help, but not to hinder the soul. A servant it is, and therefore it
ought to obey and serve the soul, that the soul might serve God not as the
body will, neither as the soul it self will, but as God will, whose will we
should learn to know and behave our selves thereafter. The which thing to
observe is hard for us now: by reason of sin which has gotten a mansion
house in our body, and dwells in us as does the soul. To the which (sin I
mean) we are altogether of our selves inclined, because we naturally are
sinners and borne in sin, by reason whereof we are ready as servants to
sin, and to use our bodies accordingly, making the soul to sit at reward,
and pampering up the servant to our shame.

Oh therefore (good Lord) that it would please thee to open this gear unto
me, and to give me eyes to consider effectually th^s my body what it is,
namely a servant lent for thee soul to soiourne in, and serve the in this
life: yea it is by reason of sin that has is dwelling there, become now hto
the soul nothing else, but a prison, and that most strait, vile, stinking,
filthy, and therefore in danger of miseries to many in all ages, times and
places, till death have turned it to dust whereof it came, and whither it shall
return, that the soul may return to thee from whence it came, until the day
of judgment come, (...) the which thou will raise up that body, that then it
may be partaker with the soul, and the soul with it inseparably of weal or
woe, according to that is done in and by the same body here now in earth.

Oh that I could consider often and heartily these things, then should I not
pamper up this body to obey it, but bridle it that it might obey the soul:
then should I fly the pain it putt ^t) my soul unto by reason of sin and
provocation to all evil, and continually desire the dissolution of it with
Paul, and the deliverance from it as much as ever did prisoner his deliverance
out of prison: for al^^ely by it the Devil has a door to tempt, and so to
hurt me: in it I am kept from thy presence, and thou from being so conversant
with me, as else thou would be: by it I am restrained from the sense and
feeling of all the joys and comfortes (in manner) which are to be taken as
joys and comfortes indeed. If it were dissolved and I out of it, then could
satan no more hurt me, then would thou speak with me face to face, then the
conflicting time were at an end, then sorrow would cease, and joy would
increase, and would I enter into inestimable rest. Oh that I could consider
this accordingly. I. B.

Another meditation concerning the sober usage of this body and pleasure in
this life.
The beginning of all evil in our kind of living, springs out of the
deprauation and corruptnesse of our judgment, because our will always
follows that which reason judges to be followed. Now, that which every man
takes to be friendly and agreeing to his nature, the same does he judge
necessarily to be good for him, and to be desired. This is meat, drink,
apparel, riches, favor, dignity, rule, knowledge, and such like, because they
are thought good and agreeing, either to the body or to the mind, or to both,
for they help either to the conversation or to the pleasure of man accounted
of every one amongst good things.

Howbeit, such is the weakness of our wit on the one part, and the blindness and
too much rage of our lusts on the other part, that we being left to our
selves, cannot but in the desire of things which we judge good and agreeing to
our nature, by the judgment of our senses and reason, ^e cannot (I say) but
ouerpasse the bounds whereby they might be profitable unto us, and so we make
them hurtful unto us, which of themselves are ordained for our health.

What is more necessary than meat and drink, or more agreeing to nature, but
yet how few be there which do not hurt themselves by them? In like manner it
goes with riches, estimation, friends, learning, etc. yea although we be in
these most temperate, yet when there wants the spirit our regenerator, we are
so drowned in them, that we utterly neglect to lift up your minds to the good
pleasure of God, to the end we might imitate and follow God our maker, by
yielding our selves over, duly to use his gifts to the common and private
utility of our neighbors.

But now, God only is life and eternity, and cannot but demand o^ us his
handy work, that we should render our selves and al we have, to the end
wherefore we were made, that is, to resemble for our portion, his goodness,
as they which be nothing else but witnesses and instruments of his mercy: So
that when we wholly do naturally strive against that kind of life whereunto
he has created us, by seeking always our selves, what other thing ought to
ensue, but that he should again destroy us, and take away his notable gifts,
wherewith he therefore endued us, that by all kind of well doing we should
resemble his image: yea what other thing may ensue, but that he should leave
us, and that eternally, that we might feel and by experience prove how
bitter a thing it is to leave the Lord, in whom is all goodness? Oh that I
might therefore ^^nde such favor in thy sight (dear father) that thou would
work in me by thy holy spirit, a true knowledge of all good things, hearty
love to ye same: through Christ Jesus our Lord and only Savior, Amen. I. B.

A meditation of death, and the commodities it brings.
What other thing do we daily in this present life, but heap sin upon
sin, and hoorde up trespass upon trespass? so that this day is w^rse
always then yesterday by increasing, as days, so sins and therefore thy
indignation, good Lord, against us: but when we shall be let out of the prison
of this body, and so taken into thy blessed company, then shall we be in most
safety of immortality and salvation, then shall come unto us no sickness, no
need, no pain no kind of evil to soul or body, but whatsoever good we can
wish, that shall we have, and whatsoever we loath, shall be far from us. O
dear father, yt we had faith to behold these things accordingly, O that our
hearts were persuaded thereof, and our affections inflamed with the desire of
them.

Then should we live in longing for that which now we must loath. Oh help us,
and grant that we being ignorant of things to come and of the time of our
death (which to thee is certain) may so love and finish our journey here, that
we may be ready, and then depart when our departing may make most to thy
glory, and our comfort through Christ.

What is this life but a smoke, a vapor, a shadow, a war far, a bubble of
water, a word, grass, a flower? That thou shall die, it is most certain, but
the time no man can tell when. The longer in this life thou do remain, the
more thou sinnest: which will turn to thy more pain. By cogitation of death
our minds be often in manner oppressed with darkness, because we do but
remember the night of the body, forgetting the light of the mind and of the
resurrection.

Hereto remember the good things that after this life shall ensue without
wavering in certainty of faith, and so shall the passage of death be more
desired It is like a sailing over the sea to thy home and country, it is like
a medicine or purgation to ye health of soul and body: it is the best
Physician: it is like to a woman's travel. For as the child being delivered
comes into a more large place, than the womb where in it did lie before: so
thy soul being delivered out of the body, comes into a much more large and
fair place even unto heaven.

A meditation upon the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.
OH Lord Jesus Christ, ye son of the everliving God, by whom all things were
made, and be ruled and governed: thou the lively Image of the substance of the
Father the eternal wisdom of God, the brightness of his glory, GOG of God,
light of light, coequall, coeternall and substantial with the father: thou
which of the love thou had to mankind, when he was fallen from the
fellowshippe of God into the society of Satan and al evil, did vouchsafe for
our redemption, to become a mediator between God and man, taking to thy
godheade our nature, as concerning the substance of it, and so becamest man
also the heir of all, and most merciful Messiah, which by the power of thy
Godheade and merits of thy manhood, have made purgation of our sins, even
by thine own self, whilst thou wast here on earth, being now set on the
right hand of thy father for us, even concerning our nature, in majesty, glory
and power infinite, I pray and humbly beseech thy mercy to grant me at this
present to rehearse some of thy passions and sufferings for me the last night
yt thou wast here before thy death, that thy good spirit might thereby be
effectual to work in me faith, as well of the pardon of my sins by them, as
mortification of mine affections, comfort in my crosses, and patience in
afflictions Amen.

In the midst of thy last Supper with thy dear apostles, these things could
not but be before thee, namely that they all would leave thee, the most
earnest would forswear thee, and one of the twelve should most traitorously
betray thee* which were no small crosses unto thee. Judas was admonished of thee
to beware, but when he took no heed, but wilfully went out to finish his
work, contemning thy admonition and counsel: he could not but vex thy most
loving heart.

After supper there was contention amongst thy Disciples, who should be
greatest after thee, yet dreaming carnally of thee and thy kinkdome, and having
this affection of pride and ambition busy amongst them notwithstanding thy
diligence in reproving and teaching them.

After thy admonition to them of the cross that would come, thereby to make
them more vigilant, so gross were they, that they thought they could with
their two swords put away all perils, which was no little grief unto thee.
After thy coming to Gethsemane, heaviness pressed thee and therefore thou
would thy disciples to pray. Thou did tell to Peter and his fellows, that
thy heart was heavy to death. Thou did will them to pray, being careful
for them also least they should fall into temptation. After this thou wentest a
stons cast from them, and did pray thy self, falling flat and goueling
upon the earth: but (alas) thou feltest no comfort* and therefore thou came
to thy Disciples (which of all others were most sweet and dear unto thee) but
lo* to thy further discomfort they pass neither of thy perils, nor of the^r
own, and therefore sleep apace.

After thou had awaked them, thou go again to pray, but thou foundest no
comfort at al, and therefore did return again for some comfort at thy
dearest friends hands. But yet again (alas) they are fast a sleep. Whereupon
thou art enforced to go again to thy heavenly father for some spark of
comfort in these thy wonderful crosses and agonies. Now, here thou wast, so
discouraged and so comfortless, that even streams of blood came running from
thine eyes and ears, and other parts of thy body. But who is able to
express the infiniteness of thy cross even at thy being in the garden? Al
which thou sufferedst for my sake, as ye l to sa^is^ie thy fathers wrath for my
sins, as also to sanctify al my sufferings, the more gladly to be sustained
for me.

After thy bloody prayer thou came and yet again foundest thy disciples a
sleep, and before thou can well awake them, lo, Judas comes with a great
band of men to apprehende thee as a thief, and so does, leading thee away
bound to y^ high Bishops house Annas, and so from him to Caiphas. Here now to
augment this thy misery, behold thy disciples fly from thee: false witnesses be
brought against thee: thou art accused and condemned of blasphemy: Peter even
in thy sight forsweareth thee: thou art unjustly stricken for answering
lawfully: thou art blindfold, stricken and buffeted all the whole night in the
bishop Caiphas house of their servants.

In the morning betimes thou art condemned again of the Priests of blaspemie,
and therefore they bring thee before the seculiar power to Pilate, by whom
thou art openly arraigned as other theeus and malefactors were: and when he
saw that thou wast accused of malice, yet he did not dismiss thee, but did
send thee to Herod, where thou was shamefully derided in coming and going to
him and from him all the way, especially after Herod had apparelled thee as a
fool.

Before Pilate again therefore, thou wast brought and accused falsely: no man
did take thy part, or speak a good word for thee.

Pylate caused thee to be whipped and scourged, and to be handled most
pitifully, to see if any pity might appear with you prelates, but no man at
all pitied thee.

Barrabas was preferred before thee, all the people, head and tail was
against thee, and cried hang him up, Unjustly to death was thou judged thou was
crowned with thorns y^ pierced thy brains: thou wast made a mocking stock^:
thou wast reueiled, beaten and most miserably handled.

Thou wentest through Jerusalem to the place of execution, even to the Mount of
Caluarie: a great cross to hang thee on, was laid upon thy back to bear and
draw as long as thou was able.

Thy body was racked to be nailed to the tree, thy hands were boared through,
and thy feet also, nails were put through them to faste^ thee thereon: thou
wast hanged between heaven and earth, as one spued out of heaven, and vomited
out of the earth. unworthy of any place: the high Priest laughed thee to
scorn, the Elders blasphemed thee, and said God has not care for thee, the
common people laughed and cried out upon thee, thirst oppressed thee, but
Vinegar only and gall was given thee to drink: heaven shined not upon thee:
the Sun gave thee no light: y^ earth was afraid to bear thee: satan tempted
thee, and thine own senses caused thee to cry out: My God my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Oh wonderful passions, which thou sufferedst. In them thou
teach me: in them thou comfortest me: for by them God is my father: my
sins are forgiven. By them I should learn to fear God, to love God, and
never to leave him for any temptations, but with thee to cry: Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit.

A prayer to Christ crucified.
AS thou, O Lord was crucified for me: so I beseech thee crucify me with
thee, that I may rise again with thee to everlasting life. Thy flesh was
crucified for me: crucify with thee: (O CHRIST) the kingdom of the flesh,
which has dominion in me, that I may put off the old Adam, and by newenesse
of life may be transformed into thee the second Adam, sin, infidelity, and
the whole tyranny of Satan being vanquished and overcome.

Bring to pass (O Lord) that by thy cross and payneful suffering, thy yoke
may be to me made light, and thy burden easy, that willingly and gladly
following thee, I may come whither thou art gone: that is, to thy father most
blessed and immortal, from whom nothing shall afterward be able to separate
us.

God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, but in the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world. Gal. 6.

A Prayer to Christ ascended and reigning in glory.
OH good Christ, our first begotten brother and tender hearted Joseph, Oh
natural Son of that Father, to whom we are made Children of adoption
through thee, Oh our head reigning on high in glory, forget not us thy poor
members here on earth, whereunto abasing thy self thou came down and
sufferedst for us most cruel death. Out of this thy throne of Majesty and
glore, thou put us in assured hope and confidence that we also shall
attain to that blessed place, whither thou art gone before to take possession
for us. Oh our strong tower of defense and succor, what can hurt us now
trusting in thee? Most unhappy are they which are ignorant of thee. Most happy
are they, which always behold thee. Blessed are they which have known thee
here in the days of their mortality: But more blessed are they which see
thee in the heavens, and shall see thee reigning with thy father in joys
incomparable. Oh Lord the only joy and comfort of our souls, show us thy
loving countenance, embrace us with the arms of thy mercy: receive us O good
Joseph, thy younger brethren with the kiss of comfort power into our hearts
thy holy spirit: pluck us up from the earth and earthly things: open our eyes
and lift them up unto thee: open thy mouth and call us unto thee: open our
ears that we may hear thee so that whatsoever we do speak or think, it may
be directed unto thee alone our redeemer, mediator and advocate.

If ye be risen again with Christ, seek the things which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God: set your affection on things that are
above, and not on things which are on earth. Col. 3.

Another.
THou Lord did put away Marie Magdalen from the kissing of thy feet,
because thy flesh was not yet exalted, and she knew not yet the dignity of thy
clarified body, and beautified with the glory of immortality, but was
addicted only to thy bodily presence.

She yet sought the living among the dead, neither was it known to her that
thou was equal with thy father. Wherefore thou would not suffer her so much
as to kiss thy feet: Luke. 14.
because it was a thing unworthy for thy majesty. Oh thou mighty Lion of the
tribe of Judah: thou conqueror of hell and death, everliving and immortal, thou
art now risen from death for us: thou art now ascended to thy father and our
father, and sit at his right hand in glory: suffer us to come near unto
thee that we may kiss thee: yea, Lord, thou lover of our souls come thou
rather unto us, Began. 1.
and kiss us with the kiss of thy mouth, that we may be glad and rejoice in
thee, draw us that we may run after the savor of thy sweet ointments:
that we may behold thee in righteousness, and when thy glory shall appear
we may be satisfied, Psalm. 17.
for in thy presence there is fullness of joy, and in thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. (...). 16


A prayer for true repentance.
MOst gracious God and merciful father of our Savior Jesus Christ, because I
have sinned and done wickedlie, and through thy goodness have received a
desire of repentance, whereunto this thy long^ suffering does draw my hard
heart^ I beseech thee for thy great mercies sake in Christ, to work the same
repentance in me, and by the spirit, power and grace, so to humble, mortify
and fear my conscience for my sins to salvation, that in thy good time thou
may comfort and quicke^ me again, through Jesus Christ thy dearly beloved
son, So be it. I. B.

A prayer for the strength and increase of faith.
O Merciful God and dear father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (in
whom as thou art well pleased, so have thou commanded us to hear him) for as
much as he often bids us to ask of thee, and also promises that thou will
hear us and grant us that which in his name we shall ask of thee: lo
gracious father we are bold to beg of thy mercy through thy son Jesus
Christ one sparkle of true faith and certain persuasion of thy goodness and
love toward us in Christ, where through I being assured of ye pardon of all
my sins by the mercies of Christ thy son may be thankful to thee, love thee,
a serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life. I. B.

A prayer for the true sense and feeling of Gods favor and mercy in Christ.
OH Lord God and dear Father, what shall I say that feel all things to be
(in manner) with me as in the wicked? blind is my mind, crooked is my will,
and perverse concupiscence is in me, as aspring or stinking puddle. O how
fainte is faith in me? How little is my love to thee or to thy people? How
great is self love? How hard is my heart? By the reason whereof I am moved
to doubt of thy goodness toward me, whether thou art my merciful father,
and whether I be thy child or (...). In deed worthily might I doubt: of that
the having of these were the cause, and not the (...) rather of thy children.
The (...) why thou art my father is thy mercy goodness, grace and truth in
Christ Jesus which cannot but remain for ever. In respect whereof thou haste
borne me this good will, to bring me into thy Church by baptism, and to accept
me into the number of thy children, that I might be holy, faithful, obedient
and innocent and to call me diverse times up the ministry of thy word into thy
kingdom: besides thy innumerable other benefits, always hitherto powered upon
me, All which thou have done of this thy good will which thou of thine own
mercy barest to me in Christ, and for Christ, before the world was made.
The which thing as thou requirest straitely that I should believe without
doubting, so would thou that in all my needs I should come unto thee as
unto a Father, and make my mo^e without mistrust of being heard in thy good
time, as most shall make to my comfort. Lo therefore to thee dear Father, I
come through thy son our Lord, mediator and advocate Jesus Christ, who
sits on thy right hand making intercession for me, and pray thee of thy
great goodness and mercy in Christ to be merciful unto me, that I may feel
in deed thy sweet mercy as thy child. The time (Oh dear Father) I appoint
not, but I pray thee, that I may with hope f^ll expect and look for thy
help. I hope that as thou for a little while have left me, so thou will come
and visit me. and that in thy great mercy, whereof I have need by reason of
my great misery.

Thou art wont for a little season in thine anger to hide thy face from them
whom thou love, but surely (O Redeemer) in eternal mercies thou will show
thy compassions. For when tho ^eauest us O Lord, thou do* not leave us very
long, neither do thou leave us to our own loss, but to our lucre and
advantage: men that thy holy spirit with bigger portion of thy power and
virtue may lighten and cheer us, that the want of feeling of our sorrow, may
to recompensed plentifully with the live y^ sen^e of having thee to our eternal
joy: and therefore thou swarest that in thine everlasting mercy thou will have
compassion on us. Of which thing, to the end we might be most assured, thine
oath is to be marked, for th^n say^st^: As I have sworn, that I will never
bring any more the waters to drown the world: Esaie 54
So have I sworn that I will never more be angry with thee* nor (...) thee.
The mou^t^ (...) shall (...), and the hills shall fall down^, but my loving
kindness shall not move: and the bond of my peace shall not fail thee. Thus
say thou, the Lord our merciful redeemer.

Dear Father, therefore I pray thee remember, even for thine own truth and
mercy sake, this promise and everlasting covenant, which in thy good time. I
may thee to write in my heart, that I may know thee to be the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; that I may love thee with all my heart
for ever: that I may love thy people for thy sake* that I may be holy in thy
sight through Christ, that I may always not only strive against sin, but also
overcome the same daily more and more, as thy children do, above al things
des^ring the sanctification of thy name, the coming of thy kingdom, the doing
of thy will here on earth as it is in heaven, etc. throguh Jesus Christ our
redeemer, mediator, and advocate. Amen. I. B.

A prayer against our spiritual enemies, the devil the world and the flesh.
O Lord God, the devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour: the flesh lusts against the spirit, the world persuades unto
vanities, y^ we may forget thee our Lord God, and so for ever ve damned. Thus
are we miserably on every (...) befet and ^e^^eged of cruel a vnrestful,
enemies and like every momente to perish, if we be not defended with thy godly
power against their tyranny. We therefore poor and wretched sinners
despayring of our own strength, which indeed is none, most heartily pray
thee to indue us with strength from above, that we may be able through thy
help, with strong faith to resist Satan, with fervent prayer to mortify the
lusts of the flesh, with continual meditation of thy holy law, to avoid
the foolish vanities and transitory pleasures of this wicked world: y^
through thy grace we being set at liberty from the power of these our
mortal enemies, may serve thee here in true holiness and righteousness, and
after be partakers of the everlasting joys prepared for thy children, which as
they are great and unspeakable, so are there few that do enjoy them. For
strait is the way, and narrow is the gate that leads thereunto, and few
there be that find it. Notwithstanding (O God) thou have a little flock to whom
it is thy pleasure to give that joyful kingdom: whose names are written in
the book of life. Make us therefore of that number, for Jesus christ's sake,
and place us amongst those thy sheep which shall stand on thy right hand to
receive that blessed inheritance, and dwell with thee for evermore.

A prayer for present help in tentation.
Dear father, to whom it is more easy to do all things, then for me to
think any one goodthing: Lo, do thou but speak a word, and thy deadly
sick servant my sonle, shall be made whole. Help (O Lord) for the great
mercy sake, for thy truth sake, and for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake,
and set thy sterngth suffice against my weakness, and the holy-spirit against
my sinful flesh and old man.

Thou art faithful (O Father) who have promised that I shall not be tempted
further, than thou will make me able to bear. Give now therefore thy grace
and strength unto thy servant, that I may with a strong faith in thy in
fallible truth and promised mercy, vanquish and subdu whatsoever rebelleth
against thy most blessed will. Preserve and keep holy my soul and body: and
let them not be defiled and made a dangeon of devils and wicked spirits
through delectation in sin. Behold dear Father, the posts thereof are
sprinkled with ye precious blood of thy dear son, and of thy great mercy that
are made the temple and tabernacle of thy holy spirit. Shall now (alas) the
Devil, the world, or the flesh, pluck from thee that thing which presently
cries to thee with assured tr^st in thy promised help? Nay father, but grant
that I may by thy mighty power, turn al their crafts, decrits, and raging
assaults unto the increase of my faith, and that by experience of thy
fatherly assistance in this my present temptation, I may with assured hope and
trust in thy ready help and comfort, overcame my said enemies hereafter in
like assaults, and praise thy holy name for the victory through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

My son, if thou will come into these rule of the Lord, stand fast in
righteousness and fear, and prepare thy soul to tentation. Eccles. 2.
Remedies against sinful motions and tentations.
First remember that sin is so heinous a thing, that God by his justice might
worthily damn thee for the same, and is therefore to be abhorred as a sweet
poison, a flattering death and destruction of the soul, which would cut thee
off from God thy Savior, and make thee a bondslaue to Satan thy deadly
enemy.

Avoid therefore even at the first the occasions thereof, and betimes quash
out the brains of the children of Babylon against the hard stones, whiles yet
they be young and weak, least when they be grown elder and stronger, they
dash thee to pieces.

And for remedy against the same, flee unto God who commands thee to call
upon him in thy troubles, and promises to deliver thee, and will not suffer
thee to be further tempted than he will make away out, whereby thou shall
escape: and doubt not, but he that causes thee to hate the sin which thy
nature is to love, will deliver thee also from the danger thereof, and make
thee to triumphouer Satan, to his confusion, to Gods glory, and thy great
comfort: which are causes that our tender loving father sends tentations unto
us: and he that is not tempted, what is he?

Now after thou have obtained the victory, remember two things: first to give
most hearty thanks to God for his grace and assistance, whereby thou have
overcome, and be not unthankful in any wise: and then that he who
continually goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, will
not be long or far away from thee, but will attempt again the same or as
evil ways to overcome thee. Watch therefore and pray.

A prayer for the avoiding of Gods heavy wrath and vengeance for our sins.
OH Lord God strong and mighty great and fearful which dwell in the
heavens, and workest great wonders, we thy miserable children here upon earth
do most humbly beseech thee to be merciful unto us, to pardon our offenses,
and to forgive us all our sins. O Lord, enter not into judgment with thy
servants, for if thou do, there shall no flesh be saved in thy sight.

We confess and acknowledge, O Lord, that it is our sins, which has moved
thee to wrath, and to show such fearful tokens of thy displeasure toward
us in these our days: first with fire from heaven, betokening thy hot burning
iud gnation and wrathful displeasure for sin, which abounds at this day:
then with such horrible and monstrous shatmpes against nature, as were never
seen here in our days, nor in any time before us, which do betoken to us
none other thing, but thy plagues to come upon us for our degenerate and
monstrous life and conversation* and now besides all this, by great mortality,
plague, and pe^ilence thou have terribly threatened us, fatherly warned us, and
merci^ully called us to repentance. The axe is set to the root of the tree,
and if we be not as rotten members without all sense and feeling, we may
perceive our careful destruction and desolation to be at hand, (unless we
speedily repent and ^arne unto thee) because we have ^^ene so long taught
out of thy most holy and sacred word, and yet no fruits of repentance or
Christian life will appear.

Woe and alas to these our days, that neither preaching by word most
comfortable, nor preaching by fire most terrible, nor preaching by monsters
most strange and ouglie, neither yet by plagues and pestilence most horrible,
will stir by our stony hearts, and awake from our sins.

We fear (O Lord) that the Turks with all the rest of the unbelieving will
condemn us in the lust day: which if they had bin so long instructed by the
comfortable preaching of thy word, and sweet promises of thy Gospel, or seen
the wonders which we have seen, no doubt their righteousness would have shined
at this day, to our great shame and confusion, thou have no less (...) us (O
Lord) of thy fearful displeasure and heavy plagues at hand for our great
wickedness, than thou did the Israelites of that horrible destruction which
came upon them, whom thou first in mercy did call to repentance by the
preaehinge of thy word: but when no warning would serve, thou did send
them monstrous and fearful ^^gnes and tokens, to declare that thy vis^^ation
was not far off. But they like unto us at this day, did always interpret these
things after the imagination of their own vain hearts, promising to themselves
peace, when (...) struction was over their heads.

Which things when we do call to mind (for as much as they are written for our
learning, Example and warning) it makes us to tremble and quake for fear of
thy just judgments. For if thou have thus dealt with thine own dear) and
those^ children, in take of thy great wrath against sin: what shall we look
for who do no less deserve thy fearful scourge (for of mercy it is that
thou do thus long forbear: us) and live as though there were no God at all
to be revenged upon our sins? It makes us to fear and cry inwardly in our
souls: Come Lord Jesus, A^oc. 22
holy and true in all thy doings, and shorten our dais: bring this our
pilgrimage to an eude: suffer us not to heap sin upon sin until the day of
vengeance, least we be caught up amongst the number of the wicked and
reprobate: which shall never fee thy loving countenance.

It makes us to cry to thee (O Lord) Let thy kingdom come, and end this our
sinful life, wherein we do nothing but provoke thee to wrath.

Correct us not O Lord, Psalm. 6
in thine indignation, neither chasten us in thy heavy displeasure. And though
to us belongs nothing but shame and confusion, though our offenses have
deserved to be visited with the rod, Psalm. 89.
and our sins with scourges, yet in mercy Lord, and with fatherly
correction, chasten us, and thy loving kindness take not away from us. Psalm. 57
To thee we fly for succor, under the wings of thy mercy shall be our
refuge, until thou turn thy wrathful countenance from us. We know that thy
mercy is above all thy works, Eccle. 2.
and even as great as thy self: Therefore will we say with holy Job,
Though thou kill us, yet will we put our whole trust in thee. Job. 13


Thou came to comfort and pluck out of the dungeon of Hell, such wretches as
we are. Thou art the good Samarican that came to heal our deadly wounds:
thou art that good Physician that came to cure our mortal, infirmities: Luke
15
thou art the good Shepherd that came to seek us wandering and lost sheep,
Ephe. 5,
to bring us to thy sold again: and more than that, Esaie, 53
thou art our brother: flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones, which have
tasted of our infirmities, felt our temptations, and borne the burden of our
sins: therefore at thy hands we look for mercy against the day of
vengeance. And though thou punish us, yet our hope is and ever shall be that thy
rod shall no further touch us, than shall make to thy glory, our commodity,
and the strengthening and increase of our faith.

Let this thy Preaching sundry ways (O Lord) be sufficient for our warning,
and grant that we may speedily and from the bottom of our hearts repent,
endeavor to do thy righteous and blessed will revealed in word, and frame our
lives according to the same, that we may here live in thy fear all the days
of our life, and after this our sinful course is ended, may dwell with thee in
thy blessed kingdom, through the death and merits of Jesus Christ our only
redemer. So be it.

Another prayer for the avoiding of Gods deserved wrath hanging over us for our
sins.
When we look back and behold our sinful life past, what a dungeon of
errors, vice and wickedness opens himself unto us: So that there is no man
but he must needs be ashamed of himself when he calls to mind what he has
bin: and trembles when he conf^aereth the wickedness ^S sinful course of his
life to come: for who shall undertake that the rest of our a^fe shall be any
better than is past? How can we then sufficiently magnify: and praise thy
great mercy which have deferred thy punishment so long? Beholding therefore this
our dangerous and miserable state, we come unto thee (O thou great and mighty
Judge) in trembling and fear, humbly beseeching thee not to heap upon us thy
deserved vengeance, but let thy tender kindness and love thou dearest to Jesus
Christ thy Son our gracious Lord and redeemer, cover our iniquities: for
whose sake (though we deserve al extremity) thou do pardon us.

If thou Lord shall straightly mark our iniquities, O Lord, who shall be able
to abide it? psalm. 103.

A prayer to be said of all such as suffer any kind of cross.
ALmighty God, king of al kings, and governor of all things, whose power no
treasure is able to resist; to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners; and
to be merciful unto them that truly repent: we confess thou do most justly
punish us for unto have u^^ously finned against thee, and we acknowledge that
in punishing us thou do declare thy self to be our most merciful father,
as well because thou do not punish us in any thing as we have deserved, as
also because by punishing us thou doestcal us, and (as it were) draw us to
increase in repentance it faith, in prayer, in contem^ing of the world, and in
hearty d^^^ing for everlasting life and thy bless^^ presence,

(...) therefore gracious (...) Lord thankefully to acknowledge thy great
mercy, which have thus favorably dealt with us, in punishing us, not to our
confusion, but to our amendment. And seeing thou have sworn that thou will
not the death of a sinner, but that he turn and live, have mercy upon us,
and turn us unto thee, for thy dearly be oued Son Jesus Christ's sake, whom
thou would should be made a slain sacrifice for our sins: thereby declaring
thy great and unspeakable anger, against sin, and thine infinite mercy
toward us sinful wretches.

And for as much as the dullness, blindness, and corruption of our hearts is
such, that we are not able to arise up unto thee by faithful and hearty prayer
according to our great necessity without thy singular grace and assistaunce,
grant unto us gracious Lord, thy holy and sanctifying spirit, to work in us
this good work, with grace to weigh and cons^^r the need and greatness of
that we do desire, and with an assured faith and trust that thou will grant
us our requests, because thou are good and pracious, ^ue^ to young Raunes
calling upon thee, much more then to before who^ thou have made al things yea,
and have not: spared also thine than dear Son, because thou have commanded
us to call upon thee: because thy throne whereto we come, is a throne of grace
and mercy, because thou have given us a mediator Christ to bring us unto thee
being the way by whom we come, being the door by whom we enter, and being
our head on whom we hang, and hope, yt our poor petitions shall not be in
vain, through him and for his names sake.

We beseech thee therefore of thy rich mercy, wherein thau art ple^tifull to
al them that call upon thee, is forgive us our sins, namely, our
unthankfulness; unbelief; self love, neglect of thy word, security,
hypocrisy; contempt of thy long suffering omission of prayers, doubting of thy
power, presence, mercy and good (...) toward us, insensible, of thy grace,
^^^patience, ^c, and to (this thy benefit ofim correcting us, add thy gracious
gift of repentance, says the spirit of prayer:e the contempt of this world,
and hearty desiring^ for everlasting life. In due us with thy holy spirit
according to thy covenant and mercy, a^^el to assure us of pardon; and that
thou (...) accept us in thy favor as thy (...) children in Christ and for his
sake, as to write thy same in our hearts, and (...) to work in us, that we
may now begin and go forward in believing ^uing, fearing, obeying, praying*
hoping a serving thee, as thou do require most fatherly and most iustire of
us, accepting us as perfect in thy light, through Jesus Christ our lord ^men.

A Prayer of the afflicted for the profession of Gods word.
O Gracious God, which seek almeanes possible, how to bring ^y children into
the feeling and ^re sense of thy mercy, and therefore then prosperity will not
serve, then ^ndest thou adversity, graciously cor^ting them here whom thou will (...) elsewhere to live with thee for^er; we poor wretches give humble
^aises and thanks to thee, yt thou have ^^ched us worthy of thy correction at
(...) present, hereby to work yt which (...) in prosperity and liberty did
neglect. For the which neglecting and many other our grievous sins, whereof
we now accuse our selves before thee (Most merciful Lord) thou ought most
justly have given us over, and destroyed us both in soul and body. But such is
thy goodness toward us in Christ, that thou seek to forget all our offenses,
and as though we were far otherwise than we be indeed, thou will that we
should suffer this cross now laid upon us for thy truth and Gospels sake,
and so be thy witnesses, with thy Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors,
yea, with thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ: to whom thou do now here
begin to fashion us like, that in his glory we may be like to him also.

O good God, what are we on wh^ thou should show this great mercy? Oh
loving Lord, forgive us our unthankfulness, and sins. Oh faithful Father,
give us thine holy spirit now to cry in our hearts, Abba dear father: to
assure us of our eternal election in Christ: to reveal more and more thy
truth unto us: to confirm, strengthen, and stablish us in the same, that we
may live and die in it as vessels of thy mercy, to the glory, and to the
commodity of thy Church. Indue us with the spirit of thy wisdom, that with
good conscience we may always so answer the enemies in thy cause, as may
turn to their conversion or confusion, and our unspeakable consolation in
Christ Jesus: for whose sake we bes^^che thee hence forth to keep us, to
give us patience, and to will no otherwise for deliverance or mitigation of our
misery, than may stand always with thy good pleasure and merciful will
toward us.

Grant this dear father, not only to us in this place, but also to all
others elsewhere, afflicted for thy names sake, through the death and merits
of Jesus Christ our Lord Amen, I. B.

A prayer to God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost.
O Almighty and everliving God, the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which of thy unmeasurable goodness have opened thy self unto us, and with a
loud voice have said of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord, Hear him. O maker
and pr^seruer of all things, with thy coeternall son our Lord Jesus christ
which reigns with thee, and was manifested in Jerusalem, and with thy holy
spirit, which was powered upon the Apostles: O wise God, merciful Judge, and
mighty Lord, which have said. As truly as I live I will not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should convert and amend: which also haste said:
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, have mercy upon
us for Jesus Christ's sake, whom thou would of thy marvelous and
incomprehensible counsai^e, should be made for us a stain sacrifice,
mediator, reconciler, He. 9. 10
and peacemaker to the end that thou might sh^we ^hine exceeding great
wrath against (...) and thine in estimable mercy toward mankind. Sanctify and
illuminate our hearts and souls with thy holy spirit, that we may truly
^eleeue in thee, call upon thee, be thankeful unto thee, Esaie, 59
and obedient (...) thy holy will. Defend, govern, and cherish thy church, as
thou have ^^omised saying: This is my covenant ^^at I have made with them, my
spirit which is in thee, and my word which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy feed for ever. Preserve
those kingdoms and commonweals, which give harborough to thy people, and
maintain the ministry of thy holy word and Gospel, that the kingdom of
thy son Jesus Christ may increase and shine throughout all the world.

O Jesus Christ, A prayer to God the son
Son of the everliving God crucified for us; and raised also from the dead,
and now^ reigning at the right hand: of thy father; that thou may give gifts
unto (...), which have said: Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden; and I will refresh you, Hau^ mercy upon us, and pray for us unto thy
eternal father: sanctify and govern us with thy holy spirit: John 14.
help^ and succor us in all our necessitie^ as thou have promised, saying: I
will^ not leave you comfortless.

O holy and blessed spirit, together with the father and the son, one true and
everlasting God, full of majesty and power, which with thy heavenly
inspiration quickenest the minds of those that before were dead in sin, A
thanksgiving to the holy Ghost.
make joyful the hearts of the faithful penitent. bring into the way of
truth, all such as have erred and gone astray, comfortest the souls of such as
hunger and thirst after righteousness, and plenteously inrichest those with
diverse gifts which ask them in Jesus Christ's name: purify our hearts (we
beseech thee) and inflame them with the fire of thy love: replenish them with
thy heavenly benefits and spiritual blessings, that they may be made meet
temples for thee: lead ^s into all truth, which art the only fountain of
truth, and mortify in us whatsoever proceeds not of thee.

Or else pray thus.
O Holy spirit, powered unto the Apostles, which have promised unto us by the
Son of God our Redeemer, to kindle in us a true knowledge and invocation of
God, as it is written: I will pour upon you the spirit of grace and of
compassion: make to arise in our hearts a true fear of God, and faith and
knowledge of thy mercy, which the eternal father of our Lord Jesus Christ
has promised unto us for his sons sake. Be our comforter in all our counsels
and dangers. Illuminate our understanding, and fill our herrtes with new
affections and spiritual motions, and renew us both in soul and body, that
we may die to sin, and live to righteousness. and so in true obedience may
praise the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his son our redeemer, and
thee also our comforter everlastingly.

A thanksgiving to God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
WE render thanks unto the, O Almighty and eternal God, with thy dear son
our Lord Jesus Christ, and with thy holy spirit, for that of thine exceeding
great goodness, thou have made thy self known unto us by most assured and
evident testimonies: and for that thou have gathered and chosen unto thy self
a perpetual Church, and would that thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ
should suffer death, to restore us from death to life: for that thou have
given to us thy Ghospel and the Holy Ghost: for that thou forgiuest us our
sins, deliuerest us from the power of the deuell, and from eternal death,
and give unto us everlasting life: finally, for that thou have visited us
with many great benefits, giving us life, food, doctrine peace in such places
as we have lived in, and have diminished the pains which we have justly
deserved.

We give thanks unto thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, son of the living God, A
thanksgiving to the son.
crucified for us and risen again, because thou have coupled unto thee our
human nature, and of thy inestimable love did give thy self to death for
us, turning upon thee the great wrath of GOD the Father, conceived against
us, to reconcile us unto him, and to purchase us eternal redemption: because
thou have brought us to this grace, wherein we stand and rejoice in hope of
the glory of GOD: because thou do preserve, cherishe, and defend thy church
against the Devil and all thine enemies: because thou give and renewest
often the light of thy Gospel and maintainest the ministry of thy word:
because thou do forgive us our sins and give unto us everlasting life:
because, thou art our mediator, and make continual intercession for us, and
finally because thou do succor and preserve us in all our necessities, A
thanksgiving to the holy Ghost.
dangers and afflictions.

We give thanks also unto thee, Oh holy spirit, the giver of life, which
wast powered upon the Apostles, because thou kindlest thy light in our hearts:
because thou rulest, instructest, admonishest, and helpest us: because thou
gouernest and guidest the labors and works of our vocation, and sanctifiest
us to eternal life.

A prayer to God for his help and Protection against the obstinate enemies of
the truth.
MOst righteous Judge, God of all mercy and comfort, which by thy secret
judgment and wisdom do suffer the wicked to triumph and increase for a
time, for trial of the faith of thy well-beloved little flock, and the
mortifiing of their lusts, but at length to the utter confusion of thy enemies,
and joyful deliverance of thy people: look down we beseech thee on thy
dispersed sheep, out of thy holy habitation in heaven, and strengthen our
weakness against, their furious rages: abate their pride ass wage their
malice, confound their devises, wherewith they lift up them selves against
Christ Jesus thy son our Lord and Savior, to deface his glory, and to set
up Antichrist. We be not able of our selus to think a good thought, much
less to stand against their assaults, except thine undeserved grace and
mighty arm defend and deliver us. Perform thy promises made to Jacob, and
stop the mouths of the cursed Edomites, Call them to repentance whom thou
have appointed to salvation: bring home them that run astray: lighten the
blind and teach the ignorant: forgive all those that wilfully and obstinately
rebel not against thy holy will. Let thy fearful threatninges pearce our
st^nie hearts, and make us tremble at thy judgments. Make the examples of
them whom thou have ouerthr^wne in their own devises, as Cain, Cham, Nymrod,
Esau Pharaoh, Saul, Achitophel, Judas, and such other to be a warning for us,
that we set not up our selves against thy holy will. Grant free passage to thy
holy word: that it may work effectually in us the work of life and blessed
hope of our salvation, to the eternal praise of thy majesty, through our
mediator Christ Jesus: to whom with thee and the holy ghost, three persons
and one God, be praise and thanksgiving in all congregatio^s world without
end. So be it.

A prayer for the afflicted and persecuted under the tyranny of Antichrist.
O Merciful Father, who never do forsake such as put their trust in thee:
stretch forth thy mighty arm to the defense of our brethren by the rage of
enemies persecuted, and grievously tormented in sundry places for the true
profession of thy holy Ghospel, who in their extreme necessities cry for
comfort unto thee. Let not thy long suffering, O Lord, be an occasion, either
to increase the tyranny of thy enemies, or to discorage thy children, but with
speed O Lord, consider their great miseries and afflictions. Prevent the
cruel devise of Hamon: stay the rage of Holophernes: break off the counsel of
Achitophell. Let not the wicked say, Where is now their God? Let thy afficted
flock feel present aid and relief from thee: O Lord, look down upon them
with thy pytiful eye from thy holy habitation: send terror and trembling
among their enemies: make an end of their outrageous tyranny: beat back
their boldness in suppressing thy truth, in destroying thy true servants, in
defacing thy glory and in setting up Antichrist. Let them not thus proudly
advance themselves against thee and thy Christ, but let them understand and
feel that against thee they fight. Preserve and defend the Wine which thy
right hand has planted, and let all Nations see the glory of thine
anointed. Amen.

A prayer to be said before the preaching of Gods word.
Almighty God and most merciful father, whose word is a lantern to our
feet, and a light unto our steps, we most humbly beseech thee to illuminate
our minds, that we may understand the mysteries contained in thy holy law,
and into the self same thing, that we godly understand, we may be virtuously
transformed, so that of no part we offend thy divine majesty, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

An other.
IN this great darkness of our soule^ O Lord, thou shinest diverse waie^ unto us
by the light of thy grace, but in nothing so effectually as in the preaching
of thy word. Great is the Harvest (as thou thy self have said) and the
workmen are few. The greatest part of men are ignorant and wrapped in miserable
blindness and few there be that teach thy word truly and as they ought.
We beseech thee therefore to send forth woorkemen into thy harvest. Send
^eachers (O Lord) which are taught of thee, and instructed by the spirit of
godly wisdom and understanding, which by their preaching will ^eeke, not
themselves, but thee, because they are godly: and can so do, because they are
wise and understand. ^iue to the preacher of thy wor^e are present, out of the
treasures of by wisdom, that which he may ^^wre upon us to our salvation: and
^^to us give thy grace and holy spirit, (O Lord) so to hear and to receive
thy word, that the good seed which falls upon us be not choked with
thorns, or withered away with heat, or devoured by the fowls of the air,
but may grow up in a goodgrounde, and fructify with great increase.

A prayer to be said after the preaching of Gods word. 1. Pet. 5.

Almighty God and most merciful Father, Number. 29.
we heartely beseech thee that this seed of thy word no^ sown amongst us,
Deuteronomy. 9.
may take such deep root, Joshua. 7.
that neither the burning heat of affliction, Math. 13
or persecuti^e cause it to wither, neither the th^^^nie cares of this life do
choke it, be that as seed sown in good ground it may bring forth thirty,
sixty, (...) an hundred fold: as thy heauen^^ wisdom has appointed* And
^^^cause we have need continually to crave many things at thy hands, Luke 17.
we humbly beseech thee (O heavenly father) to grant us thy holy spirit, Romans 8
so to direct our petitions, James. 5
that they may proceed from such a fervent mind, 1. John, 5
is may be agreeable to thy most blessed Rom.. 12
will. Wisd. 9.


And seeing that our infirmity is such, that we are able to do nothing
without thy help, 2. Cor. 3.
and that thou art not ignorant with how many and ^reate tentations we poor
wretches are on every side compassed and enclosed, John. 19.
let thy strength (O Lord) ^ustaine our weakness, Phill 2.
and assist us with thy grace, Psalm. 40.
that we may be fafe^pre served against all the assaults (...) Satan, 1.
Pet. 1.
who goes about like a ^aring Lion, 1. Pet. 5.
seeking to devour us. Luke. 17
Increase our faith (O merciful Father) that we do not swar^e at a^etime from
thy heavenly word* Augment in us hope and love, Psalm. 95.
with a careful keeping of all thy commandments, Heb. 15.
that no heardnes of heart, 2 John. 2
no hypocrisy, no concupiscence of the eyes, nor intisements of the world,
do draw us away from thy obedience* And seeing the times are dangerous
wherein we live, let thy fatherly providence defend us against the violence
of all our enemies, and specially against the furious rage of that Romish
Idol, enemy to thy Christ.

Furthermore, for as much as by thy holy Apostle we be taught to make our
prayers and supplications, for all men, we pray not only for our selves here
present, but beseech thee also to reduce all such as be yet ignorant, ^phe. 13
from the miserable captivity of blindness and error, Romans r I 1. Go4.
to the pure understanding of thy heavenly truth, that we all with one
consent and unity of mind, map worship thee our only God and savior.

We beseech thee also (most decare Father) for pastors and ministers to whom
thou have committed the dispensation of thy holy word, John. 21
and charge of thy chosen people, Math. 18
that both in their life and doctrine they may be found faithful, 2 John. 9
setting only before their eyes thy glory, Mork. 6.
and that by them all poor sheep which wander and go astray, may be sought
out and brought to thy fold.

Again, that it would please thee to deliver thy church from such idle ^h^pe
heardes, wolves, and hirelings ^s seek themselves and their bellies, and not
thy glory, Pro. 2^.
and the safegarde of thy flock* John. 16.


Moreover because the hearts of ^ulers are in thy hands, Romans ^3
we make our praers unto thee for all Princes and Magistrates, John. 6.
to whom thou ^ast committed the administration of justice: especially (O
Lord) for the Queens Majesty, that it would please thee to Indue her with
thy plentiful grace and principal spirit, that she may with a pure faith
acknowledge Jesus Christ thy only son to be King of all Kings, and
governor of all governors, even as thou have given all power unto him both in
heaven and earth: and so work in her heart, that she considering whose
Minister she is, may heartely seek, and zealously promot^ thy true honor and
glory, carefully traveling to bring thy people comemitted to her charge, (and
yet remaining almost in all parts of this Realm in miserable blindness and
dark ignorance) to the true knowledge of thee, ruling and guiding them as she
is taught and commanded by thy holy word.

Also we beseech thee, to indue all such as are in any authority under her,
with thy grace and holy spirit, that they may be found upright and faithful
in their calling, fauoureres and furtherers of thy holy Gospel, maintainers
and defenders of the true Preachers and Ministers thereof, and such as in
singlenes of heart will seek not themselves, but thy glory and the comm^^tie of
thy people.

And for that we be all members of the mystical body of Christ Jesus, we
made out requests unto thee, 1. Cor. 2 Romans 12 Jacob. 5
(O heavenly father) for all such as are afflicted with any kind of cross or
tribulation, as war, plague, ^^mine, sickness, poverty, imprisonment,
persecution, banishment, or my other kind of thy rooddes, 2. Cor, 12 Heb. 13
whether it be grief of body, or vnquiet^es of mind, that it would please
thee to give them patience and constancy, till thou send thein full
deliverance out of all their troubles.

Finally (O Lord) we most humbly beseech thee to show thy great mercy upon
our brethren which are persecuted, cast in prison, and daily condemned to death
for the testimony of thy truth, Heb. 13* Romans 8.
and though they be utterly destitute of all man's aid, Psa. 4.
yet let thy sweet comfort never depart from the^, John. 1
but so inflame their hearts with thy holy spirit, that they may boldly and
cheerfully abide such trial as thy godly wisdom shall appoint: 1. Pet.
so that at length as well by their death as by their life, Acts. 2. Math. 10
the kingdom of thy son Jesus Christ may increace and shine throughall the
world. Luke 21
In whose. name we make our humble petitions unto thee, as he has taught us
saying: Our father which art, etc.

A prayer to be said before the receiving of the communion.
O Father of mercy and God of al consolation, seeing all creatures do
acknowledge and confess thee to be their governor and Lord, it becomes us,
the workmanship of thine own hands, at al times to reverence and magnify thy
godly majesty: Genesis 1 Ephesians. 2.
First, for that thou have created us to thine own image and stmilitude,
Galat. ^ Genesis 2.
but chiefly because thou have delivered us from that everlasting death and
damnation, Act. 4 Heb. 9
into which Satan drew mankind by the means of sin, Apoc. 5 Ioh. 3 Heb. 8
Heb. 4.
from the bondage whereof, 1. Pet. 1 Esaias. 45 53
neither man nor Angel was able to make us free: but thou (O Lord) rich in
mercy and in^^nite in goodness, Mat. 3. 17 lere. 31.
have provided our redemption, to stand in thine only and well beloved son:
whom of very ^oue thou did qiue to be made man like unto us in all
things, sin excepted, that in his body he might receive the punishment of
our transgression, Heb. 8.
by his death to make satisfaction to thy justice, Romans 5.
and by his resurrection to destroy him that was the author of death, Heb. 2.
and so to bring a gain life to the world, John. 6.
from which the whole offspring of Adam was most justly exiled. Genesis 3. Romans 5.
Ephesians. 3.


O Lord, we accknowledge that no creature was able to comprehend the length
and breadth, Ephesians. 2 Ioh. 6. 17 Genesis 6 Romans 3 Esai. 64.
the deepenesse and height of that thy most excellent love, Psalm. 5. 12 Rom 7.
which moved thee to show mercy where none was deserved, Math. 16 2. Cor. 2
Luke. 11 Mark. 10
to promise and give life, where death had gotten victory, to receive us into
thy grace when we could do nothing but rebel against thy Majesty. The
blind dullness of our corrupt nature will not suffer us suff^^antly to weigh
these thy most amp^^ benefits. Yet nevertheless at the commandment of Jesus
Christ our Lord, we present our selves to this thy table (which he has
left to be used in remembrance of his death until his coming again) to
declare and witness before the world, Math. 16 Luke. 11 1. Cor. 11 Ioh. 8.
that by him alone we have received liberty and life: Galath. 5 Romans 8 1.
Pet. 1 Ephe. 5 Ephe. 2 Heb. 4 Romans 3 Math. 23 Phil. 3 Ephe. 1 Ephe. 2 Apoc. 13
that by him alone thou do acknowledge us to be thy children and heirs:
that by him alone we have entrance to the throne of thy grace: that by him
alone we are possessed in our spiritual kingdom to eat and drink at his
Table, and with whom we have our conversation presently in heaven, and by
whom our bodies shall be raised by again from the dust and shall be placed
with him in that e^dlesse joy, which thou (O Father of mercy) have prepared
for thine elect before the foundation of the world was laid. Romans 3 Ephe. 2
Titus. 3 Romans 8
And these most inestimable benefits we acknowledge and confess to have
received of thy free mercy and grace, by thine only beloved son Jesus Christ.
For the which therefore we thy congregation, moved by the holy spirit, do
render to thee all thanks, praise, and glory, for ever and ever.

A thanksgiving after the receiving of the holy Communion.
MOst merciful father, we render unto thee al praise thanks honor and
glory, for that it has pleased the of thy great mercies to grant unto us
miserable sinners, 1 Gor. 10
so excellent a gift and treasure, Rom, 4 John. 6
as to receive us into the fellowship and company of thy dear son Jesus
Christ our lord, whom thou have delivered to death for us, and have given him
unto us, as a necessary food and norishment unto everlasting life. And now we
be^^ech thee also (O heavenly father) to grant us this request, that thou never
suffer us to become so unkind as to forget so worthy benefits, but father
imprint and fasten them sure in our hearts, Luke 15 Galat. 5.
that we may grow and increase daily more and more in true faith, 1. Tim. 4
Ephe. 4.
which continually is exercised in all manner of good works: 2. Pet. 5 Mat. 5
1. Pet. 1.
and so much the rather (O Lord) confirm us in these perilous days and ^ages
of Satan, that we may constantly stand and continue in the confession of the
same, to the advancement of thy glory, which art God ouet all things, blessed
for ever.

A lamentation of a sinner afflicted in conscienc^^^ his offenses.
IN the midde st^^ the desperate assaults of my soul, the intolerable
heaviness of my mind has hereto fore (LORD) cried as shrill in thine ear,
as though I had shriked, and with lamentations cried out saying: Help, help
me my God, my creator, my most provident keeper, and everlasting defender, for
behold I perish.

On this occasion (Lord) when heaviness of mind did heeret ofore assault
me, I remembered that thou had many times set before mine eyes the
wonderful greatness of thy most tender love toward me, by the great
multitude of thy benefits powered upon met, which benefits every of thy
works (as they came before mine eyes) gave me just occasion to be mindful of.

Would not (thought I) if I had in any manner any ^^^race at al, would not such
love brin^^ now into my heart a wonder^^ ^^electation, joy, and comfort in
God for the same^ And again, could such delight in Gods sweet mercy and
tender love toward me (if I were not as evil is a cast-awaye that were none
of Gods children) be without loathing of my sin, and lust and desire to do
Gods holy will? And these things thought I (fie upon me unthankful wretch)
are either not at all in me, or else in deed so coldly and stenderly, that
they being truly weighed and compared to right cousnesse, are more vile than a
filthy cloth starched in corrupt blood, Psalm. 104


O (thought I) Iain afraid I have deceived my self: for thy servants at all
times (I trow) f^^^ otherwise than I now do the fruit^ of thy spirit, as
love, joy, peace, and such like. But my love (alas) toward thee, what is it?
my joy is not once almost felt of me: for my very soul within me (as David
in his heaviness said) refuses comfort, and fares as though it did utterly
despair: Psalm. 77
and what peace can I feel then, or certainty of thy favor and love? Justly
may I power out this dolorous lamentation of Sion: The Lord has forsaken me,
and my Lord has forgotten me. Esai. 49


Even in the midst (I say) of these my former desperate assaults, mine
intolerable heaviness cried to thee O my God, and from heaven thou heardest my
gronings, and thereupon first preparedst my heart to ask comfort of thee, and
then thou did accept my prayer, and gave me plentifully my asking.

Oh my soul consider well that thou art never able to declare the exceeding
goodness of GOD in this, that he heard the very desires of thee being
afflicted: who is so ready favorably to grant the requests of the afflicted,
that oftentimes he tarieth not until they do call, but or ever they call upon
him, favorably hear them, as the Psalmist says: The desire of the
afflicted thou hear O Lord: Psalm. 10
thou preparest their hearts, and thine ears hear them.

Oh Lord my God, marvelous things are these, whether I consider this
marvelous manner of thy hearing, or else the marvelous nature and property of
thy goodness. Marvelous (no doubt) is that thy hearing, whereby the very
desires of the aflicted are heard: but much more maruailous is this thy
goodness, which tarrfest not until the afflicted do desire thy help, but
preparest first their hearts to de^^re, and then thou give them their destres.

Yea Lord (worthy of all praise) it cannot otherwise ^e, For how should
thou do otherwise than thy nature and property is? Art not thou very goodness
mercy it self? How can thou then but pity and help misery?

Art not thou both the creator and also the conseruer of all things?

In so much as the Lions whelps roaring after their pray, do seek their
food at thy hands, Psalm. 147 Esaias. 94.
and the Rauenes birds lacking meat, do call upon thee.

If then thy fatherly providence and tender care (O Lord) upon all thy
creatures be so great, that the very beasts and fowls have this experience
of thy goodness in their necessities, that their roarings and cryings have the
strength of earnest calling and desires: how much rather do these sighinges,
groninges, and desperate heaviness of men, but chiefly of thy children, cry
and call loud in thine ears, though they speak never a word at all.

Should I then now despair of thy fatherly mercy, whiles presently I feel
thee, stir up my soul and heart to crave help at thy hande^ Should I
think that thou will absent thy self for ever? Psalm. 77*
that thou will be no more entreated? that thy mercy is clean gone? that thy
promise is come utterly to an end? and that thou will now shut up thy loving
kindness in displeasure?

Nay Lord, for all alterations are of thy right hand, and turn al way to
the best to them that fear thee: All this is but mine own inffrmitie: for
thou art ever one, thy promises be infallable, and the love toward thine,
everlastingly during. I will therefore in this my present tentation and
grievous assault, power ^ut the heaviness of my heart before thee dear
Father. Out of the deep will I cry, and lift by my soul unto thee, Psa. 77
from whom I assuredly know my help is coming, I will also for my present
comfort, call to remembrance (O Lord my God) thy tender mercies toward me
already showed, the multitude of thy benefits the greatness of the same, the
long continuance of them, even from my conception until this instant: and
finally, thy continual lust and desire to power them upon me.

And moreover, fith thy goodness is so great (O Lord) that thou do not
only pity misery, but also call the heavy hearted and afflicted unto
thee, Math, 11
promising. that thou wit ease their misery, for as much as by the motion of
thy good spirit I loath and abhor my s^nnes, feel the gree uousnesse of them,
and thy heavy wrath toward me for the same: and finally, what need I have
of thy gracious aid and succor: heresore (O Lord) in thy son Christ's
name, with sure confidence and trust in thine infallible promise, in this mine
anguish and trouble I come unto thee at thy merciful calling, and crave
comfort at thy hand. For thou have promised, that when I loath my sins, thou will utterly forget them when I feel the grievous burden of them, thy mercy
swalloweth them up: when I seek that I want thou will assuredly grant it me.
For ^^th tthou moouest my heart to desire help, how should I mistrust but thou will for thy trueths sake, guie me my asking?

Yea, where I know not how, Romans 8
or what to desire, as I ought, thy holy spirit graciously working in me,
makes intercession mightily for me with gronings which cannot be expresses,
and therewith certifieth my spirit, that by adoption through thy great mercy
and goodness I am become thy child and heir.

Why should I not then be of good comfortand joyful in thee my God? For if
thou be on my do, who can be against me? Since thou diddcst not spare thine
own son, but gave him for me, even when I was thine enemy: how fhalt
thou not with him, now that by his death I am brought into thy (...), Romans 8
give me all things with him, and for his sake? Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of thine elect. It is thou Lord which iustifiest me. It is Christ
that has died for m^e, yea, rathe^ that is risen again for me. Who also is
set on thy right hand, and hat taken possession, yea, and perpetually there
makes interrcession for m^ until that joyful day be come, wh^ I shall have
full fruition of the most glorious presence of thy divine may sty in that
kingdom which thou have prepared before the beginning of the world, Ephe. 1.
but in time (to thy gracious goodness thought best) make known to me, by
giving thy holy spirit into my heart: whereby, Romans 8.
when I first (Lord) believed thy holy word, which is thine own power to
save all that believe, I was sealed, confirmed, and stablished in the certainty
of that thine everlasting kingdom and inheritance.

For the which inestimable benesite of the rich grace (Oh Lord my God) I
beseech the, even for the love thou barest to Christ Jesus thy son, and thy
mercy thou had on him when he cried on the cross: Math. 27*
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Help, help, I say, inflame my
heart with love so plentifully toward thee again, that I may be even
swallowed up in the joyful feeling of the same, in such sort that I may of very
thankfulness love thee my God alone, thee I say my dear God, and nothing but
thee, and for thy sake O holy spirit whose work this is in me, increase this
the work of thiue infinite mercy, and preserve me that I never become
unthankful unto thee therefore, Amen.

A prayer for the sick
O Most merciful God, which according to the multiude of thy mercies do so
put away the sins of those which truly repent, that thou rememberst them no
more: open thy dies of mercy, and look upon this thy sick seruant^ who most
earnestly destreth pardon and forgiveness, Renew in him (most loving Father
whatso ever has been decayed by the fraud and malice of the Devil, or by his
own carnal will and frailty. Preserve and continue this sick member in the
unity of the Church. Consider his contrition accept his tears, assuage his
pain a shall be seen to thee most expedient for him. And for as much as he
putte^h his full trust only in thy mercy, impute not unto him his former
sins, but take him vntoty favor, through the merits of thy most dearly
beloved son Jesus Christ.

A prayer to be said at the hour of death.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which arl the only health of all men living, and the
everlasting life of them that die in thee: I wretched sinner do submit my
self wholly unto thy most blessed will, and being sure that the thing cannot
perish which is committed unto thy mercy, willingly now I leave this frail
and sinful flesh, in sure hope that thou will in better wise restore it to
Me again at the lost day in the resurrection of the just. I beseech thee most
merciful Lord jesus Christ, that thou will by thy grace make strong my soul
against all tentations, and defend me with the buckler of thy mercy against
all the assaults of the devil.

I see and acknowledge that there is in my self no hope of salvation, but all
my confidence, hope, and trust is in thy rich mercy and goodness. I have no
merits or good works which I may allege before thee: of sins and evil
works (alas) I see a great heap: but yet through thy mercy I trust to be in
the number of them to whom thou will not impute their sins, but wilt accept
and take me for righteous and just, and to be an inheritour of Everlasting
life.

Thou merciful Lord wast borne for my sake: thou did suffer both hunger
and thirst for my sake: thou did teach, pray, and fast for my sake: all thy
holy actions and works thou wroughtest for my sake: thou sufferedst most
grievous Pains and torments for my sake: Finally, thou gave thy most
precious body and blood to be shed on the cross for my sake. Now most
merciful Savior, let all those things profit me, that thou freely have done
for me, which have given thy self also for me. Let thy blond cleanse and wash
away the spots and fowlnesse of my sins. Let thy righteousness hide and
cover my righteousness. Let the merits of thy passion and bloodshedding be
the satisfaction for my sins. Give me Lord thy grace, that the faith of my
salvation in thy blood waver not in me, but may ever be firm and constant:
that the hope of thy mercy and life everlasting never decay in me: that love
wax not cold in me: Finally, that the weakness of my flesh be not
overcome with the feate of death.

Grant me merciful Savior, that when death has thut up the eyes of my
body, yet the eyes of my soul may still behold and look upon thee: and when
death has taken away the use of my tongue, yet my heart may cry and say:
Lord into thy hands I commend my soul: Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

A prayer for a woman with child.
THou art wonderful (O Lord) in all thy works* and whatsoever thy good
pleasure is, that do thou easily bring to pass, neither is there any thing
impossible with thee that thou will have done. And albeit this thy almighty
power shows it self abundantly in all thy works, yet in conceiving, forming
and bringing forth of man, it shines most evidently.

At the beginning (O Father) when thou made man and woman, thou commaundest
them to increase, multiply, and replenish the earth. If through the subtle
inticementes of Satan they had not transgressed thy commandment by eating
the forbidden fruit, the woman whom thou had appointed to be the
instrument and vessel to conceive, nourish and bring forth man through thy
woonderful workmanship, had with out any labor, pain or travail brought
forth her fruit.

But that which thy goodness made easy, sin and disobedience has made hard,
painful, dangerous and without thy special help and succor, imposible to
be brought to pass,: so that now all women bring forth their children in
great sorrows, pains, and troubles. Notwithstanding, that which through their
own imperfection and feeblenes, they are not able of themselves to pass, thou
through thine unspeakable power make easy in them, and bring unto a
joyful end.

We therefore being fully persuaded of thy favor and goodness, of thy
present help, and of thy sweet comfort in all miseries and necessities,
knowing also by the testimonies of thy holy word how great and intolerable the
pains of women are that travel of child, if through thy tender mercy they be
not mittigated and eased: most humbly pray thee for Jesus Christ's sake thy
son our Lord, to help and assist this thy servant now in travel and labor,
that by thy almighty power she may safely bring forth that which by thy
goodness she has conceived, and that thy loving kindness may make that
easy and tolerable unto her, which sin has made hard and painful.

Ease (O Lord) the pains which thou most righteously have put upon her and
all women, for the sin and diso bedience of our Graundmother Eve, is whom al
we have sinned. Be present with her in her trouble, according to thy merciful
promise: Give her strength, and make perfect that which thou have so
Graciously begun. Let thy power be showed no less in the safe bringing forth,
than in the wonderful forming and fashioning of that she bears. Make her a
glad and joyful mother, that she through thy goodness being safely delivered
and restored to health again, may live and praise thy blessed name for ever.

A Psalm to be said in the time of any common plague, sickness, or other
cross and visitation of God.
O Come let us humble our selves and fall down before the Lord with reverence
and fear. Psalm. 95.


For he is the Lord our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and sheep
of his hands. Oseas. 6.


O come therefore, Acts. 1.
let us turn again unto our Lord, for he has smitten us* and he shall heal
us.

Let us repent and turn from our wickedness, and our sins shall be forgiven
us.

Let us turn, Jonas. 3.
and the Lord will turn from us his heavy wrath, and will pardon us, and we
shall not perish.

For we acknowledge our faults, and our sins are ever before us. Psalm. 51.


We have sore provoked thine anger (O Lord: Lamen.
) thy wrath is waxed hot, and thy heavy displeasure is fore kindled against us.

Thou have in thine indignation stricken us with grievous sickness and by and
by we have fallen as leaves beaten down with a vehement wind. Esaias. 64.


In deed we acknowledge that our punishments are less than our deseruings:
Judith. ^
but yet of thy mercy lord correct us to amendment, Job. 11.
and plague us not to our destruction. Sap. 12.


For thy hand is not shortened, that thou can not help: neither is thy
goodness abated that thou will not hear.

Thou have promised, Esai. 65.
O Lord, that before we cry thou will hear us: whilst we yet speak thou will have mercy upon us.

For none that trust in thee shall be confounded: Tob^. 8
neither any that call upon thee shall be despised. Job. 3.


For thou art the only Lord, Oseas. 6
who woundest and do heal again, who killest and reuiuest, bring even to
hell, and bring back again.

Our fathers hoped in thee Sap. 22.
and trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.

They called upon thee. and were helped: they put their trust in thee: and were
not confounded.

O Lord, Psalm. 6
rebuke us not in thine indignation: neither chasten us in thy heavy
displeasure.

O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth: but according to thy
mercy think thou upon us psalm. 25
O Lord, for thy goodness.

Have mercy upon us O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord heal us, for our bodies
are vexed.

And now in the vexation of our spirits and the augnish of our souls, we
remember thee: and we cry unto thee, Baruc. 3
hear Lord, and have mercy.

For thine own sake, Jonas. 2.
and for thy holy names sake, incline thine care and hear, Dan. 9
O merciful Lord.

For we do not power out our prayers before thee, trusting in our own
righteousness: but in thy great and manifold mercies.

Wash us thoughly from our wickedness: and cleanse us from our sins

Turn thy face from our sins, and put out all our misdeeds.

Make us clean hearts, O God, and renew aright spirit within us.

Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us,
Psalm. 70.
and be merciful to our sins for thy names sake.

So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever, and will always be showing forth thy praise from generation to
generation.

Glory be to the father, etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

A psalm of thanksgiving for deliverance from the plague, or any other kind
of sickness, trouble or affliction.
Lord thou art become gracious to thy land, Psalm. 83.
thou have turned away the afflictions of thy servants.

Thou have taken away all thy displeasure, and turned thy self from thy
wrathful indignation.

For if thou Lord had not helped us, Psalm. 94
it had not failed but our souls had been put to silence.

But when we said: our feet have slipped, thy mercy (O Lord) helped us up.

In the multitude of the sorrows that we had in our hearts thy comforts have
refreshed our souls.

Our souls waited still upon the Lord, our souls hanged upon his help, our
hope was always in him.

In the Lords word will we rejoice: Psalm. 62.
in Gods word did we comfort onr selves.

For the Lord said: Call upon me in the time of trouble, Psalm. 50.
and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me.

So when we were poor, needy, sickly, Psalm. 40.
and in heaviness, the Lord cared for us: he was our helper and our deliverer
according to his word.

In our adversity and desiresse he has lifted up our head, Psalm. 17.
and sau^^ us from utter destruction.

He has delivered our souls from death: Psalm. 33.
he has fed us in the time (...) dearth, he has saved us from the noisome
pestilence.

Therefore will we offer in his holy temple the oblation of thanksgiving with
great gladness: Psalm. 27
we w^^sing and speak praises unto the lord our Savior. Psalm. 106


We will give thanks unto the Lord, Psalm. 86.
for he is gracious, and his me^^cie endures for ever.

The Lord is full of compassion an^ mercy, Psalm. 103
long suffering, plenteous i^ goodness and pity. Job. 5. 7


His mercy is greater than the h^^uens, Psalm. 108
and his gracious goodness rea^cheth unto the clouds. Psalm. 103


Like as a father pitieth his ow^ children: even so is the Lord merciful unto
them that fear him.

Therefore will we praise thee and thy mercies, Psalm. 72.
O God: unto thee will we sing, O thou holy one of Israel.

We will sing a new song unto thee, O God: we will praise the Lord with
psalms and thanksgiving. Psalm. 98.


O sing praises, sing praises unto our God: O sing praises, sing praises unto
our king. Psalm. 47


For God is the king of the earth, sing praises with understanding.

We will magnify thee, O God, our king, Psalm. 145
we will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Every day will we give thanks unto thee, and praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Our moutn shall speak the praises of the Lord and let all flesh give thanks
to hs holy name, Psalm. 72.
for ever and ever.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever: and blessed be the name of his
majesty, world without end, Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

Prayers to be said before meals and after.
ALL things depend upon thy providence (O Lord) to receive at thy hands due
sustenance in time convenient. Thou give to them, and they gather it: thor
openest thy hand and they are sanctified with all good things. Psalm 104.


O heavenly father, which art the fountain and full treasure of all goodness,
1. Tim. 4
We beseech thee to show thy mercy upon us thy children, and sanctify these
thy gifts which we receive of thy merciful liberality, granting us grace to
use them soberly and purely, according to thy blessed will: so that thereby we
may acknowledge thee to be the author and giver of all good things: 2. Tim. 2.
and above all, that we may remember continually to seek the spiritual food
of the world, John. 6.
wherewith our souls may be norished everlastingly, through our Savior Christ,
who is the true bread of life which came down from heaven, of whom whosoener
eats shall live for ever, and reign with him in glory world withour end, So
be it.

Another prayer before meals.
Whether ye eat or drink (says S. Paul) or whatsoever ye do else, 1. Cr. 10
let all be done to the praise and glory of God.

Eternal and everlasting God, fathere of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of thy
most singular love which thou barest to mankind, have appointed to his
sustenance, not only the fruits of the earth, but also the fouls of the air,
the beasts of the field, and fishes of the sea, and have commanded thy ben^
fites to be received as from thy hands with thanksgiving, assuring thy
children by the mouth of thine Apostle, that to the clean al things are
clean, as the creatures which be sanctified by the word and prayer: grant
unto us, so moderatly to use these thy gifts present, that our bodies being
refreshed, our souls may be more able to proceed in all good works, to the
praise of the holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

Another.
O Eternal God, the very God of peace and al consolation, which broughtest
again from death our Lorke Jesus the great shepherd of the sheep, through
the blood of the everlasting couenante: make us fruitful in all good works to
do thy will, and work in us that which is acceptable in thy sight. Sanctify us
thoroughout, and keep our whole spirit soul and body faultlesse, unto the
coming of thy dear son our Lord Jesus Christ. Thou art faithful (O Father)
who have promised this, who also shall bring it to pass: to thee therefore be
given everlasting praise, honor, and glory, Amen.

A thanksgiving after meals.
LEt al nations magnify the Lord, let all people rejoice in praising and
extolling his great mercies: For his fatherly kindness is plentifully showing
forth upon us, and the truth of his promise endures for ever.

We render thanks unto thee, O Lord God, for thy manifold benefits which we
continually receive at thy bountiful hand, not only for that it has pleased
thee to feed us in this present life, giving unto us al things necessary for
the same: but especially because thou have of thy free mercy fashioned us
anewe, into an assured hope of a far better life, the which thou have
declared unto us by thy holy Gospel.

Therefore we humbly beseech thee, Oh heavenly father, that thou will not
suffer our affections to be so entangled and ro^ted in these earthly and
corruptible things, but that we may always have our minds directed to thee o^
high, continually watching for the co^mming of our lord Isesus Christ, what
time he shall appear for our full redemption. To whom with thee and the holy
Ghost be all honor and glory, for ever and ever, So be it.

Another thanksgiving after meals.
Glory, praise, and honor be unto thee most merciful and omnipotent Father,
who hastfed and daily do feed (of thy most bountiful goodness) al living
creatures: we beseech thee, that as thou have nourished these our mortal bodies
with corporal food, so thou would replenish our souls with the perfect
knowledge of the lively word of thy beloved son Jesus Christ, to whom with thee
and the holy Ghost be praise, glory and honor for ever. So be it.

Another.
MOst bountiful and gracious God, which feedest all flesh, and have promised,
that asking of thee, we shall not lack if we first seek thy kingdom and the
righteousness thereof we feeling presently the benefit of this thy gracious
promise in feeding our bodies with this corporal food do rendervnto thee most
hearty thanks for the same, beseeching thee likewise to feed our souls with
that heavenly food which perishes not, but abides unto everlasting life: so
that we being norished by thy goodness both in body and soul, may be apt and
ready to do al good works which thou have prepared for us to walk in,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Unto him that loves us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, and made
us Kings and Priests, unto God his father, be all glory, power, and dominion
for evermore, Amen.

Another.
THe God of glory, who has created, redeemed, and presently fed us, be
blessed for evermore, Amen.

The God of all power, who has called from death the great pastor of the
sheep our Lord Jesus, comfort and defend the flock which he has redeemed by
the blood of the eternal Testament increase the number of true preachers:
repress the rage of obstinate tyrants: lighten the hearts of the ignorant:
relieve the pains of such as be afflicted, but specially of those that suffer
for the testimony of thy truth: and finally, confound Satan by the power of
our Lord Jesus Christ, So be it.

Prayers, commonly called Lydleys prayers, with certain godly additions.
Before thou prayest, forgive, if thou have any thing against any man and come
not to GOD with a double heart, but lift up pure hands without wrath or
doubting. 1. Tim. 2.
AL mighty and most merciful Father, I thy poor creature and work of thy
hands, acknowledge and confess unto thee my manifold sins and ^ffences, which
I from my youth up unto this day, have committed against thee in thought, word
and deed, beseeching thee for Jesus Christ thy dear sons sake, to have
mercy upon me, and to pardon the same according to thy great mercy, which
have promised, that At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin,
from the bottom of his heart, thou will put his wickedness out of thy
remembrance.

O Lord, I confess that I was borne in sin, and conceived in wickedness,
and am by nature a child of wrath: for in my flesh dwells no good thing, and
of my self I am not able to think a good thought, much less to do that thou
in thy law requirest of me, saying: Cursed is he that continues not in all
things that are written in the law to do them. Again, thy law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin. Therefore, O LORD, I come unto
thee for grace (which have said, Ask and ye shall have seek and ye shall find:
knock and it shall be opened unto you) to prevent and draw my will unto all
goodness: for none can come unto thee except he be drawn: and except we be
borne from above, we cannot see the kingdom of God.

Therefore (O Lord) renew in me a right spirit, that I may receive strength
and ablenes, to do thy righteous will.

Grant that I may ever desire and will that which is most pleasing and
acceptable to do thy will.

Thy will be my will, and my will be always to follow thy will:

Let there be ever in me one will and one desire with thee, and let me never
desire to will or not to will, but as thou will.

Grant me that above all things I may rest in thee, and fully quiet and
pacify my heart in thee: for thou Lord art the true peace of the heart, and
the perfect rest of the soul.

Thou know Lord, what is most profitable and expedient for me: where. fore
do with me in all things as it shall seem best unto thee. For it may not be
but well that thou do which do most justly and blessedly dispose al things
after thy most godly wisdom. Therefore whether it be by prosperity or
adversity, loss or gain, sickness or health, life or death, thy will be done.

Cast out of my heart, al unprofitable cares of worldly things, and suffer me
not to be lead with the unstable desires of earthly vanities: but give me grace
that all worldly and carnal affections may be mortified and die in me.

Grant unto me the strength of thy holy spirit, to subdue this body of
sin with the whole lusts thereof, that it may be obedient both in will, mind
and members: to do thy holy will:

Assist me with thy grace (O Lord) that I may be strenthened in the inward
man, Ephesians. 6.
and be armed with thy holy armor, which is the breastplate of righteousness,
the shield of faith, the hope of salvation for an helmet, and the sword of
the spirit, which is thy holy word, that I may stand perfect in all that is thy
will, and be found worthy through Christ, to receive the crown of life, which
thou have promised to all them that love thee.

Give me grace that I may esteem all things in this world as they be,
transi^orie and soon vanishing away: and my self also with them drawing
toward mine end. For nothing under the Sun may long abide, but all is
vanity and affliction of spirit.

Oh Lord God which art sweetness unspeakable turn into bitterness unto me
all transitory and earthly delights, which may draw me from the love of
eternal things: and for all worldly comforts, give me the sweet comfort of thy
holy spirit: for thou Lord art my joy, my hope, my crown, and my glory.

Blessed are they that for the love of thee, set not by the pleasurs of this
world, but crucify the flesh and the iustes thereof, so that in a clean and
pure conscince they may offer their prayers unto thee, and be accepted to have
company with thee, together with the Angels and heavenly spirits.

O everlasting light, send down the beams of thy brightness and lighten the
inward parts of my heart.

Open my heart, that I may behold thy laws, and teach me to walk in thy
commandments.

Behold my weakness (O Lord) be clarified and made glorious in thy kingdom.

Oh holy father, thou have ordained it so to be, and it is done as thou have
appointed.

Wherefore (O Lord) give me the grace to rest in thee above all things, and
to quiet my heart in thee above all creatures, above all glory and honor,
above all dignity and power, above all health and beauty, above all riches and
treasure, above al joy and pleasure, above all fame and praise, above al mirth
and consolation that man's heart may take or feel besides thee. For thou Lord
art most good, most wise, most righteous, most holy, most just, most blessed,
most high, most mighty, most comfortable, most beautiful most loving, most
glorious, in whom all treasures of goodness most perfect^y rest.

And therefore, whatsoever I have besides thee, it is nothing unto me: or my
heart may not rest, nor fully be pacified, but only in thee.

Oh Lord Jesus, who shall give me wings of perfect love, that I may fly up from
these worldly miseries, and rest with thee?

Oh Christ the king of everlasting glory, my soul cries unto thee with
continual gronings, and says: How long tarrieth my Lord God to come to me?

Oh, when shall the end come of all these miseries?

When shall I clean be delivered from the bondage of sin?

When shall I Lord, have my mind only fixed on thee, and be merry in thee
with perfect joy and gladness?

When shall that blessed hour come that thou shall visit me, and make me glad
with thy blessed presence, when thou shall be to me all in all?

When shall I come up to thee, and feel and enjoy those sweet consolations
which with thy blessed Saints are always present?

When shall I have peace without trouble, peace without and peace within and on
every side steadfast and sure?

O Lord Jesus, when shall I stand and behold thee, and have full sight and
contemplation of thy glory?

When shall I be with thee in thy kingdom, that thou have ordained for thine
elect before the beginning?

Oh blessed mansion of that heavenly city: Oh most clear day of eternity,
whom the night may never darken.

This is the day always clear and merry, always sure and never changing.

This day shines clear to thy saints in heaven, Oh gracious God, with
everlasting brightness: but to us here on earth (so great is ye darkness of
sin in us) it shines obscurely, and as it were a far off: we see but a
glimmering thereof.

Would to GOD this day might shortly appear, and shine unto us, and that these
wordly vanities were at an end.

Thy heavenly Citizens know and feel how joyful this day is: but we the
children of Eve, strangers and exiles here on earth, do lament and bewail the
bitter tediousness of this present life, short and evil, full of sorrow and
anguish.

Where man is oftentimes defiled with sin, disquieted with troubles,
oppressed with cares, bus^ed with vanities, blinded with errors, ouercharged
with labors, vexed with tentations, overcome with vain delights and
pleasures of the world, and miserably wrapped in many kinds of calamities.

Wherefore, O Lord, arise and help me: comfort mine exile: assuage my
sorrow: destroy the power of mine enemies, the kingdom of sin, Satan, the
world, and my wicked flesh, which always make battle against me, and bring
these co^flicting days to an end. So shall I sing praises un to thee (O God of
my salvation) and magnify thy holy name world with out end, Amen.

A confession of sins, and a prayer for the remission thereof.
O Lord God, rich in mercy, and of ^reat goodness, who of thy tender love
toward us, even when we were thine enemies, did send into the world thine
own dear Son Jesus Christ to be a slain sacrifice for our sins: so that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting: have
mercy upon me, acording to thy great mercies, and according to the multitude of
thy compassions put away mine iniquities. Psalm. 38


For mine iniquities are gone ^uer my head, and as a weighty burden they
press me down. Luke. 1^


Against heaven and against thee have I st^ned: O Lord, I am not worthy to be
called thy child.

I am ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee for my sins are ascended up into
thy sight.

There is nothing sound in my flesh because of thy displeasure, Psalm. 38
neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin.

Behold I am sold under sin, Romans 7.
and in my flesh there dwells no good thing

For the good which I would do I do not: but the evil which I would not do,
that I do.

^^tash me therefore, O Lord, from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin.

Purify my heart by the sanctifying of thy holy spirit, and by the sprinckling
of the blood of thy dear Son from the filth of sin and an evil conscience.
Psalm. 51


Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice. Psalm. 5


Create in me a new heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence and take not thy holy spirit from me.

Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablishe me with thy free
spirit: Psalm. 8


For thou art good to them y^ trust in thee, and to the soul that seeks
thee. Psalm. 25


AL thy ways are mercy and truth to them that seek out thy covenant and thy
testimonies.

The fountain of thy goodness is ever full and ouerflowing: thy mercy never
decays.

Thou woundest and healest again thou killest and reuiuest, bring even
down to hell, and bring back again.

Thou raysest up those that are fallen, thou comfortest ye broken hearted.

Thou strengthenest the weary stands and crooked knees: and out of the gulf
of hell thou deliuerest the afflicted.

Out of darkness thou bring light out of death life, and out of damnation
thou bring salvation.

Hear me therefore, O Lord, according to thy loving kindness, turn unto me
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies. Psalm. 30


Look upon mine affliction and my travel, and forgive me my sins.

Remember not the offenses of my youth, Psalm. 63
nor my rebellio^s against thee.

For if thou Lord should mark our iniquities, Psalm. 130
Lord who should be able to stand in thy sight? Ioh. 15


Seeing thou have found iniquity even in thine Angels, and the heavens are not
clean in thy sight: much more is man abominable and filthy, which drinks
iniquite like water.

Notwithstanding thou have said, O lord, that as the reghteousnes of the
righteous man shall not save him whenever he offends: so shall not the
wickedness of the wicked man hurt him whenever he forsakes his wickedness
and turns to thee.

For thou know thine own handie work: thou reme^brest what we are: thou
see that we are but weak and feeble flesh. Psalm. 83


Look not therefore upon my sins, O Lord, but look upon the face of thine
anointed.

For he has borne our iniquities he has ca^ried our sorrows. Esai. 58


He was wounded for our transgressio^s: he was broken for our iniquities: the
chastiseme^t of our peace is laid upon him.

He gave his body to be beaten, and his cheeks to be stricken: he bare y^
sins of many, and prayed for the offenders.

He came to bring glad tidings to the poor, Esai. 61
to bind up ye broken hearted, to preach liberty to the captives, to comfort
them that mourn in Sion, and to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of
joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for ye spirit of heaviness, that
they might be called trees of righteousness and the planting of the Lord.

For his sake therefore, O Lord, be merciful unto me, and say unto my soul:
behold I come to thee, thy health and thy salvation.

A prayer for the true knowledge and understanding of the word of God.
LEt my prayer come before thee, Psalm. 61
O Lord, and give me understanding according to thy word.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, teach me thy statutes.

That with my lips I may declare all the judgments of thy mouth.

That I may delight in the way of thy testimonies above all riches.

That I may meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways.

That I may take pleasure in thy statutes, and not forget thy word.

Be good unto me thy servant, O Lord, y^ I may live and keep thy word.

Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders which are in thy law.

I am a stranger upon earth, notwithstanding hide not from me thy
commandments.

For my heart languisheth with the desire that it has to thy judgments.

Thy testimonies are my delighte and my counselles.

I will praise thee with an upright ^^art, when thou have taught me the
^udgmentes of thy righteousness. Psalm. 25


Show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy paths.

Lead me forth in thy truth, and each me, for thou art my God and ^y
salvation, Psalm. 119
in thee do I trust all the day long.

Make me understand the way of ^hy preceps, and I will consider thy ^onderous
works.

Thy hands have made me and ^ashioned me, give me vnderstan^ing that I may
learn thy commandementes.

That they which fear thee, seeing me may rejoice because I have trusted in
thy word.

Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant, and teach me thy
ordinances.

Thou art good and gracious, therefore according to thy goodness teach me thy
statutes.

O Lord of whose goodness the earth is full, teach me thy ordinances.

O lord I beseech thee, accept the sacrifice of my lips, and teach me thy
judgments.

The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: grant me understanding
and I shall live.

Deal with thy servant according to thy mercies, and teach me thy statutes.

I am thy servant, grant me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

My lips shall show forth thy praise, when thou have tanght me thy statutes.

My tongue shall talk of thy word, for all thy commandments are righteous.

For in thee is awel of living waters and ever flowing, Psalm. 36
and in thy light shall we see light.

A prayer for the leading of a godly life.
I Cry unto thee with my whole heart: Psalm. 119.
hear me (O Lord) and guide ^e, that I may keep thy statutes.

I call upon thee: save me, that I may keep thy testimonies.

Let my prayer be directed in thy ^^ght as incense, Psalm. 131
and the lifting up of ^y hands, as an evening sacrifice.

I have gone astray like a lost ^eepe, seek thy servant, for I do not forget
thy commandments.

Teach me thy way (O Lord) that I may walk in thy truth: knit my heart unto
thee, that I may fear thy name.

Let thy loving kindness come unto me, Psa. 119
O Lord, and thy salvation according to thy promise.

Let my heart be upright in thy statutes, that I be not confounded.

Oh that my ways were so directed, Psalm. 86
that I might keep thy statutes.

Then shall I not be confounded, when I have regard unto all thy
commandments.

I made my supplication in thy presence with my whole heart, be merciful unto
me according to thy promise.

Guide me (O Lord) that I may consider my ways, and turn my fee^ into thy
testimonies.

Wherewith shall a man redress his ways? In taking deed thereto according to
thy word?

Teach me (O Lord) the may of thy statutes, that I may keep them to the end.

Give me understanding that I may keep thy law, yea that I may keep it with
my whole heart.

Direct me in the path of thy commandments, for therein is my delight.

Turn away mine eyes that I regard not vanity, and quicke^ me in thy way.

Stablish thy promise to thy servant, whereby he may be taught to fear thee.

Direct my steps in thy word, and let not iniquity have dominion ever me.

Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the
wicked move me.

Gather not my soul with the sinners, nor my life with ye bloody men.

Let my foot stand in vprightnes, that I may praise thee, O Lord, in the
congregation.

Let not the word of truth depart out of my mouth, Psa. 141,
for I trust in thy judgments.

Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips.

Let not mine heart be inclined to evil, Psalm. 116
to work wicked works with them that work iniquity. Psalm. 17


Teach me good judgment and knowledge, Psalm. 119
for I do believe thy commandments.

Stay my steps in thy paths, that my feet do not slide.

Stablish me in thy promise, that I may l^ue, and let me not be disappoynted
of my hope.

Stay thou me (O Lord) and I shall be safe, and I will delight continually in
thy statutes.

O God, create in me a pure heart, and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit.

Let me hear thy loving kindness in the morning: show me the way that I
should walk in, for in thee is my trust.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: let thy
good spirit lead me unto the land of righteousness.

A prayer for deliverance from sin, and to be restored to Gods grace and
favor again.
OH Almighty and everlasting Lord GOG, which have male heaven and earth, and
all things, therein contained: O incomprehensible unity: Oh always to be
worshipped most blessed trinity: I humbly beseech thee and pray thee by the
assumption and crucified humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou
would incline and how down the great depth of thy Deity to the
bottomless pit of my vilitie. Drive me from al kind of vice, wickedness and
sin. Create in me a clean heart, and renew in me a right spirit, for thy holy
names sake.

Oh Lord Jesus, I beseech thy goodness, for the exceeding great love which
drew thee out of thy Fathers bosom, into the womb of the holy virgin, and
for the assumption of man's nature, wherein it pleases thee to save me, and to
deliver me from eternal death: that thou would draw mece out of my self
into thee my Lord God, and grant that this my love may recover again to me
thy grace to increase and make perfect in me yt which is wanting, to raise up
in me yt which is fallen, to restore to me that which I have lost, and to quicken
in me that which is dead and should live, so that I may become comformable
unto thee in all my life and conversation, thou dwelling in me, and I in thee,
my heart being coupled with thy grace, and settled in thy faith for ever.

Oh my God, loose and set at liberty my spirit from al inferior things:
Govern my soul and so work, that both in soul and body I may be holy, and
live to thy glory, world without end, Amen. I. B.

A prayer necessary to be said at all times.
O Bountiful lord Jesus, O sweet Savior, O Christ the son of God, have
pity upon me, mercifully hear me, and despise not my prayers: Thou have
created me of nothing, thou have redEemed me from the bondage of sin,
death, and hell, neither with gold nor silver, but with thy most precious body
once offered upon the cross, and thine own blood shed once for all for a
ransom, Therefore cast me not away, whom thou by thy great wisdom haste
made. Despise me not, whom thou have redeemed with such a precious treasure,
nor let my wickedness destroy that which thy goodness has bu^lded.

Now whiles I live O Jesus have mercy on me: for if I die out of thy favor,
it will be too late afterward to call for thy mercy. Whiles I have time to
repent, look upon me with thy merciful eyes, as thou did vouchsafe to
look upon Peter thine Apostle, that I may bewail my sinful life, and obtain
thy favor to live and by therein. I acknowledge, that if thou should deal
with me according to thy justice, I have deserved everlasting death.

Therefore I appeal to thy high throne of mercy, trusting to obtain thy
favor: not for my merits, but for thy deserts (O Jesus) who have given thy
self an acceptable sacrifice to thy father, to appease his wrath, and to bring
all finners truly repenting and amending their evil life, unto his favor
again.

Accept me (O Lord) among the number of them whom thou have in Christ elected
and chosen to salvation. Forgive me my sins: give me grace to lead a godly
and innocent life: grant me thy heavenly wisdom: inspire my heart with
faith, hope, and charity: give me grace to be humble in prosperity, patient
in adversity, obedient to my rulers, in all my doings faithful, dealing truly
with all men: to live chastely in wed lock, to abhore adultery, fornication, and
al uncleanness, to do good after my power unto al men, to hurt no man: that
thy name may be glorified in me during this presentlife, and that I afterward
may attain everlasting life through thy mercy, and the merits of thy death
and passion, Amen.

A prayer for grace and remission of sins.
O Lord God merciful Father, I poor wretched sinner come unto thee in the
name of thy dearly beloved son Christ Jesus my Savior, beseeching thee for
his sake, to be merciful unto me, and to cast all my sins out of thy sight,
even through the merits of his bloody death. Power upon me (O lord) thy
holy spirit of grace and wisdom, to govern and lead my body and soul in
thy holy work and commandments. Show thy mercy upon me, and so lighten the
natural blindness and darkness of my heart through thy grace, that I may daily
be renewed by thy holy spirit. Open my heard heart and gross ears to hear
and read thy word and heavenly voice, and to believe and follow it in my
conversation, and ever to hold fast that blessed hope of everlasting life.
Mortify and kill all vice in me, that my life may express my faith in thee.
Mercifully hear the humble supplications of thy servant, and grant me thy
peace al my days. Graciously pardon my infirmities, and defend me in all
dangers, has outwardly in my body. goods and name, and inwardlye in my
soul, against al evil temptations and subtle baits of satan that roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Grant (O Lord) that I and every member
of thy Church in his vocation and calling, may truly and godlilie serve thee.
Graft in my heart the love of thy name: increase in me true religion,
replenish me with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep me in the same
unto the end. Give unto me the spirit of prayer, true humility, perfect
patience, and continual joy in the holy Ghost. I commend unto thy pratection
(O Father) my house and all that thou have given me: my whole family, my wife
and children: and me that I may well and holily govern, nourish and bring them
up, in thy fear and service,

And forasmuch as in this world I must always be at war, not with one sort of
enemies, but with an infinite number: not only with flesh and blood, but with
the devil, which is the prince of darkness, grant me thy grace, that being
armed with thy defense, I may stand in this battle with an invincible
constancy against all corruption, which I am encompassed with on all sides,
until such time as I having ended the combat which during this life I must
sustain, in ye end I may attain to thy heavenly rest, which is prepared for
me, through Christ our Lord and Savior, Amen.

A prayer taken out of the first Psalm.
Almighty and most gracious GOD, take away from us all evil counsel, and then
our sins: sufer us not to run into an ungodly and wicked life: and finally
keep out minds far from the contempt of godliness, and scorning of virtue,
(...) in the stead of these evils, grant (...) we may continually be occupied
in thy law and sacred scriptures, that we be not carried about like the wicked,
as like dust and fruitless chafe with every blast of affection and doctrine:
but rather that we as trees planted by the water brooks, endued with the life
of the spirit and faith may also bring forth ye fruits of good works: and that
whatsoever we^ take in hand may prosper, and tend to the praise and glory of
thy name and furtherance of our salvation: and at the last, when the wicked
shall fall away in thy judgment, we may stand steadfast and be made perfect,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Out of the same Psalm.
ALmighty God, we are sufficiently taught, that grievous calami^ies and
miserable plagues do therefor daily vex and trouble the church because we have
not ceased to follow ^he counsel of the ungodly, which being once known, we
ought to have schewed. The way also of ye wicked ^e have not shunned: yea we
have not ceased to walk their race by con^inuall transgressing of thy
comman^ements, we have also of long time ^^ntemned al godly correction and
dis^^pline, and whatsoever has bin taught ^s out of thy word, has bin too
little ^egarded, yea, without al shame neg^ected and scorned.

Wherefore it is no marvel, if we (...) the steed of that happiness and met
peace: which we (alas) have too ^ing abused, be now compelled to suffer all
heavy, grievous, and most bitter plagues, But now, O God, in humblencs of heart
we fly unto thee, confessing our grievous offenses, and we most humbly and
heartily beseech thee, yt those evils which we so foolishly and wretchedly have
committed, thou will mercifully for giu^ us* and frame our minds wholi^ to the
obedience of the law, insuch wise that our hearts might be occupied both day
and night in nothing else, but in the meditation of thy holy Scriptures, for so
shall we giving credit to thy words, bring^ forth seasonable and pleasant
fruit and shall not be spoiled of the grace^ of the holy Ghost: yea, our doing
shall never be without happy successe^ Now we are tossed hither and thither not
unlike to leaves and chafe, wit^ the mind of adversity and affliction yet
grant (O most merciful father that our life perish not with the wicked, but
that ye cause of the just may be defended by thy singular providence and
protection: so that in judgment and in the company of the just we may be able
to stand, and not be confounded, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Out of the same Psalm.
Almighty GOD, for as much as we have now learned, that a great part of our
felicity, so long as we live here, consists in this, that we refrain from
ungodly counsel and wicked manners, and also avoid the company of those that
despise and ^eride all good things: and that in the stead of these evils, we
give our selves to the heavenly study of thy ^olie law, to be occupied and
exercised therein both day and night, (whereby we do perceive that we have
very much erred and straied from this way of our salvation, yea we have in
these things most wickedlie offended: therefore we beseech thee, even for thy
mercies sake, that thou will pardon our offenses, and that hence forth by
continual study and exercise of thy word, thou will vouchsafe to make us
fruitful plants, y^ we may not only bring forth wholesome fruits in thy Church
whiles we live here, but also may be able in y^ other world to stand in
judgment before thee, who best know the way of the just thorough Jesus
christ our Lord Amen.

A prayer taken out of the second Psalm.
WE perceive (most merciful and mighty God) that not only Antichrist, but
also the power and strength of the whole world, conspireth against thee, and
against thy Christ, which think the Gospel and the building up again of the
Church to us an intolerable bondage, and (...) yoke. Wherefore they labor by
(...) possible means, to break asunder the societies and congregations of the
faithful, and cast away all disciplin^. But for as much as thou ^iuttest to
heaven, and art not ignorant what the devil or wicked flesh goes about: laugh
thou to scorn their value counsels, and bring their purposes to might. Let
them feel thine (...) to (...) kindled against them, and make them astonished
at the (...) of the ^t in^^gnation, so that they may not be able to destroy the
Church, over whom thou have appointed Jesus Christ our only savior to be a
governor, thee in (...) reign up his (...) and spirit with (...) might and
power. Wherefore (...) unto us although unworthy and shrinking children, such
faith constancy, that we may find him and also confess him to be our only
king and that we may nothing doubt, but that we be his nation, people and
heritage, being most assured of this, that he is of such strength (...) and we
that with his word more (...) iron, be is eble to destroy whom he will, and
break them in pieces like earthen ^ots.

Therefore O GOD, turn the Kings and Princes of the world unto to thee, that
they may be wise and understand* whereby they may unfeignedly acknowledge,
im^race, and kiss his son least when his wrath shall once be kindled, they
perish and be destroyed for ever. And where it shall be thy good pleasure* make
them blessed (...) themselves to thy gouernanc^ and protection, by Christ Jesus
our Lord, Amen.

Out of the same Psalm.
MOst mighty and merciful Lord God though the devil rage, the powers of the
world daily rise up, and the flesh with all her bond^a^ce conspire against the
kingdom of thine only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord: yet make us to
understand, and with constant faith to be persuaded that thou deridest and
contemnest all such whom thou can in thine anger and fierce displeasure when
thou will, ^odainelie destroy and bring to naught: In this faith, seeing we
are sometimes so weak, that being overcome with sundry kinds of terrors and
dread we are not so obedient to thy commandments as we ought to be, we
therefore beseech thee for thy great goodness sake to be merciful unto us,
and grant that we may constantly believe thy Son our king, and our redeemer,
to hauethe highest power and dominion with thee in all things. For seeing thou
have begotten him, thou have also delivered to him all nations to be ruled by
his power as his own inheritance. Grant therefore unto us, that yet at the
length we may be wise and understand in such sort as we may serve thee with
all due fear and worshipp: that in the last day we be not dashed in pieces as
earthen vessels with the rod of thine indignation: through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

A prayer which M. John Bradford said a little before his death in Smithfield.
Merciful God and Father, Math. 27
to whom our savior Christ approached in his fear need, by reason of death,
and found comfort: gracious God, and most bounteous Christ, on whom Stephen
called in his extreme need, Acts. 7.
and received strength, most benign holy spirit, which in the midst of all
crosses and death did comfort the Apostle S. Paul with more consolations in
Christ, than he felt sorrows and terrors in the world: have mercy upon me, a
most miserable, vile and wretched sinner, which now draw near the gates of
death, deserved both in soul and body eternally, by reason of my manyfolde
horrible, old and new transgressions, which to thine eyes (O Lord God) are
open and known. Oh be merciful unto me, and forgive me for the bitter
death and bloudshedding of thine only son Jesus Christ. And though thy
justice do require in respect of my sins that now thou should not hear
me, conteraning thy daily callinges: yet let thy mercy which is above al my
works and wherewith the earth is filled, let thy mercy (I say) prevail
toward me, through the merits and mediation of Christ our fauiour, for whose
sake it pleases thee to bring me forth now as one of his witnesses and a
record bearer of thy verity and truth taught by him, to give my life
therefore, of which dignity I do acknowledge (dear God) that there was never
any so unworthie and unm^ete, no not the thief that hanged with him on the
cross* I humbly therefore pray thee that thou would accordingly aid, help
and assist me with thy strength and heavenly grace, that with Christ thy Son
I may find comfort, with Stephen I may see thy presence and gracious power,
with Paul and al others which for thy names sake have suffered afliction and
death, I may (...) and present with me thy gracious (...), that I may by my
death glorist thy holy (...), set forth and retifie thy verity, comfort the
hearts of the heavy, confirm thy church in thy truth conuertsome that (...)
be converted (...) so depart out of this (...) (where I do nothing but dai^e
heap (...) upon (...)) and enter into the fruition of thy blessed mercy,
whereof how give and increase in me a lively taste, (...) and feeling, where
through the ter^our of death, the torments of (...), the pains of ^^me, the
darts of Satan and the dotours of hell may never overcome (...), but may be
dri^en away through the working of y^ most gracious spirit which now (...) me
withal. y^ through the samespirit I may offer (as now^ I (...) ready to do)
in Christ and by him myself wholly soul and body, to be a lively sacrifice,
holy and acceptable in thy sight (dear father) whose I am and al waie^ have
been even from my mothers womb, yea* even before the world was made, to
whom I commend my self, faith and name, family and friends, country and
all the whole Church, yea (...) my very enemies, according to thy good
pleasure, beseeching thee entirely to give once more to this Real me of England
the blessing of thy word again, with godly peace, to then teaching and setting
forth of the same* O deer father, now guide me to come unto thee: so purge and
purshe me by this fire in Christ's death and passion through thy spirit that I
may be a bu^nt offering of sweet (...) thy sight, which live and raignest
with the son and the holy (...), now (...) evermore, world without (...),
Amen.

The Letanie.
O God the Father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of heaven, etc.

O God the son redeemer of the world, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son redeemer of etc.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the father and the son, have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, etc.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious, etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers; neither
take thou bengeance of our sins spoke us good Lord, spare thy people; whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

(...) Spare to good Lord.

From all (...) from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the devil, from
thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory and hypocrisy from (...),
hatred, and malice, and all (...)

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other (...) sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from batt^l
and murder, and from soda^ne death.

Good Lord deliuervs.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and herisie,
from hardness of heart and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation by thy holy nativity and
circumcision, by thy baptism, fasting, and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy glorious
resurrection and assention, and by the coming of the holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beeseech thee to hear us etc.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Elizabeth our most
gracious Queen and go^ernor.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to rule her heart, in thy faith, fear, a love, and
that she may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to be her defender and keeper, giving her the victory
over all her enemies,

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to illuminate all bishops, p^stors and Ministers of
the church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both
by their preaching and living they may set it forth, and she in it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to endue the Lord of the council, and all the
nobility with grace, wise dome and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to give to all nations unity, peace and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection and to bring forth
the fruits of the spir^te.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to bring in to the way of truth, all such as have
erred and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us etc.

That it may please thee to succor help and comfort all that he in danger
necessity and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us etc.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, to show thy
pity upon al prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherles children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies persecutors, and slaunderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to give and preserve, to out use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences, and ignorances and to indue us with thy holy spirit, to
amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, we beseech thee, etc.

O lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us:

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven etc.

And lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil, Amen.

The versicle. O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful father which despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desires of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee in all our troubles and adversities whenever they oppress
us and graciously hear us that those evils which the craft and subtlety of
the devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness, they may be dispersed, that me thy servants being
hurt by no persecution, ^aie evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory (...) to the father, and to the Son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end,
Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behoulde the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David, have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Christ, graciously he are us O Lord Christ.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech thee (O Father) mercifully to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those evils that we
most righteously have deserved, and grant that in all our troubles we may put
our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in
holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only
mediator and advocate Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer for the Queens Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly father, high and mighty, king of kings, Lord of Lords, the
only ruler of princes, which do from thy throne behold all the dwellers
upon the earth: most heartily we beseech thee with thy fa^our to behold our most
gracious sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenish her with thy grace
of thy holy spirit, that she may al ways incline to thy will and walk in thy
ways, endue her plentifully with heavenly gifts, grant her in health and wealth
long to live: strengthen her that she may v^^quish and overcome al her enemies
and finally after this life, she may attain everlasting joy and felicity:
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer for Bishops and Ministers. of the Church.
Almighty and everliving God. which only workest great marueiles, send down
upon our Bishops and Pastors, and al congregations committed to their charge,
the health full spirit of thy grace: and that they may truly please thee,
power upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this (O Lord) for
the honor (...) advocate and mediator Jesus Christ.

For Rain.
O GOD, heavenly Father which by thy son Jesus Christ, have promised to all
them that seek thy kingdom and thy righteousness thereof, al things necessary
to their bodily sustenance, send us we beeseech thee in this one (...)
moderate rained showers, that we may receive the fruits of the earth, to our
comfort, and to thy honor, thorough Jesus Christ (...) Lord, Amen.

For ^aire weather.
O Lord God, which for the (...) of man drodest once drown all the world,
except eight persons, and afterward of thy great mercy did promise never
to (...) it so again: we humbl^e (...) if, that although we for our (...) have
worthyly deserved this plague of rain and waters, yet thou will send us such
weather whereby (...) may receive the fruits of the earth in due season, and
learn both by thy punishment to amend outlines, and for thy clemency to give
thee praise and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

In the time of dearth and famine.
O Merciful God and heavenly father, whose gift it is that ye rain dothfal the
earth is fruitful, man and beasts increase, and fishes do multiply, behold
we beseech thee, the afflictions of thy people, and grant that the scarcity
and dearth which we do now most justly suffer for our iniquity, may through
thy goodness be mercifully turned into cheapnes and plenty, for the love of
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be praise for
ever, Amen.

In the time of war.
Almighty God, king of al kings, and governor of all things whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly repent: save and deliver us (we humbly
beseech thee) from the hands of our enemies: abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devises, that we being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved from all perils, to glorify thee, which art the only giver of
all victory, through the merits of thy only son Jesus Christ our Lord, So
be it.

In the time of any common plague or sickness.
O Almighty God, which in thy wrath in the time of King David, did stay
with the plague of pestilence threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembering
thy mercy did save the rest: have pity upon us miserable sinners that
(...) are visited with great sickness and mortality, that like as thou
did then command thine Angel to cease from punishing: so it may now please
thee to withdraw from us this plague and grievous sickness, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

A prayer for the strength and comfort of the holy Ghost.
Almighty and most merciful God, which give to thine elect people thy holy
spirit, as a sure pledge of thy heavenly kingdom, we most humbly beseech thee
so to replenish our hearts with the grace of thy holy spirit, that he may bear
witness to our spirit^ ye we be thy children, and heirs of thy kingdom, and
that by thy gracious working of this thy good spirit. we may kill al carnal
lusts, unlawful pleasures, concupiscences, and evil affections contrary to
thy most blessed pleasurs, concupiscences, and evil affections, contrary to
thy most blessed will through our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. So be it.

For (...) hope and sure taste of everlasting life.
O Almighty God, which have prepared everlasting life* for all those that be
thy faithful servants, grant unto us (...) hope of this (...) everlasting, yt
whites we be here in thit miserable world, we may have some taste and feeling
of it in our hearts, through the merits of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ.
So be it.

For the true knowledge of God and his word, and a life agreeable to the same.
Grant unto us (O merciful God, we most heartelie beseech^ thee) knowledge
and true vnvnderstanding of thy blessed will and word, that all ignorance being
expelled we may know what thy will and pleasure is in all things, and how to
do our duty, and truly to walk in our vacation* and that also we may
express in our living those things that me. do know, that we be not only
knowers of thy will and word, good Lord, but also may be hearty and faithful
workers of (...)same, through our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, So be it.

A prayer for the strength and increase of faith.
O Almighty and everlasting God, which not only (...), every good and perfect
gift; but also increasest those gifts that thou haste given: ^e most humbly
beseech thee (...) in us ye gift of faith, that we may true lie believe in
thee, and in thy promises made unto us in Christ su our Lord and that neither
our negligence nor infirmity of the flesh, nor by grieuousnesse of tentations,
neither by the subtle crafts and assaults of the devil, we be driven from
this faith in the blood of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. So be it.

For a godly life.
ALmighty God, give us grace that we may cast away the works of darkness and put
on us the armor of light, now in the time of this mortal lif^ (in the which
thy so^l Jesus Ihrist came to visit us in great humility) that in the last day
when be shall come again in his glorious majesty to judge the quick and the dead,
we may rise to the life immortal, through him who lives and reigns with
thee y^ holy Ghost, now and for ever. So be it.

A prayer for the true perseverance and assured hope of eternal life.
BLessed God which have caused all holy scriptures to be written for our
learning; grant that we may in such wise hear them, read them, mark them,
and inwardly printe them in our hearts, that by patience and comfort of thy
holy word, we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting
life, which thou have given us in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So be it.

A prayer for the obtaining of our petitions.
Almighty God, which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise that when two or three be
gathered together in thy (...), thou will grant their requests: fulfill now (O
Lord) the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy tru^^ and in the world to
come life everlasting* Amen.

The end of the Letanie.
A GODLY INSTRVction, containing the sum of all the divinity necessary for
a Christian conscience.
Made by John Bradford.
A Man that is regenerate and borne of GOD, the which thing that every one of
us be our Baptism, the Sacrament of regeneration does require under pain of
damnation, and therefore let every one of us with the Virgin Marie say. Be it
unto me O Lord, according to thy word, according to the sacrament of
baptism, wherein thou ^^st declared our adption, and let us lament, y^ doubting
hereof in us, (...) against it as we shall be made able of the Lord, a man (I
say) that is regenerate, consists of two men, (as a man may say) namely of
the old man, The old man.
and of the new man. The old man is like to a mighty Giant, such a one as was
Goliath, The new man.
for his birth is now perfect: but the new man is like unto a little child,
such a one as was David, for his birth is not yet perfect, until the day of his
general resurrection.

The old man therefore is more stronger, Why the old man is stronger than
the new.
lusty and st^ring then is the new man, because the birth of the new man is
but begun now, and the old man is perfectly borne. And as the oldeman is more
stirring, lusty and stronger than the new man: so is the nature of him clean
contrary to the nature of the new man, as being earthly and corrupt with
Satan's seed, In what respect one man is.
the nature of the new man being heavenly and blessed with the celestial ^eed
of God. So that one man, in as much as he is corrupt with the seed of the
serpent is an old man: both an old man also a new man
and in as much as he is blessed with the seed of God from above he is a new
man. And as, in as much as he is an old man, he is a sinner and an enemy to
God: so in as much as he is regenerate, he is righteous and holy, and a
friend to God, the seed of God preserving him from sin, so that he cannot
sin, as the seed of the serpent, wherewith he is corrupt even from his
conception, inclines him, yea, inforceth him to sin, and nothing else but to
sin. So that the best part in man before regeneration, in Gods fight is not
only an enemy, but enimitie it self.

One man therefore which i^ regenerate, How one man may be called always
sinful (...) always just.
may well be called always just and always sinful: just in respect of Gods
seed and his regeneration: sinful in respect of Satan's seed and his first
birth. Why the old man oftentimes preuayleth against the new man.
Betwixt these two men therefore, there is continual conflict and war most
deadly. The flesh and the old man by reason of his birth that is perfect, do
often for a time prevail against the new man (being but a child in
comparison) and that in such sort, as not only other, The old man so mightily
preuayleth sometimes against the new man in the children of god, that the spirit
and seed of God seems to be utterly taken from the whereas indeed it is not
so, as afterward, to their great comfort they find and feel
but even the children of God themselves think that they be nothing else but
old, and that the spirit and seed of God is lost and gone away, where yet
notwitstanding the truth is otherwise, the spirit and the seed of God, at the
length appearing again, and dispelling away the clouds which cover the Sun
of Gods seed from shining, as the clouds in the air do the corporal Sun:
so that sometimes a man cannot tell by any sense, that the^ is any sun, the
clouds and winds so hidet^ it from our fight: Even so our cecitie or
blindness, and corrupt affections do often shadow the sight of Gods seed in
Gods children, as though they were plain reprobates. Whereof it comes that
they praying according to their sense, but not according to the truth, desire
of God to give them again his spirit, as though they had lost it, and he had
taken it away. Which thing God never does indeed although he make us to think
so for a time: for always he holds his hand under his children in their
falls, that they lie not still as other do which are not regenerate. And this
is the difference betwixt Gods children, which are regenerate and elect before
all times in Christ, and the wicked cast awayes: that the elect lie not still
continually in their sin, as do the wicked, but at the length do return
again by reason of Gods seed, which is in them hid as a spark of fire in the
ashes: as we may see in Peter, David, Paul, Marie Magdalen, and others. For
these (I meant Gods children) God has made all things in Christ Jesus: to whom
he has given this dignity, that they should be his inheritance and spouses.
This our inheritour Christ Jesus, God with God, light of light, coeternall and
consubstantiall with the father and with the holy Ghost, to the end that he
might become our husband (because the Husband and the Wife must be one body and
flesh) has taken our nature upon him, communicating with it and by it in his
own person, to us all his children, his divine majesty (as Peter says) and
so is become flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones substantiallie, as we
are become flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones spiritually: all that ever
we have perteining to him* yea even our sins, as all that ever he has,
perteining unto us, even his whole glory. So that if Satan should summon us
to answer in our debts, and sins* in that the wife is no suable person, but
the husband, we may well bid him enter his action against our husband Christ,
and he will make him a sufficient answer.

For this end (I mean that we might be coupled and married thus to Christ,
and so be certain of salvation, and at peace with God in our consciences) God
has given his holy word which has two parts (as now the children of God do
consist of two men) the one part of Gods word being proper to the old man, The
law pertains to the old man, and the Gospel to the new man.
and the other part of Gods word being proper to the new man. The part
properly pertaining to the old man is the law: the part properly perteining
to the new man, is the Gospel. The law is a doctrine which commands and
forbids, What the Law is.
requiring, doing, and avoiding. Under it therefore are contained al precepts,
threatenings, promises upon conditions of our doing and avoiding. etc.

The Gospel is a doctrine which always offers and gives, requireng on our
behalf, What the Gospel is.
not as of worthiness or as a cause, but as a certificate unto us, and
therefore under it are contained all the free and sweet promises of God. as I
am the Lord thy God, The conscience feared and beaten down with the terror of
Gods judgment against sin, may not look upon the law, but fly to the Gospel
for relief and comfort,
etc.

In those that be of years of discretion it requires faith, not as a cause,
but as an instrument whereby we ourselves may be certain of our good husband
Christ, and of his glory: and therefore when the conscience feels it self
disquieted for fear of Gods judgment against sin she may in no wise look
upon the doctrine pertaining to the old man, but to the doctrine only that
pertains to the new man, in it not looking for that which it requires, that
is, faith, because we never believe as we should: but only on it which it
offers, and which it gives that is, on Gods grace and eternal mercy and
peace in Christ Jesus. So shall she be in quiet when she looks for it
altogether out of her self in gods mercy in christ Jesus: John. 13
in whose lap if she lay her head with S. John then is she happy, When the
conscience is quiet and at peace with god the Law serves only to keep down
the old man.
and shall find quietness in deed. When she feels her self quiet, then
(in Gods name) let her look on the law, and upon such things as it requires,
thereby to bridle and keep, down the old Adam, to stay the Goliath: from whom
she must needs keep the sweet promises, being the bed wherein her spouse and
she (...) lie together. For as the wife (...) keep her bed only for her
husband, although in other things she is contented to have fellowship with
others, as to speak, sit, eat, drink, go, etc. so our consciences which are
christ's wives, must needs keep the bed, that is, goes sweet promises all only
for our selves and our husband, there to meet together, to embrace and laugh
together, and to be joyful together. If sin, the law, the devil, or any
thing else would creep into the bed and lie there, then complain to thy
husband Christ, and forthwith thou shall see him, play Phinees part. Thus my
dearly beloved, Number. 2, 5
I have given you in few words, a sum of all the Deuinity which a Christian
conscience cannot want.

FINIS.
The Table.
AN introduction to prayer. 17 A meditation concerning prayer. 49 A meditation
upon the Lords prayer. 68 Private prayer for the morning, evening, and other
th^e^ of the day 132 When you awake out of your sleep. cod. When you behold
the day light. 134 When you arise. 135 When you apparel your self. 136
When you are made ready to begin the day vvithall. 138 Cogitation meet to
begin the day vvithal. 139 When you go forth of the door. 143 When you are
going any iourneie. 145 When you are about to receive your meat. 148 In the
meal time. 150 After your meat 152 When you come home again. 155 At the
Sun going down. 156 When the candles b^ light. 158 When you make your
self unready. 160 When you go into your bed. 161 When you feel sleep to
be coming. 163 A general confession of sins, with other prayers for the
morning and evening, to be used in families and public assemblies 165 Another
confession of sins. 167 A prayer to be said in the morning. 169 An other. 172
An other. 143 An evening prayer. 176 Another. 181 Another. 183 A prayer for
(...) of sins. 185 A prayer for the true knowledge of the mystery of our
redemption in Christ. 197 A form of thanksgiving for our redemption, and a
prayer for the strength and increase of faith. 200 A thanksgiving to God for
his great benefits. 202 A prayer for true mortification. 205 A meditation of
the exercise of true mortification. 212 A meditation of the coming of Christ
to judgment, and of the revvard both of the faithful and unfaithful. 215 A
meditation of the life everlasting, the place where it is, and the
incomparable joys there of. 222 Another meditation of the blessed (...) and
felicity of the life to come 231 A meditation of the presence of God. 238 A
meditation of the providence of God, 240 A meditation of Gods power, beauty,
goodness, etc. 245 A meditation concerning the sober usage of the body, that it
may be subject and obedient to the soul. 249 Another meditation concerning
the sober usage of the body and pleasures in the life. 252 A meditation of
death and the commodities it brings. 256 A meditation upon the passion of our
Savior Jesus Christ. 259 A prayer to Christ crucified. 267 A prayer to Christ
ascended and reigning in glory. 268 A prayer for true repentance. 272 A prayer
for the strength and increase of faith. 273 A prayer for the true sense and
feeling of Gods favor and mercy in Christ. 274 A prayer against our spiritual
enemies, the devil, the world and the flesh. 279 A prayer for the present
help in temptation. 281 Remedies against sinful motions and tentations. 284 A
prayer for the avoiding of Gods heavy wrath and vengeance for our sin. 286
Another. 263 A prayer to be said of such as suffer any kind of cross. 295 A
prayer for the afflicted for the profession of Gods word. 299 A prayer to God
the father, the son, and the holy Ghost. 302 A thanksgiving to God the
father, the son and the holy Ghost. 307 A prayer to God for his help and
protection against the obstinat enemy, of the truth. 310 A prayer for the
afflicted and persecuted under the tyranny of Antichrist. 312 A prayer to be
said before the preaching of Gods word. 314 A prayer to be said after the
preaching of Gods word. 316 A prayer to be said before the receiving of the
communion. 323 A thanksgiving after the receiving of the communion. 326 A
lamentation of a sinner afflicted in conscience for his offense. 327 A prayer
for the sick 33 A prayer to be said at the hour of death. 339. A prayer for a
vvoma^ with child. 343 A Psalm to be said in the time of any common plague,
sickness, or other cross and visitation of God. 346 A Psalm of thanksgiving
for deliverance from the plague or any other kind of sickness, or affliction.
350 Prayers to be said before meat and after. 354 An other prayer to be said
before meat. 355 An other 356 A thanksgiving after meals 357 An other
thanksgiving after meals. 359 Another 360 An other. 361
Prayers commonly called Lidleys Prayers, with certain godly additions.
A Confession of sin. 362 A confession of sins and a prayer for the remission
thereof. 374 A prayer for the true knowledge and understanding of the word of
God. 380 A prayer for the leading of a godly life. 383 A prayer for the
deliverance from sin, and to be restored to Gods grace and favor again. 387 A
prayer necessary to be said at all times. 489 A prayer for grace and remission
of sin. 392 Prayers taken out of the first Psalm. 39 Prayers taken out of the
second psalm. 400 A prayer which M. John Bradford said a little before his
death in Smithfield. 404 The Letanie 409 For the Queens majesty. 410 For
Bishops and ministers of the Church. 421 For rain. 421 For fair weather 422 In
the time of dearth and famine. 423 In the time of war 423 In the time of any
common plague or sickness. 424 For strength and comfort of the holy Ghost. 425
For sure hope and true taste of everlasting life. 426 For the true knowledge of
god and h^ word and a life agreeable to the same. ibi. For the strength and
increase of faith. 427 For a godly life. 428 For the true perseverance and
assured hope of eternal life. 429 A prayer for the obteining of our petitions
429 A godly instruction, containing the sum of all the Divinity necessasrie for
a Christian conscience. 4^1
FINIS.
Printed by R. Robinson for Simon Waterson. 1596


