INSTRVCTIONS for the use of the beads, containing many matters of meditacion
or mental prayer, with diverse good aduises of ghostly counsel. Where unto
is added a figure or form of the beads portrued in a Table. Compiled by John
Bucke for the benefit of unlearned. And Dedicated to the honorable good Lady,
ANNE LADY Hungarforde, sister to the Duchess of Ferria.

depiction of the virgin Mary and Jesus Christ or the Madonna and Child,
encircled by rosary beads, with decades divided by two hands, two feet and a
heart

Imprinted at LOVAIN in the year of our Lordre. 1589.

depiction of the Visitation, featuring the virgin Mary, Elizabeth, and the
infant John the Baptist; in the background is a city

blazon or coat of arms of Lady Anne Hungerford, nee Dormer TO THE RICHT
Virtuous Lady, ANNE Lady Hungarfoorde, his honorable good Maistres, John Bucke
Wishes al health.
FOr so much as man borne in to this world haithe no long time to live Here,
he being (as the Wy seman says) lent, not given to life: And for that we
must render an account, at the day of Judgment (before that dredefull Judge,
which is void of partiality) not only of words and works, but of
each moment of time spent here, yea even unto the thoughts of our hearts,
every one in his vocacion and degree: And for my part calling all this to the
eyes of my mind: seeing also all my actions hithertho to be very base and
barrain in his sight, which is the true searcher of al thoughts: I began to
think how I might employe my self in some work acceptable to so bountiful
and benign a patron, and lord, as haith beside my creacion and redemption,
not only sanctified me and preserved me from my infancy: but also brought me
out af that dark Egiptiacal England, (the very sea of heresy) and placed me
under so good and graciouse a lady, in whom I daily behold many examples
of true Religion, goldie fear, constant patience, and Christian piety.
Therefore finding nothing more agreeable to his divine pleasure, than is the
charitable trauail in moving the deuocio^ of others to the effectual service
of his Divine Majesty by prayer and meditacion: and considering how great
commodity a little direction in prayer may bring to the unlearned and ignorant,
whose weakness I would be glad any way to releue: The first part of
this book.
I have thought good to put forth such spiritual exercises, as I my self
have priuatlie used, with great comfort, in sayieng the Rosaire, Croune, or
Psalter of our blessed laidie the virgin Marie, upon the beads. The second
part.
And I have also set down sundry meditacions and consideracions to be used
otherwise, touching as well the passion of our Savior and our redemption: as
also the infinite benefits and Graces most plentifully bestovved upon every
Christian: to the end that in thinking thereof a good religiouse mind may be
more diligent and attentive to note and mark what is said: more inflamed to
devotion: and more moved with compunction and sorrow for sins committed.
And thies meditations a man muy divide in to seven parts, according to the
days of the week: to the end that a thankful heart Daily beholding (as in
a glass) the bountiful guiftes of God may take occasion to hate sin, and
to love God so good a benefactor and patron. And because many well disposed
parsones would feign walk according to the vvil of their lord and Creator:
yet do they wander astray by want of good instruction, rather than upon
malice: The third part.
I have collected out of devout authors certain lessons an directio^s
shevveing, not oulie, good means to avoid sin, and to frame the whole
course of life according to his rule and commandment, which says; Hoe
fac, and viues. Do this, and thou shault live: but also profitable signs and
arguments, whereby one muy perceive, whether he stands in the state of God
his grace and favor, The fovverth part.
or no. Lastly I have added some rules to know from vvhe^ce cuell thoughts
do proced eand means to avoid them: with a figure or portrature of the
beads, containing your Lady ships usual Meditacion upon them.

Thies with such like being the scle^der fruit of my barrain vvyt having no
better crop to put in to the barn, I have published for the benefit of the
unlearned, vviche can not skill of curiouse discourses penned by great clerks.
And I have presumed to dedicat this fruit of my poor talent unto your Ladyship,
my honorable, and most bountiful Maistresse: by whose example of Christian
life and conversation I have been much edified, and animated, as to other
Christian exercises, so to this vvoork now here set forth. Which I hope
shall find better enterteinment; for that it passes under the favor of your
honorable countenance. And good reason I have so to think, for (to omit other
places, times, and proofs testifyeing your virtues) since your coming in to
thies Countries, you have given such demonstracions of true Religion, by the
fruits of your good life, as for your pittifoll heart, and charitable
compassion, with the effect of almoise and works of mercy, I may well
compare you to Paula, whom Seint Ierom so highly commends. The town of
Louain and other places in time of plague famine, war, and heresy can
testify your piety. The naked then by you clothed, the hungry then by you
fed, the sick of daungerouse diseases than by you visited, comforted, and
releued; the dead then by you buried, the captives then by you ransomed, yea
the simple seduced souls then by your meants reconciled to God and his Church
are suffficient testimonies and prooses of your zeal to virtue, and of your
perfection in Catholic Religion: and will plead for you before God and man:
that as the whole course of your life hitherto haith been accounted among the
most honorable in virtue: so vvil your temporal end be in deed aright famous
in all good memory and your second life in heaven very gloriouse among holy
Confessors, for (as Saint Ierom truly says) seldom or never dies that man
an evil death, which willingly exercises the works of Charity. And his
reason is, for that such persons have many intercessors among good and
virtuous poor people: and very unlike it is and almost impossible that none
of their prayers should not be herd.

And though (good Madame) you have endured many afflictions and grievous
adversities: yet have you no cause therefore to be discouraged: for they are
evident signs of the favor that God bears tovvard you. It is a peculiar
property of God to punish them whom he loves. Examples thereof we have
infinite in holy scripture and othervvhere. Holy Job did never willingly eat
morsel of bread alone, without company of some one or other poor and needy
person: yet were his plagues and afflictions so terrible, and his diseases so
lothesome as we tede not of any greater. Who was more pitiful to the poor
and nedie than old Tobie, which buried the dead: fed the hungry; and
supplied the wants of many: visited and comforted his fellows captives? Yet
did he bear the burden of many heuye crosses. And when he did stand in most
need of al comfort, he lost the use of his sight: But with thies and such
examples of Scripture you are well acquainted. I will recompt unto you
others. It is well known hou charitable a hand and heart Saint Gregory the
great had, the restorer of Christian Religion in England, to whom our Savior
appeared among others poor beggars, as a special token that God was well
pleased with that good man's almoise deeds, and works of charity: yet was
he vexed with bodily sickness continually. It is written of a holy woman
called Liduina so pitiful toward the poor and needy, as when she had not
sufficient of her own to give, she would beg and borovv of others to
releue the necessity of the poor, Such encrcase ostentimes followed her hand,
as though she ever gave where need required, yet did her portion find no
decrease: In so much as one time (if not oftener) thirty poor persons were
well releued of the meat that was put in one pot, and in the end as much
meat found in the pot as was at the first put in to it. yea she had a purse
where in she used to put her almose money, which she called JESUS his pot,
for that it never failed: yet was this good woman ever siklic, and often
afflicted with many most greuouse diseases and adversities. And it is well
known hou your Ladieshipp being at Namure in a time of great famine you
releued the hun grie soldiors with flesh he and pottage, and how God so
blessed your almoise, as the meat provided in tuo pottes for thirty parsones
did suffice well nigh two hundred people. Therefore as you have Good cause
with that good woman Lidunia to magnifye God, which gave you ability and
good vvil to exercise the works of charity) and multiplied your guystes in
your hands: So have you good matter of comfort by patient bearing of your
vvordlie afflictions, expect with Liduina the revvard prepared for faith sull
and charitable Christianes: knovveing perfectly that he which gives but a
cup of cold water for the love of Christ shall not leese his reward.

Thies examples show you that temporal afflictions casuallie falling upon good
men, are signs and arguments of Gods favor. For (as Saint Gregory does
well note) there is no greater mark of Gods wrath and displeasure, then is
a continual good success in health, vvelthe, and vvordlye prosperity. Yea
sickness and affliction does frame and conform us like to our Savior Jesus
Christ: whom God the Father sent in to the world not to reap the delicate
pleasures thereof: but to suffer great pains and miseries. What careful
troubles and dredefull perils did his blessed mother endure, when it was
known that our master Jesus should be borne? And after he was borne a great
number of deadly enemies did dailye arise against that svvete babe and her.
What terrible fear and care with paynfull labors did she endure traualing
over hills and dales; when she heard the cries of mothers for their children
haled out of their arms and mordered before their eyes: when shedyd mete the
cruel bouchers that sought to morder her dear child by the cruel edict of
wicked Herod, proclaming all male children from troo years old and under to
be slain? what soroufull cares and hard traunlyng did that blessed virgin
endure to hyde and save her oulie son from the cruelty of those sinful
creatures, whom her son came to sane and keep from hell and damnacion if they
would accept him? Shall we then look for priuileige and immunitie from
vvordlie afflictions, when we see that spotless lamb the son of God, and
the immaculat virgin his mother to have endured all miseries that the world
could procure against them? In very truth, afflictions and miseries sustained
by a faithful Christian are the bages of our lord and Master. Therefore we
must not grudge to vvear our Masters liuereys, and to bear our cross and
follow him: considering that in so doing we have an assurance of his
entertainment with life everlasting in his high palace of heaven: Whereunto
he that bought your laidyship bring you when it shall please him. In mean time
I humbly beseech you accept this myte putin to the box. Interpret of it as I
mind to your honor and to all good Catholics to whose vieue it shall come.
I crave only the glory of God hereby to increase, to whom I commend your
Ladyshippe with all true Catholics.

Your Ladyshyppes obedient servant John Bucke.
depiction of the virgin Mary and Jesus Christ or the Madonna and Child, in a
room



CERTAIN MATTERS OF Meditacion or mental praeyer to be considered in reciting
the Rosaire, Psalter, on Croune of our Laidie the most blessed virgin Marie
upon the beads.
IT is an ancient exercise of devout Christianes in time of prayer, and
specially in the use of the beads, to set before the eyes often the Soul some
conceit or Imaginacion of one or other matter contained in the life of our
Savior, or of the blessed virgin Matie. And this conceit well imprinted in
mind, vvil keep it from wavering in the vain thonghtes, and will make it
more attentive and hedefull: vverby devotion is sooner kyndled: without which
prayer yields small fruit. Therefore when you are disposed to praey upon the
beads: you may think upon three sorts of mysteries (vvherof five poinctes in
every one are Joyful, five aredolorouse, and five are gloriouse) in manner
folovveing.

depiction of the Annunciation, featuring the virgin Mary in a room with the
angel Gabriel in a cloud sending the Holy Spirit (in the form of a bird or dove
inside a halo) toward her Of five Joyful Mysteries to be thought upon when
you are to pray upon the beads.
THe first Joyful Mystery or secret is the annunciation of the blessed virgin
Mary. There fore when you take your beads, and have advisedly commended your
self to God, blessing your self with, In nomine Patris and Filij and
Spiritus sancti. Amen. The Annu^ciation often our Lady.
Then may you first set before the eyes of your soul, the Annonciation of our
blessed lady: and Imagine in your mind that you behold the Angel Gabriel
presenting him self before that blessed virgin with his heavenly salutacion
Aue Maria,

And with that Imaginacion still kept in mind, say the first Pater noster,
and ten Aue Mary's folovveing (which is the first part of the beads)
attentively, distinctlie, and devoutly: there let thies cogitacio^s folovveing
run through your mind avvhile, before you go any further.

First thinck how the Angel found her at prayer:

Secondly mark with what modest silence she gave ear to the messaige,

Thirdly note her zeal to keep her maidenhode and virginity,

Fouerthlie consider her present faith in believing the words of the Angel,
a virgin should bear a child: and hete learn faithfully to believe the
promises of God.

Fyftlie behold her humble obedience, and resigned vvil to the disposicion of
almighty God. And when you have thus occupied your mind some little time:
then prepare your self to the second Joy.

depiction of the Visitation, featuring Elizabeth reaching to touch the stomach
of the pregnant virgin Mary at the entrance to a house

THe second Joyful mystery is her Visitacion of her cossein Saint Elizabeth.
The visiting of S. Elizabeth
Here you may think that you see the meting of thad blessed virgin, Pater
noster, and ten Aue Mary's, folovveing with like attencion and devotion as
before.

Then learn a lesson of great humility and charity of our lady. And when
thou hear thy self commended give all the thanks to God as she did. And if
thou art advanced to any degree of honor: bear not thy self more highly, nor
neglect to do good offices to others under thee. Consider also how effectual
the words of our Lady (then haueng conceyved our Savior in her womb)
were to cause the babe Saint John to move, in the womb of his mother, when
the virgin saluted her. And therefore ceass not to laud and praise her, and to
call upon her help in thy need. And when thou have thus thought, begin the
third part of the beads, as follows.

depiction of the Nativity, featuring the Holy family (the virgin Mary, Joseph,
and the infant Jesus Christ in a stable with an ox and two figures in the
background

THe third Ioyefull mystery is the Nativity and birth of our Savior. The
Nativity of Christ.
Here thynk that thou see svvete Jesus newborn, vvrapped in poor clothes,
laid in a cryb between two beasts in an abject place of a common Inn, for
want of ability to hyre a better lodging. And with this thought say the
third Pater noster, ad ten Aue Mary's folovveing attentively and devoutly
as before.

Then consider with what pain the most blessed virgin mirror of humility
went from Nazareth to Bethleem in cold vvinter,

Secondelie consider in what poor estate the lord of all the world would
be borne and brought in to this world:

Thirdly note here the love of our Savior to mankind, to have ever due
regard to the poor: and imitate thou those poor men which with great zeal
simplicity and diligence sought our Savior, to yield unto him all that honor
and service which was requisite. And after thies thoughts prepare thy self
to the fouerth loye devoutly as before.

depiction of the Presentation in the Temple, featuring Simeon, the virgin
Mary, Joseph and the infant Jesus Christ, with a male and a female figure

THe fouerth Ioyefull mystery is the Presentacion of our Redemer in the temple
before the Bishop. christ presented in the temple.
Now thou do dimisse thy servant o lord, according to thy word in peace.
Because mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. And with this thought say the
fouerth Pater noster, and ten Aue Mary's, folovveing, devoutly as before.
And then learn to present thy self oftentimes in the Church vvithall
diligence, reverence and devotion, specially at the holy sacrifice of the
Mass: that thou may be parttaker of great mysteries. And thynk how Just
and faithful persons by devout prayer, and godly patience, have at last
obtained their holy desires, as this man did. And here also mark how our
Savior in his infancy, being but eight days old, shed his blood for thee
at his holy Circumcision: and learn for his fake to suffer from thy childhode
what adversity so ever fall upon thee: And with this thought prepare thy
self to the fyst Joy devoutly as before.

THe fyft Joy is the finding of our Savior in the temple. Here behold our
Lady and ancient Joseph with great care seeking for her son, whom she had
lost: and at last finds him disputing of deep mysteries, with great Doctors
in the Temple. And with that Impression say the fifth and last Pater noster,
and ten Aue Mary's folovveing, denoutly as before.

Then learn here of the virgin and good Joseph to seek for Christ with all
care and diligence:

And think not to find him with vvorldely affection tovvarde thy kindred,

Always provide to thy uttermost power that thou keep him in the cabinet of
thy heart:

Of five dolorous Mysteries to be thought upon when you are to use the beads.
depiction of the Agony in the Garden, with Jesus Christ knelt in the Garden of
Gethsemane, surrounded by the sleeping Apostles Peter, James, and John

When you have said the Rosarie, Christ prayeng in the garden.
or beads ones over, with the meditacions and thoughts before mentioned:
then may you with like preparacion and order as before muse upon the five
dolorous mysteries: that is to say five special panges of the sorrows and
pains that our Savior endured for our Rede^pcion.

The first dolorous mystery was the svveating of blood and water which
our lord and Master suffered in the Garden. And here behold Christ in the
Garden kneeling upon his knees, holding up his face and hands to heaven, and
prayeing thriste to his Father, in this sort. Father if it be possible let
this chalice pass from me: yet not my will, but thy will be done: And mark
his great agony upon the impression and conceit of the great pains which he
was to suffer upon the Cross for mankind: and how for very labor of
sorrow he svveateth water mixed with blood: and behold with all an Angel
sent from heaven so comfort him. And with this Imaginacion say the first Pater
noster, and ten Aue Mary's devoutly.

Then note first how in all adversities thou must flee for succor to God.

Secondly that it is not enough to pray with thy lyppes,

Thirdly how great need you have to pray for avoiding eternal pain,

Fovverthly comfortly continue in prayer and think that God in the end will
hear the, and send his holy Angel to relieve thee when need shall require.
This being done prepare thy self as before to the second dolor.

THhe secounde dolorous mystery is the apprehension and arraignement of our
lord and master with all manner of contumelious skorne and despite. The
arraignement of Christ.


And with thees thoughts say the second Pater noster, Aue Mary's devoutly:
and then consider that when thou upon vvillfull malice do commit any deadly
sin, thou art become a persecutor of thy Savior, and a part taker and
companion with Judas in betrayeing, skornyng, whipping, and contumelious
abusing thy Redemer.

Learn also with patience to suffer all affliction laid upon the for thy
sins:

depiction of the Scourging at the Pillar, with Jesus Christ tied to a column
while two men whip or beat him with tree branches; four other figure in the
background

THe third dolorous mystery is the crovvning of our Savior with a crown
of Sharp thorns, The crown of thorn.
thorns, like unto nails, and beating the same violently in to his head: and
with lothesome derision saluting him as king. A terrible sight, hable to brust
the heart of a good Christian to consider rightly. With this Imaginacion and
conceyt say the third Pater noster, and ten Aue Mary's. And then note the
insolent pride and hypocrisy of all Jews, heretics, and infideles against
the head of the Church then, and now against his members. And learn to
embrace the true adoring of our Savior vvithall humility and simplicity,
without all pride and insolency. And here note that the property of all
heretics is ever with most rigeur and malice to assault the head principal
directors of true religion: which is a plain demonstracion of their
disobedience, think therefore how thou may take the contrary course, and
embrace obedience in singleness of heart: which all mighty God more
estemeth then sacrifice: and there upon conclude thou that Idolatry is in no
degree worse than is disobedience: And with this thought prepare thy mind to
the fovverth dolor.

depiction of the Condemnation of Christ, featuring Pontius Pilate surrounded
by a group of male figures; including a soldier holding a cross

THe fovverth dolorous mystery was the false sentence of Christ his
condemnacion, Christ condemned
Pater noster, and ten Aue Mary's. And then note that if we will be perfect
servants of Christ we must bear our own crosses: that is, we must
patiently suffer all pains, afflictions, and adversities which fall upon us
for our sins, or for his sake that endured so much for us. And here learn
to detest all false Judgment, and corrupcion of conscience for any fear or
reward, lest thou become an other Pilat by condemning Christ in his members
as he did Christ in his own person. And thus thinking prepare thy mind
with good devotion to the fist dolor.

depiction of the Crucifixion, featuring Jesus Christ nailed to a cross at
Golgotha; surrounded by the virgin Mary, John the Apostle, and a kneeling
female figure

THe fist dolorous mystery was the crucifieing of Christ. The crucifyeing of
Christ.
new torment. Mark how they streched him alonge and nailed his hands and
feet with rough and blunt nails to the cross. Consider what huge torture
he endured in every member and part of his body, through all his senses ot
one instant, vvhiles they hoysed him up thus hanging upon nails by his hands
and fete, with all the weight of his body, having no other thing to rest
upon. And with this terrible sight say the fifth and last Pater noster, and
ten Aue Mary's. And then dravv together all thy senses and with all the
powers of thy mind consider how thou may fall in to a true mortificacio^
of al thy vices and concupiscences, and prepare thy self to dye with him that
thou may be found vvoorthie to arise with him. This sight only (if thou
view all circumstances duly and througlie) vvil be hable (by the grace of
God to pull the away from all vvordlie delites, and to setle the love of God
rightly in thy heart. Now when you have well mused upon thees matters, you
may conclude with a good confidence the Credo. And this much for the second
Rosarie or second part of the psalter of our lady.

Of five glorious Mysteries to be thought upon when you are to pray upon the
beads.
depiction of the Resurrection, with Jesus Christ emerging from his tomb,
surrounded by three soldiers

When you have tvvyse said the Rosarie, The resurrection of Christ.
or the beads tvvyse once with the meditacions and thoughts before
mentioned:

The first glorious mystery was the resurrection of Christ here may you
present to the eyes of your mind in what beauty, brightness, and glistering
clearnes the body of our Savior so before disfigured with stripes and
torments is now risen again impassible, and immortal. Behold how he
visits first is sorrowful mother to comfort her. How he shovveth him self
to Marie Magdalen, and to all his disciples. And with this comfortable sight
repeat the first Pater noster, and ten Aue Mary's devoutly. And then vveaghe
the glorious victory of our Savior against whom neither deuell nor hell
with all their ministers was hable to preuail further than he him self
lysted. Note how all the practizes of Jews against the Gospel are
disapointed and overthrown: Even so shall all devises of heretics when it
shall please God. Therefore consider how in all tentacions afflictions,
persecutions and troubles for a Just cause, we must not yield nor relent to
the wicked: but expect with true patience the vvil of God: who after a
storm sends fair weather: after many troubles gives quietness, with ever
lasting rest. And here may we conceive an assured hope of our resurrection in
soul and body: and in mean time by continual prayers and good life to have
many visions and sightes of our Savior in our hearts: as the blessed Marie
Magdalen and many others had visible after his resurrection.

THe second glorious mystery was the Ascension of our Savior forty Days
after his resurrection. The Asce^sion of Christ.
Pater noster, and ten Aue Mary's. And pray to God that thou may so humble
thy self in this life and so keep thy heart pure and Innocent as thou may
ascend after him to those Joys which God has prepared for his elect.

THe third glorious Mystery is the coming of the holy Ghost. The coming of
the holy Ghooste.
And here thou may view the blessed mother of God our Redemer, Pater noster,
and ten Aue Mary's. And then note his faithefull performance of his promise,
and their firm faith and belefe in the same, and use thou that example to thy
benefit, here all so for thy instruction and coumfort consider six special
causes of the coming of the holy Ghost: to wit, for to rejoice the pensive:
to revive the dead in sin: to sanctify the unclean; to confirm his
Disciples in love: to save the Just: to teach the ignorant. Thees guyftes and
graces are preserved and increased in us by special means. vvherof prayer
with humility is one: diligent frequenting the Sacraments with hearing
divine service is an other: continual exercife of the works of Charity is a
third for thus it gives strength against all assaults and tentacions of
ghostly and bodily enemies. Therefore no peril nor persecucion can anoye that
person which has the holy Ghost.

depiction of the virgin Mary and Jesus Christ or the Madonna and Child,
encircled by rosary beads, with decades divided by two hands, two feet and a
heart

THe fouerth glorious mystery is the Assumpcion of our Lady. The Assumpcion
of our lady.
Note how the Apostles being all dispersed abroad in the world exercising
their functions in several far distant places, are miraculouslie come to
gether in a moment to testify her death and assumpcion. And with thies
thoughts recite the fouerth Pater noster, and ten Aue Mary's. And here
consider how our Savior can and vvil reward those which serve and love
him faithfully. Mark also how dear she was to him, and there upon how
auailable her prayers are with him.

THE fifth glorious mystery is the Crovvning of the blessed Virgin Marie, The
crovvning of our lady.
Pater noster, and ten Aue Mary's. And then note how in heaven she makes
daily intercession for the good estate of holy Church: and is ready to assist
each one which with a contrite heart prays to her. For the more reverence
and devotion we bear toward her, the greater help shall we receive of her
son, in all our distresses. And this we may be sure of, that living here
according to her example in continence, humility, patience, and mortificacion
we shall arise at the last day in body and soul to rest in heaven for ever.
Unto which Joy God of his mercy bring us, where that blessed virgin
rests in presence of the Holy Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy Ghoost.
To whom be all honor and glory. Amen.

depiction of the Jesus Christ wearing a crown of thorns and carrying his
cross, followed by a group of male and female figures, also carrying crosses

SEVEN SHORT MATters of Meditacion touching the benefits which God has
bestovved upon Mankind.
IT is requisite and expedient for every Christian often to think upon the
benefits that God haith given to man which being infinite in number and
value may be reduced to seven principal heads. And thees are the benefits
of our Creacion, Gratificacion, Vocation, Iustificacion, Dotacion, Gubernacion,
and Glorificacion.

Touching the benefit of Creacion.
We may consider sex things touching our Creacion.

First how God has predestined us in perpetual love before the world
was made.

Secondly how he made man most like to him self.

Thirdly how he has given us a body of a most seamly constitucion and
proporcion, void of many deformities, and made it apt to serve him.

Fovverthly how he has made our soul immortal,

Fiftlie that he haith appointed for each one of us a Good Angel to guide and
keep us.

Sixtlie that he has given us a prerogative to be borne of Christian parents,
not of infideles nor heretics.

Touching the benefit of Gratificacion.
We may consider six things touching Gratificacion.

Secondly how he has given us the holy Ghoost in token of adopcion as a
priuileige of love,

Thirdly how he haith bestovved on us his holy Sacraments in his holy
Church there to have a refuge and place of succor (as in the Ark of Noah)
from the fludde of sin and iniquities.

Fouerthly how by baptism he haith purged us of Original sin;

Fiftlie how he haith fortified us with the Sacrament of Confirmacion;

Sixthly how he haith made us Christianes,

Touching the benefit of vocacion.
VVhe may consider six things touching vocacion. to dye in our wickedness.

Secondly how many vvayes he haith sought to recall us: sometime by inward
inspiracions: sometime by admonicion of other men: sometime by exhortacions of
holy scriptures: yea oft^etimes by large and bountiful guyftes of nature,
fortune, and grace: sometime by evident shows of eternal Joys.

Thyrdlie how he haith broken our hard hearts:

Fouerthly how fatherly he haith enterteined us when we have returned to
him:

Fifthly that he has moved us to hearty repentance,

Sixtlie how he has put us in a reformed place, in his holy Church: we may
live religiously doing penance for our sins. And has set us in a state to
prevent the malice of sin, and has remitted our sins by the sacrament of
penance. Of thies matters you may think every vvedensdaye.

Touching the benefit of Iustificacion.
In considering this benefit of Iustificacion:

Secondly for that he has given us constant perseverance in faith fear and
love:

Thirdly for that he has given us the evangelical virtue hope,

left unto us the blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior, as
a viaticum or necessary provision for our relief in our journey.

Fiftely for that he has left us the holy Scriptures wherein, as in a Glass,

Sixthly,

Touching the benefit of Dotacion.
Here we may first think of the guyftes of nature,

Secoundly how that among many other prefermentes,

Thirdly how he haith illuminated our understanding with knovvleige of his
secrets:

Fovverthly how he haith inflamed our desires,

Fiftlye how he haith preserved us from the wound of sin,

Sixthly how he haith so delivered us from the danger of tentacion, matters
you may consider every friday, and yield to him al dew thanks for the same.

Touching the benefit of gubernacion.
Here we are to think how he haith preserved us ever bodily and ghoostlye in
good estate,

Secoundly how from our Cradels to this moment he haith preserved us from many
enemies, diseases, dangers,

Thirdly how he haith hitherto furnished us with all necessaires of meat,

Fovverthly how he haith for us ordained course and succession of times,

Fiftlie how he haith directed us in prosperity and adversity: Bearing with
our infirmities, remitting our enormityes: increasing our merits: and of thies
matters you may think every Saturday and give God thanks for these benefits.

Touching the benefit of glorificacion.
Here we are to consider and to thank God for many things of diverse degrees
and qualities touching our glorificacion, which he has ordained for us, if
we lyve and dye in his grace and favor: and of thies, some are above us, some
nigh us, some within us, others without us, some under us, and many all about
us.

Touching the first,

And touching the second, of all patriarchs, prophets, martyrs, confessors,
virgins, and other Seyntes and devout Christianes which have been syns the
beginning of the world, and for their integrity of life are now most clear
and bright, and in number infinite.

Touching the third point we have to consider and to thank.

As for the fovverth we are to look for a place most pleasant to behold,

Touching the fifth we have to consider how by divine grace we shall eschape
our terrible and cruel enemies that are in the pyt of hell:

As to the sixth degree, to wit, we have to think upon many guyftes and
graces that God haith bestovved upon us, innumerable, inestimable, unmeasurable:
And also to consider the infinite euels and miseries from which God has
preserved us: and how we shall be in safety and security delivered from all
that we need to fear: enioyeng all things we can desire.

Thus much touching the benefits which God haith given us. These things
every good Christian is bovvnd to thynk upon daily either in all or in part,
and to endeavor him felfe to be thankful. For ingratitude is a great part of
Injustice. And among all Christian exercises, none is more easy, (if we be
vvilling) none more needful, (if we regard our duty) none more profitable
(if we look for reward) than is often to meditate consider and think of the
great and manisolde benefits which we have received of God: for what may
be the cause why we feel so great decrease and want of guyftes and graces
which in time past we enjoyed, but only our ingratitude? what other better
mea^ can we find to preserve our selves in the favor of God than by often
calling to mind and memory the benefits of God toward us? This kind of
meditacion is as it were a cord to hall and dravv us to God. Nothing more
kyndleth in our hearts the love of God (says saint Augustine) than often to
vveagh and consider the benignity of God tovvarde us.

Certain circumstances touching the passion of our Savior very profitable to
be often thought upon to move contricion and amendment of life.
depiction of the Crucifixion, featuring Jesus Christ nailed to a cross at
Golgotha; surrounded by the virgin Mary, John the Apostle, and a kneeling
female figure

A Man may with great commodity meditate upon the passion of Jesus Christ our
Redemer, in admiring his vvonderfull great charity, humility, and patience.
which appears by four circumstances. To wit, if a man consider who he
was that suffered: what he suffered: by whom he suffered: and for whom he
suffered. Understand then that he which suffered was the Creator of the
world: Lord commander and governor of all creatures: Goodness it self:
the son of God, and God him self: he suffered banishement, hungar, thurst,
cold, tentacions, I kornes, contumelies, bonds, beatinges, wounds, and
villanouse cruelty, with all despite that the devil by man could execute
against him. Therefore in vveighing of thies two circumstances (who and what)
you may easily conceive, that the parsone so persecuted was so great, and the
indignities which he endured were so monstrous, as you may well say and
think, that the Judge of the world was him self arraigned and Judged:
Justice it self was condemned: Innocence it self was accused, blamed and
defamed: Glory it self was with all opprobrie spit at: God him self
openly to his face blasphemed: light extinguished: and life was slain: The
Segnior, lord, and master of heaven and earth was put to death: to the most
cruel, most shameful and most reprochefull death of the Cross: and so
horribly abused, as the very elements repined against the fact: The son
loft his light, and the earth trembled with the horror thereof. Here behold
the marvelous patience of the sufferer: which in a moment, with a thought,
might have consumed all those vvreches, and thrown them in to the fire of
hell. And at whose hands did he bear all thies indignities? of whom did he
suffer thies contumclious cruelties? for suthe of his own creatures whom he
had made of naught: of his own servants and vassailes, who had there being
of him, and every other good thing else. Whom he had chosen and picked out
from the rest of the world for his own peculiar people: whom he had higlie
advanced in the sight of the world.

But for whom did he suffer thies afflictions? not for any fault that he him
self committed: but even for them that thus traiterouslie abused him: for them
he suffered which contemn him and all goodness. he suffered these pains to
deliver his enemies from pain: to pay their ransom and to redeem them from
the danger of sin, from damnacion, death and hell, if they would repent in
time and reconcile them selves to him. If you deeply think of thies four
circumstances, you shall find matter enough to vvonder at the marcie,
clemency, patience, longanimitie and charity of our Redemer: and Just cause
shall you see to accuse, blame, and condemn your selves of ingratitude, to fall
in to repentance, grefe, and sorrow for your sins: to seek to reform your
selves, and to flee to him for succor: to study with all love and duty to
requite him with love, which for your sakes endured all thies miseries.

Of three special sorts of meditacion, some what hard to exercise, but passing
profitable.
THere is one kind of meditacion, This kind of meditacion is no more but to
imitate and follow our Savior his life and conversation, as a most perfect
pattern and exemplar of all integrity in word, deed, and thought: to be
charitable, obedient, humble, patient, meke, and marcifull as he was: to
renounce propriety and possession of Riches (at least in desire) as hedyd: to
be poor and needy (at least in mind and will) as he was: To profess and
exercise all chastity or continence as he did: to reject all delicate fare,
svvete odours, soft beds, and daintines, as he did: to employ all your
trauaill, industry, and powers in profiting others as he did for you all: yea
patiently to sustein affliction, contempt, and all persecucion, even death it
self, and death vvithcruell torment for truth sake, and for defense of
justice, if occasion be offered, as he did for the delivery of mankind from
damnacion: and for testimony of true Religion. This is the most perfect kind
of meditacion, consideracion, and thinking of God that can be used.

There is an other kind of meditacio^, and is a good mean to help us to the
formor. And that is a continual compassion and suffering with our Savior
which suffered so much for us: As when his afflictions and torments have
such an Impression in our minds and thoughts as vvhe have some sensible
feeling thereof in mind and body or at least in mind and affection. Such an
Impression had the blessed virgin, who as it were felt the stinges of the
vvhippes, the pricks of the thorns, the stampes of the nails, the torments
of the cross: and the vexacio^s of all his passion, who so ever can reach to
this contemplacion, is in an high degree of perfection.

There is yet a third special kind of meditacion very gainful and
commodious, thy vvil and mind in to Jesus Christ crucified, as he be never or
seldom out of thy sight, even as he was hanging upon nails on the cross for
us sinful creatures, according to the sayeing of him which said he felt
nothing in him self but Christ crucified, mocked and blasphemed. This
continual thinking of Christ with a desire to follow his steps vvil work
great effects in such as use this.

An other sort of meditating of the passion of our Savior by way of
reioyesinge.
AS we use most commonly to contemplate the passion of our redemer with
compassion, to break our hearts with contricion and true repentance: so may
we to the same effect think there of with great Joy and comfort: And that
for three respects: to wit, for the redemption of mankind: for the
reparacion of the dekaye of Angels: and for the advancement of the honor of
God. Who by the death, passion and resurrection of his son our Savior has
not only set us free from the bondage of Satan: but has also united angels
and mankind in that heavenly society. And thus to his passing great honor
and glory has given a most express demonstracion of his infinite mercy,
clemency, and love toward us. A matter of great loye consolacion and
comfort to us. For each man accompteth it a great cause of Joy to be in great
favor of his temporal prince. Much more glad and Joyful may we be that the
king of heaven and co^maunder of the world does so tenderly love us as he
did vonchesafe to offer up him self in sacrifice to his father for us: and
with his precious bloudde to redeem us. Thus we may think, meditate, and
consider of his most bitter passion, with great comfort and joy. For if we
deeply and duly vveighe the matter: our hearts shall melt with feruor of
desire to reverence, serve, and love him which so dearly haith bought us.
Yea we shall be so carried away with sincere affection toward him; as we
shall clear forget our old man: and rest only so resolved in Christ
crucified, as we shall delight in nothing but in him, and in doing that which
is his vvil and pleasure to be done: where upon many good effects vvil
follow. It will breed in us a special lothesomenes, hatred, and disdain
against all filthy works, words, and thoughts: It will chase away the
coldenes of spirit, the tedious slothefulnes of mind: and inflame our
devotion: and setle in us a perfect resolucion of mind and will to serve God,
love God, and honor God with all integrity: and bring us to the high tower
of perfect contemplacion.

Of six matters of meditacion to save us from relapse or falling again in to
sin after we be reconciled to God.
Among many good thoughts and consideracions, that help to prevent sin, good
men of experience in spiritual exercises have noted six special means. ones
die: that nothing is more uncertain than the hour of death. Therefore says
holy Scripture: Remember thy end and thou shall not sin for ever. VVherby
is meant that the memory of death (if it be often exercised) vvil work in
man such compunction as he shall not dye without perfect repentance: And so
by a consequence obtein such remission as his sin shall not burden him for
ever. And Seint Augustine says that nothing more vvithdravveth a man from
sin, than often to remember that he must dye. And Saint Basil the great being
asked what is philosophy, ansvvered that the definition of the principal
philosophy is nothing else but a meditacion and continual thinking of death.

An other remedy is to think often of Christ his passion,

The third help is the remembrance of sins committed,

The fovverth preseruature is often to think and meditate of the last
Judgment or day of dome. Arise you that are dead, and come to Judgment. And
good reason he had to be careful therein. For (as Saint Barnard says:) God
at that day will call for acompt and reckeninge of every time and moment that
we have spent in earth.

The fifth mean is to think and meditate of the pains of hell,

The sixth remedy is to consider and meditate of the Joys of heaven: expressed
by tongue, nor comprehended in the understanding of man. A certain paynim being
of great authority under one of the persecutors of Christians, observing how
vvilling Christian men were to endure all torments, yea and death also for
Christ his sake, demanded of a presoner expecting death, what great reward
he looked for to recompense his patience. It was ansvvered thus: such reward
is looked for as no tongue can tell, nor ear has heard, nor the heart of man can
measure. Then said the pagan (if it be so) I vvil be of your Religion. So he
became a Christian, and afterward a martire. If a paynim was so touched with
only ones hearing of those Joys: how ought we to be moved that have heard so
many testimonies thereof by so many denout martyrs and confessors?

Of the miseries and Inconveniences that man does fall into by relapse and
sinning again after reconciliacion to God.
When a man has rightly professed Christ in the Catholic Church and
afterward falls again: he is in worse state than ever he was, and brought
in to extreme misery.

For first he has lost the fruit of his former penance,

Secondly he is resembled to a dog that svvalovveth his own filthy vomit:

Thirdly he falls again in to the hands of his greatest enemy against
whose will he was delivered:

Fovverthly he is made more impote^t, folly. Therefore our Savior said to the
man whom he had healed: John 5.
Behold thou art made whole: sin no more, lest some worse thing chance to
thee. And of this mischefe he vvarneth us in an other place, where he
shows, that the unclean spirit returns in to the house whence he
departed, and brings seven other spirits worse than him self, and
dwells there. And the last of that man be made worse than the first.

Fiftlie he is accounted a derider and mocker of God:

Sixtlie (as much as in him lies) he causes the Angels and blessed Seyntes
in heaven to be pensive and sade,

Seventhly his soul is compared to a dry and wethered branch cut of from
the tree which receives no moisture nor norishement of the tree:

And here we may call to mind a notable punishment of such as after
reconcilement have fallen from God in to their former sinful practizes. There
was a company of certain youg men, which at the time of easter repared to
the church, craved the benefit of the Sacrament of penance, were absolved
and received the blessed Sacrament of Christ his body and bloudde. But they
were no sooner departed from that holy place, tha^ they did fall again to
their old wicked Riot, dronkinnes and filthy life. Whereupon they were
greuouslie punished by the Just Judgment of God. For they were sodeinlie
smitten with a grievous disease: and driven in to such an extreme vomiting, as
they did cast out of their mouths great abundance of corrupt bloudde, with
their own excreme^tes very lothesomelie, contrary to the course of nature.
Their corn and other fruits were consumed upon the ground and destroyed,
some with water, and some with fire. Serpents and venomous beasts did breed
abundantly in their grounds, in such sort as their persons were in great
daungier. And thus brought in miserable distress many lamented their case:
Among whom one devout holy man upon compassion prayed to God earnestly for
them, till at last an Angel of God appearing to him did demand of him what
punishment he deserved that did put in to a filthy presone the Innocent son
of a mighty Emperor: the good man ansvvered that he deserved grievous
punishment. Yea (said the Angel) but what punishment deserves he which in
the sight of all men does cast the blessed body and blood of Christ in to a
filthy mire? he is to be brent as an heretic, said the good man. And even
such fellows are all they (said the Angel) for whom thou have so long
prayde. Therefore it is expedient for every good Christian, when he has
received the blessed Sacrament, and is reconciled to God: then and ever after
to take good heed of relapse: and often to call to memory these seven
miseries and inconveniences of relapse here mentioned.

depiction of a deathbed scene, featuring a figure in a bed receiving a
blessing from a robed male figure; a second robed male figure and a female
figure stand nearby, while two other male figures kneel in prayer Certain
signs and tokens Thereby a Christian after he has received the blessed
sacrament may probably conjecture that he is in the favor of God: all framed
to the similitude of a syk man.
THe first sign and token of Gods favor is compunction or harti sorrow for
sin committed. for his sins by past, in respect that thereby he had offended
god, may well hope that the blessed sacrament does vvoork in him many good
spiritual effects, for (as Saint Barnard says) the more seeling a man has
of sin, the greater sobbes and sighs he casts out of his sorrowful heart.

The secounde sign or token is laudable conversation of life with good
example. notable great thief and robber which spoiled and mordered many
passing by the common vvayes, had great compassion of this thief for his
sinful life, and studied how he might reclame him. At last he thought the
best way to be, first to talk with him. And though he knevv no mean to do
it without personal danger to him self: yet he purposed to give a proof:
And taking a Monk in company with him adventured to pass through the place
where the thief haunted. It so fell ovvt, that the thief met the Abbot, and
according to his profession, spoiled the Abbot and his companion of all that
they had. After a while the thief having gotten his pray, waxed somevvhat
more cold than before: for the Abbot used him self with all humilite in
word and countenance toward him. And the Abbot perceiuyng the rage of the
thief to be assuaged used the matter so as they two fell in to familiar talk
of common matters: As of the great pains that the thief endured and of his
continual peril: and of the commodities of security, and such like. At last
the Abbot asked him if he could be content to leave that paynfull, dangerous,
and disordered course of life for a filthy and uncertain gayn: And to go home
with the Abbat, where he should be assured of a sufficient living with great
credit and honesty. After some discourse upon the Abbots word the thief
yields, and home he comes with the Abbat to the Abbey, where he syndeth
all things that the Abbot had promised and more. Now this good Abbot hoping
by good example to win the thief, appointed one of his monks a devout man
to attend upon the thief, and to give what so ever he demanded, with this
admonicion to eat and drink ever in his company, and what deinty meat so ever
was set before the thief, yet he him self should eat none of it: but content
him self only with bread and water. The monk well performed what was
commanded. In continuance of time the thief observed well the diet of the
Monk: and being somevvhat amassed there with all, asked the monk, what great
offense he had committed, that caused such straitnes of diet, whether he had
committed any morder, incest, or great crime. No said the Monk, I am not
culpable of any haynouse fact. But this austeritie I use to the end that the
king of all kings may be more merciful to me at the latter day, when every
man's deeds shall appear. This answer struck the thief with such remorse
and repentance, as he came to the Abbot, and with great thanks so humbled him
self, as he was admitted unto that society: and became so penitent, and
after so religious, as in holiness and perfection of life he excelled all the
covent. Thus may we see what good fruit virtuous examples may bring forth.

against God and man: but the other is quiet, takes all in good part what so
ever happens.

The fouerth sign is the sense of taste.

The fifth sign is our tongue, when a man deliteth in godly talk, and
conference of godly matters, without detracting or bakbiting his neighbor,
ever interpreting the deeds and words of other men in the best sense. For
often the tongue walks after the affection. And of abundance of the heart,
the mouth uses to speak.

The sixth sign is a disposicion to do good works,

The seventh sign is natural heat:

Of certain good documentes touching evil thougtes.
TOuching evil thoughts we have to consider for our better instruction
diverse special matters.

First the cause whereof they arise.

Secondly the reason we are so prone and inelined to them.

Therdlie the hurt that we receuie by them.

Fouertlie how we may arm our selves against them.

Fiftlye by what means we may avoid them.



Touching the second point:

Certain godly lessons and obseruacions touching the heart of man.
GOD requires the heart of man, and to have the possession of yt. And three
reasons may begeuen to move him thereunto. One is, for that the heart is as it
were the harbarovv of the Almighty, and the proper bedchamber or cabinet of
the king. Again the heart is the principal seat and first member that
receives life. And by natural consequence the heart being full of bloudde is
apter to conceive an impression of him that shed is blood for us upon the
cross.

God desires a purified heart. And three things there are which purify the
heart. The first is a careful examinacion daily of our own words, deades
and thoughts, with a special desire to give good example to others. The
second is, daily penance with due confession co^trition and satisfaction for
our offenses against God and our neigbour. The third is continual craving and
begging of God by devout prayer to be preserved by his Grace from all occasions
and matters that may offend God. for (as the prophet David says) If our lord
have not builded the house; in vain have they labored which builded it.

A pure and clean heart is known by three signs or marks. The first is the
quick and pregnant knouleige of our own defectes. For as a small spot is
sone espied in a very white linen clothe: so a pure heart quickelie
perceives a small fault in it self. The second is quietness of conscience in
all troubles and adversities. For a pure good wine in a clean glass changes
not his color and clearnes be it never so much troubled: even so a pure heart
and clean conscience is well settled and rests ever in one estate what
adversity so ever happens. The third mark is increase of couraige in time of
affliction even as a pure fresh wine sprinkleth and leapeth when it is with
any force poured in to a Cup.

And our heart is preserved in purity and cleanness by a true fear of God: by
a careful government of our external senses, and by continual exercise of
the works of charity.

Fouer good lessons for preserving our hope and confidence in God.
Now to make an end: we must ever study to establish our affiance and trust
in God against all tentacions: And one special good mean thereunto is a patient
and quiet mind, neither too negligent and recheles, nor too anxious and
careful about our temporal affayrs. As for example, touching our bodily
sustentacion and necessities we must not be over solicitous: but rest upon
this ground, that sith it is true that the geuer of all good things does
nourish the birds of the eyr, fishes in the sea, and beasts on the earth
every one in his degree and quality, to whom yet he has made no promis
thereof: how much more cause have we to hope that he will provide for us, to
whom his promys is past? as appears in the sixth of Saint Matthew, where he
delivers us of all such care, an says in express words. Be not
careful, sayeing, what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or were with
shall we be covered? Seek first the kingdom of God: and all these things
shall be given you besides.

And too much care for other temporal things is forbidden as a very
dangerous tentacion. As well for that in this world we are but as
pilgrims or vvayfayring men, having here no place of certain abiding, but are
to remove upon many sudden occasions; and to clogge and over lode our selves
with superfluities were mere solye: As all so and specially for that such
carefullnes is seldom or never without sin, and vvithdravveth our minds
from providing for things of mere necessite and of great importance touching
our soul: And it argues in us a greater love and affection toward thies
vanities, than toward the wealth of our soul. Again where they are not got
without great labor, nor kept without care, they are quickie lost and
notvvithout great grief. Therefore this carefullnes and love to vvorldlye
things is to be eschevved. For (as S. Gregory says,) That which is
possessed without great love or affection thereto, ye also lost without any
great grief. Let us then forsake the care of transitory things, and setle
our trust in God, who never failed those that put their affiance in him.
Examples we have infinite to prove the same.

An other preservative is a mature and ripe discrecion and Judgment in
vveighing and considering our sins. For many curiouse simple men, as well as
the sinful and wicked upon repentance look so far in to their life only as
they forget the mercy of God, and fall into despare and blasphemye. It is there
fore good and very necessary ever with all consideracions of our sins, to
call to mind the article of our faith, touching remission of sins, and the
promises of God for the same: vvherof holy scripture has great plenty. As
where the Prophet says: In what hour a sinner is sorry and confesses his
sins they are all put out of mind: God is both hable and vvilling to
forgive a penitent sinner be his sins never so great. But no man can have
true repentance, nor do right penance which does it not with a firm hope
of forgeuenes, and without all mistrust and diffidence of the promis of God.
Accused there fore at the desperate before our Savior which says, I vvil not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he be converted and live.

Another good assurance we have to confirm our hope in god: Matthew. 7.
Ask and it shabbe given you: seek and you shall find: knock and it shall be
opened to you, for every one that asks, receives, etc. And we know that he
hears us (says Saint John) what soever we shall ask according to his will.
Always provided that we ask in faith nothing doubting. as Saint James byddeth
us: For the asker of lavvfull things may not either mistrust gods power and
ability, or be in despair of his mercy: but that the doubt we have be
only in our own vnvvoorthinesse or undue asking.

A fouerth good stay we have to lean upon, be like to the waves of the fea
which are carried about with the vvinde: let us flee from too much care of
transitory things, and keep in our mind and memory the promise of God ever
offering his grace to us, reddie to hear and help us. So shall we preserve the
hoope and confidence that God requires of us: to whom be all honor and glory
for ever. Amen.

A prayer to our blessed lady made by the most holy and ancient Ephrem.
MOther of God undefiled, Queen of al, the hope of them that despair, my lady
most glorious, higher than the heavenly spirits, more honorable than the
Cherubines, holier than the Seraphines, and without comparison more glorious
than the supernall hosts, the hoope of the fathers, the glory of the
Prophets, the praise of the Apostles, by thee we are reconciled to Christ my
God, thy son: thou art the helper of sinners: the haven for them that are
tossed with storms, the solace of the redemption of captives: vouchesafe me
thy servant to praise thee. Hail Lady Marie full of grace: Hail Virgin most
blessed among women.

An other prayer made by Saint Cirill.
PRaise and glory be to thee o holy Trinity: to thee also be praise, o holy
mother of God, for thou art the precious pearl of the world: thou art the
ca^del of vnguensheble light, the croune of virginity, the scepter of the
Catholic faith. By thee the Trinity is glorified and adored in all the
world: by thee heaven rejoices, Angels and Archangels are glad, devils are
put to flight, and man is called again to heaven, and every creature that was
held with the errors of Idols is turned to the knovvleidge of truth: by thee
Churches are founded through the world: thou being their helper, the Gentiles
come to penance. O blessed Marie, who can be hable wor thelie to praise or
thank thee: receive our prayers, obtanie our requests: for thou art the
special hoope of sinners, by thee we hoope for perdone of our sins: and in
thee (o most blessed) is the expectacion of our rewards.

An admonicion for the unlearned touching the use of the figure of the beads
here after portrued.
THou have here (gentle reder) a figure or form of the beads; with certain
matters of meditacion to be used when thou art disposed to recite the crown
of our lady upon the beads which matters have not been before this time put
into english meter, for the beter memory and delectatio^ of devout persons.
Therefore if thou have been here to fore delited with vain ballads and sonets,
thou may now upon better advise please thy self with songs and ditties more
profitable. And of what good trade, occupacion or qualiue so ever you are,
vvhiles you go about your necessary business in your vocation, or vvhiles
you are traualing by the way: or in tillinge or plovvinge the grovvnd that
hit may bring great increase, you may not vvithstanding, some time among, call
upon our Savior or upon the blessed virgin mary, either in word or in
thought, and with great comfort, yea and profit also both spiritual and
temporal, repeat or think upon the Pater noster and Aue Mary, or some part
there of, and of the verses, or of some of them set down in the table
folovvinge. And there upon may you take occasion to muse and think less or
more of the matters contained in the verses or any of them. VVher upon you by
Gods grace shall be induced in to a svvete cogitacion what special graces God
has bestovved upon you; from what euells he has preserved you; to what good
end he has created you: what good reward he has provided for you, if you
come to that end: and to come unto it you are assured if you be so vvilling as
you ought to be. Thus shall you also take occasion to keep your self well
occupied, avoid idle thoughts, the snares of satan, and so keep your self in
the way toward heaven.

Where as I have seen your Ladyship accept, such holy and verteus exercises, and
hold them in great estimacion, and conster all faults escaped by the print to
verteus interpretacion: taking the meaning, and not the letter; so I hoope your
holy use will be a mean, that I shall not be altogeither disliked of such vvhos
hands hit comes unto: But as I ashure my self, all banished parsons living
for one cause, vvil not despise good thoughts procedinge of holy desiers, and
especially those, vvhos wisdoms know how hard it is to print our languaig, in
a strange country with out faults: which makes me so far presume upon all
holy Catholic persons, especially such of honorable consideracion, and have
so long lived a banished lief for true religions sake: as your honor has done
this 17 Years. In this consideracion, I presume of all good Catholics, that
they will esteem of my meaning, and not the letter: as I shall not cease daily
and orderly to pray for all estates, trusting in IESV, he will hear a poor
pilgrome and banished parson: for his righteousness sake: that hit shall please
him to convert our poor countery, vvher we may pray togeither, live
togeither, and die togeither, to the end we may be partakers of his heavenly
kingdoome, vvher God the father, God the son, God the holy ghost, is
glorefied: vvher the blessed Viren is crouned, vvher Angels, Saints, and
marters reioys, at our repentance; for which I daily pray to be given to all
sinners saying.

Pater noster, Aue Maria. CREDO Good reder remember me in the like. I. B.
depiction of the virgin Mary



Hic liber nihil mali aut erronei continet: conducit autem ad deuotionem and
pietatem imperitiorum Anglorum.

GILBERTVS BVRNEFORDVS. GVLIELMVS CLIDERO. Angli Sacerdotes.

Horum duorum eruditorum and fide dignorum virorum iudicio and ego subscribo

H. CVYCKIVS Apostolicus and Regius librorum censor.


