A commentary upon the second Epistle of S Paul to the Thessalonia^s. In ye
which besides the sum of our faith, there is syncerelye handled and set
forth at large, not only ye first coming up and rysyng with the full
prosperyte and dominion, but also the fall and utter confusion of the kingdom
of Antichriste: that is to say of Machomet and the Bishop of Rome.

1538.

Academiae Cantubrigiensis Liber


The sum or substance of the second Epistle of S. Paul to the
Thessalonyans.
IT seems that this latter epistell of S. Paul to the Thessolonya^s, was
written straight way after the first, in the stead of a defense or bulworke to
the same. For in that he handeleth certain things at large, which in this he
touchyth more scarcely. And in the beginning he does yet stylle publyshe and
praise the faith of the Thessalonians because that they had endured constantly
in much tentacyon and affliccion. For the which cause he promyseth unto them,
refreshyng and eternal life, and to their adversaries, fire and utter
confusion: to thentent that he might strengthen their minds. Further more
because that in his first Epistle, he had made mention of the coming of the
LORD, and the resurreccyon of ye dead, some did understand that they were
even then at hand: therefore he shows in this, that the LORD shall not come,
before that the child of perdycion be reveled, that is to say Antichriste,
whose coming and kingdom, ye also ye destruction, he does connygly paynte
forth truly, even that the world then to come being warned, might beware of
that pestilence. Last of all he does very often inculcate, that such men
ought to be brought into an order, which with their ydelnes and curyosyte did
trouble the publyke or comen wealth. For he had made mention of such in the
fourth chapter of his first Epistle. This Epistle truly is short, but yet
very profitable and learned. In the style it dyffereth nothing from the first,
another is it of any less erudycion then that. They say that this also was
written by Paul at Athenes, and sent by men of the same town: Theophilactus
thinks that it was sent by Titus and Onesymus.

The first Chapter.
Paul and Siluanus and Timotheus, unto the congregation of the Thessalonians,
which are in God our father, and in the LORD Jesus Christ: Grace be with
you and peace from God our father, and from the LORDD Jesus Christ. We are
bound to thank God alvvayes for you brethren, as it is mete, because that your
faith grows excedyngly, and every one of you ouerflovveth in love tovvard
another between your selves, so that we our selves rejoice of you in the
co^gregacions of God, over your patience and faith in all persecucions and
tribulacio^s that ye suffer: which is a token of the ryghteous judgment of
God, that ye are counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for the which ye
also suffer.

HE prayseth and rejoices at the Thessalonians, and gives thanks unto God
for their constancye and increase of virtue. Of the which we may first learn,
yt if we do any thing well we should give the thanks unto God, and not ascrybe
it unto our virtue, but to attrybute unto him the pryncipall effects of all
things, and in no wise wax proud for any thing that we do well, nor yet
think our selves strayghte way perfayt, if we seem our selves somewhat to
have profyted in virtue and goodness: but rather let us think to go forward
every day, and study to pass our own selves in all kind of virtues.
Secondlye we may learn hereof that we should not enuey at other men's virtues,
but rather rejoice with them, ye and to give thanks for the going forward
and good example of our brethren. Here are also recyted the chief points of
our relygio^, faith, charity and sufferynge far other manner of things, then
those which the Bishop of Rome, and a many of monks have rehearsed unto us.
And in that he calls the churches, not his but Gods, it comes of humylite
and faith. For they are false deceauers which being but the seruau^^ of God
and mynisters of the churches, do require to be called Lords, and to usurp
unto them selves, any preemynence over other men's servants. This place also
does teach, that saints or holy men are appointed to persecucion, and to be
exercysed with contynuall affliccions: and that those trybulacions are a token
or demonstracion of the ryghteouse judgment of God, that is, that wicked men
peryshe iustlye, but the godly are counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for
the which they have suffered much aduersytye. For after this manner does he
comfort and lift up the saints, setting the pains and rewards before their
eyes. The affliccions of this life, are not worthy of the glory which shall
be s^^wed upon us. ^o. viii.
But if any man through the help of this place, will contend, that salvation
is dew unto our affliccyons, and not unto the passion and blood of Christ
only, let him mark this also, that the very same man said unto to the
Romans, that we are justified by the benefyte of faith, and not by the merit
of our works. It is therefore of the fatherly liberalyte and good will of God,
that it is here said, that eternal life is given us by right, and we made
worthy of the kingdom of God through affliccyons: where as it is plain that
all our aptenesse is of God, and that we are made happy by the grace of God.
But the goodness of God, would not disco^forte our minds, and as it were through
our inabilite, provoke us to slacknesse or weerines. And therefore the scripture
speaks as though we deserved somewhat, and were worthy of the kingdom of God,
that we should do all things with a glad and merry mind.

It is verily a ryghteous thing with God, to recompense trybulacion to the^
that trouble you, and to you which are troubled, rest with us.

This is a cause whereby is showed, how that trybulacion of saints is a token
of the ryghteouse judgment of God. Whereupon S. Ambrose says very goodly:
because that saint Paul says, that a token of the just judgment of God, does
apeare, whether upon the good or upon the badde, therefore he says afterward:
It is verily a ryghteous thing with god, to give unto every man according unto
his deeds. What is so ryghteous as that they which in this world do suppress
good men, and banyshe them out of their country through persecucions, should
suffer such like things in ye world to come, as they do them selves here: And
that the other should be in rest with other saints, which coming out of many
trybulacions, shall receive the everlasting kingdom. For the Apostle does set
forth rest or refreshyng, against the fire of trybulacion, wherewith holy men
without ceassyng are exercised in this world. For when they shall be gone from
hence, all labor and sorrow shall cease, and quyetnes and toye shall
follow. But to the ungodly shall happen contrary wise. Whereupon we read in
the Gospel, that to the rich glutton it was said: Son remember that thou
in thy life time receauedeste thy pleasure, and contrary wise Lazarus pain.
Now therefore he is refreshed, and thou art tormented. It differs nothing
from this, that we read in the fourth chapter of the book of Sapie^ce. And
these things truly are to be laid up in the remembrance of ye faithful, to
the intent that in time of aduersyte we might persevere in truth and
ryghteousnes, A true saying.
against the tentacions of the deuell. For the prosperyte of wicked men which
they have in this world, and on the the other side ye trouble of holy me^ and
their most unfortunate estate, do greatly vex our minds, for to cast of the
kingdom of God, and embrace this present world. Let us remember therefore the
ryghteous judgment of God, and the change of all things. Forsothe there were
in the time of the Prophets, contemners of God and lovers of this world,
which (after the manner of our men) commending the felicite of the wicked, and
scornynge or conde^nynge the perils that saints are in, said: Men serve God
in vain, for there comes no profit by that we have kept his commandments.
And we se that proud men and subtle persons are happy, and they that do
wyckednes to speed well, and to be short, that such are safe as do te^pte
God. And what other thing is it, that men now adays do obiecte against the
true worshypers of God: what good have ye gotten by your belefe? say they. But
what does Malachie answer? The LORD gave head and herd this, and there was a
book of remembrance written before ye LORD, and ye shall se in time to come,
that there is great difference between ye ryghteous and the wicked, between the
seruau^te of God and the despyser of him. Malachie the.iii. chapter. When the
LORD Jesus shall shevve himself from heaven, with his mighty angels, in
flamynge fire, rendryng vengeance unto them that know not god, and to them
that obey not unto the Gospel of our LORD Jesus Christ, which shall be
punished with everlasting da^pnacyon, from the presence of the LORD, and
from the glory of his power, vvha^ he shall come to be glorified in his
saints, and to be made marvelous in all the^ that believe (because our
testimony that we had unto you, was believed) in that same day.

He does here paynt and with express and very notable words, set forth
before our eyes the coming of the LORD Jesus and the manner of the iudgemenete.
The same coming shall be unto all saints very acceptable and most best
welcome, and to the ungodly very sour and sorrowful. And every word has his
strength and pythe. Now (says he) the matter goes all by words. But when
the end of all things shall come, those things shall apeare manyfestly, of
which all saints have disputed so long and many years. For the LORD Jesus
himself to who^e all power is given in heaven and in earth, and to whom all
judgment belongs, shall apeare in a corporal form and lykenes, for to
judge all flesh. And now does he descrybe the behaueour of this mighty
Judge, that unto all his enemies shall be so terryble, and so desirous and longed
for of his friends. He shall comme (I say) from heaven, not now (as once)
crepynge upon the earth, nor yet low and despised as he appeared in his
first coming: But compassed about with ye host of angels. For we read in
Daniell the.vii: A thousand thousands mynistred unto him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand stood before him. And therefore eue^ as a mighty king,
being appointed with a chosen and strong hooste of men, does set upon his
enemy, so shall the LORD Jesus use the mynisterye of angels in subduynge of ye
wicked and mayntenaunce of the godly. Therefore does he call them the mighty
angels of God, as he would say: they, by who^ god does exercise his power or
might. Another shall he the^ come forth gently and pleasant and for to heal
ye unruly, but be armed with horrible and flamynge fire. The Apostle Peter
bears witness also, that the LORD shall judge the world by fire.ii.
Petri.iiii. And the Prophet David descrybynge yt manner of Christ's coming to
judgment, Psalm. xviii. says: Fire shall go forth before him, he shall send
forth his arowes and skatter the^ he shall cast out lyghtenynges and destroy
the^. And Daniel: A fyry flowde brake forth (says he) and went out from his
syghte. Furthermore Paul does in plain words declare who^ ye LORD shall
destroy at his coming. He shall of his wrath re^dre ve^geau^ce unto the^
which knew not god, or at ye lest would not know god, which followynge ye world,
regarded not his precepts, and obeyed not ye Gospel of our LORD Jesus
Christ. Which thing agrees very well to ye matter that is now in hand. For
the Thessalonia^s obeyed ye Gospel, and suffered persecucio^ for it. It was
sweet therefore to hear yt their obedience should be healthful unto the^, and
to their adversaries yt persecuted the^ damnable. For he repetyng again the
same thing, which he had said eue^ now in other words: which shall be punyshed
(says) with everlasting damncion. For eue^ so does he render vengeance unto
the^. For he punysheth these conte^pners, when he appoynteth them unto
everlasting fire. For so we read in Daniell also the xii. chapter. Many that
sleep in ye duste of the earth shall waken: some to eternal life, and some to
shame and everlasting fire. After the same manner also does the judge give
sentence, Math. xxv: Depart fro me ye cursed children into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the deuel and his angels: and they shall go into
everlasting pain. And S. Ambrose says excellently well: The wicked shall have
the pains which are due unto them, that is, they shall evermore feel eternal
confusyon, and yet shall never wholly fail, that the pain it self might
engendre and renew them after a certain manner whereby they may ever from time to
time, be as it were consumed. Therefore they deceive and are deceived, as many
as do promise themselves delyueraunce out of hell, and do feign that after the
day of judgment, wicked men also shall be forgeuen. The which thing men say
ye Orygen thought, I wot nere how truly: but it is sure ye certain of the
Anabaptystes have taught this openly. But out of this place it apeareth how
falsely and wyckedly. For the ungodly shall peryshe by everlasting death. From
the presence of the LORD, that is when the LORD comes, and from the glory
of his power: that is, when he shall come gloriously, for to show his power
and strength unto good and evil. For with these words (says Theophylactus)
he shows how easy it is for God to punyshe, nether shall it be hard for him
to punyshe: because that rebellious and obstynate people shall be tormented eue^
with the very syghte of him. And the divine presence shall bring unto some
bryghtenesse with it, and to other punyshement and pain. For he shall come
with glory and power, so that another his glory shall want power, nor yet his
presence be without glory. For it follows that his coming shall not alonly
be fearful unto the wicked, but glad also and glorious to ye godly. He shall
come (says he) to be glorified in his saints. As though he would say: when
he shall come for to render vengeance unto the wicked, he shall show him self
glorious unto the saints also, and make their vile bodies like unto his
glorious body, for ye which cause he shall be maruaylous in all the^ that believe,
who then shall praise and magnifye his so great goodness and power? And this
shall be so (says he) because that ye believed our witness, that is our
preaching, which I preached unto you, tellyng you that that should come to
pass, which God shall do in that day. There are which think that these words:
because that ye believed our testymony, are put in by a Parenthesis, and that
to declare who be ye true beleuers, that is to say, such as give credence to
the Apostles witness. Saint Ambrose says that it may be expounded two ways.
For he shall come (says he) to punysh the evil and glorifye the good. For he
shall seem and show him self glorious and marvelous, toward them that believe,
after the ensample and faith of ye Apostles, at what time they shall be crowned
with glory, the Gospel bearyng witness unto the^ in the day of the LORD. And
he shall appear to the unfaithful a sore and heavy Judge, at suchtyme as they
shall begin to feel the bytternesse of everlasting pain. For the glory of
the master is a rejoice and in manner of a crown unto the disciples, and his
truth the extreme pain and mysery of the unbelievers: because they believed not
ye true preachers.

Wherefore we pray alvvayes for you, that our God will count you worthy
of this calling, and fulfill every good purpose to goodness, and the work of
faith in power, that the name of our LORD Jesus Christ may be glorified by you
and ye by him, thorovve the grace of our God and LORD Jesus Christ.

To hard things he always adds prayer. For faith it self and the
reverence that we owe unto God do teach us, that through prayer we owghte to go
about to obtain ye chief gifts of God. And we should pray without
ceassynge. For S. Paul says: We pray always for you. And what we should
pray or desire, it follows: That our God will count you worthy of this
calling. What calling I pray you? The same no doubt, wherwyth he shall call ye
blessed into his kingdom, saying: Come ye blessed children of my father,
possess the kingdom that is prepared for you, from the beginning of the
world. Math. xxv. Compare now this place with that: Ye suffer, that ye might
be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, and ye shall perceive that the fre
grace of God makes us worthy of the kingdom of God. For if our merits make
us worthy, what need were there to pray the LORD yt he would count us worthy of
his calling. That worthynesse therefore hangs upon the fre liberalite of God.
After this we must pray, that God will fulfill all our good purposes to
goodness: That is, yt according to his goodness, wherewt he loves us, he will
fortunatly perform that, which he has bego^ne in us. For he that continues
unto the end shall be safe. Math. xxiiii. It is not unlike to this ye follows:
That he will fulfill ye work of faith in power. That is: yt he will make our
faith perfect through constau^cy and strength of mind: the which thing once put
into our minds by God overcomes all aduersityes. Last of all we must pray,
yt the name of our Lord, not our name may be glorified through our hope, and
that he may glorifye us in his coming: that is, make us safe in soul and
body. He adds through ye grace of our God and Lord Jesus Chrste: monishynge
us, yt all these things do depe^de upon ye grace of god, and not of our own
merit. This is also to be marked, yt in this place also, he does in all things
make ye son equal to ye father: wherevpo^ it follows, that ye unite of God
in the trinite is ryghtely defended of us.

I beseech you brethren by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and for our
assemble in him, that ye be not suddenly moved from your mind, and be not
troubled, another by sprite, another by word nor yet by epistle, which should
seem to come from us, as though the day of Christ were at hand. Let noman
deceive you by any means.

Some me^ understood by ye fourth chapter of his first epistle ye the coming
of ye Lord unto judgment, and the resurrection of the dead was eue^ the^ at
hand. There were also many deceauers, which affirmed planely, yt the end of
all things was than come. Eue^ as there lack none now adays of the sect of
the Anabaptists, which come where as is great resort of people and cease not
to cry, yt the day of judgment is at hand. But Paul in this place does
show what must go before the coming of the LORD, and with what foresygnes
and things, man ought to be warned before. And he does very properly beseech
ye Thessalonians by that same thing in which they erred, that is to say, by
the coming of the LORD, of the which he has hitherto spoken, and in the
first chapter also. Furthermore he exhorts the^ by the unite and concord,
which we the me^bres have with the head Jesus Christ. For we seem to be
plucked from this holy body, as often as we have no right opynion of the head
or health of the me^bres. And he besecheth them that they be not suddenly moved
from their mind, that is from the true understanding and godly mind.
Erasmus: Be not suddenly moved (says he) from your mind, if that his coming
be deferred. But the playner exposycion follows: Be not of that mind and
judgment, yt ye should think, the day of the LORD to be now at hand.
Another be ye troubled. And to be troubled is to be amassed in the mind, to be
afeared and to be destitute of counsel and help. After that he reherseth
diverse manner of ways, by which the congregacions are troubled. Three special
causes o^ troublynge of the congregacio^s.
The first is the sprete that is a reuelacion, prophecy or telling of things
to come, with the which certain most ungracious knaves have deceived many,
bostynge the^ selves to have the sprete of God, where as they were led with
evil lusts. The Montanystes and the Valentynia^s which before time were endued
with such a sprete (as Ireneus and Eusebius have written) did greatly deceive
the simple people, as ye Anabaptists do now. The second way to trouble the
churches is word, yt is doctrine coming forth of a living voice, the which
if it be decked with eloquente and apparaunte words, it is most pestylente.
The third way is a cou^terfayte Epistle or some writing garnyshed with a
false inscrypcion or title. (as S. Ambrose testified) False deceauers are
wou^te (that they might the sooner deceive) for to feign an Epistle under the
name of some noble writer, to the intent that the authoryte of the man, may
set forth that, which can not be received by the^ selves. And it can not be
spoken, how shamefully ye certain vnthryftye knaves through this craft have
mocked ye church of God, which have thruste in among us many books, many
epistles, and works, as though they had come from the Apostles or apostolical
men, orels from writers that were noble and excellent in authoryte, learning
and holiness, which for all yt they never knew or could aproue, if they were
yet alive. For there are abroad certain canones of the Apostles, certain
Epistles of apostolyke men, yet and many little books also, under ye name of
Augustine and Ambrose which these men never saw: What shall I say of certain
sermons garnyshed with the title of Cypriane and Augustine: The negligence of the
age yt is passed, and the covetousness of writers and prynters, with the
ygnoraunce and vnshamfastnes of the^ was so great yt noman can deteste it to
much. They that have read the wryttynges of ye old doctoures, and have seen
any of Erasmus judgments upon ye works of Jerome and Austen, do understand
what I say. And yet shall you find me^, which through the help of this place,
will thrust into ye church of God every thing yt they lust: Obiectyng that all
things necessary to true godlynes are not written in ye scryptures, because ye
mention is made here of ye sprete of ye word, and of the Epistle, by the
which a more perfayte doctrine might be delivered to the world then to come.
But these men do not se, that this same place does monyshe us, that men should
not be drawn away from their mind, that is ye wholesome faith once
received, through their tradicions: which being covered with the cloak of the
sprete, of the word, or of a decretall epistle, these men do cast unto us as
Apostolic and most holy doctrine. For after this manner they do auaunce and
only set forth unto us both their popysh masses and all other things which
they can not prove by ye testymonye of scryptures affyrmynge that they were
institute by the tradycion of the Apostles, and afterward confyrmed by the
Epistles of Apostolyke men, and by the reuelacion of the holy gooste. Let us
beware therefore of these rauenynge woulues, which being clothed with shepes
clothing, do come for to spoil, for to trouble, and to devour. Let us keep
faithfully ye meaning of Christ, with the wholesome and Apostolycall points of
true and undefiled relygion, and then shall noma^ deceive us by any means.
That learned man Tertulyan, has spoken more of this matter in his book that he
made of ye banyshme^t of Heretykes.

For the LORD comes not except there come a departing first, and that that
sinful man be opened, the lost child, which is an adversary, and is exalted
above all that is called God or vvorshypped: so that he shall sit in the temple
of God auauncynge himself as God. Do ye not remember that when I was yet
with you, I told you these things?

The LORD shall not come, except that there come a departing ^yrste.
Ye think (says he) that the day of the coming of the LORD is now at
hand, but ye are deceived brethren. For except there come a departing first,
the LORD shall not come. Except therefore that there come a departing first,
and that Antichriste do raygne, Christ shall not come unto judgment. Therefore
ye departing and raygne of Antichriste or rather tyranny, shall go before ye
day of judgment. And here he does descrybe Antichriste and his kingdom at
large. We shall touch every thing with a co^pendious brefenes, comparynge yt
which Daniel spoke of this matter, with these things. For it seems that the
Apostle took much of his out of him. And first we will speak of the
departing. Departing.
Departing is here taken after such a manner, as when a man does slide back
or fail from his author or prince. Saint Ambrose does expound it of the
diuydynge of the kingdom of ye Romans, and of the departing of other
kingdoms from it. Other have interpreted it of the departing of faith, of the
which the Apostle spoke, i. Timo. iiii. saying: The sprete speaks
euydentlye, that in the latter days some shall depart from the faith, geuyng
head unto spretes of error and deuelyshe doctrynes, etc. But both comes to
one effect as touching the substance of the matter. For when that same last
monarchye or kingdom began to be divided, through the departing of certain
kingdoms from it, then began the Christen relygion and faith to be corrupted
and perverted also, by them, which gave head unto spretes of error and
deuelyshe doctrynes. And by ye same last monarchy or kingdom is meant the
empire of Rome. For Daniell in his.vii. Chapter. After.iii. mighty kingdoms,
that is to say of the Babylonia^s, Perses, and the Macedonyans, adds to the
fourth, that is the Romans. I saw (says he) in a vysion by night, and
behold the fourth beast was grymme and horrible and maruaylous strong, it
had great iron tethe, it devoured and destroyed, and stamped the resydue under
his fete, it was far unlike to other beasts, that were before it: For it
had ten horns. I marked the horns, and behold there came up among them
an other little horn, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked
away: Behold this horn had eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth
speaking presumptuouse things. Hitherto have we rehearsed the words of
Daniell. And after he had desired to know ye meaning of this vysio^, he herd
this answer: The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon the earth, it
shall be greater then all other kingdoms, it shall devour, tread down, and
destroy all the world. The ten horns are ten kingdoms yt shall arise out
of the kingdom, after whom there shall stand up another, which shall be
greater then the first, and shall subdue three kings, and so forth. S. Jerome
declarynge this place of the Prophet, The Empire of Rome.
does expound it of the empire of Rome, saying: He compared the kingdom of
the Romans unto no beast, and named it not: to the intent yt what cruelte more
the^ other we did suppose in the beasts, we should understand that of the
Romans. And surely this empire has subdued and waysted all the world: not
being alonly unlike unto other kingdoms, in the setting up and governance
of the kingdom, but also in cruelnes, strength, and fearcenes. For what nations
has it not wasted with fire and sweard, and utterly destroyed, brought them in
to bondage, and as it were a full and wanton beast trod them under his fete?
For the which cause Mitridates the king of Po^tus (as Justinius did note out of
Trogus Pompeius) was wont to say of the Romans: That they did truly boste,
yt their first begynners or auncetters were brought up with woulues milk,
because yt all the people of Rome had wolves minds, never full of blood and
ever gredy and gapynge after dominion and riches. Also Plinius in ye.vii. book
of his natural hystory, ye.xxv. chap. says of Julius Caesar. Julius Caesar.
He fought in plain field fyftye times: he only passed Marcus Marcellus a
captain of the Romans also which yet had pytched and fyghten.xxxix.
battayles. For besides his vyctoryes over cities, truly I would not speak to
his praise, of eleue^ C.xcii.M. men that were slain by him in battayles. Also
the great injury that mankind suffered by him: which thing to be true he
himself confessed, although he made no mention of his destruction in cyuile
wars. The self same Plinius in the.xxvi. chapter witnesses, that in ye
temple of Minerua, was a table hanged up, brefly co^taynyng the acts of Gneus
Pompeius the great which he had done in the East parts, Gneus Po^pe^^^
in these words followynge: Gneus Pompeius the great Emperor and guyder of
the Romans hooste, in the time of his wars, which continued.xxx. years,
did beat down, put to flyghte, slew, and took to mercy twenty hundredth and
lxxxiii. thousand men, he bowed and took.viii. hundredth and.xlvi. ships, he
had yeldyd unto him a.M.CCCCC.xxxviii. towns and castles, and subdued all ye
contrye from the water of Meotis unto the reed see. And the title or
inscrypcion of his tryumphe had the third day of the kalendes of October
(Marcus Messala and Marcus Piso being co^sules) was this: When he had once
rydde the sea coostes of Pirates, and had restored the Romans unto their
dominion which they had on the sea, he brought glorious spoils out of Asia,
Po^tus, Armenia, Paphlagonia, Capadocia, Cilicia, Syria, from the Scythians,
Jews Albanes, out of Iberia, the I Will of Creta, and from the Basternes: And
besides these he led unto his triumph these two kings Mytridates and
Tigranes. We have touched only the acts, vyctories, and tryumphes of two
Emperors: we have spoken nothing yet of Scipions, Fabyones, Marius and
Metellus, another yet of Lelius Sylla, Lucullus, Marcellus, Crassus, Paulus
Aemilius, Flaminius, Sertorius, Cornelius Cinna and Fymbria, and of many noble
men of this sort and degree: by whose study, feruencye, ambycion, covetousness
and desire to bear rule: To conclude, by whose wild cruelnes, and extreme
tyranny it came to pass that (according to the prophecye of Daniell) all the
world was devoured, destroyed, and trodden underfoot.

Ye have now ye mystery of that cruel beast, now shall we show what is
sygnifyed by the ten horns, and what by the half horn that sprange up among
them and plucked away other three horns. The nombre of ten signifies a
multitude, The diuydyng of the Empire of Rome and the departing from it.
and horns kingdoms: and it means that the Empire of Rome should be divided
again in to many kingdoms: that is, ye through men's departing from it, it
should come to pass that many kings at once should rule in the Empire of
Rome. The which thing began to be about the time of Constantine the
great, some gouernynge the kingdoms of the East, and some of the Weste. And
after that by process of time many nations began to fall from it also,
taking other kings and princes unto them. Farthermore rude nations brake in,
and yt against the Emperor of Romes will: ye and subduynge the Provinces and
kingdoms of the Empire of Rome they raygned strongly. For those things are
well known, which writers of stories do tell of the Frenchemen, Germaynes,
Lombardes, and Perses.

And so are those things and stories, also which credyble auctoures both
Greeks and Latins have written of the bloudye dominion of the Gothies, Hunnies,
and Wandaies. And after this manner did ten horns spring out of that
beast, and the departing was fulfilled of which the Apostle has now
spoken. Of the spryngyngs up of Antichrists.
Now shall we speak of the coming up of Antichriste, that is to say, of
the reuelacion of that sinful man. There grew up a certain foolyshe opynion
that Antichriste should be one only man, the which should be borne in
Babylon, and of the trybe of Dan, and that he should raygne certain years to
the great hurt of the faithful. But the foolyshe men se not that Daniell did
understand all the Kings, Emperoures or head rulers of the Babylonians,
Perses, Macedonyans, and Romans under the names of one Lion, Beer, Leoparde
and other beasts. Therefore it must needs be, that he mente by that little
horn, that is to say by Antichriste, not some one only man, but an whole
kyngedome and an whole body which should fight against Christ with their
laws, co^stitucions, manners and strength. Let us therefore mark the words of
the Prophet: I marked the horns (says he) and behold another little horn
came up among the^, before whom three of ye horns were pluckyd away. And
again: Another (says he) shall arise after them and shall be greater then the
first, and shall subdue three kings. Ye have now the mysterye, and the
exposicion of the same. For the horns do sygnifye the diuidynge and confusion
of the kingdoms. And in this confusion of things, by little and little spring
the up another kingdom in the world which does subdue three other kings.

Let us compare with this, those things which the wrytters of hystoryes have
showed. Machomet of Arabia, some said that he was of P^^^^.
Now Machomet of Arabia in ye year of our LORD.vi. hundredth and.xx that is
to say while there was a maruaylous confusion of things both in ye East, and
also in the West, sprang up in ye time of Heraclius the Emperor, which (as
Volaterranus does recyte out of a lybrarye) came of a low stock, and being
fatherless one Abdemonaples a man of the stock of Ismaell boughte for his
captive and loved him for his favor and wit: for the which cause, he made
him a ruler over his marchau^dyse and business. The^ one Sergius a monk,
which for the sect of heresy fled out of the city of Constantynople into
Arabia, endued him with the heresy of Nestorius, and loved Machomet greatly
for his wit. In the mean season his master dyed without children, leaving
behind him much riches, and his wife a wydowe of fyftye years of age: whom
Machomet married, and after that she was dead, he was made heir, and greatly
increased with riches: and being had in honor with the foolyshe people (by
the counsel of Sergius) began to call him self the great Prophet of God.
Therefore after that his name was publyshed, and his authoryte greatly augmented
among his people, he made a law which he borrowed partly of the Jews, partly
of the Christian, ye and also of the Heythen, and called it Alcoran. And those
that obeyed it, he gave them to name Sarracenes or Agarens, and armed them
against the Perses: Against whom because he had metelye good fortune, he
began to be taken for a Prophet or a man of God. And when he had gotten him
great glory, he dyed, after he had lived.xl. years. After his death many
princes of that nacio^ by succession when they had dyuyded the multitude or
hoostes between them raygned some in one place, and some in another. And Homar
the third after Machomet, after that he had subdued ye Perses, took Jerusalem
and all Syria about the year of our LORD.CCCCCC. lxx Constantine the fourth
then reygnyng. After this they that followed him invaded Egypt also, and
ordained Calypha to be ruler over it. A man m^^e read more of the Sarracenes
and of their kingdom, here and there among the wrytters of histories. And the
nation of the Turks coming of the Scythyans warred under the Sarracenes in
Asia, and took their profession and relygion of them from time to time as it
were by hand from one to another: even as they took of them also ye greatest
porcyo^ of their Empire, and keep it to this day getting since thereto Asia,
Macedonia, Moesia, Athens, Peloponesus, Epyrus, Thratia, Illiricus, with many
other contryes. Now by this ye perceive what that little horn did sygnifye,
the which coming up among the ten horns did pluck up other three. For it
is Machomet the which coming of a mean, ye of a most low stock, of a
marchaunte is made a king, whose successoures have holden three of the most
myghtyest kingdoms of the world, Persia, Siria, and Egypt: and yet I rehearse
not ye other kingdoms of which I made mention even now. For by the nombre of
three, he understood many kingdoms.

But yet all this while we have not mad an end of ye mystery of iniquite. The
bys^^p of Rome.
For there is another certain thing also, which pertayneth to the perfeccion of
this body of Antichrist. Therefore while these things were in hand in ye East
parties, ye By shop of Rome goes about ye dominyo^ of ye West in ye West
parties. Ye looked not that I should say such things of the By shope, but yet
they are true. And who would ever have thought ye the ministers of Gods word
and of the churches should once have come unto such madness, as for to think
and cauncell how they might get the governance of the city and of the
world? Specially in as much as Christ had said in so plain words: The
kings of the gentyles do rule, but so shall not ye: but I have chosen you, yt
ye should go and bring forth much fruit. And he that is greatest among you
shall be a servant to you all. But these commandments of the LORD being
neglected, there began certain men to dispute of the primacy of the Byshope
of Rome, at such time, as that little horn was aco^mynge forth. And because it
was written: Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church. And
I will give the the keys of the kingdom of heaven: And what so ever thou
byndest upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: And again because that Achasius
the Bishop of Constantinople and Timotheus men of Grecia did desire of
Simplicius the Bishop of Rome, that he also would condemn Peter the bishop of
Alexandria the follower of Euthicetys, heresye, as one which had rule over the
chief church and whose authorite was of great value among all me^: certain
men concluded upon this, that the seat of Rome was ye chief of all churches,
and that the Byshope of Rome was the head ruler over all byshopes. Thou seyst
here also how that little horn began to lift up it self. Ihon of
Co^sta^tinople.
And Iho^ of Constantynople putting more coals unto this fire, held a
Council among the Grecyans, in the which he declared himself to be the
universal Bishop or Patriarch. The which thing Mauricius the Emperor of
the Romans did sygnifye unto Gregory the first Byshope of Rome of that name,
commaundynge him for to submytte himself and to be obediente unto Ihon. But
Gregory answered yt the power of byndyng and lowsyng was given unto Peter, and
not unto ye Byshopes of Constantynople, and that therefore he should cease to
provoke the wrath of God upon him. This same Gregory writing unto Anastasius
of Antioche and to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria in the register of the.vii.
part of his.xxx. Epistle, says: Your worshypfull holiness knows, that this
name universal byshope was offered by the holy Counsel of Calcedonye unto
them of the Apostolyke seat, which (god so disposynge) I do now serve. But
none of my predecessoures did consent for to use so profane a name: because
surely yt if one be called an universal Patryacke, it is a derogacio^ unto ye
name of other Patriarchs. But God forbid ye any Christian man should take that to
him self, whereby he should seem to dimynyshe the honor of his brethren in
any part, were it never so little These are Gregorius words. But not al only
the Byshopes of Constantynople, but also of Rome the successoures of Gregory
forgetting these things, did not cease to strive about the prymacy, until
that Bonyface the third of that name, not long from the time of Gregory, had
optayned. But yet (as Platina says also, not without great co^tencion) of
Phocas the Emperor which slew Mauricius with his children very cruelly: That
S. Peter's seat should be counted and called the head of all other churches. Of
the which thing Paul the Deacon makes mention also, in the.iiii. book of the
acts of the Lombardes the.xi. Chapter. Now when this was granted unto the
Byshopes of Rome, there was as it were a wyndowe opened unto ye whole Empire:
And the^ they cast their mind for to rule over the city and the whole world.
And the^ having an occasyon, they gave all their diligence to the same. And
the wanders which were seen at that time, did sygnifye a great change of
things, for they were such, as were never seen before, of which the hystoryes
do testifye dylige^tly.

And there were the^ very many occasions, which did lift up the Byshope of
Rome very hye, then going about the same thing, and specially the sedycious
wars and the often breakyng in of rude nations. The breaking in of the
Sarracens
For the Saracenes the generation of Machomet, after they had taken Africa, did
spoil Syria and Asia and set upon Europa. Therefore the Emperors being holden
in the East partys because of these present perils, were compelled to set
aside the governance of the West. And by this means it came to pass that the
French men and Lombardes increased greatly, in so much that the Emperor
was at the last afraid of the kings of both those nations. For although
the Emperor had set certain Debytes for to govern Italy, yet was their power
to weak for to resyste the^. The which thing apeared well by this one token,
yt when Theodorus the Emperoures Leuftenaunte in Italy, had once foughte^ with
the Lombardes at Scultenna a river in Mutina: The kings of Lo^bardye.
it was said that he was shamfully put to flight and chased away, with the
loss of.vii. thousand soldiers of Rome: by reason of which vyctory, Rotharis
the king of Lombardye not a little proud, joined unto his kingdom all Lyguria.
Therefore after this manner the Emperors power began to decay in ye West, and
the Byshopes of Romes power increased, by so much the more, as ye Lo^bardes
and French men did raygne largely. For a little after he was exalted by their
strength, with whom he began to fall into amitye. But it came to this pass
by little and little, of the which thing we shall now speak. If the Byshope of
Rome had been chosen by the clergy and people of the Romans, yet had the
eleccion ben counted as vain, except ye Emperor or the Debyte of Italye had
aproued it, until that Constantyne the Emperor the son of Constance,
which began to raygne the year of our LORD. CCCCCC. lxx. being moved with
the holiness of Be^net the second Bishop of Rome, sent a decre that from
thence forth all men should believe, that man to be immediatlye the true vycare
of Christ, which the clergy with the people and the soldiers of Rome should
choice to be the pope, without any tarynge for any authoryte either of ye
prince of Consta^tynople, or the Debyte of Italye, as it was wont for to be.
And after that the Byshope of Rome had gotten this privilege, he began to
pluck his neck from the Emperors pocke, and the more boldly to part: in so
much that within a little while after this, when a mete occasion was offered
him, that is to say, a bitter contencion between the Bishops of the East and
of the West, he began the boldelyer to exercise his authoryte against the
Emperor himself.

For the heresye of the Monothelytes sprange up under Heraclius the Emperor:
The heresy of the Monothelites.
And that sect confessed only one will in Christ. Martyn the first of that
name gathered a synod of.C. and.l. Byshopes and condemned it at Rome. The
syxte synod holden at Co^stantynople condemned the same. And that same
infeccio^ seemed then to be quenched. But Philippicus the Emperor being
infecte with the same, after he had banyshed Cyrus a Bishop of good judgment
into Pontus, he made one Iho^ a certain monk Bishop over Constantynople, and
sent his naughtye doctrynes into Rome, co^maundyng ye they should be approved
by ye consent of all me^. Here Co^stantyne ye Bishop of Rome the first of that
name, getting a good occasion to wythstande the Emperor, gathered a council
and condemned Phylyppicus of heresye and, Ihon the monk, ye and decreed also
that the images of those holy fathers, which had been present at six
Councelles approved of all men, should be painted in S. Peter's porche.
Contencion about the use of images.
And therefore through this occasyon thee began to be a disputacion among
them, of the use of images also. In the which co^trouersye they of ye East
part thought more godly then they of the Weste: But for because that a
ryghteouse cause was joined with a wicked, it came to pass yt it had the less
favor among many wyttye and learned men. And the Greeks fell not without
affeccion into this contencion, whom it grieved that the Romans did abuse
images, as a token of victory in the despyte of them of the East: for by this
means they turned all their cryenge against images. But I am not very sure
whether that the Emperoures Leo and Consta^tyne did defend the learning of
the Monothelytes: but this is plain that they did abrogate images for
avoiding of Idolatrye, not without the example and authoryte of the
scryptures, and commanded the Romans more then once for to do the same. But
the Byshopes of Rome by the means of this occasion did wythdrawe all the
people of Italy from the obedience of the Emperor, and thruste in themselves
by their own authoryte, calling unto the^ strange kings, by whose help the
Byshope of Rome was made Lord of Italy, and the Emperoures Debyte driven out.
For when the Emperor Leo had given a commandment, that all which were
under the Empire of Rome, should take away the pyctures and images of saints
for avoiding of ydolatrye, and that he that did other wise should have him for
an open enemy: The bishops of Rome do condemn the Emperoures of Rome.
Gregory the second admonyshed all men that they would in no wise fall into
such error, nether for fear, nether yet for any commandment of their
prince, and steared up all the people of Italy with so great vehemence of
oracion, that a little more would have made them to have chosen them a new
Emperor. And at Rauenna truly, after that a great sedycion was raised up,
Paul the Debyte of the Emperor was slain there with his son also. Gregory
the third followynge his example did depreue Leo as well of his Empire, The
bishops of Rome do call upon the help of the kings of France
as of the communion with the faithful. The same Gregorye called first of all
upon the kings of France for help against his enemies. For whiles ye
Luythprandus king of Lombardye was moved with the desire to bear rule, did
besege the city of Rome, and had taken all the towns on every side: this same
Gregory sent embassadoures into France for to desire Charles Marcellus the
father of Pipyne, that he would now the first time help Rome and ye church
being in trouble. And the Bishops of Rome were wounte to ask help of the
Emperor of Constantynople, if any evil had been coming toward them by any
forayne enemy. The which thing Gregory would not now do, because he had
publyshed Leo the Emperor to be an heretyke, or chefely because that Leo
could scante defend his regal city from the Sarracens, much less help
other men. By this mean therefore it came to pass (says Platina) that then
first of all the defense of the church was translated from the Emperoures of
Constantynople unto other men. Then Charles took upon him this defense, and
delivered Rome from the sege: After that he had wythdrawen Luythprandus the
king and his godfather from his purpose with a loving exhortacion. But the
king of France through this good turn, bound the Bishops of Rome so much
unto him, That Zachary the first the successor of Gregorye the third, denied
not his consent unto Pipyne the son of Charles, Pipyne by the means of the
B. of Rome is made king of France.
in a matter most unhonest. For Pipyne went about the kingdom of France and
desired greatly for to put Clyperichus his Lord, which came of the auncyente
and noble stock of the kings of France, and was the last king of the
stock of Merouea, out of his kingdom, and to make him self king. Now when
he had troubled greatly both the nobylite and the laytie, ye and also the
clergy about this matter, at the last he sent Burghardus the byshope of
Herbipolis with Folradus his priest unto zacharye the Bishop of Rome: for to
ask whether that he were more worthy to be king which was but the king
only in name and could do nothing with his counsel and help, or else he
which bare all the burden of the kingdom alone, and yet in the mean season
lacked the dygnite of a king? This Byshope of Rome remembrynge what had been
done for him, gave an express sentence (I write the words of Frysingens. a
wrytter of hystoryes and a Bishop) that it was meter, that he which took the
charge of all things should be called king, then he which had but only ye
name of a king. For of an old costume the kings of France did leave the
governance of their kingdom unto ye most auncienteste of their stock: for it
was ye hygheste power nexste the kings. Now when these embabassadoures had
brought this answer unto ye king, Pipyne bearing himself bold of the
verdyte of these great learned men and chief of relygyon, and also of the aid
of certain princes and noble men, did thruste Chylpericus his Lord and king
out of his regal dygnite, and when he was out of his authoryte did shut
him in to a monastery, and he himself by ye consent of his me^ took upon him
all the kings power. And when this good king called upon the common fydelite
that me^ had promised him, and that there were many in the realm which greatly
improued such tyranny and breaking of their oaths, Zachary the Byshope of
Rome assoyled Pipyne with all his of their oath, which they had made unto
Chylpericus their king. And that this matter was thus handeled I will bring
for the two witnesses: The first out of the hystorye of Platina, and this it
is: Pipine being desirous to bear rule, sent his embassadoures unto the
Bishop of Rome and desired him that he would confyrme the kyngedome of
France unto him by his authoryte. The Bishop granted unto his request after
he had remembered what good turn he had received, and also the old kyndnes yt
had been between the Bishops of Rome and ye kings of ye family. And so by his
authoryte the kingdom of France was judged unto Pipyne in the year of our
LORD.vii. hundredth.liii. This is Platinas saying. Now follows ye latter
testymonye of Gelasius, written unto Anastasius the Emperor, which is
contained in the.xv. questyon the.vi. Canon in these words: Another bishop of
Rome called zacharye, deposed ye king of France from his kingdom, not so
much for his iniquyties, as because he was unmeet for so great a dygnite, The
sheep troubles the wa ter that the wolf should drink in that is, an occasion
is lyghtely found.
and did set in his place Pipyne the son of Charles the Emperor, and
assoyled all the people of France of their oath of alegiau^ce. Hitherto go ye
words. And king Pipyne for to recompense the Byshopes of Rome, helped Steven
the second, Bishop of Rome being oppressed of Aistulphus king of Lombardye
and fled into France: and after that Pipine had passed ye mounteynes twyse
with an army of men, he baysted into Italye, and at the last compelled
Aistulphus to restore again those things which he had taken away: going
about by this means for to quyte the Byshope of Rome for confyrmyng of him in
his kyngedom. Pipine gives unto the Bishops of Rome, that which belo^ged to
the Emperor.
Then was the office of the Debyte given unto ye Bishop of Rome, and all that
lies between Padus and Apenninus, from the Placentyns unto the pooles or
stondynge waters of Venyce, and all that is contained within Isaurus a floude
of Apenninus and Adriaticus, and what so ever ye Aistulphus had gotten of ye
men of Hetruria, and of the Sabyns: All these things (I say) did Pipine of
his lyberalyte give unto the Byshope of Rome, the Emperoures Legates nothing
regarded. For as Pipine was remouynge into Italye against Lombardye, Gregorye
the chief Secretary of the Emperor Co^stantyne the fourth met him, and in
the name of the Emperor warned the king, that if he happened to have the
vyctorye of the Lombardes, that he should not give unto the Byshope of Rome nor
to the Romans, the Debyteshyppe over Rauenna, which was oppressed of the
Lombardes and belonged unto the Emperor. But Pipine drove him away from him
with a metely sharp answer, because he thought to do as he did a little while
after, for the which cause he was the first of the kings of France that was
called, the most Christen king.

His son that was called Charles the great followed the ensample of his
Charles the great.
(...) with a loud voice, he ordained this Charles to be Emperor, and gave
him a kings ornamenete: the people of Rome cryeng thryse together: Long life
and victory be unto Charles Augustus crowned of God, ye great and peaceable
Emperor. These things were done, the year of our LORD.viii. hundredth
and.iii. nor it is not like that these things were done without the consent
and counsel of Irenes the Empress of Constantinople, specially because that
the Cronicles of the Greeks do show that there were messau^gers dyrected from
Charles and Leo unto Irenes, to require her that she would be married unto him:
the which would soon have granted unto their requests, if that the princes
of Constantinople knowing of the matter, had not banyshed her straight way (and
that before the face of Charles Embassadoures) unto Lesbus, into an Abbey that
she had builded. But Egynhartus in the life of Charles, does lay all the
fault of the translacion of the Empire, to the Byshope of Rome. For Charles at
the first (says he) did so greatly refuse ye name of the Emperor and
augustus, that he said that he would not have entered into the church that
day, although that there were great solempnyte, if he might have known the
Byshopes mind before. He adds more: yet he suffered with great patience,
the evil will that he had for taking yt name upon him (for the Emperors of
Consta^tynople were greatly dyspleased with it) and he overcame their grudynge
with his myghtinesse, in the which he passed them far. Moreover their
forayne wars held them back, that they could not set upon the Byshope of
Rome and king Charles. And therefore did Nycephorus ye first Emperor of
Constantynople after the diuidynge of the Empire, make alyaunce with king
Charles.

Hitherto have we showed at large with what begynnynges and in what order, The
conclusion.
that little horn crepte up, and gatte so great power. Nether was there then
truly any power so great in all the Weste party, as the Bishops of Rome
was. For at their sentence were there mighty kyngedomes translated. For first
Chylpericus that was borne king of France being cast of, he did craftily
constitute Pipine his governor in ye kings stead. And after that he had taken
away the power of the eleccion and ordenynge of ye Emperor from the heads
of Constantynople and the Romans, he gave Charles the king of France the
name of Augustus. For the which cause he himself get the rule of that
city, which is the lady of the world, for a reward of this gaye done deed.
Furthermore he waysted that strong nacio^ and myghtie kingdom of the Lombardes
through his request and counsel. Therefore he that once optayned Rome, he
threw down and exalted Emperoures at his own pleasure, and gave Frenchemen a
king, and used their service as they had been his servants. For with their
armies he tamed ye Lo^bardes, that he might afterward raygne safely over all
Italy. He I say that rules over so many and so great kingdoms, may he not
by good right we are a glysterynge diadem with a tryple crown: No doubt the
prouydence of God would, that this Byshope of Rome (with this manner of apparel
fyte for a king) should show forth unto all the world what he was, that is to
say, that little horn yt Danyell speaks of, which came forth and put aside
three other horns, and with wondrous subtylte subdued them under him.

And here unto belongs the gift of Jews the son of Charles, The gift of
ye kings of France.
whom these men (for his favor and beniuolence toward the seat of Rome)
called Pius, yt is to say, good or godly: even as before, they had given
Pipine to name. The most Christen king. If any man desire to read of that
same gift, he shall find it dyligently written of Raphaell Volaterranus, in
the acts of Pipine and Charles, libro. Geog. tercio. The effect of it is
this: I Jews the Emperor do grant unto the blessed saint Peter ye prince of
the Apostles, and through the unto thy vycare my Lord Pascall the hye Bishop
and his successoures for ever. The city of Rome with her iurisdyccion and all
ye land about it, with the cytyes, havens and places of Hetruria that lie nigh
ye see, ye and all that lies within the land of the same, and the whole
dukedom of Rauenna also, even as Charles our father worthy to be had in
mind, and Pipine our graundsyre, did of late grant unto blessed saint
Peter. Furthermore we do also approve and grant, the dukedom of Spoletyne,
the Ilo^des also of the inner see, Corsica, Sardinia, Sicilia: the which all of
them Pipine our grandsyre, of godly remembrance, and after him Charles the
Emperor our father, did give by writing unto blessed saint Peter and his
successors etc. The gift of Constantine.
In this gift here is no mention of Constantyne, the which verily is a feigned
thyngt: for at the length the Bishops of Rome rayned at Rome and in Italye,
even against the Emperoures of Romes mind by the help of the kings of
France. The Bishops of Rome in the mean season, do often cast forth out of
their decrees the Canon which in the.xcvi. dystinction is read after this
manner: Constantyne the Emperor did grant the crown and all ye regal
dygnyte within the city of Rome and Italye and the Weste parties, unto the
Apostolyke man. But how soever ye matter comes to pass, we se that the
Bishop of Rome does rule over all the kingdoms of the Weste.

The name of Augustus or Emperor translated to the Germans.
For it belongs hereunto also, that through the counsel and dylygence of
Ihon the.xiii. Byshope of Rome, the Empire of Rome or the name of Augustus, was
translated again from the French men unto the Germans. That is to say, to the
princes of the Almanes, Saxones, Bauares and Swychers. But how they kept them
under their yocke also, ye hystoryes of many Emperoures of the Germans do
show full well: and specially ye Canon which in the.lxiii. dystynction is
read in these words: King Otto.
I king Otto do promise and swear to thy my Lord Iho^ the Pope, by the
father, the son and the holy ghost, and by this wodde of ye lively cross,
and by these relyques of saints, yt if by the sufferaunce of God I come to
Rome, I shall exalte the holy church of Rome, and the the ruler of the same,
according to my power: and thou shall never lose by my will or my counsel, or
my consent, or mine exhortacio^, another life nor members, nor yet the same
honor which thou now haste. And I will make no statute nor none ordinance in
Rome, of any thing that belongs unto the or to the Romans, without thy
counsel. And what soever of S. Peter's land comes to my power, I will
restore it the again. And to whom soever I shall commytte ye governance of
Italye, I shall cause him to swear that he shall help the to defend S. Peter's
land with all his power. Surely these great and incredible things, if any man
should compare this great alteracion and change of things, and it were but
with Gregorye the great, ye first Byshope of Rome of ye name. But these sweet
Bishops not being content with these great things, never ceased to lay
wait for the Empire of Rome by their most subtyl counselles, until that they
had prescrybed laws of the true eleccion of the Emperoures: The bishop of Rome
makes laws for the eleccio^ of the Emperoures.
and had decreed that the confyrmacio^ of the king of Romans should depend
upon them. And for the same cause Platina in ye life of Gregory ye fyfte, wrote
after this manner: Gregory knowing ye weakness of the Empire and the change of
fortune, to the intent yt the highest power should remain the longer among
the Germaynes, and that he should bear rule over other, which passed other in
strength and dygnite, made a decre (Otto not denyenge it) of the eleccion of
the Emperor, in the year of our LORD. M. and.ii. which thing we se kept
unto our time: that is to say, that it is lawful for the Germans only to
choice out that prince which is called Caesar and the king of Romans: and
he should then at the last be taken for the Emperor and Augustus, Read
Marsilius Pataninus. dictia. 2. cap. 25
if ye Byshope of Rome had co^fyrmed him. I could also bryngforth other
innumerable things of this same sort, But I thynk yt the reader does under
sto^de plainly enough by these of whom ye prophecy of Daniel and of Paul is
me^te.

But some man will say, An obieccion.
thou make two horns: Machomet and the Byshope of Rome: where as Daniel
makes mention but of one only. But except that the Bishop of Rome, being
bold of the help of the Frenchemen, had broken the power of the Emperor of
the East, he would surely more strongly have put to flight and persecuted
the multitude of ye Sarracens. On the other side if that the Sarracens with
their runnnyge in, had not kept the Emperor in ye East parties, the power
another of the Byshope of Rome, nor of the Lombardes, another yet of the
Frenchmen, could not have increased so greatly in the Weste parties. Therefore
each of them gave an occasion unto other both for to overcome and to raygne.
in so much that of the Empire of Rome little did remain but a bare name only
For the Byshope of Rome keeps ye city of Rome, and the great Turk
Constantinople. Now both of the^ impugn Christ's institucions and laws a
like: both of the^ do persecute Christen me^, defending their own laws, and
such as hold with them. Wherefore I could not make two horns of them that
are so like. Ye and the kyngedome of the Perses and Medes is fygured under ye
image of one beer indyfferentlye, although they seem to be tweyne. And so in
the.xi. chapter, the same Daniell prophecyenge of the self same Antichrist,
and beginning at the Empire of Rome, says not: An arm shall stond out of him,
but arms shall stand out of him, and shall defyle ye sentuary of strength,
etc. But you have now the beginning and going forward of Antichriste: here
follows now a clearer exposycio^ of his disposicio^ and kingdom, by his
deeds and properties.

The dysposycion and Kingdom of Antichriste.
For holy S. Paul, does set forth Antichrist in diverse ways as it were in his
colors: that he might paynte forth, and as it were set out before our eyes to
behold, his dysposycion and kingdom. And to begin wtall, he gives him to
name the sinful man. And after yt, as it were expoundynge himself, the child
of perdycio^. The which names after the propertye of the Ebrewe tunge, are as
much to say, as if one in our tunge should call any man, most ungracious
patron, or unhappy person: ye and as it were myschefe it self and
perdicion it self: as you would say, such a man as were the cause of
wyckednes, and perdycion both to him self, and also unto other. If any man
would read the hystorye of Machomet or of the Turks (the brefenes of the
which Raphaell Volaterranus has gathered, Geog. libro.vii. Of Machomet.
) and would ponder it with a dyligente judgment, he would swear that this
Antichriste were the syncke of all myschefe, and the greateste destruccio^ of
all mankind For he had trodden down the law of God and had publyshed his own,
that is to say, a most superstycious law, in ye which hypocrysye is myghtely
set forth, but yet in the mean season a way opened unto all wyckednes. He has
also subverted most mighty cytyes and laid the^ flat upon the ground: he
has destroyed ye most holycongregacio^s of god, Antioche, Alexandria,
Jerusalem and Consta^tynople with all the congregacions of Grecia and Egypt: for
I will rehearse no mo. Truly within this.lxxx. years he has invaded, beaten
down and spoiled more kingdoms, then ever any mighty prince, or cruel
tyraunte had done before him. We have herd such examples of his cruelnes,
that we may very well understand by this child of perdicion and sinful man,
the kingdom of Machomet.

The life of the most holy fathers of Rome.
Another is the seat of Rome any thing behind him in myschefe or wyckednes.
There is no myschefe nor ungracious deed, but that they which are called most
holy, have defiled themselves therewith. I will here use no strange wytnes, I
do appeal unto their own Cronicles and lives. In the mean season I am not
ignoraunte, that certain men of good fame have come unto this seat, but thou
shall read of very few, that have dyed incorrupt. For who can believe yt the
best man that were could sit so clean in such a profane and abhomynable
seat, that he should draw no fyltynes unto him? But it came to pass that some
were worse the^ some, by ye reason of ye dyuersyte of their dysposycions.
Surely for the most part of the^ they were not behind the most wyckedest
man and vngraciouste knave that is, in ambycio^, in evil and traiterous
crafts, in wars, in bryberye, in extorcion, in most insatiable covetousness,
in pride most arrogau^te, in filthy lust and voluptuousnes. We brought
examples out of hystoryes here before in our exposycion, where we showed by
what subtilties they came into the dygnyte of ye Empire. And Platyna although
he greatly spared the Bishops of Rome yet being over comme with the euylnes,
wyckednes, and unspeakable myscheuous deeds of some of them, left that in
wryttynge to his posterite, which he saw to be ouertrue. Beno ye Cardinal
did rather but touch, then descrybe, the most vngraciouste life of some
Bishops of Rome. In ye life of Gregorye the.vii. Platina did count him among
the best and most innocente, but Beno rekenned him among the worste and
vnhappyest: as one which after sacrylege and most wicked abhomynacions, did
also use wytchcrafte, and all kind of ungraciousness. And Marsilius Patauinus
the most learned and best writer of his time in his work, which he made at
Bauarus for Jews the fourth, of the power of the Pope and the Emperor, and
called it the defender of peace, does clearly show what the Byshopes of Rome
be, and were many years: that is to say, proud, hye minded, covetous, doers
of wrong, unfaithful, troublers of peace, and ye commune welthe, dyspysers of
God and holy authoryte, enemies of all goodness and honestye. Let men read
the.xxii. xxiii. xxiiii. xxv. xxvi. Chapters, etc. of ye second dictio^ or
part of his book. We have seen also Byshopes of Rome in our time, that
nothing more unshamefast, more fylthy, more abominable or wicked things can
be ymagyned the^ they have done. For those things are well known, which
Volaterranus has showed of Paul the second in his xxii. book of
Antropologia. of Syxtus the fourth, and Alexander the vi. very few men have
thought well. Also duke Valentyne made them both noble men. Julius the second
was the best beloved Pope of all vserers, dronkardes, whorehunters, most
cruel and bloudye souldyers: In so much that they wyshed him that he had
changed rowmes with Maximilian the Emperor, a man worthy of blessed
remembrance. For they said that he was a man that was given unto relygion,
commune peace and tranquyllyte (as in deed he was a godly and meke Emperoue)
and that the other was borne for war and troublynge of matters. Also
Pasquyllus of Rome yested upon Clement the.vii. with verses hanging upon him
on this matter.

Pope Clemente is now gone by the help of Gods clemencye. Pasquyllus. is an
image at Rome, whereon be fastened letters of things lost or of like matters
that a man will have publyshed, either pryuely or openly.

Let all mankind rejoice, the whole world through out.
He shamed all the world, besides his own city.
And was the great ruin, of his time, without doubt.
This is he which with princes, no promise would hold.
But evermore betraye them, notwythstondynge any oath.
In ouerchargynge Italy with trybutes, was never none so bold.
Great riches he had, but depart from any he was loathe.
This is he, which his own country with cruel wars did oppress.
And filled all the earth, full of Christen men's blood.
He spoiled many cytyes, thrustynge out both more and less.
Oh cruel person, who ever read that he did any good?
Infinyte other things of this sort I do ouerpasse, lest I should make ye
godly reader for to vomyte. And surely no man (although he were very
eloquente) can sufficientlye declare, what multitude of wickedness has crepte
from such heads of the church, among all the people of Christ: so that I
have not offended in expoundynge this prophecye of Paul, of the Byshopes of
Romes kingdom. I will speak nothing now of the ypocrysye, sins and
wyckednes of Monks, Nonnes, Prestes and the spiritualte (as men call them)
because that experience itself does set forth all these things more clerlye
then any man ca^ descrybe the^. For here is ye thing fulfilled of which S
Paul did prophycy: They shall resyste ye truth, men of corrupt minds,
reprobate as touching the faith, but they shall prevail no longer: for their
madness shall be euydent unto all men.ii. Timo. iii.

Secondlye Paul calls Antichriste Aduersarium, yt is to say an aduersarye:
and he calls him an aduersarye or Antichriste, as though one should say, set
plain contrary against Christ: as one whose wit, manners, life, doctrine,
deeds, laws and institucions do fight against Christ. A comparison between
Christ and Antichriste.
Christ came to show peace to all the world, as of whose coming ye
Prophets had showed before, that the^ most cruel nations should turn their
sweardes into coulters, and their spears into sythes. Now Machomet does
boaste himself to be sent of God in the power of armoure. Christ taught that
men are not defiled with those things that go into the mouth. But Mahomet has
forbydde^ his, wine and other meats, which god ordained to be received with
geuynge of thanks. He has also given unto his, circumcision, and admits
Polygamiam: that is moo wives at once then one: the which Christ has
abrogate, and taught out of ye old law, that one flesh only and not two or
mo, ought to be in matrymony. To be short all the life and doctrine, all the
laws, institucions and deeds of Mahomet are against Christ. Another do the
sayenges, deeds, doctrynes and rytes of the Byshope of Rome with all his body,
agree any better with Christ. Christ has given us in the Prophets and by ye
preaching of the Apostles an absolute and perfect doctrine, which alone is
sufficient enough to get everlasting life. But the Byshope of Rome says,
yt unto that perfeccion we must have tradycions of fathers, I wot not what, as
things without which no man can be saved, and as though those holy me^
which lacked them were damned. Christ taught that one only God ought to be
worshypped and called upon, and that by the means and intercession of his
name. But ye Byshope of Rome has thruste in to the churches the prayenge and
worshyppyng of saints more diligently, then the true relygyon of God. The
Apostles out of the tradycion and spirit of Christ, taught that there was but
one only hye priest, and one everlasting sacrifyce only, that is Jesus
Christ. But the Bishop of Rome subuertynge that order of Melchisedech, has
consecrated innumerable sacrifyces for to sacrifyse daily for ye sins of the
quycke and the dead. The Apostelles taught that God only does remytte sins,
and that to him only men ought to confess them. But the Byshope of Rome has
set forth unto the churches wondrous lies of the power of the keys, of
auricular confession, of cases reserved, and of the market of pardones. The
Apostles did commend unto the churches ye grace of God, they taught that ye
beleuers were justified by faith. But the Bishop of Rome has boasted ye
merits of saints, ye and has sold the^ to. What need is thereof many
words? truth does not so much repugne lies, nor light darkness, as Antichrist
is contrary to Christ. Christ did abrogate ceremonies, he set in their
stead a few sacraments, ye rest he would have us to serve him in sprete and
truth, and required faith and charity of us. But the Byshope of Rome as one
forgettyng these things, has stuffed the church with ceremonies, ye and
with most foolyshe rytes and superstycions. And those things which Christ
by his example, words and deeds had banyshed out of ye church, he once
received them again and holds the^ fast by the tethe. Christ flies
kingdoms, washes his disciples fete, taught humylite: The kings of ye
Gentyles bear rule (says he) but so shall not ye. But the Bishop of Rome
persueth not after kingdoms only, but the chief Empire it self, gets it
by craft, and bears rule over kings that are subject unto him, ye and
profereth his fete unto kings to be kyssed, and such kings as kycke against
him, and will not worship- this beast, he stryketh them with ye thonder bolte
of his excommunicacion, puts them out of their kingdom, sets other
kings in their rowme, and assoyleth their subiettes of their oath of
obedience. Christ ware a crown of thorn, and was clothed with a purple
garmente. But the Byshope of Rome, decked with a tryple crown, as it were
Darius of Persia comes forth glysterynge in his gold and precious stones,
compassed about with an host of men: Christ paid toll. But ye Byshope of
Rome does exempte his from it, condempnynge and persecutynge the holy
authorytye, yt requires any trybute of this anointed sect. Christ bears a
cross: The Byshope of Rome is borne upon the shulders of most covetous me^.
Christ was poor, he fed the sheep, went mekely into the town, and cast
out of the temple both buyers and sellers: But this man boasts himself to be
the Lord over all the Weste parties, he spoyleth and deuoureth the sheep, and
closed in with an host of men is carried proudly in a tryumphe, he receaueth
into the temple of God all buyers and sellers, and the^ that will not receive
them he excommuntcateth and pronou^ceth them heretykes: To be short he has
suffered all the temples of Christ to be made so profane, yt now they be like
to a well trymmed market. For if I should speak nothing at all of the
choppynge and chaungyng and byeng of benefyces, of the pardoners, or rather the
deuelles marchaundise, of the fayers of sacraments, masses and indulgences.
There stand ready before the church doors, tabernacles, tables, chayres and
settelles: in them are set forth to selle fygures of wax, little images, fete
and hands of iron and wax, hens ans cocks and innumerable much of such
kind of oblacions: and in the churches themselves, stand Idolles with
stretched out hands and because they be domme, they have an, interpreter by,
that lacks no tunge. For he standing by the altar and by the Idol, for to
salute them that come, receaueth them, allureth them, and fedeth them with
fair words, expounds the virtues of the saint, and tells forth the
feigned miracles of the Idol: to be short he mylketh away the money from the
superstycious and foolyshe people. And that there should be nothing to let
him that should offer, he has al sorts of money by him, and therefore he
choppeth and changes and scrappeth all into the saints box. Over the which
Idol sum monk or priest has rule, which of those offerynges does noryshe
his shameless household, whores, baudes, yesters, scoffers, knaves and idle
houswyues: And before all things, the most holy father has his part of
these gifts: the which has confyrmed this holy marchaundyse, by granting
of his large indulgences, for all that our LORD has commanded: Frelye ye
received, freely give again. Peter also saying and pronouncynge: Peryshe thou
and thy money, because thou thynkeste yt the gift of God can be gotten with
money. But why do I prosecute these things so much, seeing he is not living
yt can sufficientlye declare the covetousness, deceates, and vnshamfastnes of
his most ungracious stock, with their works most contrary to Christ and
true relygion.

Thyrdlye, there follows in Paul: He is exalted above a ^ that is called God
or worshyped.
yt he is exalted above all that is called God or worshypped: which sentence
may be expounded two manner of ways: either yt he is exalted above God himself,
and set up against all true relygyon and worshyppynge of God: either that he is
exalted against all godly things, that is to say all true worshyppynge of
God, taking the person and name of God, for true relygion and godly things.
But why do I stand upon these things so much? seeing that the Apostle
himself does join unto this immediately, that which may expound all the
forsayde sentence: so that he shall sytte in the temple of God, auauncynge
himself as God. After this manner (I say) is he exalted against God himself
and all true relygion. The temple of God is here taken for the world, for the
catholyke and universal church and the faithful heart of every man. To
sytte, is for to raygne and to bear rule. To auau^ce him self as God, is to
boaste him of the power of God, and to promise and challenge those things as
peculyar to himself, which belong only to God. Let us hear now how
these things are fulfilled, in Machomet and the Bishop of Rome. Mahomet does
not alonly despise the most holy trynite, but denies also Jesus Christ
himself to be very God. He affirms that he gave a more perfecter law, then
was given either of Moses or of Jesus Christ: he gloryed also that there was
written of him in the law, and in the Gospel, ye and that his name was
written from the beginning in ye throne of God in the upper part on the
right hand. And among us if ye Bishop of Rome or his Legate had come into any
town, with great dilygence ye congregation fell down before him at his metyng
and received him, not as a man, but as God. All the relyques were brought
forth, and all me^ kneled down to him, looked for his blessing, and thought it
healthful if they might have kyssed his fete. And if that any man had but once
thought, that he had not had ye full power in heaven and in earth, he was
straight way taken for an heretyke. What shall we say also, that all prestes
with wicked Freres did preach openly in express words in all the temples of
Christen men, that the Bishop of Rome was the vycare of Christ, the head of
the church, and that he had full power in heaven and in earth, ye and in
purgatory to: and that he did give full remyssio^ of sins, that he could not
err, that all ye interpretacion of scripture was subject to him, that his
laws ought to be kept as the law of God that he was judge over all men, and
that he was under no man's judgment, ye these me^ were not ashamed for to put
these horrible blasphemies into public and common laws. Of ye which thing I
will now bring forth certain euyde^te witnesses. distinc XXII. cap. Oe^s. Unto
Peter (says Pope Nycolas,) the keye bearer of eternal life, did God commytte
jurisdiction over heaven and earth. Item capit. Sacrosancta. Although all were
Apostelles (says Anacletus) yet did the LORD grant unto Peter (ye and
they would the same among them selves) that he should have rule over all the
Apostles, and should be called Cephas, that is to say, the head and chief of
the Apostles: the which also did deliver the same manner to be kept of their
successors and other Bishops. Therefore this Apostolical seat is ordained
of God and of none other, to be the head and henge: and as the door is ruled
by ye henge so by the ordinance of God, are all churches ruled by the
authoryte of this holy Apostolycall seat. Again Distinct.xix. Agatho the Pope
does write thus unto all Bishops: All the decres of the Apostolyke seat are
so to be received, as if they were confyrmed by the godly mouth of S. Peter
himself. Item capit. In memoriam. Although that holy seat do lay a yocke
upon us, scarslye able to be suffered, yet let us suffer it and obedie^tly
abide it. And a little after says Pope Steven: Truly because the holy church
of Rome (over which God would us to rule) is set forth for a glass and an
example: what so ever it decreethe or ordeyneth, it is to be kept of all men
for ever, and without any gaynsayeng. Furthermore.ix. questi. capit.iii.
Gelasius the Bishop of Rome, says unto all the Bishops that were ordained
through out Dardania, these words: All the church knows through out all the
world, yt the Popes seat which is saint Peter's right, has power to lowse
those things which are bound by any man's judgments what so ever they be,
as one that has rule to give sentence over every church. And again: All the
church knows through out all the world, that ye holy church of Rome has
power to judge over all men, but it is not lawful for any man to judge upon
the sentence of it: for me^ may appeal unto yt out of any part of the
world, but from that no man is suffered to appeal. Item distinct. Abused Canon.
XL. capit. If the Pope (says Boniface) be found neglyge^t about his own
health and his brethrens, or else unprofitable and slow in his works, or
slack to do good, which hurts himself greatly and all other men, and does
also lead with him by heaps innumerable people to be punyshed with him
euerlastyngly in hell: yet let no man in the world be so hardye as to rebuke
his fautes: for he being ordained to judge all men, ought to be judged of no
man, except he be taken swaruynge from the faith. Again.IX. Questi. III.
capit. says Innocencius the Pope: No man may judge ye chief seat, which
desires to moderate justice: another may the judge be judged, either of the
Emperor or of all the clergy, another of kings, nor of the people. Upon the
which Canon the author of the gloss says: that a counsel can not judge the
Pope. Vt extra de elect. Significasti. Wherefore if all the whole world should
give sentence in any matter against the Pope, it seems that men ought to
stand to the sentence of the Pope. etc. Ye shall find the same thing again
in cap. quanto de transla. Episcopi titulo. VII. in plain words: It is said
that the Pope (says he) has an heaue^lye judgment, and therefore change
the nature of things in applyenge the substance of any thing to another. And
of nothing he can make some what, and make the sentence which was nothing
worth, somewhat worth. For in those things which he list, O blasphemye.
Ei est pro ratione uoluntas: his will stands for a reason or a cause: another
is there any man that may say unto him. Why doeste thou so? For he may
dyspense with the law, and of vnryghtuosnesse make ryghteuosnesse: in
correctynge and chaungynge ye laws, The Bishop of Rome another god nor man.
for he has obtained full power, etc. Hereunto belongs it that these ioly
wrytters of commentes do so often inculcate, that ye Pope is another a man nor a
God, but the vycare of God, and a certain thing mengled and made of God and
of man. If any man require the places, he shall find these damnable
blasphemies, in VI decretalium lib. I. de elect. and elect. potestate. titulo
sexto in cap. XVII. Item in cleme^tinarum proemio. And what need many words?
This draggon usurped unto him self the full power of God in earth, he
translated kingdoms, and for his own profit made and unmade all laws and
rytes, and turned all the old and true relygio^ topsyturnye, and hate dashed
and defiled it with his fylthynesse: the which thing no man can deny. He
sytteth therefore in the temple of god, auau^cynge himself to be god.

Now will we add unto these things, The prophecye of Daniell upon Antichriste.
that which the godly prophet Daniell has spoken of the same thing in the
vii. chapter: Behold there were eyes (says he) like the eyes of a man in his
horn, and a mouth speaking presumptuous things. And a little after that: He
shall speak words on ye party of the most highest, and shall destroy the
saints of ye most hygheste, and think yt he may change times and laws.
All these things are very plain, by that that goes before. For eyes do
sygnifye prudence. He mente therefore, that this kind of me^ should be most
subtle, because that it should rule and bring all things to pass by fraud,
gyle, sutteltye, and craft And surely who so ever does mark well how that
these Bishops of Rome, out of so low a degree have come up on high, and
optayned the dygnite of so great an Empire, he will say yt they have been
most craftye and suttyll men. Another could any man's mouth speak more
presumptuous things, the^ it is plain here before, that Machomet and the
Byshope of Rome have done. Ye and though they have arroga^tly attrybuted so
great things unto themselves, yet will they needs speak and be on ye side of
the most highest: insomuche that if any man yet now a days should call them
the adversaries or enemies of God, he should scarsely escape their hands
alive. Besides this, the one of them will be taken for the Prophet of the
most highest, and the other for the vycar of God upon the earth: as men which
had received this power delivered them of God himself, and do now usurp it
by ye laws of God. But there have not lacked which have smelled out this
deceate and wyckednes, and have resisted it with all their power. But the most
holy father, and the vyctorious Emperor of the Turks have destroyed them.
For how much Christen blood both of them have shed, it is declared in the
hystorye before mencyonede and how much they shed yet stylle, unlucky
experience does teach us well enough. Now although in very deed that no man
has the power for to make and unmake the good laws of God at his pleasure,
yet has Antichrist usurped ye power upon him. Whereupon says Daniell: he
shall think that he may change the times and laws: but he says not, he
shall have power to change them. Now Machomet and the Bishop of Rome have
usurped ye power unto them most shamefully, which thing we have proved a
little before by sufficient testymonyes. In the eleventh chapter the same
Daniel says: The king shall do what him list: he shall exalte and magnifye
himself against all that is God, he shall speak maruaylous things against
the God of gods, and he shall prospere, until the wrath be fulfilled, for
his fall is appointed and so forth. For the Prophet has spoken more upon
this matter in that place, which may be understand of every wyttye man
without any labor or exposycion.

The prophecy of Pauie wrested against the preachers of the Gospel.
And here we may not pass over yt the Papystes do expound this place of Paul
upon us. For now say they, is this departing fulfilled, when the Lutheryans
and the Zwynglyans do depart from the holy seat of Rome, and with their
liberty do open a gate unto all sin and myschefe, and are against the
Prelates of the church: besides this, they are lift up against the vycar of
God himself, defylynge the authoryte of the church, which never erred, and
sitting in the temple of God, do boaste themselves to preach the word of
God, and therefore they think themselves worthy to be worshypped as God. But
they do us wrong, because we never departed a straw breadth from the truth of
ye canonical scripture. For although we know not the church of Rome, as it
is now ordered, yet we do knowlede the holy catholyke church and the only
head thereof Jesus Christ. The which in as much as he promised that he would
abide with us unto the end of the world, Math. xxviii. we need not believe
that he has put a vycare or Debyte in his stead. For a vycare stands in the
stead of him that is absente. But Christ is evermore present with his
church: him only do we preach, comme^de, and inculcate unto our churches. We
do move men contynually to believe in him, and we do teach most dylygentlye,
charity, innoce^cye and pure living. Another do we teach any other lybertye
the^ yt of which the Apostle spoke: Ye are called into lybertye, but se that
ye give not your lybertye an occasion to the flesh, but through charity serve
you one another, Galat. v. And we are against none of the chief of the
church. For the Prelates of the church, are the mynysters of the word and
teachers of the truth of the Gospel: and who despyseth such? who is against
such? But if any under the pretense of the church and of mynystracion do seek
their own, bear rule, oppress the truth, and setting godly things aside,
do teach men's tradycio^s, forsothe they are of good right despised through
their own defaute. For Peter says: We must obey God more then man. And our
LORD in the Gospel: Se yt no man deceive you. For many shall come in my name,
saying I am Christ, and shall deceive many. Farthermore we did never defyle the
authoryte of the catholyke church. For we do hyghly esteem Christ himself and
the canonycall truth. Now the strength and foundation of the church is
Christ and the truth. How should not we the^ judge honorably of the church?
We have never sytten in the temple of God, but have mynystred always: and for
this cause have we chefly cried against you, because that ye will bear rule or
sytte, and not mynystre as we do. Moreover we do freely confess that we
leaving men's tradycions do purely and symply (that is to say as much as ye
grace of God and our fraylnes will suffer) preach the canonical scripture,
and for the establyshynge not of our authoryte but of it, do often say with
saint Paul: He that refuses these things, refuses not man, but God, which
has given his holy sprete unto the Prophets and Apostles, yt they should
teach these things unto us.i. Thessalo. iiii. Yet we do give all honor to
God only in all things, and unto our selves nothing but confusion. Our
churches, which are Christ's, will testifye this.

Last of all I will put to ye paraphrase of saint Jerome, The paraphrase of
S. Jerome upon these words of Paul.
with the which he did expound these words of saint Paul in the.XI.
question. unto Algasia, after this manner: Except (says he) there come a
departing first, and that all nations which are subject to the Empire of
Rome do depart from it, and that he be reveled, that is to say opened, whom
all the words of the prophets do show forth: The man of sin, in whom is
the fountain of all sins, And child of perdycion, that is, of the deuell
(for he is the destruction of all men) which is against Christ, and is
therefore called Antichrist, and is exalted above all that is called god so that
he treads down with his foot the gods of all nations, or else all comely
and true relygion, and in the temple of God (which is Jerusalem as some
think) or else in the church (as we rather suppose) shows himself as
though he were Christ and the son of God. Except (says he) that the
Empire of Rome be first made desolate, and that Antichriste go before, Christ
shall not come, which shall therefore so come, yt he may destroy Antichriste.
Ye remember says he, that these things which I now writ by mine Epistle,
when I was with you I showed you in express words, and told you that Christ
should not come, except that Antichriste went before. Hitherto have I
rehearsed ye words of S. Jerome.

And now you know what vvythholdeth: even that he might be uttered at his
time. For the mysterye or iniquite does already work. Let him which now
holds, hold still, until it be taken away, and the^ shall that vvycked be
uttered, whom the LORD shall consume with the sprete of his mouth, and
shall destroy with the clearness of his coming.

He writes mor plainly of ye time of Antichriste when he should come.
Some man might say, why should we not believe, that the adversary of Christ,
does now raygne, and is already come, when we do se the name of Christ, and
his doctrine by all means to be spoken against, of all the myghtyest men of
this world? The Apostle does answer: You know what lets: even that I
told you that he should be uttered, when his time is come. Forsothe a man can
not deny, but that even now the power of iniquyte does work by him, but now
he sets forth his strength more couertlye, the^ he shall do when his time is
come. For unto the body of Antichriste belong blasphemies, cruel
persecucions, heresies and other such like iniquities. But these things
began to budde and spring up by and by, even in the time of the Apostles.
Whereupon Ihon the Apostle says: My little children, it is now the last
time, and as you have herd, that Antichriste shall come, even now there
begin to be many Antichrists already.i. Iho. ii. Therefore does Paul more
clearlye sygnyfye unto us, that same time in ye which Antichriste, that is to
say, the perfeccion of all iniquite should be uttered, saying: When that shall be
taken away, which now wtholdeth or lets him for to raygne, the^ shall ye
wicked be opened. That is to say, when that the Empire of Rome shall be taken
out of the way, or at the leest way troubled, then shall Antichriste raygne,
and after that shall Christ come both for to destroy this enemy of all
saints, and also for to judge all flesh. For he does now expownde that more
plainly, which he spoke of before. The words corresponde^t to the greek
text, do make those things more plain for thus they sygnyfye: holding that
now, till it be out of the way: which is as much to say, as that that
thing which now only lets, shall be taken out of the way. And then
shall ye wicked appear. Or else (to speak it more plain) that thing wyhche
now only lets shall be a let so long, until it be taken away: Saint
Jerome.
and when it is taken away, then shall Antichrist come forth. And S. Ierom
also follows the same sense, writing unto Algasia these words in a manner:
What is the cause that Antichrist comes not now, ye know full well. Another
would he plainly say, that the Empire of Rome should be destroyed, because
that they which govern it do think it everlasting. For the which cause
after the Apocalypse of S. Ihon, there was written in ye foreheade of the whore
that was clothed in purple, a name of blasphemy, that is to say, Rome
eternal. For if he had said plainly and boldly, Antichrist shall not come,
except the Empire of Rome be first done away, it seems that he should have
given a just cause of persecucion, against the church in the East parties.
And a little after he says: The Empire of Rome which now has all nations
under it, shall cease and be taken out of the way, and then shall Antichrist
the fountain of iniquyte come. This says Jerome. Tertulian also, Tertulli^
of the resurreccion of the flesh: Who (says he) shall be taken out of the
way? but the estate of Rome, which being cut away? and scattered into ten
kings shall bring in Antichriste, etc. For the departing of kingdoms from
the Empire of Rome, and the runnynge in of the rude Gotties, that is to say of
the Vandales and Hunnies, did give an occasion unto the Saracens, and unto the
Bishops of Rome, for to invade and get ye Empire. For if the one had not
broken the strength of the Empire of Rome, the other had not raygned. But we
have expounded all these things more at large in the hystory here before.

Now follows the ruin and destruction of Antichrist. Of the destruction of
Antichrist.
He shall not fall by and by after that he is stryken with a stroke or weapon,
but by little and little, and after he has been made weak by many battaylles he
shall at the last peryshe. But he shall not be cast down with man's hand,
another yet by the multitude of hoostes, nor strength of souldyers, or gonne
strokes, but by the hand and power of God. For Christ shall first consume him
with the sprete of his mouth, and after that shall he put him clean out of
the way, with his most glorious coming into judgment. The first of these
two, did Paul take out of the eleventh chapter of Isaie, whose words are
these: With ryghteousnes shall he judge ye poor, and with equite shall he
contend for the meke of the earth, he shall stryke the world with the rod
of his mouth, and with the sprete of his lyppes shall he slaye the wicked.
Now the sprete of ye mouth or of the lyppes of God, is the true exposycion of
the word of god. For the word of God is the same swearde, wherewyth ye head
of this proud Golyas shall be stryken of. For Antichrist speaks on the side
of ye most highest, and he says yt all that he does, is deduced or taken out
of the Decrees of ye holy scripture. For under the pretense of this, has he
hitherto raygned safely. But when that thoroughe the goodness of God the light
of the Gospel, that is, Gods word begins to shine, the clouds of this
deceauer do straight way vanyshe away. For it is plain unto all men, that
this fellow in his manners and laws, is clean contrary to Christ. Therefore
it comes to pass, that all godly wytted men (the truth once known) do
abhor and forsake him. Therefore the swearde wherwyth this man is slain is
the word of God, for the^ is he most surely slain, when that his nature and
dysposycio^ are manyfestly known by the doctrine of truth. The knowledge of
him does kill him and cast him down, and the clokyng and ignorance of him
does set him up. For they that know him not, do believe that he is an
Apostolycall prophet, ye and a god to, but they yt know him truly, are sure
that he is Antichriste. The latter of these two did Paul take out of ye.vii.
chapter of Daniell, where we read: I looked till the seats were prepared, and
the old aged satte him down, and behold, there came in the clouds of the
air one like the son of man, and he came unto the old aged, and the
judgment was set and the books opened. Then took I head thereunto because
of the voice of ye proud words which that horn spoke. And I beheld still,
till yt the beast was slain, and his body destroyed and given over to be
burnte in ye fire. And therefore says Paul: Whom the LORD shall destroy with
the bryghtnes of his coming, yt is to say with his most glorious coming. For
our LORD said in the Gospel: Even as the lightening comes out of the
East, and appears unto the Weste, so shall the coming of the son of man
be. For he shall come in ye clouds of heaven with great power and glory Math.
xxiiii. And even as darkness (as says S. Jerome) is driven away at the
coming of the Son, The battle and vanquyshyng of Antichriste.
so shall the LORD destroy and put him away with the bryghtnes of his
coming. This glory and vyctorye is reserved unto Christ only. For they are
deceived which think ye Antichriste, before the day of iudgeme^te, shall by
abolyshed by the strength of arms. But this battayll between Christ and
Antichriste shall rather endure unto ye end of the world. And he being bold
of the strength of arms, shall break a sondre and tread under his fete the
saints of the most highest, but the members of Christ shall wythstonde him,
and shall set upon him with the swearde of the word of God, shall bewraye his
deceate, shall accuse his wyckednes, and so slaye him. For by this means shall
he be put out of men's hearts, and his authoryte shall fall. The vyctory of ye
Christen stands in the truth of Gods word and constauncy.
And in ye mea^season, although he be overcome, yet shall he take on, until
Christ the judge shall put him quyte down. And therefore my brethren our
vyctorye must stand alonly in the truth of Gods word, and in the constanucy
of our faith. Therefore let us betake our lives unto our faithful creator, and
go forward in ye affyrmyng of ye canonical truth, and glory of Christ
ourredemer and LORD, against ye blasphemies of this vnpure draggo^. Christ will
be present with his, although he deliver us into his hands.

Whose coming is by the vvorkynge of Satan, with all power and lyenge
signs and wonders and in all deceueablnes of unrighteous among the^ that
perysh: because they received not the love of the truth, that they might have
been saved. And therefore god shall send the^ strong delusio^, that they should
believe lies: that all they might be damned, which believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in vnryghtousnes.

Antichriste raygneth by power and lies.
Hitherto has the Apostle entreated of the reuelacion of Antichrist, of the
ruin and confusion of him: he has spoken also of his kyngedome and
propertyes, and now he turns him from that, and descrybeth his strength and
works more at large. That deceauer shall come (says he) prepared with the
sprete and power of Satan, the which shall show forth them self in him most
manyfestly. For this manner of speaking Whose coming is by the vvorkynge of
Satan, is so much to say. Now the strength and workynge of Satan ar chefely,
murder, and lies, as our saueoure says: He was a manslayer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because the truth is not in him. When
he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, because he is a liar and the father
of it. And Paul in this place showing the works of Satan by parts, does
teken up power and signs, that is lyenge wonders, and the deceaueablenesse of
unrighteousness also. For Mahomet says that he is sent of God in the
strength of armoure, and for this cause does he destroy all things with fire
and swearde. And ye Byshope of Rome has abused ye armor of al kings and
princes, persecuteth and slays the saints, either calling upon the secular
arm, or else by excercysynge hy^ own strength. The great destruction of most
strong nations now in our days do testifye what he may do by strength, and
what murthurs, ye and betraye^ge of kingdoms, and robberyes, the deuell has
done in the world by his procuremente. We may thank his counsel and craft,
that here within this.xxxvi. years, we have seen the strength of most
strong nations, that is to say of the Heluecians, Germans, Frenchmen and
Spanyardes, after they have been broken, to have fallen now into the kingdom
of Naples, now in the dukdome of Myllan, and sometime into other kyngedomes,
and their kings or princes banyshed or else led into captyuyte, man's laws
and Gods laws plucte up by the roots, good study oppressed, most noble
cities subverted, and plentyfull contryes utterly destroyed: to be short, there
was none age spared. I do wyllynglye pass over many things of the same sort,
which ye members of this Bishop, and the Ecclesiastical prelates with their
companions, have done in diverse parties of the world, and in many kingdoms,
and prouynces to the great hurt of the common welthe and of all goodness,
and specially of the truth. The prudente reader does well understand by
these things which I have noted, what he should do, believe, or fly.

Antichrists signs, and how his religion has been greatly estabyshed by them.
Now there are two manner of signs, true, and false. Those are true, which are
done in deed, and spring out of no phantasye or imagynacion, but are wrought
of God him self by his mynysters, for the stablyshynge of the truth. Such
are all the signs of the prophets and Apostles, of Moses and of Christ. And
those are false, which (by the sufferaunce of God) are done by ye mynysters or
workynge of Satan, to the derogacion of the truth or stablyshyng of falshed.
And of these there are diverse kinds. For there are some which by a false
appearau^ce do deceive men. There are other which are done in very deed, as
they seem to be, but for this purpose, that they might lead men away from the
truth unto error. For the holy Apostle does not call them only lyenge
signs and wonders, which have a false symilitude or appearau^ce with the^, but
those also, which although they be done in very deed, do yet bring men unto
lies, and deceive the lokers on. S. Augustine has disputed more of signs. In
opere octoginta trium questionum. quest. LXXIX. Our LORD Jesus says in the
xxiiii. chapter of Mathewe: There shall arise false Christ's and false
prophets, and they shall do great signs and wonders, insomuche that if it
were possible, the very elect should be brought in to error. Behold I have
showed you before. If they say unto you, behold he is in the wilderness, go
not out: behold he is in secret places, believe the^ not, etc. Truly great
authoryte happened unto Machometes relygion, through lyenge signs and
wonders. Another yet has the estymacion of the Bishop of Romes relygio^,
encreassed by any thing so much, as by the multitude of miracles. For by
miracles has he thrust into the world ye honourynge of saints and
worshyppyng of images. For no man can well express the wondrous crafts, In
this pla^e ye author of the comme^te, called Henricus Bullingerus of Tigury had
put in diverse pylgremages of his own contrye. In the flede of which (because
they were unknown to us) I have set in these of our old acquayntau^ce
without any al alteracio^ of the intent yt he brought them in for.
wherewith ye deuel has deceived the whole world. They yt have at any time
vysyted our Lady at Wylsoon, Muswell, Ypswyche or Walsyngame, the roode of
comfort, ye roode of rest, the roode of grace in Kente, S. saueoure at London,
S. Thomas of Canterbury, or such like Idolles: they have seen tables,
oblacions and more testymonyes of miracles, the^ a great nauye of ships
could carye away. For some one has crepte into the chapel of our Lady,
or some other saint both crooked and lame, and there has made his petycion to
an Image, and came home again in good health: and therefore in wytnes of this
thing has hanged up his styltes before the Idolle. Another has swymmed safe
to land from a shyppewracke after he has called upon the help of some
saint, and therefore hanged a table or a figure of a ship before the Image.
The third escapynge of an host of men of war, made a vow unto the virgyn
Marye, and did therefore dedicate his harness unto her. Some other after they
have broken out of preson, have consecrate unto a sayncte, either a cheyne, or
manacles or else a pair of fetters. Then came it to pass at length that not
alonly those temples, but all churches of Christen men were polluted with such
delusions. These false signs occupied ye most holy seats in Christ's
church, out of which the signs and truth of ye Gospel ought to have been
declared. For out of such places were these most unshamefast lies pronounced
and showed, with great boldness of the preachers, and wondrous reioycynge of
the most foolyshe people. What shall we say, that men have said, yt the very
Images themselves have either removed out of their places, or else have been sent
of God himself from heaven, or else where as they have been hyd in certain
places they have come to light again. Some have laughed, and some have wept,
other have trembled and given forth beams out of them, ye and sometime they
or their beardes have wonderfully growe^ in length or bygnesse, sometime they
were gone clean away alone, and many times they have spoken. And it was
lawful for no man to doubt, or else frelye, that is to say truly to talk
of, these things, ye a man had stand in danger of his life if he had not
worshyppped and received these wyckednesses as things that had come from God
him self, and set forth to be worshypped. Antichriste that Bishop of Rome not
being co^tente with these abominable things, and with the exteme
superstycion and manyfeste Idolatry of the people, did almost every day
consecrate new Gods, that is (as they call it) canonysed them, did either
institute new pylgrimages, or else confirm such as were invented or received
already: he chose out relyques of ye most stynkyng and wicked men's bones,
and set them forth to be worshypped, ye and promised pardon to the
worshyppers of them, and commanded holidays for those feigned Gods, and
left nothing undone which might encreace, norysh, or set forth Idolatrye:
and did so corrupt the true relygion, that the very Gentyles were never much
more corrupt. Beside this the prouable appearaunce and wounderous estymacio^
of false miracles did deceive all the wysest men in a manner. How many good
people have been deceived like wise with ye feigned miracles of ye holy maidens
of Re^t and Ipswych.
It lacked but little, that we were not compelled to have worshypped in ye
stead of true signs and miracles of God, ye signs and wonders, which
certain black frerers consecrate to the deuell had wyckedlye done in ye city
of Berne in Nuchtlande, not without the help of wytchcrafte you may be sure.
They went already about the confyrmacion and approbacion of the Bishop of
Rome, and they had lightly obtained it, but that the goodness of God having
pytye on the symplenesse of the people, did dysclose this mysterye of iniquyte
to all the world before that it was fully fynyshed and ended, to the
derogacion and shame of oll other false miracles. I think that the buyldyng of
these cloisters of beggynge Frerers, is one porcio^ of ye chief of these lyenge
signs. He shall not be believed I know well among our posteryte, that should
tell them that beggars in so short a space, had builded so large and goodly
houses, of the which each of them are sufficient for to receive and noryshe
kings and princes. But we se many thousands of these buylte up on high, and
retched forth, both long and large, and besides that to have gotten ye
goodlyest porcio^s of land in all contryes and cities. Ye and these deceauers
themselves, knowlegynge this wonder, do say: No prince or king could
perform in certain hundredes of years, ye which we beggars (not without
miracle) have fynyshed in so little a space. Ye and have so fynyshed them ye
our buyldynges may compare with the most goodlyest old places that are. God
has opened by this thing (say they) that the rules of our orders do not so
greatly dysplease him: as though Daniell had not said long time before, that
this should come to pass. For thus we read of Antichrist in ye.xi. chapter:
Such as will serve him, he shall give great worship and power, ye and make
them Lords over many, and give them the land for naught. etc.

Paul adds thereunto, in all deceaueablenesse of unrighteousness:
understand yt Antichriste shall come after such manner. That is to say, when
he comes, he shall bring with him all kind of iniquite, wherewyth he might
bring men away from the truth, equity, honestye and righteousness, and
wrappe men in ypocrysy and erroures. We know therefore that by the means of
antichrist the commune justice, all honestye, and holy truth shall be moved out
of their place, and unrighteousness, ypocrysye, unshamefastness,
voluptuosnesse, and most vain persuasions to be set up in their stead.
Which things he ye seyth not to have all ages and degrees in possession now
at this time, lacks both his eyes and his wit. But all me^ shall not be
deceived, but the reprobate: that is to say, they, of whom the truth was
refused, and lies received, that is to say, such as do wylfully peryshe. And
because that a secret questyon might be moved: Why ye Antichrist has so
great power and prosperethe so greatly.
Why has God suffered Satan, and Antichrist his captyue to have so great
power? By a solucion he preuenteth the question and says: because they
received not ye love of the truth, that they might have been saved. That is to
say: the justice and vengeance of God, requires ye same thing to be done.
For their obstynate rebellion against Christ, deserves that all they which
received not Christ, that of his charity was willing to save all men, and for
his truth sake did open those things which belonged to salvation that they
might have been saved, should now by ye sufferaunce of God for the truth have
falshed, in the stead of charity tyranny, and for a saue^ure have a destroyer,
and that they should now believe the lies of a wicked man, which would not
believe Christ, that told them the truth. For our LORD himself says, in
ye Gospel of Ihon: Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. I
receive not ye glory of me^: but I know that you have not the love of God in
you. I came in the name of my father, and ye receive me not, if an other shall
come in his own name, him will ye receive, Ioh v. And out of this truly it
seems, that that noble sentence of the commune people was taken: They yt
believed not Christ, shall believe Antichriste. And hereunto belong also the
words of Paul that follow, wherwyth he makes that which goes before more
clearer, saying: And therefore, that is to say, because they received not the
love of the truth, and were not ye lovers and followers of true relygio^, God
shall send them strong delusio^s, that is to say, most euydente seduccion
and deceate, that even like mad persons, and men rauyshed of their wits,
they can not chose but believe lies. And for this cause that all they might be
judged, that is to say tormented and punyshed, which believed not the pure
and simple truth: but rather approved unrighteousness, ypocrysy, superstycion
and error. Ye have now a reason how it comes to pass, that the world now
a days is so ready to believe the miracles, doctrynes, and rytes of
Antichriste. It is the iudgeme^te of God, which has showed miracles enough
by his son, by his prophets and Apostles, and has also prescrybed us
doctrynes, and rytes clearlye and sufficient enough. But all these things set
aside, we had rather be deceived. Therefore these prestes and monks
Antichrists knights, deceived us by getting away our money, and never
ceased to thruste in their lies unto us, until yt they had emptyed all men's
cofers. Such things as might be brought out of the Bible seemed old forworne
things* all men daily desired to hear new matters, and therefore was it fre
for every man that would, for to inuente every thing that he lift. He was best
allowed that had brought in any new thing into the church: and so through
their unshamefastness, and our curyosyte and foolyshnesse, it came to pass,
by the ryghteous judgment of God, that all truth was banyshed many years
sense, and error has raygned myghtelye through out the co^gregacions. Now
though it be thus, and that experience it self do prove these things to be
over true, yet are there certain evil occupied persons, which go about to
boulster up the corrupt captayns of ye most corrupt relygion, which are
bente to dostroye the sprete of the mouth of God. But the truth which is
inuyncible, shall overcome both those vain prelates of the church, and also
their foolyshe defenders and shall also overthrow them and bruise them all to
pieces, except they convert unto the LORD. Hitherto have we disputed more at
large, then we thought to have done at the beginning, of the coming of
Antichriste, of his kingdom and confusion, for the readers pleasure, and for
the erudycion and warning of the simple people. Now will we return unto
Paul and the Thessalonyans. For Paul himself after he has fynyshed his
dysputacion of Antichriste, turns him unto the Thessalonyans.

But we are bound to give thanks alvvayes to God for you brethren beloved of
the LORD, because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation
thorovve sanctifyenge of the sprete, and thorovv beleuynge the truth:
whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our LORD
Jesus Christ. A notable place of the election.


Theophylactus knyttynge these things very goodly with those that are gone
before, says thus: When he had showed them certain horrible things, and
such as might amase the mind of the hearers, he does afterward ease their
hearts, monyshynge them after this manner: Let other men be afearde of these
things, they (I say) which peryshe, and over whom ye deuell has great
power, but we are bound to give thanks for you unto God, because that he has
chosen you, and embraced you with his love. And this is a notable place of the
eleccion of God. For God has chosen us unto salvation, and not that we should
say: if God have chosen me, I need not fear dampnacion, and though I sin
never so much. But God has chosen us unto salvation says Paul, which
salvation is fynyshed in us through ye sanctifyenge of the sprete and beleuynge
the truth: that is to say, by the sprete himself, which purifyeth our
hearts, and gives us true faith. For faith which is the gift of God, is
mighty in operacion. Paul therefore does set true faith against the false
persuasion, of ye which James speaks, saying: faith without works is
dead. To this matter of eleccion, belongs the preaching of the Gospel also.
For through the preaching of the Gospel, he calls us to the true faith, and
to the optaynynge or possession of the glory of our LORD Jesus Christ: that is
to say, that we might be made the glorious and bewtyfull possession of our
LORD Jesus Christ, an holy, innocente and immaculate people, which might
honor and worship God, and that God himself might dwell in ye hearts of
them that serve him. For God has not called us unto lusts and uncleanness, i.
Thessa. iiii. but unto holiness, and pureness, and that we might become his holy
temple. These things ought to be taught unto ye congregacions. After this
manner such as are captyue should be plucked out of the bondage of Antichrist:
and if ye any have not fallen into his captyuyte, let them here learn to give
God contynuall thanks, and also to pray him that he lead them not into
temptacion, but deliver them from that evil, sanctifye them through the sprete,
and by true faith to keep them in the eleccion of salvation.

Therefore brethren stand fast, and keep the ordynau^ces which ye have
learned: whether it were by our preaching or by our Epistle.

Now brings he in that which he mente in the beginning of this chapter
where he said: I beseech you by the coming of our LORD Jesus Christ, that
ye be not suddenly moved from your mind, etc. And in the meanseason he
dysputeth many things to this effect; and now at the last he brings in
and says: In as much as it is thus, abide you in our ordynaunces which we
taught you, whether it were by mouth when we were yet among you, or else by
mine epistles, The Apostles taught all their or dinaunces, either by mouth or
else by epistles written.
which I sent when I was absent from you. For I taught you the true Gospel:
ye need not to seek any other. The Papists do abuse this place, for the
defense of man's tradycions. And we do grant, that the tradycions of the
Apostles, ought as well to be received as their epistles written: but we do not
grant that all those are the tradycions of the Apostles, which they do
thruste unto us under ye name of the Apostles. The tradycions of the Apostles,
are not contrary to their epistles written: but these men's tradycions are
plain contrary to the wrytynges of the Apostles.

Our LORD Jesus Christ himself, and God our father which has loved us, and
has given us everlasting consolacion and good hope thorovve grace, comfort
your hearts, and stablyshe you in all good saying and doing.

He does here after his manner, unto his admonycion join an happy and luckye
wyshe. And he does here very co^nynglye bring in together the whole sum of
the Gospel, that is to say, that God has loved mankind, and given him
everlasting consolacion, that is Jesus Christ, which is our hope, and has
given it us through his grace, and not for our merytes: that is to say, that
we might live evermore. He wysheth unto them (I say) that the same meke and
loving God, would comfort their hearts and stablyshe them in all good saying
and doing: that is to say, in all ryghteousnes. For in these two things he
co^prehendeth all the offices or duties of a Christen man. And we English men
using the same partycion do diuyde all ryghteousnes into good saying and
doing, or into good words and works. For these are those good fruits, which
spring forth of an heart that is sanctified through the holy ghost and true
faith. Saint Ambrose marked the order of S. Paul's words, Ambrose.
and because (says he) that the father, and the son are one power and one
divinity and substance, therefore he doubted not to name our LORD Jesus
Christ first, Theophilactus.
and afterward God our father. And Theophilactus noted that Paul did so order
this prayer, that he did also prescrybe them therwyth, what it became them to
do: yt is, to give themselves, to say well and do well, and to persevere in
goodness, and specyallye to knowledge Christ to be the only hope, and
everlasting consolacio^ of the faithful.

Caput. iii.
Farthermore brethren pray for us, that the word of God may run abroad,
and be glorified as it is with you, and that we may be delivered, from
unreasonable and evil men. For all men have not faith, but the LORD is
faithful, which shall stablyshe you, and keep you from evil. And we have
good hope of you thorovve the LORD, that ye both do and will do that which
we command you. And the LORD guide your hearts into the love of God, and
lokynge after Christ.

Of prayer.
There is nothing stronger in the syghte of God then a faithful prayer, and
therefore does he by all means move the godly unto that most dylygentlye. And
here he sendethe men unto prayer also, in that most troublesome and wicked
world, and in the great danger of godly men. The truth was preached in deed,
but in the mean season there sprange up diverse schismaes among them also,
which would seem to be the followers of true relygion. And the open enemies of
the catholyke relygio^ did both ba^nyshe the truth, and also persecuted the
chief setters forth thereof most cruelly: another lacked there certain
hypocrytes and false brethren, which were worse then they, and did much more
hurt unto true godliness. For it is a true saying, that an hypocrytycall
friend does more hurt then an open enemy. For of the one we take heed, and
from the other we hyde no thing. Therefore the great dyshoneste, wyckednes,
and unfaithfulness that was used in those days, did make the life of Christen
men, (which otherwise was sharp enough) much more bitter. But Paul moves
men unto prayer, and says: Considering the great dangers that the world is
now in, there is none other help but turn unto prayer. And he prescrybeth the
pryncypall things, which they should ask of God by their contynuall prayer.
First that the word of God might run abroad, and be glorified among all
other nacyo^s, even as it was dyuulgate among the Thessalonians, and received
of godly me^ with an holy reioycynge. And all the scripture bears witness,
that this was the perpetual and most feruenteste wyshe or desire of all
saynctes. And in ye fourth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, the Apostolyke
church did ask this one thing of God, that he would give the apostles grace
and strength to speak the word of God with boldness. We offend greatly now
a days, that we do ask these things so coldlye of God: ye and I would to
God that we did not utterly forgette to ask them at all. Now where as he
said to run abroad, he spoke it after the commune speech, and he mente, that
it might encreasse and spread abroad apace with out any let. And the word
is gloryfyed, when it is received of men, and all the glory given unto God
only. The second thing that he teaches to be asked with prayer is, that we
may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men: that is from inordynate and
froward men, Who us unreasonable and eu^ll men.
which do nothing in their time and place, but all things peruerslye. And
the Apostle mente the enemies of Gods word, who^ nothing can please, and yet
in the meanseason they can do nothing well themselves. They find fautes, and
peruerte all things, and deprave those things which are well said and done,
and do lade them and defyle them with shameful suspycions. They are also
called shrewde, malycious and perverse me^. And David in his psalms, does
desire very often to be delivered from them. And our LORD did add unto ye end
of that holy prayer: Deliver us from evil: not alonly from the deuell, but
also from all his army and body, and specially from that spyrytuall
wickedness and those crafty deceauers. For there is more ieopardye in a false
friend and one that dissembleth all thing, the^ in an open enemy. Al me^ have
not faith.
And hereunto belongs that which follows: For all men have not faith. For
this means Paul: All they are not faithful and true which would seem to be
faithful. For faith in this place is usurped in the same sygnifycacion that
ye Poet takes it, when he says: Nusquam tuta fides, a man woteth near
whom he may trust. If ye will not grant this manner of speaking, then this
is ye meaning: Touching ye I do require your prayers so greatly that we
might be delivered from unreasonable and froward men, it is because I know
that there are many false brethren among you. For all they which pretend
faith, and profess it with their mouth, have not the true faith in deed. For
our LORD says in the Gospel. Math. xx. Many are called, but few are
chosen. And although these two senses dyffer not much, yet ye first lyketh
me better. Now there follows. But the LORD is faithful, which shall
stablyshe you and keep you from evil For lest he should dysco^forte the
minds of the saynctes through the unfaithfulness of many: although (says
he) that there be many unfaithful among you, yet the LORD is faithful and
true, which will keep his promise with us, and be with his for ever. They do
resyste the Gospel, but they shall not overcome it: they let it that it can
not go much abroad, but they shall not drive it clean back. They do betraye
the favorers of the truth, but yet they shall not utterly oppress the
truth. For Jesus Christ which is faithful is ever at hand for to fight for
his. He shall stre^ghthen his against the unhappiness of these men, and shall
keep the^ from evil. For as much as he is true, he will luckly perform those
things, which he has begone in us. These words that are so full of
consolacion, should be often laid forth to such as are in perrell and are
greatly aferde also of unreasonable and evil men. Now to mytygate and as it
were to correcce, that which he said before, he says: But we have good
hope of you through the LORD, etc. As though he would say: We say not these
things because that we doubt of your constauncy, no we do rather hope of you
by the help of the LORD Jesus that those things which I command you of
prayer, of watchynge and steadfastness, ye both do and hereafter will do. And
it has much grace with it, if that in our admonycion, we do rejoice of the
thing which we desire to receive and obtain, as it were received and
optayned already. Again, lest that any man should attrybute ouermuche unto
their own strength, but that rather we should all know, that every gift is
given us of God from heaven, the LORD (says he) guide your hearts, into the
love of God, and lokynge after Christ. To ye wyhche Erasmus does add:
Charity shall cause you for to study to do good unto all men, even as God is
benefycyal toward all men. The lokynge for the coming of Christ, shall
cause you to suffer all afflyccions manfully. Therefore in all trubles and
perils, we have these two styltes for to bear us up: prayer and steadfast
faith. Brethren let us remember these things I pray you, and in as much as
our times also are most corrupt and troublesome, and that for this cause it
is not possible but ye saints should be vexed, let us pray to God, and
constauntly believe that he will never fail us: although that in the meanseason
many unreasonable and evil men, do either persecute or betraye the truth. God
is true and faith full, which can not deny himself, and the truth shall
remayn evermore inuincyble: let us cleue therefore unto ye truth, and we shall
have the vyctory, although that when we be overthrown of the world, we seem
to be overcome.

We command you brethren in the name of our LORD Jesus Christ, that ye
vvythdravve your selves from every brother that walks inordynately, and not
after the instytucion which he received of us.

It is manyfeste in the fourth chapter of the first Epistle, He condemns
deli^es exhort the men to labor.
what gave him an occcasion of this commandment: That is to say, because
that immediatlye after the time of ye Apostles, certain curious men began to
thruste themselves into the church of God, and under the pretense of relygion
or evil sciences and slothful ydelnes, did get them a sweet living. And
where as before in his first epistle, he did but easlye as it were bycker or
skyrmyshe with them: he does now comme in open field upon them, overthrow
them, and put the^ to flyghte. First of all he settethe forth the matter
generally and says: I will not that you have any conversation with inordynate
fellows, and such as order themselves otherwise then we did ordeyne. And he
speaks not this thing sleghtlye, but with great authoryte and pythye
words, saying: We command you brethren. After ye, lest any man should
contemn him, when he thus commands the^: he adds to: in the name of our
LORD Jesus Christ. As though he should say: those things which we command
you, we command you not so much in our own name, as at the commandment
and express bidding of Jesus Christ. And now he recytethe the co^maundeme^te
of Christ: that ye wythdrawe your selves from every brother which behaueth
himself inordynatelye, that is to say, not after the institucion which he
received of us. We will speak of that instytucion a little hereafter. Erasmus
says, that those are brought into an order, which are bound to the commune
law, and dyffer in nothing from other men. And that it is contrary to this,
when any man the publyke laws neglecte, lives at his own pleasure. And yt
Paul should mean this, by walking inordynatlye, the life of Monks, which
is received of us against the instytucion of the LORD and of the Apostles
agrees with this in all points. But when he commands, that we should
wythdraw our selves from them, he commands us not to do as the Anabaptystes
do, which separatynge themselves from ye communion of saints, do set up a
private congregation: but that we should fly their company as much as we can,
to the intent that they might be ashamed and perceive themselves to be
condemned for their slothfulness, and so be converted unto the LORD.

For ye your selves know, how ye ought to follow us. For we behaved not
our selves inordynatlye among you, another took we bread of any man for
naught, but vvroughte with labor and sweat both night and day, because we
would not be chargeable to any of you. Not that we might not so do: but for
to make our selves an example unto you, to follow us.

He shewethe by his example what instytucion he had given them. Paul laboreth
with his own hands.
He does also persuade men to labor, and cande^pneth ydelnesse. His words
are plain. Although (says he) I might well live at your cost and stypende
(for by bread he does understand meat and drink: ye and all such things
as belong unto ye sustentacion and necessyte of this life) yet had I rather to
labor both night and day, for to show our selves an ensample and form unto
all me^ that they might follow us. And by this we may se what it is to walk
inordynatlye, To live inordynatlye.
and to be in order. They live inordynatly, which are idle and take their
bread for naught, ye is to say, To live ordynatlye.
like drone bees do eat up other men's labors. They live in order which with
labor and sweat do work night and day, that is to say, contynuallye, and
be not chargeable to any man. The instytucions and rules of all ordres or
Monks, Monks.
after that they be touched, as it were with these holy thonderboltes, do fall
flat down. That which the same Paul dysputed at Myletus, with the brethren
of Ephesus, Actu.xx. agrees well with this.

For when we were with you, this thing we commanded you: that if there
were any that would not work, the same should not eat.

He that laboreth not, ye same should not eat.
He reherseth the same instytucion of his, which he said to be contained in
the express words of the LORD. And this is the law: That he which would
not labor, should not eat. For slothful people deserve none alms another.
For I think it not unlike unto this law of God, which the Ge^tyles were
wou^te to say in like proverbs: Qui fugit molam fugit farinam: he that flies
ye mylle flies the meele, that is to say: he that refuses to labor, shall
have none of the vantage. And again: Neque mel, neque apes. No bees, no honye.
For if any man will not suffer bees, because they have stynges, he is unworthy
to have any honye. And Mimus says in these words: Bear that which is
greueous and paynfull that thou may have that which is pleasant and
profitable. Wherefore Valerius maximus.ii. book.i. chap. says that the
Massilians do keep their gates shut against all such which under some
pretense of relygion do go about to maintain their ydelnesse. If that ye
kings and rulers of England had marked this instytucio^ three hundredth years
sooner, they had had more riches and fewer Monks. Plutarche shows in his
notable and brefe sentence of the Lacedaemonians, that among them, the Gods
and Goddesses be painted and portured echeone with a spear in their hand: In
so much that Venus herself was in complete harness. Sygnifyenge by this,
that not so much as the gods were idle among the^. He says farther that
they have this proverb among them: Put to thy hand, and call on fortune,
for so we must trust on gods help, that not wythstondynge earnestly we put
to our dylygence so much as lies in us. For God hears not the prayers of
the slougyshe fylbellyes. Again it is a common saying: God will help the^
that will labor. Farther more, he that has learning or an occupacion, may
go where he will. Also that knowledge and conning is a haven to men from ye
storms of pouertye, that is to say: a science or an occupacio^ is the only
remedy or refuge for pouerte. Erasmus in adag^is: Arcem queuis alis terra.
Wherefore they that are wise (I use the words of Erasmus) although yt they
have substance enough, will yet cause their children for to learn some
occupacion, wherwyth if they fall into pouertye, or should chance to be
banyshed their contrye, they might yet get their living. Dionysius a tyraunte
among the Syracusans after he was put out of his domynyon, set up a scoole
at Corynthum and taught children learnyge and Musycke. But now a days there are
many, which having nothing of their own, do spend their time in rych men's
houses, from whence if they should be driven out, they must either beg or
steal. Also this place of Paul does condemn all sturdy beggars. I need not
to speak any thing of Monks and such sacrifyers, as are unprofitable to the
godly mynystracion of the church, seeing there can nothing be feigned which
does more condemn the^ then this. A necessary exhortacion to princes and
rulers.
Ye princes and rulers of cytyes take good head, that this law of God be put
in ure and have place among you, if that you love the health of the common
welthe. I pray you suffer not the substance of your people, to be cast unto
these puttockes to be devoured, like me^ that were bewytched under the pretense
of relygion: and wynke not always at these craftye bryhers. Defend your
people for Gods sake, and bring the law of god again into your commune
wealths.

For we have herd say, that there are certain among you, which walk
inordynatly, and work not at all, but live curiously. And them that are such
we commau^de and exhort by our LORD Jesus Christ, that they work with
quietness, and eat their own bread.

Inordenate me^ must be broughte^^ to an order.
He speaks now more plainly and shortly that thing, which he has hitherto
set forth at large. The cause (says he) why I speak of this matter so much,
is, that I hear certain men to be among you, which do walk inordynatlye:
that is to say, do no work, but lead their life curiously. Therefore we
command these men by our LORD Jesus Christ, yt they will get their living
quyetlye, workynge with their own hands. For this thing did the LORD
command, Genes. iii. And condemned ydelnesse for ever. We have herd (says
he) yt there are certain among you which do no work at all, but give their
minds to unprofitable things. Who do live curyouslye.
For to live curiouslye, is to be busy and labor in vain: as you would say,
to be another idle, nor well occupied: that this might be the menynge: I hear
yt there be among you which work not: for although they labor myghtelye and
ouermuche, yet their labor is unprofitable, and it were a great deal better
that they were idle, then to be so evil occupied. After this manner we se
certain Monks, Sacryfyers, and Nonnes to labor a pace: for they sing and
mumble up prayers both day and night, they watch and leave nothing undone ye
such kind of people should do: But in as much as Christ says, Math. xv. They
worship me in vain, teaching the doctrynes and commandments of men. Their
labor is unprofitable, and to none effect. And so do the Anabaptystes crepe
into all men's houses, and read and preach both day and night: but no man
calls them, another do they study syncerytye and and pureness, but do trouble
me^. Vserers also run all about, and pull every man by the sleue and take
great pain: but to ye intent yt they might be rich, and live by the sweat
of other me^. For although that all these do labor strongly, yet there comes
no prosyte of their labor. For they do little good or none unto their
neighbors. What said I do no good? where as they not only do hurt, but are
also the greatest destruction unto the common welthe. Saint Ambrose
descrybynge a certain kind of curious men, of which sort we lack none now
a days, says: They which desire to be idle, Of this sort be these honest
beggars (as they seem) and they, which fayn themselves to be banyshed for ye
truth sake.
go about to get an occasion, that they may make the rich men feign on them,
and to call them often unto their houses, and as they go up and down, they
mark suttylly the doings and opynio^s of each one, by this means knowing
what they would gladlye hear of every man, that they may be fed thankefullye
and required also: which kind of doing greatly abhors from the doctrine of
ye LORD. For the bellye is the God of those which get their living by such
filthy and shameless provision. Hitherto is S. Ambrose saying. How much more
does it dyffer from the doctrine of the LORD, that Monks and sacryfyers have
robbed the people, under ye pretense of the name and service of God, and have
stuffed their bellyes with most sweet delycates and deyntye dyshes? How much
is it contrary unto ye doctrine of Christ also, that sturdye beggars and
hypocrytes under the pretense of Christ's name do maintain their ydelnes, at
the cost and charge of Christen men? We command and require such (says
the Apostle) yt they work with quyetnes, and rate their own bread: their
own bread (I say) as though he would say, not other men's bread, but their
own. For they yt live curiously do not eat their own bread but other men's.
Farther more they labor not with quyetnes: for their labor causes trouble,
in as much as it is unprofitable and chargeable to ye myserabe people. On ye
other side, necessary labor bring the with it much quietness and vtylyte:
for he that goes about his own business and works with his own hands
has need of nothing.i. Thessalo. iiii. And therefore is chargeable to no man,
but does give to them that have need. Ephe. iiii. As many of you as are
chargeable unto the people, as many of you as do no work at all, but go about
things that be to no purpose, think ye yt this is spoken unto you also.
Christ shall punyshe you, except ye leave your dyshonest and most vncomlye
ydelnesse, and get you to labor. And here is a goodly place, to speak of
the kinds of labors and business, and of the helping and duetyes to the
poor also. For all things are out of order among us, but I had rather to
subscrybe unto other better learned, then to show forth mine ignorance. Jews
Viues has written two books of this matter, in the which if the rulers would
exercise themselves co^tynually, peradventure the common wealth should be in
better case then it is, and there shuldbe less sloth and ydelnesse, and more
labor and quietness.

And ye brethren be not vverye in well doing. We ought to do good unto al
me^.


The most part of the rich me^ do use to vpbrayde ye poor their
slouggyshnesse and ydelnesse, they other whiles not so evil or myscheuous, as
wretched and miserable. And by this pretense they keep their charity from them
that have need of it. And therefore S. Paul says: I will not by this means
wythdrawe any man from well doing, or give any man an occasion for to order
miserable people the more cruelly or vnge^tlye. For me^ ought always to do
good. They shlud do well to every man, but specially unto godly men, we would
not ye God should be werye of our necessityes. We would yt he should receive our
often requests with a merry cou^tenau^ce. Therefore we should not be weerye also,
when ye his me^bres do call upon us for our help. And it is a pyteous thing:
ye yt a very idle person should peryshe for hunger. Again they offend against
ye doctrine of God, which are over favorable unto sturdye vagaboundes. But
good me^ can determyne this strife, equity being their guide:

If any man obey not our sayenges, send us word of him by a letter: and
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. And count him not as an
enemy, but vvarne him as a brother.

He ordeneth a punyshemente for the dysobediente. A pain is ordained for the
dysobediente.
If that any man (says he) despyseth to obey our instytucions, send us word
of him by Epistle, and in the meanseason let him be put out of your
familiaryte: and that for this purpose, that after he is overcome with shame,
he may amend. For this dysciplyne is not ordained for ye destruction of any
man, but for his health. Therefore ye shall not utterly put from you a sinner,
but love him always as a brother: but yet in ye meanseason ye shall monyshe
him of his fault and correct him. And out of this place we may learn what
the disciplyne of ye church is, and unto what end it ought to be put in
^e, and also why the Apostle does command us to fly the company of the
dysobediente: not that we should abhor them as enemies and wicked me^, not
that we should prefer our selves above other in holiness, or else stand well
in our own conceates, or exercise tyranny toward the miserable people: but
that he which is gyltye, being taught through our wythdrawynge from him, and
as it were warned of himself, should remember him self, and esteem his
fylthynesse as it is in deed, and so being ashamed, to amend. And if that by
the means of the evil that raygned in him he will not amend, and by this
means come to him self and repent: the^ shall ye saints take delyberacio^
among them, by what means this mad man may be helped, lest that either he
himself do utterly peryshe, or else infecte other with the same disease. For
they are deceived which when theyse that the avoiding from his company
avails not, do set aside all farther remedies, thinking that after this, the
church may use none other means to bring them into the way. But Paul
says, send us word of him by a letter. To what purpose I pray you? That he
might have the name of him that dysobeyeth? But what profit should come of yt?
He would therefore have knowledge of such by an epistle, that he might take with
godly men such counsel for those vnruelye people, as they should think mete.
For we ought all of us to do our diligence that we destroy not the^ for whom
Christ dyed, another by our importunytie or cruelnesse, another yet by our
ignorance and negligence. But these words of ye Apostle seem unto some me^,
to be understand of ye private co^uersacion of men: that is to say, that
every man should abstain so much as he could from the company and
familiarity, of such as are dysobedyente: And many have expounded it of the
open exco^munycacion.

The very LORD of peace, give you peace alvvayes by all means. The LORD be
with you all. The salutacio^ of me Paul, with mine own hand. This is my
token in all epistles. So I write. The grace of our LORD Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.

He concludes his epistle, and wysheth them the bond of al righteousness,
holy peace, that they might keep yt always and in all their business For
Satan is the author of discord, chiding, strife, envy, and privy hatred: and
God is the author of concord, meknesse, and charity. He dwells with all
saints, so long as they live in this world in truth and righteousness. His
presence is the fountain of all goodness, and his absence is the cause of all
darkness, error, and eternal horror. Saint Ambrose sayethe that for fear
of choppers and chau^gers and corrupters of scryptures Paul does testifye, yt
he did always subscrybe his salutacio^ in every one of his epistles with his own
hand: to the intent yt any epistle received in his name, might not be
suffered if it were not subscrybed with his own hand. The Apostles took such
care, lest that the congregacions should be deceived by any craft or deceate.
These things do show of what certayntie and verite the Apostles wrytynges be.
And because that Paul did teach constantlye among all nations yt mankind
was saved by the grace of God, therefore he repetynge his wounte signet or
subscripcion did set to at the end of all his epistles, this mark and seal
of our faith: The grace of our LORD Jesus Christ be with you all. It
appears: therefore by this, that the Apostle used the help of a notarye or
scryuener for to write his epistles yt he sent.

FINIS.
Fautes escaped in prentynge.
Werof the first nombre is the leaf, and A the first side, B the second,
the other nombre is the line.

iii. b line xxiiii. seruau^- read servants iii. b line.xxvi. and to usurp.
read do usurp iiii. b line.xxii. accordyns, read according vii. a
line.xxvii. say- he. read says he vii b line.xviii mighty engendre. read
might xi. a line.xix. (as S. Ambrose read For (as S Am. xiii. a line.x
departing of faith. read from faith xiii. b line.xxliii. ten kingdoms. read
kings xiiii b line.xxiii. he bowed read bouged xv. a line. xix. Lel^us Sylla.
read Lucius Sylla xv. b line iiii. the half horn. read little horn xvi. b
line.iii Let us therefore read Let us now there. xviii. a line.xv. mad an end.
read made an end xviii. b line xiiii. Entichetis heresy. read Entichetis of
xxxi. a line.xix. he had trodden down. read has trode^ Item and has
publyshed for had publyshed
Here ends the commentarye of Henricus Bullingerus of Tygurye upon the
second Epistle of saint Paul to the Thessalonyans, and faithfully translated
into English by R. H.

Laus detur deo soli. Amen. Prynted in Southwarke in S Thomas hospytall by
James Nicolson. Anno. 1538.


