AN APOLOGY FOR RELIGION, Or AN ANSWER TO AN UNLEARNED and slanderous
Pamphlet entitled: Certain Articles, or forcible Reasons discovering the
palpable absurdities, and most notorious errors of the Protestants religion,
pretended to be printed at Antwerpe 1600.

By EDWARD BVLKLEY Doctor of Divinity.

Proverb. 14. 15. The foolish will believe every thing: but the prudent will
consider his ways. Lamenta. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways and turn
again unto the Lord. Chrysostom. in Genes. Hom. 5. Quocirca diuinae Scripturae
vestigia sequamur, neque seramus eos qui temere quiduis blaterant. i. Let us
follow the steps of the holy Scripture, and not endure or abide them that
rashly babble every thing. AT LONDON, Printed by Felix Kingston for Arthur
Johnson, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of
the Flower de-luce and Crown. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON KNIGHT, LORD Keeper of the great
Seal of England, Chamberlain of the County Palatine of Chester, and one of
her Majesty's most honorable privy Council, grace and peace be multiplied.
WHen I consider (Right Honorable) the estate of England in these our days, I
cannot better compare it, then with the estate of the kingdom of Judah under
K. Josias, expressed shortly yet effectually by Sophonie the Prophet, who lived
and preached in that time. For as then God gave to that people that worthy and
godly King, who zealously 2. King. 23.
rooted out Idolatry, and planted Gods true worship agreeable to his law: so
God in great mercy has given us our most gracious Queen Elizabeth, by whose
godly means Idolatry has been abolished, Gods true religion and service
restored, his holy word truly and sincerely preached, and peace and
tranquillity among us long maintained. And as in those days under King Josias,
notwithstanding that godly and zealous reformation, there was great wickedness
among the people, as the said Sophonias shows. For there were then which
worshipped upon the rouffes of their houses the host of heaven: Sopho. 1. 5.
and which worshipped and swear by the true and only God Iehoua, and by
Malcham their Idol: and such as were turned back from after the true God, 6.
and sought him not, nor inquired after him: and that did wear strange
apparel: and others that filled 8.
their masters houses with robbery and deceit: 9.
and such as were frozen in their dregs, and said in 12.
their hearts the Lord will neither do good nor evil. And Jerusalem was then
a filthy and spoiling Chap. 3. 1. 2.
city, which heard not Gods voice, received not instruction, trusted not in
the Lord, and drew not near unto her God, etc. Even so how these sins abound
at this time in this land, I think there are but few, but do see: and none
that truly fears God, but does lament. To omit other sins here mentioned,
as then there were which worshipped Iehoua the only true God, and Malcham
their Idol: even so there be now not a few, which to please the Prince and
State pretend outwardly to like of religion established, and yet inwardly in
their hearts favor Idolatry and wicked worshippings repugnant to the same.
And as then many were turned back from after God, and sought him not, nor
inquired after him: even so now there are many which be revolted from Gods holy
worship agreeable to his word, and utterly forsake the holy assemblies where
Gods word is truly preached, the Sacraments are according to Christ's
institution rightly ministered, and Gods holy name faithfully called upon. These
with Lots wife look back unto Sodom: and are with the Israelites in heart
turned Genes. 19.
back into Egypt, desiring rather to eat onions and Numb. 14.
garlike there, then to feed upon the heavenly Manna of Gods blessed word.

Of these thus turned back from seeking after God, they be most dangerous,
which being deceived themselves, endeavor by all means both by speaking and
writing to seduce and deceive others. Such be the Seminary Priests and
Jesuits, who although they be at this present time (at leastwise in outward
appearance) at deadly fewd among themselves, writing most bitterly one against
another: yet they all agree in resisting Gods truth, seducing the simple, and
in laboring most earnestly to set up again their Dagon of the Mass fallen
down before the Arc of Christ's Gospel. To this end they write lewd, lying,
and slanderous Pamphlets, wherein they traduce the truth, and faithful
favorers thereof, deceive the ignorant, and confirm in error their over
affectioned favorers, who without trial or examination over rashly receive,
and over lightly believe whatsoever is broached by them.

Of these lying Libels there came one to my hands a year past and more,
pretended to be printed at Antwerpe 1600. wherein is boldly affirmed, but
faintly proved, that we have no faith, nor religion: that of us both the
learned, and ignorant of the Greek and Latin tongues be Infidels: that we
know not what we believe: that we are bound in conscience both never to ask
forgiveness of our sins, and also to avoid all good works: that we make God
the author of sin, and worse then the devil. These and such other shameless
assertions and false slanders when I read, it came into my heart, that Master
Thomas Wright (with whose spirit I had been acquainted) was the venture of this
ware. In which opinion I was afterward confirmed, for that both some of his
favorers could not deny it, and in a written copy thereof taken in a search
in Shropshire and sent unto me, these two letters, T.W. were set in the end of
it.

This lewd Libell although in respect of the matter void both of truth and
learning, deformed rather to be despised, then earnestly answered: yet because
the author of it, thinks so highly of himself, and so basely and
contemptuously of us, giving out in certain written conferences, which he has
dispersed abroad in this land, and some faithful men have seen, that we be
unlearned, and so given to worldly affairs, that we bestow no time, or but
little in study: I (although the meanest and vnmeetest of many) was moved to
write this answer, thereby to confute these calumnies, to clear the truth, to
confirm the faithful, and if by Gods gracious blessing it might be, to
reclaim and reform the ignorant and seduced. Whereof I have the less hope,
for that as they imitate those wicked Israelites, which refused to hearken,
turned away their shoulder, stopped their Zach. 7. 11.
ears that they might not hear, and made their hearts as an Adamant stone,
least they should hear the law and the words which the Lord of hosts sent in
his spirit by his Prophets: So they do fully follow the perverse Pagans, which
most obstinately refused to read godly books written by Christians, as that
ancient eloquent Christian Lactantius, in these eloquent words declares: Non
est apud me dubium, Constantine Imperator Lactant. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Maxim, quin hoc opus nostrum, quo singularis ille rerum conditor, and huius
immensi operis rector asseritur, si quis attigerit ex istis ineptereligiosis
(vt sant nimia superstitione impatientes) insectetur etiam maledictis: vt vix
lecto fortasse principio, affligat, proijciat, execretur, seque inexpiabili
scelere contaminari atque astringi putet, si haec aut legate patienter aut
audiat. One Be or egg is not liker to another, then to these Pagans be our
peevish Papists, in shutting their eyes from reading godly and learned books,
tending to the confutation of their errors, and the instruction of them in the
truth. Whom yet I am to entreat with Lactantius words immediately following:
Ab hoc tamen, si Idem ibidem.
fieri potest, humanitatis iure postulamus, vt non prius damnet quam vniuersa
cognouerit. Nam si sacrilegis and proditoribus, and veneficis potestas
defendendi sui datur, nec praedamnari quenquam incognita causa licet, non
unjust petere videmur, vt si quis erit ille, qui inciderit in haec, si leget,
perlegat: si audiet sententiam differat in extremum. This reasonable request I
would that I might obtain at our Romish Catholics hands, that they would
first read and examine this my answer, before they condemn it. For what is
more unjust, then to condemn that which a man does not know. Howbeit, I doubt
least with the same Lactantius I must say: Sed noui hominum pertinaciam,
nunquam impetrabimus. Timent enim ne a nobis reuicti, Ibidem.
manus dare aliquando clamante ipsa veritate cogantur. Obstrepunt igitur and
intercidunt ne audiant: and oculos suos opprimunt, ne lumen videant quod
offerimus. Even so our untruly termed Catholics do follow this froward
peruersitie of the Pagans, in whom that saying also of the Prophet (as it is
alleged by Saint Luke) is verified: The heart of this people is waxed Act. 28.
27.
gross or fat, and their ears are dull of hearing, and they have shut their
eyes, least they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I might heal them.
The which is a fearful judgment of God, when men refusing the love of the
truth that they might be saved, be given up to a strong delusion to believe
lies. 2 Thessalonians. 2.


But if these blinded with error and ignorance, for whose sake especially I
have written this answer, will not vouchsafe to read it, nor make any use and
profit of it: yet if it may somewhat serve to edify the faithful, and
confirm the weak, I shall think my labor not altogether lost. The which how
small or simple soever it be, yet as I have written it for the good of Gods
Church: so I have bin by your Honors courtesy encouraged to offer and present
it unto your Lordship, as a true testimony of my loving heart and dutiful
affection toward your Honor, for your favor showed me. The God of all grace
and mercy bless your Lordship and all yours, increase his good graces and
gifts in you, and long preserve you to the benefit of this Church and
Commonwealth, Amen. Westminster the 7. of May 1602.

Your Honors most humble to be commanded, EDWARD BVLKLEY.

AN ANSWER TO AN UNLEARNED, SLANDEROVS, AND LYING PAMPHLET, INTITVLED:
Certain articles, or forcible reasons, discovering the palpable absurdities,
and most notorious errors of the Protestants Religion, pretended to be printed
at Antwerpe 1600.
TO the sayings of the Prophet Esaias, chap. 59. 10. and Elizeus 4. King. 6.
20. set in the first front of this peevish Pamphlet, whereby he would insinuate
and signify us to be blind: I answer, that if we be blind, which give our
selves daily and diligently, both pastors and people to the reading and hearing
of Gods holy word, and do endeavor to make that a light unto our Psalm. 119.
105.
feet, and a lantern unto our paths: in what estate be they, which keep the
light of Gods word under the bushel of a strange tongue, and read the same
both little themselves, and dissuade and withdraw others from it? Aeneas
Syluius, who was Pope called Pius Secundus, writes thus of the Italian Priests
in his days, and of the good people in Bohemia: Pudeat Italiae Sacerdotes,
quos ne semel Commenta. de dictis and factis Alphonsi Reg. lib. 2. 17.
quidem nouam legem constat legisse: apud Thaboritas vix mulierculam inuenias
quae de Nouo Testamento and veteri respondere nesciat. i. The priests of Italy
may be ashamed, who are known not once to have read the new Testament, seeing
with the Thaborites one can hardly find a silly woman which cannot answer out
of the old and new Testament. John Gerson Chauncellor of the University of
Paris, who lived Anno 1415. and was a great dealer in the Council of
Constance, writes thus: Nam queme Sacerdotum Tom. 1. Sermon. coram Alexand. Papa
in die Ascensionis.
numero mihi dabis non ignarum legis Christi? Whom among the multitude of
Priests can thou show me, which is not ignorant of Christ's Law? Nicolaus
Clemangis a Doctor of Paris, who lived in the same time that Gerson Nicol
Clemang. de corrupto Ecclesiae statu. fol. 5. b.
did, complains in like manner of the gross ignorance of the popish Clergy
in these words: Non tamen a studijs aut schola, sed ab aratro etiam and
seruilibus artibus ad Parochias regendas, caeteraque beneficia passim
proficiscebantur, qui paulo plus Latinae linguae quam Arabicae intelligerent,
etc. i. Yet they commonly came to rule parishes and other benefices, not from
schools and Universities, but from the plowe and servile arts; yea, and such
as could not read, and (which is shameful to be spoken) could (...) discern A
from B: And again: Nam quotus quisque hodie est Ibidem fol. 10. b
ad pontificale culmen euectus, qui sacras vel perfunctorie literas legerit,
audierit, didicerit, imo qui Sacrum codicem nisi tegamento tenui vnquam
attigerit, cum tamen iureiurando illas in sua institutione se n^sse confirment:
i. How many are there now advanced to be Bishops which have but lightly read
the holy Scriptures, heard, or learned them: yea, who has touched the holy
Bible, except it be the covering of it? Again: De literis vero and doctrina
quid loqui attinet, cum omnes fere presbyteros sine aliquo captu aut rerum aut
vocabulorum Ibidem f^l. 13.
morose syllabatimque vix legere videamus: i. But what should I speak of
learning, for that we see in a manner, all Priests can hardly spell and read,
being without understanding of the matter or words. I might allege the like
complaints of Erasmus and others, but to omit them: if we who with the Council
of Toledo condemn ignorance as the mother of all errors; and say with
Epiphanius: Did. 38. ex conc. Tole. Contra Ma^ich^^s Haeris. 66. Hier. in
Esaiam did. ^8. si i^^^a. Prou. 2. 4.
Nihil peius imperitia multos excaecauit ignorantia: i. There is nothing worse
than ignorance, which has blinded many: and with S. Hierome, to be ignorant of
the Scriptures, is to be ignorant of Christ: and do with Solomon exhort all
men to seek for knowledge as for silver, and for understanding as for
treasures: if we (I say) be blind, in what estate are they which hold ignorance
to be the mother of devotion, as Doctor Cole at Westminster said, and who to In
the conference at Westminster in the beginning of her Majesty's reign.
this day have not published the whole Bible in the English tongue, for the
instructing and inlightning of Gods people, although they writ eighteen years
past, that they had long before that time translated it, and yet to this day
they have wanted means to publish it. They have had means See the beginning
of the Pr^face of the New Testament set out by them. 1582.
since that time to print and publish D. Stapletons great book, de Principijs
doctrinalibus, and many such others on the like sort, but they can or will find
no means to publish the blessed Bible and book of God: for it serves not so
well for the defense of their doctrine and doings, as the others do. But to
conclude this matter, I also do both pray with the Prophet David, and say;
Open our eyes, that we may see the wonders of thy law; and with Saint Paul,
The Psalm. 119. 2. Timoth. 2. 7.
Lord give us understanding in all things, that the eyes of our understanding
being lightened, we may know what the hope is of Gods calling, and what the
riches of his glorious inheritance is in the Saints, etc. and also exhort this
man and his fellows to take heed they be not of the number of them, of whom
our Savior Christ said, If ye were blind, John. 9. 41.
ye should have no sin: but now ye say, we see: therefore your sin
remains.

The Pamphlet. The copy of a Letter, written by a Catholic to a worshipful
Protestant Gentleman his special friend, concerning certain reasons, why the
Protestants Religion is false and absurd.
Loved and relouing friend, I have received your courteous letter, wherein you
greatly wonder, that I wondered so much in our last discourse; that any man in
England endued with a good judgment, conjoined with a religious conscience,
could either accept, or affect the Protestants new coined Gospel. You request
me to set down briefly such reasons as induced me thereunto: the which suite
I could not deny: for both religion and affection urged me to satisfy so just
a desire. For I must confess, I love you as a man, and as an honest civil
Gentleman, and most gladly I would have occasion to love you as a Catholic
Gentleman: for it is great pity that such a multitude of detestable errors,
and heinous heresies should lodge in so rarely qualified a soul. I have penned
them after an unaccustomed manner following the fashion of schools, in most of
them after a syllogisticall method: to the intent that if you should show them
unto your Ministers, which swarm about you, they might not have such free
scope and liberty, to range abroad with their idle discourses (as they use to
take) veiling their confused conceits with a multitude of affected phrases:
thereby more easily to deceive the simple, and loathe the learned. Wherefore I
beseech you if any such itching spirit shall attempt an answer, to entreat
him to perform it briefly, orderly, and seriously. This I request, for that I
perceive that Protestants cannot answer with brevity, because their Religion
lacks both certainty and perspicuitie: And extreme hard or impossible it is
to reply without perplexity, where there is no truth nor verity. And
therefore I request you as you love me, to will them to consider well, before
they answer ill: and not to reply with rashness, least they retract with
deliberation, to their utter shame and confusion. And that you may perceive how
my wonder rather deserved approbation then admiration, and for that order is a
favorite of memory: I thought good to reduce all my reasons into two heads;
wit and will, knowledge and affection, faith and good life: because the nature
of heresy has ever been such as did not only inueagle the wit with errors,
but also seduce the will with occasions of inordmate affections. I say the that
no excellent goodwit, linked with a religious conscience, can accept nor affect
the Protestants new coined Gospel: for good wits and judgments, assisted with
Gods grace, may easily conceive the truth, yea by the force of their very
natural faculties, they may judge credibly of the truth once proposed; and
without great difficulty discorne the absurdities of an untrue religion.
Virtuous and well inclined affections which are the base of quiet, secure, and
religious consciences, abhor and detest such principles as either dishonor God,
abase man's nature, occasion sin, favor iniquity, or any sort diminish
devotion, or piety: And therefore all the insequent articles shall stand upon
these two foundations, to wit, that the Protestants religion debarreth the wit
from right understanding the true faith, and the will from following of any
virtue or godliness.

Answer.
YOu wonder that any man in England endued with a good judgment, conjoined
with a religious conscience, can either accept or affect the Protestants new
coined gospel. But why do you not show what is the new coined gospel, which
the Protestants preach and profess. The Gospel is the good and joyful
message of our salvation, through Gods mercies purchased unto us by Jesus
Christ. This Gospel God preached to Adam, that Jesus Christ the seed of the
woman should break the serpents Genes. 3. 16.
head. This he renewed to Abraham saying, in thy seed shall all the nations of
the world be blessed. This Gospel was Genes. 22. 18.
preached by all the Prophets, who bear witness unto Act. 10. 43.
Christ, that through his name all that believe in him, shall receive
forgiveness of sins. Now if you can prove that we preach or maintain any
other gospel then this, then you may well call it a new coined gospel: if
otherwise, take heed you do not belch out blasphemy, in calling this old and
true gospel of Jesus Christ, a new coined gospel. And let the Christian
reader, which tendereth his own salvation well consider who they be that coin
a new, false, and counterfeit gospel. Do not they which teach us to ascend
into heaven by the blood of Thomas Becket, coin a In the popish Primer printed
1557.
new and false gospel? Tuper Thomae sanguinem etc. which they englished in
Queen Mary's days thus: By the blood of Thomas, which he for thee did spend,
make us Christ to come, whither Thomas did ascend. Again, Jesus bone per Thomae
merit unt nostra nobis dimitte debita: O good Jesus for the merits of Thomas
(Becket) forgive us our sins. Do not they, which teach us to seek to be
delivered from the fire of hell by the merits and prayers of Saint Nicholas,
mainetaine a new coined gospel? Thus they prayed: Quaesimus vt eius meritis
and precibas a gehennae incendijs In the same Primer.
liberemur: Grant we beseech thee, that by his merits and prayers we may be
delivered from the fire of hell. Do not they which say and believe of an Agnus
dei, that is to say, a piece of wax and balm consecrated by the Pope, Tollit
and omne malignum, peccatum frangit, vt Lib. 1. Caeremo. titul. 7.
Christi sanguis and angit, It takes away all evil, it breaks and
strangleth sin as does the blood of Christ: do not they (I say) coin a new,
false, and blasphemous Gospel? Yes surely, for to attribute remission of
sins, or any part of salvation to the merits of any other, but only of Jesus
Christ crucified, is to coin a new and false gospel: for it is not that
gospel of God, which he promised before by his Prophets in the holy scriptures,
which is concerning his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord etc. To conclude this
point, I say woe, woe unto them that accept or affect any new coined gospel.
And whereas you wonder that men endued with judgment and a religious
conscience, could affect or accept the gospel that we preach, which you
falsely call a new coined gospel: we may well wonder, that any man that has
any spark of knowledge or conscience should believe these foresaid false
gospels. We may also wonder that men endued with reasonable souls and senses,
being the handy work of God, should bow down and worship a stone and stock,
which has neither soul nor life; has eyes and sees not; ears and hears
not etc. and is the workmanship of man's hands, especially being so plainly
and expressly forbidden in Gods commandments, Psalm. 115. and 135.
and infinite places of the scriptures. We may wonder that any man should be so
mad, as to worship, and think that which he does eat, to be his God and
maker: which is so absurd, that even Tully not without reason could say,
sedecquem tam amentem esse putas, qui illud quo vescitur deum Cicero de Natura
deorum lib. 2.
credat esse? Do thou think any man so mad as to believe that to be his
God, which he does eat? yet into this madness, by a spiritual frenzy, be
these men fallen. We also may wonder, that they should believe such false
fables, and lying miracles, as abound in popery: as for example, (to cast the
dung of their abominations upon their faces) That Images did speak, did sweat
did roll their eyes, did bleed: that the head of a dog being cut off from the
body by thieves, which upon Saint Katherines day came to rob Inter sermones
discipuli Sermon. de S. Katherinae.
a Priest, who was a devout worshipper of her, did still bark? That the virgin
Mary did for many years in a Nunnery keep the keys, and supply the place of
one Beatrix, whilst she went away and played the whore. These and many such
absurd fables were preached, published, printed, and believed, as may appear
by Sermones In promptu. discipuli.
discipuli, Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence stories, Mariale, Summa
praedicantia, the festival Vitas patrum, and that monstrous book the Legend,
written by Iacobus Supplementuns Chronicorunt Bergomens.
de Varagine, Archbishop of Genua: Which yet was in so great reputation with
them, that it was published in print in the English tongue, when the holy Bible
was suppressed, lib. 13. fol. 205.
and had this title set before it, The golden Legend: for as gold excels all
other metals, so this book excels all other books: to the which title
that worthy and right worshipful Knight Sir Andrew Corbet of blessed memory,
did add these words, In lying, and so of a false and blasphemous title, made
it a most true title. Yea I have a book in English in Folio, translated out of
French, and printed in London in King Henry the 8. days Anno 1521. entitled,
The flower of the Commandments, fully fraighted with such sottish and worse
then old wives fables, which yet in those days were preached and believed. And
we may wonder that men of any wisdom; knowledge, or judgment, should be
deluded and mocked with such false, fained relics, as were and are in Popery,
as with Saint Peter's finger at Walsingham, as big as if it had been of Erasmus
in Colloquio. peregri. ergo.
some Giant: and also the virgin Mary's milk there, which seems by Erasmus
to have been the white of an egg and Blondus de Rema instaurata lib. 3.
propefinem.
chalk mingled together, and a vessel of the same at Rome as writes Blondus:
the blood of Hales, the which was proved and declared at Paul's Cross by the
Bishop of Rochester in King Henry the 8. days, to have been clarified
Holingshead in Henry 8. p. 946. Caluinus admonitione de reliquijs.
honey colored with saffron. In Geneua there was worshipped for the arm of
Saint Anthony, that which afterward was proved to be the pisle of a Stagge,
for a piece of S. Peter's scull, that which was found to be a pumish stone. But
this will not be believed of this writer and of his fellows, because Calvin
did write it. But why Calvin should write and publish even in the French tongue
in Geneua, such a thing of Geneua, unless it were true, which the Inhabitants
thereof might know to be false, I see no reason: it could purchase no credit to
him or to his doctrine. But why might not that as well be true, as the things
before alleged, or as that which Gregorius Turonensis who lived Gregor.
Turonens. lib. 9. ca. 6.
sundry hundredth years past, writes that there was found in a box of
relics, of a certain Saint, roots of trees, the teeth of a Mole, the bones
of Mice, and the claws of Bears, which were worshipped for holy relics. But
of these iuglings I will write no more at this present, God may give occasion
hereafter more largely to entreat of them. At these things we may wonder, but
yet we do not overmuch marvel and wonder at them, for that the spirit of God
by Saint Paul has foreshewed us, that the time would come, when men should
turn away their ears from 2. Timoth. 4. 4.
the truth, and be given to fables: and that the coming of Antichrist should
be by the effectual working of Satan, 2. Thessal. 2. 9.
with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenes of
unrighteousness, among the^ that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth that they might be saved, therefore God should send them a strong
delusion to believe lies, that all they might be damned which believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Whereas you request that he that
shall answer this your pamphlet, will do it briefly, orderly, and seriously,
I will endeavor to do the two last as God shall enable me. But concerning
brevity, I will use my liberty, and peradventure more largely lay down your
absurdities, then you would be willing I should do. But whereas you say, that
you make this request, for that you perceive that the Protestants cannot
answer with brevity, because their religion lacks both certainty and
perspicuitie: I say that with one breath you do utter two untruths, or to
speak plain English, lies. The first that we cannot answer with brevity,
which how untrue it is, let it be tried first by the brief and pithie answers
of that great learned man Doctor Fulke: who answering many of their books,
which yet to this day stand undefended, how briefly and pithily he answered
the same, let any man that has but a grain of indifferent judgment, consider
and judge. And particularly I refer them to his answer to Rishtons
challenge, and to Allens book of Purgatory, both in one volume: yea many
times in his writings he called them from long and impertinent discourses, to
short syllogismes, whereunto he could never bring them. How closely that
precious Jewel and excellent ornament of this Church of England did hold
himself to the matter, and how unlike he was to Doctor Harding in his long
discourses and digressions, who in his book entitled, A detection of lies,
etc. discoursed two hundred and six whole sides of paper, only in preambles
and prefaces, before he once stepped into his matter, as Master Jewel truly told
him; let the upright reader indifferently judge. The like I may say of that
worthy Preface to the defense of the Apology, edition 2.
man of famous memory, Doctor Whitakers, who how briefly, soundly, and
learnedly he has answered Campion, Saunders, Duree, Stapleton, William
Reynolds, and Bellarmine, any man that has an incorrupt eye may see and
discern. And if T. W. be the author of this pamphlet (as I nothing doubt but
he is) he may remember that one which had conference with him, did write a
brief epistle unto him, and did therein set down short syllogismes concerning
the controversies of prayer to Saints, and the sacrifice of the Mass, and
required to have the like short syllogismes set down of him for the defense of
his assertions, and could not receive one, but a long tedious discourse
concerning prayer to Saints, which was confuted, and never defended. But
whether answers be brief or long, it makes no matter, so that they be
learned, sound and true, to the effectual confuting of the error, and
satisfying of the reader. Now as touching certainty which you say, but do not
show, that our religon lacks: I answer and auonch that out Religion is far
more certain; consonant, and agreeable to it self, then the doctrine of the
Church of Rome is: the which if I do not effectually prove hereafter in place
more convenient, I will not require any man (to use your own words) to accept,
or affect it. But with what forehead can this man charge our doctrine with want
of perspicuitie, seeing he cannot be ignorant how obscure, dark, and intricate
the popish religion and doctrine is; as may appear by their manisold, both
turious questions, and intricate distinctions, which be their chief shifts, to
elude the plain truth. And if any would see how dark the doctrine and
writings of Papists are, let him look into the Schoolmen, Tho Aquine, Io.
Scotus, Alexander de Hales, Gabriel Biel, and many such other, amongst whom he
may find as much certainty, unity, and perspicuitie of doctrine, as he may
in holl. But how we study for perspicuitie, and seek to make all matters
plain, both in our preachings, and in our writings, avoiding all curious
questions, and intricate and needles distinctions; we appeal to the
consciences of all that read, and hear us. As touching your method concerning
errors in doctrine, and inordinate affections in manners, if you can prove
that our wits be inueigled with them, and our lives stained with these, more
then we can prove even your holy Fathers the Popes, forsooth Peter's
successors, and Christ's vicars have been, you shall win the victory, You
seem to attribute too much to our very natural faculties, to the judging and
discerning of truth proposed, not considering the corruption of our natural
faculties by sin, how both the mind is blinded, and the will perverted. Our
Savior Christ says, The light shines in darkness, and the darkness John 1. 5.
comprehends it not: Saint Paul says, that animalis 1. Cor. 2. 14.
homo, the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for
they are foolishnes unto him: neither can he know them: because they are
spiritually discorned. But of this I forbear to speak any more, and also will
leave the other wait words in your letter, and do come unto your articles of
faith.

The Pamphlet. The first article concerning knowledge and faith. The
Protestants have no faith nor neligion.
THe Protestants have no faith, no hope, no charitic no repentance, no
justification, no Church, no altar, no sacrefice, no Priest, no Religion, no
Christ: the reason is; for if they have then the world was without them; for a
thousand years (as they themselves must needs confess: vid elicet all the
time their Church was eclipsed) and 1500. as we will prove by all records of
antiquity, as Histories, Councels, monuments of ancient Fathers: Whereby it
plainly appeaneth, that the synagogue of the Jews was more constant in
continuance, and more ample for place, then the Church of Christ: For they have
had their s^nagogue visible in di^ers countries, even since Christ's death and
passion even until his day; which is the very path to lead man into Atheism,
as though Christ were not as yet come into the world, Isa. 60. 11.
whose admirable promises, are not accomplisheds Matthew. 16. 18.
whose assistance has failed in preserving his Church, unto the worlds end
cap. 28. 20.
whose presence (...) absent many hundred years, before the final
consummation: and consequently they open the gap to all Machiuillians; who say
that our Savior was one of the deceiuere of the world, promising so much
concerning his Church and performing so little.

Answer.
LOoking in this first article to have found a syllogism, which this worthy
writer uses in some articles following, but here for want of a good medium
(as it may seem) to frame one by, has omitted, I found a false assertion, and
a foolish probation. The assertion, that we have no faith. Have we no faith?
The Devils have some faith: Saint James says, The Devils believe and tremble,
and have we no faith? we are much beholden unto you for your charitable opinion
of us. You are by Iam. 2. 19.
the doctrine of Saint Paul, not to think so evil, but to 1. Cor. 13. 7.
hope the best of them that profess Jesus Christ, and his holy Gospel. But to
this your false and slanderous assertion, I will oppose a true affirmation and
confession. We believe all that God has delivered to us by Moses, the Faith.
Prophets, and Apostles, in the old and new Testament: yea we believe the
contents of the Creeds of the Apostles, Nicene, and Athanasius: and yet have we
no faith? We hope Hope.
to pass hereafter from death unto life, and to be partakers of that kingdom
of glory, which God has promised, and Jesus Christ has purchased for all
those that truly believe in him. We trust that we have charity, and love both
toward God and man, although we confess not in such Charity.
full and perfect measure as we ought to have: we with Saint John say, He that
loves not his brother abides in 1. John 3. 14.
death. We acknowledge repentance to be one of those chief heads wherein the
sum of Christianity is comprised. Repentance.
Saint Mark setting forth the sum and substance of Christ's doctrine,
comprehends it in these two, Repent and believe the Gospel: so did Saint
Paul, witnessing Mark 1. 16. Acts 20. 21.
both to the Jews, and to the Grecians the repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. We believe to be justified not by our own works
of righteousness (which we unprofitable servants, and prodigal children have
done) nor by the merits of any Saints in Justification.
heaven or in earth, but by the mercies of God, purchased Luke 17. 10. and 15.
21.
unto us by the blessed and bloody merits of Jesus Christ, and applied unto our
souls by the hand of faith, by the John 3. 36. Romans 3. 25. and 4. 5.
which Christ does dwell in our hearts, and is made ours. We believe that we are
true members of that holy Catholic Ephesians 2. 8.
Church, which is Christ's mystical body, and Ephesians. 3. 17. Church.
whereof he is the head: which is his spouse, and he the bridegroom: which is
his flock, and he the shepherd: which is the heavenly Jerusalem the Mother of
us all: Galath. 4. 26.
finally, which is the number of Gods elect and chosen people, that shall rest
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. And we know that we
have particular Matthew. 8. 11.
and visible Churches, wherein Gods word is more truly preached, the Sacraments
seals of the word, are more purely ministered, and Gods name more faithfully
inuocated and called upon, then in any or all the Romish Synagogues. Indeed we
have no Idolatrous altars, to offer either carnal or external sacrifices
upon, as though Altas.
Christ's sweet smelling sacrifice were not yet offered: but we have Mensam
Domini the Lords Table, whereupon we minister the Supper of Christ, which is a
holy Sacrament 1. Cor. 10. 21.
of Christ's body and blood given for us, a memorial of his death and passion,
and a pledge of our redemption and salvation purchased thereby. We have that
sweet smelling and sufficient sacrifice, which Jesus Christ by his Sacrifice.
Heber. 9. 14.
eternal spirit offered without fault unto God, to purge our consciences from
dead works to serve the living God. As for the sacrifice of the mass, as
being injurious to the said sacrifice of Jesus Christ, which he once, for all,
and for ever offered upon the Altar of the Cross, we deny, and defy. We have
no thauen nor greased priests to offer the said false and forged sacrifice of
the Mass: but we have Priests.
priests, pastors, or ministers, howsoever we term them, according to the
ordinance of Christ, to preach his holy Gospel, and to administer his
sacraments to his Church. We have and use that religion which has the
testimony Religion. Romans 3.
of the law and prophets, and wherein the true worship and service of God,
according to his will revealed in his holy word is contained: your (...), and
superstition we flee and forsake. Finally, we have that Christ, which came into
this world to save sinners, and which is that Lamb Christ. 1. Tim. 1. 15. Ioh.
1. 29.
of God, that takes away the sin of the world, whom we acknowledge more
soundly to be our only high prophet, Matthew. 17. 5.
to instruct us in the will of his father, whose only voice we must hear; our
only high priest, with the sacrifice of his body and blood once offered to
redeem us, and reconcile us unto God; our only mediator and intercessorto sit
for ever at the right hand of God to make intercession for us; and our only
high king, to deliver us out of the hands of our enemies, to give laws unto
our consciences, and to rule us with the scepter of his holy word, then the
Pope, and all his adherents do. This our true confession whereunto God and our
consciences be witnesses, we oppose to your false and slanderous obtrectation
and accusation, saying with Saint Paul, We pass very 1. Cor. 4. 3.
little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment: and with him also exhort you
not to judge before the time, until the Lord come, who will lighten things
that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the hearts manifest, and then
shall every man have praise of God. Further I do exhort you that take upon you
so severely to censure and judge others, carefully to take heed to your
selves, that you have not a false faith grounded not upon Gods promises,
contained in his word; but upon man's devises and traditions, which as
Epiphanius says, as worse then no Epipha. in Ancorato.
faith. (...): and that you be not void of true hope, by teaching the doctrine
of doubting (whereof I shall speak hereafter) and by fearing to be after death
thrown into the fiery torments of purgatory: and that you want not true
charity, in judging so falsely and maliciously, and persecuting us so cruelly,
as you use to do, when time and power serves you: and that you have no true
repentance, nor remorse of conscience for sin, in persisting so, obstinately
in damnable doctrine, and abominable idolatry: and that by leaning to your
own righteousness, and the merits of other men, which were sinners themselves,
you lose not that true justification which is the righteousness of God, by the
faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all that believe, which is only able
to stand and discharge us, before the judgment seat Romans 3. 22.
of Jesus Christ, and is the only strong staff to lean upon, to leap over
the ditch of damnation, and beware (I say) that you leaning upon the weak
reed of your own merits and others, fall not into the midst thereof, from
which there is norising: take heed you be not of the malignant Church, which
hears not the voice of Christ, and wherein that man of sin, and son of
perdition sits and reigns: and that you have not such Idolatrous altars,
as Ieneboam had, against which the man of God cried, and upon which the like
judgment of God fell, 1. King. 13. 2.
as has done upon yours now: And that you have not a false forged sacrifice,
which appeaseth not, but daily provoke Gods wrath against you, and that you
be not without priests to teach the law of God truly, but have swarms of such
priests, as say not where is the Lord, and Ierem. 2. 8.
know not God, but prophecy in Baal, which have gone Malach. 2. 8.
out of the way, and have caused many to fall by the law, etc. Beware that you
be not without religion, remembering the saying of Lactantius: Quare non est
dubium, quin Lactant. de origi. erroris lib. 2. cap. 19.
veligio nulla, sit, vbicunque simulachrum est: that is, wherefore there is no
doubt, but that there is no religion, wheresoever an Image is. Finally, I say
again and again, beware that you forsake not the true Christ, and worship
Antichrist, sitting in the western Babylon built upon seven August. de
ciuitate dei lib. 18. cap. 2.
hills, which in the days of Saint John reigned over the Kings of the earth:
wherefore be not so rash in judging Apoc. 17. 9. 18.
so hardly and uncharitably of others, but examine and judge your selves, that
you be not judged of the Lord. But I now come to your pithie probation of this
your uncharitable 1. Cor. 11. 31.
and shameless assertion. The reason you say is: For if they have, then the
world was without them for a thousand years (as they themselves must needs
confess, videl. all the time their Church was eclipsed) and for 1500. as we
will prove by the testimony of all records of antiquity, etc. Whereunto I
answer, that if we take the world in that sense, which the scripture sometimes
does, for the multitude and society of them, whereof the Devil is prince:
which hates Christ and his true disciples, which Ioh. 14. 30.
is set upon wickedness: for the which our Savior Christ 2. Cor. 4. 4.
refused to pray saying, I pray not for the world: and Ioh. 15. 18 19.
where of Judas (not Iscariot) did say, what is the cause, that 1. Ioh. 5. 19.
thou will show thy self to us, and not unto the world? In Ioh 17. 9.
this sense I may grant that the world has not had these Ioh. 14. 22.
gifts of Gods grace these thousand years, and put another thousand and more
unto them. But if we take the world more generally for this great globe, and
all the inhabitants thereof, then prove by the testimony of all antiquity
that the doctrine which we teach and profess has not been these 1500. years
in the world, and we will yield, and you shall win the victory. But it is
usual with you and your fellows to make great and brave bragges to amaze the
simple and ignorant; and to bring small and poor proofs (as you do here none
at all) to persuade the wise and learned: great braggers are no great doers. In
deed we confess that the Church is well compared by Saint Augustine to the
Moon. For as the August. in Psalm. 10.
Moon receives her light from the Sun: so does the true Church receive her
light from Jesus Christ the sun of righteousness. And as the Moon is
sometimes in the Malach. 4. 2.
full, and shines in full brightness, and sometimes is in the waine, and
sometimes is eclipsed, and does little appear: even so the Church is sometimes
in the full, and shines in full brightness and glory as in the Apostles times,
and diverse hundredth years after it did: sometimes it is in the waine and
eclipsed, as for many hundred years last past it has been, in which that
Apostasy from the faith is come, which Saint Paul by the spirit of God
foreshewed, and the event has proved by Mahometisme in the East, 2. These. 2.
3. 1. Tim. 4. 1.
and Papisme in the West. During which time although the Church has been
driven into the wilderness, and the Apoca. 12.
light of true doctrine (which is the soul of the Church) has been eclipsed,
yet they have never utterly perished. For in all ages God in mercy has
reserved a remnant according to the election of grace, by whom the light of his
Romans 11. 5.
truth has been preserved, and in whom those admirable promises of his mercy
have been performed. These have been, not proud Popes treading upon Emperors
necks, deposing them from their Crowns and Kingdoms, raising bloody
battles, and pouling and spoiling Christian countries with grievous and
horrible exactions and devises, as might be showed: not carnal Cardinals
Princes peers, having 200. and 300. benefices apeece, as Gerson Gerson tom. x.
de defect. Virorum ecclesiast. Nicol. Clama. de corrupto statu ecclesiae.
and Clamangis Parisian Doctors before named do affirm, not popish blind
prelates, Abbats, Monks, priests, etc. wallowing in all worldly wealth, and
for the most part in great filthiness of life, as hereafter I will show: but
such as the Apostle speaks of, that have been tried by Heber. 11. 36.
mockings and scourginges, yea by bonds and prisonment, which were stoned,
hewn asunder, tempted, slain with the sword, wandered up and down in
sheepe-skinnes, and in goats skins, destituted, afflicted and tormented,
whom the world was not worthy of, which wandered in wildernesses and
mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth. Such were those good people (in
the time of the foresaid apostacy) the Waldenses and Pauperes de Lugduno
dispersed in diverse countries, as namely Calabria, Sauoye, Prouence in France,
of whom many both long ago in sundry places and diverse times were burned, as
it is written in the old book called Fasciculus Temporum: and also Aetate 6.
fol. 84
of late years were most cruelly and unmercifully perse cuted in Merindoll,
the valley of Angrone, Luserne, and See Acts and monuments tom. 2.
Saint Martin: Such were they that were called Begardi, of whom to the number
of 114. were burnt at Paris, as the foresaid book Fasciculus Tempo. shows.
Such were Ibidem fascicul. temporum.
they that were called Albingenses inhabiting especially about Tholossa in
France, of whom by the procurement of that false Friar, and superstitious
Hypocrite Dominicus Vincent. Bella. Specu. Histor.
an hundredth thousand were destroyed, as writes Bernardus Lutzenburgus, and an
180. were together burned, lib. 29. cap. 103 Anton. hist.
as both Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence writes, and Bellarmine himself
confesses. Such were they of part. 3. titul. 19. cap. 1.. 4.
whom Albertus Crantius writes, which in Sueuia publikly Crant. in Metropo
lib. 8. cap. 18 and lib. 10. cap 9.
preached, that the Pope, Bishops and prelaces were heretics and Simoniakes;
that the begging Friars did pervert the Church with their false preachings, for
the which they were persecuted and some burned. Such were they in Bohemia and
Morauia in great number, with whom Aeneas Syluius (who was Pope called Pius the
second) having had conference, writes thus of one of them. Finitis sermonibus
istis assurrexit vnus de primoribus Thaboritarum, and animo satis inflato, quid
tu nobis, inquit, apostolicam Aeneas Syluins epist. 130. page 677.
sedem tot verbis amplificas? Nos Papam and Cardinales anaritiae seruos
nouimus, impatientes, inflatos, tumidos, ventri ac libidini deditos, ministros
scelerum, diaboli sacerdotes, and Antichristi praecursores, quorum deus venture
est, pecunia caelum. That is, when these speeches were ended, there did rise up
one of the chief of the Thaborites, and with an hautie mind said, What do
thou amplify to us in so many words the Apostolical seat? we know that the
Pope and the Cardinals be slaves to covetousness, imputient, proud, arrogant,
given to the belly, and filthy lust; the ministers of wickedness, the priests
of the devil, and the forerunners of Antichrist, whose God is their belly,
and whose heaven is money. Such also was Arnoldus Brixianus, persecuted by that
proud English Pope Adrian the fourth, anno 1155. John Rochetailada burnt at
Auinion by Pope Frosard fol. 54.
Clement the sixth 1345. Michael Cesenas burnt 1322. John Wickliffe, who died
1387. and after his death his body was burnt. Two Franciscan Friars burnt at
Auinion by Pope Polychron. lib. 6.
Innocent the sixth 1354. Two others burnt at London 1357. William Swinderby
burnt 1401. William White burnt 1428. Polidor Virg. lib. 19.
Peter Clarke, and Peter Pain 1433. persecuted and forced to flee into
Bohemia. Thomas Rhedonensis burnt at Rome 1430. Mattheus Palmerius burnt at
Florence, as witnesses Anton. part. 3. titul. 22. cap. 10.
Sabellicus. Dulcinus of Nouaria and Margaret his wife burnt about the year of
our Lord 1304. John Hus and Hierome of Prage burnt at Constance 1415. 1416.
Hieromus Sabel. Enne. 10. lib. 4.
Sauonarola burnt at Florence 1499. These and many such other that might be
produced with their faithful favorers and followers, were the true Church of
God, in whom his merciful promises were performed. These are they that have
mourned in Zion, that have lamented and cried for all the abominations that
have Isa. 61. 3.
been don in Jerusalem, or rather in Rome, that were killed Ezech 9. 5.
for the word of God, and for the testimony which they Apoc. 6. 9. 19.
maintained, and which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes in the blood of the Lamb. But Apoca 7. 14.
these now have beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, Isa. 61. 3.
the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, and are trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, in whom he is glorified, they be now
under the altar, and Apoc. 6. 9.
are in the presence of the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his
temple, and he that sits on the throne does dwell among them, neither does
the sun light on them, neither any heat. But this man will say, 7. 15.
that these were condemned and punished by the Church for heretics. I confess
they were so, even as the Prophets of God, Christ our Savior, and his holy
Apostles were before them condemned by the prelates and priests of the Church
of Israel, which carried the countenance of the Church of God, as much and more
rightly then the Pope and his prelates now do. Neither were these so few in
number, but that by confession of some popish writers, the Romish false faith
was sometimes in danger to have been subverted by them. Wernerus a Charterhouse
Monk of Colen in his foresaid book called Fasciculus temporum Fascicu. Temps.
aetat. 6. fol. 78.
writes thus: Fuerunt nihilominus postea quidam subtilissimi haeretici, qui
istam haeresim Waldensium defendere conabantur, and plura regna and populos
deceperunt: that is, notwithstanding there were afterward some most subtle
heretics, which went about to defend this heresy of the Waldenses, and
deceived (or rather truly instructed) many kingdoms and nations. And again,
having made mention 1233.
of certain popish doctors in those days, as Hugo Cardinalis, etc. he has
these words: Quos diuina bonitas Fol. 80.
misit pro fidei defensione, alioquin tota pene fides perijsset propter
haereticorum multiplicitatem, and subtilitatem simul and potentiam: that is,
whom God sent for the defense of the faith, for otherways it had like wholly to
have perished by reason of the multitude, subtlety and power of heretics. It
appears by the testimony of this popish Monk, that in those days there
were very many of them whom he falsely calls heretics. And whereas these
detested the enormities and abominations of the Church of Rome, and maintained
the same substantial and fundamental points of doctrine that we do, (as it
appears by the articles objected unto them that they did) how does this man
say that our religion was not these 1500. years in the world? It was in the
world, but hated of the world, which hated Christ: yet was it constantly
confessed Ioh. 15. 18. 19.
even to death of them whom God the Father has given to Christ out of the
world. Hereby it may sufficiently appear, Ioh. 17. 6. 9.
that the Synagogue of the Jews has not bin more constant in continuance, nor
more ample in place, then the true Church of Christ has been. In deed it may
be, that the Synagogues of the Jews have continued in some certain places
more constantly, then the true Churches of Jesus Christ have done: Yet hereupon
it does not follow, that either Gods admirable promises have not bin performed,
or that the true Church has perished. It is not the Synagogue of the Jews,
but the true Church of God, that is clothed with Christ the sun of
righteousness, treads under Apoca. 12. 1.
her feet earthly things, which be mutable as ye moon, and is adorned with
the Doctrine of Christ's twelve Apostles, which is forced to flee into the
wilderness. Chrysostom Chrysostom in psalm. 114.
says well: Ecclesia est tabernaculu^ a deo fixum non ab homine: ab vno loco
in alium fugit, sed non a pietate ad impietatem fugit. that is. The Church is
the tabernacle which God has pight and not man, she flees from one place to
another, but she never flees from godliness to impiety and wickedness. As
Barrabas found here more favor with the prelates and priests of Judah and
Jerusalem, then Jesus Christ the son of God did: So the Popes and Jews
Synagogues have found more favor, and more quietly rested in this wicked
world, then the true Church of Jesus Christ has done. As even in Rome the
Jews, professed and open enemies of our Savior Christ, have had and yet have
their Synagogues, and live (paying their tributes) in as great quietness and
safety, as the Curtizans and Whores of Rome do, which pay yearly Cornel.
Agrip. de Vanitate Scient. cap. 64.
to the Pope twenty thousand duckates. It is written in the pontifical, that
at the coronation of the Pope, and in his procession to ye Church of Laterane,
the Jews use to meet him, and making courtesy do offer the law to him, to
whom he gives a gentle answer. But whereas the foresaid Arnoldus Brixianus a
great learned man reproved the errors and enormities of the Church of Rome,
Adrian the four our Platina in Adriano. 4.
proud countriman (who rebuked the Emperor for holding his wrong stirrup) would
not go up to the Church of Laterane to be consecrate, until he were driven but
of Rome. Platina in Honorio. 2.
There was also one Arnulphus in Rome a godly man, whom many of the inhabitants
thereof acknowledged for a true disciple of Christ, that was there murdered by
the priests for inueighing against their wickedness. Also in a town Platina
in Paulo. 2.
near Rome called Pole, the lord thereof with many others Sabellicus Ennead.
10. lib. 7.
were counted heretics, for saying that none of them which followed Peter were
ye true vicars of Christ, but such as followed the poverty of Christ. These
Pope Paulus the second persecuted and contumeliously entreated, as Platina and
Sabellicus do write. Hereby we see that it is a thing more allowable in Rome,
to deny Christ as the Jews do, then to meddle with the Popes triple crown,
or to reprove his pride, and enormities.

This our doctrine of performing Gods admirable promises not in proud Popes,
and wicked worldlings, but in the faithful which fear God, tremble at his
word, and are for the most part hated and persecuted in the world, does neither
show the path to Atheism, nor open the gap to Machiuilian devises, which by
the testimony of some papists themselves are no where sooner learned then in
that school, wherein T. W. the author of this slanderous libell, has bin (as
I suppose) too much and too long trained. I mean the school of Jesuits, of
whom William Watson a popish secular priest in his book of Quodlibets lately
published does thus write; Many Atheal paradoxes be taught in Quedlib. 1. art.
9. page 21. Ibidem.
the Jesuits conclaue, or close conuenticles. Aga. Questionles the Jesuits
want neither art nor evil will, nor yet malicious means to effect it, as
having used from the beginning more Machauilian devises, and Atheal practices
in secret conference by their inferior agents with schismatikes, yea and with
our common adversaries, then with catholics. Again: It must needs follow,
Quodlib 4. art. 4. page 112.
that there is not a Jesuit in all England this day, but has a bitter smack
of father Parsons impiety, irreligiosity, treachery, treason, and Machiuilian
Atheism. Again neither Machiuel, nor any that ever yet was in Europe came
near Quodli. 9. art. 7 page 314.
unto the Jesuits for Atheal devises to prevent the stopples of their
stratagems, and to further their proceedings. Again: But I call them
Jesuitical (that is, the faction of In the appendix to the Quodli. page 346.
the Jesuits) by abbreuiation to avoid circumlocution, in one word expressing
them to be a factious, seditious, ambitious, auaritious, treacherous,
traitorous, Machiuilian, Atheall consort, that abusing the rules of their
society, etc. By the judgment of this popish priest, let the good reader
consider who they be, that show the path to Atheism, and open the gap to
Machiuilian devises.

The Pamphlet. The learned Protestants are Infidels. 2. Article.
Whosoever builds his faith upon his own private and singular exposition of
Scripture, is an Infidel. But all Protestants in England build their faith upon
their own private exposition of Scripture: Ergo, all the Protestants of
England are Infidels. The Mayor cannot be denied: because faith must be
infallible, and impossible to be either erroneous or changeable: but faith
which is builded upon private exposition of Scripture, is subject to error and
change, and consequently upon better advice and consideration may be altered.

The minor I prove: for either they build their faith upon their own private
opinion, in expounding of Scriptures, the exposition of the Church, the
Fathers, or Councels: but not upon these three: Ergo, upon their own private
exposition.

Some Protestants allow the Fathers, and their expositions, so far forth as
they agree with Gods word, and no farther: but this is nothing else but to
delude the world; for what mean they when they say they will allow them so far
forth as they agree with the Scriptures? Mean they perhaps, that if the
Fathers bring Scriptures to prove any point of Religion now in controversy, to
allow that point as true? If so, why then reject they S. Augustine Aug. lib. de
cura. again. pro mortui.
and other Fathers, who bring Scripture to prove prayer for the dead? yea and
all controversies almost in Religion, the Fathers prove by Scriptures when they
dispute upon them. Or perhaps they mean to admit the Fathers, when they
allege Scripture, but such as every Protestant shall allow of, so it be
conformable to their fancies, and fit their new coined Gospel: and in this
sense who sees not, that every paltry companion will make himself, not only
expositor of Christ's word, but also will prefer his exposition before all
ancient Fathers, when they dance not after his pipe, and consent not with his
heresies.

Answer.
HEre we have a syllogism, to the Mayor or first proposition whereof, I
answer, that they which universally in all matters and doctrines of salvation
do follow private and false expositions of the Scripture be Infidels: but in
some places of Scripture a man may follow a private and false exposition of the
Scripture, and believe the same to be true, and yet be no Infidel. Hilarie
followed a private and false exposition of the place, Come behind me Satan: and
Ambrose of Peter's denial of Hilarious. in Matthew. can. 16. Ambros. in Luc. lib.
10.
Christ, and Hierome in like manner of Peter's dissembling with the Jews,
Galat. 2. yea, and all the Fathers have in sundry places of Scripture followed
private, and untrue expositions, and have believed the same to be true, and yet
they were no Infidels. Saint Augustine says well: Quisquis igitur Scripturas
diuinas, etc. Whosoever therefore August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 36.
does think himself to understand the holy Scriptures or any part of them; so
that by that his understanding, he does not edify and build this double love
of God and of his neighbor, does not yet understand them. But whosoever does
draw such a sense or exposition from them, as may be profitable to the edifying
of this love, and yet does not deliver that which he whom he reads shall be
proved in that place to hauement, is not dangerously or wickedly deceived,
neither does he at all lie. And again, Sed quisquis in Scripturis aliud sentit
quam ille qui scripsit, illis Ibidem.
non mentientibus fallitur: sed tamen vt dicere coeperam, etc. But whosoever in
the Scriptures does conceive any other sense, then he that did write it did
mean, he is deceived although the Scriptures do not lie: yet as I began to
say, if he be deceived by that sense which does edify love and charity, which
is the end of the commandment, is so deceived, as if a man missing and
leaving his way, yet goes by the field thither, whither the way does lead
him. Hereby you may perceive that every one which follows a private or false
exposition of some place of the Scripture is not an Infidel.

But to leave this, and to come to your Minor or second proposition, I anouch
the same to be false, and do deny that we build our faith upon private or false
expositions of the Scripture. We say with S. Peter, that no prophecy of 2.
Pet. 1. 20.
the Scripture is of any private interpretation. But we are to take that sense
which the holy Ghost intends and means. And we say, that many things be
most plain and evident in the holy Scriptures, so that the simpliest may
understand them, and get knowledge and comfort by them. So Chrysostom says:
An ista aliquam expositionem desiderant? Chrysostom. ad Romans Hom. 19.
annon clara sunt, etiam vehementer stupidis: i. Do these need any
exposition? are they not clear and manifest, even to those that be very dull.
So Saint Augustine August. in Euang. Ioannis tract. 50.
says, Quadam in Scripturis tam manifesta sunt vt potius auditorem quam
expositorem desiderent: i. There be some things in the Scriptures so manifest,
that they require rather a hearer, then an expounder. So says Justinius Martyr:
(...). Justinius Martyr dialo. (...). page 68. edit. Robert. Stephan.
Mark and give heed to those things which I shall recite, out of the holy
Scriptures, which need not to be expounded, but only to be heard. And whereas
we confess that there be some things hard in the Scriptures, we say that the
same are to be understood and expounded by conferring them with other places
of the Scriptures. And that no foreign or private exposition is to be brought
to them, but that which is gathered out of the Scriptures themselves. So
Chrysostom says: Scriptura seipsam exponit, and lectoremerrare Chryso. in Genesis
homil. 12.
non sinit: that is, the Scripture expounds it self, and suffers not the
reader to err. Again, Semper enim quando quid obscurum loquitur seipsum
iterum interpretatur. In 2. Cor. homil. 9.
Whenever Paul does speak any thing obscurely, he does always expound
himself. So says Saint Augustine, August. de doct. Christi. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Magnifice igitur and salubriter, etc. that is, The holy Ghost has so
excellently and holesomely tempered the holy Scriptures, that with plain
places, he does put away hunger, and with obscure places take away
lothsomnesse. For there is nothing gathered from those hard places, which is
not to be found most plainly uttered in others. So Saint Basil says: Quae
ambigua sunt and tecte dicta esse in quibusdam Basil Quaest. comp. explic.
quaest. 267.
diuinae scripturae locis videntur, ea ab alijs locis manifestis declarantur:
that is, What things be doubtful, or seem to be covertly spoken in some
places of the holy Scripture, the same are expounded by other plain places.
Again: Ecce nunc audi ipsam seipsam declarantem scripturam. Behold Idem.
Hexam. homil. 4.
now, hear the Scripture expounding it self. So also says Irenaeus,
Ostensiones quae sunt in scripturis non possunt Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 12.
ostendi nisi ex scripturis: that is, The expositions which be in the
Scriptures cannot be showed but out of the Scriptures: So Theodoritus says,
(...). Theodor diae. log. 1.
Thou need no strange exposition. For the Evangelist expounds himself. So
Hilarious Hilarious de trinitate lib. 9.
says: Dictorum intelligentia aut ex praepositis aut ex consequentibus
expectetur: that is, The understanding of the sayings is to be looked for
either of those things which go before, or those that follow after. So Clemens
says: Ex ipsis scripturis sensum capere veritatis oportet. From the Distinct.
37. cap. Relatum.
Scriptures themselves we must take the sense and exposition of truth. Finally,
so Pope Pius the second: Ab ipsa scripture recipiendus est sensus veritatis:
that is, The understanding Aeneas Siluius epist. 130.
of the truth is to be received from the Scripture it self. Now how carefully
and diligently we endeavor to do this, that is to expound the holy Scriptures
truly and sincerely, by the Scriptures themselves, God knows, our writings
and sermons do show, and the consciences of those that read and hear them
can witness with us. And this is also an argument hereof, that you cannot bring
forth any places of the Scriptures which we falsely expound, or seek violently
and wickedly to wrest from the true and simple sense of the holy Ghost,
contained in the holy Scriptures. The which this cauiller should have done, and
thereby declare how we build our faith upon private and false expositions. But
let us see and examine his proof of his Minor, which is, that because we
build not our faith upon the exposition of the Church, the Fathers, or
Councels; therefore we build upon our own private expositions. I answer,
that although we reverence the judgment of the true Church of God, the holy
Fathers and Councels, yet by this that I have before alleged it plainly
appears, that we are to fetch the sense and exposition of the Scriptures, not
from them, but from the Scriptures themselves. And whereas you by the Church
do mean the Romish Church, I will show hereafter that she has corrupted and
falsely expounded the Scriptures. As touching the Doctors, we are not bound
unto their expositions, which sometimes be not sound, and sometimes differ
among themselves: Yea Cardinal Caietanus plainly Card. Caietanus in
praefatione in lib. 5. Mosis.
avouches this, and doubts not to bring sometimes senses and expositions to
the Scriptures which be not in all the Doctors. His words be these: Nullus
itaque detestetur nouum sacrae scripturae sensum; ex hoc quod dissonat a
priscis doctoribus. Sed scrutetur perspicacius textum ac contextum scripturae,
and siquadrare inuenerit, laudet Deum, qui non alligauit expositionem
scripturarum sacrarum pristorum doctorum sensibus, etc. that is, Let no man
hereupon detest or dislike a new exposition of the holy Scripture, because it
dissenteth from the old Doctors. But let him more sharply search the text and
Coherence of the Scriptures, and if he find it to agree therewith, let him
praise God, who has not bound the exposition of the holy Scriptures to the
senses and expositions of the ancient Doctors. Yea Bishop Fisher a great
patron of the Popes doubts not to affirm, 10. Roffens. Assert. Lutheran.
artic. 18. fol. 206.
that many things in the Gospel and other Scriptures be now more exactly
discussed, and more plainly understood, then they were of old time of the
Fathers, and that there be yet many obscure and hard places, which will be much
better understood of the posterity: whereby it appears that his Judgment
was, that the exposition of the Scriptures is not to be tied unto the Fathers,
and then much less to the Councels, which do not expound in order the books
of the Scriptures (as the Fathers did) but only examined some places, and
discussed some Doctrines which were in controversy. Moreover, whereas Saint
Augustine in his four books de doctrina christiana entreats largely of the
exposition of the Scriptures, and gives many good and learned lessons
concerning the same, and namely seven rules of Ticonius the Donatist which he
commends, and calls them keys to open the Scripture, neither he nor
Ticonius do make mention of these rules, which the author of this pamphlet
does here set down, nor refer us unto them. Therefore these be new coined
rules of your own, void of the testimony of antiquity. But that the
Christian reader may see, who they be that build their faith upon private and
false expositions of the Scripture, let us come to the examination of some
particular places of the Scripture, and see who they be that follow private and
false expositions. The words of our Savior Christ: drink ye all of Matthew.
26. 27.
it, they expound that Christ spoke them only to his Apostles, which (as they
term them) were priests: and therefore this binds priests to drink of the
Cup, but not the lay people. So says John Fisher the Bishop of Rochester:
Bibite ex eo omnes. Quae verba proculdubio solis erant dicta 10. Roffens.
Assert. Luther. confut. arti. 16.
sacerdotibus, quibus and potestas tum fuerat collata conficiendi sacramenti,
nimirum hijs verbis, hoc facite in meam commemorationem: that is, Drink all of
this, which words without all doubt were spoken only to priests, to whom power
also was given to make the Sacrament, that is, by these words, do this in
remenbrance of me. The same in effect Hosius de Com. sub viraque specie. and
Confess. Petric. cap. 40. and contr. Brentium. lib. 3.
wrote Cardinal Hosius, Doctor Harding, Andradius, Aeneas Siluius, and others.
This exposition although peradventure it will not be counted private, for that
it is maintained by so many great men, yet it is a very false and absurd
exposition, and easily to be discerned by any simple man. For if Doct. Hard. in
his answer to M. Jewel arti. 3 Andrad. ortho. explicat. lib. 7. page 606.
these words, Drink ye all of it, were spoken only to priests; then likewise
these, Take ye, eat ye, were spoken only to priests. And so by your wise
exposition, as none but priests, by these words are bound to drink of the Cup:
so none but priests are bound to take and eat the bread, Aeneas Syluius epist.
130. page 672.
as it was the manner and custom of the common people in Liuonia not to
receive this Sacrament at all, as Gerson writes. But if our Savior Christ did
speak the one to all, both priests and people, why not theother? If the one
Io. Gerson tom. 1. declar. dofect. viro. ceclesiast.
do bind all, why not the other? Moreover Saint Paul delivering to the
Corinthians the Supper of our Savior Christ, according to the institution
which he had received of Christ, delivered not only the bread but also the
Cup to the whole Church of Corinth, which I suppose you will not say were all
priests. This Cup is the new Testament in my blood. As often as ye shall eat
this bread, and drink this 1. Cor. 11. 25. 26 27.
Cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this
bread, and drink the Cup of the Lord unworthily shall be guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord. Paschasius expounds these words thus: Bibite ex hoc
omnes, hoc est, tam ministri quam reliqui credentes: that is, Drink ye all of
this, that is to say, both ministers and the rest that believe. The gloss as
it is alleged by Cassander thus. Bibite ex hoc omnes scilicet sine personarum
acceptione: that is, Drink ye Cassan. de vtraque specie.
all of this, that is, all without respect of persons. So does Chrysostom:
Omnibus vnum corpus proponitur and poculum vnum. One body and one Cup is
propounded to all. Chrysest. in 2.
So says Theophilactus: Tremendus calix pari cunctis condition Cor. hom. 18.
Theoph. in 1.
traditus est. The fearful Cup is in like sort delivered Cor. 11.
unto all. Yea this absurd exposition of theirs is contrary to the practice of
the Primitive Church, and to all antiquity, as might be showed, and of some
Papists is confessed.

But to proceed and to show how they handle other places, I will join two
places together, because they do often allege them together to prove the
Popes supremacy over the whole Church of God dispersed over the whole world.
The one Hosea. 1. 11. Then shall the Children of Judah, and the Children of
Israel be gathered together, and appoint themselves one head. The other place
is John 10. 16. There shall be one fold, and one shepherd. These places be
alleged by Pope Pius the second, epist. 288. by Johannes de Joan. de Paris. de
potest regia. and Papali. cap. 3 D. Hard. confut. Apolog. cap. 3. diuis. 2.
Parisijs, by D. Harding, etc. expounding the same not of Christ, but of the
Pope, to be this one head, and one shepherd. The which what a private and false
exposition it is, I need not greatly to show, it is so plain and apparent.
The first place of Hosea, Saint Hierome expounds thus: Haec Hieron. in Oseam.
cap. 1.
omnia fient, quia magnus est dies seminis Dei, qui interpretatur Christus: i.
All these things shall come to pass, because it is the great day of the seed
of God, which is expounded (not the Pope) but Christ: so also does Friar Lira.
Congregabuntur, filij Iudae, id est, Apostoli, etc. There shall assemble Nicol.
Lira in Oseam. cap. 1.
together the Children of Judah, that is to say the Apostles: and the Children
of Israel, that is to say, the heathen converted: together, that is to say, in
one Church: and shall appoint unto themselves one head, that is to say, one
Christ: So does S. Augustine de ciuitate Dei lib. 18. cap. 28. Whose words for
shortness sake I omit. The other place is so plain, that a Cobbler by hearing or
reading of it, may perceive that our Savior Christ spoke it of himself, and
not of the Pope. He says, I am the good shepherd and know Ioh. the 10. 14.
mine, and am known of mine: I lay down my life for my sheep. Other sheep I
have also, which are not of this fold: them also must I bring: and they shall
hear my voice: and there shall be one sheepefolde, and one shepherd.
Therefore does my father love me, because I lay down my life that I might take
it again. Who is so blind as sees not these words to be spoken of our Savior
Christ himself, and not of the Pope. Yet that doughtie or rather doltish
Doctor, Johannes de Parisijs is not ashamed to say, that it is not to be
understood of Christ, but of some other Minister, which should rule in his
place. His words be these: Congregabuntur filij Judah, and filij Vbi supra.
Israel, vt ponant sibi caput vnum: and Joan. 10. fiet vnum ouile, and vnus
pastor. Quod quidem de Christo intelligi non potest: sed de alio aliquo
ministro quipraesit loco eius. i. The Children of Judah and the Children of
Israel shall be gathered together, and shall appoint themselves one head: and
Ioh. 10. There shall be one fold, and one shepherd, which cannot be
understood of Christ, but of some other minister that must rule in his place.
Behold the absurdity of this saying and exposition, and let this cauiller, who
in his questions and challenge so disdainefully despises our learning,
consider what a blind, ignorant, and unlearned Doctor and writer this was, that
so absurdly expounds this place, and contrarily to the plain words denies
them to be understood of our Savior Christ, and blasphemously attributes yt
unto the Pope, which is only proper and peculiar to Jesus Christ. Friar Lira
was of better judgment, who Nic. Lira in Joan. cap. 10.
writes thus: Fiet vnus pastor, id est, Christus: i. There shall be one
pastor, that is to say, Christ. I will show another place or two in like
manner, expounded for the proof of the same matter. In the book of the
ceremonies of the Church of Rome, the which I wish were in English, that our
English Catholics might see the goodly ceremonies and orders of that Church,
it is thus written: Papa in nocte natiuitatis domini benedicit ensem, quem
postea donat alicui principi in signum infinitae potentiae pontifici collatae,
iuxta illud, Lib. 1. Carem. ^^ul. 7.
data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo and in terra. Item dominabitur a mari
vsque ad mare, and a flumine vsque ad terminos orbis terrarum: i. The Pope in
the night of the feast of Christ's Nativity, blesses a sword, for a sign of
the infinite power given to him; which he afterward bestows upon some Prince,
according to that saying: All power is given to me both in heaven and in earth:
also, He shall rule from the sea unto the sea, and from the stood unto the ends
of the world. Are not these sayings think you finely expounded of the Pope,
whereof the one our Savior Christ himself spoke, and the other the Prophet
David prophesied of Jesus Christ himself? And the former of these places,
Stephen the Archbishop of Patraca applied unto Pope Leo the 10. In Council.
Lateran sub Leo. 10. page 671.
in the Council of Lateran, in the audience of the Pope himself, who
thankefully accepted it, and suffered it to be published, and printed; and so
to this day was never by any Papist disliked. By these places any man may
discern and judge, whether this Romish prelate be not that man of sin, and
son of perdition, an adversary, that exalts 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. 4.
himself against, or above all, that is called God, or that is worshipped,
sitting as God in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God (of whom
S. Paul before prophesied) in taking these things unto himself, which Gods
spirit spoke properly, and peculiarly of Jesus Christ? The place of Saint Peter
1. chap. 4. Love or charity covers the multitude of sins: they expound in
this sense, that charity makes satisfaction for our sins, and covers and
hides our sins before God. John Fisher the Bishop of Rochester writes
hereof thus: Tertius modus est per vehementis Assert. Luther. Confut. cap: 17.
charitatis affectum. Nam vehemens vtique charitatis affectus peccatorum etiam
expurgat reliquias, quum dicat diuus Petrus: Charitas operit multitudinem
peccatorum: i. The third means (to purge away sin) is by the affection of
vehement charity: for surely the vehement affection of charity, does also
purge out the remnants of sins, for S. Peter says, Charity hides the
multitude of sinner. That this is a private and false exposition, a simple and
mean man may see, especially if he look upon the place, in the Proverbs,
chap. 10. 12. from the which Saint Peter does allege it, and is commonly
quoted in the margent. Hatred stirs up contention: but love or charity
covers all trespasses. Where Solomon shows, that as envy and hatred moves
men to contention, and to blow abroad the faults of their brethren to their
infamy: so love and charity should move us to cover and hide their faults and
infirmities, and rather seek to amend them, then to defame them: and therefore
these words are not meant of satisfying for our sins, or covering them before
God; but of the covering of them before men. And so does D. Bayne, Bishop of
Lichfield in Queen Mary's days, expound them. What In Proverb. 10.
should I show how privately or rather falsely they expound the places of Genesis
14. 18. touching Melchesedeck bringing forth bread and wine, and that of
Malachie 1. 11. of the incense and pure offering, which in every place shall be
offered to God, by which they seek to maintain their Mass, and the false
forged sacrifice thereof. I would have passed these places over in silence, but
that D. Harding does so hardly handle us, and so grievously charge us for them,
in these words. The Scripture it self ministering evident proof for the
oblation of Christ, to his father by the Priests of the new Testament, in the
institution of this holy Sacrament, in the figure of Melchisedeck, and in the
prophecy of Malachie the Prophet, the authorities of the Fathers needed not to
be alleged, were not the same Scriptures by the ouertwhart and false
interpretations of our adversaries, wrested, and turned to a contrary sense,
to the heretical seducing of the unlearned. These be Master D. Hardings modest
words. Let it therefore be In his answer artic. 17.
examined and tried who they be that thus ouertwhart these places, and turn
them to a contrary sense. As touching the first place out of Genesis, they
expound it that Melchisedeck offered bread and wine, for he was the Priest of
the most high God, and that was a type and figure of the sacrifice of the new
Testament, wherein Christ is offered unto his father, under the form of bread
and wine. Pighius Controuers. 5. Hosius Confess. Petriconiensi. cap. 41. Who
says that this is the opinion of all the holy Doctors of the Church, that this
bread and wine was offered for a sacrifice to God, and not for a refection to
Abraham. But this both exposition and assertion is false: for both Tertullian
contra Iudaeos, and also Epiphanius, Haeres. 55. expound it Epiph. Haeres. 55
of his bringing forth of bread and wine to Abraham. Epiphanius says: Abraham
fuit 88. aut 90. plus minos tunc Melchisedec ipsi obuiam venit and proposuit
ipsi panem and vinum: i. Abraham was about 88. or 90. years old when
Melchesedeck met him, and brought forth bread and wine unto him. So does
Josephus expound it: Melchisedec milites Joseph. antiq. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Abrahami hospitaliter habuit, nihil illis ad victum deesse passus; simul ipsum
adhibuit mensae: Melchisedech used hospitality to Abraham's Soldiers and
suffered them to want no victualles, and did take Abraham to his Table. That
this is the true sense it appears by the Hebrew word (...) which does never
signify to offer and sacrifice, but to bring forth: and the force of truth
forces some of their own side to confess this to be true. Cardinal Caietanus
upon this place writes thus: Nihil cribitur hic de sacrificio Caitt. in Genesis
cap. 14.
seu oblatione: sed de prolatione seu extractione, quam Josephus dicit factam
ad refectionem victorum. Quod autem in vulgata editione subditur vt causa
oblationis, erat enim sacerdos dei altissimi: in Hebraeo non habetur vt causa,
sed vt separata clausula: that is, There is nothing here said of sacrifice or
oblation, but of bringing forth, which Iesephus says was done to the refection
of them which had gotten the victory. And that which in the vulgar edition is
put after as a cause, for he was the priest of the most high God; in the Hebrew
is not set as a cause, but as a clause separated from it. Andradius also the
Jesuit does herein forsake his friends, and acknowledges this to be the true
exposition, his words be these: De offerendi autem vocabulo non est Kemnici
Andrad. defens. fidei Tridert. lib. 4.
quod digladeremur, cum and in correctioribus latinis exemplaribus, and sanctis
patribus qui locum hunc Eucharistiae accommoundat extet proferens; atque ego
cum illis sentiam qui lassos Abrahae milites, and diuturna pugnafractos
Melchisedecom pane vinoque refecisse aiunt: that is, We need not Kemnicus to
strive about the word of offering, seeing that both in the best corrected
Latin coppies, and also in the holy Fathers which apply this place to the
Eucharist, it is, proferens brought forth, and I in judgment agree with them,
which say that Melchisedech refreshed Abraham's soldiers wearied and fainted
with long fight. Their exposition of the other place of Malachie is as absurd,
in applying it to the sacrifice of the Mass, which is neither a pure
sacrifice, nor is offered in all places. And the Fathers Tertullian, Hierome,
and others expound it of the spiritual sacrifices of the faithful which they
offer in all places to God. Tertullian in three places does so expound it,
whereof I will set down but one: Et in omni loco sacrificium nomini meo
offeretur, Lib. aduers. lud^o^ lib. 3. aduers. Marcionem, and lib. 4.
and sacrificium mundum, scilicet simplex oration de conscientia pura: that is,
and in every place a sacrifice shall be offered to my name, and a pure oblation,
to wit, simple prayer from a pure conscience. S. Jerome expounds it thus:
Dicit orationes sanctorum domino offerendas esse, non in vna orbis prouincia
Hieron. in Malach. cap. 1.
Iudaeae, sed in omni loco a. He says that the prayers of the Saints shall be
offered to God not in Judea, one only province of the world, but in every
place. But I will forbear to write any more, of the perverse exposition of this
place, and will refer the reader to that most learned conference, of that
excellent ornament of this Church of England Master Doctor Reynoldes, with John
Heart, where he shall find Cap. 8. page 454. 546. 562.
this place fully discussed, and Cardinal Allens reasons, which he braggingly
calls valida and plane bona; that is, strong and very good, fully confuted:
Which book I marvel that neither this challenger, nor any other of our
Jesuits could as yet find leisure to confute. I might allege many more places
most falsely expounded by these Romanistes, but I will forbear them, and will
show you one place out of the 26. of Jeremy, trimly applied by Bonauenture a
Seraphicall Doctor, a Bishop, a Cardinal of Rome, and a Saint canonized by
Pope Sixtus the fourth, De vanitat. Scient. cap. 64. Bonauent. part. 2.
who did as holy an act in Saincting of him, as he did in building nobile
admodum Lupanar, a noble stews in Rome, as Agrippa a papist writes.
Bonauentures words be these: Septimo eleuatur Corpus Christi ad ostendendam
bonitatem operum in exposi. missae. fol. 100. G.
Christi. Quae enim mayor bonitas quam quod Christus dignatur captiuus esse in
altari, vnde ipse dicit in persona Hieremiae prophetae. Ecce ego in mambus
vestris sum, quod bonum and rectum est in oculis vestris facite mihi. Nota quod
dum aliquis dux propter suos captiuus tenetur non dimittitur nisidet magnam
pecuniam. Sic nec nos Christum captiuum dimittere debemus nisi remissionem
peccatorum nobis tribuat, and regnum coeleste ab eo accipiamus. Eleuat ergo
sacerdos Corpus Christi in altari. q. d. Ecce quem totus mundus capere non
potest, captiuus noster est. Ergo eum non dimittamus nisi quod petimus prius
obtineamus: that is, Seventhly the body of Christ is lifted up to show the
goodness of Christ: for what greater goodness is there, then that Christ
vouchsafes to be prisoner upon the Altar: whereupon he says in the person of
Hieremie the Prophet, Behold, I am in your hands; that which is good and right
in your eyes, do ye vnt me. Note that when any captain is kept prisoner for
his people, he is held prisoner, and not let go, unless he give a great sum
of money. So also we ought not to let Christ our prisoner go, unless he give
unto us forgiveness of sins, and that we receive of him the kingdom of
Heaven. Therefore the priest does lift up the body of Christ upon the Altar;
as though he should say: behold, he whom the whole world is not able to
contain, is our prisoner, therefore let us not let him go, unless we do
first obtain of him that which we require. This place I thought good the more
largely to lay down, that the reader may see what divine doctrine these Romish
Saints have delivered, and how finely they have applied the Scriptures. By this
doctrine Christ is prisoner in the Mass, and he must not be let go until he
have paid his ransom. And this is substantially proved out of Jeremy chap.
26. where Jeremy having preached the word of God, and denounced his fearful
plagues against Judah and Jerusalem, the priests and people took him and went
about to kill him, to whom Jeremy spoke saying: The Lord Ierem. 26. 11.
has sent me to prophecy against this House, and against this City all the
things that ye have heard, therefore now amend your ways and your works, and
hear the voice of the Lord your God, that the Lord may repent him of the
plague, that he has pronounced against you. As for me, behold I am in your
hands: do with me as you think good and right. But know ye for certainty
that if ye put me to death, ye shall bring innocent blood upon your selves,
and upon this City, and upon the inhabitants thereof: For of a truth the Lord
has sent me unto you, to speak all these words in your cares. Is not this
place finely expounded, and applied, and does it not substantially prove that
Christ is in the priests hands at Mass, when he holds him over his head, and
belike goes about to kill him as they did Hieremie? In deed by their doctrine
they tear him with their teeth, and devour him. Thus we see, how these Romish
divines and Saints have handled and expounded the word of God, of whom that may
be well said and verified, which Polidore Virgil fauorer of the Romish religion
writes of the popish lawyers and canonists. videl. Non secus isti
iurisconsulti aliquoties detorquent Polido. Virg. de invent. rerum lib. 4. cap.
9.
sacras scripturas quo volunt, ac sutores sordidas solent dentibus extendere
pelles: that is, See how these lawyers (we may say divines yea and Saints) do
sometimes no otherwise wrest the holy Scriptures, then cobblers use to stretch
out with their teeth their filthy leather or skins. And that also which
Theophylactus says: Ita exponere scripturas, manifest delirare est: that is,
So to expound the Scriptures is to dote or be mad. I might show infinite other
places which they have most falsely expounded and applied, yea and also which
they have corrupted, mangled, and altered (which I mind hereafter somewhat to
do) but this shall suffice at this present to let the reader see, who they be
which follow private and false expositions of the Scriptures, and consequently
be infidels. And if the author of this pamphlet, or his companions, can charge
us with the like, then they may truly say that we have followed private
expositions, and be Infidels. But it is the usual manner of these men to make
many vehement accusations, and to bring few sound proofs.

Where you say that we reject Saint Augustine, and other Fathers, who bring
Scripture to prove prayer for the dead, I answer, that we refuse not the
alleging of Scriptures by any, but upon good and sound reason, which we will
be ready to justify and maintain. If you think either Augustine in that
book de cura pro mortuis which you quote (which is more full of doubts, then
of sound proofs out of the Scripture) or other Fathers have any plain places
of Scripture to prove prayer for the dead, you may produce them, urge them,
and make syllogismes of them, and we will answer them. But you speak many
things generally, and prove few particularly and pithily: For us to prove and
examine by the Scriptures, the expositions of the Fathers, is no fault. For if
the spirit of God commend that good people of Berea for examining Paul's
preaching by the Scriptures, we cannot be worthily blamed for examining the
writings and expositions of the Act. 17. 11.
Fathers by the Scriptures, as long as it cannot be proved, that we do
otherwise, then accept the good, and reject the evil. So Saint Augustine
speaking of the writings of godly Fathers says: Hoc genus literarum ab
autoritate canonis distinguendum est, etc. This kind of writing is to be
distinguished from the authority of the canon of the August. epist. 48.
Scriptures. For they be not so read as though a testimony were so alleged
out of them, that we may not think or judge otherwise, if they have any where
otherwise thought then the truth required. For we are of the number of them
which do not disdain to accept to our selves that which was said of the
Apostle. If you be otherwise minded God shall reveal the same unto you. The
like he writes in his 111. epistle to Fortunatianus, and in his 112. epist.
and in his second book against Cresconius, cap. 31. and 32. which I forbear
to allege. To conclude, if you can produce any expositions of the ancient
Fathers (whom we reverence, and whose works we read as diligently as you do)
which we reject, if we do not show good reason for the same, let us bear the
blame, and shame of it. Nevertheless we do not allow every paltrie companion
(as you term them) either to be an expositor of Christ's word, or to prefer
his exposition there of before all ancient fathers. Neither do I know any man
so to do: but we allow all men to read and hear Gods holy word, and as they
may be much edified and comforted by the things that be plain, so if they
understand not some places, we exhort them to do as the noble man the Act. 8.
Queen Candaces Treasurer did, to seek to a faithful Philip, Hierom. in
epitaphio Fabiolae. August. de moribus eccles. Catho. cap. 1.
that is, a godly and learned man, and by him to seek to have them opened and
expounded: so did Fabiola and other godly women to Saint Hierome. So Augustine
says: Scripturarum expositio ab ijs petenda est qui earum doctores se esse
profitentur: that is, The exposition of the Scriptures is to be sought of them,
which profess themselves to be doctors and teachers of them. Yet with Saint
Paul we say, that as we are not to despise prophesying, that is, the expounding
1 Thessalonians. 5, 20. 21. 22.
of Gods word, so we are not rashly to receive whatsoever is delivered to us,
but we are to prove all, and to hold that which is good, and to abstain from
all appearance of evil, for the ear tries the words, as the mouth tastes
meat. Job. 33. 3. Basil Quaest. compend. explica. Quaest. 279.
So also Saint Basil says: Quod in edulijs est sensus qualitatis vniuscuiusque
edulij, hoc in verbis sanctae scripturae est intellectus. Gula enim, inquit,
cibos gustat, men's verba dijudicat: that is, That which in meats is the taste
of the quality of every meat, the same is the understanding or mind in the
words of the holy Scripture. For the throat, says he, tastes the meats, and
the mind judges the words.

Now I will retort your argument upon you in this manner, Whosoever builds
his faith upon private and false expositions of the Scripture is an infidel.
The Papists build their faith upon private, and false expositions of the
Scripture, as I have showed before, and can prove in many places more: ergo the
Papists be infidels. And thus much to your second article of faith.

The Pamphlet. All Protestants who are ignorant of the Greek and Latin
tongues are Infidels. 3. Article.
Whosoever relieth his faith upon the ministers credit and fidelity, has no
faith at all.

But all those in England, who are ignorant of the Greek and Hebrew tongues,
rely their faith upon the ministers credit. Ergo.

All those in England who are ignorant of the Greek and Hebrew tongues, have
no faith at all.

The Mayor is manifest: because they themselves confess that every man may
err, and does err; neither have they any warrant why the ministers do not
err, since they constantly do defend, that whole general councels, yea and
the universal Catholic Church may err and has erred.

The Minor I prove: for all such Protestants ground their faith upon the Bible,
translated into English, the which translation they know not whether it be true
or false, whether the minister Tindall for example erred or no, either upon
ignorance as Broughton one of the greatest linguists among the precisians
affirms in an epistle dedicated to the Lords of the Counsel, or upon malice
to induce the people to protestancie, or to cause them to leave the Catholic
Religion: as Gregory Martin in his discovery most pregnantly proves. These
errors I say they know not, and consequently cannot discern a true translation
from a false, and therefore must needs rely their faith upon the silly
ministers faithles fidelity: which conuinceth that they have no faith at all.

Answer.
I Deny the Minor or second proposition of this Syllogism, and say that we
rely not our faith upon the Ministers credit and fidelity, but upon the word
of God translated, the which we know to be true and holy, not so much for that
it is by public authority, and general assent of men allowed, as for that it
contains most holy doctrine agreeable to true faith, and godly life, whereby
any that reads or hears it, may behold the Majesty of Gods spirit
appearing in it. As for example, I believe these sayings to be true: that Jesus
Christ came into this world to save sinners: that he is the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world: that 1. Tim. 1.
the grace of God which offers salvation to all men has Ioh. 1.
appeared, and teaches us, that we deny ungodliness and Tit. 2. 11.
worldly lust, and live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world,
etc. not for that this, or that man has translated them, but because the
spirit of God does bear witness unto my heart, that most holy, pure, and divine
doctrine is contained in them. And therefore to say that those which understand
not the Hebrew, and Greek tongues, because they use the word of God translated
to them into other languages, do rely their faith upon the Ministers credit
and fidelity, and have no faith, is most foolish and absurd. And let the
Christian reader mark and consider how this sottish reason tends to the
discrediting not only of us, but also of the most part of all godly and
faithful Christians in all ages; yea and to the most of the godly Doctors and
Fathers of the Church, who were almost all ignorant of the Hebrew tongue, and
some of the Greek also. The holy Scriptures were translated into many tongues,
in the which the people of God did read and hear them. As Theodoritus
writes: Hebraici vero libri, non modo in Graecum idioma conuersi sunt, sed in
Romanam quoque linguam, Aegyptiacam, Persicam, Indicam, Armenicamque, Theodor.
de curatione Graecarum affectionum lib. 5.
and Scythicam, adeoque Sauromaticam, semelque vt dicam, in linguas omnes,
quibus ad hanc diem nationes vtantur, that is, The Hebrew books be translated
not only into the Greek tongue, but also into the Roman, Egyptian,
Persian, Indian, Armenian, and Scythian, and also the Sclauonian tongues, and
to say at a word, into all languages which the nations use unto this day. Did
the ancient faithful Christians which read and heard the holy Scriptures in
these sundry languages, rely their faith upon men that did translate them, or
upon the divine doctrine, and precious promises of God contained in them? And
let this cauiller show sufficient reason, why we are not either to be acquitted
with them: or they condemned with us. They could no more judge of the truth of
the translations, then our people can: yet they did to their great comfort, and
godly instruction and edification read and hear the holy Scriptures,
grounding their faith not upon the translators, who might be, and sometimes
were evil men; but upon the sound, holy and heavenly doctrine therein
contained. Saint Hierome exhorted ladies, and gentlewomen not only to read
the Scriptures themselves, but also to Hieron. ad Gaudentium de Pacatule
Infantulae educat. and ad Letam de institut filiae.
bring up their young daughters when they were but seven years old in that
holy exercise. They were not able to judge of the translations otherwise, then
to discern and perceive that the doctrine by them delivered was pure and holy,
agreeable to true faith, and godly life. And even so they that be godly in
these days, although they, having not the knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek
tongues, cannot judge so exactly of translations, and of the truth of them, as
those that understand them can; yet they may discern whether the translations
deliver sound and holy doctrine consonant to true faith, good manners, and the
general heads and principles of Christianity or not. I need not here ask
upon what or whom your (...) Catholics do rely their faith, when they read
either the old vulgar Latin translation, or the Remish English: seeing they
can no more, nor better judge of these translations whether they be true or
false then we. I do not (I say) ask whereon they rely their faith, for it
seems that they build not their faith so much upon the written word of God in
the Scriptures, as unwritten Extrauagant. Ioh. 22. cum inter in glossa. and
did. 96. satis euidenter.
traditions of men, customs of fathers, decrees of councels, and especially
upon the will and pleasure of their great God (as his own friends call him)
the Pope of Rome: Whose will is the rule of their faith and life. If he give a
dispensation for a man to mary his own sister as Pope Martin the fifth did, it
is lawful: if he give a dispensation Antoninus Sum. part. 3. titu. 1. cap. 11.
55. quod papa. and summa Angelica, in Papa. fol. 232.
for one to many his sisters daughter (which is as unlawful as the other) as a
late Pope gave to the late King Philip of Spain, it is lawful. But yet if any
of these counted Catholics will pretend to build their faith upon the
Scriptures, and being ignorant of the Hebrew and Greek tongues, reads either
the vulgar Latin or English Remish translation of the new Testament, I would
ask how he does know whether these translations be true or false, or whether
he will say that his faith depends upon the credit and fidelity of the
translator or no? But I know what they will answer, that the Latin vulgar
translation is allowed by the Church, that is to say, by the council Counc.
Trident. Sessi. 4. decretum. 2.
of Trident which represents the Church, which has decreed the same to be
taken for authentical in readings, disputations, sermons, or expositions, and
that no man be bold or presume upon any pretense to reject or refuse it:
whereunto first I say, that as this decree does allow the Latin, so it does
not approve the English. Now how shall an English Catholic, that understands
not the Latin know whether the same be truly translated out of the Latin or
no, or shall his faith here rely upon the credit and fidelity of the
translator? I would know what difference there is between such a one reading
or hearing that translation, and one of us reading or hearing ours: And why the
faith of the one does more depend upon the credit and fidelity of the
translator, then the other. Surely this difference there is, that our
translations be true, and agreeable to the original of the Greek, wherein the
holy Ghost indicted, and the Apostles did write the new Testament: and their
said Remish translation is false differing from the same, in contradictions,
additions, and detractions in very many places, as I have showed in a discourse
thereof added to the confutation of the ten foolish reasons, which the Remish
use in the preface of the Testament by them set forth, which moved them in
translating to leave the original fountain of the Greek, and to follow the
corrupt stream of the Latin, which has been extant in print these twelve
years, and yet to this day never answered. Now as touching the decree of the
council of Trident for the Latin, made by about forty blind Bishops or
Bussards, I say, it is a shameful decree, and a fit one for such a council, and
such a one as cannot be showed in any of all the councels, that have bin before
in the Church of Christ, to authorize a translation so much differing and
dissenting from the Hebrew and Greek as it does, to be authentical, that is,
to have authority of it self, and not to be refused in any readings,
preachings, etc. The which translation is so corrupt and full of faults, that
Isodorus Clarius a Spanish Monk professes that he found eight thousand faults
in it: the which preface of his as they have since suppressed, so it is written
that the Spanish inquisitors Amand. Polanus in didascalia page 49.
plagued him for it. But to admit that this Latin translation is authentical
as the Tridentine council has decreed: I would ask one of these Catholics
upon what edition thereof they will rely their faith, whether that which of
late years was set out at Rome by Pope Sixtus the fifth, or another two or
three years after, by this present Pope Clemens the eight. The which editions
do greatly differ in alterations, additions, detractions, contradictions, as
Master Thomas James has very diligently, and largely showed. The former Pope
Sixtus the fifth had as he professes such care to have the Bible incorruptly
set fourth and printed, that he corrected the faults with his own hand, and
charged that none should afterward be printed but according to that copy, Ne
minima quidem particula mutata, addita vel detracta, as he in his preface
says, that is, not the least particle changed, added or detracted: yet this
Pope Clemens the eight has, as I have said, made many great alterations,
additions, and detractions in the same. Hereof I will allege an example or two
for a taste, Iosue 11. 19. Sixtus edition has. Non fuit ciuitas quae se non
traderet filijs Israel praeter (...).i. There was not a City which did not
yield it self to the children of Israel beside the Hiuite. Clemens thus: Non
fuit ciuitas quae se traderet filijs, etc. There was not a City which did
yield it self to the children of Israel, etc. the one negatiuely, the other
affirmatively. Lib. 1. Esdrae. cap. 3. Sixtus says, Sursum autem adportam
equorum adisicauerunt: that is, they built upward to the gate of the horses.
Clemens aporta equotum, from the gate of the horses. Lib. Sapienlia, cap. 2.
11. Sixtus has iustitiae justice. Clemens has iniustit^ae, that is,
injustice. 1. Sam. (or as they count. Reg. 4. 7.) Clemens has taken all these
words out of Sixtus exact edition Viu^ dominus, quia nisi dominus perousserit
eum, aut dies eius vene^ic vt moriatur, aut descendens in praelium perierit,
propitius mihi sit dominus, vt non mittam manum meam in Christum domini: that
is, as the Lord lives, that except the Lord si^ite him, or his days come that
he dye, or going down to the battle he perish, the Lord be so merciful to me,
that I will not lay mine hand upon the Lords anointed. The like detractions
you may read. 2. Samuel. or 2. Reg. 6. 12. and ibid. 21. and cap. 8. 8. and
ibid. verse. 13. and many other places, as the reader may see in the said
editions, and in Master James collections, upon which of these so greatly
differing will the Catholic rely his feith? And here let him consider whether
the Pope may err, or not, for that one of these Popes erred, especially Pope
Sixtus, notwithstanding all his great care, and diligence in correcting the
Bible with his own hand, it cannot be denied. Such great variety, diversity,
and faithles infidelity I am sure that the author of this worthy pamphlet and
all his companions cannot show in our translators, which he seeks so much to
discredit. As for Gregory Martines pregnant proofs in his discovery, they
belong ago effectually, and learnedly confuted by D. Fulke; and to this day
stand undefended. And therefore until you have answered the same, you may be
ashamed to brag of his pregnant proofs, which were so weak, and cauils so
great and many, that he rather discovered his own folly; then discredited our
translators, What Master Broughton writes concerning our translation I do not
know, neither do I greatly care: yet this I say, although that our translations
were made in the fear of God; to profit Gods Church and people, according to
the measure of the grace of God bestowed upon the laborers in that holy work,
and be void of wilful corruptions either for doctrine or manners: yet I do not
think them to be void of imperfections, in respect of propriety of words, and
phrases, wherein they may be some what reformed, and amended. And hard it is to
have a translation so exact and perfect, but that some such imperfectnes may be
in it, which yet be not repugnant either to holy doctrine or good life. And for
as much as this man of malice would feign if he could discredit our
translations, and cause the Reader to doubt of the truth of them, I will show
not only the good Christian, but also the Romish Catholic that has
understanding of the Latin tongue, how he may discern and know the truth and
faithfulness of our translations, and so not to rely upon the credit of our
Ministers. There is a Latin translation of the old Testament made from the
Hebrew very well and learnedly by Sanctos Pagninus an Italian, and a dominicke
Friar, a man excellently learned in the Hebrew tongue (for I will give him and
his work their due and deserved praise, and commendation, and not do as this
libiller, and his fellows use to do, who of envy and malice, wherewith their
hearts be infected and possessed, cannot give a good word to any thing we do,
though it be never so good and godly.) This translation he did dedicate to Pope
Clemens the seventh: Let the Reader compare our translations especially of the
latter editions with the said translation, and see whether in any substantial
matter of faith and life, he can find any corruptions and any great and
notorious dissensions from the same. And the like I may say of Erasmus
translation of the new Testament dedicated to Pope Leo the tenth, and allowed
by him. Let I say the Reader compare our translations with these, and although
he may find some difference in words and phrases, yet in matters of substance
which concern either the doctrine of faith, or precepts of good life, I am
sure he shall find a goodly and godly harmony, and agreement to his comfort
and contentation. And lastly I will offer to this challenger (who offers
challenge of disputation with us) and to al his partakers, that for one fault
of moment or weight, that they shall find in our translations, especially, as I
said of the latter editions, wherein they differ from the original fountains
of the Hebrew and Greek; I will undertake to find fix, yea ten greater and
fouler in that vulgar Latin translation, which the council of Trident has
most absurdly confirmed and made authentical: And therefore let neither the
godly Christian Reader, nor the seduced Catholic, be dissuaded from reading of
our translations, nor doubt of the truth of them. But this has been in all
ages the drift of the Devil to secke to discredit and diffame those godly men
that have labored in Gods vineyard, and have endeavored to translate his holy
word to the comfort and salvation of his elect and chosen people. How Saint
Hierome of old and Erasmus of late were used, I have elsewhere showed. So this
cauiller deals now, with that blessed man of God, and constant Martyr of
Jesus Christ Master Tindall, who as he did patiently and constantly bear and
abide their furious cruelty, and confirmed the truth of God which he had
taught, with the shedding of his blood in flaming fire, so he needs not my
defense. Who was a man of such mortification and godly life, that I have known
some of great credit, and authority that knew him, and lived with him at
Antwerpe, that would say of him, that if a man could be like God, it was
Tindall. I doubt not but he was endued with much more godliness then a hundredth
of your Popes, whom their own friends and favorers call for their horrible
wickedness, Monstra and Portenta, Monsters of mankind. But he that justifies
Platinae in Benedicto 4. and Christophoro 1. and Joan. 13. prou. 17. 15. Psalm.
116. Romans 3.
the wicked, and he that condemns the innocent even they both are abomination
to God. That all men may err we do confess, Omnis homo Mendax: that is, all
men be liers: and general councels which consist of men may err, and have
erred we do not doubt. But of this it shall be impertinent to speak at this
present. I will only now retort your argument upon you: Whosoever relyeth his
faith upon man, has no faith: but all English papists that understand not the
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and read the Remish translation, rely their faith
upon man, videl. the translator of that Testament: ergo all such English
papists have no faith. The like may be said of them that read the Latin,
which rely their faith upon the council of Trent who were men. Again,
whosoever relyeth his faith upon man, has no faith: all papists rely their
faith upon the Pope, who I trow is a man ergo all papists have no faith. And
this shall suffice for answer to your third article.

The Pamphlet. The Protestants know not what they believe. 4. Article.
THe Protestants know not what they believe, nor why they believe: that they
know not why they believe, I have showed before. For that the ground of their
belief is not the authority of Scripture, of councels, of Doctors, nor of the
Church, but their own fancy. And that they know not what they believe is
manifest, because they have no rule, whereby to know what is matter of faith,
and what is not. Some will limit their belief to their creed, saying, that
nothing ought to be believed, which is not in the Apostles creed. But then I
would demand of them, whether that we ought to believe that the Scripture is
the word of God? that baptism is a Sacrament? that in the Eucharist is the
body of Christ by faith? to what article should these be reduced, seeing they
are not contained in the creed? or how shall we know infallibly, how these be
matters of faith: since they are not contained in the creed? others deny some
articles of their creed also: for the Protestants deny three articles of our
creed, and the puritans five: The first is the Catholic Church. Credo
ecclesiam sanctam Catholicam: I believe the holy Catholic Church, the which in
very deed they do not believe: because Catholic is universal, Matthew. 26.
Isa. 60.
and so the Church of Christ which we are bound to believe, must be vninersall
for all time comprehending allages, and universal for place, comprehending all
nations: but that Church which the Protestants believe, was interrupted all the
ages betwixt the Apostles and Luther, which was 1400. years, or in very deed
was never seen before Luthers days, therefore that Church they believe,
cannot be Catholic. Neither is it universal in place, being contained within
the narrow bounds of England, which is accounted but as a corner of the world,
for the Lutherans in Germany, the Hugonites in France, and the Guines in
Flaunders detest their religion as much as the Catholics; neither will they
join issue with them in diverse essential points. And therefore the
Protestants Church which they believe, can no more be called Catholic or
universal, then England the universal world: or Kent the Kingdom of England:
or a pruned bough a wheat tree, or a dead finger a man, or a rotten tooth, the
whole head. The second article is the communion of Saints, the which they many
ways deny. First by not believing that Christ has instituted seven
Sacraments, wherein the Saints of his Church communicate: and specially the
true and real presence of our Savior Christ in the Eucharist, by which all the
faithful receivers participating of one 1. Cor 10. 17.
and the self same body, are made one body, as all the parts of a man's
body, are made one living thing by participating one soul. Secondly they
deny the communion of the Church militant and triumphant by exclaming against
invocation of Genesis 48. v. 16.
Saints, by which holy exercise the blessed Saints in heaven, and Apoca. 1. v 4.
we in earth communicate; we by prayer glorifying them, and they by
meditation, obtaining our request. Thirdly, they deny the communion of the
Church militant, and the souls in purgatory, bereauing them of that Christian
charity, which charitable compassion and merciful pity requires, and by
natural affection the members of one body help one another. The third
article is remission of sins, for they acknowledge no such effect in the
Sacrament of Baptism: but only count it as an external sign, or seal of a
prereceiued grace or favor of God, by his eternal predestination, against the
express word of God: which therefore calls this Sacrament the lauer of
regeneration, for that in it the soul dead by sin is newly regenerate Ad
Tit. 3.
by grace. Moreover they allow not the Sacrament of penance, wherein all
actual sins committed after Baptism are cancelled: Ioh. 20.
and that which exceeds all in absurdity, is to deny that our sins are all
perfectly forgiven, but only not imputed, and as it were veiled or covered
with the passion of Christ: all the botches, and biles the filth and
abomination of sin still remaining, and as it were exhaling a most
pestiferous sent in the sight of God. For let them shift themselves as they
list, and scarf their ^ores according to their fancies, yet no veil, nor
mantell can cover their deformity of sin, from the pearcing eyes of Gods
perfect understanding, from which nothing can be concealed. Fourthly, the
puritanes in effect deny that Christ is the Ioh. 8. verse. 24.
son of God: for they peremptorily affirm that Christ is God Ioh. 16. ver.
13.
of himself, and not God of God: So that he received not his divinity from
his father. The which position flatly takes away the nature of a son, for
the nature of a son is to receive his substance of his Father, and it
implies contradiction: that the son receives his person of his Father and
not his substance and essence, for the substance of God is essential to every
person in trinity. Fifthly, finally they deny the descension of Christ into
hell, and desperately defend that he suffered the pains of Hell upon the
Cross, whereby they blaspheme most horribly that sacred humanity: as if
Christ had despaired of Isa. 66. verse. 24.
his salvation, as if God had hated him and he had hated God, Mark 9. 48.
as if he had been afflicted, and tormented with anguish of mind Math. 25. 41.
for his offenses: for which he was deprived of the sight of God, and eternally
to be deprived: all which horrible punishments are included in the pains of
Hell, and whosoever ascribes them to Christ, blasphemeth more horribly then
Arius who denied him to be God, for less absurdity it were to deny him to be
God, then to make God the enemy of God.

Answer.
IN this fourth article the syllogism promised is not performed. But in steed
thereof, here is an accusation that we know not what we believe, nor why we
believe. Your proof before I have examined, and what we believe I have
declared, whereof the rule is not our own fancy as you say, and show not, as
the rule of your faith and life is the Popes folly, as has been in part
showed. You say we have no rule, whereby to know what is the matter of faith.
We have the word of God contained in the canonical Scriptures of the old and
new Testament, and is that no rule? I pray you what does (...) signify but a
rule? and why be the Scriptures called canonical, but because they be the rule
of our faith and life? Thomas Aquinas says: Doctrina enim Apostolorum and
prophetarum dicitur canonica, quia est regula intellectus Thom. Aquinas in 1.
Tim. 6.
nostri: that is, The Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is called
canonical because they be the rule of our understanding. David when he said;
Thy word is a light Psalm. 119. 105.
unto my feet; and a lantern unto my paths: what did he but make that same,
the rule, direction, and guide of his faith and life? when Moses said: Now
therefore hearken O Deuteronomy. 4. 1.
Israel unto the ordinances and to the laws which I teach you to do, that ye
may live and go in, and possess the land, which 2
the Lord God of your Fathers gives you: ye shall put nothing to the word,
which I command you; neither shall take ought therefrom, that ye may keep the
commandments of the Lord your God which I command you: what did he but make
Gods word declared to him, and written by him, the rule of their faith and
life? When God said to Joshua: Let not this Iosu. 1. 8.
book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night,
that thou may observe and do according to all that is written therein: for
then shall thou make thy way prosperous; and then shall thou have good
success: What did he but make his written word the rule of his faith, and
whole life? When Abraham said to the rich man condemned in Hell: They have
Moses and the Prophets let them hear them, what did he but show that the
writings of Moses and the Prophets Luke 16. 29.
were the only rule which his brethren should follow to avoid damnation, and
consequently to attain eternal salvation? Chrysostom says: Ne igitur
multorum opiniones habeamus, sed resipsas inquiramus. Quomodo autem non
absurdum Chrysostom. in 2. Col. hom. 13.
propter pecunias alijs non credere, sed and ipsas numerare and supputare; pro
rebus autem amplioribus aliorum sententiam sequi simpliciter, praesertim cum
habeamus omnem exactissima^ trutinam and gnomonem ac regulam diuinarum inquam
legum assertionem. Ideo obsecro and oro vos omnes, vt relinquatis quidnam huic
vel illi videatur: deque hijs a scripturis haec omnia inquirite etc. i. Let us
not seek the opinions of many men, but let us search the things themselves:
for how is it not absurd not to believe men concerning money but that we will
count it; and for matters of greater weight to follow simply the mind and
opinion of others, especially seeing we have the most exact balance, square
and rule, the doctrine of Gods laws? Therefore I request and beseech you all to
leave and forsake what seems good to this or that man, and of these matters
search ye al these things, by the Scriptures. The same Chrysostom Idem in
Genes. homil. 58.
has these words: Vides in quantum absurditate^ incidunt qui diuinae
scripturae canonem sequi nolunt, sed suis cogitationibus permittunt omnia. i.
Thou see into how great absurdity they do fall which follow not the rule of
the divine Scriptures, but permit all things to their own fancies and devises.
And again: Satis sufficere credimus quicquid secundum Idem hom. de Adam and
Heua.
praedictas regulas. Apostolica scripta nos docuerunt, vt prorsus non opinemur
catholicum quod apparuerit praefixis sententijs contrarium: that is, we believe
that that is sufficient enough whatsoever according to the foresaid rules, Then
is not the doctrine of the Church of Rome Catholic. Beda 8. quest. 1. Nec
sufficere.
the writings of the Apostles have taught us, so that we do not at all judge
that to be Catholic which shall appear to be contrary to the foresaid rules.
Beda has an excellent saying hereof, which is recorded in Gratians decrees.
Nobis sacris literis vnica est credendi pariter and viuendiregula praescripta:
that is, The only rule both of faith, and also of life is prescribed unto us
in the holy Scriptures. This rule we have, and will you say this is no rule? If
you have a better rule let us know it. And whereas you would have the councels,
doctors, and Church the rule of our faith and life, bring such like plain
places out of the Scriptures and doctors, for the proof of it, and then we
will yield unto you. As touching the Apostles creed, we acknowledge it to be
abriefe abridgment of the especial and principal points of Christian faith
and doctrine, yet there be some truths, which are not particularly expressed
in the same. But whereas you say, or rather falsely slander, that the
Protestants deny three articles of our creed, and the Puritanes five, I say
that you affirm much, and prove little. But first you might well enough have
forborne this distinction of protestants and puritanes; for although some have
differed in some outward matters concerning ceremonies and external orders in
the Church; yet these all greatly agree and consent in all points of the
doctrine of faith, and Articles of Christian Religion: Neither do I know any
that so well deserve this name of Puritanes as you, who glory that you after
baptism be pure from all sin; and for actual sins after committed, can
make so full satisfaction to God for them, that he can request no more of you,
as hereafter I will show: and therefore it be you that may well be called
Puritanes, of whom that saying of Solomon may be well verified; There is a
generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet are not Prou. 30.
washed from their filthiness.

But let us come to the examination of your proof of this your absurd and
slanderous assertion. The first you say is the Catholic Church, Credo:
Ecclesiam sanctam Catholicam: Do we deny this Article? Why do we then not
only print it and rehearse it in our Creed, but also expound it in our
preachings and Catechizing? I have said before that which may seem sufficient
concerning this matter, and article: yet the better to satisfy the Christian
Reader, and to stop the mouth of this malicious accuser, I say again that by
the holy Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed, is meant the company of all
Gods elect and faithful people, whom he calls, justifies, and sanctifies
to be vessels of his mercy, and heirs of his kingdom of glory, which is the
body of Christ, and he the head; the spouse of Christ, and he the bridegroom;
the house of Christ, and he the foundation; the flock of Christ, and he the
shepherd. And this Church we confess to be Catholic, that is to say
universal, both in respect of time, for that it consists of al them that are
written in the book of life, which have been from the beginning of the world,
and shall be to the end thereof: and also of place, for yt it is not now
contained in any one country, but as S. Peter says: In every nation he that
fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted with him, and is a true Act.
10. 35.
member of this Catholic Church. That this is the holy Catholic Church which
we confess and believe, whereof the profane wicked hypocrites, and reprobates
be no part; besides that which I have said before, I will further prove it by
the holy Scriptures, and ancient Fathers. Saint Paul says, Let us follow the
truth in love, and in all things grow up Ephesians. 4 15.
unto him which is the head, that is Christ, by whom all the body being
coupled and knit together by every joint, for the furniture thereof (according
to the effectual power, which is in the measure of every part) receives
increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love. Again, Christ
loved the Church Chap. 5. 25.
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the
washing of water through the word, that he might make it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be
holy and without blame. These things belong only to the elect people of God,
who shall reign with him in his eternal kingdom of glory. For they only be
the body of Christ knit together in him, sanctified here, to be without spot
or blemish hereafter. The Apostle to the Hebrews says: Whose house we are, if
we hold fast that confidence, and that rejoicing of hope unto the Heb. 3. 6.
end. Where he shows that they belong to the house of God, which is the
Church of the living God, the pillar and 1. Timoth. 3. 15.
stay of truth, which unto the end hold fast their confident faith, and hope of
Gods glory, whereof they rejoice, which belongs only to the faithful and
chosen children of God. This is that Church whereof he speaks after: But ye
are come unto the mount Sion, and to the city of the living God; the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Heb. 12. 22.
Angels, and to the assembly and congregation of the first borne, which are
written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just and
perfect men. To whom can these things pertain, but only to the Jerusalem which
is above Galat. 4.
the mother of us all, which is the holy Catholic Church that we believe.

Hereunto I will add a few sayings of the Fathers to them which I have before
alleged. Saint Augustine says: Corpus huius capitis Ecclesia est, non quae
hoc loco est, sed quae August. in Psalm. 81.
hoc loco and per totum orbem terrarum: nec illa quae hoc tempore, sed ab ipso
Abel vsque ad eos qui nascituri sunt vsque in finem, and credituri in Christu^,
totus populus sanctorum ad vnam ciuitatem pertinentium, quae ciuitas corpus est
Christi, cui caputest Christus: that is, The body of this head is the Church,
not which is in this place only, but that which is in this place, and through
the whole world: neither that Church which is at this time, but that of them,
which from Abel shall be borne unto the end, and shall believe in Christ, even
the whole company of Saints pertaining to one city, which city is the body
of Christ, whereof Christ is the head. And in another place: Ille caput est,
nos membra sumus: tota ecclesia quae vbique diffusa est, corpus ipsius est,
cuius Idem in Psalm. 62.
est ipse caput. Non solum autem fideles qui modo sunt; sed and qui fuerunt
ante nos, and qui post nos futuri sunt vsque in finem seculi, omnes ad corpus
eius pertinent, cuius corporis ipse caput est, qui ascendit in coelum: He is
the head, we are his members: the whole Church which is dispersed every where
is his body, whereof he is the head. And not only the faithful which be now,
but also they which have been before us, and which shall be after us unto the
end of the world, all pertain to his body: of which body, he which has
ascended into heaven is the head. Again, Caelestis Jerusalem Idem de Catech.
tud. cap. 20.
ciues sunt omnes sanctificati homines qui fuet unt, and qui sunt, and qui
futuri sunt: that is, All sanctified men, which have been, which are, and which
shall be citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem. Cyprian says: Ecclesia nunquam a
Christo discedit, and ijsunt ecclesia, qui in domo Dei permanent: Cyprian. lib.
1. epist. 3.
that is, The Church never departs from Christ, and they be the Church which
continue in the house of God: Again, Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi:
incorrupta est and Idem de vnitate ecclesiae.
pudica: vnam domum nouit, vnius cubiculi sanctitatem casto pudore custodit.
Haec nos Deo seruat, haec filios regno quos generauit assignat: that is, The
spouse cannot be defiled: she is vncorrupt and chaste, she knows one house,
and keeps with chaste shamefastnes the holiness of one chamber, she keeps us
to God, she assigns the children whom she has borne unto his kingdom. Saint
Hierome says: Ipsa ecclesia quae est Sanctorum omnium congregatio pro aeterna
sibi Hieron. in Job cap. 28.
in Domino stabilitate, columna and fundamentum dicitur veritatis: The Church
which is the congregation of all Saints by reason of her eternal stedfastnes
in God, is called the pillar and ground of truth. Chrysostom says: Ecclesia
est Chrysostom. in Psalm. Hom. 114.
tabernaculu^ a Deo fixum, non ab homine: ab vno loco in aliu^ fugit, sednon a
pietate ad impietate^ fugit: that is, The Church is the tabernacle which God
has pight, and not man, she flies from one place to another, but she never
flies from godliness to impiety and wickedness. Ambrose: Apostolus omnem
ecclesiam dicens, summatim totum comprebendit quod Ambros. in Ephesians. cap. 1.
in coelo est and interra: that is, The Apostle meaning all the Church, briefly
comprehends the whole which is both in heaven and in earth. Bernard says:
Electi Dei sunt ecclesia Dei: The elect of God be the Church of God. So says
Bern. in Cant. sermon. 78.
Clemens Alexandrinus, as I have before alleged: Non nunc Clem. Alexand.
Sirom. lib. 7. page 35.
locum, sed electorum congregationem appello ecclesiam: I call not now the
place the Church, but the congregation of the elect. Yea Friar Lyra says: Ex
quo patet quod ecclesia non consistat in hominibus ratione potestatis vel
dignitatis ecclesiasticae Lyra in Mat. 16.
vel secularis, quia multi principes and summi pontifices and alij inferiores
inuenti sunt apostatasse a fide: propter quod ecclesia consistit in illis
personis in quibus est notitia vera and confessio fides and veritatis: that is,
Whereby it appears that the Church consists not in men, in respect of their
ecclesiastical or secular power or dignity: for many Princes and Popes, and
others of lower degree have bin found Popes Apostates.
to have bin Apostates, and to have fallen away from the faith. Wherefore the
Church consists in those persons in whom is true knowledge, and the
confession of faith and truth. This is that holy Catholic Church, which we in
the Creed confess, and believe, even the whole number of them whom God has
elected and chosen to eternal life, whom God has, had in all ages, and of all
nations: of which Church every true and faithful man and woman, must believe
himself to be a true and lively member, whereof he may be assured, if he find
and feel that God has lightened his mind with the knowledge of his truth,
has wrought in his heart an unfeigned faith to trust in his mercies, and to
believe that his sins be forgiven him for Christ's names sake: and that God
has sanctified his soul and body to hate sin, and to have a care and
conscience to serve him in true holiness and righteousness all the days of his
life. This being our confession and belief, with what conscience and truth can
this man say, that the Church which the Protestants believe has been
interrupted all the ages betwixt the Apostles and Luther, and in very deed was
never seen before Luthers days: or that we imagine the same to be
comprehended within the narrow bounds of England? I can say no more, but that a
false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks Proverb. 19. 5.
lies shall not escape. But now let us see what this man and his fellows hold,
believe, and call the Catholic Church, forsooth the company of all them that
receive and profess the religion and doctrine of the Church of Rome, and
submit themselves to be ruled and governed by the Bishop and Pope of Rome. They
that do not this, be Heretics, Schismatikes, out of Noah's Arc, and out of
the Catholic Church. And hereupon it follows, that the Christians in
Graecia, Muscouia, Armenia, Aethiopia, etc. where Christianity has continued
unto this day, and among whom no doubt but some have been of Gods elect and
chosen people, yet be they no Catholics, nor of the Catholic Church, nor in
the state of salnation: And why? because they neither have been nor be subject
to the Pope of Rome. For so it is with many words solemnly defined and
determined by that holy and virtuous Pope Boniface the 8. Subesse Romano
pontifici, omni humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus, and dofinimus, and
pronuntiamus, omnino esse de necessitate Extra. de mayor. and obedien. vna^
sanctam.
salutis: that is, We declare; say, define and pronounce, that it is altogether
of necessity of salvation to be subject to the Pope of Rome. Where the Gloss
helps out the matter with these words: Quie quid saluatur est sub summo
pontifice: Whatsoever is saved is under the Pope. Gloss. ibidem.
And on the other side, All they that profess the religion of Rome, and submit
thomselues to the Bishop thereof be Catholics, and the Catholic Church how
profane, wicked or ungodly soever they be.

Pope John the 8. the whore, John the 12. or as some reckon him, the 13. who
was an adulterer, and of two Cardinals, did cut out the tongue of the one, and
the hand of the other, and at dice-play would call upon the devil, and made
the palace of Laterane a stews of strumpets, as Luithprandus Ticinensis
writes Syluester the second a coniurer, who gave himself to the Devil to be
made Pope, Luitherand. lib. 6. cap. 7.
Gregory the 7. a coniurer and monster, Boniface the 7. who robbed Saint
Peter's Church, and put out the eyes of Platina in Syluest. 2.
John a Cardinal, Boniface the 8. who entered into his popedom like a fox,
reigned like a wolf, and died like a dog, Alexander the sixth, and Julius the
second, and all they whom Idem.
Platina calls monstra and portenta, monsters and wonders Platina.
for their wickedness, were not only Catholics, but also heads of this
Catholic Church. And he that married (as I said before) his own sister, and
Ferdinando a king Naples, who married his Aunt, and king Philip of Spain that
married his Niece, because they did these things by ye dispe^sations Phil.
Comineus.
and allowing of holy Popes of Rome, were Catholics, and good sons of the
Catholic Church. Now whether of these doctrines concerning this article of our
faith, I believe the holy Catholic Church, be the sounder and truer, let the
Christian reader uprightly judge. I doubt not but Matthew. 11.
wisdom shall be justified of her children.

And whereas you would make men believe, that the Church whereof we are, is
contained within the narrow bounds of England, and that the Lutherans in
Germany, the Hugonotes in France, and the Guines in Flanders (as you term
them) will not join issue with us in diverse essential points of religion, you
do to the offending of God, and deceiving of your ignorant reader, utter two
notorious untruths. For we (as I have said before) confess our selves to be
members of that holy Catholic Church, which has been in all ages, and is
dispersed over the world, and we have communion and fellowship with all them in
all nations, that fear God and obey his truth, especially in the fundamental
doctrines of religion and salvation. But how do you truly confess the Church
to be Catholic, that is, universal, comprehending all nations, in restraining
it to the religion and subjection of the Pope of Rome, and so consequently to a
small part of Europe; unless you will now of late add the West Indians, where
the Spaniards have committed more horrible murders, then they have madagood
proselytes. And what an absurd speech is this, that you call the Church of Rome
the Catholic Church, as if a man should call the Church of Corinth or Ephesus
the Catholic Church, which if they were holy, are but members of the Catholic
Church. This is therefore that which you untruly attribute to us, to call
England the universal world: or Kent the kingdom of England, etc. But the
Church of Rome now committing fornication with stocks and stones, is so far
from being the Catholic Church, that it is no true member thereof, as M.
Doctor Raynolds has learnedly proved. And that In his Theses.
these whom you contemptuously call Lutherans, Hugonotes, and Guines, do
dissent from us in essential points of religion, you may easily affirm, but
shall never be able to prove. Some indeed in Germany, whom you call Lutherans,
do dissent from us in one point concerning the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood: howbeit you cannot be ignorant, but that many Churches and countries in
Germany join with us in that matter. And let the reader read and examine the
confessions of faith set out by the Churches in France, and in the low
countries, and they shall see both how great their agreement in doctrine is
with us, and also what a shameless slander this is, which this author has
according to his accustomed manner avouched, but not proved. And moreover I will
offer this issue to this man, who thinks so highly of himself, that whereas
he shall prove that there is dissension among us in one essential point of
religion and doctrine; I will prove that there is in three at the least among
them. And this much for this article.

The second article of the communion of Saints you say we many ways deny.
First, by not believing that Christ has institnted seven Sacraments, wherein
the Saints of his Church communicate. But why do not you bring some plain
proof yt our Savior Christ instituted these seven Sacraments? seeing you say
that the denying of the is the denial of this article of our faith. Saint Paul
going about to terrify the Christians of Corinth from going to idolatrous
feasts, by the example of Gods fearful judgments and plagues poured upon the
Israelites for the like sins: to prevent an objection which the Christians of
Corinth might have made, that the Israelits were not the Children of God so
much as they, and had not such Sacraments of Baptism and of Christ's supper, as
they had; and therefore God would not deal so hardly with them as he did with
the Israelites: to take away, I say this objection, he shows that they were
Gods people, as well as the Christians of Corinth were, and had the same
sacraments in substance that we have. For the fathers were under that cloud,
and al passed through the sea, and were all baptized by Moses in that cloud,
and in that sea, and did all eat the same spiritual 1. Cor. 10. 1.
meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of the
spiritual rock that followed them: and the rock was Christ. Where Saint Paul
making mention of the Sacraments, which are tokens of Gods grace, and marks of
his people, names but these two, Baptism and Christ's supper. Saint Augustine
also writing of the Sacraments whereby Christ has tied his people together,
makes mention but of the same two, in these words: Primum itaque tenere volo
quodest huius disputationis caput, dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, sicut ipse
in Euangelio loquitur, Leui August. ad lanuar. Epist. 108.
iugo suo nos subdidisse, and sarcinae leui, vnde sacramentis numero
paucissimis, obseruatione facillimis, significatione praestantissimis
societatem noui populi colligauit, sicut est baptismus Trinitatis nomine
consacratus, communicatio corporis and sanguinis ipsius, and si quid aliud is
scripturis canonicis commendatur, etc 1. First therefore, I would have thee
hold that which is the head of this disputation, that our Lord Jesus Christ
has, as he speaks in the Gospel, put us under his easy yoke and light
burden, whereupon he has bound together the society and communion of his
people by Sacraments in number fewest, in observation easiest, in signification
most excellent, as is baptism consecrated in ye name of the Trinity the
communion of his body and blood, and if there be any thing else commended in the
canonical scriptures. The like he writes in his 3. book de doctr. Christiana
cap. 9. by the which it appears, that he thought these two Sacraments to be
sufficient for faithful Christians to communicate in: And if he had
acknowledged any mo, it is marvel, yt writing of purpose of the^, he did not
name them: Yet S. Augustine did not deny this article of the communion of
Saints. Bessarion, a Cardinal of Rome, and a learned man, dissenteth from you,
and says: Bessar. de Sacram. Eucharistia.
Haec duo sola sacrame^ta in Eua^gelio manifest tradita legimus: i. We read
that these only 2. sacraments are plainly delivered to us in the Gospel: yet
did he not deny this article of faith. Your own doctor Alexander de Hales
flatly affirms that neither Christ, nor his Apostles did institute and ordain
the Sacrament of Confirmation, but yt it was afterward ordained Alexand. de
Halis par. quaest. 24. men. 1.
in the Council called Meldense: yet he denied not this Article. And therefore
you ouershot your self in saying, that they which believe not yt Christ did
institute 7. sacraments, deny this article of faith, The communion of Saints.
But to proceed with you concerning ye true and real presence of Christ in the
Eucharist, we deny the same, not to the faith of the godly and worthy
receiver, but to the mouth and teeth of ye carnal eater. We believe and say
that Christ's body and blood, in as much as they were offered upon the cross
for our redemption, are the spiritual food of our souls, without which we can
neither live unto God here, nor live with God here after: and that ye same is
offered to us partly in the promises of the Gospel, and partly in ye sacraments
of Baptism and Christ's supper: and is in both apprehended of us by faith,
without which neither the word nor Sacraments can profit us. But here I must
put you in mind, that you corruptly allege a place of Saint Paul 1. Cor. 10.
17. foisting in this word, Body for Bread, S. Paul's words bethus: We that are
many are one bread, and one body, because we are partakers of one bread.

This shifting of the words of the holy Ghost is too usual with your
companions. Bunderius a Louaine Friar alleging the words of Saint Paul in the
next chapter, verse 27. Quicunque manducauerit panem hunc, etc. He that eats
Compend. concept. titul. 21. act.
this bread, etc. puts out the word panem, and foisteth in the word carnem,
flesh, alleging it thus, Qui manducat carnem, and bibit calicem Domini
indigne, etc. He that eats the flesh, and drinks the cup of the Lord
unworthily, etc. D. Harding in his Confutation of the Apology entreating
Confut. Apolo. cap. 16. diuis. 1.
of Purgatory, alleging the words of S. Paul, 2. Cor. 7. 1. to prove
satisfaction for sins, by that fained fire, puts out Sanctification, and
in place thereof puts Satisfaction, alleging it thus: making perfect
satisfaction in the fear of God. Cardinal Hosius changes the words of Saint
Paul, alleging them thus: Neque far possunt vt per verbum Dei Confess. Petri.
10 cap. 13.
signo crucis vlla creatura sanctificetur, that is, They cannot abide that any
creature should be sanctified by the word of God and sign of the cross. He
puts out prayer, and puts in the sign of the Cross as a more holy
thing. The foresaid Bunderius does most shamefully allege a place of the
Apostle in this sort: Nam si cinis vitulae conspersus Ibid. titul. 30. arti. 5.
populum sanctificauit atque mundauit: quanto magis aqua sale conspersa diuinis
precibus sacrata populum sanctificat atque mundat: that is, If the ashes of an
heifer sprinkled have sanctified and cleansed the people, how much more shall
water sprinkled with salt, being hallowed with divine prayers, sanctify and
cleanse the people, etc. The words of the Apostle be these: If the blood of
bulls and goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling them that are
unclean, sanctifies as touching the purifying of the flesh, how much more
shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal spirit offered himself
without fault to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the
living God. Is not this horrible handling of Gods word, and blasphemous
attributing that to their salt water, which is proper and peculiar to the blood
of Christ? I could show in like manner, how they have clipped the coin of Gods
word, in leaving out words of purpose, which serve not their turn, but I will
omit them: only this I say, yt if they which counterfeit and clip the kings
coin deserve ha^ging, what do they deserve, yt counterfeit and clip the word of
the eternal God king of al Kings? but corrupt doctrine cannot be maintained
without corruption of Gods word. But to return to S. Paul's place: he there
disswadeth the Christians of Corinth from going to Idolatrous feasts, by a
reason taken from the Supper of our Savior Christ, showing that as the
faithful by eating that bread which there is broken, and drinking that Cup,
are made partakers of Christ Jesus: so they that did eat those feasts ordained
to the honoring of Idols, were partakers of Idolatry there committed, or
rather of the Devil that was there served. And as the faithful by being
partakers of that bread have communion together, and be made one body, to wit,
the mystical body of Christ: so they that receive those Idol bankets, have
communion together, and show themselves to be of one body, videl. of the
Devil. Now as there needed no transubstantiation for the one, no more there
does for the other. Also this bread which S. Paul calls the communion of the
body of Christ is broken; yet I trust they will not say, that Christ's body is
broken, although Pope Nicholas caused that excellent man Berengarius so to
confess. But De consecra distinst. 2. Ego Berenga.
of the gross and absurd doctrine of transubstantiation I will speak no more
at this present. You say moreover that we deny the communion of the Church
militant, and triumphant, by exclaming against invocation of Saints, by which
holy exercise those blessed Saints in heaven, and we in earth communicate, we
by prayer glorifying them, and they by meditation (I think it should be
mediation) obtaining our requests. Hereunto I answer, first that this
invocation of Saints is unlawful, and cannot be proved by the holy
Scriptures. And this offer I do make you, that if you can bring one plain
place out of all the holy Scriptures, wherein it was ever commanded, or of any
faithful man or woman used, I will yield unto you not only in this, but also
in all matters of Religion. You quote in your margent Genes. 48. 16. and Apoca.
1. 4. which make as much for proving invocation of Saints, as Tityre tu patule
does. The words of the place of Genesis be these: The Angel which has
delivered me from all evil bless the children, and let my name be called or
named upon them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac, that they may
grow as fish into a multitude in the midst of the earth. Out of this place the
Papists take two arguments to prove prayer to Angels and to Saints. The first
out of these words, The Angel which has delivered me, etc. the other out of
those, let my name be called upon them, etc. But yet let the reader note this,
that of the Papists some do find the one saying, and some the other so weak,
that some allege the one, and some the other, and I have not read any one,
that does use them both. T. W. in a discourse of this matter alleged the
former words of the Angel: and Ecchius the latter. To the which I will briefly
answer: By the Angel is meant Jesus Christ the Angel of the covenant, as
Malachie calls him, and the Angel of the great counsel of God. So does
Aloisius Lipomanus that great Catholic Bishop of Verona both out of Cyrillus,
and of himself expound it in these words: Cyrillus, Jacob pueris benedicens
deum and patrem and Cyrillus. Alois. Lipoma catenae in Genes. 48.
nutrientemse, and Angelum liberantem nominat, illum nempe Angelum, qui Angelus
magni consilij ab Esaia dicitur, quia omnis benedictio, omnis gratia non aliter
quam a deo per Iesum Christum in homines descendit. Considerandum quod dictio
hagoel vel redimens vel qui redimit proprie reddi potest, quo loquendi modo
clarissime filius dei mundi generalis redemptor denotatur. Et si diligenter
aduerteris, tacit propheta domini sanctissimam inuocat trinitatem, patrem
scilicet, and spiritum S. sub nomine dei bis repetiti, vnigenitum vero dei
filium sub nomine Angel: Angelum vero intelligit redemptorem, verbum diuinum,
saluatorem nostrum, vel auxilij dispensationis diuinae ministrum, ipse, inquam,
ille benedicat pueris istis: That is, Cyrill. Jacob blessing thy children does
name God both the father which did nourish him, and the Angel which did
deliver him, to wit, that Angel, whom Esaias calls the Angel of great
counsel, because all blessing and all grace descends no other ways from God
upon men, but by Jesus Christ. We must consider that the word Hagoel may be
translated either redeeming or he that redeemeth, by which phrase of speech the
son of God the general redeemer of the world, is most manifestly signified:
and if thou diligently mark, thou may perceive, that the prophet in secret
sort calls upon the most holy Trinity, to wit, the father and the holy
Ghost, under the name of God twice repeated, and the only begotten son of
God, under the name of the Angel. For by the Angel he understands the
redeemer, the word of God, our Savior or the minister of Gods help and
dispensation; even he, I say, bless these children. Hitherto Lipomanus. who
with that ancient Father Cyrill truly understand by this Angel Jesus Christ,
and not any other ministering spirit, or created Angel. And therefore this place
proves the invocation of Christ, but not of other Angels. By the other words,
Let my name be called upon them, etc. Jacob meant nothing else, but that
Manasses and Ephraim Joseph's sons should be counted amongst his sons, to
make up the twelve tribes of Israel. And even so Friar Lyra does truly expound
it in these words: Inuocetur super cos nomen meum, quia vocati sunt filij
adoptiui Jacob, and facti sunt capita Lyra in 48. cap. Genes.
duarum tribuum, sicut alij filij Jacob: that is, Let my name be called upon
them, because they were called the adopt sons of Jacob, and were made the
heads of two tribes, as were his other sons. This phrase of speech is so used
in other places of Scripture as Isa. 4. 1. In that day seven women shall lay
hold of one man, saying, we will eat our own bread, and we will wear our
own garments: only let thy name be called upon us, and take away our reproach.
Whereby is meant, that he should be their husband, and they counted and called
his wives. The like phrase is 2. Sam. 12. 28. Hierem. 7. 10. etc. And therefore
that this exposition of this place, whereby they go about to prove invocation
of Saints, is a private and false exposition, any man may easily perceive; And
this is the more evident, for that some great papists are forced to confess
that invocation of Saints is not commended nor commanded in all the Scriptures.
There is one Francis Hamilton a Scot, a papist, and fugitive prior of S. James
at Herbipolis in Germany, who in a discourse concerning invocation of Saints
writes thus: Porro lihic concedimus, disertis scripturarum verbis ipsam
(inuocationem sanctorum) non commendari. Quibus enim? cuius authoris? cuius
libri? cuius instrumenti? Noui an veteris? Francist. Hamiltonius de Iunocat.
Sancto. demonstrat. priore in appendice page 37. 81.
commendantur Sancti, commendatur oration, quam pro nobis ad deum faciunt: vt
ipsos inuocemus, atque vt pro nobis orent, rogemus nullo loco commendatur. Vbi
consulatur, locus demonstrari non potest. Sed neque conueniebat, vt aut
commendaretur aut consuleretur, nascentis maxim ecclesiae exordijs: ne plures
sibi deos more gentium fingere aut constituere existimarentur christiani,
quando etiam in suspicione^ Idololatriae venerunt, du^ sub specie panis and
vini verum deum colerent. 83. praecepta ne est? Non est praecepta, etc. that
is, Moreover we do here willingly grant, that invocation of Saints is not
commended to us by express words of the Scriptures. For by what words? of what
authors? of what book? of which testament? the new or the old? Saints are
commended, prayer which they make to God for us is commended: but that we
should call upon them, and that we should entreat them to pray for us, is in
no place commended. No place ca^ be showed, where it is counseled. Neither was
it couenient that it should be either commended or counseled, especially in
the beginning of the Church arising, lest christians should be thought to make
unto themselves after the manner of the gentiles more Gods: seeing they were
suspected of Idolatry for worshipping the true God under the form of bread
and wine. 83. Is it commanded? It is not commanded. Hitherto the words of
this Papist Hamilton, by which it appears that invocation of Saints is not
commanded nor counseled in the Scriptures, and therefore they do wrest them,
and bring a private and false exposition to them, which seek to prove it by
them. You quote also in the margent Apoc. 1. 4. where at a man might well
wonder, that you would quote a place so impertinent for this purpose, but that
it is ever usual amongst you and your fellows in such sort to abuse the word
of God. The words of Saint John be these: John to the seven Churches which are
in Asia, Grace be with you and peace from him, which is, and which was, and
which is to come, and from the seven spirits which are before his throne, and
from Jesus Christ, etc. What means this man to allege this for invocation of
Saints? will he by these seven spirits understand the Saints? either he knows
little, or he cannot be ignorant that this is expounded of the holy Ghost, who
although he be in person one, yet by the communication of his virtue, and
demonstration of his divine works in those seven Churches, does so perfectly
show himself, as though there were so many spirits, every one working in his
peculiar Church. Ambrose set out by Doctor Tunstall Bishop of Duresme writes
upon these words thus. Hic tota trinitas demonstratur: that is, here the whole
Trinity is showed: and a little after: Per septem autem spiritus, spiritus
sanctus eo quod sit septiformis intelligitur: that is, By the seven spirits the
holy Ghost is understood, because he works seven manner of ways. And hard
it were, or rather absurd, to pray for grace and peace from Saints, and that
before Jesus Christ: But upon this I will not stand; only the reader may
consider how barren this cause is, which has no plainer proofs, and drives
this man to such private and false exposition of Gods word. Now whereas you say
that by prayer you glorify the Saints in heaven: I say, that by prayer we do
glorify God: Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify Psalm. 50. 15.
me. But that by prayer we should glorify Saints, I do not find in all the
holy Scriptures. If this man can, why does he not show it? I find that God
will not give his glory to any other, and that the Saints with David say: Not
Isa. 42. 8. Psalm. 115. 1.
unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory, for thy
loving mercy and thy truths sake. And that the Angel would not be worshipped
or glorified, but said unto John Apoc. 19. 10. 21. 8.
worship God. As touching the Saints mediation, when Jesus Christ shall cease
to be our mediator, and to sit at the right hand of God to make intercession
for us, then we will seek to your mediation of Saints. In the mean time take
you heed, that in attributing that to the Saints, which is proper and peculiar
to the son of God, yea which he has bought with his blood, you do not deny
the Lord which has bought us, and that you do not horribly dishonor those
Saints, and make Idols of them. Furthermore you say that we deny the communion
of the Church militant, and the souls in purgatory, etc. Whereunto I answer,
yt when you shall plainly and pithily prove this your feigned fire of purgatory
(which the Greek Church always has denied) then we will yield unto you, and
grant our selves to be to blame, in not helping these seely souls with
dirges, masses, etc. out of the pains of this forged fire. You quote in your
margent for proof thereof, 1. Cor. 3. v. 15. and 15. v. 29. Alas poor
purgatory, that has no better proofs. The words of S. Paul in the first
place be these: If a man's work burn, he shall lose, but he shall be saved
himself: nevertheless yet as it were by fire. Here is mention of fire, and
therefore it must needs be the fire of purgatory: for such is the great
judgment of these worthy writers, that if they read in the Scriptures or
Fathers this word fire, it is none other but the fire of purgatory: if
sacrifice, it is the sacrifice of the Mass: if confession, it can be nothing
but auricular confession to the priest: if tradition, it is vnwritte^ verities
or vanities. But touching these places of S. Paul, because the author of this
Pamphlet does not allege them, but barely quote them, I will but briefly
touch them. To the first I say, that S. Paul there speaks not of all men, but
only of teachers and preachers, which be builders of Gods house and Church,
which even Bellarmine confesses. Secondly, he speaks not of all their
works, but only Tom. 1. contr. 6. de purgat. lib. 1. cap. 4.
of their doctrine whereby they build the Church of God. Thirdly, he speaks
not of the purging of works or persons, but of the probation of doctrines.
Fourthly, the works are said to be proved, and not the persons. Lastly, if this
place should be understood of purgatory, then every man should be thrown
into it, for it is said the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is:
but this is contrary to the doctrine of the papists, who will not have all men
come into purgatory. These things plainly show that this place cannot be
understood of purgatory: Saint Augustine in many places does understand it of
the afflictions and troubles sustained in this life, and not of the pains of
Purgatory after this life, Enchir. ad Laurentium cap. 68. de ciuit. Dei lib.
21 cap. 26. de side and operibus cap. 16. in Psalm. 80. But S. Paul speaks of
trial of doctrine, showing that as the fire tries metals, so the light of
Gods truth tries doctrines: and as gold and silver abide in the fire, and hay
and stubble be consumed: so true, sound, and holy doctrines abide the light and
trial of Gods word; when either untrue doctrines or vain speculations perish
and be consumed. So does S. Ambrose expound it: Mala doctrina in Ambros. in 1.
Cor. 3.
igne omnibus apparebit, nunc enim quosdam fallit: that is, Evil doctrine
shall appear unto all in the fire, for now it deceives some. Again, Mala
enim and adultera doctrina idcirco in ligno, foeno, and stipula significata
est, vt ostenderetur ignis esse esca: that is, Evil and counterfeit doctrine
is therefore signified by wood, hay, and stubble, that it might be showed, that
it is but meat to be consumed of fire. And again, Ignis ergo hic Christi
sermo est: and bonus ignis, etc. Ide^ in Psalm. 118. in haec verba, ignitum
eloquiu^ (...).
This fire is the word of Christ, and it is a good fire, which warmeth, but
burns not but only sins. By this fire that gold of the Apostle laid upon
the good foundation is tried. By this fire that silver of manners or works is
proved. By this fire those precious stones are lightened: but the hay and
stubble is consumed. Therefore this fire cleanses the soul, and consumes
error. Hitherto S. Ambrose: whereby we may see yt neither S. Augustine, nor S.
Ambrose expound this place of Purgatory, much less the Greek Fathers, who
never acknowledged it. Therefore to expound it of Purgatory, as the Papists do,
whether it be not a private and false exposition, let ye godly reader uprightly
judge.

The words of the other place here quoted are these: Else what shall they do,
which are baptized for the dead: if the dead rise not at all, why are they then
baptized for dead? To pick Purgatory pickpurse out of this place passes my
skill. Here is mention made of baptism for the dead: but neither of
Purgatory, nor of prayer for the dead. I am not ignorant that there be sundry
expositions of this place: yet I do not remember that ever I read it expounded
of Purgatory, or applied unto it. And therefore I will write no more at this
present of it, but will expect a syllogism to be made of it for the proofs of
Purgatory, and then I shall further consider what to say unto it. We do
believe that they only be members of that body whereof Christ Jesus is the
head, which be either triumphing with him in heaven: or be fighting for him
against Satan, sin, and the world here upon earth. Saint Paul says, that
Christ came to Coloss. 12. 0.
make peace by the blood of his cross, and to reconcile the things which are
in earth, and the things which are in heaven. That is to say, his whole
universal Church, whereof part was already in heaven, and part remained
behind upon the earth. They therefore that be in Purgatory, be no members of
his body, nor are to be delivered by him: but being the Popes creatures, are
either by him (who can at his pleasure empty and scour Purgatory) to be
delivered, or else still in that fained fire to be tormented. Neither has true
Christian charity so much, as the cursed covetousness of Priests, been the
bellows to blow that forged fire for the heating of their kitchens.

Now that I have answered your reasonlesse reasons of our denying this article
of Christian faith, the communion of Saints, I will briefly show what is our
belief of it. We believe that all the Saints of God, and members of the holy
Catholic Church have communion and fellowship with Jesus Christ, and are
partakers of all his benefits. Of this communion Christ speaks: I am the
vine, ye are the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings Ioh. 15. 5.
forth much fruit. Of this speaks S. Paul: God is faithful, by whom ye are
called unto the fellowship of his son Jesus 1. Cor. 1. 9.
Christ our Lord. This communion or fellowship is wrought by faith, by the
which Christ dwells in the hearts of all his elect and faithful people, and
by which we be graffed Ephesians. 3. 17.
into him to receive all grace and goodness from him as the branch does from the
vine or stock. And we believe that all the faithful and godly be knit
together in love, as the Apostle speaks, whereby they are to communicate
those Coloss. 2. 2.
graces and gifts, which God has bestowed upon them, to the edifiyng and
helping of others, in such sort as God has appointed. Yea we believe that all
the faithful have communion and fellowship together in that they have all one
heavenly father, one Jesus Christ their redeemer and mediator, one holy Ghost
their sanctifier, are justified by one faith common to all the elect, dedicated
to God by one baptism, called by one Gospel to be partakers of one kingdom
of glory. This is the sum of our belief concerning this article, wherein
we would know what fault you can find. But your communion and union
consists in being under one Pope of Rome, under whose obedience whosoever is
not, you think he cannot be saved, as is before showed; neither will you have
communion with him: And therefore whereas Christianity has continued (as I
said before) in Greece, Russia, Aethiopia, Armenia, and other countries,
amongst whom no doubt but God has had, and now has his elect and chosen
people, yet you have no communion or fellowship with them, because they be not
under your own Pope. And much less have you communion with the Saints in
heaven, because you have not the faith of Gods elect. For did the faithful
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and others believe to be Ti^^^ 1. 1.
delivered from the fire of hell by the merits of Nicholas, or to ascend into
heaven by the blood of Thomas Becket? Nay Jesus Christ is the only mercy
seat, into the which the two Cherubinis did look, that is, as I take it, both
the faithful before his coming in the flesh, and they that be after do look
only upon Christ, in him only to seek and find mercy.

Now let us see the third article of our Creed, which you say we deny, which
is Remission of sins. Here I beseech the Christian reader to consider who
they be that deny this article, containing a principal point of Christian
religion and salvation, whether we or this accuser with his partners. We
believe, that whereas we be children of wrath, unprofitable servants, and
prodigal children, that have sinned against heaven and our heavenly father,
and are so deeply indebted to God, that we be never able to make payment, for
the which he might justly throw us into the dungeon of damnation for ever: we
I say believe that he has given his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Ioh. 3. 16.
life, by whom we have redemption through his Ephesians. 1. 7.
blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according to his rich Coloss. 2. 14.
grace, and that our sins are forgiven us for his names 1. Ioh. 2. 12.
sake. And we believe that God of his great mercy in Jesus Christ does forgive
us not only our sins, but also the punishment due unto them, and which we
have deserved by them, accepting us for vessels of his mercy, and heirs of
his glory. Now this accuser of us, and his companions do first believe, that
they do make satisfaction to Gods justice for their sins: which is a flat
denial of the forgiveness of our sins. For whereas our sins be called
debts, and satisfaction is a payment; it follows, that if we do make
satisfaction for them, then we neither need, nor can have forgiveness of them.
For our satisfaction, and Gods forgiveness cannot stand together. For even as if
I owe a man a hundredth pounds, and I pay him, he does not forgive it; and if he
forgive it, I do not pay it: So if we by satisfaction make payment to God for
our sins, then he does not forgive them; if he forgive them, then we do
not make satisfaction for them.

Now let us see, what is the doctrine of these men concerning this their
satisfaction, whereby they make payment themselves to God for their debts.
Bishop Fisher, whom I suppose the Pope has sainted for standing so stiffly in
his cause, writes hereof thus: Thirdly, some there John Fisher in Psalm. 1.
poenitens.
be, which by grace in this life have so punished themselves for their
offenses, that they have made a sufficient recompense for them. Again: So does
hearty weeping for sin, expel sin, and is a sufficient and just
recompense Ibidem.
for it. And again: But whereas any creature have made due satisfaction in
this life, he never after shall suffer more In Psalm. 2. poenitent.
pain, and also is clean out of debt, and nothing after that shall ever be
claimed of him. Again, They be called recti cord, that have made satisfaction
so plentifully, that God Ibidem.
can ask no more of them. And in his Latin book against Luther he has these
words: Secundo supponimus, quod quanquam nemo sit cui non cumulatius praemium
in coelis Deus largiatur, Idem in confur. assert. Luther, articulo 17.
quam hic in terris ipse meruit, innumeri tamen sunt, qui long grauiores
aerumnas pertulerunt quam adsuorum suffecissent delictorum expiationem: that
is, Secondly, we make this supposition, that although there is none, to whom
God does not give a greater reward in heaven, then he has merited and
deserved: yet there be many which have suffered far more grievous griefs and
punishments, then would have sufficed to the expiation and purging away of
their sins. This is their doctrine, and is this to believe the forgiveness of
sins? or is it not rather to deny 2. Pet. 2.
the Lord Jesus that has bought us? For I may say with S. Paul, that if
righteousness come by the law (or by Galat. 2.
our satisfaction) then Christ died in vain. And with what face can these men
accuse us of denying this article, The forgiveness of sins, themselves
teaching such blasphemous doctrine, so manifestly opposite and contrary unto
it? Again, they deny the forgiveness of the punishment due for sin, saying,
that Christ has delivered us a culpa from the fault or offense, but not a
poena from the punishment; or at leastwise he has delivered us from eternal
punishment, but not from temporal, which must be sustained in Purgatory,
whereby our sins or souls must be purged, and Gods justice satisfied. And
yet the Popes Pardons, Masses and Dirges may discharge and deliver from it.
Wherein first, what do they but extenuate, and greatly diminish the virtue and
power of Christ's death? For if our Savior Christ have not delivered us from
the punishment due to our sins, what great good has he done us? And if he
have discharged us from eternal punishment in hell, but not from the temporal
in Purgatory, then is he not a full and perfect Savior, but an half Savior.
Have you the testimony of all Antiquity for this doctrine? Tertullian says,
Exempto scilicet reatu, eximitur and poena: that is, The guiltines of sin
being taken away, the Tertull. lib. de baptismo.
punishment is also taken away. And Chrysostom says: Vbi enim gratia, ibi and
venia: vbi vero venia, illic nulla erit Chrysostom. ad Romans Homil. 8.
poena: that is, Where grace is, there is forgiveness: and where forgiveness is,
there shall be no punishment. S. Augustine says, Ablato ergo peccato,
auferetur and poena peccati: The sin August. de vera relig. cap. 13.
being taken away, the punishment of sin shall also be taken away. By this
let it be discerned who they be that deny this article of the forgiveness of
sin. Moreover, let the Christian reader consider how they attribute first
that to their Purgatory, which is proper to the blood of Christ, which, as S.
John says, cleanses us from all sin: and secondly, 1. Ioh. 1.
more to their Dirges, Masses, Pardons, and such paltries, then they do to the
death and passion of Jesus Christ. For they may deliver from the pains of
Purgatory, but Christ's death does not. O coelum non sudas, o terra, non
tremes? etc.

But now let us come to your proof of this your accusation of our denying of
this article. Your first reason is, that we acknowledge no such effect in the
Sacrament of Baptism, etc. We acknowledge that baptism is a Sacrament of the
forgiveness of our sins, by the death and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ,
whereby our faith is confirmed, and we assured, that as water washes away the
filth of the body, so all the filth and guiltines of our sins is so purged
in the blood of Christ, that we be accepted for just and righteous before God.
But we do not acknowledge that Baptism, or any other Sacrament, do confer
grace of themselves, or have grace included in them as in a vessel: but we
affirm that they be seals of Gods promises, and instruments whereby God
works in his elect and chosen people those graces, which he has in his word
promised, and Jesus Christ has purchased for them. But all that be outwardly
baptized, be not inwardly cleansed, as Simon Magus, who being baptized, was yet
still in the Act. 8.
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. For the spirit of God works
by them in whom, when, and how much it pleases him. Neither do we believe
that Baptism serves only for the remission of sins committed before it, as
you say here, but that the use and benefit of it, pertains to our whole life,
continually to assure us, and confirm our faith in the forgiveness of al our
sins by Jesus Christ. And whereas you say, that this our doctrine is
contrary to the express word of God, which calls this Sacrament the lauer
of regeneration, for that in it the soul dead by sin is newly regenerate by
grace: I answer that Baptism is so far from being in this place of S. Paul
expressed, that it is not mentioned, neither necessarily to be understood.
Saint Paul's sweet words be these: When the bountifulnes and love of God our
Savior toward man appeared, not by the works of righteousness, which we had
Tit. 3. 4.
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new
birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through
Jesus Christ our Savior. Where is baptism here mentioned? or expressed to be
the lauer of regeneration? Saint Paul does here attribute this washing, whereby
we be regenerate and renewed, to the holy Ghost, alluding as it were to the
words of God, by the Prophet Ezechiel: Then will I power clean water upon you,
Ezech. 36. 25.
and ye shall be clean: yea from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols
will I cleanse you. By this clean water is understood the spirit of God, as it
is expounded in the two next verses following. I confess that Baptism is a
Sacrament and pledge unto us of this washing and clensing of the holy Ghost,
to whom this washing is to be attributed, and not to baptism, as though it
were included in it, or affixed to it: for (as I said) many be outwardly
baptized, which be not inwardly cleansed, but only the faithful children of
God, in whom Gods spirit inwardly works that, which by the word of God is
promised, and in baptism sealed and confirmed. And therefore this lauer is the
spirit of God, by whom we be regenerated and renewed. Saint Augustine says
well: Ea demum miserabilis est seruitus signa prorebus accipere, and supra
creaturam corpoream oculum August. lib. 3. de doctr. Christ. cap. 5.
mentis ad hauriendum aeternu^ lumen leuare non posse: that is, This is
miserable servitude to take the signs for the things signified, and not to be
able to lift up the eye of the mind above the corporeal creature to receive
eternal light.

Your second proof is, that we allow not the sacrament Penance, wherein all
actual sins committed after Baptism are cancelled. Your popish penance
consisting in shriuing to a Priest, receiving absolution from him, and doing
some (...), will worshippings appointed by him, we allow not: but true
repentance, which consists in unfeigned sorrow for sin, earnest confession
with remorse of conscience both to God and man offended, and a true reformation
and amendment of life we allow and commend, and do judge that we can do
nothing acceptable to God, which proceeds not from this true repentance.

The third thing whereby you would prove that we deny this article of
remission of sins, which you say exceeds all in absurdity, is that we
deny that our sins are perfectly forgiven, but only not imputed, and as it
were veiled or covered with the passion of Christ, etc. Whereunto I answer, that
you here bring an absurd distinction. For what difference is there between
forgiving, not imputing, and covering and hiding of sin? Surely it seems
that David could find no such ods betwixt them as you dream of, whose words be
these: Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.
Blessed is the man, unto whom Psalm. 32. 1.
the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. Does
not David here take these all for one, and attribute blessedness alike to every
one of the^? When S. Paul says God was in Christ, and reconciled the world to
himself, not imputing 2. Cor. 5. 19.
their sins unto them: what does he mean by not imputing of sin, but forgiving
of sin? Primasius expounds it Primasius in illum locum.
thus: Non reputans illis delicta ipsorum: hoc est, indulgens per solam fidem,
quae gratis donata est: i. Not imputing to them their sins: that is to say,
pardoning them by only faith, which is freely given. And whereas you so much
extenuate, Not imputing, and make it not so much as Forgiving; Chrysostom a
man of greater judgment then you, affirms the contrary, and makes not
imputing greater then Chrysostom. in 2. Corinthians. hom. 11
forgiving, in these words: Attamen cum tanta sint nostra peccata, non solum
non exposcit poenam, sed and conciliatus est: non solum dimisit, sed neque
imputauit, etc. that is, But whereas our sins be so great, he does not only
not require punishment, but also is reconciled with us: and not only has
forgiven, but has not so much as imputed our sins to us. Bernard thinks not
basely of not imputing as you do, his sweet words be these: Sufficit mihi ad
omnem iustitiam solum habere propitium cui soli peccaui: Omne quod mihi ipse
non Bernard. in Cant. sermon. 23.
imputare decreuerit, sic est quasinon fuerit. Non peccare, Dei iustitia est:
hominis iustitia indulgentia Dei: that is, It is sufficient for me unto all
righteousness, to have him merciful, against whom only I have sinned:
whatsoever he has determined not to impute unto me, is so as though it had
never been. Not to sin is the justice of God: man's justice is Gods mercy.
Bernard here says, that the not imputing of our sins unto us, is as much as
though they had never been committed: And will you say that notwithstanding
the not imputing of them, yet their botches, biles, filth and abomination
remain still, exhaling a most pestiferous sent in the sight of God? Is not the
sweet smelling sacrifice of Jesus Christ able so to perfume them and us, that
we and all our actions may be sweet and acceptable Ephesians. 5. 2.
in the sight of God? And if the robe which the Father put upon his prodigal
son could so hide all his Luke 15.
rags, that he was dear in his fathers eyes; cannot the robe of Christ's
righteousness so cover and hide all our rags, yea our botches, and biles,
that we may be dear and precious in the sight of God our heavenly and most
merciful father? And if those that had the marriage garment Matthew. 22. 12.
upon them, were admitted to the marriage, without regard what the said garment
covered: shall not we having the marriage garment of Christ's righteousness, be
acpted to the marriage of the Lamb, notwithstanding all the botches and biles
which it covers? Yet we do not say that we can cover or hide all our sins
from the piereing eyes of God: but this we say, that even God himself does
hide them with this robe of Christ's righteousness, and looking on us in the
face of Jesus Christ his Son, does accept us his members, for such as Jesus
Christ himself is. And do you not think that that which God hides is well
hid, and shall never come to light? David says of God, Thou have forgiven the
iniquity of thy people, and covered Psalm. 85. 2.
all their sins. Does not David here take forgiveness and hiding both for
one? And therefore this your distinction betwixt perfect forgiving, and not
imputing and covering, is as substantial a one, as that is of your blind and
barbarous Schooleman Richardus de Sancto Victore: Christus potuit Ri. de S.
Victore de potestate ligandi and scluendi par. 1. cap. 14
dimittere peccata: nos vero non possumus dimittere peccata, sed tantum
remittere. As great difference as there is betwixt dimittere and remittere, so
much there is betwixt forgiving, not imputing, and covering of sin. This is (as
Erasmus says) Frigidissimis distinctionibus omnia confundere: that is, with
frivolous distinctions to confound all Erasmus in vita Hieronymi.
things. And this much for this Article of the Creed, which you do as
foolishly prove, as you falsely affirm that we deny it.

Now I come to the fourth Article that you say the Puritanes in effect deny,
which is no less, then Christ to be the Son of God. But who be these
Puritanes that be thus grievously charged? what are their names? why be not
their books named, and sayings produced? These things ought to have been
done, if you had been disposed rather ratiocinari qua^ calumniari: that is, to
reason, then Page 50.
to rail and slander.

But to this your malicious and false accusation I will first oppose the true
confession of faith concerning this article, whereunto all the reformed
Churches whereof I have either heard or read do assent and agree. We believe
and Ex Gall. confessione.
acknowledge one only God, who is one only and simple essence, spiritual,
eternal, invisible, immutable, infinite, incomprehensible, almighty, most
wise, good, just, and merciful; and that in that one and simple divine
essence, there be three persons subsisting, the Father, the Son and the holy
Ghost. The Father the first cause in order, and the beginning of all things;
the Son his wisdom and everlasting word: the holy Ghost his true power and
efficacy. The Son begotten of the Father from everlasting: the holy Ghost
from everlasting proceeding from the Father and the Son: which three persons
are not confounded, but distinct; and yet not divided, but coessentiall,
coeternall, and coequall. If you mislike any thing in this confession confute
it: if you know any of us that maintain any diverse doctrine dissenting from
this, name them, produce their sayings, and quote the places. But you say that
these (whom you term puritanes) peremptorily affirm, that Christ is God of
himself, and not God of God: So that he receives not his divinity from his
father. I answer, that if we consider of Christ absolutely in respect of the
essence, he is (...), God of himself, to whom all things do agree which are
spoken of the divine essence by it self: but if we consider of him in respect
of his person, he is not of himself, but son of the father, yet coeternall
and coessentiall. So says Saint Augustine, Christus ad se deus August. hom. de
temper. 38.
dicitur, ad patrem filius dicitur: that is, Christ in respect of himself is
called God, and in respect of the Father is called son. Saint Basil says
that it was an undoubted principle of divinity in all ages: (...) Lib. 1.
contra. Eunomium.
that is, The godhead to be begotten neither of it himself, nor of any other,
but to be (...) unbegotten. And that Christ is God of himself I prove it thus:
He that is Iehoua, is God of himself: Christ is Iehoua: ergo Christ is God of
himself. The first proposition cannot be denied: for God is called Iehoua,
because he has his being of himself, and all others have their being of him:
And that Christ is Iehoua, I think you will not deny, and if you do, it may
easily be proved. For he that appeared to Esaias the Prophet cap. 6. and is
there called Iehoua verse. 3. is said of Saint John to be Christ in these words.
These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory and spoke of him. That which
Ioh. 12. 41.
Esaias. cap. 18. 13. 14. speaks of Iehoua; Saint Paul Romans 9. 33. expounds
of Christ. The Angel that appeared to Moses in the bush is called Iehoua: but
Christ who is called the Angel of the covenant, and the Angel of the Exodus 3.
2. 7.
great counsel, was that Angel, ergo Christ is I^houa: And so consequently is
God of himself. And therefore Epiphanius Epipha. hares. 69.
(whom I trust you will not term a Puritan) calls Christ, (...), God of
himself. The Fathers of the Nicene council in calling Christ God of God, did
thereby signify that he is coessentiall, and of the same substance with the
Father, and not as you falsely affirm that he received his divinity of his
Father, which is in effect to make Christ no God. For it is proper to God to be
of himself. The deity is the divine essence, which is one and singular, and
the same wholly in the Father, in the son, and in the holy Ghost. And so we
acknowledge a Trinity of persons, and a unity of essence, that is one only
God. (...), says Saint Basil etc. it is manifest that the names of Father Lib.
2. contra. Eunomium.
and son do not signify the essence, but the proprieties of the persons. So
Damascene says, (...). that is, The deity signifies the nature De orthodox
fide lib. 3. cap. 11.
(or essence) the word Father, the person. And the essence is wholly in the
Father, wholly in the son, and wholly in the holy Ghost, as even your great
Master of the sentences Peter Lumbard confesses; so that the Father is God of
himself, the Son God of himself, the holy Peter Lumb. lib. 1. did. 5. cap.
1.
Ghost God of himself: and yet not three Gods, but one true and immortal God.
And therefore with Athanasius we worship a unity in Trinity, and Trinity in
unity.

The fifth article, which you say those whom you disdainfully call Puritaines
do deny, is the descension of Christ into Hell. Can you show and name any such
puritanes which omit this article either in rehearsing it, or in expounding it,
as you have done the second commandment of God? I am sure you cannot. Why do
you then say that they deny it? forsooth because they receive not your
exposition of it, to wit, that Christ descended in soul to Hell, and was there
as long as his body was in the grave, and there harrowed Hell, and delivered
thence Catechis. Trident page 69. In Act. 2.
the patriarchs, and all just men there houlden in bondage unto his death, as
your Rhemists write. And do all that receive not this exposition deny this
article? Then did your own Doctor Durand deny this article, who held and
published in writing that Christ's soul did not in Durand. in 3. A 22. q. 3.
respect of the substance and essence thereof, but by effect, efficacy and
operation descend into Hell. Then did John Io. Picus Apel. quaest. 1. in Tho.
Aqui. 3. quaest. 52.
Picus that learned Earl of Mirandula, and Cardinal Caietane, (whom the Pope
sent into Germany to suppress Luther) deny this article, who concur and
agree with Durand: yea I might say that then either Saint Cyprian or Ruffin
denied this article, who expounds it of Christ's burial. But you say that
these nameles Puritans defend that Christ suffered the pains of Hell upon the
cross, whereby they blaspheme most horribly that sacred humanity, as if
Christ had despaired of his salvation, as if God had hated him, and he had
hated God, etc. I answer that this doctrine of Christ's suffering the pains of
Hell upon the cross, is not so desperate, as your collections thereof are
false, and blasphemous. What desperatnes or absurdity is this, that Christ our
Savior, not in respect of himself, but in that he became our surety, and
took upon him our debts, and bare our sins in his body upon the wood as
Saint Peter says, did bear and endure in his humanity 1. Pet. 2.
the wrath of God, and the pains and torments which our sins had deserved,
to deliver us from the wrath of God which we by our sins had provoked, and
from the said pains and torments which we had merited. We are not to think,
that Christ did suffer only an external and corpo^ral death, for then he had
showed greater weakness, then many mere natural men have done, who with great
courage and cheerfulness have gone unto death: but Christ our Savior was in
such an Agony, that his sweat was like drops of blood trickling down Luke
22. 44. verse. 43.
to the ground, so that an Angel appeared from heaven Math. 27. 46. 32.
comforting him: He cried, and said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.
Whereby it does evidently appear that he suffered not only an outward death
of the body, but did in his soul wrestle with the pains of Hell, and bear
the burden of Gods wrath, dew to our sins, to deliver us from the same, and
to purchase the love and mercy of God unto us. And when the prophet says of
him: He has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: Isa. 53. 4. 5. 6.
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities: the
chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, and with his stripes we are
healed. All we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his
own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Did not our
Savior Christ herein suffer the punishment which was due to our sins? Saint
Paul says, that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law being made a
curse for us: for Galath. 3. 13.
it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on the tree, yet Jesus Christ
was never accursed of his Father; but he bare in his body and soul, the curse
that was due to our sins, to deliver us from the curse of God, and to
purchase to us the blessing of God. But these men (who otherwise are so full
of curious distinctions) do herein err, because they do not with Saint
Augustine put a difference between that which appertained to Christ's own
person, August. in psalm. 21. etc.
and that which he suffered in the person and place of us, the which if this
writer or rather slaunderer had done, he might have abstained from these his
blasphemous collections of his own, and not our assertions: As if Christ had
despaired of his Salvation, or God had hated him, etc. Whereunto I answer,
that Christ was far from such despair, which properly is a sin in the
reprobate, and not a punishment of Gods justice. And we hold that our Savior
Christ suffered in our person, and for us those torments, which are righteous
punishments of Gods justice against sin, and not such as properly be sins
in the devils, and in wicked and reprobate men, as are despair and hatred of
God. And therefore we confess with our mouths, and believe with our hearts,
that Christ was never hated of his Father, but always the dearly beloved
Son of God, in whom he was always well pleased. But he hated sin, the
which as man had committed, so in man's nature Gods justice was to be satisfied.
The which for that corrupt and sinful man was not able to perform, the Son
of God as I said, became our surety, took upon him our nature, and in the same
has suffered upon the cross, the punishment of Gods anger due to our sins,
and thereby has satisfied Gods justice, pacified his anger, and purchased his
love and mercy to all those that truly believe in him. And so Christ was
tormented with anguish of mind, not for his sins, as you falsely gather, but
for our sins, which he bare in his body and soul upon the cross: and God
was not enemy to God, but enemy to our sins, which were imputed to Christ,
that his satisfaction and righteousness might be imputed unto us. To conclude,
we believe that Christ suffered upon the cross those punishments of sin
which proceed from Gods justice, and be no sins, which in some sense may be
called the pains of hell, because that as Christ by his Deity overcame them,
and it was impossible for him to be held and overcome of them: so the devil
and the reprobate shall eternally endure them. And this is no desperate
doctrine, but a most comfortable doctrine to assure us, that in Christ Gods
justice is satisfied, our sins are discharged, hell is conquered, and we
from it be delivered. So that we may with the Apostle say, O death where is thy
sting? O hell where is thy victory? 1. Cor. 15. 35.


The Pamphlet. The Protestants have no mean to determine controversies, and
abolish heresies. 5. Article.
AS the Protestants neither know what they believe, nor why they believe: so
have they no means in their Church to settle them in unity of belief; nor to
determine controversies, nor to abolish heresies, as has the Catholic Church:
for our Savior Christ by his divine providence did foresee, that heresies were
to arise in his Church, as his Apostle S. Paul does warn us: the which as
plagues were to infect his flock, and therefore he not only forewarned us of
them, but also gave us means how to prevent and extinguish them. He willed us
to hear his Church; if we would not be accounted as Etlmicks and Publicanes.
He ordained Pastors and Doctors, lest we should be carried away with every
blast of vain doctrine. He promised to the Church the assistance of the holy
Ghost, in such sort as they which would not hear her, would not hear him. The
Catholics therefore believing certainly that the Church cannot err: that the
general Councels cannot deliver false doctrine: that the Pastors and ancient
Fathers with joint consent cannot teach untruths, when heresies spring up,
presently with the voice of the Church pluck them up even by the roots, and
so ever has practiced: and after this manner has overthrown al encounters,
false opinions, and errors, which the devil by his ministers ever planted, or
established in the world, and so they have been freed from all braules, and
quarrels, in matters of religion. But the Protestants admitting the sole
Scripture, as vmpire and Judge in matters of controversies; and allowing no
infallible interpreter thereof, but remitting all to every man's private spirit
and singular exposition, cannot possibly without error wind themselves out of
the laborynth of so many controversies, wherewith they are now in^^^gled, and
intricated. And the irreconciliable iarres bet^ixt them and the Puritanes in
essential points of faith, give sufficient testimony, that they will never
have an end, or can have an end, holding those grounds of opinion, which they
obstinately defend. And finally, they have no argument to prove, that they
have the true Church, true religion, true faith, which all heretakes which ever
were, will not bring to condemn the Church as well as they. For example, they
allege Scriptures, so did the Arrians: they contemn Councels, the Arrians did
not regard them: they challenge to themselves the true interpretation, the same
did all heretics to this day. And to conclude, they call themselves, the
little flock of Christ, to whom God has revealed his truth, and illuminated
them from above, all which the Donatists with as good reason, and better
arguments did arrogate unto themselves. The same I say of Pelagians,
Nestorians, Eutychians, with all the rabble of other damned heretics. And to
conclude these articles of faith, I say that if the principles of the
Protestants religion be true, S. Paul himself exhorts us to infidelity,
which I prove thus:

Whosoever exhorts us to doubt of that which we are bound to believe by
faith, exhorts to infidelity. But S. Paul does exhort us to doubt of our
salvation, which we are bound to believe by faith, according to the Protestants
religion: Ergo, S. Paul exhorts us to infidelity.

The Mayor is plain: for to doubt of matters in faith is manifest infidelity,
because whosoever doubts, whether God has revealed that which indeed he
has revealed, being sufficiently proposed, as revealed: vertually doubts
whether God says truth or lies.

The Minor is proved by the testimony of S. Paul: Cum timore and tremore
salutem vestram operamini: With fears and trembling work your salvation. All
fear whether it be filial fear or servile fear, includes doubt, the one of
sin, the other of punishment.

Answer.
AS it is false that we neither know what we believe, nor why we believe (as
has been before sufficiently showed) so is it no less false, which is here
boldly affirmed, but faintly proved: That we have no means in our Church to
settle us in unity of belief, to determine controversies, and to abolish
herefies. We have the word of God, which we acknowledge to be the only
touchstone of truth, concerning religion and salvation: We have learned, and
godly Bishops and Pastors to teach the truth of Gods word, to confute both by
preaching and writing errors and heresies: And we have Synodes, although not
general, yet provincial, wherein controversies may be decided, and heresies
condemned, as heretofore the truth has been maintained, and heresies
confuted; and confounded in some provincial Councels, as that called
Gangrense, and some other Africane Councels, as well as they have been in some
general. I would feign know of you, what other and better means, the Church
of God had for the space of three hundred years after Christ's in carnation
then these, to determine controversies, and abolish heresies. General Councels
they had not before Constantines time, which therefore your fellow Papist
Fighius counts to Pigh. 6. de cecles. Hierarch. cap. 1.
have been an invention of his: but your great Rabbin Rob. Bellarmine therein
controlleth him, and says it is false. Rellarm. tom. 1. contro. 4. lib. 2.
cap. 13.
So well these men be settled in unity of belief. And to your great Master of
Rome (whom you now would make the Oracle of the world) there was before that
time but Aeneas Siluius epist. 28. page 802.
small respect and regard had, as your own Pope Pius 2. in these words
confesses: Ante Concilium Nicenum sibi quisque viuebat, and ad Romanam
Ecclesiam paruus habebatur respectus: i. Before the Council of Nice, every one
lived to himself, and there was small regard had to the Church of Rome. Show
us therefore what means the Churches of God then had for maintenance of unity
of faith, which we want?

You say that Christ willed us to hear his Church, if we would not be
accounted for Ethnicks and Publicanes. The Matthew. 18. 17. Bellarm. contro 1.
lib. 3. cap. 5.
which place your said Rob. Bellarmine Reader full wisely alleges to prove
the Pope and his Council to be the supreme Judge of controversies. As though
our Savior Christ there spoke of deciding of controversies in doctrine, or of
expounding the Scriptures; or by the Church meant the Pope and his Council, and
that every man against whom his brother trespasseth, must go to the Pope and
his Council to make his complaint. These be vanities and follies, which nullo
impellente ruunt, and need no confutation. You further allege out of Ioh. 14.
17. that Christ promised unto the Church the assistance of the holy Ghost:
where, by the Church you mean the Pope and his Council, as your Master
Bellarmine has taught you, who writes us: Sed hic in genere dicimus, iudicem
very sensus Scripturae and omnium controuersiarum, esse ecclesiam, id Idem
ibid. cap. 3.
est Pontificem cum concilio, in quo omnes Catholici] conueniunt: that is, We
generally say, that the Church is the judge of the true sense of the Scripture,
and of all controversies, that is to say, The Pope with the Council, wherein
all Catholics do assemble (or rather dissemble together). But our Savior
Christ made this promise to his disciples, saying: I will pray the Father, and
he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even
the ^h. 14. 16. 17.
spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him; but ye know him: for he dwells with you, and shall be in
you. This promise pertains not to all the successors of the Apostles, but to
all them that truly fear God, and believe and obey the holy doctrine which
Christ delivered to his Disciples, and which they preached: the which when you
shall soundly prove, that your Popes and Councels do, then we will grant that
this promise of Christ belongs to them. In the mean time we will follow
Chrysostomes good counsel: Si videris aliquem Euangelica Chrysostom. Hom. de
Sancto and adorando spiritu.
repetentem, profecto spiritum sanctum habet. Venidt enins spiritus sanctus vt
recordari vos faciat eorum, quae docui. Si quis igitur little, qui dicuntur
habere spiritum sanctum dicat aliquid a scipso, and non ex Euangeliji, non
crodite, meam doctrinam sequimini: that is, If thou see any man speaking out of
the Gospel, surely he has the holy Ghost. For the holy Ghost shall come to put
you in remembrance of those things which I have taught you. If therefore any of
them, which are said to have the holy Ghost, do speak any thing of himself,
and not out of the Gospels, believe him not, but follow my doctrine. Whereas
you say, that you believe certainly that the Church cannot err, that the
general Councels cannot deliver false doctrine etc. I answer, that you
foolishly beg that which is in question. For as we acknowledge Councels
assembled of godly, learned, and modest men, which simply seek the glory of
God, and the profit of his Church, are good means to suppress errors and
heresies, and to abolish abuses and enormities; so to affirm that general
Councels cannot err, or deliver false doctrine, is most false and absurd, as
by many both reasons and examples might be proved. But for shortness sake I
will touch but a few examples.

The council of four hundred Priests of Israel erred, 1. King. 22. 6.
and Santan was a false spirit in the mouth of them all to the 22.
destruction of Achab that cursed king of Israel. The council Matthew. 26. 3. 65
66.
of the Priests of Judah erred in co^demning Jesus Christ to death. The Council
of the high Priest and other Act. 4. 5. 18.
Priests, Rulers, Elders, and Scribes erred in forbidding Christ's disciples to
speak or teach in the name of Jesus. The council of Neocaesarea erred in
judging hardly and falsely of second marriages, which Gods word allows. Romans
Council. Neoca. sar. Can. 7.
7. 3. 1. Cor. 7. 39. the words of the Council be these: Presbyterum conuiuio
secundarum nuptiarum, interesse non debere, maxim cum praecipiatur secundis
nuptijs poenitentiam tribuere: that is, A priest ought not to be present at the
feast of second marriages, especially because he is commanded to appoint penance
to second marriages. This Council although it were provincial, was confirmed
by Pope Leo Distinst. cap. 20 de libellis.
the fourth, as appears by Gratian, and the Papists hold, that provincial
councels confirmed by the Pope cannot err. The Council of Ariminum, wherein
were assembled Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 17.
above four hundred Bishops, horribly erred, in maintaining the blasphemous
doctrine of Arius. The like did the Councels of Millaine, Seleucia, and of
Tyrus. The second Council of Ephesus erred, and maintained the false doctrine
of Eutyches. These Councels the Papists confess to have erred, and why?
because they were not allowed and confirmed by the Bishop of Rome. A simple and
shameless shift: as though the Bishop of Rome had in those days power either
to call, or confirm Councels any more then the other Patriarks had. In that
second Council of Nice (most unlike unto the first) not only the wicked
worshipping of Images was allowed, and the Scriptures for the confirmation
thereof most shamefully abused and detorted, as appears by the said corrupt
council, and Calvin and Mart. Chemnicius have largely showed: but also in the
Calvin. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 11. 14.
same was decreed, that the Angels have bodies, and that the soul of man is
corporal, and therefore they may be Mart. Chemni. exam. Council. Trident.
part. 4 de imagine, Action. 5.
painted; the which he foul errors. If you will not allow the worshipping of
Images to be an error, then you cannot say but that the Council of
Constantinople under Leo the Emperor, where were present 338. Bishops, and
another of Frankford under Charles the Great, in which the worshipping of
images was condemned, did err. Some of these Councels erred: To omit for
brevity sake many other Councels, a Council at Rome under Stephanus the
sixth, or as some reckon, seventh, condemned Platina in Stepha. 6.
Pope Formosus and his doings. Another Council at Rauenna under Pope John the
tenth, restored Formosus, and condemned Stephen and the acts of his Council.
I Platina in Joan. 10.
hope you will not, or cannot say, but that one of these Councels erred.
Another Council at Rome under Pope Nicholas the second, caused that excellent
learned and godly man Berengarius to recant, and to confess that the very
true body of Christ is indeed handled, and broken DeConse. Inst. 2. Ego
Bereng. Sess. 13.
by the priests hands, and torn with the teeth of faithful people: The which
is a gross, false, and blasphemous doctrine. The Council of Constance erred
most wickedly in taking away the cup of the Lord from the lay people, contrary
to the word of God, and the testimony of all antiquity. And that their last
Council of Trident has foully erred, and confirmed false doctrine, repugnant
to the truth of Gods word, and the Canons of ancient Councels, both these
excellent learned men Martinus Chemnicius and Innocentius Gentilletus have
showed: and we do, and will prove to the consciences of all those, whom the God
of this world has not blinded. I am not ignorant what colors that Jesuit
Bellarmine seeks to cast upon the foresaid errors of these Councels, and
such others, and what simple shifts he seeks to elude and avoid them, the
which I will not stand here to answer, but I will refer the reader to the
answers of Lamb. Danaeus, and to that excellent man of blessed memory D.
Whitakers, where he may find the weakness and nakedness of Bellarmines said
shifts plainly discovered, and the same fully confuted, the which I think will
stand (as other of his works have done) long undefended.

Whereas you note in your margent the ancient Councels of Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus, and Chalcedon, wherein old heretics were confuted and condemned: and
thereby claim them to appertain to your Church. I answer, that as it is most
certain, that those Councels were not called, not governed and directed by the
Bishops of Rome, as now by usurpation they are; so you shall never prove, that
those godly and learned fathers agreed with you in many great and principal
points of Christian doctrine. It were easy to show that sundry things were
condemned by them, which be received and used by you: And therefore you vainly
brag of their names, whose doctrine and proceedings you have forsaken: neither
have you so much by disputation in Councels, as by cruel persecution through
fire and faggot suppressed such as in all ages have complained of your idolatry
and abominations, as plainly appears by histories.

As it is true that we admit the holy Scripture, or rather the holy Ghost,
speaking in the Scripture, to be the supreme vmpier and Judge in matters of
controversies, and acknowledge him to be the only infallible interpreter of
his own words; so is it false, that we admit no other judge, but remit al to
every man's private spirit, and singular exposition. We say, that as the holy
Ghost in the Scriptures is the high infallible judge and interpreter of the
Scriptures: so we acknowledge inferior Judges and interpreters both private
and public. Every man is a private judge to discern and judge of the
doctrine which he hears or reads in the Scriptures. So Saint Paul says: I
speak as unto wise men, judge ye what I say. Let the Prophet! speak two or
three, and let the other judge. Despise not prophesying. 1. Cor. 10. 15.
Try all things, and keep that which is good. Abstain from all Ibid. 14. 29.
appearance of evil. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the 1 Thessalonians.
5. 20.
spirits whether they are of God. The spiritual man judges all 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
things. Good Christians ought to have their wits exercised 1. Cor. 2. 15.
to discern both good and evil. The true sheep of Christ Heb. 5. 14.
hear and know his voice, and they will not follow a John 10. 5.
stranger, but they fly from him; for they know not the voice of strangers,
whereby our Savior Christ shows, that those which be his sheep, and be
truly gathered into his fold, can judge and discern between his voice
sounding in the Scriptures, and the voice of strangers, delivering a strange
doctrine differing and dissenting from the same, such as is the false doctrine
of the Church of Rome. We also admit public judges of controversies, both
severally, as learned Bishops, pastors, and doctors; who may give their
sentences and judgments in matters in question: and coniunctly, when they be
assembled in Synodes and Councels to examine questions of greater difficulty,
and to decide the same. How beit their judgments be not infallible (for all
men be liars, and subject to ignorance and error) neither have they any
absolute power and authority Psalm. 116.
to judge after their own spirit or mind, but according to the canonical
Scriptures: from the which if they be found to decline and swerve, their
judgments are not to be followed. But your meaning is, that the Pope with his
Council is the supreme vmpire and judge in matters of controversy, and the
infallible interpreter thereof. How they have most falsely interpreted the
Scriptures, I have in some part showed before: and that he who is a party, and
whom a great part of Christendom does accuse to be Antichrist, and guilty of
most grievous crimes, as of impiety, idolatry, tyranny over the Church,
sacrilege, treason, etc. should be judge in this his own cause, is against all
Vide Brutum Fulmen.
law and reason. It is written in your own Canon law, Si Papa cum aliquo
causam habet, non debet ipse esse iudex. i. If the Pope have matter with any
other, he ought not himself to be judge. And again, Quando Papa est in statu,
qui plerisque est offendiculo, and scandalizat Ecclesia^, noc est corrigibilis,
tunc Distinct. 40. Si Papa in gloss.
non potest esse iudex, quia videtur male sentire de fide. i. When the Pope is
in that state, that he is an offense to many, and scandalizeth the Church, and
is incorrigible; then he cannot be Judge, because he seems to be of an evil
faith. And even so not only we do, but also many of his own favorers have
justly accused the Pope to be.

You vainly and falsely exaggerate controversies and irreconciliable iarres (as
you term them) among us in essential points of faith. But why do you not
particularly expresle some of those essential points of faith? Surely because
you cannot. I confess there has been in our Church some controversy
concerning external ceremonies, and form of government, as there has been
heretofore between good men; as between Peter and Paul: between Paul and
Barnabas: between Anicetus Bishop of Rome Galat. 2.
and Polycarpus: between Chrysostom and Epiphanius; and many others: who all
were godly men, agreeing in unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God.
But you that are so eager in traducing our iarres, cannot see your own manifold
and irreconcilable iarres and controversies among your selves. As between
your Schoolmen, namely, your Thomists and Scotists, differing in sundry
matters of moment, as not only Erasmus has declared, but also John Bishop of
Rochester has affirmed. Also between Assert. Luth. art. 36. page 339
your Dominican and Franciscan Friars, about the conception of the virgin Mary,
debated not only by words, but also by blows, which controversy was never
yet decided, but in the Council of Basil, which the Papists count a
schismatic Council, and in the same was the false doctrine approved, to
wit, that the Virgin Mary was conceived without sin. You cannot see your
iarres between your great Master of Sentences Peter Lumbard (who iustled
Saint Paul out of the schools) and your Sorbonist Doctors of Paris, which
found and condemned 26. errors in him: nor the iarres between Ambrosius
Catharinus Archbishop of Minorien, and Dominicus de Soto confesson to Charles
the fifth, concerning assurance of Gods grace, predestination, original sin,
freewll, and induration of a sinner, as in their bitter books one against
another about these matters appears: nor ye iarres between the said
Catharinus and Cardinal Caietane, whom Catharinus charge with 200. errors,
of which he writes thus: Quae vt non solum euidenter falsa merito culpari
possent, verum etiam vt Christianae religioni perniciosa, etc. Which may be
worthily reproved not only as evidently false, but also as pernicious to
Christian religion. I might mention many mo iarres among the Papists, and
namely between the secular Priests and Jesuits, as appears by their bitter
books one against another, and particularly that of William Watson a secular
Priest lately published in print against the Jesuits, which this camlling
exclamor cannot espy, who can see a moate in our eyes, but cannot behold great
beams in their own: but for shortness sake I omit them at this present, only
the learned may see how that great Rabbi Rob. Bellarmine iarreth with all other
his pewfellowes, and in very many essential points of doctrine dissenteth from
them, and controuleth them. Whereof also Johannes Pappus has made a large
collection.

Whereas you say yt we have no argument to prove, that we have the true Church,
true religion, and true faith, but such as al heretics have ever used: I
answer, that we have that argument and proof for these things, which although
Heretics have falsely pretended, as popish heretics now do, yet the godly
learned Fathers have sincerely used. And that is the holy word of God, the
only touchstone of truth and pillar of the Church: for as the Church in one
respect, is the pillar of truth as Saint Paul says: so in another, 2. Tim. 3.
15.
the truth is the pillar and prop of the Church, as Chrysostom says: For by
what means else have the godly Chrysostom. in illum locum homil. 11.
and learned Fathers in all ages confuted heresies, and proved the Church, but
by the Scriptures? by them out Matthew. 4. 4. 7. 10.
Savior Christ foiled the Devil, and put him to flight. By them he answered
the Pharisees. By them he confuted Matthew. 19. 4.
the Sadduces. By them he proved himself to be the promised ibid. 22. 29.
Luke 24. 27. 32. 44. 46.
Messiah, and Savior of the world. By them Saint Paul confirmed the Gospel
which he preached: By them Romans 1. 2. and 3. 21. and 4. 3.
he persuaded the Jews those things which concerned Christ Jesus, both out of
the Law of Moses, and out of the Act. 21. 23. ibid. 18. 2. 8.
Prophets. By them Apollos confuted the Jews, with great vehemency, showing
by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ. By them the godly and learned
Fathers confuted and confounded the Arians and other Heretics, whom you here
name, as by their books and particular sayings it evidently appears.
Athanasius speaking of the godly decrees of the Council of Nice, against the
Arians writes Athanas. de decretis Nicen. Syned page 528.
thus: Atque harum rerum non aliunde nos quam ex scriptutis persuasionem
habemus: that is, We be persuaded of these things, by no other means but by
the Scriptures. Epiphanius says: In Scripturis sanctis Trinitas nobis
annuntiatur ac Epiph. contra Pneumatomachos haeres. 74.
creditur citra curiositatem, etc. The Trinity is in the holy Scriptures
preached unto us, and without curiosity believed. And that by the^ all
doctrines are to be confirmed, and all errors and heresies to be confuted, they
plainly and plentifully show. Tertullian says, that if Heretics be brought
to examine and try their questions only by the Scriptures they cannot stand.
Epiphanius says: that we Tertull. lib. de resurree. carnia.
are not to discuss questions, by our own wits and reasons, Sedex
scripturarum consequentia. By the consequence Epiph. contra Paulum Samosa.
haeres. 66.
of the Scriptures. Saint Basil says: Let us stand to the arbitrament of the
Scripture inspired of God, and with whom be found doctrines agreeable to
those divine Basil. epist. 80.
words, let the truth be judged to be with them. Constantine said unto the
Bishops in the Nicene Council. The Evangelical and Apostolical books, and
the oracles of the Theod. lib. 1. cap. 7. fol. 284.
Prophets do plainly instruct us of God, wherefore laying away all enimitie
and discord, let us take the explication or resolution of the questions in
controversy out of those sayings inspired of God. So says Saint Augustine:
Verum nos sacris literis accommodemus auditum, etc. that is, August. in Euang
Joan. tract. 60.
Let us harken unto the holy Scriptures, and according to them let us by the
help of God dissolve this question. And again. Non secundu^ opinionem, etc.
We must consider of this August. de cura pro mortuis cap. 2.
matter not according to ye common opinion, but according to the holy
Scriptures of our religion. And of the church he says thus: Sed vtrum ipsi
ecclesiam teneant, non nisi diuinarum Scripturarum canonicis libris ostendant:
that is, But whether De vnitate ecclesiae. cap. 16.
they have the Church, let them show by no other means, but by the Canonical
books of the divine Scriptures. Chrysostom says that we cannot know, which
Chrysostom in Math. homil. 44.
is the true Church of Christ, Nisi tantummodo per Scripturas: that is, but
only by the Scriptures. Therefore by the Scriptures prove your doctrine, and
show your Church. But you say the Arians and other Heretics alleged the
Scriptures: whereunto I add, that so did the Devil also, Math. 4.
but (...) in such sort as you and your fellows do, in mangling them, and
falsely expounding and applying them, as I have in some part before showed. I am
content to join this issue with you, that they which be proved, to deprave,
detort, mangle, and falsely expound and apply the scriptures, be heretics, and
to be condemued with these old heretics whom you here name, To whom whether
you or we be more like, let the upright Reader indifferently judge. The Arians
seeing that they could have nothing out of the Scriptures fled (as Athanasius
says) unto the Fathers, and even so do you. The Arians used subtle
distinctions Athanas. tom. 2
to elude and shift off the truth, and so do you. They denied the person of
Christ: and you deny the office of Christ, in not acknowledging him to be our
only Prophet and teacher, whose only voice we must hear and obey: nor the
only King and head of his Church, nor our only high Priest with the sweet
smelling sacrifice of himself once for ever offered, to redeem and reconcile
us to God, nor our only mediator to make intercession for us. The Arians did
cruelly persecute the true Christians, and so do Papists, when power is in
their hand to do it. The Arrians when they could not prevail against that
excellent man Athanasius, fell to rail upon him, and to Ruffin. lib. 1. cap.
17.
slander him, accusing him of adultery, murder, and sorcerie: and even so do
you deal now with such as for their Socrates lib. 1. cap. 27.
godliness and learning may well be compared with Athanasius, I mean
especially Calvin, whom the Author of that unlearned libell and beastly book
entitled, A quartron of reasons of Catholic religion, etc. is not ashamed 5.
Reason pa. 30
to call a sear backed priest for Sodomie. O thou shameless man, or rather
monster! art thou not ashamed to slander and belie such a man? of whom they
that knew him, did truly write of him, ipsa a quo potuit virtutem discere
virtus, Theo. Beza.
that even virtue it self might (as it were) have learned virtue of him. How
do thou know that Calvin was such a man? I assure my self that thou did
never see him nor know him: yea, I nothing doubt but that thou wast scarsly
borne when he died. And how do thou know yt he was subject to such a filthy
sin? where was he ever accused or convicted of such a matter? In that City
adulteries be punished by death, and would Sodomie have bin winked at in the
Preacher? And if it were not known there, how do thou know it? But I will
not insist any longer in co^futing this shameless slander. For most true it
is which Tully says: Nonne vt ignis in aquam coniectus continuo restinguitur
and refrigeratur, sic referuens falsum crimen in purissimam Cicero pro Roscio
Com.
castissimamque vitam collatum statim concidit and extinguitur? that is, As
fire being cast into water is straight ways quenched: so a fervent false crime
and slander being cast into a most pure and chaste life (such as Caluines was)
forthwith falls down and is extinguished. And even so let this (...), i.
slanderer, and Bolsec the Apostata, and all other rail and slander what they
can, yet Caluines memory with God and all good men will be blessed for ever.
And this railer herein shows himself like not only to the Arians, but also
to that ancient enemy to Christianity Porphyrius, who, as Eusebius says,
going about to reprehend and find fault with the Scriptures and Preachers of
the Word, not being able to reprove their doctrine: (...): that is, wanting
reasons, he fell a railing and slaundering Eusebius. Eccles. Histor. lib. 6. cap.
19.
the Preachers.

But to return to my matter, let the reader also with indifferency consider
who be like to the Donatists, Pelagians, Nestorians, and Euty chians, we or the
Papists. The Donatists affirmed the Church to have perished from the rest of
the world, and to have remained only with them in Africa: Do not the Papists
in like manner affirm only them to be the Church of God, which in a part of
Europe be under the obedience of the Bishop of Rome, unless now they will add
the West Indians, of whom as the Spaniards have murdered many millions: so
peradventure a few be either persuaded or coacted to profess Popery, and
submit themselves to the Pope of Rome. But the Christian Churches in Grecia,
Aethiopia, Armenia, Muscouia and other countries, they acknowledge not for the
Church of God: because they do not subject themselves unto the Church of Rome:
we acknowledge al them to be of the Church of God, which in all the world hold
the truth in the chief and fundamental points of Christian religion. The
Pelagians held, first, that the grace of God, whereby we be delivered, is
given according to our merits. Secondly, that the law of God may be fulfilled
of us. Thirdly, that we have free will: the Papists herein be so like to them,
that as they maintain in effect the same matters, so for the defense of them
they allege the same places of Scriptures now, as the Pelagians of old time
did, as appears by the writings of S. Augustine, and S. Hierome against them.
Nestorius did (as Theodoretus writes of him) trouble and entangle the simple
and plain doctrine Theodores lib. 4. Haret. Fabul.
of Christian faith with Greekish Sophistications. How the Papists have herein
joined with him, and by their curious Questions, and vain Sophistications,
have troubled and perverted the pure, simple, and plain faith of Christ, by
their Schoolmen it does evidently appear. Entyches confounded the two natures
in Christ, and the properties peculiar to them: So do the Papists, in making
the body of Jesus Christ to be at one instant in heaven and earth, and
infinite places of the earth, which is only proper unto the Deity. This shall
suffice to show that the Papists be liker to these old heretics then we are,
whose doctrine we abhor, and be far further from it, then they be. Yea I
may not only truly say, but can also plainly prove Popery to be an hotchpotch
of old heresies long ago condemned in the Church of God. The which as I did
once in public place show, so I may (if it be the will of God) hereafter more
plainly and plentifully prove.

At Paul's Cross Anno 1590.
Now this worthy writer, or rather lewd libeller will prove, and that by a
syllogism, out of the principles of our religion, that S. Paul exhorts us to
infidelity: This subtle syllogism is thus framed:

Whosoever exhorts us to doubt of that which we are bound to believe by
faith, exhorts to infidelity.

But Saint Paul does exhort us to doubt of our salvation (which we are bound to
believe by faith, according to the Protestants religion) Ergo: Saint Paul
exhorts us to infidelity.

As the assumption or second proposition of this syllogism, as it now stands
is false: so by a small alteration, both it, and all the rest may be very true,
that is, by putting out the name of S. Paul, and putting Papists in place
thereof, in this sort.

Whosoever exhorts us to doubt of that which we are bound to believe by
faith, exhorts us to infidelity.

The Papists exhort, or at leastwise teach us, to doubt of our salvation: Ergo,
the Papists exhort us to infidelity.

The first proposition of this syllogism is affirmed by Sess. 6. page 29.
this writer to be plain. The second is the doctrine of the Papists concluded
and determined in that Tridentine Co^uenticle, where it is said, that they
which be truly justified, cannot without all doubt account themselves to be
justified. And again, that no man can know by certainty of faith, which is
not subject to error and falsehood, that he has obtained the grace of God. And
again, Siquis Ibid. Can. 73.
dixerit, omni homini, etc. If any shall say, that it is necessary for every
man to the obtaining of remission of sins, to believe certainly and without
doubt of their own infirmity and indisposition, that their sins be forgiven
them, be he accursed. But more plainly and pregnantly do the Doctors of
Louaine lay down this doctrine of doubting: Fides, qua quis firmiter credit,
and certo statuit, per Christum sibi remissa In articul aduers. Luther. artic.
9.
esse peccata, seque possessurum vitam aeternam, nullum habet in Scripturis
testimonium, imo eisdem aduersatur: that is, The faith whereby a man does
firmly believe, and is certainly assured that his sins by Christ be forgiven
him, and that he shall possess eternal life, has no testimony in the
Scripture, yea is contrary unto them. Hereupon I conclude by this writers own
reason, that the Papists in maintaining this doctrine of doubting, teach
infidelity. But whereas these Louainian Doctors say, that this doctrine of the
certainty of forgiveness of our sins by Christ, and of our possession of
eternal life is not testified in the Scriptures, but contrary to them: how
false this is, I refer it to be tried by these places here following. They
that trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be moved, but
remains for ever. Being justified by faith, we have Psalm. 125. 1. Romans 5. 1.
2.
peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also through faith,
we have had this access unto his grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice under
the hope of the glory of God. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to
fear again: but ye Romans 8. 15.
have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The same
spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Ibid. verse. 33.
Gods chosen? it is Christ that justifies: Who shall condemn? etc. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, Verse. 35.
or sword, etc. I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Verse. 38.
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come
neither height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. It is God which
stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, who has also sealed
us, and 2. Cor. 1. 21.
has given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. In whom also ye have
trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, even the Ephesians. 1. 13.
Gospel of your salvation, wherein also after ye believed, ye were sealed with
the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, etc. Let
us therefore go with confidence or boldness Hebr. 4. 16.
unto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to
help in time of need. So God, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs
of promise the stablenes of his Chap. 6. 17.
counsel, bound himself by an oath, that by two immutable things, wherein it is
impossible that God should lie, we might have strong consolation, which have
our refuge to lay hold upon that hope that is set before us, which hope we
have, as an ancre of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and it enters into
that which is within the veil, etc. Let us draw near with a true heart in
assurance of Chap. 10. 22.
faith, our hearts being pure from an evil conscience, and washed in our
bodies with pure water, let us keep the profession of our hope without
wavering (for he is faithful that promised.) Therefore by faith, that by grace
the promise might be sure to all the Romans 4. 16.
seed. And he not weak in the faith considered not his own Verse. 19.
body, which was now dead, being almost an hundred years old; neither the
deadnes of Saraes womb: neither did he doubt of the promise of God through
unbelief, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God, being
fully assured that he which had promised, was able to do it, and therefore it
was imputed to him for righteousness.

Hereunto I will add to the confuting of this doctrine of doubting, two or
three sayings of the Fathers. Chrysostom says: Spes humana subinde
intercidit, and sperantem pudore afficit: Nostra vero eiusmodi non est, sed
firma and immobilis Chrysostom. ad Romans Homil. 9.
perdurat, etc. that is, The hope that is had in man sundry times falls
away, and shameth him that hops: but our hope is not such, but abides firm
and immovable. Augustine says: Gaudium ergo nostrum, fratres, nondum est
in^e, sed iam in spe. Spes autem nostra tam certa est, quasi iam August
praefat. in Psalm. 123.
res perfecta sit: 1. Our joy O brethren is not as yet in possession, but in
hope. And our hope is so certain, as though the thing were already done.
Bernard says: Ergo, aut dixi, fides ambiguum non habet: aut si habet fides non
est, sed opinio: Bernard. lib. 5. de considera.
Faith has no doubting: or if it have, it is not faith, but an opinion. Hereby
the indifferent reader may see, both how false this desperate doctrine of
doubting is (against the which Ambrosus Catherinus an Archbishop and a great
doer in the Council of Trent did earnestly write) and also that the Papists by
this principle of their doctrine teach infidelity. And withal let him
consider whether is a more true, godly, and comfortable doctrine, to believe by
faith our salvation, or to be uncertain and to doubt thereof, as they teach.

But now let us see how S. Paul exhorts us (as this man says) to doubt of
our salvation. He says: Cum timore and tremore salutem vestram operamini:
which is thus translated, With fear and trembling work your salvation. This
text was alleged by hearesay, and not by sight. For this worthy writer, who
so highly thinks of himself, and so greatly disdaineth others, quoteth in
the margent 1. Cor. 2. whereas it is not in that chapter, nor in all that
Epistle, but it is Philip. 2. 12. But the fault hereof will be laid upon the
Printer. Yet that the Printer should so much err, and set 1. Cor. 2. for
Philip. 2. it is not likely. And that this error is not of the Printer, but of
this man's fine memory, it may hereby appear, yt it is not in the vulgar
editio^, which they both do, and are bound to follow, cum timore, but cum metu.
Hereby the reader may see, with what care these men allege the Scriptures, not
looking upon the words, nor considering the simple sense and meaning, but
snatching at the words, and wresting them contrary to the purpose and meaning
of the Apostle. Whose intent is not to teach the Philippians, that they be
saved by their works, which Romans 3. 28. and 4. 2. 5. Galat. 2. 16
is contrary to his doctrine, in many other places; but to dissuade them from
careless security, and to exhort them Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. 2. Timoth. 1. 9.
to walk in good works, and to run on the race of their Tit. 3. 4.
life in the fear of God, until they come to attain that faluation, which God
has promised, and Jesus Christ for us has purchased. Saint Paul to the
Ephesians does as it were to the explication of this place, make-declaration
both of the true doctrine of salvation, and of the way whereby we are to walk
unto it. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it
is the gift of God; not of works, least any man should boast himself. For we
are his Ephesians. 2. 8.
workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained,
that we should walk in them. Thus good works, and holy obedience of life,
which cannot be joined with careless security, but do flow from the fear of
God, are not causes to merit and deserve salvation, which Jesus Christ by his
blood shedding has purchased for us, but always to walk unto it, without the
which we shall never see God, as the Apostle says. Heb. 12. 14.


The Pamphlet. Articles concerning good life and piety.
The Protestants are bound in conscience never to ask God forgiveness of their
sins.

Whosoever is assured by faith that his sins are forgiven him, sins most
grievously in asking God pardon for them: but all true Protestants are assured
by faith, that their sins are forgiven them. Ergo.

All true Protestants sin grievously in asking pardon of God for them.

The Mayor is evident: for who but an Infidel or a mad man, would demand of
God the creation of the world, which he is assured by faith that God has
already created? or Christ's incarnation, which already is performed? or the
institution of Sacraments, which already is effected? In like manner, who but
an Infidel or a mad man will demand pardon of his sins, which he believes
already by faith that God has forgiven? for it is a sign that he doubts of
that which he is bound by faith to believe, which doubting faith is
infidelity.

Moreover, what soever we demand, that we hope to obtain: but no man hops
to obtain that he already possesses, as no man will demand of God his own
soul, or body, because already he possesses them.

The Minor is undoubted, because this is that lively faith, whereby the
Protestants are justified: by this they apprehend Christ, by this they apply
his merits and passion unto them, and without this no man can attain unto
salvation. Hereupon I will infer, that no Protestant can with a safe
conscience say the Lords Prayer, because he cannot pray as he ought without
true faith, and call God his father; and if he have true faith, he cannot
without note of infidelity utter this petition, Forgive us our sins: for
that most assuredly he believes and protests in the first ingresse of that
prayer, that he is the Son of God, and consequently believes by faith that his
sins are forgiven him.

Answer.
TO the first proposition of this subtle syllogism, I answer, that the
assurance by faith, which Gods elect have of the forgiveness of their sins,
does well stand with the asking of forgiveness of them. For we are to ask
forgiveness of our sins, because God does command it, and require it of us.
Moreover, it is our duty to ask forgiveness of them: for otherwise we cannot
be assured by faith that they be forgiven us: for by asking pardon of them, we
do make confession of them, and do acknowledge our own guiltines, the which
if we should refuse to do, we can have no assurance of the remission of them.
For Solomon says, He that hides his sins shall not prosper: but he that
confesses them and forsakes them, shall Prou. 28. 13.
have mercy. And S. John says, If we confess our sins, God is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to clouse us from 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
all unrighteousness. Moreover, we ask forgiveness of our sins, to confirm
our faith, and to increase the assurance we have of the forgiveness of them, and
that we may more and more have the feeling of the forgiveness of them increased
in our hearts. For we do not mean that any man has any such firm assurance
of faith, but that the same is mixed with weakness, and many times shaken with
temptations, against the which we must strive and pray, and say both with him
in the Gospel, Lord I believe, Lord help my unbelief: and with the Apostles,
Lord increase our faith. Mark. 9. 24.
Our faith is but as a grain of Mustard seed, which must Luke 17. 5.
grow and increase. Saint Paul says, that by the Gospel the righteousness of
God is reueiled from faith to faith. Upon Romans 1. 17.
which words Clement Alexandrinus writes thus: (...). Clemens Alex. (...).
The Apostle seems to declare a double faith: but rather one faith, which
receives increase and perfection. And therefore in praying for the forgiveness
of sins, we pray that our faith of the forginenes of them may be more and
more confirmed, and our assurance thereof increased in us. Lastly, seeing we
daily sin, both in doing that which God forbids, and omitting that which
he commands, why ought we not daily to ask forgiveness of them? And in
praying for the remission of our sins, we desire all those things which be
effects and fruits thereof, as Sanctification and eternal life, etc. And yet
we must pray in a true persuasion of faith of Gods mercy toward us to the
forgiveness of our sins not only past, but also future and to come. And so
our praying for the forgiveness of them, is a craving of the continuance of Gods
mercy, to the continual pardoning of them, which we continually commit.

Now whereas he says, the Mayor is evident, and none but an Infidel or mad
man would demand of God, the creation of the world, which he is assured by
faith that God has already created? etc. I answer, that none that is well in
his wits would make such a foolish and absurd comparison, as is between the
asking of God the creation of the world, the incarnation of Christ, etc. and
the remission of our sins. For those are neither commanded, nor at all to be
asked: and will this man say, that forgiveness of sins is not at all of any to
be prayed for? Of those things we need not further to be confirmed, but of the
forgiveness of our sins, our faith had need to be strengthened, and the
feeling thereof in our consciences to be increased. Moreover (as I said before)
for as much as we daily sin and offend God, we ought daily to crave Gods
mercy in pardoning our sins. What likeness has prayer for the creation of
the world, or for the incarnation of Christ, etc. herewith? And whereas this
man thinks it so absurd a thing to pray to God to forgive us our sins,
because we believe the forgiveness of them, I would ask of him, whether S.
Paul praying both in the beginning, and in the end of his Epistles, for Gods
grace to the faithful, did not assuredly believe, that they were even then,
and before those his prayers endued with Gods grace? No doubt but he did
believe that they were endued with it, for else he would not have acknowledged
the effectual faith, the diligent love, and patient hope of the Thessalonians,
and that they 1. These. 1. 3.
were elected of God. Which gifts of Gods spirit could not be in them, without
the grace of God. Now by this man's divinity what a madness was it, for him to
pray for grace unto them, whom he did believe to be endued with Gods grace
already? And where as Saint John says, These things have I written unto you
that believe in the name 1. Ioh. 5. 13.
of the son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that
ye may believe in the name of the son of God. By this man's deep doctrine, it
might seem madness for Saint John to write unto them that did believe in the
name of the son of God, that they should believe in the name of the Son of
God. But it seemed not so to S. John, who writes to them that as they had
blessedly begun to believe in the name of the Son of God, so they might
still continue, grow, and increase in the same faith. Moreover also I would
ask of this man and his fellows, whether they praying do believe the
forgiveness of their sins? if they do not, then are they Infidels, and deny the
article of the creed, I believe the forgiveness of sins, which before he
falsely objected to us. If they do believe the forgiveness of their sins, why
do they then (by this man's doctrine) pray for it? If he say, that he believes
that there is in generality, a forgiveness of sins, but particularly he is
not assured by faith, of the forgiveness of his own sins; then what does his
faith differ from the Devils faith? who believes and trembles, as Saint James
says: and what is this his doubting, but (as he himself here says) flat
infidelity? Iame. 1.
And no marvel though these men feel in their hearts no assurance of faith,
for that they ground it not upon the immovable rock of Gods promise, but upon
the unsure sand of their own works and satisfactions, by the which indeed
neither can their faith be assured, nor their consciences quieted. The which
false doctrine, while they believe, I would know how they can ask forgiveness
of their sins? for whosoever makes satisfaction to God for them, needs not
to ask forgiveness of them. But the Papists maintain that they make full
satisfaction to God for them (as I have before showed) therefore I may much
more justly say, then he does here, that it is madness to ask forgiveness of
them. For what man not being mad, owinge a sum of money, and paying it, will
desire the same to be forgiven him? Concerning your scoffing in the proof of
your Minor or second proposition, we indeed believe Romans 3. 18. Ephesians. 3. 17.
that we are justified by faith without the works of the law, and that Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith, and that by this hand of a true and unfeigned
faith in Jesus Christ, we apply the plaster of his precious blood shed for our
sins, to cure all the sorances and sores of our souls. And take you heed,
that you trusting in your own works and merits, in your Masses, agnus deis,
holy water, pardons, and manifold other such paltries, fall not into the ditch
of damnation. And this shall suffice for this article, which is so absurd that
it deserves not so much.

The Pamphlet. The Protestants are bound in conscience to avoid all good
works. 2. Article.
EVery man is bound upon pain of eternal damnation to avoid all deadly
sins. But fasting, praying, alms deeds, and all good works, according to
the Luther in assert. artic. 31. 32. and 36. Calvin. lib. 3. institu. cap. 12..
4. and cap. 14. 4. 19. Melan. in Loc. tit. de peccato.
Protestants religion, are deadly sins: Ergo, according to the Protestants
religion all men are bound upon pain of eternal damnation, to avoid fasting
praying, alms deeds and all good works. The Mayor is manifest: for the wages
of deadly sin is death, Romans 6. 24.
Stipendium peccatimors. The Minor is evident: for according to the Protestants
religion and common exposition of this text of Scripture: Isa. 64. 6.
Factisumus vt immundi omnes nos, and tanquam pannus menstruatae omnes
iustitiae nostrae: We are made all as unclean, and all our justices are as
stained cloth. That is to say, the best works we can do are infected with
deadly sin, and consequently deserve eternal damnation, and therefore to be
avoided.

Answer
AS Hannibal said of Phormio, that he had heard Cicer. lib. 2. de oratore.
many doting fools, but he never heard any that so much doted as did Phormio:
so may I say, that I have heard and read many foolish disputers, but any that
did so foolishly disoute and reason as this man does, I never heard nor read.
For what man in his wits will reason thus: that because the corruptions of men
do creep into these works of fasting, praying, and alms giving, therefore
the works themselves be deadly sins? Our doctrine is, first, that these
works and such other, being done by unfaithful hypocrites and wicked men be
turned into sin, as David says: for they be so corrupted and defiled with
Psalm. 109. 7.
their infidelity and wickedness, that they be but splendida peccata: that is,
glittering sins before God, as Saint Augustine terms them. For even as
most pure water flowing through a filthy sink or privy, is made foul,
filthy, and stinking: even so these works, prayer, fasting, etc. which be
good works commanded of God, flowing from their faithles and wicked hearts
and bodies be so defiled, that they be but filthy sins in the sight of God.

Solomon says: the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord: but the
prayer of the righteous is acceptable Pro. 15. 8.
to him. God says by the Prophet Esaias: Bring no Esa. 1. 13.
more oblations in vain: incense is an abomination unto me: I cannot suffer
your new moons, nor Sabboths, nor solemn days (it is iniquity) nor solemn
assemblies. My soul hates your new moons, and your appointed feasts, Ibid.
cap. 66. 3.
etc. He that kills a bullock, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a
sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck, etc. These sayings show that even the
sacrifices commanded in the law of God, were wicked and abominable, when they
were offered of wicked and profane persons void of true faith and repentance.
So it is in the prophet Haggai: Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Ask now the
priests concerning the law. If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of Hagg. 2. 12.
his garment, and with his skirt do touch the bread, or the pottage, or the
wine, or ale, or any meat, shall it be holy? And the priests answered and said
no. Then said Haggai, if a polluted person touch any of these things, shall it
be unclean? and the priests answered and said, it shall be unclean. Then
answered Haggai and said, so is this people, and so is this nation before me,
says the Lord: and so are all the works of their hands, and that which they
offer here is unclean. Agreeable to this is that which Saint Paul says: Unto
the pure are all things pure, but unto them that are defiled, and unbelieving
is nothing pure, Tit. 1. 15.
but even their minds and consciences are defiled. Christ our Savior says:
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs Matthew. 7. 16. and 12. 33.
of thistles? and a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. Whatsoever is not
of faith is sin, and without faith it is impossible Romans 14. 23.
to please God. Here of we conclude that even those works Hebr. 11. 6.
which God has commanded and commended to us, in his word, being done by the
ungodly and reprobate be so corrupted by their infidelity and wickedness, that
they be not acceptable, but rather abominable before God. So says Saint
Augustine: Sine qua (fide) quae videntur August. lib. 3. ad Bonifac. cap. 5.
bona opera, in peccata vertuntur: that is, Without faith those works which
seem to be good are turned into sin. Saint Ambrose says: Sine cultu very
dei, etiam quod virtus Ambros. de vocat. gentium lib. 1. cap. 3. page 6.
videtur esse peccatum est, nec placere vllus deo sine deo potest: that is,
Without the worship of the true God, even that which seems to be virtue is
sin, neither can any please God without God. Anselme says: Omnis vita
infidelium Anselme in Romans cap. 14.
peccatum est: and nihil bonum sine summo bono. i. The whole life of the
unfaithful is sin: and there is nothing good without the chiefest good,
which is God. By this the Christian reader may sufficiently see, how false the
doctrine of the Papists, and namely of our fine and delicate Jesuits is, who
teach (as their proctor Andradius one of that Explicat. orthodox. lib. 3. page
277. page 279. nulla culpa contaminata page 280.
coat blusheth not to avouch) that all actions of those which be void of the
true knowledge of God be not sin: yea that they may do works defiled with
no fault, but worthy of great praise; and that we are not to think, that all
the works of them which be void of faith do so displease God, that they be
crimes worthy eternal punishments. Let the godly reader compare these sayings
of this Iebusite, with those alleged before out of the Scriptures and ancient
Fathers, and discern which is more sound and agreeable, not to the blind
reason of man, but to the will of God reueiled in his word. Secondly,
concerning the works of there generate, that belong to Gods election and
mercy, we say, that although they be done with imperfection, and not so fully,
with their whole soul, heart, and mind, as they should be; but carry the
touch of man's corruption, and are not able to abide the strict and straight
judgment of God: yet because they proceed from hearts purified by faith, and
sanctified in some measure with Gods holy spirit, they please God, and the Act.
15.
imperfections of them being pardoned in Jesus Christ, they be accepted for
pure and holy. Christ says: A good Matthew. 7. 16. and 12. 33.
tree brings forth good fruit: to the pure are all things pure. The prayer
of the righteous is always acceptable to God. Pro. 15. 8.
The faithful be an holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices 1. Pet.
2. 5.
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. To do good, and to distribute Hebr. 13. 16.
forget not: for with such sacrifices God is pleased. This therefore is a
falsely, which this man with a brazen brow affirms, that fasting, praying,
and alms deeds according to our religion be deadly sins. These works be
commanded of God, who commands no sins. We say that the corruption of our
nature, which is but in part and imperfectly regenerate in this life, does
creep into them; and therefore they be not so purely and perfectly done of us
as God requires: whereby we acknowledge, that even the best works we do had
need of Gods mercy. So Saint Augustine says: Vae etiam laudabili vitae
hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam: that is, Woe be August. confess.
lib. 9. cap. 13.
to the laudable life of man, if thou O God examine it without mercy. Now what
reasonable man will reason or imagine us to reason thus, that because we do
good works not so purely and perfectly as Gods righteousness requires and
deserves, that therefore good works as prayer, alms deeds, etc. be deadly
sins, or are to be avoided of us.

But let us come to examine the proof of your Minor or second proposition. You
say that according to our religion and common exposition of this text of
Scripture: we are made all as unclean, and all our justices are like a stained
cloth: the best works we can do are infected with Isaia 64. 6.
deadly sin, and deserve eternal damnation, and therefore to be avoided. We
indeed expound this place not only of wicked hypocrites, but also of the
regenerate and faithful, and say that all our own righteousness of works is
so stained with the corruption of our sinful nature, that it is not able to
stand before Gods judgment seat, nor abide his severe trial and examination.
For when we have done all those things which are commanded us, we must Luke
17. 10.
say, that we are unprofitable servants. And if thou O Lord Psalm. 130. 3.
straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? and therefore we must
pray and say: Enter not into judgment Psalm. 143. 2.
with thy servant: for in thy sight shall none that lives be justified. And
with Daniel we say: O Lord unto us appertains open shame, to our Kings, to
our Princes, and to our Fathers, because we Daniel. 9. 8.
have sinned against thee: yet compassion and forgiveness is in the Lord our
God. Whereupon we acknowledge that our Justice and righteousness consists
not in the perfection of our virtues, but in the forgiveness of our sins.
Bernard thus expounds and applies the place of Esaias: Nostra si Bernard. de
verbis Esaiae. Sermon. 5.
qua est humilis iustitia, recta for sitan, sed non pura: nisi forte meliores
nos esse credimus quam patres nostros, qui non minus veraciter quam humiliter
aiebant: omnes iustitiae nostrae tanquam pannus menstruatae mulieris. Quomodo
enim pura iustitia, vbi adhuc non potest culpa deesse? i. Our humble or base
justice if it be any, is peradventure right, but not pure: unless we believe our
selves to be better than our Fathers, who no less truly then humbly said, all
our righteousness is as the cloth of a menstruous woman; for how can
righteousness be pure where sin as yet wants not? And again: Sed quid
potest esse omnis iustitia nostra coram Deo? Nonne iuxta Prophetam velut pannus
menstruata reputabitur, and si districte iudicetur iniusta inuenietur omnis
iustitia nostra: i. What can all our justice be before God? Shall it not
according to the Prophet be reputed like the cloth of a menstruous woman, and
if it be straightly judged, all our justice shall be found to be unjust. How
you expound this place I know not, belike you satisfying Gods justice so fully
with your own pure works, that he can ask no more of you, as I alleged
before out of Bishop Fisher, think that this place is not to be understood of
you, and your justice, which is pure and perfect: but of the justice of
Lutherans, Caluinists, and such other profane persons. Wherein take you heed
that you show not your selves to be of them whom Christ came not to call, who
says, I am not come to call the righteous, that is to say, them that be puffed
Matthew. 9. 13.
up with a vain and false persuasion of their own righteousness, but sinners
to repentance: And that they whom you disdain and despise as Publicanes and
harlots, Ibidem 21. 31.
go not before you into the kingdom of God. We take upon us the person of the
Publican, in acknowledging our Luke 18. 13.
own vileness and unworthiness, and in respect thereof are abashed to lift up
our eyes to heaven, but flee in all our works to Gods mercy, and are content
that you with the Pharisce glory of your own works, merits, and righteousness.
Solomon says as I have before alleged: There is a Proverb. 30. 12
generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet are not washed from
their filthiness. Now briefly to answer your syllogism, I reason thus: No good
works are to be avoided: but fasting, prayer, and alms deeds, being
commanded of God, and proceeding from faithful hearts, are by our doctrine
good works: Ergo they are not to be avoided; but diligently in the fear of God
to be used of us: but the corruptions of our sinful nature which creep into
them, are to be avoided, and resisted, and we are to pray unto God in mercy to
pardon them. And so we may be assured, that as in mercy through Christ he has
accepted of us: so he will in like mercy accept our works as pure and perfect
in Christ Jesus.

Now I will retort your reason upon your own head in this sort: Every man is
bound upon pain of eternal damnation to avoid all sin: but fasting,
praying and alms deeds, as they be used by Papists to make satisfaction to
God for their sins, and to merit and purchase heaven, be sins: Ergo,
fasting, prayer, and alms deeds done in such sort are to be avoided. The
Minor or second proposition, I prove thus. He that attributes that to his
works, which is proper and peculiar to Jesus Christ, sins grievously: but
to make satisfaction for our sins appertains only to Jesus Christ: Ergo,
he that attributes the same to his works, grievously sins. But I shall
have occasion hereafter more largely to handle this matter, therefore now I
omit it, and so I will also the quotations of Luther, Calvin, and Melanchthon
set in the margent, for that they deliver no other doctrine, but that which I
have before declared, the which I nothing doubt, but it is so sound, that it
will endure and abide this man's hammer.

The Pamphlet. The Protestants either have no faith at all, or ly most
damnably, in denying that a man assisted by Gods grace, can keep the
commandments. 3. Article.
Whosoever knows God, keeps his commandments: But all true Protestants
know God. Ergo all true Protestants keep his commandments. The Mayor is
express Scripture: John. epist. 1. cap. 2. verse. 4.
qui dicit se nosse deum, and mandata eius non custodit mendax est, and in eo
veritas non est. He that says he knows God, and keeps not his
commandments is a liar, and truth is not in him. The Minor no Protestant
doubts of: for this knowledge of God is nothing else but a lively faith
wherewith all zealous Protestants (as they say) are indewed. Hence from,
manifestly it follows, that either the most zealous Protestants lack a
lively faith, and so are Infidels: or if they have a lively faith, and deny
that they keep, or can keep Gods commandments, they are damnable liars: if
they choose the first, they are Pagans, Heretics or Jews: if they take the
second, they are damnable seducers, and impostors in religion, and consequently
their faith is false.

Answer.
THis syllogism according to Saint John's meaning is wholly true. The Apostles
purpose is to show that the knowledge of God in the faithful ought not to be
idle, but effectual and fruitful in godliness and holy obedience, working a
care and conscience in them to keep Gods holy commandments, by diligent
endeavoring both to avoid all wickedness which he forbids, and to yield
that holy obedience which he requires. The which they that do not, but live
profanely, wallowing in wickedness, and committing ungodliness with
greediness; and yet make a profession of the knowledge of God (as too many do)
their profession and knowledge is in vain. For as Saint James says: if any
seem religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but deceives his own Iam. 1.
26.
heart, that man's religion is in vain. So if any seem to have the knowledge of
God, and lives loosely and wickedly, having no care to frame his life to the
obedience of Gods commandments, his religion, profession, and knowledge is in
vain. For not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, Matthew. 7. 21.
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does my fathers will
which is in heaven. But your meaning is, that by keeping of Gods commandments
is understood an absolute and perfect fulfilling of them, in yielding without
any transgression at all that full and perfect righteousness which God
commands. The which never did any man 1. Pet. 2.
yield, but only the man Jesus Christ, who never did sin, and in whose mouth
was never guile. This your doctrine of the perfect fulfilling of Gods law in
this life is false, and you in maintaining of it, show your selves to be blind
and proud Pharisees, not knowing either the perfect righteousness of God, nor
the corruption of our nature, against the which I reason thus: Whosoever
sins, transgresses and breaks Gods law and commandments: but all men
do sin: therefore all men transgress and break Gods laws and
commandments. The first proposition is manifest: for S. John says, Sin is
the transgression of the law. The second proposition cannot with any face be 1.
Ioh. 3. 4.
denied. Solomon says, There is no man that sins not. Saint 1. King. 8. 46.
Paul says, All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of Romans 3. 23.
God. Saint James says, In many things we sin all. Saint John Iam. 3. 2.
says, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and 1. Ioh. 4.
8.
the truth is not in us. Moreover, S. Paul says, As many as are Galat. 3. 10.
of the works of the law, are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things, which are written in the book of
the law to doc them. Where Saint Paul does reason after this sort: Whosoever
does not continue to do all that is written in the book of the law, are under
the curse: but there is none that continues to do all that is written in the
book of the law: Ergo, there is none but is under the curse. The first
proposition Saint Paul proves by a place of the law, Deuteronomy. 27. The second
Saint Paul takes as a thing granted, and not to be denied, that there is no
man which continues to do all that is written in the book of the law to do
it, the which if it be not granted, Saint Paul's argument is nothing worth:
for it might be said, that some do fulfill the law of God, and therefore are
not under the curse. So that which seemed to Saint Paul absurd to be denied, is
now denied by these absurd and blind Pharisees. Furthermore, Saint Paul says,
That which was impossible to the law, in as much as it was Romans 8. 3.
made weak, because of the flesh, God sending his own son in the similitude
of sinful flesh, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh. Does not S.
Paul here show, that whereas we could not be saved by the law, God has sent
his son in the flesh to save us? And he declares why we could not be saved
by the law, because the weakness of our sinful flesh, is not able to yield
that perfect righteousness which the law of God requires: the which if we could
do, we should live thereby. For God says, which if a man do he shall live in
them. And that even they that are regenerate with Ezech. 20. 21.
Gods spirit, do not perfectly fulfill the law, and keep Gods commandments,
it is most evident by Saint Paul's confession of himself: I am carnal, sold
under sin. I allow Romans 7. 14.
not that which I do: for that I would, I do not: but what I hate, that I
do. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me: For I know
that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will is
present with me. But I find no means to perform that which is good. For I
do not the good thing, which I would, but the evil which I would not, that
do I, I find that when I would do good, evil is present with me. I see
another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, leading me
captive to the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death? If S. Paul that elect vessel of
God, which was taken up into the third heaven, and into paradise, and heard
Act. 9. 15. 2. Cor. 12. 2.
words which cannot be spoken, did not fulfill the law, and fully without
transgression keep Gods commandments; who but a blind hypocrite and proud
Pharisie will arrogate to himself the same? Bernard says well: Aut te ergo si
audes praefer Apostolo (nempe ipsius ista vox est) aut fatere Bernard super
Cantic. sermon. 58.
cum illo te quoque vitijs non carere: that is, Either if thou dare prefer
thy self before the Apostle (whose saying this is) or else confess with him
that thou also art not void of vices.

I will add hereunto a few testimonies out of the ancient Fathers, to prove
that none in this life is assisted so fully with Gods grace, that he perfectly
fulfilleth the law, and keeps Gods commandments without any transgression
or breach of them. Justinius Martyr says Justinius dialog (...). page 98.
: (...) etc. And that none has exactly done all things, you your selves dare
not deny: but there be which have kept the things commanded, some more, and
some less then others. S. Hierome says: Facilia dicis esse Dei mandata, and
tamen nullum proferre potes qui vniuersa compleuerit. Hieron. ad Ctesiphontem
aduers. Pelagianoi.
Responde mihi, facilia sunt an difficilia? Si facilia, profer quis ea
impleuerit: Thou say Gods commandments be easy, and yet thou can not
bring forth any that has fulfilled all. Answer me, be they easy or hard? If
they be easy, show any that has fulfilled them. Again, Haec hominibus sola
perfectio, si imperfectos se esse nouerint: that is, This is Idem ibid.
the only perfection of men, to acknowledge themselves to be imperfect.
Again, Tunc ergo iusti sumus, quando nos Idem lib. 1. aduers. Pelagianos.
esse peccatores fatemur, and iustitia nostra non ex proprio merito, sed ex Dei
consistit misericordia: that is, Then we be just, when we confess our selves
to be sinners, and our justice consists not in our own merits, but in Gods
mercy. Saint Augustine says: Ipsa iustitia nostra tanta est in hac vita,
August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 19. c. 27.
vt petius peccatorum remissione constet, quam perfectione virtuium: that is,
Our justice is so great in this life, that it consists rather in the
remission of our sins, then in the perfection of our virtues. And again,
Omnia mandata Lib. 1. Retract. cap. 19.
facta deput antur, quando quicquid non fit ignoscitur: that is, All the
commandments are then reputed to be done, when whatsoever is not done is
pardoned. Again, Gratia Dei tribuit in hac vita studium praecepta seruandi:
and eadem, Ad Bonifa. lib. 3 cap. 7.
si quid etiam in illis praeceptis minus seruatur, ignoscit: that is, The grace
of God does give in this life a desire to keep his commandments: and the
same grace, if any thing in them be not observed, forgiueth it. The like I
might allege out of many other places of his works: As, De natura and gratia
cap. 36. Contra Iulianum lib. 4. cap. 3. De libero Arbitrio cap. 16. and such
others, but for shortness sake I omit them. Chrysostom says: Neque enim alios
licet in lege Chrysostom ad Romans Hom. 17.
iustificari, nisi eum qui cuncta adimpleuerit. Id vero nemini dum possibile
factum est: that is, None can be justified by the law, but he that has
fulfilled all. And that has been as yet possible to no man. Bernard says:
Quomodo ergo iubenda Bernard super Cantica sermon. 50
fuit quae implenda nullo modo erat? etc. How was the law to be commanded,
which can by no means be fulfilled? or if thou rather think that the
commandment De affectuasi.
was given for the ruling of our affections, I will not hereupon strive, so
that thou also do yield unto me, that in this life it neither can, or ever
could be fulfilled of any man. For who dare arrogate that to himself, which
Paul himself confesses that he had not comprehended? Neither was the
commander ignorant, that the weight of the commandment exceeded man's
strength: but he judged it to be profitable, that thereby they might be put in
mind of their own insufficiency, and so might know that they ought according
to their power labor to the end of righteousness. Therefore by commanding
things impossible, he made men not transgressors, but humble, that every mouth
might be stopped, and all the world made subject unto God, because that by the
works of the law no flesh shall be justified before him: for we receiving the
commandment, and feeling our own want, will cry unto heaven, and God will
have mercy upon us. Again, Quantumlibet in hoc corpore manens profeceris,
erras vitia si putas Idem ibidem sermon. 58.
emortuae, and non magis suppressa: velis nolis intra fines tuos habitat
Iebusaeus, subiugari potest, sed non exterminari: scio (inquit) quod non
habitat in me bonum: that is, How much soever thou do profit, whilst thou
abidest in this body, thou art deceived if thou think vices to be dead in
thee, and not rather suppressed: whether thou will or no the Iebusite will
dwell within thy coasts: he may be subdued, but not utterly banished. I know
(says Paul) that no goodness dwells in me. This was Bernards judgment
concerning our keeping of Gods commandments and fulfilling of the law. Ferus
also a late Friar, but yet a man of better judgment in many matters, then many
others were, or be, hereof writes thus: Per Christum implenda erat omnis
iustitia, per quem solum lex poterat impleri, nam maledicta erat natura humana,
legemque implere non potuit, iuxta illud: neque Ferus in Matthew. cap. 3.
nos neque patres onus hoc portare potuimus: that is, All righteousness was to
be fulfilled by Christ, by whom only the law could be fulfilled. For man's
nature was accursed, and could not fulfill the law, according to that saying,
neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear this burden. Again, the same
Ferus says: Si nemo potest gloriari se a peccato In cap. 19. Matthew.
immunem, nec quisquam gloriari potest se legem seruasse: cum peccatum nihil
aliud sit quam transgressio legis: that is, If no man can glory that he is
free from sin, neither can any man glory that he has fulfilled the law,
seeing that sin is nothing else but the transgression of the law. Hence from
it follows, that zealous Protestants want neither a lively faith in Gods
mercies, nor true obedience to Gods commandments, although they unfeignedly
confess their manifold imperfections and sins, by which they be far from
perfectly fulfilling the law of God. And now pro coronide I will requite you
with another Syllogism. They that think they can fulfill the law of God, be
proud Hypocrites and Pharisees: but the Papists think that they can fulfill the
law of God, yea can do superarrogant works, I should say works of
Supererogation above them that the law requires: Ergo, the Papists be proud
Hypocrites and Pharisees.

The Pamphlet. The most points wherein the Protestants dissent from the
Catholics tend to loosenes of life, and carnal liberty. 4. Article.
His article may be proved by a general induction in all such matters, as now
the Protestants call in question. First say they that man has not free will to
do good, but all goodness proceeds so from grace, that it lies not in his
power neither to have it, nor resist it, but of necessity it must have effect.

To what other end tends this senceles doctrine and fatal fancy, but to
make men negligent in disposing and preparing their souls to receive Gods
grace, and to rouse it up, and put it in execution after they have it? making
man not much unlike a sick ass, who neither can dispose nor prepare himself
to seek for his medicine, but of necessitis must expect till his master
thrusts it into his throat, neither after he has drunk it, can cause it
cure his disease, but carelessly lets it work as it will.

Secondly, they defend that men be justified by faith alone, the which
solifidian portion overthrows flatly true repentance, sorrow for sins,
mortification of passions, and all other virtues which tend to perfect
reconciliation of the soul with God, causing men only to procure a certain
false fantastical apprehension of Christ's death and passion, the which faith
although they erroniously auerre, cannot be severed from charitis, virtues, and
good works; yet both experience teaches that it may, for also few or none
have faith, because few or none of them have these works: and the Scriptures
plainly prove that all faith, yea and the most noble faith which has force to
remove mountains, may be without charity.

Thirdly, they assure us that faith once had can never be lost, the which vain
security opens the gap to all libertine sensuality: for if a man be
certain that he has true faith, if it be impossible he should lose it, if he
be secured, that by it alone he shall be saved; why may be not wallow in all
licencious pleasures in this life, and never doubt of glory in the other?
could ever Epicurus have found a better ground to plant his Epicurisme? could
ever Heliogabalus have better patronized his sensuality? could Bacchus, or
Venus ever have forged better reasons to enlarge their dominion?

Fourthly, they say, a man cannot keep all the commandments: for what other
cause I pray you; but thereby to make men negligent in keeping of them, to
pretend an excuse of impossibility, whenever they transgress them.

Fifthly, why deny they the Sacrament of penance; but to make men careless how
they live, and never regard the avoiding of sins, as though they were never
to render an account of them? to hinder that shame and blushing which men
conceive in discovering their sins, the which are most excellent means to
deter them from sinning another time: to shuffle up restitution and
satisfaction of injuries committed against our neighbors, to draw men from
remorse of conscience by burying their sins in eternal oblivion: the sores
whereof confession rubbeth, and causes.

Sixthly, why exclude they the true and real body of Christ from the blessed
Sacrament of the altar, but for that they perceived how by the presence
thereof, they were deterred from sin and wickedness? for they knew well that
sinful lives consorted not with those sacred mysteries, and therefore they
rather resolved to banish Christ from the Sacrament, then sins from their
souls.

Finally, for what other cause have they joined a new negative religion, wholly
standing upon negation of Sacraments, ceremonies, rites, laws, customs and
other practical points of the catholic Church; but for fasting, to bring in
feasting; for praying, playing; for devotion, dissolution; for religious fear
of God, vain security; for zeal and mortification, a number of vain verbal
sermons: and to conclude, for a positive working a flat denial almost of all
points of faith and religion?

Answer
COncerning this article, I will first answer these cauils, which this
cauiller obiecteth to the slaundering of our doctrine, as tending to loosenes
of life, and carnal liberty: Secondly, I will show to what loosenes and
wickedness of life the doctrine of the Church of Rome tends, and what fruits,
or rather weeds of wickedness it has brought fourth even in Popes and their
clergy, and namely in Rome that holy City, where that holy Father resideth,
and whereupon he especially breaths and blesses. He begins with free
will, wherein he neither sets down truly our doctrine, nor the state of
the controversy: which is a usual customewith his companions, to pervert and
alter the state of the question, as Doctor Whitakers shows that Bellarmine
uses to do. I will Epist. dedica. in controuers. 1.
therefore lay down our doctrine truly as we teach concerning this matter we
believe, that although in worldly matters concerning this life, man have wit,
reason, and understanding to know; and will, for the choice of good and evil,
just and unjust: yet in spiritual matters pertaining to eternal life, and the
worship of God, we believe, that man's reason is so darkened, and will so
corrupted, that he can neither truly know, love, nor covet, much less do and
perform, those things which be agreeable to Gods will, and acceptable unto his
Majesty, until God in his elect and chosen people do by his holy spirit
regenerate them, by lightning their blind reason, and reforming their wicked
wills. This we prove by these places of Scripture here following. The Lord saw
that the wickedness of man was great upon the earth, and all the imaginations
Genes. 6. 5.
of the thoughts of his heart were evil continually. And that the imagination
of man's heart is evil from his youth. Flesh and Ibid. cap. 8. 21.
Matthew. 16. 17.
blood has not reueiled it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. That
light shined in the darkness, and the darkness Ioh. 1. 5.
comprehended it not. Which are borne not of blood, nor of the verse. 13.
will of the flesh, but of God. Except a man be borne again, he Ioh. 3. 3.
cannot see the kingdom of God. That which is borne of the flesh 13
is flesh: and that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. A man can receive
nothing, except it be given him from Heaven. No 27
man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me, Cap. 6. 44.
draw him. Therefore I said unto you, that no man can come 65
unto me, except it be given unto him of my Father. Without me ye can do
nothing. The wisdom of the flesh is death. The wisdom Cap. 15. 5.
of the flesh is enmity against God. The natural man perceives Romans 8. 6.
not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnes 1. Cor. 2. 14.
to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. What
have thou, that thou have not received? No man Cap. 4. 7.
can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. By the Cap. 12. 3.
grace of God I am that I am. Not that we are sufficient of our Cap. 15. 10.
selves to think any thing as of our selves: but our sufficiency 2. Cor, 3. 5.
is of God. It is God that works in you, both the will and the Philip. 2. 13.
deed, even of his good will and pleasure. The God of peace Hebr. 13. 21.
make you perfect in all good works to do his will, working in you that which
is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ our Lord. Whosoever commits
sin is the servant of sin: If Ioh. 8. 34. 36.
the son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. By these sayings let
the Christian reader consider of what value and force our wit and will is in
heavenly matters, until the one be lightened, and the other reformed by Gods
grace and spirit. Hereunto I will add a few places of the ancient Fathers.
Saint Augustine says: Quid boni operari potest perditus, nisi quantum fuerit
perditione liberatus? Nunquid August. Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 30
libero voluntatis arbitrio? and hoc absit: Nam libero arbitrio male vtens homo
and se perdidit and ipsum. Sicut enim qui se occidit, etc. that is, What good
can he that is lost do, but in as much as he is delivered from perdition? Can
he be restored by his free will? God forbid. For man using ill his free will,
lost both himself, and it also. For as one killing himself, does kill
himself whilst he lives, but having killed himself, does not live, nor can
raise and restore himself being dead: so when man sinned by his free will,
sin having gotten victory, his free will was lost. Again, Quid tantum de
naturae possibilitate praesumis? vulnerata, sauciata, vexata, perdita est: vera
confessione, non falsa De Natura and gratia cap. 53.
defensione opus habet. Gratia ergo dei non qua instituatur, sed qua
restituatur, quaeratur: that is, What do thou presume so much of the power of
nature? it is wounded, maimed, vexed and lost: it has need of a true
confession, not of a false defense. Therefore the grace of God, not whereby the
will is ordained, but whereby it is restored, is to be sought. Many such other
sayings he has in his works against the Pelagians, which I omit.

But this man says, that man may dispose and prepare his soul to receive Gods
grace; and this he proves not by Scripture, but (I will not say Assedly) by
the similitude of a sick Ass, that cannot dispose, nor prepare himself to
seek for his medicine. By this divinity men prevent Gods grace, and it does
not prevent them; men first seek God, and not God them. For answer whereof, I
would ask this man, whether it be not with all the of spring of Adam, as it
was with Adam himself after his fall. Now whether did Adam seek God first, or
God him: the Scripture says, that God called upon Adam, and that he was so
far from Genes. 3.
seeking God, that he and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord
God. So that if God in mercy had not sought them, and called upon them, it
seems that they had never sought nor called upon God. And even so it is with
all his posterity, as our Savior shows by the lost sheep, whom the
Shepherd seeks and brings home, the sheep nothing disposing nor preparing
it self to seek to the Shepherd, or to return to the fould. So God says: I
was found of them that sought me not. Did Peter Isai. 65. 1.
repent until Christ had looked on him, and the Cock had crowed? What
disposition and preparation was in Paul to seek the grace of Christ? Therefore
I may truly say, that as Lazarus prepared himself being dead in grave, to be
raised up by Jesus Christ; so do men dead in sin, dispose and prepare
themselves to receive the medicine of Gods grace. Saint Paul says: God which
is rich in mercy, through his great Ephesians. 2.4.
love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead by sins, has quickened us
together in Christ, by whose grace ye are saved. To this doctrine the ancient
Fathers bear witness. Saint Augustine says: Vt totum Deo detur, qui hominis
voluntatem August. Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 32.
bonam and praeparat adiuua^dam, and adiuuat praeparatam: that is, All is to be
given to God, who both prepares the good will of man to be helped, and helps
it being prepared. Again, Nolentem praeuenit vt velit, volentem Idem ibidem.
subsequitur ne frustra velit: that is, God preuenteth him that is not willing,
that he may be willing: and he follows him that is willing, that he may not
will in vain. Now if this our doctrine concerning the will of man be the truth
of God confirmed both by the word of God, and by the testimonies of the most
learned Fathers, then without blasphemy it cannot be said to tend unto
loosenes of life, or carnal liberty: it teaches us both true humility, in
acknowledging our own misery and wants, and to attribute all to Gods grace
and mercy, and to arrogate nothing to our selves, and does it tend to carnal
liberty, and careless security? We are both to exhort others, and also to
stir up our selves, to fear and serve God in holiness of life. And yet we
must acknowledge, that God works those things in us, whereto he exhorts us.
And therefore the same spirit that says: Turn unto me with all your hearts,
Joel. 2.
says also, Turn us O Lord, and we shall be turned. He that Lament. 3.
says, Make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye dye Ezech. 18.
31.
O house of Israel? says also, I will put a new spirit within their Ezech. 11.
19.
bowels, and I will take the stony heart out of their bodies, and will give
them an heart of flesh. And again: Create in me a Psalm. 51. 20.
clean heart, O Lord, and renew aright spirit within me. The same spirit that
says, Wash you, make you clean, says also, Isai. 1. 16.
Purge me with Hyssope, and I shall be clean: Wash me, and I Psalm. 51. 7.
shall be whiter then Snow. And again, I will power clean water Ezech 36. 25.
upon you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and ye shall be clean: yea
from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. The same
spirit that says: Be ye holy, for I am 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
holy, says also, the God of peace make you holy. And so we must come to that
saying of Saint Augustine: Da quod iubes, August. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 29.
and iube quod vis: Give us O Lord, that which thou commaundest us, and then
command us what thou will. And therefore they reason like doltish Asses, which
infer upon the exhortations to grace and godliness which be in the Scriptures,
that there is a power and ability in us to perform those things whereunto God
in his word exhorts us. Exhortations be Gods instruments and means which he
uses, to work his heavenly graces in us. I would here end this matter, but
that I must tell you, that you write improperly and falsely in charging us,
that we say all goodness proceeds so far from grace, that it lies not in
man's power neither to have it, nor to refuse it, but of necessity it must have
effect. Improperly you write, in putting, having Gods grace, in steed of
obtaining and getting it. We say, it is in man to have it, when God does give
it, without which gift it is not in man's power to get it. But it is in man to
resist it. For the grace of God offers salvation Tit. 2. 11.
to all, but it is resisted and rejected of many, in that their hard and stony
hearts will not admit it. The grace of God is offered to men, when his word is
preached, and they be called to repentance; but it is with many, and namely
you, as Zachary says: They refused to hearken, and Zachar. 7. 11.
pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear.
Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant stone, As the Papists do now.
least they should hear the Law and words which the Lord of hosts sent in his
spirit by the ministry of the former Prophets. I know no man that denies,
but such men do resist the grace of God, which yet is received of them that
are written in the book of life, whose wills it reformeth, and of evil wills
makes good wills, willing and covering those things which be acceptable in Gods
sight. Finally, I thought good for the better satisfying of the reader in this
matter, to let him understand: that whereas Erasmus (a man as all men must needs
confess of great learning) was had in jealousy of the Papists, as too much
leaning to Luther and his doctrine, he was at the last provoked and set on by
them to write against him: who choosing this matter of free will, and writing in
defense thereof, yet afterward he retracted and revoked his former opinion and
writing, and was not abashed to confess the truth, as appears by these his
words. Verum vt ingenue dicam; perdidimus liberum Erasm. lib. 19. epist. ad
Ludonicum Vinem.
arbitrium: illic mihi aliud dictabat animus, aliud scribebat calamus: that is,
But simply to speak my mind. We have lost our free will: in that matter my
mind did indite to me one thing, and my hand did write another.

I come now to the second doctrine of ours, which you untruly charge, and
falsely slander to tend to loosenes of life, and carnal liberty, that men be
justified by faith alone, which you scornefully call a solifidian portion, and
falsely say, but do not prove, that it flatly overthrows true repentance,
sorrow for sins, mortification of passions, and all other virtues, which tend
to the perfect reconciliation of the soul with God, etc. Where first I would
exhort you (if the same might any thing prevail with you) to take heed that by
scorning in this manner at Gods truth, you show not your self to be one of
them that sit in Psalm. 1. 1.
the seat of the scornful. Solomon says, that judgments Prou. 19. 29.
are prepared for the scorners, and stripes for the back of fools. Secondly,
as this doctrine which you deride is true, godly, and comfortable, confirmed by
the word of God, and ancient Fathers; so does it not exclude, much less
overthrow repentance, or any other good work, but shows the true and right
use of them. Saint Paul says, We conclude that a man is justified by faith,
without the works of the Romans 3. 28.
Law. And in the fourth chapter he reasons thus from Abraham the father of
the faithful: If Abraham were justified Romans 4. 2.
by works, he has wherein to rejoice or glory: But Abraham has not wherein
to rejoice or glory before God. Ergo, Abraham was not justified by works. And
after says; To him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Galat. 2. 16.
We know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law, because
that by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified. This doctrine was
neither scorned nor denied by the ancient godly Fathers, of some of whom I
will set down a few sayings.

Origene speaking of the thief that was hanged with Origin. in 3. ad Romans
Christ, says, Pro hac sola fide ait ei Jesus, Amen dico tibi; Hodie mecum
eris in paradiso: that is, For this his only faith, Jesus said unto him:
Verily I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in paradise. And of the
woman that had the issue of blood: Ex nullo legis opere, sed pro sola fide ait
ad Ibidem.
tam. Remittuntur tibi peccata: that is, For no work of the law, but for faith
only he said unto her, Thy sins be forgiven thee. Hilarie says: Solafides
iustificat: that is, Only Hilar. in Math. Can. 8. and Can. 21 Ambros. in Romans 3.
faith does justify. Ambrose says, Iustificati sunt gratis, quia nihil
operantes, neque vicem reddentes sola fide iustificati sunt dono Dei: that is,
They are justified freely, because working nothing, nor rendering any
recompense, they are justified by faith only through the gift of God. The like
he writes in Romans 4. and 10. and upon the 1. Cor. 1. Praefat. ad Galat. and
upon chap. 3. Saint Hierome says: Conuertentem impium per solam fidem
iustificat Deus, non opera bona Hieron. in Romans cap. 4.
quae non habuit: God does by faith only justify the wicked man converting,
not by good works which he had not. Many such other sayings I might allege
out of Hierome, but I leave them. Saint Augustine faith: Sine bonorum operum
Augustinus in Psalm. 67.
meritis per fidem iustific atur impius: that is, The wicked man is justified
by faith without the merits of good works. Again, Quia sola fides in Christum
mundat etc. that is, Because In Psalm. 88.
only faith in Christ does make clean, they that do not believe in Christ, be
void of cleanenes. He has also often this fine saying: Fides impetrat, quod
lex imperat: that is, Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 117.
Faith obtains that, which the law commands: that is to say, the law
commands a righteousness of works, faith obtains the righteousness of
Christ, which only is able to hide and discharge all our unrighteousness.

This doctrine which this disdainful man so much disdaineth, is acknowledged
of the Greek Fathers. Basil says, This is perfect and sound glorying in God,
when a Basil. (...) page 388.
man does not boast himself for his own righteousness, but knows himself to
be void of true righteousness, (...): i. And is justified by only faith in
Christ: (...), Chrysostom says: Nobis pro cunctis sola fides Chrysostom. in
Matthew. Hom. 12 Idem de proditione Judah.
sufficiat: that is, Only faith is sufficient to us for all other things.
Again, Illud vnum asseuerauerim, quo sola fides per se saluum fecerit: that
is, This I may affirm, that only faith by it self saves. Again, Rursus illi
dicebant, qui Idem in Galat. cap. 3.
sola fide nititur, execrabilis est: hic contra demonstrat, qui sola fide
nititur eum benedictum esse: that is, They said, he that leans only to faith
is accursed: but Paul on the contrary part shows, that he that leans to
faith only is blessed.

Many such other places out of the Latin and Greek Fathers I might produce,
but I omit them. I hope he will not say, that these Fathers which delivered
this doctrine of solifidian faith (as he disdainfully terms it) did overthrow
repentance, mortification, and all other virtues. Nay this true faith, which
neither falsely, nor fantastically, but truly and effectually apprehends
Christ's death and pastion, and applies the same as a most sovereign salve to
cure all the sores of our souls, is that which grueth life to repentance,
mortification, and all other virtues. For as faith without works is dead, as
S. James says: so works James 2. 26. Cyril in exposit. Symbol. Nicen. tom. 1.
Council. page 543. Chrysostom. in 1. ad Timoth. Hom. 5.
without faith are dead, as Cyril and Chrysostom say. And we truly auerre,
that this true faith in Gods merciful promises, by the which Christ does dwell
in our hearts, cannot be severed from charity, virtues, and good works, as he
falsely affirms, but faintly and foolishly proves that it may. His first
reason is taken from experience, because few or none of us have faith, for that
few or none of us have these works. How many or few of us have faith and good
works, you are no competent judge for to determine. And therefore we appeal
from your affectionate and erroneous judgment, to the true and just judgment
of God. I doubt not but before I have ended this article, to prove that we be
not so void of good works, and so full of abominable wickedness, as your Popes
and spiteful spirituality has been.

Your second proof you will draw out of the Scripture, that all faith; yea,
and the most noble faith which has force to remove mountains, may be without
charity. I 1. Cor. 13.
answer, that Saint Paul speaks not there of the faith of Gods elect, but of
that which is a gift to work miracles, Tit. 1. 1. Matthew. 7.
which may be in wicked reprobates, such as Judas was: and so does Oecumenius
the Greek Scholiast expound it in these words: (...), Oecumen. in 1. Cor. 13.
(...). i. He speaks not of the common and Catholic faith of the faithful,
but of a certain gift of faith. For there was a certain kind of gift, which
by an equivocation was called faith. So that S. Paul, as he had before compared
charity with the gift of tongues, and with the gift of prophesying: so here he
compares it with the gift of doing miracles. And as those gifts may be in the
wicked severed from charity, so also may this. Some writers also in the former
chapter, where S. Paul says: To another is given 1. Cor. 12. 9.
faith by the same spirit, do expound it of the particular faith of doing
miracles. As Theophilactus: Non fides dogmatum, Theophilact. in 1. Cor. 12.
sed miraculorum, que and montes transfert: that is, He speaks not of faith
of doctrine, but of miracles which moves mountains. And therefore S. Paul
means, that if the whole faith which is in doers of miracles were in him
separated from charity, as it may be, he were nothing. But that faith by which
Christ dwells in the hearts of his elect, neither is, nor can be separated
from charity, but works by it. And therefore S. Paul in his gratulations in
the beginning of his Epistles, does always joy ne them Galath. 5. 6.
together, as being such graces of Gods spirit, which be never separated
asunder, Hearing of the faith, which ye have in Ephesians 1. 15.
the Lord Jesus, and love toward all the Saints. To conclude Coloss. 1. 4.
this point, that this doctrine does not tend to loosenes of 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
life, we teach that they which do not follow peace and 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
holiness shall never see God, and that good works are the Philem. 1. 5.
ways, wherein we must walk to the kingdom of God, Hebr. 12.
and eternal life; to the which, they that do not walk in them, shall never
come. For without the holy City shall be dogs, and enchaunters, and
whoremongers, and murderers, and Apocal. 22. 15.
idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes lies. And although good fruits make
not the tree good, yet they be necessary effects of a good tree: so every tree
that brings not forth good fruit shall be cut down and cast into the fire.

The third doctrine of ours, which you untruly charge Matthew. 3. 10.
to tend to loosenes of life, is, That faith once had can never be lost: the
which vain security (you say) opens the gap to all libertine sensuality:
and hereat you make great exclamations. Here I will first clear the doctrine,
and afterward answer your vain cauillations, and needless exclamations.
Faith is diverse ways taken in the holy Scriptures. First, it is taken for the
doctrine of faith, or the Gospel which we believe: as, By whom we have
received Romans 1. 5.
grace and Apostleship, to the obedience of faith among all Gentiles: that is,
that all nations might obey the Gospel. Also to the Galathians: This only
would I know of you, Received ye the spirit by the works of the law, or by the
hearing of faith, Galat. 3. 2.
that is, by hearing the Gospel preached. So we call the Christian faith, and
the Apostolical faith. In this sense faith being taken for the doctrine of the
Gospel: we confess that many may know it, make profession of it, and
historically believe it, and yet afterward may fall from it, as Judas and many
in Asia did. Secondly, it is taken for 2. Tim. 1. 15.
that promise which we make in Baptism, whereby we bind our selves to
profess true religion, and to believe in God, in whose name we be baptized.
Hereof S. Paul speaks, Refuse the younger widows: for when they have begun
to 1. Tim. 5. 11.
wax wanton against Christ, they will marry, having damnation because they
have broken the first faith. The which is to be understood of the first
profession of faith in Baptism, and not of the latter vow of single life, as
the Papists falsely and foolishly expound it. From this faith all they do
fall, which turn either on the right hand to false doctrine, or on the left
hand to wicked life. Many other ways faith is taken, but this question is of
that true, lively, and justifying faith, which is the faith of Gods elect,
whereby Christ dwells in their hearts, and they receive nourishment Tit. 1.
Ephesians. 3.
and life from him. This faith may be covered by temptations and falls, as
fire in the night with ashes, but never utterly extinguished. For they in whom
this true faith is, are like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that will
bring forth her fruit in due season, whose leaf shall not Psalm. 1. 3.
fade. And they that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Psalm. 125. 1.
Sion, which cannot be moved, but remains for ever. They that by this faith
are built upon the rocki Jesus Christ, hell gates shall never overcome them.
Christ says, He that Matthew. 16. 18.
believes in the Son of God has everlasting life. He that hears my word,
and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting Ioh. 3. 36. Chap. 5. 24.
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to
life. He that believes in me shall never thirst. Saint Paul says, Wherein
after ye believed ye were sealed with Chap. 6. 35. Ephesians. 1. 13.
the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, for the
redemption of that liberty purchased unto the praise of his glory. These
places sufficiently show, that that faith which is common to all Gods elect,
and proper only to the elect, can never perish, nor be utterly lost in them.
And this true and comfortable doctrine brings no vain security, nor opens
the gap to any libertine sensuality. For they that by this faith have tasted
how sweet the Lord is, cannot but love and fear God, and greatly delight in
his commandments. And that faith which swimmeth in men's lips, but is not
printed in their hearts, nor shines by Psalm. 112. 1.
godliness and good works in their lives, is a dead faith, and is no more that
true faith, whereby we live unto God, then a dead man is a man. To conclude
this matter, although we distinguish between justification and sanctification:
yet we acknowledge that they be inseparable, and the one does necessarily
follow the other. For whosoever are justified by Gods grace and mercy through
faith in Christ Jesus, be also sanctified with Gods holy spirit, to abhor
that which is evil, and to cleave to that which is good, and to serve God in
true holiness and righteousness Tom. 12. 9. Luke 1. 75.
all the days of their life. And therefore we teach that they which without
repentance persist in sin, wallow in wickedness, and commit ungodliness with
greedines, have no faith, nor have any assurance of the remission of their
sins: but may be assured that the wrath of God hangs over them, and if they
do not truly repent, and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life, will
fearfully fall upon them. So that you might have spared your vain and foolish
exclamations, concerning Epicures, Heliogabalus, Bacchus and Venus, which are
more honored in Rome (as hereafter I will show) then allowed of us. For of
whom did Mantuan the Italian Carmelite Friar an 100. years past write this,
but of your Popes and his favorers: Neglecto superum cultu, spretoque tonantis
imperio, Baccho indulgent, De calamitat temper. lib. 2.
Venerique ministrant: that is, Neglecting the worship of God, they serve
Bacchus and Venus.

Concerning the fourth point of doctrine, of keeping Gods commandments, I
have spoken sufficiently before. Only now I say that our doctrine tends
hereunto, to show us our misery by transgressing of them, that we may thereby
be moved to hunger for Gods mercy in Christ: and although we cannot perfectly
fulfill them (for in many things we sin all) yet we ought according to
James 3. 2.
the measure of Gods grace given to us, have a care and conscience to walk in
them, and to frame our lives to the obedience of them.

Whereas fifthly you charge us, that we deny the Sacrament of Penance, thereby
to make men careless how they live: I answer, that although we deny your penance
to be a Sacrament, because it has no outward visible sign, and reject your
clancular confession, your absurd absolution, and your superstitious or rather
blasphemous satisfaction, thereby to answer Gods justice, and discharge your
sins: yet we truly teach ye doctrine of repentance, as it is delivered unto us
in the word of God. We teach men to come to the knowledge of their sins, by ye
law of God, which is the Romans 3.
glass to show us our spots, and the first step to repentance: then to lament
their sins, whereby they have offended their gracious God, and merciful
father, to confess their sins with remorse of conscience, both to God and
men, whom they have offended: and especially we call upon men for amendment
of life, in bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance, without the which
there is no repentance. One part of which amendment is satisfaction to our
brethren for injuries committed, and restitution of goods unlawfully and
ungodly gotten. As touching our injuries against God, we plead not our own
satisfaction, but crave Gods mercy in Christ Jesus, who is our only
satisfaction, and by whom only we seek to have remission of them. Whereas you
say, that your confession rubbeth the sores of sin, and causes remembrance
of them, I say that this more truly and effectually is wrought by the preaching
of Gods word, whereby sin is more showed, and the wrath, and judgments of
God against sin are more threatened, and thereby the conscience more pricked
and wounded, then by your confession. So David was brought to repentance for
his foul sins of adultery and 2. Sam. 12. 7.
murder, by Nathans preaching, and thundering Gods judgments against him, and
not by his secret confessing. So the people having heard Peter preach the word
of God, were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the Act. 2. 37.
Depaenitent. did. 5. cap in poenitent. in glossa.
other Apostles, Men and brethren what shall we do? This is Gods holy
ordinance, the other a plant which God has never planted, but an invention of
man, as even your Council. tom. 1. part. 1. P. 155. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 19.
Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 16.
own Canonists against your Schoolmen do confess. And what wickedness has
come of it, the ecclesiastical history partly shows, and God who sees al
secrets knows.

To your sixth accusation I answer, that we exclude and banish our Savior
Christ, neither from the Sacrament of his supper, nor from the hearts of the
faithful; but acknowledge that as by faith he dwells in the one, so by the
same he is received of the godly in the other. Your false and gross doctrine
of Transsubstantiation, which the Ephesians. 3. 17. 2. Cor. 13. 5.
Greek Church never believed, and the Latin Church lately defined as Erasmus
says, we justly reject and condemn. We exhort men, when they come to receive
that Erasm. Anntotat. in 1. Cor. 7.
holy mystery, the Sacrament and pledge of our salvation in Christ, to examine
themselves: and so to eat of that bread, and drink of that cup: For he that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation, because
he discerns not the Lords body. But if (as you say) 1. Cor. 11. 28.
sinful lives conforte not with this sacred mystery, I marvel how your
Priests lives consorted with it, which how holy they were, I will show
hereafter. Lastly, you charge us with a new negative religion, wholly standing
upon negation of Sacraments, ceremonies, rites, laws, customs, and other
practical points of the Catholic Church: whereunto I answer, that we deny
nothing that God has commanded, in the holy canonical Scriptures, the which
as I have before showed, is the only rule of our religion and life. In deed
we deny and defy your trifling traditions and unwritten vanities, and
inventions, with the which you have gone a whoring as the Prophet says. If you
can show that we deny any thing, which God has commanded, as we can plainly
prove that Psalm. 106. 39.
you do, then spare not to charge us with a new negative religion. You deny
the sufficiency of the Scriptures, and that all doctrine necessary to
salvation is contained in them. You deny the same Scriptures to be in the
vulgar tongue, for all Gods people to read and hear to their comfort. You
deny prayer and the public service of God to be in the same vulgar tongue. You
deny Christ to be our only mediator between God and us. You deny the Cup of
Christ's Supper to Gods people. You deny the lawful authority which Princes
have over their people and subjects, in all causes ecclesiastical and
temporal. You deny marriage to ecclesiastical ministers, whereby what great
and horrible wickedness you have caused, I will hereafter declare. You say we
bring in for fasting, feasting; for praying, playing, etc. Concerning your
fasting, consisting in a superstitious observing of times, and diversity of
meats, and tending to the honoring of Saints, and satisfying Gods justice for
your sins, we deny it. But fasting purely used according to Gods word, to
humble our souls before God, and to mortify the wicked affections of our
sinful flesh, we allow; and especially that great and principal fast, in
abstayning from sin, whereof Saint Augustine speaks in these words:
Ieiunium autom magnum and gerale est August. in Joan tract. 17. and distinct.
de consecra. cap. Ieiunium.
abstinere ab iniquitatibus, and ab illicitis voluptatibus seculi, quod est
perfectum ieiunium in hoc seculo: The great and general fast is to abstain
from iniquities, and unlawful pleasures of the world, which is the perfect
fast in this world. Chrysostom says, Ieiunium dico abstinentiam a vitijs, I
say that fasting, which is to abstain from vices. Chrysostom. in Ganes. hom. 8.
Hereby let it be discerned, who do most truly fast. In deed I know that it
is your manner, much to glory in your writings and speeches, of your outward
fasting from meats, as the Pharisee in the Gospel did, who gloried that he
fasted twice a week, which neither God in his law Luke 18. 12.
had required, nor the Apostles of Christ (for any thing we read) used.
Whereby we may note, that true godlynes neither is to be measured by such
outward abstinence from meats, nor is always joined with it. John Baptist
used greater austeritie in his diet, and abstinence Matthew. 11. 18.
from meats, then our Savior Christ did; yet was his life nothing so holy.
John's Disciples used more fasting then the Disciples of our Savior Christ did.
Yet it is not Matthew. 9. 14.
to be doubted, but our Saviors Disciples lived as godly or more, then they
did. The Montanists Heretics were greater Tertul. de I^iunio aduers. Psychicos.
fasters then were ye true Christians, as Tertullian shows. And S. Hierome
writes yt they observed three Lents in a year, and yet were Heretics
condemned by the Church Hierom. in Aggaetim. cap. 1. page 230.
of God, although then favored by the Bishop of Rome, as Tertullian shows in
the beginning of his book against Praxeas. The Jews used such great
abstinence and fasting, that they brought weakness and sickness to their
bodies: as Saint Hieromie writes, who nevertheless were enemies to our
Savior Christ. The Moscouites which Hieronymus ad Algasiam. quaest. 10.
never acknowledged the Popes authority be as great fasters as Papists are.
And so also be the Turks. And therefore these men need not to boast so much
of their fasting. Saint Paul says, that bodily exercise profits little, but
1. Tim. 4. 8.
godliness is profitable to all things, and has the promise of this life
present, and that which is to come. Howbeit, as I will not deny, but that there
may be less fasting, and more feasting, then were requisite: yet that there is
more feasting and superfluity in fare now, especially in ecclesiastical
persons, I think it would be too hard for this man to prove. Whence came these
phrases, As fat as an Abbot, he has a face like an Abbot, and an Abbey Lubber,
but of their immoderate fare and feeding? And how these men were given to
gluttony and excess, I will show at this time but by one example. Giraldus
Cambrensis in his Book entitled, Speculum Ecclesiae, writes, that the Abbot
and Monks of Saint Swithens in Winchester, came to King Henry the second,
hunting at Gilford in Surrey, and fell down in mire and dirt before him,
pitifully crying out. The King asked them, what was the matter. They answered,
that their Bishop had taken three dishes of meat from their dinners and
suppers. He asked them how many he had left unto them. They answered ten, but
from the foundation of their house they had used daily to have thirteen dishes
at a meal. The king turned to his Nobles and said: By the eyes of God (for
that was his oath) I thought their house had bin burnt, and now I see it is but
a matter concerning their paunches. And then turning to the Abbot and Monks
said: If your Bishop deal not with you, as I have done with my court, to bring
you to three dishes, I would he were hanged. This was the remedy, that these
gluttonous Monks found at the hands of that prudent Prince. Where the reader
may note, not only the great gluttony, but shameless impudency of these men
or monsters, in making such a lamentable complaint, for wanting of three
dishes, having ten remaining. The same Cambrensis writes, that in some
Abbeies they had at every meal sixteen dishes, which slender diet was a good
means to preserve their vowed virginity. Monks bellies were Bacchus barrels.
Hereof came the old ryming verse. O monachi vestri stomachi sunt amphora
Bacchi, etc. To come to the next, I wish there were more praying, and less
playing then there is: yet this will I say, that there is now more true praying
according to the will of God, and less playing then was ever in popery.
Dicing and carding is in some reformed Churches abolished, and of those that
truly profess the Gospel less used, then it has been of Papists. But I will
not Cicero pro Ligario.
stand to prosecute the particularities that here you name. I will say unto you
as Tullie said to Tubero, Habes Tubero quod est accusatori maxim optandum,
confitentem reum, etc. Thou have O Tubero that which an accuser would most wish
for, the party accused confessing himself guilty, yet so confessing that he
was on the same side that thou Tubero and thy Father were. So we say and
confess, that there is less devotion, and more dissolution, less religious
fear, and more vain security, less zeal and mortification, then there
ought to be: but I trust hereafter to show, that these virtues have as much or
more wanted, and these vices abounded among Papists, as they do with us.

Now I will come to the second part of my answer promised to this article. To
show to what loosenes and wickedness of life, the popish doctrine does tend, and
what weeds of wickedness it has brought forth.

First their doctrine of keeping Gods word in a strange tongue, and restrayning
Gods people from reading and hearing of it, has been and is a great cause both
of error in doctrine, and wickedness in life. Our Savior Christ says, You err
not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of Matthew. 22. 29. Psalm. 19. 7. 8
God. David says, That the law of God gives wisdom to the simple, it
lightneth the eyes, it makes Gods servant circumspect: and that it is a light
unto our feet, and a lantern unto our Psalm. 119. 105.
steps. He shows also that it is a mean to preserve men from sin. For
speaking of the righteous man he says: The law of his God is in his heart,
and his steps shall not slide. And again: I have hid thy words in my heart,
that I might Psalm. 37. 31. Psalm. 119. 11.
not sin against thee. That good Father Chrysostom, who was a most earnest
exhorter of all men to the reading of De Lazaro and diuite. Homil. 3. and ad
Romans in praefatione.
the Scriptures says: Magna aduersus peccatum munitio Scripturarum lectio:
magnum praecipitium, profundum barathrum Scripturarum ignoratio. Haec haereses
peperit, haec vitam corruptam inuexit, haec sursum and deorsum omnia miscuit:
that is, The reading of the Scriptures is a great sauegard against sin: the
ignorance of the Scripture, is a slipperie means to fall into sin, and a
deep gulf of sin. This has bred Heresies, this has brought in corruption
of life, this has turned all things vpside down. Again: Hoc omnium malorum
causa est, quod Scripturae ignorantur: that Ad Coloss. hom. 9.
is, This is the cause of all evils, that men be ignorant of the Scriptures.
Saint Hierome who exhorts Ladies to bring up their young daughters, being but
seven years old in the reading of the holy Scriptures, says, Ama scientiam
Scripturarum, and cartis vitia non amabis: that is, Love the Hieron. ad
Rusticum.
knowledge of the Scriptures, and thou shall not love the vices of the flesh.
Many such other sayings might be alleged out of the Fathers, which plainly
show, that the keeping of the holy Scriptures in an unknown tongue, and the
restrayning of Gods people from reading and hearing of them is a doctrine
tending to loosenes, and great wickedness of life.

Their doctrine of vowing chastity and single life, and prohibiting
matrimony, what an occasion it has been of horrible filthiness and wickedness
of life, I will briefly declare. Chrysostom of some women in his time which
under Chrysostom. tom. 5. quod regulares faecmi. tum viris cohabitant.
a profession of virginity lived wickedly, says thus: Virginitas ista cum
viris plus ab ominibus argultur quam stuprum ipsum: that is, This virginity of
women with men is more reproved of all men then whoredom it self. Saint
Hierome in his time complained of the like women. Sanctum virginum propositum,
etc. that is, The evil name of some, which behave not themselves well, does
slander the holy Hieron. ad virg. Demetri. adem.
purpose of virgins. Saluianus the Bishop of Massalia, who lived in the year
of our Lord 480. writes thus: Nouum est prorsus religionis genus. Licita no^
faciunt, and illicita committunt. Temperant a concubitu (quamuis nec hoc
faciunt nisi a licito) Saluianus lib. 5. de prouidentia.
and non temperant a rapina, etc. i. This is a new kind of religion. They do
not things lawful: and commit things unlawful. They abstaandigrave;ne from
copulation (although they abstain not from that neither, but from that which
is lawful) and refrain not from rape. What do thou O foolish persuasion?
God has forbidden sin; and not marriage, your deeds agree not with your
studies or profession. You ought not to be fauorets of vices. There is extant
an epistle of Huldricus Bishop of Augusta, who lived about the year of our
Lord 860. unto Pope Nicholas the first concerning Paralip. Abba. Vsperg. p. 414.
the forbidding of Priests marriage, wherein is declared, that Gregory the
Pope having given forth a decree, for the single life of Priests, upon the
finding of 6000. childrens heads in ponds of water, where they had been
drowned, did revoke the same decree, and commended the saying of the Apostle,
It is better to marry then to burn: 1 Cor. 7. 9.
adding thereunto, that it was better to marry then to give occasion of
murder. Of this epistle Pope Pius the second makes mention, entreating of
Germany, and it was found in a library in Holland before Luthers time.
Bernard the Abbot, who lived Anno domini 1150. complains of the wicked life
of the clergy, in these words: Episcopi and sacerdotes huius temporis
castitatis sanctimoniam, sine qua Bernardus in council. Romensi.
nemo videbit deum; tam in cord, quam in corpore quomodo student obseruare?
traditi in reprobum sensum facrunt quae non conueniunt. Quae enim in occulto
fiunt ab episcapis, turpe est dicere: that is, How do the Bishops and Priests
of this time keep holy chastity both in heart and body, without which no man
shall see God? Being given up into a reprobate mind, they do the things that
are not convenient: for what things be done of Bishops in secret, it is a
shame for to speak. Again, Toll de ecclesia honorabile connubium, etc. Take
from the Church honorable marriage, Suprae. Cantica. sermo. 66.
and the bed undefiled, and thou shall fill it full of whoremongers, incestuous
persons, buggerers, and all kind of unclean ones. Again, he shows that
there Bernardus de sustinenda persecutione. cap. 29.
were very many, who abstayning from the remedy of marriage, fell afterward
into all kind of wickedness. About that time, the Pope sent a Cardinal called
Ioannes Cremensis into England, to dissolve Priests marriages, who in a synod
having inueyed against their marriage, saying, that it was a shameful thing,
that a Priest should rise from his wife, to consecrate the body of Christ, was
the same night after taken with a whore; as Fabian and other writers do
witness. And I read the same story in an old Fabian. part. 7. cap. 229. fol.
154
written book, which I think was the story of Henry Huntington, where these
words were added: Celari non potuit, taceri non debuit.i. It could not be kept
secret, and it ought not to be suppressed in silence. In the gloss upon
Gratians decrees it is said, that a Priest for simple fornication is not to be
deposed from his benefice, and the reason is, because Pauci sine, illo vitio
inueniuntur: i. Few are found Distinct. 81. Maximinus in glossa.
without that vice. Robert Holket an English man, and a Dominike Friar, who
lived about the year of our Lord 1340. writes of the Priests in his tune in
these words: Sed pro^^ ^olor, his diebus verificatur nim is illud Job. cap. 3.
Eoce qui seruiunt ei, id est, Domino, non sunt stabiles, and in Angelis suis
raperit Rober. Holket supra lib. Sapient. lecti. 173.
prauitatem. Sunt enim quida^ de modernis sacerdotibus Angeli Sat anae per
discordiam: quida^ Angeli Apostatici per superbiam: quida^ incubi per laxuriam:
and quidam Angeli abyssiper auaritiam: i. But alas in these days that saying
of Job cap. 3. is too true: Behold, they that serne the Lord, are not stable or
constant, and in his Angels he has found naughtines. For of the Priests of
these days, some be Angels of Satan, by discord and contention: some
Apostaticall Angels by pride: some be filthy spirits by riotousnes and
uncleanness: and some the Angels of the bottomless pit, by covetousness. Again,
Hunc vilissimum deum (Priapum) excolunt non pauci Idem ibidem. sacerdotes
moderni, discipuli illius magni Angeli de quo loquitur Paulus, 2. Cor. 12.
Datus est mihi Angelus Satanae etc. This most vile and filthy god (Priapus) not
a few Priests of these days do serve, being the disciples of that great
Angel, of whom Paul speaks 2. Cor. 12. The Angel of Satan was given unto
me, etc. Auentinus writing of Pope Hildebrand, called Gregory the seventh, who
earnestly forbad Priests marriage says: Maxima pars sub honesto nomine
Auentinus in Annalibus Boiorum lib 5. page 564. excusi. Ingolstadij. 1554.
castimoniae stupra incestus, and adulteria passim and impune committunt: that
is, A great number of Priests, under the honest name of chastity, committed
every where, and without punishment, Whoredom, Inecst, and adulteries. Yea,
what other great mischiefs were committed he there declares. There is a
treatise in the second tome of the Councels, entitled Opusculum Tripartitum,
in the second part whereof are these words. Tanta immunditia luxuriae notoria
Council. tom. 2. page 1002.
est in multis partibus mundi, non solum in Clericis, sed etiam in
Sacerdotibus, imo (quod horribile est audire) in praelatis maloribus: that is,
So great uncleanness is notorious in many parts of the world, not only in
Clearks, but also in Priests, and (that which is horrible to hear) in great
Prelates. Panormitane who lived anno 1431. and was a great dooer in the
Council of Basile, having showed that the vow of continency is not of the
order of Priesthood, nor holds by the law of God, but is a constitution of
the Church, adds these words: Credo quod pro bono and salute animarum,
Panormita. part. 3. de clericis coniuga. cap. cum olim.
etc. I believe that it were a wholesome ordinance for the good and salvation of
souls, to leave it to their own wills, that would live continently, and merit
more, and that they which could not contain, might marry: because that
experience does teach, that a clean contrary effect does follow of that law
of continency, for that now adays they do not live spiritually, nor be
clean, but be defiled by unlawful copulation to their most grievous sin,
whereas they might live chastely with their own wife, as the Nicene Council
said. John Gerson in his time complained John. Gerson. Tom. 1. declar.
defectuum virorum. Eccles.
that some Cloisters of Nuns were become stews of strumpets and whores: his
words be these: Rursus oculos aperite, and inquirite, Si quae ^^die Claustra
monialium facta sunt quasi prostibula moretricum. Mantuan the Carmelite Italian
Friar, who was an excellent learned man, and lived an hundred years past,
writing of this vow, and the fruits thereof says thus:

Propterea leges quae sunt connubia contra,
Esse malas quidam perhibent: prudentia patrum Lib. 1. Fastor.

Non satis aduertit, dicunt, quid far recuset,
Quid valeat natura pati; ceruicibus, aiunt,
Hoc insuaue iugum nostris imponere Christus
Noluit: istud onus quod adhuc quam plurima monstra
Fecit, ab audaci dicunt pietate repertum,
Tutius esse volunt, qua lexdiuina sinebat,
Isse via, veterumque sequi vestigia patrum,
Quorum vita fuit melior cum conings, quam nunc
Nostra sit, exclusis thalamis and coniugis vsu.
Mantuan here shows, first, that many in those days misliked that law of
vowing single life. Secondly, that it had bred many monsters, that is to say,
such as for their wickedness did lead a monstrous life. Thirdly, that the life
of the ancient Fathers that lived in marriage, was better then of these which
vowed chastity. Polidorus Virgilius an Italian, and gatherer of the Popes
Peter pense here in England, writes thus: Illud tamen dixerim tantum abfuisso
vt ista coacta castit as illam coniugalem vicerit, etc. Yet this I Polidor.
Virg. de invent. rerum. lib. 5. cap. 4
will say, that this enforced chastity is so far from excelling that
chastity of marriage, that no crime and sin has brought more shame to the
order of Priesthood, more evil to religion, nor more grief to all good men,
than that blot of the filthiness of Priests. Wherefore peradventure it were
expedient, both for the Christian common wealth, and the estate of that order
of Priesthood, that at the last the right of public marriage were restored unto
Priests, which they might holily use without infamy, rather then most filthily
defile themselves with such a natural vice. Such a loosenes and filthiness of
life, this doctrine of vowing chastity, and forsaking matrimony has brought
forth: whereof much more might be alleged, but this shall suffice. Yet
hereunto I will add not only their practice, but also their doctrine of
having Lupanaria stews, where whoredom is publicly permitted; for the
restoring of which, Friar Perine preached at Paul's Cross in Queen Marier
days, and D. Harding calls them necessary evils. And if it Confut. Apolog.
were not the doctrine of the Church of Rome to allow them, neither would they
have so long permitted them, nor Sixtus the fourth would have built Nobile
Lupanar, a noble Brothell house in Rome, as before I alleged out of Cornelius
Agrippa. In these places, what filthiness and incest, and what murders were
committed, God knows, and ancient men may somewhat remember. God says,
There shall be do whore of the daughters of Israel, nor Deuteronomy. 23. 17.
whore keeper of the sons of Israel.

Another doctrine of theirs tending to looseness and wickedness of life, is
their doctrine of Popes pardons, whereby they falsely feign, that the Pope
having the merits of Martyrs (which they call the treasure of the Church) to
dispense and bestow at his pleasure, he can pardon whatsoever sin men have
committed, and acquit and discharge them both a poena and culpa; that is from
the sin and punishment, which is more by their doctrine, then the death and
passion of Christ can do. What miserable mischief has flowed from these
pelting pardons of Popes (from which the ruin of their kingdom has justly
proceeded) By Luthers dealing against them.
I will declare out of the words of the Princes and estates of Germany in
their 100. grieuances exhibited to the Popes Legate at Norenberg anno 1522. and
printed at In Fasciculo rerum expeiendarum. fol. 177. Grauamen. 3.
Colen, anno 1533. In the third grieuance be these words: Illud importabile tam
olim increbuit Romanarum indulgentiarum onus, etc. That importable burden of
Romish pardons has now a long time increased, when under pretense of piety,
either for the building of Churches in Rome, or that the Bishops of Rome
promised avoyage against the Turk, they sucked all the marrow of money from
the simple and over eredulous Germans. And that which is much more to be
regarded, by these deceits, and the publishers and Preachers of them, the true
godliness of Christians is abolished, whilst they to broach the sale of these
their bulls, and pardons, give praise unto their wares, that by these bought
pardons, great and strange offenses both which be past, and that are to come,
not only of the living, but also of the dead, being in the fire of Pargatorie;
(as these publishers of pardons call it) be pardoned, so that money be paid,
and that it tingle in their right hand. And by the sale and merchandise of this
ware, both Germany of money is spoiled, and Christian godliness is
extinguished, when every one according to the quantity, which he bestows
upon this ware, does take unto himself liberty and impunitie to sin. Hence
whoredom, incest, adulteries, perjury, murder, theft, robberies, vsurre, and
an whole heap of mischiefs have proceeded, and taken their beginning. For
what mischiefs will men be afraid to commit, when they be once persuaded, that
they obtain by money of these brokers and pardoning pediers; license and
impunitie to sin, not only in this life, but also after their death? etc. By
these words it does evidently appear, to what loosenes of life, and manifold
mischiefs this doctrine did tend, which Alphons. de cast. libr. 8. Duran. in
lib. 4. did. 20. quest. 3. Antoni. 1. part summa. ^i^u^, 10. cap. ^.
some Papists themselves confess, to have no warrant of the Scriptures, John.
Maier. in 4. sent. did. 20. quest. 2.
and other some affirm such pardons as be granted for twenty thousand years
to be supersitious and foolish. I might speak much of this matter, but at this
time I will conclude it with two sayings, the one contained in a book printed
at Colen, anno. 1531. entitled Omio Ecclesiae, wherein after great complaint
of these pardons, and of the wickedness that proceeded of them, be these words:
Illi autem indulgentiarum buccinateres omnimodumpromittunt Onns Eccles. cap.
15. fol. 26.
securitatem, quae paritnegligentiam, and negligentia offensum Dei: that is,
These publishers of pardons do promise all manner of security, which breeds
negligence, and: negligence the offense of God. The other is in the treatise I
named before in the second Tome of the Councels, called Opusculum Tripartitum,
in these words: Item habent Opuseul. Tripart. tom. 2. Council. part. 3. page
1002.
breuia, quae relinquunt in singulis parochijs, in quibus continentur tot
indulgentiae, quod mir antur boni viri, Si vnquam de conscientia Papae vel
etiam alicuius boni viri potuerunt. illa procedere: that is, They have also
briefes which they leave in every parish, in which such pardons be granted,
that good men do marvel, that ever they could proceed from the conscience of
the Pope, or of any good man.

The doctrine of the Popes dispensations to what loosenes and wickedness of life
did it tend? First, hereby incest was committed, as before I showed how Pope
Martin 5. gave a dispensation to one to marry his own Sister, Ferdinandus a
King of Naples married his Annt, and lately Maximilian the Emperors daughter
was married to King Philip. Comines.
Philip of Spain her Uncle, of whom he begat this present King. These and many
such other were not done without the Popes dispensation. So Bonifacius a Bishop
of Germany in one Epistle to Pope Zachary shows, how a great Tom. 2.
Council. page 447.
man by the Popes dispensation married his Uncles widow. Fabian our English
Chronicler, who lived somewhat before Luther, writes that Charles the fifth the
French King Fabian. 7. part in Charles 5. page 189.
did by the dispensation of Pope John 22. put away Blanch his wife, because her
mother was his Godmother, and afterward was by the same Pope dispensed with to
marry Vide Rob. Gaguinum lib. 8. fol. 133.
his Cousin German. Many Kings, by means of such dispensation bought of the
Pope for money, have put away their lawful wives, and married others: as
Vladistaus King of Micha. Ritus lib. 2. Rob. Gaguinus in Ludo. 12. Sabel.
Ennead. 10. libr. 9.
Hungary, Ludauicus the 12. the French King, etc. Yea I am ashamed to express
what a horrible sin Pope Sixtus 4. did dispense with, to be used in the hot
months of June, July and August, as writed Veselus Groningensis in his
treatise of Pardons. They did dispense to keep as many Benefices as one could
get, so that Cardinals of Rome, had some 200. some 300. Benefices, as I have
out of Io. Gerson, and Nicholaus Clemangis before declared Hereof also that
learned Earl of Mirandula Io. Franc. Picu: complained in an Oration to Pope
Leo 10. in these words: Sanctissime cauetur, In fasciculo rerum expetend. ac
fugiend. impress, Coloniae 1553. fol. 210.
ne multa ab vno Saoerdotia, quibus annexa sit animaru^ cura, possideantur:
dispensatio (ita solet appellar^) effecit, vt iam non multa, non plura, sed
innumera teneant multi, qui ne diaconi quidem mererent ur officio defungi at
eiusmodi rerum dissipationem non ego; sed Bernardus tot ante see^lis
appellauit: It was most godly provided that one man should not have many
Benefices whereunto cure of souls is annexed. But dispensation (for so it is
called) has brought to pass that many men have not some, and many, but
innumerable Benefices, which are not worthy to execute the office of a Deacon.
This not I, but Bernard many ages past called a Ex lib. 3. de consideratione ad
Euge.
dissipation: Io. Gerson, having made mention of Bernards complaint, adds
these words: Quid modo dicendum putabimus de tam facill, vt appellant,
dispensatione per Papam and Io. Gerson tom. 1 de potesta. ecclesia consider. 10.
Praelatos super iuramentis licitis, super votis rationabilibus super immensa
beneficiorum pluralitate, super generali conciliorum non obstantia, super
priuilegiorum and exemptionum commune ius priuantium concessione. Quis omnia
denumeraret per quae nune vigor ecclesiasticae, imo and Euangelicae disciplinae
totus vere elanguit, emareuit, euanuit? 1. What shall we think is to be said now
of such easy dispensing by the Pope, and Prelates, concerning lawful oaths,
reasonable vows, infinite plurality of Benefices, the general infringing of
Councels, and the granting of privileges and exemptions, which take away
common rights. Who can number up all, by which the whole strength of
Ecclesiastical and Evangelical discipline is languished, withered, and
perished. Hereby it may sufficiently appear what dissolution and loosenes of
life has proceeded from the doctrine of the Popes power in dispensing.

What great mischiefs and calamities have comen of their doctrine concerning
the Popes power in deposing Emperors, Kings and Princes from their Crowns and
dignities, no pen can express, nor any mind sufficiently conceive. Hereupon
infinite bloody battles have been fought, Cities sacked, Countries wasted,
and millions of people consumed. As appears by ye histories of Henry 4. Henry
5. Frederick 1. and Frederick 2. Ludouicus Bauarus, and many others. From
hence came that fearful faction of the Gibellines, holding with the Emperor;
and the Guelfes, holding with the Pope: whereby not only Vide Platinam in
Bonifacio 9.
the Cities of Italy were distracted and in a manner wasted, but also the
inhabitants of singular Cities were divided amongst themselves, expelling,
killing, and murdering one another. So that even in Rome it self, those two
great families the Columns being Cibellines, and the Carrion per Pencerum part.
4. lib. 5. page 94.
Vrsines, being Guelfes, have fought one with another daily three months
together. Here by the way the Christian Reader may consider, how vainly and
falsely the author of that other lying and slanderous Libell, entitled A
Quartron of reasons, etc. glories that peace and tranquillity find harbor
and intertainment only in Catholic Reason 24. page 150.
Realms and Commonwealths: and that their Catholic religion ever brings
with it, peace, quietness, love, friendship, plenty, and all kind of happiness.
Whereby he shows his gross ignorance in histories, which most plainly and
plentifully show the contrary, and that it was with Christian countries in
time of Popery, as Azaria 2. Paral. 15. 5.
said, There was no peace to him that did go out and in, but great troubles
were to all the inhabitants of the earth. For Nation was destroyed of Nation,
and City of City: for God troubled them with all adversity. But of this I
will speak no more at this present: hereafter God may give an occasion more
largely to handle it.

Moreover, their doctrine of easy expiation and purging of sins by a Priests
absolution, by buying the Popes Pardons, by hearing Masses, by procuring Dirges
and Trentals, by sprinkling holy water, by bearing Agnus Dei, and many such
other paltries, whereunto did it tend but to loosenes and wickedness of life, by
encouraging them to commit that, which might by such easy means be
discharged? Whereunto did their doctrine of worshipping Images tend, but to
Idolatry? whereof what calamity has come to the Christian Commonwealth, by
weakening and renting asunder the Empire, and thereby strengthening Infidels, I
will not at this present show. Whereunto does their doctrine of keeping no oath
nor faith with Infidels and Heretics tend, but to cause perjury, and to take
peace and tranquillity from Countries? What fearful plagues of God have
ensued hereof, might easily be showed. I will only note one, namely that
great overthrow which the Christians received at Varna by Amurathes the Turk,
with whom Vladistaus the king of Polonia, and Ioannes Huniades having made an
honorable and Ponsi. Decad. 3. lib. 6. page 457.
profitable peace, and confirmed the same with oaths and writings, Pope
Eugenius 4. urged them first by Francis the Cardinal of Florence, and
afterward by Iulianus the Cardinal, to break peace, and to renew war.
Whereat the Turk wondered, and in the heat of the battle, as Bonslnius
writes, Amurathes took out of his bosom the writings of the peace and
leagui, and looking up to heaven Bonsin. Decad. 3. lib. 5. page 464.
said, This is the league, O Jesus Christ, which thy Christians have made, and
confirmed by thy name, who have falsified their faith given by thy name. If
thou be God, as they say, avenge thy miurie, and punish these false abusers of
thy name. After which words the victory fell to the Turk, there Vladislaus
the King was slain, all the Poionians killed, the Nobles of Aeneas Siluius
Commens. in Europ. page 399.
Hungary destroyed, Iulianus the Cardinal the Popes Messenger, and causer of
that mischief in flight murdered. By which great overthrow, the power of
Hungary was so weakened, that afterward it was the easilier conquered by the
Turk. This great calamity came of their doctrine of keeping no oath nor league
with Infidels and Heretics, and of the Popes power in dispensing therewith.
And what a hindrance of stablishing peace among Christian Princes it is at this
day, any man of mean understanding may easily consider.

Now for as much as this man makes so much of their devotion and our
dissolution and loosenes of life; I will according to my promise before made,
show what holiness the Popes have inspired and breathed into the City of
Rome, where they reside, and into their own Court. Bernard writes of Rome in
these words: Quid iam notum seculis quam proteruiae and fastus Romanorum? gens
insueta paci, Bernard. lib. 4. de considerat.
tumultui assueta. Gens immitis and intractabilis, vsque adhuc subdi nescia,
nisi cum non valet resistere: that is, What is so well known unto ages as the
frowardnes and pride of the Romans? A people unacquainted with peace,
accustomed to tumult and trouble: A people cruel and intractable, which will
not as yet be subject, but when it is not able to resist. And of the Court of
Rome those Curia bonos facilius Idem eodem lib.
recipere, magis quam facere consueuit, etc. The Court rather receives good
men, then makes them good. But if we have proved, that more good men have
become naught in it, then evil men have become good then such are to be
sought, as neither decaying in them is to be feared, nor amending is to be
wished, as being already perfect.

Franciscus Petrarch, who lived in Rome, greatly co^plassneth of the
abominations of Rome, and the Popes Court: Anno 1370.
Quicquid vspiam perfidiae and doli, quicquid inclementiae superbiaeque
quicquid impudicitiae, effraenataeque libidinis audisti aut Epist. 19.
legisti, quicquid denique impietatis and morum pessimorum sparsim habet aut
habuit orbis terrae, totum istic cumulatim videas, (...) reperias. etc. i. What
other treachery and deceit, whatsoever cruelty and pride, whatsoever
uncleanness and unbridled lust thou have heard or read, finally whatsoever
impiety the world now has, or has had, thou may see, it and find it wholly
in full heap and measure there. For I need not to speak of covetousness and
ambition, of the which the one has there set the throne of her kingdom, from
whence she might rob be and spoil the world; and the other dwells no where
but there. I would the learned reader would read the rest of that 19. Epistle,
and the next Epistle following, and see how he painteth forth the a
bominations of Rome, and the Popes Court, which would be too long and tedious
for me to write. F^^er Mantuan (of whom I made mention before) writes thus of
Rome:

St quid Roma dabit, nugas dabit, accipit aurum, Ecloga. 5.
Verba dat. Heu Romae nunc sala pecunia regnat: Exilium virtus patitur. If Rome
give any thing, it gives trifles; it receives gold, and gives words: Alas
only money does reign in Rome, virtue is banished out of Rome.

Again.

Viuere qui sanctie cupitis discedite Roma; Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse
pi^^^. i. Lib. 1. Sihiarum.
You that desire to live godly depart ye from Rome, whereas all things are
lawful there, it is not lawful to be a godly man there.

Again.

I pudor in villat, si non patiuntur easdem Lib. 2. Fastoru^.
Et villae vomicas: vrbs est iam tota Lupanar. i. Depart honesty into
villages, if they also be not infected with the like filthy impostumes. The
city (meaning Rome) is wholly become a Stews. Many such other complaints he
has which I omit. Palingenius another Italian Poet and Papist says:

Atque rogant, quidnam Romana ageretur in vrbe. Cuncti luxuriae atque gulae,
furtisque dolisque, Marcel. Paling. in Capricorno.
Certatim incumbunt, nosterque est sexus vterque. i. They ask what is done in
the city of Rome. All are wholly given to riot, to gluttony, to theft, to
deceit, and to Sodomitrie.

Andrew Board Doctor of Physic and a popish Priest writes thus of Rome: And
shortly to conclude, I did never Andrew Board in his Breniarie of health named
Extranag. cap. 2
see no virtue nor goodness in Rome, but in Bishop Adrians days, which would
have reformed diverse encrmities, and for his good will and pretense he was
poisoned within three quarters of a year after he did come to Rome, etc.
Again, And now to conclude, whosoever has been in Rome, and has seen their
vsuage there, except Ibidem.
grace do work above nature, he shall never be good man after, etc.
Catherina Senensis that holy woman, whom Pius 2. canonized for a Saint, because
she was his country woman, talking with Pope Gregory the 11. complained,
Antoni. part. 3. titul. 23. cap. 14. 13. fol. 224. Foetorem infernalium
vitioru^.
as Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence writes, that in the Court of Rome
where should be a delicate paradise of virtues, she found a stink of hellish
vices. And of the same Court Aeneas Siluius himself a Pope writes thus: Nihil
est quod absque argento Romana curia dedat. Nam Aeneas Siluius epist. 66. p.
554.
and ipsae manus impositiones, and spiritus sancti dona venduntur. Nec
peccatoru^ venia uisi nummatis impenditur: that is, The Court of Rome grants
nothing without money: for even imposition of hands, and the gifts of the holy
Ghost are sold. Forgiveness of sins is not granted but to them that have
money. Again, Quid est Romana curia Idem epist. 188. page 763.
his qui summam tenent, nisi turpissimum pelagus ventis vndique durissimis
tempestatibus agitatum? Auaritiae ibi atque inuidiae procella vix quenquam
intactum praeterit: that is, What is the Court of Rome in them that be the
chief, but a most filthy sea on every side tossed with winds and strong
tempests? The storm of covetousness and envy does there scarsely leave any
one untouched. And because this man complains so much of our dissolution and
loosenes of life: I will add hereunto a few complaints of some Papists, of the
great and general dissolution, loosenes, and prophanenes of life of former
ages, when Popery most flourished. The same Aeneas Siluius who lived above
eight score years past writes us: Vsque adeo apud homines nostri Histor. de
Europa cap. 21. p. 763. Commene. in dicta and facta Alphonsi.
seculi diuina and humana perierunt: that is, So greatly both divine and humane
things be perished with men of our age. Again, Quid magis Barbarum quam rapto
viuere, and omnem aequitatem, omnemque religionem proculcare, quem Italicum
morem esse videmus? that is, What is more barbarous then to live by robbery,
and to tread under feet all equity and religion, which we see to be the
manner of Italy? Again, Quod cum singulari moestitia referimus, statuum omnium
Epist. 128.
and sexuum omnium religionem, fidem, and vrbanos mores in populo Christiano
adeo a iustitiae tramite declinasse, quod diuinam non cessant irritare and
prouocare vindictam: that is, The religion, faith, and civil manners of all
estates and sexes (which with great grief I declare) is so declined from
justice, that they cease not to provoke the vengeance of God. Again, Nulla
inter nos concordia, nulla obedientia est, neque spirituali, neque temporali
paremus capiti. Iacet spreta Epist. 398.
religio, iustitiae nullus honos, sides pene incognita: that is, There is
neither concord nor obedience? We obey neither the spiritual, nor temporal
head. Religion lies despised, righteousness not honored, faith is in a
manner unknown. Platina who was the Popes Secretary, and lived at the same
time, in many places greatly complains of the horrible corruption of life,
both in the Priests and people in those days: Quanta sit auaritia sacerdotum
etc. Platina in Mar^^^. 1.
How great covetousness of Priests, and especially of those that be in thiefest
authority, how great leacherie, how great ambition and pomp, how great pride
and idleness, how great ignorance both of themselves, and of Christian doctrine,
how little religion, and the same rather fained then true, how corrupt manners
to be detested in profane and secular men; I need not declare, when they
themselves do do openly sin, a^ though they sought praise thereby* believe
me, the Turke^ more cruel enemy of Christianity then Diocle^ian or
Maximinian will come (I would I might be a false Prophet) and even now knocks
at the gates of Italy. The like complaints he has in many other places in
Dionysio. 1. in Bonifacio 5. in Stephan. 3. in Gregorio 4. etc.

Petrus. de Aliaco a Cardinal of Rome, in his treatise concerning the
reformation of the Church exhibited to Petr. de. Aliaco (...) rerum expetend.
ac fugiend. (...) Anno 1535. fol. 207.
the Council of Constance Anno 1415. has these words: Adhibendae esset
correctio circamores ecclesiasticorum qutiam nimis (pro^^ dolor) sunt corrupti
ira, gula, luxuria, pompa prodigautate, otio, and alijs generibus, quod cedit
in grave laicorum seandalum: that is, A reformation were to be had about the
manners of Ecclesiastical persons, who now (which is greatly to bedamented) be
so much corrupted by anger, gluttony, riot, or uncleanness, by pomp,
prodigality, idleness, and other kinds of vices, which redoundeth to the great
scandal and offense of lay men. That noble and learned Earl of Mirandula, in
his Oration to Pope Leo the tenth and the Council of Laterane concerning the
reformation of manners, has these words: Apud plaerosque Ibidem 209.
religionis nostrae primores, ad quorum exemplum componi atque formari plebs
ignara debuisset, aut nullus, aut certe exiguus Dei cultus, nulla been viuendi
ratio atque institutio, nullus pudor, nulla modestia: iustitia vel in odium,
vet in gratiam declinauit, pietas in superstitionem pene procubuit; palamque
omnibus in hominum ordinibus peccatur, sic vt saepenumero virtus probis viris
vitio vertatur, vitia loco virtutum honorari soleant, etc. that is, With most
of the chief of our religion, to whose example the ignorant people should
conform their lives, there is either no worship of God or surely very little,
no manner nor order of good life, no shamefastnes, no modesty: justice is
turned either into hatred or into favor, godliness in a manner into
superstition. All forts of men do so openly sin, that oftentimes virtue is
made a reproach in good men: and vices be honored in place of virtues, etc. The
learned reader may there read of other horrible sins that then reigned,
which I am ashamed to utter. If I should set down many other complaints of the
horrible and universal wickedness that reigned in Popery, I should be too
tedious, I will end it with the complaint of one Bredenbachius, who was Deane
of the Church of Mentz in Germany in ye time of Charles the 4. about Anno 1370
in these words: Recessit lex a sacerdotibus etc. 1. The law is departed from
Priests; justice Bredenbath. in suae peregrinationis historia.
from Princes, counsel from the Elders, faithfulness from the people, love from
parents, reverence from subjects, charity from Prelates, religion from Monks,
honesty from young man, distipline from Cl^rkes, learning from teachers,
study from scholars, eqeitie from Judges, concord from Citizens, fear from
servants, fellowship from Countrymen, truth from Merchants, virtue from
Noblemen, chastity from Virgins, humility from widows, love from the
married, and patience from the poor: O times, O manners most troublesome and
miserable times, reprobate and wicked manners both of the Clergy and of the
people? Here by this man and others who so much accure our manners, and these
times, may see what has bin the estate of the Church, and manners both of the
Priests and people heretofore when Popery most flourished; and thereby may
discern with whom dissolution and loosenes of life do most reign.

The Pamphlet. The Protestants make God the author, of sin, the only cause
of sin, that man sins not, that God is worse then the Devil. 5. Article.
Whosoever defends that God commands, persuades, urges, impelleth to
sin, makes God the cause of sin.

Calvin. lib. 1. Institu. cap. 17.. 11. and cap. 18.. 4. and lib. 3. cap. 23..
7. 8. 9.
But all Protestants say that God commands, persuades, urges, impelleth to
sin: Ergo.

The Protestants make God the cause and author of sin.

The Mayor I prove: for if God persuade or impell men to sin, as for example:
Judas to sell Christ, Saint Peter to deny Christ, the Jews to crucify Christ:
questionles he intended the Quintius sermon. de prouidentia Beza Aphoris.
sacrilege of Judas, the negation of Peter, the murder of the Jews: and this
much more effectually then Judas, Peter, or the Jews. For who can resist his
impulsion? or who can frustrate his intention? Voluntati eius quis resistet?
Who is able to oppose himself against his will? yet what man is he, that in
conscience were not bound to conform his will unto the will of God, who is the
author of all good wills, and the first rule and square of all regular wills.
Judas, Peter, and the Jews, if they bad followed the motions of God, who could
have blamed them, for following him, who could not err in impelling, nor sin
in persuading them?

But some will say, that God moved them for a good end: videlicet, the
redemption of man, and they intended an ill end: to wit, Lucre, revenge, or
some other sinister effect. Yet this shift will not salve the sore, for evil
may not be done, that good may follow. Non sunt facienda mala vt inde veniant
bona: For Romans 3. verse. 8.
otherwise a man might steal to give alms, be drunk for a meriment, commit
aduontrie to beget children.

Moreover why might not Judas, Peter or the Jews, intend that good end which
God intended, and yet have sold, denied, and crucified Christ conforming their
intentions to his, they being instruments and he the first moouer?

Again it cannot be said: but that God indirectly, and most effectually
intended their sins; for he that intends any effect wherewith another
effect is necessarily conjoined, consequently intends it: as for example. He
that intends to burn a ship in the midst of the sea, intends consequently
the death of all the men which be in her. In like manner, if God intended that
Judas should sell Christ, unto which action sin was necessarily adjoined,
consequently God intended the sin as well as the selling.

The Minor is to too evident. For the Protestants deride Gods permission, they
say that all his actions are energeticall, or effectual: they desperately
aver, that Paul's conversion, and David's aduoutrie, were in like manner the
works of God: And as he elected some to glory, before the preuision of
works; so he rejected some from glory before the preuision of sins. Here
hence I infer that according to the Protestants principles, God is most
properly the author of sin, because he impelleth most effectually thereunto.

Next that he is the only author of sin, for that he inforceth men upon
necessity to sin, and they as instruments follow the motion of their first
cause.

Again, that man sins not; for where there is necessity of sinning, there
is no sin, for sin is free or no sin: besides, how can man sin in
conforming his will with Gods will?

Finally, God is worse then the devil: for that the wickedness of the devil,
principally consists in moving, persuading, and inducing of men to sin:
the which by the Protestants confession, God performs more effectually then
the devil, because the motions of God are more forcible, and less resistable,
then the illusions or suggestions of the devil.

Many sins moreover are acted without the temptations of the devil, some of
ignorance, some of passion, but none without the motions of God: so that God is
worse then the devil, both in causing a greater multitude of sins then the
devil, and in the forcible manner of causing sins, which the devil cannot
attain unto. The which doctrine is as good a ground for Atheism as ever hell
could devise: for were it not much more reasonable to say there were no God at
all, then to believe there were such a God, as commands, persuades, urges,
impelleth men to sin; and yet for the same sins will torment them with the
inexplicable pains of hell.

Answer.
THis man shows himself to be like to the unrighteous judge, who neither
feared God, nor Luke 18. 2. Apoeal. 12. 10. John. 8. 44.
reverenced man; or rather like him that is a slaunderer of Gods Saints, and a
liar, and the father of lies. For the Minor or assumption of this syllogism,
that all Protestants say, that God commands, persuades, urges, and
impelleth men to sin, is as true, as that is, that Catholics in England be
wrapped in bears skins, and cast unto dogs to be devoured, which was
published in Rome by a printed book, and set out in tables, confirmed with
Pope Gregory the 13. privilege. The In a book entitled Eccles. Anglicanae
Trophea, printed in Rome 1584.
which as all men know to be a false malicious slander, to discredit our
gracious Queens merciful and good government: so is this also to defame the
teachers of Gods truth. For if this man or any of his partners can prove, that
either all Protestants, or any learned Protestant does say, that God
commands, persuades, urges, and impelleth to sin, then will I yield unto
him, not only in this, but in all other matters of religion. If this cannot be
showed, as most certainly it cannot, what a shameless man is this, to utter such
a gross and palpable lie, as even a blind man may (as it were) feel it with
his fingers: and in what miserable estate be those simple ignorant souls,
which credit such lying spirits. But this is the just judgment of God against
them that receive not the love of 2. These. 2. 10.
the truth, that they might be saved, to send them strong delusion, that they
should believe lies. As touching the matter, we believe with our hearts, and
confess with our mouths, that God tempts no man to evil and sin, Ianus
1. 13.
but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence,
and is intised: and that every good gift and every perfect gift is from above,
and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variablenes,
neither shadow of turning. Whereby Saint James means that God is in such sort
good, and so the giver and author of good things, that there is no change or
alteration with him, and therefore is the giver of all good gifts and graces,
and never of any evil. And we say with the Prophet David: Thou art not a God
that loves or Psahn. 5. 8.
wills wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee. And with Saint John,
God is light, and in him is no darkness. And as 1. John 1. 5.
there is no darkness, that is to say, ignorance and wickedness in God; so is he
not the author thereof, neither does he command, persuade, urge, or impell
unto it. Fulgentius says: Iniquit as igitur quia in Deo non est, vtique ex Deo
non Lib. 1. ad Monimum.
est: that is, Because iniquity is not in God, therefore it is not of God.
These blasphemies we deny and desie, neither do Calvin or Beza in the places
by him quoted, or any Beza Aphoris. 1
where else affirm them. What is it then that they say? They say, that there
is nothing done by any, neither universally, nor particularly, but by the
ordinance of God, no not those things excepted, which be evil and to be
detested, not in as much as they be ordained of God, who is always good and
just: but in as much as they be done by the devil, and other wicked
instruments. So that we say, that the power and providence of God (who makes
the 2. Cor. 4. 6.
light to shine out of darkness) does so cooperate and work with the evil
actions of wicked men, and does so direct them to the execution of his holy
ordinance, and just judgments, that the same, as they be done and directed by
God, be pure and holy; and as they be committed of man be wicked and
abominable. Joseph's brethren did wickedly, and of malice sell him into Egypt
for a slave: yet Joseph says: God sent me before you to preserve your
posterity in this land, and to save you by a great deliverance. Genesis 45. 7.
Now then you sent not me hither, but God, who has made me a father unto
Pharaoh. And again, When ye thought evil against me, God disposed it to good.
Here God did neither Chap. 50. 20.
command, persuade, nor impell Joseph's brethren to sell and send him into
Egypt: yet his omnipotent hand was in that action to turn it unto good. So
when the Chaldeans and Sabeans took away Jobs Oxen and Camels, and slew his
Servants, they were urged and impelled thereunto by the devil: yet Job says;
God has given, Job. 1. 21.
and God has taken, blessed be the name of God. To this spoiling of Jobs
goods, God did not command, persuade, urge, or impell the Chaldeans and
Sabeans; yet the same was not done without his providence and ordinance, who
turned the same to his glory, in proving and purging Job in the furnace of
affliction, in making him a pattern of patience to all posterity, and in
teaching men thereby not to judge of men by outward afflictions and
adversities, whereunto both the faithful and wicked he subject. So in the
examples here set down, the devil put into the heart of Judas to betray
Christ, and impelled the Jews to crucify him; yet he was delivered to them by
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, to do whatsoever Act. 2.
23. and 4. 28.
the hand and counsel of God had determined before to heldone. Thus these
things which were done against the will, of God, were not done (as Saint
Augustine says) Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 100.
beside or without the will of God, that is, they were done against the
commandment and will of God revealed in his word; yet not without the
eternal purpose, counsel, and decree of God. And the same being most
wickedlie committed by man; God turned and directed them to the endless praise
of his mercy, and the eternal salvation of his elect. So Saint Augustine
says: Cum ergo and pater tradiderit August. epist. 48. ad Vincent. page 109.
filium suum, and ipse Christus Corpus suum, and Judas Dominum suum, cur in hac
traditione Deus est pius, and homo reus, nisi in re vna quam fecerunt, causa
non vna est ob quam fecerunt: that is, Whereas both the Father gave his son,
and Christ gave his own body, and Judas gave or betrayed Christ, why in this
giving is God holy, and man guilty, but that in one thing which they did,
there was not one and the same cause wherefore they did it. This is not to do
evil that good may come of it: for all actions as they are of God are good and
righteous. For if a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit as our Savior
Christ says; Matthew. 7. 18.
how much less can God who is the author of all goodness, and even goodness it
self, bring forth evil actions. Neither does God directly or effectually
intend the sins of men, nor their danation, but his own glory, which shines
not only in the manifestation of his mercy toward the faithful and godly,
but also in the declaration of his justice against the wicked and reprobate.
The similitude of intending the burning of a ship, and consequently the death
of them that be in it, will not here hold. For God (as I have said before) does
intend neither the sin nor perdition of man, but his own glory, and the
execution of his just judgments. Your own Angelical Doctor Thomas Aquinas to
the like similitude of drowning a ship answers thus: Ad tertium dicendum,
quod subuer sio nauis attributur Thom. Aquin. part. 1. summa quest. 49.
nautae vt causae, ex eo quod non agit quod requiritur ad salutem nauis: sed
Deus non deficit ab agendo quodest necessarium ad salutem, inde non est simile.
i. To the third we say, that the drowning of a ship is attributed to the
Mariner as the cause there of, because he does not that which is requisite for
the safety of the ship: but God fails not from doing that which is
necessary unto salvation: whereupon this is not like. So in burning a ship,
malice in man is the cause thereof: but there is no malice in God, neither does
he desire the death of him that dies, but the execution Ezech. 18. 32.
of his justice. Yet it is true which Augustine says: Deus operatur in cord
bus hominum ad inclinandas voluntates August. de gratia and lib. arbitr. cap.
21.
eorum quocunque vult sieve ad bona pro sua misericordia, sieve ad mala pro
ipsorum meritis, iudicio vtique aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto, semper
autem iusto. i. God works in the hearts of men to incline their wills to
whatsoever he will, either to good things by his mercy, or to evil for their
deserts, by his judgment, which sometime is open, and sometime secret, but
always just. And which Fulgentius says: Deus licet auctor non sit malarum
cogitationum, ordinator est tamen malarum voluntatum, and de malo opere
cuiuslibet mali, Fulgentius ad Monimum lib. 1.
non desinit ipse botum operari. 1. Although God be not the author of evil
cogitations, yet is he the orderer of evil wills: and of the evil work of
every evil man, he cease not to work a good work. Therefore these
wonderful works of God whose judgments are unsearchable, and Romans 11. 33.
ways past finding out, are not curiously to be discussed, but reverently to
be adored. For, O man what art thou that Romans 9. 20.
pleadest against God? In the probation of his minor, he first untruly
(according to his custom) says, that we deride Gods permission, the which is
false: for we neither deride, no deny Gods permission. God said to Abimelech: I
kept thee also that thou should not sin against me: Non permisi Genes. 20.
6.
te vt tangeres eam: therefore I have not permitted thee to touch her. Again,
God permitted him not to hurt me. But we say, first, that God permits not
sin inuitus, against Ibid. cap. 31. 7.
his will, but of his will: for else he were not omnipotent. Secondly, that he
does not only permit sins, but also by his infinite wisdom, and almighty
power, draws good out of them, and directs them to his glory. So S.
Augustine says: Hoc quippe ipso quod contra Dei voluntatem fecerunt, de ipsis
facta est voluntas eius, etc. In that thing August. ad Lament. cap. 103.
which they have done against the will of God, the will of God is done in them.
Therefore the works of the Lord are great, and are to be sought out of them
that love them. So that by a wonderful and unspeakable manner, that is Psalm.
111. 2.
not done without his will, which is done against his will: because it could
not be done, unless he did permit it: nec vtique nolens sinit, sed volens,
neither does he permit it against his will, but with his will. Neither would he
being good, permit evil to be done, unless he being omnipotent, could also
of evil do good. S. Hierome says: Dica^ quicquam sine te fieri, o Domine
Deus, and te nolente tantum posse Hieron. in Habac. cap. 1.
impium? Hoc sentire blasphemum est. Quum itaque tu sis vniuersitatis rector
and Dominus, tu necesse est facias, quod sine te fieri non potest. i. Shall I
say that any thing is done without thee O Lord God, and that the wicked can do
so much thou being unwilling? To think this is blasphemous. Seeing therefore
thou art the ruler and Lord of the world, thou must needs do that, which
cannot be done without thee. We say indeed that Gods works be energeticall
and effectual not only in the faithful, but also in the wicked and
reprobate, whose Exodus 4. 21. Rom 9. 18.
hearts he hardens, Iok. 12. 40.
and eyes blinds, Romans 1. 28.
whom he gives up to a reprobate mind, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
and to whom he sends a strong delusion to believe lies. These be Gods just
judgments, whereby he punishes the wicked, who yet are not impelled or coacted
of God to these sins, but willingly harden their own hearts by the deceit of
sin, shut their eyes that they may not see, Romans 6. 19.
give up their members servants to uncleanness and iniquity, and delight in
delusions, and in believing lies, as Papists now do. We do not desperately
auerre, but you do falsely and impudently affirm, that we teach, that Paul's
conversion, and David's adultery, were in like manner the works of God. This
shameless saying you have picked out of Campians reasons, out of which you
have like a Ratione 8.
goodly Rapsodist gleaned a great part of this lying Libel, but you cannot show
it in the writing of any Protestant. This is calumniari, and non ratiocinare,
to slander, and not rightly to reason. But you know your friends and favorers
will believe you, though it be never so false. And you have learned that
lesson, Audacter calumniare, semper aliquid adhaeret. We say that Paul's
conversion was a work of Gods mercy, agreeable to his will revealed in his
word: David's sin of adultery was a work which he hates and repugnant to his
said will. God wrought mightily in Paul by his holy spirit, in converting his
heart, in drawing him out of darkness, and in making him of a persecuter, a
preacher of his Gospel, and a minister of his mercy. God did not so work at
that time in David, but left him to himself, to be tempted, drawn away, and
overcome of his own corrupt concupilcence: yet we say, that God did draw good
out of that sin of David, in making him a pattern of true repentance, and
example of Gods mercy in forgiving his sins, and thereby teaching us to
walk warily, and flee carnal security. For if so excellent a man, that was
according to Gods heart, did so foully and fearfully, fall, what may fall unto
us, if we walk not circumspectly, and pray not fervently to God to uphold us
with his hand, and to guide us with his holy spirit.

Touching Gods permission, you write as though you neither did know what we
teach, nor regard what your self do write. Do we teach that God elected some
to glory before the preuision of works, and rejected some from glory before
the preuision of sins? You shall find this false assertion in our books,
when you find the former shameless slander. We do not teach that God elected
any to glory before he did foresee their works. For from everlasting, he (to
whom all things be present) did foresee both the good works of his elect, and
the wicked works of the reprobate. But this we say, that the foundation and
cause of Gods election and reprobation is not his prescience, and foreseeing of
the good works of the one, and the wicked works of the other, but his own
purpose, will, and pleasure, and that good works be not causes of Gods
election, but fruits and effects of it. Saint Paul says: Before the Children
were borne, and when they had neither Romans 9. 11.
done good, nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain according to
election, not by works, but by him that calls, It was said to her, The elder
shall serve the younger: At it is written, I have loved Jacob, and have hated
Esau. Again, As he has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the
world, Iphes. 1. 4.
that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: Who has
predestinate us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ 5.
in himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, in whom 11.
also we are chosen, when we were predestinate according to the purpose of him,
which works all things after the counsel of his own will. Again, God has
saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but
according to his 2. Timoth. 1. 9.
own purpose and grace, which was given to us through Christ Jesus before the
world was. Where we may see that the foundation and cause of Gods election is
his own will, pleasure, and purpose, and not the foreseeing of our works.
Saint Augustine says: Quod si futuros eorum mores dicitur August. lib. de
Praedestina. and gratia. cap. 7.
diuinum discreuisse iudicium, profecto illud euacuabitur quod praemisit
Apostolus dicens, etc. i. But if it be said, that the judgment of God did
discern the manners of Esau and Iac^ob which afterward would be, then surely
that which the Apostle said before, shall be made frustrate and in vain, Not
of works, but by him that calls, it was said, The elder shall serve the
younger. For he says not, by the works past, but having said generally, Not
by works, he would thereby have understood works both past and to come:
works past, which were none; to come, which as yet were not. Jacob was
predestinate a vessel unto honor, because not by works, but by him that
calls, it was said, The elder shall serve the younger. Again, Nam quid est
quod ait Apostolus, sicut elegit nos in ipso, etc. i. For what is that which
August. lib. 1. de praedestin. Sancto. cap. 17.
the Apostle says, As he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world. The which if it be therefore said, because God did foresee that they
would afterward believe, and not that he would make them to believe, against
this foreseeing the son speaks, saying, You have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you. A little after he says: Elegit ergo Deus fideles, sed vt sint, non
quia iam erant: i. God has chosen the faithful, that they might be, and not
because they now were. Again, Vt essemus sancti and immaculati: Non ergo quia
Ibid. cap. 18.
futuri eramus, sed vt essemus: i. That we might be holy and without blame,
therefore not because we should be, but that we might be. Again, Quos elegit,
etc. i. Whom he August. libr. 6. contra Julian. cap. 8.
has chosen before the foundation of the world, by the election of grace, not
of works, either past, or present, or to come: for then grace were no grace.
Thus Saint Augustine shows, that Gods election is not his prescience and
foreseeing of works to come, but his own grace, good pleasure and purpose.

Now I come to your illations which upon these false assertions you falsely
infer. To the first I answer, that God impelleth no man to sin, and
therefore God is not the author of sin. Secondly, God inforceth not men upon
necessity to sin, but they sin willingly, and by the instigation of the
devil, who works in the children of disobedience: therefore God is not the
author of sin. In your third inference, where you say, that sin is free, or
no sin: belike you hold with Pighius, and some other Papists, that original
sin is no sin: for it is not free for us to be without it. And whereas you
ask, how man can sin, in conforming his will with Gods will: I answer, that
they that sin, do not conform their will to Gods will, but do disobey it,
and oppose themselves unto it. This is the will of God (says Saint Paul,) your
sanctification, 1. These 4. 3.
and that ye should abstain from fornication. Finally, for as much as you can
never show, that it is the Protestants confession that God moves, persuades,
and induces men to sin, therefore you make a false and blasphemous
collection, for the which the Lord rebuke thee Satan. Lastly, whereas you thus
charge us to hold, that God is the author of sin, I would desire you to show,
where we do write more hardly of this matter, then John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester has written hereof, whose words be these: Neutrum sane potest sine
Deo, nec ad bonum se parare, John. Rossens. asserti. Luther. consuta. artic.
36. page 339.
neque malum opus facere. Neque enim adulter absque generali fluxu Dei, potest
adulterandi facinus committere: sed neque postquam ipsum admisit, sine speciali
auxilio Dei conari valebit vt resurgat: i. Man can do neither without God,
neither prepare himself to good, nor do that which is evil. For the
adulterer can neither commit adultery without the general influence of God,
nor after he has committed it, can he endeavor to rise without the special
help of God. And again: Nam quantum ad substant iam actus, etiam operibus
malis cooperatur Deus. Neque tamen Idem ibidem. page 340.
recte quisquam Deo peccatum imput abit, quia tametsi cooperetur Deus ad
substantiam actus, non tamen ipsam deficientiam operatur, sed hoc agit sola
voluntas: i. As touching the substance of the act, even God does cooperate or
work with evil works: yet may not any man rightly impute sin unto God, for
although God does cooperate to the substance of the deed, yet he does not
work the defect of the deed, but only man's will does that. Either show where
we have written more hardly hereof, or else condemn this Bishop, and Martyr
for the Popes cause with us. I trust you will not say, that he taught
Atheism, which is so rife in Rome, as I have before showed, etc.

The Pamphlet. That faith once had may be lost. 6. Article.
Whosoever leeseth his charity, leeseth his faith.

But David when he killed Vrias lost his charity.

Ergo, David when he killed Vrias lost his faith.

The Mayor is a principle undoubted of in the schools of Protestants: for they
peremptorily affirm that true faith (such as was in David one of Gods elected)
can no more be severed from charity, then heat from fire, or light from the
sun, and therefore if David killing Vrias, lost his charity, no doubt but
therewithal, he lost his faith.

The Minor I prove: for whosoever remains in death is without charity: but
David when he killed Vrias remained in death: Ergo, David when he killed Vrias
was without charity. If he was without that which once he had, no doubt but
then he lost it, for he was deprived thereof for his sin.

The Mayor proposition of this last Syllogism thus I prove: for charity is
the life of the soul, and it is as impossible for a man to have charity and
remain in death, as it is impossible to be dead in body, and yet endued with a
reasonable soul.

The Minor cannot be denied (to wit that David by killing Vrias remained in
death:) for it is the express word of God. Qui non diligit manet in morte. He
that loves not his 1. Ioh. 3. ver. 14.
neighbor remains in death: but certain it is, that David loved not Vrias
when he killed him: Ergo, likewise certain it is, that David remained in death.

The same position might easily be proved out of the eighteenth chapter of
Ezech. verse. twenty four. Si autem aucrterit se iustus a iustitia sua, etc.

Answer.
I Deny the Minor or second proposition, that David in procuring Vrias to be
killed lost his charity. For although in this co^bat between the spirit and
the flesh in David, the spirit retired, and the flesh prevailed; the new man
was foiled, and the old man overcame: yet was not the spirit utterly
extinguished, nor the new man clean killed. In deed David's faith fainted, his
charity was cooled, and his other gifts and graces covered, yet not clean
quenched: but there remained sparks of Gods spirit, which afterward being
stirred up, and blown by Nathans bellows kindled and flamed to Gods glory,
and David's eternal comfort and salvation. Shall we think that David had lost
all love of God, of his law and of man? was he clean deprived of Gods spirit?
it appears by his own words that he was not. Who upon Nathans preaching and
reproving of his sin, prayed and said: Take not thy holy spirit from me.
Whereupon I reason thus: He that Psalm. 51. 11.
was not clean deprived of Gods spirit, had not wholly lost faith and charity:
But David was not clean deprived of Gods spirit; therefore he had not wholly
lost faith and charity. The first proposition is evident by the words of
David: the second is manifest. For it is absurd to say, that the spirit of God
should continue in him, that has lost all graces and gifts of the spirit. It
is with Gods elect and chosen children, as it is with fire which in the night
is so hid and covered, that none appears; and yet in the morning is stirred
up, and is made to burn and to flame: and as with a tree, which in the winter
has neither fruit nor leaf upon it; yet it has a sap fallen into the
root, which in the spring springs, and brings forth both leaf and fruit:
So is it with Gods holy Saints, they be sometimes so overtaken and overcome
with temptations, that they seem to be as trees without fruit, withered, and
perished: yet there remains a sap of Gods spirit and grace in them, which
afterward rises and buddeth forth good fruit. And therefore to the second
proposition of your second Syllogism I say, that although David by those foul
and fearful offenses deserved eternal death: yet he did not remain in
death; and although God hated those sins, yet he never hated David. For whom
God loves, he loves to the end, and the gi^ts and calling of John. 13. 1.
Romans 11. 29.
God are without repentance. If we love a man, and yet hate some sin that he
commits, might not God, who is love it self, hate David's sin, and yet
love him, and keep some sparks of his spirit and grace in him, and so
preserve as the external life of the body, so the internal life of the soul
in him? So that neither David remained in death, neither was his love, no not
to Vrias altogether extinguished in him. No doubt but he did love him as his
true and faithful subject, and might love him, as the servant of God: yet in
that temptation his own self love, and desire to cover his own sin and
shame, did prevail against his love to Vrias, and did draw him to do an act,
which was no fruit nor effect of love and charity, and yet did not wholly
quench love in him. The Mayor of your latter Syllogism, which needs no
proof, you seek to prove by a false assertion, in barely saying. According to
your manner, but not by any place of Scripture proving, that charity is the
life of the ^oule. I say that faith is the life of the soul, the which I prove
by these two sayings of the Scripture. The Prophet Habacuk says. The just
shall live Habac. 1. 24.
by his faith. Saint Paul says: In that I now live in the flesh, Romans 1. 17.
I live by the faith in the son of God: who has loved me, and Gal. 2. 20.
given himself for me. Let this man show two such plain places of Scripture,
to prove charity to be the life of the soul. Properly Christ is the life of
our souls. Saint Paul in the place before alleged says, Christ lived in me.
And when Christ which is our life shall appear. And our Savior Col. 3. 4.
himself says: I am the way, the truth, and the life. For Ioh. 14. 6.
when we were dead in sins, he has quickened us, and at he has restored
life unto us, so he does continually nourish and preserve life in us. But this
is attributed to faith, because by it Christ dwells in us, and we by it be
put into the possession of Christ, and of all the benefits of his passion.
Concerning the place of Ezechiel, because you do not urge it, I will not stand
upon it. We doubt not, but men may and do fall from God, and just actions unto
wicked and ungodly deeds, and may have a temporal faith, and fall away from
the grace of God. But this we say, that true faith in Gods elect, which are
sealed with the spirit of adoption, and to whose spirit Gods spirit does Romans 8.
bear witness, that they are the sons of God, is never wholly lust in them,
and the same spirit works by charity, which in them may be cooled, but
never clean quenched. But of the losing of faith, and of the conjunction
thereof with charity, I have before entreated.

Now to return this argument in some sort upon you, whereas the Papists
auerre, that the Popes faith cannot fail, I reason thus: He that loses his
charity, may lose his faith: the Pope may lose his charity: Ergo, the Pope
may lose his faith. The first proposition I have proved already, and have
showed that true faith is not separated from charity, but works by it. And
most manifest it is by Saint James, that the faith which is without charity,
Iam. 2. 26.
and good works is dead: So that if the Pope be without Charity, then he
has but a dead faith. And a dead faith, is as much faith, as a dead man is a
man. That the Pope may be without charity, I think they will not deny: and
if they do, it may be proved by many examples. Platina in Joan 13. Blond.
epito. decad. 2. lib. 2. page 200. Supplem. Chronicorum. in Johan 12.
Pope John the twelft, or as Platina reckons the thirteenth, took two of his
Cardinals, and cut off the nose of the one, and the hand of the other, as
witness Platina, Blondus, and many others. Platina in Stephan. 6. Supple. Chron.
in Stephan. 6.
Stephanus the sixth did take the body of Formosus his predecessor out of the
grave, after he was dead, put him out of his pontifical habit, and put on him
a lay man's attire, cut off the two fingers of his right hand, where with he did
consecrate, and threw them into Tiber. Platina. in Serg 3. Supplement. Chron.
in Serg. 3
Pope Sergius the third took up again the body of the same Formosus, did cut
off his head as if he had been a live, and threw the body into. Tiber, as un
worthy of burial. Platina. in Bonifac. 7. Suppl. Chron.
Boniface the seventh took John a Cardinal, and put out his eyes. Platina. in
Urban. 6. Bonfinius. Decad. 3. libr. 1. page 354. Supplem. Chron. fol. 221.
Urban the sixth, of seven of his Cardinals which he apprehended at Nuceria,
took five of them, put them in sackes, and cast them into the Sea. Platina. in
Inno. 7. Supplementum Chronico. lib. 13 fol. 226.
Innocentius the seventh caused by Jews his nephew certain citizens of Rome,
which sought the restitution of their ancient liberties, and the reformation of
the Commonwealth decayed by his evil government, to be thrown out of
windows, and so killed. Alexander the sixth caused both the right hand and
tongue of Antonius Mancinellus to be cut out, because he had written an
eloquent oration against his wicked and filthy life. Many such other pranckes
of Popes might be alleged, which were no more fruits of charity, then was
David's procuring of Vrias death by the sword of the Ammonites. But
notwithstanding these and such other tragical and tyrannical acts, these
Popes faith never failed. For they never had any, but a false and dead faith,
such a faith as the Devil has.

The Pamphlet. The Protestants shall never have life everlasting, because they
will have no merits, for which everlasting life is given. 7. Article.
Whatsoever is given as wages, is given for works.

But the kingdom of Heaven is given as wages.

Ergo, the kingdom of Heaven is given for works.

The Mayor or first proposition may be declared after this manner: for
example, her majesty may bestow 1000. pounds by year upon some suitor, either
gratis, of mere liberality, and so it is called a gift, donum, a grace or
favor: or upon condition, if he behave himself manfully in the wars of
Ireland, and in this case the reuennew is called merces, wages, Remuneratio,
stipendium, a reward, or payment; and although her majesty did show him a
grace and favor to promise such a reward, for performing such a work, the
which he was bound upon his allegiance otherwise to perform, yet once having
promised, and the work being performed; her majesty is bound upon her
fidelity and justice to pay that she promised. In like manner God may give us
the kingdom of Heaven, without any respect or regard of works, as he gives
it to little children which are baptized, and so it is a mere gift, and a pure
grace. Or he may give it with some respect unto our works, and so he gives it
to all them, who having use of discretion keep his commandments: and for
this cause it is called wages merces, a reward Ad Romans 4. v. 5
and thus the Mayor must be understood: to wit, that whatsoever God gives as
wages, is given for works, and such wages are called merits. Wages then and
merits have a mutual relation: for what are wages, but a reward of merits? and
what are merits, but a desert of wages?

The Minor is most plain, and inculcated in Scriptures: Voca operarios and
read illis mercedem: Call the workmen, and Matthew. 20. 8.
pay them their wages. Ecce venio and merces mea mecum est, reddere vnicuique
secundum opera sua. Loc I come, and my wages with me, to give to every one
according to his works. Vnusquisque Apoc. 21. 12.
propriam mercedem accipiet, secundum suum laborem: Every one shall receive
proper wages, according to his labor. The like we have in twenty other places
of Scripture, 1. ad Cor. 3. 8. Matthew. 5. 12. and cap. 6. verse. 1. 1. ad Tim. 5.
18.
all which infallibly prove, that the kingdom of heaven is given as wages for
merits: and consequently that Protestants, who are enemies to merits, shall
never attain to the kingdom of heaven, which is purchased by good works and
merits. And for such men we may well say, that heaven was never made, no more
then learning for him that will never study, nor virtue for him who despises
the exercise thereof.

Answer.
A everlasting life is not in your bestowing, so we want not merits, to
obtain it, to wit, Gods mercies, and Christ's sufferings for us, with the which
we content our selves; and nothing doubt, but they be sufficient to discharge
us of damnation, and to bring us to salvation. Of these merits sweetly says
Bernard: Meum proinde meritum miseratio Domini, etc. My merit is Gods mercy. I
am not clean void of merit, Bernard. in Cantic. sermon. 61.
as long as he is not void of mercies. And if the mercies of the Lord be much,
I am much in merits. What though I be guilty to my self of many sins?
Surely where sin has abounded, grace also has superabounded. And if the
mercies of the Lord be from everlasting to everlasting, I will also from
everlasting sing the mercies of the Lord. Shall I sing my own justice? O Lord
I will remember thy justice only, for that is mine also, in that thou art of
God made justice to me. So Augustine says: Meritis suis nihil tribuunt sancti:
totum non nisi misericordiae tuae tribuunt o August. in Psalm. 139.
Deus. i. The Saints attribute nothing to their own merits, they attribute all
O God only to thy mercy. Hierome says, Tunc ergo iusti sumus, quando nos
peccatores fatemur, and Hieron. lib. 1. aduers. Pelagi. sol. 120.
iustitia nostra non ex proprio merito, sed ex Det consistit misericordia. i.
Then are we just, when we acknowledge our selves to be sinners, and our
justice or righteousness consists not in our merits, but in Gods mercy. S.
Basil says: (...) etc. i. Eternal rest or life is propounded to them that
strive lawfully in this life, not Basil in Psalm. 114 Homil. 16. page 224.
rendered according to the merit or desert of works, but according to the
grace of the (...).
magnifice^t God bestowed upon them that trust in him. But these counterfeit
Catholics not content therewith, nor thinking the same sufficient, will put
unto them the merits of Saints departed, and of men living, and their own
works and satisfactions, thereby fully to effect that, which Gods mercies, and
Christ's merits are not able perfectly to perform. This their doctrine
appears both by their prayers in their Masse-bookes, and Porteises, and also
by the form of a Monks absolution in these words: Meritum passionis Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, and bonta Maria semper Virginis, and Luther. in 2. cap. ad
Galat. Tileman. de Hesusius de 600. erroribus Papista. loc. 9. de poenitent.
fol. 67.
omnium sanctorum. Meritum ordinis, grauamen religionis, etc. i. The merit of
the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of blessed Mary always a Virgin,
and of all Saints. The merit of thy order, the heaviness of thy religion, the
humility of thy confession, the contrition of thy heart, the good works that
thou have done, and shall do, for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, be unto
thee for the forgiveness of thy sins, to the increase of merit and grace, and
to the reward of eternal life. Thus these men by their doctrine make Jesus
Christ not a full, perfect, and sufficient Savior, and so infringe the saying
of S. Peter: There is not salvation in any other: for among men there is given
none other Act. 4. 12.
name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. What is this but to deny the
Lord that has bought us, as Peter also 2. Pet. 1. 1.
says? Whether this doctrine be agreeable to the word of God, let the
Christian reader by these places discern and judge. Christ came to give his
life (...), a ransom for many. Matthew. 20. 28. Ioh. 1. 29.
He is that lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world. In him we
have redemption through his blood, that is, the Coloss. 1. 14.
forgiveness of sins. He has made peace by the blood of his cross, 20.
and has reconciled us in the body of his flesh through death. 22.
We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, 1. Pet. 1. 18.
from our vain conversation received by the traditions of the Fathers, but
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled and without spot. He
himself bare our sins in his body Ibid. cap. 2. 24.
on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live in righteousness, by
whose stripes we are healed. The blood of Jesus Christ 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
his son cleanses us from all sin. He has loved us, and Apocal 1. 5.
washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God
his father. As these places attribute our justification and salvation only to
Jesus Christ and his merits: so others do detract and take the same from our
works and deseruings. To him that works not, but believes Romans 4 5.
in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. If
it be of grace, it is no more of works: or else Romans 11. 6.
were grace no more grace: but if it be of works, it is no more grace: or else
were work no more work: By grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2. 8.
through faith, and that not of your selves: It is the gift of God, not of
works, least any man should glory. Who has saved us, 2. Timoth. 1. 9.
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his purspose and grace, etc. Not by the works Tit. 3. 5.
of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved us.
Although this which I have said may seem sufficient to answer this article,
yet I will say something to this syllogism.

To the Mayor or first proposition I answer, that with men wages is given for
works: but with God (whose thoughts are not as our thoughts: nor ways as our
ways) it is Isai. 55. 8.
otherways. Man may do labor and service to man, which may merit and deserve
by equity and justice wages and reward. For that there may be a proportion
between the service and reward, and also a benefit and commodity comes to
him to whom the service is done. As in this example here alleged, the Lord
Deputy, or some other may do some such singular service in Ireland, that if
her Majesty should bestow upon him 1000. pound a year, he might in some
proportion deserve it, and her Majesty may receive double benefit by it. But
can we do any works, that can either merit and deserve the kingdom of God,
or bring any benefit unto God? David says, My weldoing extends not to thee.
And as S. Paul says, that all Psalm. 16. 2. Romans 8. 18.
the afflictions of this present life, are not worthy of the glory that shall
be showed unto us: so may I say, that all our imperfect and stained works are
not worthy of the kingdom of God, which we have not deserved, but Jesus
Christ by his death and passion has purchased for us. Can a bond servant by
any services look to deserve an earthly kingdom? and can we which are bond
servants to God, in respect both of creation, and of redemption, look to
deserve the kingdom of God? Christ our Savior says: Does he thank that
servant, because he did that which was commanded unto him? I trow not. So
Luke 17. 9.
likewise ye, when ye have done all things which are commanded you, say we are
unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do. If he that
has done all things which were commanded, must confess himself to be an
unprofitable servant, how much more must we confess our selves to be
unprofitable servants, who have both omitted many things commanded, and
committed many great and grievous sins prohibited? So says Hierome: Si
inutilis est qui fecit omnia, quid de illo dicendum Hieron. ad Ciesiphont.
aduers. Pelagian.
est qui explere non potuit?.i. If he be unprofitable that has done all, what
is to be said of him, that could not fulfill all? Therefore we are not to
trust in our own merits, but in Gods mercy, which imports our misery, and
not worthiness.

But for the proof of your Minor, you allege the saying of our Savior
Christ: Call the laborers, and give them Matthew. 20. 8.
their wages. I grant that God does give to them that labor in his vineyard,
a reward which is called wages, because it follows piety and good works, as
outward wages follows labor. But that this heavenly wages is not deserved by
our works, as that other is by our labor, it evidently appears by that
parable, where they that had wrought but one hour, received as much as they
did which had borne the burden and heat of the day. Which shows, that this
reward came of grace, and not of merit, and so S. Ambrose does expound it: Non
labori praemium Ambros. de vocat. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 5.
soluens, sed diuitias bonitatis suae in eos quos sine operibus eligit,
effundens, vt etiam hij qui in multo labor sudarunt, nec amplius quam
nouissimi acceperunt, intelligant, donum se gratiae, non operum accepisse
mercedem. i. Not paying a reward unto our labor, but pouring forth the
riches, of his goodness upon them, whom he has chosen without works, that they
also which in great labor have toyled, and have received no more then the
last, may know, that they have received a gift of grace, and not a wages of
works.

To your other places Apocal. 20. 12. and 1. Cor. 3. 8. I say with S. Paul,
that God will reward every man according to his works, but not for the merit
and desert of their works. To them that continuing in well doing seek Romans 2.
6. 7.
glory, honor, and immortality, he will give everlasting life: and unto
them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness,
shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation, and anguish upon the soul of
every man that does evil. But you will say, why is not everlasting life the
wages of good works, as everlasting death is of evil works and sins. I
answer, that our evil works be simply evil, and being transgressions of
Gods righteous law, offend his infinite majesty, provoke his infinite wrath, and
deserve infinite pain and punishment. But our works are not simply and
perfectly good, but be imperfect, and are stained with the corruption of our
finfull nature (as I have before declared) and therefore cannot satisfy Gods
infinite justice, nor pacify his infinite anger, nor deserve his infinite glory,
but rather require Gods great mercy, as has been showed. And therefore Saint
Paul in the sixth to the Romans having said, that the wages of sin is death,
does not say (which had been most meet to have been said, if this pharisaicall
doctrine Romans 6. 23.
were true) the wages of good works is eternal life: but he says: the gift
of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, as also Oecumenius does
well observe.

You confidently affirm, that the Protestants who are enemies to merits, shall
never attain to the kingdom of Heaven, which is purchased by good works and
merits. Where first I would advise you to take heed, that you be not brethren
to those old heretics called Hieraclitae, to whom Saint Augustine does ascribe
this as an heresy, that they denied infants to appertain to the kingdom of
Heaven, because they had no merits. His words be these: Hieraclitae ad regnum
coelorum non pertinere paruulos August. in catal. Haeres. Haeres. 47.
dicunt, quia non sunt eis vlla merita certaminis, quo vitia superentur. i. The
Hieraclites say, that infants belong not to the kingdom of Heaven, because
they have no merits of strife, whereby to overcome vices. How near you iumpe
with these old Heretics, as you do in many matters with many others, let the
Christian reader indifferently judge. Secondly, I say, that we are enemies
neither to those true merits of Gods mercies, and Christ's sufferings before
mentioned, nor to man's good works, but to the merit of them, and vain
confidence put in them. We say with Saint Augustine: Si vis alienus esse a
gratia, iacta meritatua. i. August. praefati. in Psalm 31.
If thou will be void of grace, boast thine own merits. Thirdly, we believe
that the kingdom of Heaven comes to us by inheritance, and not by the
purchase of our works and merits. Christ says: Come ye blessed of my father,
take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you, Matthew. 25. 34.
from the foundation of the world. Saint Paul says: If we be children, we are
also heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs Romans 8. 17.
annexed with Christ. Thus the kingdom of Heaven is ours, in that we be
coheires with Christ. By whose bloody and blessed merits it is purchased to
us: and not by the works and deserts of us unprofitable servants, and
prodigal children, who have always need to pray and say: Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man Psalm. 143. 2.
that lives be justified: and if thou O Lord straightly markest Psalm. 130. 3.
iniquity, O Lord who shall be able to stand?

To conclude, you that so severely censure us, look to your selves, and take
heed you be not like that proud Pharisee, who gloried of his works, and
disdained the sinful Luke 18. Apoc. 3. 17.
Publicane: and that you be not like the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, who
said that he was rich, increased Athaneus lib. 12.
with goods, and had need of nothing, and did not know that he was wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, and naked. And that you be not like that mad man of
Athens, called Thraselaus, who coming in his madness to the haven named Pyreum,
did vainly imagine, that all the ships and riches there, were his own: but
being cured, and brought to good understanding, he saw his poverty, and
perceived that he scarce had a penny in his purse. Even so if you were
thoroughly cured of this frenzy of Popery, you would acknowledge your own
misery, and hunger for Gods mercy: confess your own poverty, that Christ
may enrich you: your own nakedness, that he may with the robe of his
righteousness cover you: your own guiltines, that he may acquit and justify
you; and finally humble your self, that he may exhalt you. For it is he that
fills the hungry with good things, and sends the Luke 1. 53.
rich empty away. I would you would join with your own Cardinal Poole in
this point, who misliking of Osorius book de iustitia dedicated to him, for
attributing too much to man's justice and righteousness, did add this worthy
saying, and worthy by all means to be received, That we can never attribute
too much to the mercy and righteousness of God: nor too much take from the
righteousness of man. This is written not only by Doctor Haddon in his book
against Osorius: but also by Pruilus his Secretary in his life, as that
excellent Antiquarie, and learned man my good friend Master Camden did tell me.
To conclude, be not like the froward Jews, who having Romans 10. 2. 3.
a zeal toward God, but not according to knowledge, being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and going about to establish their own righteousness,
have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. For Christ is the
end of the law for righteousness unto every one that believes, but obey the
counsel and calling of God: Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters, and ye that have no silver, come, buy and eat: Come I say, buy
Isai. 55. 1.
wine and milk without silver and without money. Wherefore do ye lay out
silver, and not for bread? and your labor without As buyers of Popes Pardons,
Masses, etc. doc.
being satisfied? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and
let your soul delight in fatnes. Incline your ears and come unto me: hear
and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you,
even the sure mercies of David. The which sweet and hid Manna of Gods mercies
they that refuse to eat, but had rather feed on the draffe of their own
muddie merits, shall never inherit heaven, but shall be cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone, where the beast and false prophet are, and shall be Apocal.
20. 10.
tormented day and night for evermore.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 5. lin. 34. read merita. p. 6. l. 16. quote Romans 1. 2. p. 33. l. 9. r.
scribitur. Ibid. l. 24. r. accommodant. p. 36. l. 14. in marg. r. Theophil. in
Joan. 14. p 43. l. 23. r. Hiueum. p. 45. l. 5. r. Sanctes. p. 48. l. 1. r.
Guiues. p. 50. l. 32. r. omnium. p. 63. l. 31. r. they. p. 70. l. 19. r. one
Pope. p. 100. l. 30. r. are ways. p. 120. l. 3. r. after this matter, a full
point. p. 126. l. 22. put out, that is.


