A comfortable Regiment, and a very wholesome order against the most perilous
Pleurisi whereof many do daily die within this City of London, and other
places: and what the cause is of the same, done by William Bulleyn. December. 8.

Anno salutis. 1562.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kingston.

To the right worshipful Sir Rob ^rt ^ingf^lde of Lc hryngham knight.
WHEN BY THE arguments of most true petigrees, and old antiquitees: it is to
be (well) proved, that you are not the fruict that is sone ripe and sone
rotten, or came in yesterdaie and gone tomorowe. But most aunciently have come
from the elder Britains, a people wo^thie of memory, and at that time d^elled
in your Castle in Wailes. Florishyng in knightly est^te, and st^^ll have
proceaded in the same, being linked with many houses of great honor, favored
of kings, without male fortune, or turnyng the globe backward, as it is
sometime spightfull alas, against great Princes them selves These things
considered, it is a good argument of Gods ^^. viii.
blessyng to the third and fowerth generation, of them that fear him: and long
life do happen to the^ that honor their pare^tes. And that is the cause of
your long branches deep roots and hard foundation, not upon the slipping
sands: but upon the rock of honor, invincible to be cast down, as long as
you do unfeignedly love God, and foresee the end. These your virtues are more to
be commended, then the air or pla cyng of your mansion is to be praised, nere
unto waters, moist meadows, and mistie rotten fennes: also the said ma^sio^
stands, very low, environed with a deep water, and your woods, hills, and
sweet fields but a little to far of. And albeit, that many of our worthy
au^cestors, did ru^ to the uttermost step of nature, yet diverse of the^ were
trapped, and overthrown in their raze by death, in their tender, or lusty
years, a^ appears by their Epitaphes, fixed upon their solitary tombs and
graves liyng in your church of Lethringha^ (and although as the proverb
says: that the young Lambs skin do come to the market, as soon as thold
shepes. Yet the old sheep, when he can live no longer for age: the Lambs and
lusty young sheep do perish, through rotten air, and pestilent pasture, in
corrupted soil). Even so unclean air, as a cause primitive, do bring the
cause Antecedente. To corrupcion of humors, stoppyng the natural virtues,
infecting the blood, bredyng sondrie Apostumacions, sores, and sickenesses in
the body, and finally comes the cause Coniunct, and finisheth the malice and
extreme vengeance against nature: and kills the body, except God by
miracle, medicen by virtue, nature by strength do prevail. This evil
considered, I am so bold t^ dedicate unto your Maistership, this small
Regiment, against the Pleurisi which have slain many hundredes: shortly, the
causes, signs, and cures: that it may please you to read them for in the
time of occasion, they shall not be hurtful. But comfortable to as many as
will consider them well: and to this Book I shall GOD willing, shortly add.
xxx. sicknesses more, their causes, signs, and cures, with diat accordynglie
to them. Thus wishyng your increase of health, worship and long life: and to
my good Lady, and your children the same. From London.

Your maistershippes ever. William Bulleyn.
Anno salutis. 1562.
W. B. To the reader.
GOod reader, through the sins of this wicked world, GOD almighty have
placed over us, ii. mighty sharp plagues, which he do threate us with all.
The one from cold Saturn, in the ^unciente house of sickness, threatnyng to
the aged and Melancholic, many evils to the body, as Quartaines, Consumption.
etc. And hor rible bloody Mars. crepeth into the house of death, armeth him
self with Fire and Darte* threatnyng the Chollorike with short, hot, and
painful death. etc. These are two evil neighbors to dwell in one year so
nere together, God of his mercy govern them, which have al thin ges in his
hands, both life and death, and defend us from soche vengaunce, as we have
deserved. And grant that this little Regiment, may do pleasure and
comfort unto the^m, which do read it: and with diligence soberlie observe
it to Gods glory, their own help, against this dangerous plague. GOD of
his mercy grant it, and that we may amend, and remember our end.

AMEN.
Deu. xxviii The Lord shall smite thee with swellyng* with fevers, heat,
burning, and with the sword. etc.
A regiment against the Pleurisy.
O Death, says the Wiseman, Eccle. xx^ and. viij.
how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to that man, that seeks rest and
comfort in his substance, and worldly riches: Unto the manne that have nothing
to vere him, and that has bodily fortune and prosperitee in all things: yea,
unto him that is yet able to receive his food. O death, how acceptable and
good is thy judgment, unto the poor and needful: and unto him whose strength
^aileth, and that is in his last age, and that in all things is full of ^are
and fearfulnes. And to him that is in despair, and Poverty, kene^se and a^
are the gr^^test enemi^ man^e.
have no hope, nor patience. Be not afraied of death: remember them that have
been before thee, and that come after thee. This is the judgment of the Lord
God over all flesh: and why would thou be against the pleasure of the
highest? Whether it be ten, one hundred, or a thousand ^eres, Death asks not
how long one have lived. And for Adams disobedience, no flesh shall escape
that Sentence, that thou shall return, into the duste or claie ene. iij.
whereof thou warte made. And although the Philosopher naturally do define,
death, to be the separacion of the body from the soul: without metyng again
for ever. And that the cause of death, is coldness and dryness. Frigiditas, and
ficcitas, ^ristot. de ^ngitudine ^bre. vit.
and that life does consiste per calidum and humidum, and what so ever is
corrupted, or killed, is destroyed of his contrary. etc. These are natural
causes to mortal me^, not repugnaunt to reason: but to ascend and climb
above reason, apprehendyng ^^ithe is a^^ue reason.
faith, the perfect way to everlasting life: there we shall plainly se, the
cause of death is sin, and of our help again in Christ. Andthus it is proved
by the Apostle saint Paul. Romans 5. As by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by the means of sin: even so Death also went over all
men. etc. And grace, life, and salvation came by Jesus Christ, which died
for us ^he cause of ^ath, ^s sin
all. Now, we that do believe in Jesus Christ, do well know the cause of
death is nothing but sin: but yet this sin, which is a strong enemy unto
grace, is of soche force, that it moves GOD, greuouslie to plague us, by
sondrie means, and makes Death fearful, painful, and horrible, specially to
them, which live not to die, and care for nothing, saying in their souls, there
is no GOD: and this is the Psalm. xi Job. xiiij.
misery that Job said: Man that is borne of a woman, lives but a short
time, and is full of misery, and that was well said. And of this his
lamentacion, may well be gathered two euilles: The one of the Two gre^
miseri^s.
mind, as ignorance, hardness of heart, evil thoughts, wrath, zeal,
fearfulnes of conscience, Idolatry, whordome. etc. with infidelity the mother
of mischief, which evil or misery, moves God to plague the world, with
outward miseries: as when Moises said unto Israel, if you disobaie your Lord
your GOD, your blessings shall turn into cursings, as in field and town,
the riches into poverty, destruccio^ of cattle, frui^te and corn, children,
shame rebuke, bondage, captivity: botche, plage and Pestilence. etc. Read
the. xrviij. of Deuteronomium, and there you shall see all these miseries that
Job do mean, and the causes of all our plagues: and thereby all men may
perceive, it is on^lie God, that blesses and curses in every age, all people,
that do strive against him. What should I rehearse, how Sodom perished ^ene.
xix.
with fire from heaven: Or how Jerusalem perished in hunger, eating of their
amenta^io^ Jeremy. ^h^pt. iiii. osephus de ello ludae.
own dunge and children also, with swords beasts, and fire. etc. What do
this help to a great number, but rather with Pharao, do indurate their
hearts against grace: God plageth no people, but first do admonish them,
saying: Turn unto ^alach. iij.
me, and I will turn unto you, says the lord. And in the Psalms says the
Prophet: this day if you will hear his voice Psalm. 84. ^ebre. iiii.
harden not your hearts, as in the prou^^acion, and as in the temptacion in the
wilderness. etc. But rather prevent, and let us worship and fall down before the
lord our maker: For he is the Lord our God, and we are the sheep of his
hands. And let us confess our sins before God, with the holy Prophet
Daniel, that we have sinned. Y^ O Lord, unto us, to our Kings ^aniel. ix.
and princes, to our forefathers, and to us all, that have offended thee,
belongs open shame: But unto thee, O Lord our God, pertains mercy and
forgiveness: as for us, we are gone back from him, and have not obeyed the
voice of the Lord our GOD, to walk in his laws, which he laid before us,
by his servants the prophets: yea, all Israel have transgressed, 2. Reg. 24.
and gone back from thy law, so that they have not harkened to thy voice.
Wherefore, the curse and oath, that is written in the law of Moises, the
servant of God, (against whom we have offended) is poured upon us. Let us not
forget, how that God will for the sins of kings, sometime The people ^lagu^d
for the sins o^ Princes.
punish the pleople: as example for David's sin, God did in three days kill
of the people of Israel* l^^. M. men, and yet suffered David to live. Take
example by that plague, how to fear god, oh princes.

A most fearful mortality of the Pestilence, both of man and beast, fell
upon Exodus viii ix. x. and.
Pharaoes land, the first begotten of every living thing, for rebellyng
against God, were suddenly slain of the plague.

The plague of Israel, is to be had in perpetual remembrance, where many
thousands were destroyed of the Pestilence, for the whordome of Israel.

Cicero lib. i^. de oratore, shows that L. Crassus a noble learned man, and a
famous Lawier, in the same day, when he sudden ^^r^e picu^sie.
mos^^ sharply pleated against Philip the Consul, he died of the Pleurisy.

Volateranus the famous historiographer, most ^earfully affirms, to the
terrible example of all men. That there was a Pestilence at Constantinople,
whereof died three. C. thousand, in a small time.

At Florence. Anno dm^. 140. There was thirty thousand men, women, and
children, died of the Pestilence. Anno. 1348. was a wonderful hunger and
Pestilence throughout the world, especially in Italy, scant. x. did l^ue,
whereas. C. died. The same year at Paris in France died of the Pestilence. l.
M. persons. And this year, ^no dm^. ^. D. lxij.
there is hunger, sword, and pestilence also.

About that time, when the Cimbria^s came over the Alpis, there was so^he a
ba^^aill seen in the heaven, that from the ^ornyng, until night it appeared,
says P^inie. And the Moon rained blood, great pestilence did follow, and
mortal battle: that the bones of y^ slain, did make many walls about the
vineyardes, after many years.

Now, let us come home to our own ^ealme, and not forget how God plagued all
this land, with hunger and pestilence ^oste fearfullie, that there was scante
the ^iuyng left, to bury the dedde. The whole ^tate destro^ed, the Commons
wasted: and ^inally (the sinful) king Cadwalider the ^aste of the Britains,
poorly departed ^o Rome, where Antichriste do dwell, and there was buried:
Whose roots and ^raunches of honor, had remained and ^rowen in the Britain
land, by the space ^f. 1822. years ante m^ar. And through Pride and extorcion
of the great men, Anno dn^i. vi. c. lxvii.
^hickednesse of the Judges, Idolatry, and coueitousnesse of the Cl^rgte,
reb^l^on of the poor men: all went to hauo^ke and came suddenly to nothing,
but mis^hief in few days, woe and wretchedness.

In king Uortigers days, soche leche^e, Anno dn^i* cccc. xlv.
dr^nknes, idleness, specially did reign in the great men, that soche evil
did en crease, that God poured for the soche Pe stilence every where, with
hunger, rob byng, insurreccion, and plague: that few were left a live to till
the ground, where upon the king was forced, to fetch in for rain people, by
Hengis and Horsos, the strangers to his destruction and his people

In these days were many sicknesses, Anno dn^i. 476.
incurable to be healed: Gods wrath was so hot, and virtue so cold.

Sone after the conquest, of king William, Anno dn^j. M. lxvii.
duke of Normandy, when the people were subded to him, his enemies vanquished,
and the Knights Fees rated, and himself placed with Croune and sceptour. The
king took the number of the acres of Land, in all this realm, the names and
nombers of all the people: and also had knowledge, what cattall there was in
all the land. After which suddenly ensued soche hunger, and cruel fears^
hot burning Botches, Pleurisis, and Pestilence, that the people died in soch^
number, that till age decayed, and famin^ insued with rotte of cattle. A
fearful ex^ ample to Princes, the noble men and commons of every land, where
soche plagues do come: that neither Physic nor money can help. For Solomon
says, riches shall not help in the day of vengeance, but righteousness
shall deliver from death.

The plagues in the days of Edward Plagues King Edward the* (...) and king
^^ward the ^^wert^ day
the iii and Edward y^. iiij, of most fearful pestilece of many thousands in
this realm in every place: great famine did follow with his. ij. servants,
heaviness of mind and poverty. And in every kings days sins, either the
Pestilence with the botch, the small sparkling Pox, the cruel quar^aine, the
hot inflamed Pleurit^, the stranglyng Squinance, the lepros French Pox, or
the sudden smotheryng sweat, have slain many one. These are gods plagues,
Plagues.
Gods vengaunce, scourge and instruments for his enemies: as the present
grievous plague in France, of persecucion, honger, sword and Pestilece, in
these pitiful days, and sorrowful time. But Exsurgat deus, and confound his
enemy, the cruel duke of Guise, with the bludsheding papists

Also of his mercy and pitee, defend our realm from all enemies, both
against almig^tie God, and the queen's Majesty, God preserve her: and give
grace good God to every man, to live in thy blessed rules, which we have
professed in our baptism, to fight against the vain world, the crafty
devil, and filthy flesh: and to run the race in that pathe, which God have
commanded us to walk in. To hear his voice, to bear his cross, to obaie
his ministers, to love our brethren: to hurt no man by word or deed, to
do as we would be done to. And then we shall not need to fear death: for it
shall be our best ^he life of a ^risten man.
exchange, into an happy land forever, where no trouble is, nor ye turning
whele of Fortune. And this is a good way, this is to seek first the kingdom
of Christ, and all good gifts will follow. This is lath. vi.
our foundation, even Christ, which gives health to body and soul: which
woorketh both by mean and Miracle. By miracle, when with his word he raised
^on. xi.
the dedde. etc. By means, when with claie, spittle. etc. He made the blind
to see, lark. vii.
and the deaf to hear, and by this mean we may use also means in his
name, ^o heal our brethren that are sick: which mean, if it be his blessed
will to prospere it, I will do my good will, to set forth the cause,
signs, and cure of the perilous Pleurise: which have s^ain a great number of
people, November and December 1562. And thus I begin the matter, as follows.

A Pleurise is a certain ap^s^umacio^ bred in the Pellicles of the ribs, and
Lacertes, between the said ribs: and sometime in the place called Midriffe,
The di^inic of a Pieur^^*
or Diaphragma. And it is also to be noted, that the breast is compact with.
xxiiij. ribs, between the same ar certain Lacertes, to bind close, or draw
together: and also to sprede or delate. For the attraccion of the air to the
Canill bones and breasts. etc. To expulse the superfluous matter, contained
within the Pellicles and thin skin, or Membrana, which are within the ribs
In this place is bred a painful, dangerous apostumacion, with peril of life,
either in the lift or right side: creping with his venime unto the Furculer or
Canill bones and breaste. And also descendyng with painful sorenes under the
rim, called the Diaphragma, or Midriffe: and this sickness do daily kill many
men, women, and children, very suddenly, and bring them quickly out of the
wa^e, from this world. The common people, which do not know how to cure it,
and call it a new sickness, which have been ever, lackyng help by Gods
ministers, or mean of the P^isicion, who^ the almighty have ordained for
infirmity: where as one do escape by Gods providence, or strength of nature,
ij. c. give place to life, for want of his singular mean of cure, by Medicene.
The same God be always praised for his mer* cie to us, for his blessing of
knowledge, the mother of medicen, in the time of sickness.

Note also, that there be two kinds of ^wo sondrie ^leurisis.
Pleurisis, the one called verae, or the certain true Pleuriti. The other
mendosa, or else no^ verae, the false, or not the true Pleurisy there is no
distin^c^o^ between the^ in their places or members (as some learned men do
sa^e) but of the matter contained. It is also called the very Pleurisy, when
it comes of blood, or mingled with blood and choler. The false Pleurisi, is
when it comes of phlegm, or of melancholy.

This ^ote apostumacion of the Pleurisy Verae.
is not, except his essence being, and dolor be within the Pellicles: and the
other is without, as among the Lacertes or pellicles, Non vera
covering the ribs, and nere the short ribs, which are under the Midrif.
Further it is to be well noted, that every pleurisy have three sondrie causes.

1. Primative. 2. Antecedent. 3. Coniuncte.
THe cause Primative, comes many Primatiu^
ways, as (God comfort them) a great number of poor people, for want of
clear Ale, Bear, or Wine, are forced to drink cold water, whereas a great
number of monstrous drunkardes, have abou^dance of all drinks, until drink
have consumed them, and never sease, in consumyng drink. Also through eating
of unripe fructes and herbs, or rotten mutten, Drunkar^^
or taking either to much sudden heat or cold, in, and after travail,
labor, or play used immoderatly, out of order, wa^tyng witty foresight or
providence, to foresee this great peril, distemperyng the body, and procuring
the most dangerous pain or sickness. To this Primative cause may be joined
grosnesse of the air, the time of the year, and the natures of the Wind. As
the Prince or spryng of Physic, says. Aphori. 33. lib. 3. Hyenie uero morbi
laterales. etc. In Winter, says he, Pleur^ses, sornesse of the lunges, reumes
and coughes, do rain in Winter. Further says he. Apho. 5. lib. 3. Quando
praeualuerit aquilonia tempestas. etc. When ^rth * ind ^lous.
the North wind blows a long time together, then it breeds Cough,
Collikes, and Pleurises. And also it destroieth many women, causyng them to
bring forth abortiues, and untimely fruictes, before their maturitee or
ripeness, and them selves dye, before age do preuente them, or youthful
years forsake them. Therefore, ^deracion c.
let all pleople take heed of extremitees and use moderate mean, in labor,
erercise, eating and drinkyng. And observe the time of the year, region,
complexion, qualitees and age, therefore both men and women, must give none
occasion through abuse of them selves, to be hurtful to them selves. As to
take great cold after sweating, labor, wrestling, daunsing. etc. Or to drink
cold water, in the time of heat: or lie against the ground, in the gardens
or fields. etc.

Cause Antecedent.
WHen these former euilles Primative, have made nature passive, and subject to
them with infectio^, then it comes to pass, that replecion of humors,
proceeds against nature, with abundance and fullness. Corruptyng the blood,
both vital and nutrimentall, obstructyng or stoppyng their virtue and course,
boilyng and adustyng the natural virtues. Sometime it may begin of the
Primative, as in drinkyng much new Wine: which have tartaru^ in it, or soche
Beware ^ new win^
dregs hurtyng the body. Read Anicen de vino, and what mischief comes of
evil Wine, take experience of them, which are hurt by the same evil new
wine.

Cause Coniuncte.
WHen as the Primative have bego^ ^oniuncte.
the cause, the Antecede^t take his effect, y^ more venomous against nature,
working all things to the worse part: preparyng, even as the Hen sitting upon
her Egg. Now comes to the Coniuncte, and bring forth the Chickin, and finish
thapostumacio^ in the Pellicles or skin in the ribs, Panicles and Lasartes,
and then comes the putrifaccion, after it is placed and gathered together into
a sore.

Note also, that every cough, without ^^ugh is not ^^waies a ^^^ne of the
^^euriti.
the foresaied signs joined to it, is not the very Pleurisy: for then it
would make a great number afraied when the^ cough, (as we do se the poor
people) as the plowman, boys, Neteherdes, and Shepeherdes, and them which go
barefooted, or tenderlynges with lined Shoes, furred gounes, and double caps
God wot, which do take cold also, and escape the same with out peril of
death, or the very Pleurisy, but not without sickness often times.

And these signs shall serve to know the Pleurisy: if you mark them well. As
do follow.

1. Prickyng in the side. 2. Sharp fever. 3. Short breathe. 4. Cough with
hedache. 5. Swifte pulse, without order or time.
The first.
THe first is painful pricking, with Prickyng the side.
a sharp prickyng under the side, by the reason of the hot apostumacion, of
hot Blood or Choler, being placed upon the Lacertes, and the rim or skin by
the ribs: which are very sensible, and some do feel, and are quickly
offended with any thing, that do oppress or touch them, by any soche evil
means. Read Galen. v. de inter. cap. ij.

The second.
A Sharp fever, or heat above nature, A sharp fever.
by the reason of opilacion, or stoppyng of the way of respiracion, or clean
drawpng air or breathe, by thinstrumentes of the lunges to the heart: through
which evil matter chokyng the way, being chouched nere the heart,
putrefaction do follow, with her disparced foul smoke, or feuerus air: also
there is vicinite or nerenesse between the Lacertes, whereas this evil matter is
contained. And the heart being the Prince of life, wherein the blood vitalle is
placed, and now stands the heart in peril, through this fever joined with
the Pleurisy, or prickyng in the side. Note also, that every prickyng y^ ^ery
pric^g in the ^, is not the ^^uriti.
seem to be in the side, is not the Pleurisy: as the sickness of the spleen,
wind. etc. But every Pleurisy have pricking in the side, the causes are
declared before manifestly.

The third.
Shortness of breathe, or much difficulty ^ortnesse ^reather
to draw it, the pain is so much, through the foul matter or filthy
humors, oppressyng, bindyng, and lettyng the instruments of breath or wind:
to use their natural working with all, in conueighyng air up and down, with
out which none can remain a live, but turn sone to corrupcio^, because they
want the Organ, which are the bellows conueighyng hot vapors forth, and
lettyng infreshe air, to comfort the life. For, man do not live by meat and
drink only, but also by air: for lacking air, brings Air.
death, and what should the dedde do with meat or drink. And Hyppocrates do
prove, every living thing, both manne, beast, trees, and herb, are nourished
of three things: as meat, drink, and air, saying. Corpora enim omnia tum
hominum, tum reliquorum quoque animantium Hyppocr. de flatib.
a triplici nutrimento sustentatur horum, autem nutrimentorum nomina hec, cibus
potus, spiritus.

The fowerth.
THen comes the painful cough, through stoppyng, straightness, and pain in
the member, of the spirits of breath and air, called the lunges, nature
feelyng foul corrupted matter: What dang is in cough the lunges*
creepyng sharply into the straighte passage of the breast, and so to the
lunges, and is hard to be expulsed, and so is the cough finished, which is no
small ruin to life, a shorter of time, and coupled with death it self, except
cure prevent it with speed.

The fifte.
ANd pulse of y^ arms or legs, that ^ulse.
do beat, always moving the heart cariyng up and down the blood and spirit of
life: whereas the Phisician prouide^tly (in felyng of the^) do judge the state
of the body: obseruyng what may chance to the pacie^t, either life or death.
And in this sickness of y^ pleurisi, the pulse, as Galen al firmeth de causis
pull. textu. 8. they ar quick and thick, without rule, unequal, and beats up
and down like unto a saw in propertee: swift the one way, and slack or
stopping (...) pulse in (...) P^e^^iti.
the other way. Because the members in whom the apostumacio^ is placed, is si?
new and skinnie, and the pulse is hard, and sine we also, with cottes from the
heart. And the more this dolorus sickness do augme^t, with thincrease of pain,
then y^ more cruel ler the pulse do beat, both swiftlier, quicker, stronger,
and unequal, keeping no time.

The times of the Pleurisy, are four in number.
1. Beginning. 2. Augmentyng. 3. State. 4. Declinyng.
IN the beginning the accidences, with small pain, little ague, and the cough
scant perceived: and no spattle but thin, cold, and watrie. And co^tineweth Who
so in the beginning (...) the Pleuris^ do spet wel^ do shorten the sickness*
but three or four days, according to the quantity of the matter, and the
strength of the natural virtues.

Augmenting, when the spattle do begin to ware gross, and in color read or
green: with increase of pain, beginning with signs aforesaied, and then the
spattle is moiste raw and loathsome.

The state is, when as the spattle, whithe is cast forth by the mouth, is
digested easelie spitte forth, altered in color Gal. Aphc xij. lib. i.
to whitishenes, and is so cocted and warmelie baked in the breaste, that it
can not be increased, or grow any higher or greater, but the matter is now spit
forth, and ready to decline and amend the pacient. But if it be long time,
raw and coide, Perilous si gnes to be o^ served in the sickness of the ^^de.
Read Gale. aphc Hypp. i. xi
and the pacient can not well spitte, then it is perilous: and when much
watch, and no sleep will follow, with pain in the head, rednes of the face,
shortness of breath, and the frenzy with idleness of words, laughyng and
weeping coupled together, with sudden mutacions of the mind: these are perilous
signs, fearful and dangerous to the Pleuritike man. And if a volu^tarie flixe
in the ^leuritf.
flux of the belly, do suddenly follow in the pleurisy: or chough of the
lunges, as Hyp pocrates affirms, is perilous. A morbo laterali vel pulmonio
hahito alui profluuium adueniens maluin. Aphoris. 16. lib. 6.

Declinyng, or when nature have cast forth his venim: and when the malice of
corrupted humors, have done their worst, and are overcome by the natural
virtues and medicen. Then, although the body be very weak, yet by little and
little, nature will help her self, and recover health again. Note further, who
so have the pleurisy, and is not purged in fowertene days, the flure will
turn to sanius matter as Hyppocrates do affirm: Si pleuricj in xiiij.
diebus non purgantur. etc.

And furdermore, if this Pleurisy be turned into sanius, or evil corrupted
matter, and digested, cleansed, or purged within fowertie days following, the
breaking forth of the same matter: the pacient shall do well, if not purged,
then shall he fall into a consumpcion: as the divine Hyppocrates says.
Quicunque ex morbo lateralj suppurantur. Si in quadraginta diebus purgantur.
etc. Aphoris. xv. lib. v. Therefore, let al people beware in the declining and
mendyng, for fear in eschuyng Scylla Charybdem do not destroy the^: that is
from one mischief to an other, from sick bed, to rotten grave.

Note also, that with ripyng syruppes or medicen for the Pleurisic: that there
be no more matter made ready, to be spitte forth, then the paciente may
well cast forth at ones, or by little and little: therefore, Prepare no more
matter then may be spette casette forth, by little and little.
give the Syruppes, according as the paciente may have strength, to conueigh
the same. For, like as many for lack of ripyng medicens do die: even so
others are strangled and choked, when it stop the throat with coming
aboundauntly, and want strength and time, to utter the same by order.

The Pleurisy either true or false, are in four sondrie bodies: and are seen
by the spattle and urine. etc. Procedyng of the Pleurisy fo* were ways.
great burden or abundance of humors in the liver, Spleen. etc. Or reume
drop* pyng down, into the extreme muscles o^ the breast. etc.

To the

j. Bloody or sanguine swet^ cruente spattle, with vrin^ read. ij. Cholorike
people, spattl^ yellowe, urine yellow with great pain and hedache. iij.
Flegmaticke frothlie and gross white spattle, with urine whitishe and gross,
with lesser pain. iiij. Mela^cholike blackish spittle with urine of y^ same
color.
NOw sir, if this Pleurisy do come Galenus de quatuor ^umoribus
of the abundance of blood, which do excede with boilyng heat, so that the
pacient do spitte blood. The^ says Galen, let the pacie^t be letten blood (in
the same side) that the pain may deminish Blod lettyng ^uste be on he pained
de: but may of the old ^riters hold he contrary.
for the Arabians, as Auicen, Rases, Hayle Serapias, and also many of the
Latins did begin the cure, to help the Pleurisy with blood lettyng. Where as
blood do abou^d open the vain: Vbi Sanguis vehementer abundat, ibi secare
venam licit. But when the plethoricke or body is full of evil humors, Celsus.
be taken with the Pleurisy, then Galen. li.
it is neither good, to begin with hot fomentes of herbs, attractions or
Oiles to Note.
the sick or painful place. For like as the hot things do stere and move
the place even so they draw more to hurt the body then cleanse by euauporacion
by the poores therefore, soche fomentes as are applied to the place, are not to
be used, if they do not ease and help the pain quickly: and so Hyppocrates
lib. ii. Vict. acut.. Therefore nothing ought to be first taken in hand, to
be drawn forth, excepted the matter be before riped, and made apt to run,
and smoke forth without stop, therefore the matter called flegmon, or an
exceeding hot inflamacion, burning above nature, infectyng the rest of the
blood: and with the fire and heat thereof, infecteth the whole blood. Nothing
is better to quench, and also diminishe the same sooner, then to open the vain,
that have societee and fellowship therewith: not onelic the Pleurisy is helped
by openyng the Iecor or liver vain But also all burning agues, so it be opened
^alenus in ^den. febri^s. i. apho. ^men. 24.
sone after the beginning, according to the age, strength of the body, and
color of the blood. And in this grievous sickness, I have good experience by
my self and others, the pacient shall be vehemente dry above measure, coueityng
drink: in this case, there is nothing better to drink, Note.
then Ptisan, that is to say, clean pilled, hulled or cried Barley without
rind, sodden, as I will note hereafter, and to drink it continually two days:
and at night to drink Almonde milk made of Ptisan, called Barley water. Or
the thin brothe of a chicken, if the pacient be weak. And to wards the
declinyng of the sickness, to eat small fish, that feed in fresh rivers
upon the stones is good, as Minewes, Gudgions, good diate
and also Smeltes are good meat in clean sweet brothe. And lie upon the side
that is grieved, or toward the same, and beware of these four things
followyng, which are great enemies to life. Read Galen lib. ii. de tuenda
Sani. i. Capi. And also four other things to them.

From

j. Fear, which choleth the heart with blood. ij. Ire, which wtdraweth the
blood contrary from the heart. iij. Dred, which brigeth sudden weakness to all
the body. iiij. Care, for things done and paste. v. Sharp things, as
Uineger, or things bindyng. vi. Wine, which inflameth the blood. vij. Spise,
as Peper, Grains, Ginger are burning. viij. Salt, for nipping and fret tyng.
THese passions of the mind, are wourse then the Pleurisy it self: and the
body being sick, and having Perilous danger.
these affections or mocions is like fire, and gunpouder together, which will
make short work, sooner for the grave, then for the Physician. Of this you
may read in my Bulwark, and the frui^tes of them. Now further to the
purpose, and cure of the body, not plethorice, or not full of evil humors.
Thus you must begin as follows to help, if God say Amen.

After that the vain is opened, let it bleed until it do alter and
change, into a better color, read and clear, obseruyng the strength, time
and age. fear not to let boys and children blood in this case of six, seven,
or eight years of age, some ounces two, according to their stength, keeping all
soche as be letten blood from sleep after, during four or five hours after
the said blood lettyng. And one great learned famous Doctor of this time,
called Amatus Lucitanus of lanua, of good judgment, and great experience, do
vouche my sayings to be true, for lettyng children blood. He has written
goodly books of Physic, commendyng blood lettyng very much: of which
blood lettyng, I will speak more at large here following. Next blood letting, as
Leonardus Futchius says ^tchi de ^dendis ^rbis. li. 2.
follow with a gentle Clister, if nature of her self do not purge, going to the
stole, casting for the excrementes, and then take heed.

A Clister.
Take the leaves of Mercury, purple Uiolettes, Spinache, Cichorie of the
garden, of each of thenn one handful, clean Barley one vnse: sees altogether
in a just quantite of clean water, unto the third part do remain in
seethyng, of the which portion, take a pound waighte, puttyng thereunto new
drawn Cassia Fistula, from the cane one vnse and a half, and the Oiles of
Chamo^ill, and Uiolettes of each one ounce and a half, new freashe butter
half one ounce, white Salt one dragme, that is the eight part of an ounce,
mingle altogether, and make your Clister, conueighing it neither to warm, nor
to cold

An other Clister.
Take Mallows, Blittes, Barley hulled, Leonel. F*uent. de ^
of each one handful, sodden in water till the part be wasted of this water,
being strained from the herbs and Barlie, take xv. ounces, in which dissolve
Cassia Fistula and read sugar Candy, of each one ounce, oi^^ of violettes.
iij. ounces, salt dragmes. ij (...) ^olke of one Egg, and make as before.

When the body is gently eased by this Clister: then nothing is better, then to
apply a fomente in manner followyng, to the pained place.

A Fomentum.
TAke Chamamill, Melilote, Dill, ^oment or ^ashyng.
the seeds of Flax or Lint, Fenicreke called Farnigrece, Bran, of each half
one ha^dfull: sees these in running water, asmoche as shall suffice, a pottle
if you will or more, and with a spo^ge hot in this water, often times apply it
to the pained place, both to humecte, moiste, and make soft, and to open the
place of the poures also. You may take Wormwood, Chamamil Dil, Primrose
leaves, Rose leaves, Flax bladder th herbs.
seed and Melilote, of each like quantitee, with Oil of Roses, runnyng water,
put them in a strong Ox bladder, make fast the mouth with a threde, and then
seethe this bladder in a Kettle of water, until it be hot: then take it
forth, and put it in a thin linen clothe, and warm lay it just to the place,
which is pained of the Pleurisi verae. But if it be not the very Pleurisi,
but windy, then make a dry bag as do follow, and warm apply it to the
place.

The bag or twilt for the Pleurisy.
TAke the sede called Milliu^, tares, and Brom, of each one hand full, Sal^e
one handefull: you may put in Wormewoode to this if you will. Mingle them
together, and twilt them in a linen cloth, then fry them to warmness and
drines in apan, with a little strong Uineger, and warm apply it to his side.
Of this read Leonellus Faue^tinus, and Leonardus Futchius, in their wholesome
learned regime^tes of health, or medicens. And old Hyppocrates. ii. rege.
acuto. cap. iii. many do use to draw forth Sanius matter by boxyng, but yet
let it ripe first. Note also, that Heben mesueus says to box, do nothing
else, but to draw evil matter from the bottom of the stomach, A good saiing
of Met for boxyng
unto the skin, and that is perilous so to do, as many rash Surgions, through
the counsel of the like Phisicions, do use the same. And except yt body be
made clean first by purging, or blood letting, boxing do bring evil matter to
the pained place, and there do increase and multiply the pain, causing the
dolor to be the greater, to the peril of life.

Furdermore, in this dangerous sickness to mankind, whereof a great number
have perished, many years past, and daily do and hereafter shall: because they
neither do well consider the causes, signs cure, diat, and Symptomata or
mischief that may follow as the Perepneumonia that is thinflamacio^ at the
^umacio^ in lu^ges is.
of the lunges, with a sharp fever, and shortness of breath, through yt hot
burning apostumacio^, bred in the lunges, of blood and choler, dryness of
tongue, lack of sleep, with swelled iyen, lothsomnesse of meat, and consumpcion
at hand. In this forsaid Pleurisi I do say, which is between ij. extreme fires
or perilous rampyng Lions: many pretty Phisicions do step to the door, and
beat the dog with the next staff that cum to hand hand ouerhed, happy man
by his dole, god ^e salve for ry sore.
send their pacientes good luck. For, look what medicen they have most gain
by, or that ca^ purge most quickly, no further they will go, they will not set a
new vessel abroch as long as they have old in store: let yt sickness be what it
will be, for money sake, they care not, which end do go forward they
^^acridion (...) kill ma^^one.
will utter their Diacridion, Scamony. etc. They will be their own Apothicares,
and sum of these are suffered to poule and practice, Chance medlie.
to the hurt of many, and help of none, but by chance medly, or good hap or
they wist. O there would do good, gratis to the common people, which people ar
in extreme poverty, Charitee ^ help at ned King He^r providence, Physician
punish offe^ dours, an^ maintain charitable.
both according to charitee and art, and finally, permissio^ of the late
souerain and mighty prince, king Henry theight. Anno. 34. and that act sins
was not frustrate, but stand in good effect at this day, not one ly to punish
the^, which lives by secret spoil, and under the name of Phisicians, do
hurt and hinder the ignorant poor people. But also quietly to suffer them,
which of charitee do help sores, agues, stone. etc. Yet Stumble^ at strawe^
these stumblers at strawes, and leapers over blocks, do not a little vex
them selves, swelling and panting for pain, criyng as the Pharisees did, nos
lege^ habemus et secundu^ legem debet soluere, quia medicum se fecit. And who
so do minister Physic without our license, shall pay for every month. v. li.
And thus they would bring a liberal art into bondage to the^, which are not of
their Fraternitee, nor yet offend the law: this is for the exceadyng
affeccion, that they have to gold, whom they do love with that thing best
belo^^ among ^^citons ^hisicians.
all their hearts, and silver as their selves, more then to have desente,
comely, and charitable orders. It is they that do abuse their poor
neighbors, not helping them that are in sickness, sornesse, and extreme
heuines: wrapped with many calamities ^he misery poor poo^e, in the ci^, and
other ^ces.
as ardent fevers, Pleurises, replecions of humors, Swellynges, Wennes, small
Pox, flires, which have not to help the^ selves in Physic, for counsel
or medicens, either to Dector, or the Apothicarie. I mean none, that either
are releued in the almoshouses, or Hospitalles. etc. But a great number of
poor Citezems, and strangers dwelling in poor houses, having ^any Doc^rs
chari^s to the ^re people.
nothing to take to, but in a manner for want of health and wealth, the bag
and the staff at hand: having also poor young children sick by them, with
small comfort, either with meat or medicene. I do see no Doctors Meules at
their doors. In this respect, and to none other end, I have used Physic to
them that are in this case, because I can not spinne, or go to plough: as for
the rich, I do commend them to the Doctors, and the great learned men, as
best worthy they are: both to receive rewards and honor, yea, of kings, as
it is written. Honora medicum What is d^^ for the Phi^ sicion.
propter infirmitatem, etenim illum creauit altissimus, a deo enim omnis
medela, and a Rege accipiet dominationem. And as for the poor, if they call
upon God and be pacient in the time of trouble, he Psalm. l.
will deliver them, and help them, and heal their sores, and be their
defense. To conclude with enemies, like as of late I have builded a book,
called a Bulwark, eue^ so now I do perceive, there is an assalte and battrie
prepared, to overthrow it by slander, with evil words, to the^, which give
them credit: yea, of them, which are compted more learned then wise (Ah?
Periant The great^ ^larkes ar^ not commonly the wise^ men.
verbis qui credula pectora falluut.) But because I am warn^d, I will be armed,
in the defense of the same: seeing it was mine own trauaill, and none others, I
will also keep watch and ward all this Winter, and make trenches for the same
with my poor pen. And these medicens for the pleu rise, are the first part of
my water work about my said Bulwark: which I will garnishe about, with a
strong cou^termure and within shall be raised a mighty mou^te ^ulleyns ^ke of
health
called Health. Whereupon tharmes of old Hyppocrates, Galen. etc. shall stand:
their coats and colors. I will advance my pe^ in their defense, against any
that of arroga^t malice shall write any thing, repugnante against my poor
travel, profitable to a public wealth. So long as I with authority shall
proceed. following them that have knowledge, and experience of old, and not of
curious, fine, golden, money lovers, which can pick out of pispottes to much
gain. And when I do err, I will be reformed by the most ancient also, which
have left their jewels behind the^. As Gal. Paul. etc. And of non that with
backbiting, or braulyng, shall dispute, obiecte, reply, or judge against me
of malice, like skoldes. Thus wishing much health, and small occasion of ^iat,
Quiat ^d Meruna^ ^ree good ^octors, and ^t costite.
Physic (but Diat, Quiet, and Merima^:) and where very need is, to use
Physic, and not for every trif^le. And unity among all people, good
medicenes to help the sick, recente, new, clean, ministered, in place,
proporcion, time, quantity, and quality. etc. Prefarryng charity before
lucre, no disdain, good words, love, friendship, and quietness: no braulyng, as
among beggars at a dole, for the spoil of sick, or ded men's goods, but to
be sorry for the sickness of the people, and glad of their health, despising no
man's gift, or knowledge. And thus I do end with the Phisicians that are to
hot, I mean not the gentle and now to the ointment for the Pleuriti.

A goodly ointmente for the Pleurisy.
TAke the oiles of chamamil, sweet Leonellus Fauentinu de meden. morb.
Almondes, white garden Lilies, of each three dragmes, new fresh butter
without Salt, Capons grease, of each two dragmes, the muslage or water in the
seeds of Fenegrece, Flare, and Mallows, have stand by the space of two or
three days, and then sodden, and beaten in a mortar, and with a piece of new
war put all into a little pan, upon a soft fire, and then keep it in a bore,
to the use, and to an oint the pacient, where the pricking grief or pain is.

Montanus Ointment.
TAke the oiles of Chamomell, ^oannis ^ptis. Mo^ni de mor ^uri*
the white Lilie of the garden, and red Roses, of each of these oiles one ounce,
the fat or greece of a Goose of the same year, half one ounce with a little Wax,
mingle them together and melte them, and a nointe the pained place: the greece
of a Goose is put to, for the penitracion or quick enteraunce. For, it will
enter into the skin sooner, then any other fat or grease: and to a nointe all
the whole breast: take oil of bitter Almonds and Goose grease, of each one
ounce and a half. But says Doctor Ihon Baptiste Montan, take heed that no
more be resolved at ones, then may be easily cast forth by spettyng, for fear
of sudden death, by ^hokyng or stranglyng in the throat.

An other worthi^ ointment, called Vnguentum R^sump^iuum for the Pleurisy.
TAke c^arified barowes or young hog good oint^nte.
ges grese three vn^es, the grese of Capons, Geese, and Duckes of each two
ounces, green Isope half one vnse the oiles of Chamomill, Isoppe and Dill, of
each two vnses: freashe new Butter without salt one pound, white virgin
Wax six vnses, the Musleges, of Gum Tragacanth, Quinse seed, Flax seed,
Mellon seed, gum Arabicke, of each half one vnse, anh make this ointment, as
the other aforesaid, and often an ointe the pacient. This is an excellent
ointment, and of a singular virtue, and do much pleasure: and co^pted for a
jewel among Phisicia^s, and the Apothicaries, at this time. When in this
sickness, and also in all other sharp hot fevers, the paciente through
inflamacion, heat, drines, and want What ^^^n ger do c^^ for want o^ sleep.
of sleep, can take no rest, but still tossed up and down, from place to
place, from bed, to bed, to seek ease and can not find it, as though the
place would help (when often times no mo^^ help come thereby) Example.
then in the streams of the Sea, when choler moves vomites, the going from
the Ship, to the Cock boat, and from the Cork again to the Ship, will
help and ease the sick mariner. In who^ bitter choler, with pain in the
stomach, and heat do abound, and still continue, and for want of sleep, and
lack of quiet rest, the pacie^t is in danger of a frenzy, or death, because
the senses be not perfectly bound by sleep, Aristotle says. Somnus est
ligamentum ^ristot. de ^m. et viliae.
omnium sensuum, and further, sleep is rest (says he) given to living
creatures for their health. Somnus est requies data animalibus, propter salutem
eorum. Therefore, they can have no health, that want rest or sleep: but all
things contrary to health, which is sickness will follow. Now, to reconcile
sleep, like as Diacodion, and the Syrruppe of white Poppie, Barley water, and
the Syrup of Uiolettes to be drunk, are very good inwardly. Even so, a
frontary made and applied to the forehed and temples, is very good to be made,
in this manner.

A forehedde clothe, for sleep or rest.
TAke red Roses, Uiolettes, the Rose of the water, Melilote, Lettes, of each
a like quantity, as half one handful or less, the seeds of Lettes, white
Poppie, and white Henbane, ^or to bring epe.
some will put in, some of the cold seeds, Petrus ^ tius For^ lae remec
of each of these that I have named, half. i. dragme, that is the. xvi. part
of one vn^^. You ma^e put in a little Dill seed, to comfort the brain: braie
al these together, then put them into a very soft linen clothe. xi. inches
long, and three inches broad, and twilte it, and apply it to the forehed.
You may take the oiles of water Lilies, Nightshade, Poppie, Rose water,
Uineger, and womannes Milk, dippe Flax therein, and bind it to the temples.

A plaster for the Pleurisey.
TAke the roots of wild or field Mallows, the grese of a hog, a Fox, a
Goose, and a Ducke, of each one vnse: freashe Butter, and Terebenthin, of each
half one vnse, the fat that There is a fat sodde^ from wolle
is gotten from wolle six dragines, the oil of Dille half an vnse, the
marowe of the Deres legs, and Calves legs, of each half one vnse, the
powder of the seeds of Flax, Fenegrece, and Ba^e beries, of each three
dragmes, and eight Figs, beaten all in a mortar. Then put all together in a
pan, puttyng thereunto some Wax, to bind it together, and stir it with a
stick upon the coals, and then take the whole, or part thereof, and spread it
upon Leather, and cover it with silk, and brase it with threde, like a twilte,
and apply the plaster to the pained place close.

An other emplaster.
TAke the flowers of Chamamill, Pagle, called the Cowsloppe, the tops of
Dille, of each half one handful, Flare seed, Fenigrece seed, of each throe
dragmes, Dille seed half a dragme, Barley meal half one handful, sees all
in sufficient quantity of water, ^chi. de ^den. li. 2.
^ntill it come to the thickenes of Honey. Then put into this same, the oiles
of Dill and Chamamil, of each one vnse and half then sees it softly again:
then put in the y^lkes of two Eggs, and a scruple or penie weight of Safron
in powder, temper all together, and make a plaster with Leather, linen, or
silk, as aforesaied, and warm apply it to the sick place, after the
ointement.

Furdermore, now when this sickness which is known by the signs, do increase
until the fowerth day, if the pacient be not letten blood in the beginning,
as commonly many Phisicions, do cause blood to be letten in the Basilica
vain, on the opposite or contrary side (then let the paciente blood in the
Cephalica vain, or Vena interna, on the same side whereas the pain is. Some of
the Arabians would never Prolong no to be lette^ blood.
let blood, until the matter were first ^^gested. But in the mean time,
because the blood, which still do remain within the body, do turn into
the worse part, increasyng the flegmon apostumacion, ouerchargyng nature: not
only through putrifaccion, destroieth the blood nutramentalle in the veins.
But also the pure blood vital in the heart, and arteres: that finally, the
whole hermonie and parts of the body, shall sone be dissolved, and ^^urne to
duste. And why? For, because blood is not let forth in duetyme, so
abou^ding. And further, in the beginning of this great heat, the body is
stronger, and the blood thimier: and then the blood being letten forth, shall
quench the heat and burning, and prevent that evil that might ensue, by the
time of continuance. Percase one be letten blood, on the contrary or oposit
part: as when the dolor is on the left side, to let blood on the right side,
do this help, ye forsooth says a great sort: the stronger is bound by the
Law of Nature, to help the weaker, among men, which are several bodies. Much
more will each member and part within the body, help each other: as the whole
hand or leg, will help One member ^ill help each ^ther.
the wounded hand, or leg, and draw from the weaker part to the stronger, to
help it in danger, with many mo reasons, which I do leave to a lege. Because
I will neither seem to be arrogante, nor repugnaunt against wisemen in this
poinete: but according to my poor talante, will write things to profit
(truly) with plainness the co^mmon wealth withal, and to eschew idleness of
time. And finally, to gratify my friends. For whose sake, I will go further to
seek for poor peoples health, to enlarge this book, if it shall please God.

And now concerning blood lettyng, that worthy present help in a Pleurisy:
whereof hitherto I have spoken. Whereas as many wise^e^, with Dialectical
arguments, Logically can reason, pro and contra in this matter. But to the
very matter in this poinete I will begin with nature: secondly Nature. Reason.
Aucthoriti
reason, thirdly aucthoritee, to prove to be letten blood on the same side,
whereas y^ pain is placed. First nature will not hurt her self, but nourishe,
comfort, make strong and defend her self. As example, no natural man will
poison himself, to pleasure an other man withal: no reason can prove it good,
nor aucthoritee confirm the same desperate part to be honest. Even so within
the body, to draw the venomous corrupted vlcerate poison, placed in the left
side (with festred Melancholy) into the right side being clean, feelyng no
prickyng, it is nothing, but to mingle all the poison together. And whereas the
stro^ ger side was well and clean, to defend death: and help the part being
weak What peril to be lette^ blood on the contrary si^ in the Pie^riti.
(not by attraccio^ or drawing) but by strong force of nature, to expulse the
venim, and put it forth by S^nius matter. Now it is become captiuate, taken,
and destroyed, and no more can help, or e^tinguishe the ^^dente or hot sore,
or Apostuma^ion of the Pleuriti, on the contrary part: then if Poles Church,
when God did send fire from heaven, the Weste end being of a fire, might have
been the cause, to have quenched the South end, which first began, after the
steeple was burned. No good reason would prove this true, but rather to have
begun with the first cause, matter, and place, to have quenched the fire,
where fire was first: and not to have drawn fire, from end to end. For,
fire of his own nature, if he be suffered, will be a cruel conqueror, and
an evil master, but it is a very good servant, if it be kept in obedience.
Even so take example of hot Biles, and burning Phlegmons, placed in the left
side: or so of the contrary side, but begin at the next vain, as the
Interne or Liver vain, on the same side infected or sore, and there the foul
blood with evil matter, will eftesones come forth, and health will follow,
by Gods grace. But on the whole side, good blood will go away, which is the
chief friend to nature: and then nothing is left in the common wealth of the
body, but a most cruel enemy to life, even Sa^uus, Makem o^ good (...)
stinkyng, and venime poison. This is an evil change, to expulse a very
friend, and retain a dedlie enemy: and this shall suffice ath it is present,
which is not repugnaunte to nature or reason. And for aucthoritee in Physic,
who ever excelled the spryng, and most famous fountain of Physic,
Hyppocrates that worthy 4. victu^ cut. 67.
man: whom in this po^^cte we must follow. As who so have the Pleuriti, he
do command to open the vain, called the inward or liver vain, on the same
side: and this manne was the most grave aucthour. And nert and best after him
came Galen, which says, when flegmon is drawn toward the liver. etc. Then
open the liuor vain, for all the veins have societae, and being with the
same. He speaks of the inward vain, because it is nere There. methorcap. ^.
to the place affected or sore: and this shall suffice, for the place of the
body, whereas blood shall be let. And now do follow four intencions, good to
be observed in this case.

1. Replecion of the body. 2. The matter corrupted. 3. Where the pain is, as
heart and hedde. 4. Retencion of blood, in any other place.
REpletion without purgacion, do bring matter to corrupcion: The remedy shall
follow repletion, and corrupcion, are causes to pain: and medicene
accordingly shall help the same pain. Retention is, when any have the
Pleurisy, as men, which have the runnyng of the Emorodes by custom, and a^
stopped, and at that time is smitten with a ^a^e ^^icen. Ca^n. 4. ca. i. lias
cano^^ 41. cap. 1.
pleuriti. Or a woman being stopped of her menstruall sickness: then what vain
shall be opened: Only the Saphenae vain: and whereas these. ^^. signs, as
Haemorrhoida lis aut menstrualis in ^^liere non occurrunt. Then in the Pl^^risy
let blood in the Interne or liver vain (as I have said) blood le^^ng how
^^che.
even until the ^oule blood do pass away, and the clean blood appears,
and not to sleep for four or five hours after. And if in blood lettyng
swonyng do come called Lipothimia, which is easier, and is not utterly
deprived of se^ces, as Syncope is, which is the image of death: it is no evil
Swouny^ in blod^et^
matter in this return of good blood, and parting from evil blood. But
although Galen do bid that old men and children, should not be letten blood:
the one for the tenderness and youth to weak the body, which is but yet very
feeble, and blood the chief stay to life. etc. And the other cold old, and
declining toward the end, having nothing to help but blood, which is warm
and moist of tempera^ent* Yet in Leonarch* Fu^^hi. in medicina li. ii. Sec^i.
this cause of the Pleuriti, the aged is preserved, and the children helped,
daiely experience do prove the same. Do not blood by the inst^^^tion of
nature, in soche hot^^ causee break for the at childrens ^ostrels to save the
life? Do not nature here help her self? Why then, should art be slack to
every age, according to the person, disease, complexion, place, time, and
measur? Did not that famous aucthour A^e^zo^ the Arabian, a great learned
Phisici^n, let his own son blood, having the pleu^^^^, being but three years
old: boys or wenches of v. vi. vtj. or. vitj. years old. etc. In this case
may bleed. in. or. iitj. ounces, or in any other hot grievous sickness in the
beginning. As for the time of blood letting, the morning is best. And the good
aspecte between the Moon and Uenus, not combuste, al is good to be letten
blood in: or when the Moon do not govern the meber that is opened. But in
soc^e sharp sicknesses, or ever the Moon come into a good place, the pacie^t
may be placed with Placebo: Quod modo fuit aegrotus. Ia^ iacet ille cini:
Therefore, prefarre the time of ^^ckenes, before the course of Moon, or
stars, yet both would do well together.

Often times this Pleuriti, have joined unto it, or the Symptomata following it:
the cough or apostumacions of the lunges, the remedy of this pleurisy, as I
have written, will help the same cough. But we do se often times, the sickness of
the lu^ges, ^he sickness (...) the lunges (...) helped with (...) medicens (...)
the Pleu^^^^.
having no Pleuritj before it, then it is very perilous also, and consumpcion
do follow it. In this case also, these medice^s contained within this
regiment, are very good: Further, what remedy if the Fever Pestilent, be
concurrant with the Pleuritj, with extreme heat, hedache, vnpacie^t, with
Pestilent humors stopped, having no exaltacion or smoke, to cleanse them out
Signs o^ Pestilence
withal, corruptyng the blood, and foul gross vrin. etc. What remedy then?
The^ are both to be helped. By what mean? Only to take away the cause, and
then the effect will sease. By what reason? Only by blood lettyng: but if the
pacient be stopped First purg^^ by stool, t^^^ let blood.
in the belie, must ye begin with blood lettyng then? In no case. But first
rela^e or ease the belie, with a lenitiue or easy cle^syng with Cassia
Fistula, new drawn from the Cane or Read, mingled with sugar, eat the same,
and follow with blood lettyng. But what if that blood be not letten, in the
beginning of the pestilent fever. What then? Shall the vain be opened or no? No
says C. Galen. XI. Metho. non em curamus putridinem nisi sanguinem seruemus.
We do not hepl the corrupted matter, except we may keep good blood in store
that is, when the matter is turned to stink and putrifaccion, having but
little good blood left. But in the beginning, as I (...) is good to ^etten
blod (...) ^he Basili^^ ^^ain, in the ^^^innyng of (...) pestilence.
have said, blood lettyng is good, for then by the extreme heat is quenched,
and the putrified matter, or stinkyng sore, shall not tha^ increase. The matter
being thus partly digested, as appears by ye urine which is declined from the
flaming, gross, red color and stink, and is become thinner, to better
substance, contents and residence orderly in the bottom. etc. And the pacie^t
toward amendment is good. But if the pacient, according to the cause
Antecede^t (...) considera^^^ after blood ^^^tyng, to a ^^die, which (...) not
clean ^^rged.
have yet evil matter, which is neither purged by Clister, spittyng,
ointmente, or blood lettyng, if then necessitee do urge the matter, then the
day after blood lettyng: let the paciente drink this medicen followyng, if
they be rich, for the said drink is costly, and poor people have little
money God help.

The drink to eradicate the cause Antecedent.
TAke Uiolettes, Maidenhere, Buglosse, of each half one handful, Resings of
the son wtthout stones, white Sanders, yelow Liqueris rased, or cut in
chippes, of each half one ounce, Sebeste^. vitj. Iuiubes. x. clean Barley
without husk, clean hulled and beaten from the rind, half one pound or
less. Sees the^ in clean water, a good quantitee, until the third part do
remain or less. From three quartes, until one quarte do remain, then let it
stand until it be cold, A goodly ^^^ging drin^
and strain it, in which dissolve. x. dragmes of new drawn Cassia Fistula,
or taken from the cane: or clean white Manna of Chalabria, the same qua^titee,
of the best Rhabarbe of Alexander one dragme and half, Spiknard, Grains. v.
Diaphenico^ dragme half, pare or stise in the Rhabarbe and put all together in
a close stone vessel during seven hours. You may put in the water of the
decoccion of Uiolettes, or stilled Uiolettes unto it, a little quantitee. Then
strain it strongly for the through a strainer, and put unto this purging drink
half one ounce of the Syrup of Uiolettes, and drink a good draught of it in the
morning. But for the weaker stomachs.

Take Cassia Fistula one ounce, Diaphenicon two dragmes, Liqueris or Buglosse
water five ounces, mingle all together, and let the pacient drink. Some do put
into the brothe of a Chickin, half one ^nce of fresh and the newest Seen of
Alexander, and Resinges of the Sun, taking forth the stones, and no Salt.
And this brothe is good, and not costly: but the foresaied pocions be of
goodlier effects.

A clensing or mundificacion.
AFter euacuacion, this mundificacion is good, to be drunk every day: clean
Barley without husk or rind, half a pound clean scraped, and fine chipped or
cut yelowe Liqueris two ounces: if you can get Sebesten one ounce, put
ingraene Uiol^t^es, or else kept dry, half one handful white Penidis, Sugar Candy white, and gum Tragacanth, of each one ounce and a half. Clean Conduicte
or runnyng water ten pintes, and the water of Uiolettes two quartes: Sees all
in a stone pot, until the third part do remain, then strain it, and
reserve it to use. Surely a Ptisan made of clean Barley, Well ^r Episan.
water Resynges without stones, L^queris, Mellon seeds, and white Sugar candy
sodden together, is of great comfort, efficasie and strength in this case, or
in any other perils of the lu^ges. As for the Ptisa^ of Barley water, Sugar
candy Amsseedes Resynges. etc. Thanks be to God, most people can make it, and
yet went neue^ to much Physic School for the matter. Barley water excels
in virtue.

A goodly Lohoch to lick upon.
IN the beginning of the Pleurit^e if the matter begin to flow. Thy take the
electuarie Diatragacan. thj frigidi dragmes fine, Penidis, whait^ Sugar candy,
of each three dragmes, the Syrup of Maiden hear, of white P^ppu and Liqueris,
of each half one ounce, min gle all together, and put them in a closi pot,
or a glass, then make clean a Liqueris stick, and put into it the same stic^
and lick of it often times: If the matte^ be flowyng, you may put in Diairis
simplex one ounce.

A Iulep for the same.
TAke the waters of Vngula, call led Horsehoue, or Tussilago, called commonly
Coltgrasse, of Uiolettes, of the seeds of Pompon, Melon, Gurde, and Cucumer,
of each a pound. Or you may make half of each, put thereunto for the greater
qua^titee, vj. ounce of the Iulep of Uiolets, and three ounces to the half
part, the Syrup of Iuiubins four ounces. Sees all together in a close stone
pot, covered with past upon a soft fire, leave a hole in the coueryng, puttyng
in a stick, and stir it half one hour. You may put some Syruppe of
Liqueris if you will: keep this to use to drink. iij. or. iiij. sponfull at
ones, after you have drunk your mundificacion.

A Syrup very good.
TAke Well water four pounds, the flowers of Uiolettes, two ounces and half,
scraped Liqueris, white Poppie, of each half one ounce, the seeds of Quinces,
Mallowe seeds, the seeds of Mellons, Citrons, Gurdes, and Cucumers, the
rindes being taken away: Pur slen, gum Tragacanth, gum Arabicke, of each three
ounces, let them be tempered together, and sodden in a Tinned pot, or a stone
vessel, until half be waisted, then let it run through a strainer, then
put in white Sugar, and sees it lightly again, in the end put it into a pet,
glass, or soche like. And this is an excellent syrup for the Pleurisy, or any
sharp, hot sickness in the lunges, coming of the cause Antecedent.

An other good drink.
SUrely, many great learned wise A plai^ pot
men, have given unto their pacientes, two, three, or four ounces, of clean
Flax, or Linte seed Oil to drink, with a little powder or rasyng of a Bores
tusch: it have virtue to dissolve spedely. Also it is not costly, but yet a
little noisome, Iho^n B. Montanj, a great Ioh. Bap^ Monta. de paupere
pleuritico.
learned Doctor, and Leonellus Fauentinus, with many more, did use this to their
poor pacientes.

Almonde milk.
TAke, sweet Almondes, blanched in clean water, puttyng the blanched seeds of
Mello^s, Cucumers and Citrons, stamp the^ in a stone morte^ Then sees them
in Barley water (that is a tpisan made of Barley, and Liqueris sodden together:)
of this make your Almond Milk, puttyng white Sugar Candy, or Penidis, this is
a good Almonde milk, being sodden upon a soft fire, in a silver stone, or
well tinned vessel, and first well strained into the said vessel, then drink
it.

To cure the Pleuriti Non verae.
THe cough but very little, and the pain not so great, as the very Pleurisy
have: to be letten blood, to have warm Baye Salt applied in a bag unto the
place is good: so is a plaster made of the powder of Mallows, l^^t sede,
Fenigrece sede, herb Grace, and fresh Butter, mingle al together, and with
unwashed Woll, spread upon linen, lay on these things, and cover them with an
other linen clothe, then twilt it fine, and make it warm between two platters,
and apply it to the place, wherein most grief is, you may put to this a
little strong Uineger.

A drink.
THe powder of Crabbes iyen, or the tyen of Creuises, sodden in the d^^oction
of Peache leaves, or Peach leaves stilled, drunk warm is very good in this
peril of the false Pleuriti.

Ointment for the false Pleuri^y.
ANoin^ the place pained, with oil^ of Spicke, and with the powder of Safron,
very warm: these are medicens of great virtue and strength.

An other very good drink.
TAke clean great Resynges well washed, take forth the stones one ounce, fat
Figs. x. Iuinbes, and Iuinbes ^ ^ebesten, at the Apo th^cares.
Sebesten, of each. viij. in number, Maide^ here, Ui^lette flowers, Be^onie,
Hearts tongue, of each half. i. handful, ^lene scraped Liqueris one ounce, the
seeds of Femile and Anisseedes, of each one dragme, the leaves of Seen of
Alerandria, and of Polipodie of the Oak, of each one ounce: some will put as
much more, for strong people Iris, or flower de Luce rotes one ounce Turbith
clean chosen at the Apothicares half. i. ounce, white Ginger. i. dragme beat the
hard things into gross powder, then sees all in a clean stone pot, with
clean water a good quantitee. Sees all until the third part do remain, then
let it stand close, until it be cold, then strain it: put into this the
syruppes of Liqueris and Isope, white Sugar, and honey of Roses, of each i.
ounce. Of this the pacie^t may take from. i. ounce, to. ii^. atones. Leonellus a
great learned Doctor, have cured many one with these ij. medicens following, from
the Pleuriti.

A medicene.
Take the thistle called our Lady thistle, e meden^ morb.
or saint Marie thistle, because it is in great strength at that time: and
the lesser. Salge, of each one handful, boil them in a good quantitee of
water, until half be wasted, tha^ strain the^, put into this water that do
remain, a good quantitee of the Syrup of Scabios, and drink it.

An other.
Take the stilled waters of salge, herb Grace, called Rewe, of each a quarter
and half quarter of one pound, in which dissolve Theriaca magna, and
Mythridatum of each half a dragme, give the pacient of this three ounce at ones
to drink.

A good powder.
TAke dried young Isope, a dragme in fine powder, Yellowe Liqueris scraped, and
^inelie shred, or cut in final pieces or chippes, Aniseedes one ounce Fenill
seed, Quinse seed, of each two dragmes beaten together, the sweet precious
wood called Aloes, white Saunders A good pou der against^ the pains the
stomach or sides.
the root called Chinus, and Sinamon, of each a dragme: the rasyng of Iuorie a
dragme, Horhound, Margerum, Enulacampana, Irius, of each half a dragme, white
sugar Candy two vnses or more, beaten as small as Baie Salt, and tempered al
together, and eat of this before and after meat, a French croune weight.

A gargarisme.
Look often times into your pacientes A gargarisi in the time the sickness the
brea^te sides.
mouth, which you shall se in this hot sickness, foul teeth the mouth,
lips, and pallet furred with filth, the tongue sodde^ into blacknes: then let
the sick body have his mouth cleansed and washed, with Barley water often
times, and with a stick, whereupon is fast knit a little roll of linen, or a
little piece of a Sponge, wherewith rub the teeth, gu^mes, and tongue. And also
cleanse or scrape the tongue with the back side of a clean knife, or an
instrument made of a thin white stick, and let him gargle, Plante^ water.
iiij. ounces, Diamoron, and Honey of Roses, or each. i. ounce, cold often times.

If the laxe do take one in the Pleuriti.
TAke Barley water, or Almond Milk, wheren Gum Traga^anth, gum Arabike, Planten
or the flowers of Pomgranettes, which the Apothicares have in store, called
Balaustia, of each of these to this Ptisan or Almond milk. i. dragme to a pint
Sees them in a close vessel, then strain them: and this is in this case, a
goodly drink and also for all flixes.

A diate toward health.
BEware of coldness, both of the air, as mistes, wind, thin clothyng, unclean
lodgyng, with open windows in the chamber, or liyng on the back, or nere the
ground, but use sweet warm air, with a small fire, not nere at hand, it will
help the matter to ripe: whereas coldness will bind or drive back the matter,
and kill the pacie^t suddenly. Suppe clean brothe of Chickins eat but little,
and often. Couite to sleep in the night, sire or seven hours: for sleep is a
great friend to nature, if sleep cum not in the night, then refuse not sleep
in the day, sittyng in the chair, with the head up right after meat two
hours, walk not much up and down. For rest with warm nesse, is a great
nourisher of the humers, specially blood and choler: be rather laratiue on the
day, tha^ in the night. Beware Care.
of carefulnes for worldly things: look not into the glass of desperacion,
with agony and heuines of mind, hope ever for Prove. xiii and. xviii. Eccle.
vii.
the best. For a good stomach drives away many disease:s but when the
spirit is vexed, who mai^ abide it. A merry heart is the life to the body. But
rancor co^sumeth the bones, heaviness do bring sickness: and they which
have heavy countenaunces, with continual agoni^, are either to rich, to
poor, to sick, to foolish, or to sor^ oppressed. Therefore, commend
gladness, because a man have no better thing ^^rth is the (...) gift of God,
but he^^esse is a (...) plague
under the Son. Then to eat and drink in time, and measure, and be to
merry, for that shall he have of his labor, all the days of his life, which
almighty GOD have given him under the Son. For, there is nothing better then
gladness, honesti^ie of life, love to each other: and do as we would be done
unto. Thus fare you well. If it shall please Jesus Christ, I will ^^lar^^e this
poor book. xxx. times greater: with. xxx. more sickenesses, and their
medicens for the^. Yours Willyam Bulleyn.

(...) Thomae Webster in laudem operis.
Cadide lector habes, (...)
Cum sint, ecce tibi, quicquid amicus habet.
Perlege, and ^^uenes fide^ pia dogmat^ sacrae,
Ingenij mira* dexteritate sui.
Disces quo pacto corpus quoque reddere sanu^
Quoque modo digne: vita degenda foret.
(...) Bulleno tali pro munere grates
Eternum digno: ^iuere, lector age.
Vale.

