AN ANSWER TO TEN frivolous and foolish reasons, set down by the Rhemish
Jesuits and Papists in their Preface before the new Testament by them lately
translated into English, which have moved them to forsake the original
fountain of the Greek, wherein the Spirit of God did indite the Gospel, and
the holy Apostles did write it, to follow the stream of the Latin
translation, translated we know not when nor by whom.

With a discovery of many great Corruptions and faults in the said English
Translation set out at Rhemes. By E. B.

1 Thessalonians. 5. Prove all things, hold that which is good, abstain from all
appearance of evil.

Hieronimus lib. 1. aduersus Pelagianos. Quaeso vt patienter audias, non enim
de aduersario victoriam, sed contra mendacium quaerimus veritatem. that is, I
pray thee patiently to hear: for we seek not victory of an adversary, but
truth against a lie.

LONDINI, Impensis Georg. Bishop. 1588

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir FRANCIS WALSINGAM Knight, Chief Secretary to her
Majesty, and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lankaster, grace, mercy and peace
from God our Father, and from Jesus Christ our Savior.
THe word of God being the immortal seed whereby we be conceived and borne
again to be the children of Gods mercy, 1. Pet. 1.23.
and heirs of his glory: 1. Pet. 2.2.
the pure milk that does nourish us being infants: Matthew. 4.4.
the bread that does feed us being grown greater in Christ Jesus: Psalm.
119.105.
the light and lantern that leads us to walk in Gods ways: Ephesians. 6.17.
Heb. 4.12. Matthew. 4.4. Hierem. 23.29. 2. Cor. 10.5.
the sword of Gods spirit to defend us against the assaults of Satan: And
finally, the hammer which beats down every high thing that is exalted
against the knowledge of God: it is no marvel (Right Honorable) if Satan the
enemy of our salvation have in all times diligently endeavored to suppress
it, and to deprive us as much as he might of the great benefit, and sweet
comfort which we are to receive by it. Hereupon it has come to pass, that in
all ages, as the true and sincere worship of God has been corrupted and
decayed, and idolatry and wicked worshippings have increased: so the Law of
God, which teaches and mainteineth the one, condemns and overthrows the
other, has been suppressed, and the clear light thereof smothered. When the
Israelits in the wilderness fell to Idolatry, and worshipped the golden calfe,
Exodus 32.19.
the tables of Gods commandments (which they were unworthy to inioie) were
broken. When true religion was decayed under Rehoboam and Abija kings of Judah:
2. Cronicl. 15.3.
Israel was without the Priest to teach, and without the Law. 2. King. 22.8.
When under the ungodly government of Manasse and Amon Idolatry reigned and
raged, the book of God was neglected and lost: when Iehoiakim an Idolater
ruled, the word of God uttered by Jeremy, and written by Baruch, was cut in
pieces, Ierem. 36.23.
and thrown into the fire. When cruel Antiochus had taken Jerusalem, 1. Match.
1.59.
and sought to overthrow the true service of God, the books of the Law which
were found were burnt in the fire, and cut in pieces. And whosoever had a book
of the Testament found by him was put to death. When bloody Diocletian went
about to root out Christian religion, he caused the holy Scriptures to be
burnt, as Eusebius in these words declares: Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 8. cap.
2. and 3.
Diuinasque and sacras Scripturas in medio foro igni tradi ipsis oculis
vidimus. i. We have seen with our eyes the divine and holy Scriptures in the
midst of the market place thrown into the fire. And even so in these later
ages, as superstition and Idolatry (wherewith God in his just indignation has
punished the wickedness of the world, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
for not receiving the love of the truth unto salvation) have increased: so the
word of God has been greatly neglected of the Priests, suppressed from the
people, and being translated and published by faithful men for the setting
forth of Gods truth, and salvation of his elect, have been in open market
places (as Eusebius says) burnt in the fire. Ezech. 7.26. Deuteronomy. 33.10.
How the law has perished from the Priests, who should have taught Jacob Gods
judgments, and Israel his Law, experience has showed, and learned men's
writings do witness. That famous man Erasmus (in whose days after the long
winter night of ignorance, began both the clouds of darkness to be dispersed,
Erasmus lib. 9. epist. ad Natalem* Beddam.
and the sun of Gods word clearly to shine forth) writes thus: Nec pauci
sunt Theologi praesertim seniores, qui adeo versati non sunt in priscis
doctoribus, vt nec Petrum Lombardum, nec scripturas canonicas vnquam totas
euoluerint. That is, There be not a few divines, especially of those that be
elder, who have been so little occupied in the old doctors, that they have
never read over Peter Lombard, nor the whole canonical Scriptures. That
learned man Andreas Hyperius witnesses, that he had seen sundry old
ecclesiastical men, Lib. de lectione Scripturae.
who after they had received some taste of Gods truth, confessed and lamented,
that they had never read the holy Scriptures. But if these testimonies will
not serve to satisfy some, for the conuincing of the great and gross
ignorance, which as a veil covered the Priests eyes from beholding the bright
beams of Gods word, Aeneas Syluius Comment. de dict. and fact. Alphons. Reg.
lib. 2.17.
let them mark what Pope Pius secundus writes hereof in these words: Pudeat
Italiae sacerdotes, quos ne semel quidem nouam legem constat legisse. Apud
Thaboritas vix mulierculam inuenias, quae de nouo Testamento and veteri
respondere nesciat. That is, The Priests of Italy may be ashamed, who are
known not once to have read the new Testament: seeing with the Which followed
the doctrine preached by Hus.
Thaborits (in Bohemia) one can hardly find a seely woman which cannot answer
out of the old and new Testament. And if those Italian Priests, which were
under that holy fathers nose, were so blind in Gods book, what may be thought
of them that were further off? unless peradventure, the nearer they were to
him, the more they were infected, poisoned, and blinded by him. And if the
sun went down upon those Prophets, Mich. 3.6.
and darkness was unto them for a divination, that should have been the light
of the world, and the eyes of the body, Matthew. 5.14.6.23.
how great was the darkness in the body it self? Especially seeing these
hypocritical pharisees took away the keie of knowledge, Luke 11.52.
and as they entered not in themselves, so they forbad them that would, in
keeping the light of Gods word under the bushel of a strange tongue, and not
permitting it to be translated into vulgar and known languages, and so to be
set upon a candlestick to shine to the instruction and consolation of them
that be in Gods house. Wherein they have showed themselves to be heretical
Priests, Chrysostom. exposit. 2. in Matthew. hom. 44.
who (as Chrysostom says) shut up the gates of the truth: for they know that
if the truth once appear, they must needs leave their Church, and from the
dignity of their priesthood come down to the state of other people. Even so
our Haereticall popish prelates and priests to maintain their Idolatry, pomp,
pride, and covetousness have shut up the gates of the truth, by suppressing
Gods holy word, and keeping it from the knowledge of Gods people: as Erasmus
truly affirms in these words; Quis non intelligat istos sacras literas ideo
velle paucis esse notas, Erasm. li. epist. 21. ad Nicol. Euerardum.
ne quid decedat ipsorum autoritati quaestuique. That is, Who knows not that
these men (meaning popish Priests and Moonks) would therefore have the holy
Scriptures known but to few, least their authority and gain should decaie.
And even so it is certain, that if the holy scriptures had been publikelie
in the mother tongue, and in the hands and hearts of the people, they could never
heretofore have been with the usurped power of that pelting and powling Priest
of Rome so astonished and amazed, with images deceived, with pardons beguiled,
with fained and forged relics mocked, with masses, trentals and purgatory
spoiled, with the hypocrisy of Moonks and such other locusts bewitched, and
many mo ways miserably abused as they were But they being utterly bereft,
and altogether deprived of this light of Gods word, Esai. 9.2. 1. John 2.22.
did sit in darkness and in the shadow of death: Walked in darkness and wist
not whither they went, because the darkness had blinded their eyes. And whereas
God of his great mercy, beholding our misery, has delivered us from this
Aegyptiacall darkness, and caused the day star of his holy word to rise unto
us, to lead us (as did that other the wise men) unto Jesus Christ, Matthew. 2.9.
in him only to seek our salvation: Esai. 9.2. Lib. de resurrect. carnis.
so that we which have heretofore walked in darkness, have seen a great
light, to our unspeakable comfort: these Fliers of the light of the Scriptures.
Lucifugae Scripturarum (as Tertullian called some, and I may truly term these
Popish owls) have howled and exclaimed against this light, which by the holy
Scriptures translated into our mother tongue has shined unto us. D. Standish in
a foolish book set forth in Q. Mary's days.
They have written against it, affirming that it ought not to be in the vulgar
language, Idem ibid. probat. 3.
calling it damnable liberty of so having it, Alfons. de castro contr. Haeres.
lib. 1. cap. 13. Deuteronomy. 6.4. and 11.19. and 17.18. Coloss. 3.16. Chrysostom. hom.
3. de Lazar. and in Genesis homil. 21. and 25. August. lib. 3. de doctr. Christ.
ca. 1. Hieron. in ca. 3. ad Coloss. Theodoretus de curaend. graec. affect. lib.
5. In the beginning of their Preface.
and saying that it is an occasion of Heresy, and have with all their might
and maine gone about to extinguish it. These their assertions how false and
absurd they be, contrary to the word of God, and the writings of the ancient
godly fathers, I will not (lest I be too tedious unto your Honor) at this
present further declare.

Notwithstanding all this their barking against having the holy Scriptures in
the mother tongue: yet now our Rhemish and Romish Papists heerin differing from
their fellows, and playing the Apes in imitating us, as they have done also
in setting forth Catechismes which before they could never abide, have at the
last published the new Testament in our English tongue, and have promised the
rest, which (notwithstanding they say was long ago done) has been, and I
doubt, will be long in performing. This they have done, not of a holy zeal,
and godly desire to have the holy Scripture known and read of all people:
but rather to keep them, especially their adherents and favorers from reading
it translated and set forth by us. In this their work so long deferred, and
now published, they have committed two foul faults: The one in falselie and
foolishlie translating it, by following the corrupt stream of the Latin
translation, and forsaking the fountain of the Greek, wherein the holy spirit
of God did indite the new Testament, and the blessed Apostles of Christ our
Savior did write it. The other in corrupting and perverting the sense, and
meaning of the holy Ghost by guilefull gloses, and absurd Annotations. Against
the former of these faults I did, either almost, or altogether five years past,
write the first part of this little discourse upon this occasion: The right
honorable and my very good Lord, the L. Saint John's of Blet so shortly after
the coming forth of the said Testament, did let me have for the space of a
month the use of it. The which I did very egarly read, and diligently confer.
And for that the book was hard to come by, I did write much out of it,
concerning the diversity, superfluity, and want of the said translation in
respect of the Greek: and also their 10. frivolous reasons in their preface,
which moved them to leave the Greek, and translate the Latin, with diverse
other things. Unto the which 10. reasons I did then upon a particular occasion,
and for a private use write this answer, never intending (as both some men do
know, and the long suppressing of it may show) to publish the same in print.
And the rather for that a full answer unto the whole has been long looked
for of many, and wished for of me. The which I would right gladly have seen,
to the perpetual suppressing of this as I first intended. But when no such
answer came forth, neither could I learn when any would: having of late a
little recognized my answer that had lien long neglected by me, and added
thereunto a discovery of sundry corruptions committed in the said
translation, I have been moved by some that have seen it, to let it pass in
print. The which although I was a long time unwilling to do: yet for that it
is thought the said translation and Annotations have seduced some, and
confirmed others in error, and many do not a little glory of them, I have
yielded to the putting forth of this little treatise: that as some have
already in part discovered the absurdity of the Annotations: D. Reynolds* D.
Bilson. M. Prime.
so this I trust may sufficiently show the weakness of those reasons, and
corruption of that translation. This small and simple discourse although I
confess it to be unworthy your worthiness, yet upon your great courtesy, I
have been bold to offer it unto your Honor, to testify thereby my dutiful
mind, and thankful heart unto your H. for your favor showed me, which I have
found and felt. Humbly beseeching your H. to accept this small mite in
goodpart, not weighing the quantity or value of the gift, but the sincere and
hearty affection toward your H. of the giver. God in great mercy bless your
H. increase his graces and good gifts in you, and long preserve you to the
service and safety of her Majesty, and the benefit of this Church and
Commonwealth, Amen. At Woodhull the 9. of April 1588.

Your Honors most humble to command and use, EDWARD BVEKELEY.

AN ANSWER TO THE FRIVOLOVS and reasonlesse reasons of the Rhemish Jesuits, for
following and preferring the old Latin translation of the New Testament before
the Greek, wherein Gods Spirit indicted it, and the holy Apostles did write it.
Which reasons be set down in their Preface before the New Testament, by them
lately translated into English: by E. B.
The first reason of the Jesuits.
NOw to give thee also intelligence in particular, most gentle Reader, of such
things as it behooves thee specially to know concerning our translation: we
translate the old vulgar Latin text, nor the common Greek text, for these
causes. It is so ancient, that it was used in the Church of God above 1300.
years ago, as appears by the fathers of those times.

Answer.
HEre is an uncertain assertion, and a foolish reason. For although I grant
the said translation to be ancient, yet to be so old as they affirm, I suppose
it will be hard for all the Rhemish rout of Jesuits plainly to prove.
Tertullian, who lived somewhat above 200. years after Christ, does not follow
it, neither has any steps of it in the places which he alleges. Cyprian, who
lived about the year of Christ 284. does not at all use it. Hilarious, Hierom,
and Augustine in their allegations of the Scriptures dissent from it. But to
omit to speak any more of the antiquity of it: what a foolish reason is this;
It is 1300. years old, therefore true and vncorrupt. The Greek translations of
the Septuaginta interpretors, of Symmachus, Aquila, and Theodotion were
ancient, yet even in S. Hieroms time wanted not many and great corruptions. The
Latin translations (which in S. Hieroms and Augustines days were many) were
even then very corrupt, as hereafter I will (by Gods grace) out of S. Hierom
declare. Or what a fond reason is this: It is 1300. years old, therefore to be
preferred before the Greek, which being the original is above 1500. years
old. So that if this matter be to be measured by antiquity, the Greek were to
be preferred, and this Latin translation not to be followed.

2. Reason.
IT is that (by common received opinion, and by all probability) which S.
Hierom afterward corrected according to the Greek, by the appointment of
Damasus then pope, as he makes mention in his Preface before the iiij.
Evangelists unto the said Damasus, and in Catalogo in fine.

Answer.
THis is but a popish and foolish opinion, void of all probability and truth:
for proof whereof I will first allege the saying of that learned man Erasmus
Roterodamus, which I doubt not, but with all wise and learned men will
counteruaile our Rhemish Jesuits, and all their adherents. Erasmus epist. N.
amico ex aninco dilecto.
Who in an Epistle writes thus: Ceu confessum assumit, hanc Noui Testamenti
translationem qua vulgo vtimur esse Hieronimi, cum eam constet nec esse
Cypriani, nec Hilarij, nec Ambrosij, nec Augustini, nec Hieronimi cum is
diuersa legate: multo minus eam quam emendasse testatur, cum in hac
deprehendantur, quae ille damnat, non solum quantum ad verba, verum etiam
quantum ad sententiam. That is: He takes it as granted, that this translation
of the new Testament, which we do commonly use is Hieroms, whereas it is
certain, that it is neither Cyprians, nor Hilaries, nor Ambroses, nor
Augustines, nor Hieroms, forasmuch as he dissenteth from it, and much less to
be that which he testifies that he corrected, seeing there be found in this
which he condemns, not only as touching the words, but also the sense and
meaning. Here Erasmus flatly affirms, that this common Latin translation,
was neither made by Hierom, nor is that which he at the request of Damasus
corrected. And to prove both the truth of Erasmus assertion, and the falsehood
of our Jesuits received opinion, I will set down a few places, wherein Hierom
not only dissenteth from it, but also finds fault with it. In his first
book against Iouinian he writes thus: Hierom. lib. 1. aduersus Iouinianum.
Ita tamen si ipsos filios erudiret in fide and dilectione and in
sanctificatione and pudicitia. Non enim (vt male habetur in Latinis codicibus)
Sobrietas est legenda, sed castitas, id est, (...). That is: Yet so if she
instruct her children in faith and love, and in sanctification and chastity:
for it is not to be read Sobrietas, sobriety (as it is evil translated in the
Latin books) but Castitas, chastity: for that is (...). Again in the same
book: Sobrium (sieve vt melius in Graeco dicitur) vigila^tem, id est, (...).
pudicum, hoc enim significat (...). That is: Sober, or as it is better in the
Greek watchful, for that does (...) signify; chaste, for that does (...)
signify. And again in the same book: Non plus sapere quam oportet sapere,
sed sapere ad pudicitiam, non ad sobrietatem, vt male in Latinis legitur, sed
sapere inquit ad pudicitiam. That is: Not to be wise above that ye ought to be
wise, but to be wise unto chastity, not unto sobriety, as it is evil
translated in the Latin books, but, says he, to be wise to chastity. In all
these places Hierom misliketh and condemns that which is in our Latin common
translation. And although I confess that he to help his cause, does without
sufficient cause find fault in these places with the said translation, for that
the words (...) and (...) do more properly and aptly signify Sobriety and
Sober, than chastity and chaste: as also Erasmus in his Scholies in these
words does show: Erasmus in Scholijs in lib. 1. aduersus Ieuinianum.
Torquet nonnihil hunc locum Hieronimus ad commoditatem causae suae: nam hie
certe magis quadrat vertere modestiam vel sobrietatem quam pudicitiam, (...),
id est, ad hoc vt sobrij sint and modesti, non insolentes and elati. That is,
Hierom somewhat wresteth this place to the commodity of his cause: for surely
it is more fit to translate it modesty or sobriety than chastity, that they
should be sober and modest, not insolent and proud: yet it is sufficient for
me, that he misliketh and finds fault with that which is in our common Latin
translation: which is a plain proof that this was not his, for then he would
otherwise have translated it. Hierom also finds fault with the vulgar
translation of that place of S. Paul, Galat. 5.9. in these words: Hierom. in
epist. ad Galat. cap. 5.
Male in nostris codicibus habetur: Modicum fermentum totam massam corrumpit:
and sensumpotius interpres suum, quam verba Apostoli transtulit. That is, It is
evil translated in our Latin books, Modicum fermentum totam massam corrumpit:
and the interpretor has translated rather his own meaning, than the words of
the Apostle. And there he does translate it otherwise: Modicum fermentum totam
conspersionem fermentat. But what need I to busy my self in seeking mo
places where S. Hierom finds fault with that which is in the vulgar Latin
translation, seeing that Andradius the Spanish Jesuit has eased me of that
labor, who has piked out and produced a number of places, in the which Hierom
misliketh that which is in the said translation. Andr. defens. Trident. fidei*
fol. 411.
Andradius liking of them that require more diligence and plainnes in the said
old translator, writes thus: Nam dum vel Graecorum dicendi rationi nimium
adhaerescit, etc. That is, For whilst he either does too much cleave to the
Greek phrase, or is not diligent enough in weighing the Latin and Greek
words, he becomes sometime over obscure, and does not sufficiently express
the force and power of the sentences. The which although I could make manifest
by many examples, yet I will produce some of those which S. Hierom notes, that
by reason of the authority of that most holy father, they may with all men be
subject to less envy. In the Epistle to the Galathians (says he) it is evil
translated in Latin, Euacuati estis a Christo, where it should be said, In
Christi opera cessastis, the which the force of the Greek word (...) does most
express, which signifies to abolish, to make vain and frustrate. In his
commentary also upon the Epistle to the Ephesians, he finds fault with the
old translator for translating the Greek word (...), armaturam, id est, armor,
whereas it signifies all furniture of armor, or whole armor. And expounding
that saying of S. Paul, Tit. 2.
Vt mundaret sibi populum acceptabilem, he does at large accuse the drowsy
negligence of the Latin interpretors, for translating the word, (...)
acceptabilem, which signifies excellent, Alleged before.
special, and chiefly peculiar. And disputing against Iouinian of chastity,
in the first epistle to Timothy (says he) it is not to be read, as it is
evil in the Latin books, Si permanserint in fide cum sobrietate, He means
Erasmus, as is before alleged.
sed cum castitate, id enim est (...). although there be learned men which
prefer herein the vulgar translator before Hierom, who do think (...) to be
as it were (...), that is, the soundnes or preservation of wisdom, as it is
in Plato, whereunto is opposed (...), that is, madness. And in his first book
against the Pelagians, he says: The simplicity of the Latin translator does
count among the properties and duties of a Bishop, that he be docibilis, that
is, docible, whereas Paul calls a Bishop (...), that is, apt and meet to
teach, the which word the same interpretor in the first Epistle to Timothy
does translate not very fitly, Doctorem, that is, a teacher, whereas many do so
unworthily perform the duty of teaching, that they seem to be apt and fit
to execute no duty. But Paul (says he) does not only think, that it is the
part of a Bishop to perform unto the Church that great duty of teaching, but
also that he ought to be furnished with excellent gifts and helps to teach. It
were long to handle all the places, in which not only Hierom, but also other
very godly men require diligence in the vulgar translator. Hitherto Andradius
the Spanish Jesuit. By the which it may plainly appear, both that this vulgar
Latin translation was not Hieroms, for that he does so much mislike it, and
find fault with it: and also what jar in judgment there is in this matter
between our English Rhemish Jesuits, who here judge it to be S. Hieroms, and
this Spanish Jesuit that does deny it. By this I doubt not, but it does most
evidently appear, how false this second assertion of the Jesuits is, and that
this common Latin translation, was neither by S. Hierom translated, nor that
which he corrected. Whereunto I will add further a saying or two of Erasmus,
who writes thus: Erasmus in Scholijs in Hieronimum ad Algasiam.
Multo rectius haec vertit Hieronimus, quam habet vulgata aeditio. That is,
Hierom does much better translate this, than our vulgar edition has it,
meaning that in 2. These. 2. where S. Paul speaks of the man of sin, and son
of perdition, etc. where no doubt if this had been Hieroms translation as the
Jesuits would have it, he would as well have translated it in the text, as he
alleged it in his book. Again, Erasmus writes thus of Hierom: Erasmus in
Scholijs in epist. Hieron. ad Pammachium.
Aperte damnat superiorem translationem qua nos tamen maxima ex part vtimur.
That is, He plainly condemns the former translation, which we yet for the
most part use: meaning this old common translation, the which he says Hierom
does condemn.

But if I should grant our Jesuits that this were either translated or
corrected by Hierom, which they will never be able to prove, and by that which
I have said, is apparently false, what have they then gained? Does it therefore
follow because it was either truly translated, or faithfully corrected by S.
Hierom then, therefore it is true, sincere, and void of corruption now? S.
Hierom himself complains of the great corruption of the Latin translations
in his days, the which yet came not so much by the translators, as by the
negligent writers out of the books, and presumptuous correctors, or rather
corruptors, as most plainly appears by Hierom himself in many places,
whereof I will set down some. Hieronimus praefatione in Iosue.
In his preface before Iosue he writes thus: Maxim cum apud Latinos tot sunt
exemplaria, quot codices: and vnusquisque pro arbitrio suo, vel adderit vel
subtraxerit quod ei visum est. That is, seeing with the Latins there be as many
examples or copies as books, and that every one according to his own will has
added and taken away as pleased him. And again he writes thus: Hieronimus ad
Marcellum some. 3.
Vt aliquid de Dominicis verbis aut corrigendum putauerimus, aut non diuinitus
inspiratum: sed Latinorum codicum vitiositatem, quae ex diuersitate librorum
omnium comprobatur, ad Graecam originem (vnde and ipsi translata esse non
denegant) voluisse reuocare. Quibus si displicet fontis vnda purissimi,
coenosos riuulos bibant. That is, I do not think that the Lords words are to
be corrected, or that they were not inspired of God: but I go about to correct
the falsenes of the Latin books, the which is plainly proved by the diversity
of them, and to bring them to the original of the Greek (from the which they
do not deny that they were translated) who if they mislike the water of the
most pure fountain, they may drink their mirie puddles, meaning of the Latin.
Lastly, S. Hierom in the same place here alleged by the Jesuits has these
words: Hieronimus ad Damasum praefatione in 4. Euang.
Si enim Latinis exemplaribus fides est adhibenda, respondeant quibus? Tot enim
sunt exemplaria pene quot codices. Sin autem veritas est quaerenda de pluribus,
cur non ad Graecam originem reuertentes, ea quae vel a vitiosis interpretibus
male reddita: vel a praesumptoribus imperitis emendata peruersius, vel a
librarijs dormitantibus aut addita sunt aut mutata corrigimus? That is, If we
must believe the Latin examples, let them tell us which? for there be as many
diverse copies as books. But if they think that the truth is to be sought out
of the greater part, why do we not return to the Greek original, and correct
these things which either unskillful translators have ill translated, or of
ignorant presumptuous persons have been foolishly amended, or of negligent
writers have been either added or altered? By these and many such other places
it does appear, how corrupt the Latin books of the new Testament were in
those days, which faults yet were most specially to be attributed to negligent
writers. And if in those learned times of the primitive Church, in which so
many learned and godly fathers lived, such manifold gross and great
corruptions crept into the Latin books of the Bible, what may we think of
these latter times, in which all good learning was lost; and blindness,
ignorance, and barbarousnes have reigned? Is it to be marvelled, though
infinite great corruptions have come into the Latin copies of the Testament?
specially seeing the same were much written and copied out by blind ignorant
Moonks, who all in a manner were so unlearned, that it became a proverb,
Monacho indoctior, that is, More unlearned than a Moonke. By whose means such
good authors as were most occupied and written out, were most corrupt, as
Ludouicus Viues does justly complain in these words: Ludouicus Viues de cause.
corrupt. artium. fol. 13.
Videmus vt quisque veterum scriptorum hijs quingentis annis in studiosorum
manibus versatus est, ita ad nos venisse corruptissimos, vt Plinium, Senecam,
Hieronimum, Augustinum, Aristotelem. Puriores sunt atque integriores qui in
vetustis Bibliothecis situ and puluere latuerunt obsessi. That is, We see how
that as every one of the old writers were these 500. years most occupied in
students hands, so they have come most corrupt unto us, as Pliny, Seneca,
Hierom, Augustine, and Aristotle. And that they have remained more pure and
perfect, which have lien in old libraries in dust and filth. By which reason of
Viues it may be gathered, that the Greek text of the Testament has continued
the more sound and sincere, because by reason of the ignorance of that tongue,
it has been less occupied, and seldomer in the unwashed hands of those
ignorant and filthy Moonks. Hereby also it appears, that if this vulgar
translation had been of S. Hieroms either translation or correction, it does
not follow, that it is now sound and sincere. But forasmuch as there be many
faults and corruptions in it (as by Gods grace hereafter shall be showed) we
ought (according to the judgment of S. Hierom) return to the original of the
Greek, and thereby correct them. The which our Rhemish and Romish Jesuits
refusing to do, in forsaking the water of the most pure fountain of the
original Greek: we are content they drink (to use S. Hieroms words) the mirie
puddles of the Latin. Ad Marcellum.


Finally, whereas our Jesuits would make their simple readers believe, that
Damasus had such supreme power as is now by the Bishop of Rome claimed, by
calling him Pope, and by showing that S. Hierom by his appointment did correct
the Latin copies: I think it not unfit nor impertinent to set down the
opinion of Erasmus in this matter, who as he was excellently learned, so is he
not to be counted as partial. Erasmus in epist. amico ex animo dilecto.
He in the Epistle before alleged, speaking of this matter has these words:
Quanquam hoc negotij non iniungit Damasus tanquam summus orbis Pontifex, quod
an fuerit in medio relinquo: certe nomen hoc nondum illis temporibus erat
auditum, quantum ex veterum omnium scriptis licet colligere, sed iniungit
tanquam Romanus Pontifex Hieronimo hactenus Romano, quod illic and baptizatus
sit, and presbyteri consecutus honorem. That is, Although Damasus do not
inioine this business, as the chief Bishop of the world, the which whether he
were or not, I will not define: surely this name in those days was not as yet
heard of, as far as we may gather by the writings of all the ancient fathers:
but he does inioine it as Bishop of Rome to Hierom hitherto a Roman, because
both there he was baptized, and obtained the degree and dignity of priesthood.
And as for the name Pope, in those days it was a title not peculiar to the
Bishop of Rome (as now they have made it) but common to every Bishop. Saint
Hierom calls both S. Augustine Bishop of Hippo in Afrike, and Epiphanius
Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus Pope. The elders and deacons of Rome called
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage Pope. Thus I trust I have sufficiently discovered
the insufficiency of this second reason, and plainly proved that there is no
probability in this opinion, and that this vulgar Latin translation, which our
Rhemists have followed, is not that which S. Hierom either translated or
corrected. Now let us examine the third reason.

3. Reason.
COnsequently it is that same which S. Augustine so commends and allows in
an Epistle to S. Hierom. Epist. 10.


Answer.
THere is no consequence in this consequence. For the antecedent not being true
(as I have before sufficiently proved) the consequence non consequitur.
Indeed Augustine does commend Hieroms translation of the Gospel out of the
Greek: but that this which you follow is not that, I have before plainly
proved. And if it were, yet it might since be corrupted, as I have before
showed. And that it has been fowly corrupted, shall hereafter (Christ
willing) evidently appear. But whereas Augustine commends Hieroms
translation out of the Greek: this does make against you, who refuse the
Greek, and translate out of the Latin: which neither Hierom would do, nor
Augustine commend.

4. Reason.
IT is that which for the most part ever since has been used in the churches
service, expounded in sermons, alleged and interpreted in the commentaries and
writings of the ancient fathers of the Latin Church.

Answer.
THere is small reason in this reason, why this Latin translation should be
preferred and followed before the Greek. First, for that the Greek fathers
have followed the Greek original, and not this Latin, from the which
generally they do dissent, as shall hereafter be showed. Secondly, the most
ancient Latin fathers do not follow it, as Tertullian, Cyprian, Hilarie, and
Hierom commonly in citations and allegations of places dissenteth from, yea and
finds fault with it (as has been showed:) Ambrose and Augustine although
they seem more to incline unto it, yet very often they leave it, and differ from
it. Therefore the Greek fathers generally dissenting from it, and the most
ancient Latin fathers having no footsteps of it, and the other fathers often
going from it: there is (as I said) small reason why it should now be counted
autentical, and be preferred and followed before the original of the Greek. As
for the Church service, it was in the primitive Church in that language, which
of the people was understood. And where it was in Latin, it was there where the
people by reason of the Roman empire understood latin, as appears by S.
Augustines sermons, and other authors. As touching your popish service full of
idolatry and superstition, and used in a strange tongue unknown to the people,
1. Cor. 14.
contrary to the express word of God, as we care not what translation it has
followed, so we think the most corrupt most meet for it.

5. Reason.
THe holy Council of Trent, for these and many other important considerations,
has declared and defined this only of all other Latin translations to be
autenticall, and so only to be used and taken in public lessons,
disputations, preachings, and expositions, and that no man presume upon any
pretense to reject or refuse the same.

Answer.
THe decree of some more ancient Council in this matter, if any could be had,
as none would be found, might have stood you in far greater stead. For
howsoever this Tridentine conuenticle (as even Henry 2. the French king termed
it) move you, surely it is of small force to persuade us. We little care what
it has heerin determined, being called together and governed by the Pope, whom
we justly accuse to be the Archenimie of God, whereof you all shall never be
able to excuse him, and consisting of about 40. blind Bishops his sworn
servants. This cursed conuenticle or Council we no more esteem, than the
godly fathers esteemed the Councels of Ariminum, Tire, Ephesinum 2. and such
others. And when you and all your adherents shall be able to prove the canons
of that Tridentine Council to be grounded upon the foundations of the Prophets
and Apostles, and agreeable with Gods blessed word, then will we acknowledge
the truth of this constitution: In the mean time we will not marvel if a
corrupt Council maintain a corrupt translation.

6. Reason.
IT is the grauest, sincerest, of greatest majesty, least partiality, as
being without all respect of controversies and contentions, specially of this
our time, as appears by those which Erasmus and others at this day translate,
much more to the advantage of the catholic cause.

Answer.
HEre be bare and naked assertions without any proof: which may as well be
denied of us as affirmed by them. And therefore this I say, that the
translations of Erasmus and Beza be as grave, of as great majesty, as sincere,
and as little partial, as is the common Latin. And in some part to prove this
my affirmation, this I say, that that translation which has many both
barbarous phrases, and gross soloecismes, is not to be counted so grave,
maiesticall, and sincere: but this vulgar translation, which they magnify,
has many such: ergo it is not so grave, etc. Some few for example I will show,
to allege all were infinite. What gravity and sincerity is in these words:
Matthew. 20.2^
Principes gentium dominantur eorum: where the masculine gender is put for the
feminine, eorum for earum, and the genitive case for the dative, contrary to
the rules of Grammar, and so false Latin committed. Or in these words: Matthew.
6.26.
Nonne vos magis plures estis illis. Or these: Hebr* 2.9.
Eum qui modico quam Angeli minoratus est. Or these: Memorari testamenti sui
sancti. Or these: Luc. 1.72.
Vir timoratus secundum legem. Act. 22.12. Matt. 24.6. Luc. 21.38.
Or these: Opiniones praeliorum. Or, Populus manicabat ad eum in templo. Many
such other and worse might be alleged, wherein I suppose no wise and learned
man will think any gravity, majesty, or sincerity to be. As touching
partiality whatsoever you pretend, yet if you in your consciences did not
judge it to be more partial and favorable for your doctrine, you would never
prefer it before the original of the Greek contrary to the judgment of
the ancient fathers, and of the best learned of your own side lately and as
yet living. Lud. Viues. Arius Most.
And that you do know it to be more partial for you than the Grooke, I will
prove by a few examples which may serve for many. John. 14. v. 26. The common
Latin translation has it thus: Suggeret vobis omnia quaecunque dixero vobis,
which you thus finely translate: Shall suggest unto you all things whatsoever I
shall say unto you. Where you know the Greek has (...). all things which I
have said or spoken unto you. Is not this translation of yours more partial to
maintain the traditions of your church, and decrees of Popes and Councels,
than the original of the Greek? In the 10. of Luke, verse. 35. the vulgar
Latin translation has it thus: Et quodcunque supererogaueris, ego cum rediero,
reddam tibi: which you have translated; Whatsoever thou shall supererogate,
etc. does not this make more for your works of supererogation (which I may well
call supererrogant works) than the Greek, which is: Whatsoever thou spendest
more, etc. In the 13. to the Hebrews, verse. 16. the Latin translation is thus:
Talibus enim hostijs promeretur Deus, which fond translation, you more fondly
and foolishly translate thus: For with such hosts God is promerited. Does not
this make more for your doctrine of Merits than the fountain of the Greek?
which is, (...). That is, With such sacrifices God is delighted or well
pleased. And for defense of the same doctrine of Merit, does not the omitting
of those words, Romans 11.6. serve to your purpose? But if it be of works, it is
no more grace: or else were work no work. Does not, I say, the dashing out of
these words in the text well serve your turn? The which notwithstanding be
found in all Greek copies, in the ancient Syrian translation, in Chrysostom,
and other fathers. And to the maintenance of the same doctrine, may not that
which is in your vulgar translation, Philip. 1.28. be more fitly applied than
the Greek? Will you not thereof better gather, that the suffering of
afflictions is a cause of salvation, Causa.
than of the Greek which says, (...).
it is a declaration or token of salvation, whereunto the children of God do
pass through manifold tribulations? Does not the Latin vulgar translation in
the 5. to the Ephesians: Sacramentum hoc magnum est: This is a great sacrament,
stand you in better stead to prove Marriage one of your seven sacraments, than
the Greek? (...). That is, This is a great mystery or secret, which S. Paul
speaks and means of Christ and his Church. Sundry such other examples
might be alleged, but these at this time shall suffice to show, that
whatsoever you say in word, or pretend in show, it is the partiality it
seems to bear to your doctrine, that moves you to follow it, and to prefer
it before the fountain of the Greek: the which how absurd it is shall
hereafter be showed.

7. Reason.
IT is so exact and precise according to the Greek both the phrase and the
word, that delicate heretics therefore reprehend it of rudenes. And that it
follows the Greek more exactly than the Protestants translations, besides
infinite other places we appeal to these, Tit. 3.14. Curent bonis operibus
praeesse, (...). Engl. bib. 1577. to maintain good works, Hebr. 10.20. Viam
nobis initiauit, (...). Engl. bib. he prepared. So in these words:
Iustifications, Traditions, Idola, etc. In all which they come not near the
Greek, but avoid it of purpose.

Answer.
WE do not mislike it for the simplicity of phrase: for such is the Greek
wherein the Apostles wrote, being far from the swelling eloquence of profane
orators. Where under the low simplicity of phrase, we behold the mighty
majesty of Gods spirit: but because in some places it is barbarous, and in
very many places is not (as you say) exact and precise acording to the Greek,
but dissenteth from it, and is even contrary to it. As for example, 1. Pet.
2.23. Tradidit iudicanti se unjust, which you translate: He delivered himself
to him that judged him unjustly; whereas you know it is in the Greek, (...).
That is, He committed himself (or his cause) to him that judges justly. Now
between judging justly, as it is in the Greek, in the ancient Syrian
translation, and in Oecumenius the Greek scholiast, and judging unjustly, as
it is in the Latin and your English, there is no exact nor precise agreement,
but a plain contradiction. So in the 1. Cor. 15.51. in the vulgar Latin
translation it is thus: Omnes quidem resurgemus, sed non omnes immutabimur,
which you translate thus: We shall all indeed rise again, but we shall not all
be changed. Whereas it is in the Greek, as we have translated: We shall not all
sleep, but we shall al be changed. And that other is so far from being exact
and precise according to the Greek, that S. Hierom writes, it was not at all
in the Greek copies: Hieron. Minerio and Alexand. in fine.
In Graecis codicibus non haberi. The which also proves this not to be S.
Hieroms translation, nor that which he corrected. In the 5. of Mark, verse. 35.
and Luke 8. verse. 49. in the Latin translation thus: Veniunt ad Archisynagogam.
That is, They came to the Archsynagog: whereas it is in the Greek, (...). That
is, From the Archsynagog or ruler of the Synagog: meaning from his house. A
like error there is in most of your Latin copies. John 18.28. Adducunt ergo
Iesum ad Caiapham in praetorium. That is, They brought Jesus to Caiphas into
the judgment hal: where it is in the Greek, From Caiaphas. Luke 11.52. The old
Latin translation is thus: Coeperunt Pharisaei and legis periti grauiter
insistere, and os eius opprimere de multis: which last words you translate
thus: To stop his mouth about many things. Whereas the Greek (...), signifies,
To provoke him to speak of many things, as Erasmus out of Theophylactus and
Beza do prove, and I will hereafter more largely show, as also the words
following do plainly declare. Act. 4. verse. 21. The said Latin translation is
thus: Quia omnes clarificabant id quod factum fuerat, in eo quod acciderat: the
which barbarous and false translation, you fondly translate thus: Because all
glorified that which had been done, in that which was chanced. Where the
Greek is: (...). That is, For all glorified God for that which was done. 1.
Cor. 6.20. The common Latin translation is thus: Empti enim estis praetio
magno: glorificate and portate Deum in corpore vestro, which you translate in
this sort: For you are bought with a great price: glorify and bear God in
your body. Where you dissent from the Greek, in adding this word, Bear, and
in omitting all these words: And in your spirit, which are Gods. By these
places which I have set down, to omit infinite others, it sufficiently
appears how true it is, that you say, it is so exact and precise according to
the Greek. The falsenes of which shameless assertion may also sufficiently be
convinced, by at least an hundred places, where that is in the said translation
omitted, which is extant in the Greek. For example sake I will set down one
notorious place, where the perfect prayer which our Lord Jesus has taught us,
is most miserably mangled, and curtalled, and made imperfect. In the 11. of
Luke, all these things be left out of that holy and heavenly prayer. First
this word Our. Secondly, these words: Which art in heaven. Thirdly, these: Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Fourthly, these: But deliver us from
evil. Thus we see how far this old translation in this short prayer is from
exact and precise following the Greek: and thereby plainly perceive what
brazen brows our Rhemish Jesuits have, who affirm it so to be, and to follow
it more exactly than the Protestants translations: wherein as they say most
untruly (as may appear by the places before alleged, and many others which
shall be hereafter produced) so I verily think they write it contrary to the
testimony of their own conscience. Yet to prove this shameless assertion they
allege two examples: the one, Tit. 3.14. Curent bonis operibus praeesse,
(...), which they say, we translate, to maintain good works. And I beseech
you, gentle Jesuits, show us why it may not so be translated? Does not (...),
and namely with a genitive case, as here S. Paul uses it, signify to
maintain? Demost. in Timocra. Badaeus translateth it: Iura vestra tueri and
defensitare. Comment. page 256.
When Demosthenes says: (...), is it not, and ought it not to be translated,
to maintain your right? And even so why may not these words of S. Paul (...)
(...) be in like manner translated, to maintain good works? What absurd sense
or false doctrine is in these words? And whereas the Latin translateth it,
Praeesse bonis operibus, and you translate it to excel in good works, although
I mislike not of it, for that the sense is good: yet you may know, that it is
not the property of the Greek phrase, for then it should be in the dative
case, (...), and not in the genitive, as S. Paul twice here has it, verse. 8.
and 14. But whether it be translated, to excel in good works, as you do, or to
maintain good works, as you say our Bibles have it: or to show forth good
works, as it is in those English Testaments which I have seen, it makes no
great matter, neither any but vain cauillers (such as our Jesuits show
themselves to be) will find so great fault with it. If I were disposed so
narrowly to examine the old translation, I dare undertake to find a 1000 places
in the Bible more improperly translated in Latin, than either of these which
you allege, is in English. But let us come to your second cauillation, where
you find fault for translating the Greek word (...), which in your Latin is
Initiauit, Hebr. 10.20.
by this word Prepared. Our translation of that place is thus: Seeing therefore
brethren, that by the blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter into the holy
place by the new and living way, which he has prepared for us through the
veil, that is, his flesh, etc. What matter is here amiss, that troubles so
much your quiet minds? Forsooth you say the word, Prepared, does not so exactly
agree with the Greek, as does Initiauit. What then? does the old Latin more
exactly follow the Greek generally, if here in this place the Latin word do
more aptly express the Greek, than the English? that does not follow. But if
we examine the etymology, property, and signification of the words, I cannot
see, but our English does as well answer to the Greek as that Latin. For (...)
is to renew, to make new or fresh. And although Initium do signify a
beginning, yet Initio does not properly signify to begin, to make new, or
fresh; for that does Innouo: but to instruct, to dedicate, to enter into. And
therefore I see no cause why the word, Prepared, may not as well answer the
Greek, as the Latin Initiauit. Sure I am it neither goes far from the
signification of the word, nor meaning of the matter. But this being only a
frivolous cavil, I will omit it, being glad, that you can find no greater
disagreeing in our translations from the Greek, than these.

And whereas you would commend the Latin for exactly following and keeping
these words, Iustifications, Traditions, Idola, etc. I answer, that as yet you
neither have, nor ever will be able to prove, that our translations have not
truly expressed the sense of the Greek in all these words: so do some of them
as much retain the last, translating (...), Idols, as does the Latin. For
whereas you mislike that we translate the Greek word (...), Image, and not
Idol, does not your Latin often translate it Simulacrum, which (I pray you)
what does it else signify but an image? As that place whereof Master How lets
friend so much complains. 1. John 5.21. (...). which in the vulgar Latin is
thus: Filioli, custodite vos a simulacris, which how is it to be translated in
English, but thus; Little children, keep your selves from images. For what is
the English of Simulacrum, but an Image? If you say, Idol, I say that that is
rather the Greek of it than the English. And therefore you do nothing but
wrangle and cauil, when you find fault with translating of (...), Image, as I
doubt not, but by others has and will be more largely proved. In like manner,
Act. 7.41. and Apocal. 9.20. the vulgar interpretor translateth the same word
(...), Simulacrum, which does signify nothing else but an Image. And to prove
that (...) in Greek may be translated an Image in English, it may appear by
the etimologie which Tertullian makes of it, in these words: Ad hoc necessaria
est vocabuli interpretatio, Tertullianus lib. de Idolalatria.
(...) Graece formam sonat, ab eo per diminutionem (...) diductam aeque apud
nos formulam fecit. Igitur omnis forma vel formula idolum se dici exposcit.
Inde Idololatria omnis circaidolum famulatus and seruitus. That is, Heereunto
is necessary the interpretation of the word, (...) in Greek signifies a
form or image: and thereof by diminution is (...) derived, which in like manner
signifies a little form or image. Therefore every form requires to be
called Idolum. And thereupon Idolatry is all that service and worship which is
done about every Idol. Does it not heerby plainly appear, that (...)
signifies the form, shape, or image of any thing, and therefore may well so
be translated: Answer to Greg. Martin fol. 7.
as also my learned brother D. Fulke has learnedly showed.

8. Reason.
THe adversaries themselves, namely Beza prefer it before all the rest in
Praefatione noui Testamenti, Ann. 1556. And again he says, that the old
interpretor translated very religiously. Annot in 1. Luc. v. 1.

Answer.
IF Master Beza and others think reverently of the old translator, they do as
becomes good and godly men to do, in accepting thankfully and in good part
the labors of good men in so good a work, as is the translating of the blessed
word of God, for the instruction and comfort of Gods people: and passing by,
and by charity covering some faults that have escaped. But it is the property
of wicked men, and enemies to Gods truth, rather to cavil and carpe, to rail
at and revile good men laboring in this sort in Gods vineyards than either
charitably to cover faults, or lovingly to amend them themselves. So S. Hierom
when he was raised up of God, and provoked by Damasus Bishop of Rome, to
translate the holy Scriptures faithfully out of Hebrew and Greek into Latin,
how was he handled of many? Forsooth railed upon very miserably, as in infinite
places of his Prefaces and Epistles does appear. Hier. ad Domnion. et Rog. in
Esdr. and Neh.
For example I will set down one or two: Legite de hijs exemplaribus, quae
nuper a nobis edita, maledicorum quotidie linguis confodiuntur. That is, Read
those copies which I have lately set forth, and are daily thrust throw with
the toongs of railers and evil speakers. Again: Sicubi ergo aeditio men a
veteribus discreparit, Hieronimus Sophro.
interroga quemlibet Hebraeorum and liquido peruidebis me ab aemulis frustra
lacerari, qui malunt contemnere videri praeclara, quam discere. That is, If my
edition differ from the old, ask any Hebrew and Jew, and thou shall plainly
perceive, that I am without cause torn in pieces of my adversaries, who would
rather seem to despise good things, than to learn any thing. Thus was S.
Hierom for translating the holy Scriptures used. And was not that learned man
Erasmus Roterodamus for his godly pains, in translating the new Testament, in
like manner entreated? Being railed upon by Lea in England, by Natalis Bedda in
France, by Stunica in Spain, and infinite other unlearned Moonks and Friars,
as Erasmus himself does declare in an Epistle to Mosellanus, Epist. lib. 6.
where he shows, that a Carmelite Friar being a Doctor, in a public sermon
charged him there present, with sin against the holy Ghost, for altering
some things in the new Testament, otherwise than was in the old translation.
And another cried out for the same cause, that the coming of Antichrist was at
hand. And when Erasmus urged him to show one place in the Testament that did
offend him: he said plainly, that he had neither read nor seen it. And even so
Master Beza and our godly countrymen, succeeding those godly learned fathers,
in their godly labors, be in like sort handled by our Rhemish Jesuits in this
Testament, and by Gregory Martin in his book entitled A Discovery, wherein he
too much discovers his own folly, and the melancholy of his stomach, in
railing upon them so rudely, or rather despitefully, who have woorthily labored
in bringing to light the light of Gods blessed word. Thus we see how Satan by
his imps and ministers, rages against those that take pains to translate the
holy Scripture: which is the sword that does foil him, the hammer that beats
down his house, the light that drives away his darkness: which also conuerteth
the soul, lighteneth the eyes, reioiceth the heart, Psalm. 19.
and makes us circumspect in all our ways. But if they do not unfeignedly
repent this their rude railing, and reuiling of Gods faithful servants, let
them be assured, that they shall fall into the claws of him that is indeed
(...), a railer, a slanderer, and a false accuser of Gods Saints.

As touching my judgment of the old translation of the new Testament, I say as
S. Hierom sometime said to such superstitious admirers of the old translation
that then was, as our Romish Papists be now. Hieronimus praefa. in lib. Iosue.
Quod si vetus eis tantum interpretatio placet, quae and mihi non displicet,
and nihil extra recipiendum putant, etc. That is, But if the old translation
only please them, which displeases not me, and they think nothing else to be
received, etc. Even so say I to them now, that stand so much upon the old
translation: I do not generally disallow it, nor condemn it, although some
faults have been both by the translator committed, and afterward by negligence
crept into it, which are not maliciously to be railed at, but charitably in the
fear of God to be reformed. But whereas you say Master Beza prefers it
before all the rest in his Preface before the Testament, 1556. you do misreport
him: for he does not in that Preface prefer it before all the rest, whereof he
makes no comparison, but only defends it against Erasmus in some places,
which he thought that he found fault with it, without sufficient cause. You
cannot be ignorant, that Master Beza in that Preface affirms, besides
manifold faults crept in by the writers, Beza his words.
it does often dissent from the Greek, interpret many things obscurely, add
some things, and omit others. And whereas you further allege, that in his
Annotations upon Luke he says, the old translator translated very religiously,
he did (as I have before declared) reverently think of him, who (no doubt) was
a godly man, and took godly pains in setting forth Gods holy word, to the
benefit of his Church. Yet you know, that even in that very place, Master Beza
shows some imperfection in him. For these be his words, out of which you have
culled your testimony: Beza in Annotat. in Luc. v. 1. (...).
Vetus autem interpres quamuis alioqui videatur summa religione sacros libros
interpretatus, tamen quae significatio sit horum vocabulorum non videtur
cognouisse, ne dum vt vim illorum intellexerit. That is, But the old
interpretor although otherwise he may seem very religiously to have translated
these holy books, yet it appears, that he did not know what is the
signification of these words, much less that he understood the force and power
of them. And how justly here he finds fault, any that is endued with any
knowledge in the toongs, and not blinded with malice may plainly perceive.
Therefore, although Master Beza reverently judged of him, yet he did not think
him to be without his faults, which are charitably to be corrected and
reformed, as he does, and not maliciously to be carped and reproved, as is our
Jesuits and Greg. Martins manner. It is not also to be thought, but that most of
those faults and corruptions, which be now in the text, were not committed at
the first by the translator, but have crept in since, either (as S. Hierom
says) by negligent writers, and copiers out of the books: or by presumptuous
and ignorant correctors, etc. which are not to be imputed unto him. Lastly, I
say the question is not so much, which is the best translation, or whether it
be better than the rest: but whether it is to be preferred before the original
Greek: which hereafter is to be discussed.

9. Reason.
IN the rest there is such diversity and dissension, and no end of
reprehending one another, and translating every man according to his fantasy,
that Luther said, Cocle. cap. 11. de cano. Script. autoritate.
if the world should stand long time, we must receive again (which he thought
absurd) the decrees of Councels, for preserving the unity of faith, because of
so diverse interpretations of the Scripture. And Beza (in the place above
mentioned) notes the itching ambition of his fellow translators, that had
much rather disagree and dissent from the best, than seem themselves to have
said or written nothing. And Bezas translation it self being so esteemed in
our country, that the Geneua English Testaments be translated according to the
same, yet sometime goes so wide from the Greek, and from the meaning of the
holy Ghost, that themselves, which protest to translate it, dare not follow
it. For example* Luc. 3. v. 36. they have put these words: The son of Cainan,
which he wittingly and wilfully left out. And Act. 1.14. they say: With the
women, agreeably to the vulgar Latin, where he says: Cum vxoribus, With their
wives.

Answer.
HEre in this 9. reason, you complain of the diversity and dissension of
other translations, by reason whereof, we should for the preserving of unity of
faith, if the world should long continue, receive the decrees of Councels, as
you imagine, and make Luther to affirm. Why? may not unity of faith stand
with diversity of translations? There were in the primitive Church four
several Greek translations of the old Testament. The first of the seventy
interpretors, second of Simmachus, third of Aquila, fourth of Theodotion: and
yet there was unity of faith in the true Church: or whatsoever diversity of
doctrine there was, I think you cannot prove, that it came of the diversity
of translations. There were in the Latin Church very many diverse translations,
as S. Augustine in these words shows: August. lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. cap.
11.
Qui enim Scripturas ex Hebraea lingua in Graecam verterint numerari possunt:
Latini autem interpretes nullo modo. That is, For they that have translated the
Scriptures out of the Hebrew tongue into the Greek may be numbered: but the
Latin translators cannot. Here you see that S. Augustine affirms, the Latin
translators of the Scriptures to have been so many, that they could not be
numbered: yet he was so far from our Rhemists opinion, that they bred diversity
of doctrine, August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 12
that he thought the same profitable, especially for them which wanted the
knowledge of the original toongs: forasmuch as that which is obscure in one,
may be made manifest by another. And if there may be diversity of expositions
of one place of Scripture without breach of unity of doctrine, why may not
some diversity of translations stand with unity of faith and doctrine? Heerof
S. Augustine writes thus: Quos necesse est etiamsi rectae atque vnius fidei
fuerint, August. epist. ad Hieron.
varias parere in multorum locorum obscuritate sententias: quamuis nequdquam
ipsa varietas ab eiusdem fidei vnitate discordet, sicut etiam vnus tractator
secundum eandem fidem aliter atque aliter eundem locum potest exponere, quia
hoc eius obscuritas patitur. That is, Who must needs, although they be of one
true faith, bring forth by reason of the obscurity of many places diverse
opinions and judgments: albeit the same diversity does nothing at all differ
from the unity of one faith: as also one expounder agreeably to one faith, may
diversely expound one place, Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 37.
because that the hardness thereof requires the same. So says Chrysostom:
Talis enim Scripturae mos est, vt in paucis verbis plurima saepe multitudo
sensuum inueniatur. That is, Such is the manner of the Scripture, that in few
words a very great multitude of senses or expositions may be found. And
therefore as there may be diverse expositions of places of the Scriptures, which
may all agree with the analogy and proportion of faith: even so may there be
in translations diversity in words and phrases, without dissension in
doctrine, or breach of faith. I write not this, that I allow the itching
ambition of some (of whom Master Beza does justly complain) who without
sufficient knowledge in the toongs, and sound judgment, take over rashly upon
them to translate that blessed book of the holy Scriptures, which ought not to
be handled with unwashed hands, but with all reverence and fidelity in the
fear of God ought to be dealt in. Neither do I think but that it were very
expedient and profitable for the Church of Christ, that in every tongue there
were one as exact and absolute translation, as might be agreed upon, which
should either only or principally be followed. The which if it cannot be
procured, I say that unity of faith may as well agree with diversity of
translations: as there might and would be diversity of doctrine through the
malice of Satan, and weakness of man's judgment, though there were but one only
translation. And therefore I think you rather suck that out of your own
fingers, than find it in Luthers works, in such sense and sort as you express
it. And thereupon have noted no place in his writings where it is to be found,
but only refer us to a place of Coclaeus, who being a professed and malicious
enemy to Master Luther, of what weight and force his report is to be
accounted, let the indifferent Reader judge. But whereas you charge Master
Bezas translation so much esteemed of us, to go so wide from the Greek, and
meaning of the holy Ghost, that we dare not (as you say) follow it: I answer,
that as we reverence the man for his great gifts of learning, and woorthily
esteem his godly and learned labors, in translating faithfully the Testament
of Jesus Christ: so neither he does require, nor we judge our selves to be
bound in all things absolutely without exception to follow him. He is a man and
may err, and as we thankfully to Gods glory acknowledge that he has even hit
the mark in many: so we doubt not, but he might miss it in some, and
peradventure so has done, not in substance of doctrine, but in some propriety
of words and phrases. Howbeit whereas you so maliciously and falsely accuse him
to have gone so far from the Greek, and meaning of the holy Ghost, let us see
your proofs. You allege here but two places: the one Luc. 3. v. 36. the
leaving out of the name Cainan, which we have put in. This is a great matter
whereat you make such a tragical exclamation in your marginall note upon that
place, which is but the leaving out of one name, whereas both in the old Latin,
and your own new English, there are left out not only words, but also
sentences in at least an hundred places. Thus you can strain a gnat, and
swallow a camel: see a mote in your brothers eye, and not behold a great beam
in your own. Touching the matter it self, which concerns neither faith nor
doctrine: Master* Beza has not without great and good cause omitted the said
name of Cainan: partly because it is not in the Hebrew, Genes. 11. nor in the
book of Chronicles, Genes. 11.12. 1. Chron. 1.18.
where the same Genealogy is set out: and partly for that it is not expressed,
but omitted in one most ancient Greek and Latin copy, that of late years
came to his hands, which he has sent to the University of Cambridge there to
be kept, and is there reserved. Whereupon Master Beza upon good warrant has
omitted that name. And if we had had intelligence of that ancient Greek and
Latin copy, we would not have doubted to have followed him. But whether it be
expressed or omitted, it is a matter of no great moment, and concerns no
point of doctrine. Beda having showed, that in the verity of the Hebrew, the
name of Cainan is in both those places of the old Testament left out, and that
S. Luke alleged it (as he thought) out of the Septuaginta interpretors, Beda
in Luc. 3.
stands in a mammering at the matter, and writes thus: Sed quid horum sit
verius, aut si vtrumque verum esse possit Deus nouerit. That is, But whether of
these readings be the truer, or whether both be true, God knows

The second place wherein you charge Master Beza with disagreeing from the
Greek, and us with dissenting from him, is Act. 1. v. 14. He translating: Cum
vxoribus; With the wives, and we according to the old Latin, With the women.
Wherein you do but cavil, according to your accustomed manner, and find a knot
in a rush. Does not the Greek word (...) signify indifferently both a woman
in respect of her sex, and a wife in respect of her calling? S. Hierom can
teach you this in these words: Hieron. lib. 1. aduersus Iouinianum.
Numquid non habemus potestatem mulieres vel vxores circumducendi (quia (...)
apud Graecos vtrumque significat) sicut caeteri Apostoli and Cephas? etc. That
is, Have we not power to lead about, women or wives (for the Greek word (...)
does signify both) as the other Apostles and Cephas? etc. Here S. Hierom does
not only flatly affirm, that the word (...) (which S. Luke in this place,
which you allege, Act. 1.14. does use) signifies both a woman and wife: but
also shows, that that place of S. Paul 1. Cor. 9.5. may be translated either
women or wives. And in his book against Heluidius, he does translate it wives.
August. de opere Monacho. cap. 4.
The which also S. Augustine does affirm, that some translated in that place
Wives. Therefore I beseech you, why may not this place in the Acts in like
manner be translated either women or wives, without going so wide from the
Greek, and meaning of the holy Ghost, as you complain on? Does your old
translator, translating Act. 21.5. the very same two Greek words (...) (which
be here in this place used) Cum vxoribus, and you, with their wives, go so wide
from the Greek? Or does Master Beza go wide from the Greek translating the
same Greek words, with the very same Latin words, as the old interpretor does,
and he near unto the same? But you will say, Act. 1.14.
the sense of this place requires to be translated Women, and not wives: and
the sense of the other, Act. 21.5. Wives, and not women. Then it follows by
your own confession, that Master Beza has not gone wide from the
signification of the word, howsoever he have gone from the sense of the place,
and meaning of the matter. But if you examine that with an indifferent eye,
there may as good reason be yielded for the translating of it Wives, as Women:
as appears by the reasons which Erasmus and Beza do bring. Erasmus in his
Annotations says, it may be either way translated, his words be these: Accipi
potest and cum vxoribus, propterea quod separauit Mariam a mulieribus. That is,
It may be taken, Erasmus in Annotat.
and with their wives, because he did separate Marie from the women. And even
so Master Beza says in his Annotations, that it may be translated either Wives
or Women: but he preferred the former: because the Apostles wives were to be
confirmed, who partly should be companions of their travels, and partly should
patiently abide their absence at home. But whether it be translated Women or
Wives, it makes no matter, the Greek word will indifferently bear both. God
be thanked that our Rhemish and Romish Jesuits can allege no greater
disagreement in Bezas and our translations from the Greek: The which may be a
good and sufficient testimony, even to the simple and unlearned, of the
soundnes and sincerity of them. But I am ashamed to persist any longer in
confuting these frivolous follies and cauillations.

10. Reason.
IT is not only better than al other translations, but than the Greek text it
self, in those places where they do disagree.

Answer.
THe tenth and last reason that has moved our Rhemish Runnagates to translate
rather out of the old Latin than the Greek, is a very strange paradoxe, that
the vulgar Latin translation, is not only better than al other translations,
but than the Greek it self when they differ. This I count and call a strange
paradoxe, because it is contrary not only to the general judgment of the
ancient fathers and learned writers (as hereafter shall appear:) but also to
the common course of all learning. For whereas in all other authors and
writings, the original languages, wherein the authors did first write
themselves, are preferred before all translations, as in Plato, Aristotle,
Xenophon, Demosthenes, Homer, Galen, Euclyde, etc. and al translations are
examined and reformed by the said originals: now by our Jesuits new Divinity,
only the Testament of Jesus Christ, written in Greek by his blessed Apostles,
through the inspiration of Gods holy spirit, must come behind the Latin
translation, translated we know not when, nor by whom. The Latin must not now
be examined by the Greek (as S. Hierom, Erasmus, and other learned men have
labored to do) but the Greek by the Latin: for it is, they say, the better;
and it is meet that the worse be reformed by the better. Now because here is
the principal controversy in this matter, and hereupon depend all the
diversities that be in the English translation of the Jesuits fetched from the
Latin, and ours derived from the Greek: (for if the Greek, wherein they cannot
deny but the Apostles did write, be generally to be preferred before that old
Latin, then ours is true, and theirs false: if otherwise the Latin be more
sound and sincere than the Greek, then is theirs true, and ours false) let us
therefore somewhat more exactly examine this matter, and weigh our Rhemists
reasons which move them to broach abroad this new doctrine and strange
opinion. And although that which I have said, may to any reasonable man seem
sufficient, that it is contrary to all reason and all learning: yet because
our Jesuits would seem greatly to depend upon the Doctors, and to carry all
their annotations, and guilefull gloses in this Testament, under the visor of
some father, let us see what the Latin godly and ancient fathers say in this
matter. For to them in this point I must specially appeal, and not to the
Greek fathers, who followed the fountain of the Greek, and meddled not with
translations, as streams flowing from it. And after I will come to other
learned men, and even such as misliked not the Romish religion. S. Hierom who
was not only excellently learned in the three learned languages, but also
greatly occupied in translating the whole Bible out of the Hebrew and Greek
(as before appears) writes thus: Hieronimus aduersus Heluidium.
Non necesse est nunc de exemplarium varietate tractare, cum omne and veteris
and nouae Scripturae instrumentum in Latinum sermonem exinde translatum sit,
and multo purior manare credenda sit fontis vnda quam riui. That is, I need not
now to entreat of the variety of the copies or examples (meaning the Latin)
seeing that the whole instrument of the old and new Scripture was from thence
translated into the Latin tongue, and the water of the fountain is thought to
flow more pure than that of the river or stream. In these words S. Hierom does
not only affirm the Latin to be translated dut of the Greek, but also the
Greek to be more pure than the Latin, as the water of the fountain is more
clean and sweet than that in the stream or river, Hieronimus ad Lucinium.
according to the old true saying: Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae.
Again, the same Hierom says: Vt enim veterum libroru^ fides de Hebraeis
examinanda est, ita nouoru^ Graeci sermonis normam desiderat. That is, As the
truth of the books of the old Testament is to be examined by the Hebrew: so the
books of the new Testament require the trial of the Greek. Hieronimus Suniae
and Fretellae.
Again he writes thus: Sicut autem in nouo Testamento si quando apud Latinos
quaestio exoritur, and est inter exemplaria varietas, recurrimus ad fontem
Graeci sermonis quo nouum scriptum est instrumentum: ita in veteri Testamento,
si quando inter Graecos Latinosque diuersitas est ad Hebraicam recurrimus
veritatem: vt quicquid de font proficiscitur, hoc quaeramus in riuulis. That
is, As in the new Testament if there arise any questions among the Latins, and
there be variety among the copies, we return unto the fountain of the Greek
tongue in the which the new Testament was written: so in the old Testament if at
any time there be diversity among the Greeks and Latins, we return unto the
Hebrew verity, that whatsoever flows from the fountain, we may seek the
same in the streams. Infinite such other places there be in S. Hierom both in
his Prefaces, Epistles, and other works: and those also which before I have in
the beginning set down, do plainly declare S. Hieroms judgment heerin, and
that he thought it most absurd to prefer the Latin before the Greek, as our
Rhemish Jesuits are not ashamed for to do. Now let us hear what S. Augustines
opinion was, who although he were utterly ignorant in the Hebrew* and as it is
thought had no great knowledge in the Greek, writes thus: Augustinus de
ciuitate Dei, lib. 15. cap. 13.
Ei linguae potius credatur, vnde est in alia per interpretes facta translatio.
That is, We ought rather to believe that tongue, from the which it is by
interpretation derived into another. Again: August. in Psalm. 38.
Sed quia non sunt loquelae neque sermones quorum non audiantur voces eorum,
exponit sequentem lingua praecedens, and fit certum in alia, quod erat ambiguum
in alia. That is, But because there are no languages nor toongs, where their
words be not heard, the former tongue expounds the later, and it is made
plain in one, which was doubtful in another. Again: August. de doctr.
Christ. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Quis interpretum vera sequutus sit, nisi exemplaria linguae praecedentis
legantur, incertu^ est? That is, Which of the interpretors has followed the
truth, unless the examples of the former tongue be read, it is uncertain?
Again: Libros noui Testamenti, Ibid. cap. 15.
si quid in Latinis varietatibus titubat, Graecis cedere oportere non est
dubiu^. That is, It is not to be doubted, but that the books of the new
Testament, if that there be any doubt in the varieties of the Latin, ought to
give place unto the Greek. The like he affirms, Sermon Domini in monte,
lib. 1. August. epist. 59.
And in his Epistles he writes thus: Secundum Graecum eloquium discernenda
sunt: nam nostri interpretes vix reperiuntur qui ea diligenter and scienter
transfer curauerint. That is, These words are to be discerned by the Greek
tongue: for we can hardly find of our translators that have been careful to
translate this exactly and cunningly. He means of the distinguishing those
words, Prayers, Supplications, and intercessions, 1. Tim. 2.1. And how we ought
to deal when there be any varieties in the books and copies of the
Scriptures, S. Augustine gives us this counsel: August. lib. 11. contra
Faustu^ Manich. cap. 2
Ita si de fide exemplarium quaestio verteretur, sicut in nonnullis quae and
paucae sunt and sacrarum literarum studiosis notissimae sententiarum
varietates, vel ex aliarum regionum codicibus vnde ipsa doctrina commeauit,
nostra dubitatio dijudicaretur: vel si ibi quoque codices variarent, plures
paucioribus, vel vetustiores recentioribus praeferrentur. Et si adhuc esset
incerta varietas, praecedens lingua, vnde hoc interpretatum est, consuleretur.
Hoc modo quaerunt, qui quod eos mouet in Scripturis tanta autoritate firmatis
inuenire volunt, vt habeant vnde instruantur, non vnde rixentur. That is, So if
there be any question touching the truth of the copies or examples of the
Scripture, as in some there be varieties of sentences, which both be few, and
also well known to those that be studious in the holy Scripture, then our
doubt is to be judged either by the books of other countries, from whence the
doctrine came unto us: or if there also the books differ, then the mo be to be
preferred before the fewer, and the more ancient before the later. And if as
yet there remain a doubtful variety, the former tongue, from whence it was
translated, should be conferred with. In this sort do they seek, which would
find in the holy Scriptures, confirmed by so great authority, that which
troubles them, that they may have wherewith they may be edified and
instructed, and not wherewith to wrangle and rail. This is the good counsel
of that good father, the which our Rhemish Jesuits not following, it seems,
and by their writings it plainly appears, that in this edition of the
Testament, they seek rather to wrangle and rail, than either to be instructed
themselves, Ambros. de incarnat. verbi, cap. 8.
or to profit Gods people. Saint Ambrose also prefers the Greek text in
these words: Ita enim inuenimus in Graecis codicibus quorum potior autoritas
est. That is, For so we find it in the Greek books, whose authority is
better. Tertullian also prefers the Greek in these words: Tertullianus lib.
2. aduersus Marcionem.
In primis tenendum quod Graeca Scriptura signauit, afflatum nominans non
spiritum. Quidam enim de Graeco interpretantes, non recogitata differentia, nec
curata proprietate verborum pro afflatu spiritum ponunt, and dant haereticis
occasionem Spiritum Dei infussandi, id est, ipsum Deum. That is, Especially we
must hold that which the Scripture in Greek has set down, naming afflatum,
that is, breath or wind, and not spirit. For some translating from the Greek,
and not considering the difference, nor regarding the property of the words,
have for breath put spirit, and give occasion to heretics to attribute sin
to the spirit of God, that is, to God himself.

By these sayings of these ancient fathers it may sufficiently appear, what
was their judgment concerning the original text of the holy Scripture, and
how far they were from this absurd assertion of our Rhemish Jesuits in
preferring the troubled stream of their Latin translation before the pure
fountain of the Greek. Now I will set down the judgment of some later
writers, and such as were no adversaries, but favorers of the Romish religion.
Ludouicus Viues in his Commentaries upon S. Augustine De ciuitate Dei,
Ludouicus Viues in Aug. de ciuitate Dei, lib. 15. cap. 13.
upon those words of Augustine before alleged: Ei linguae potius credatur,
etc. writes thus: Hoc ipsum Hieronimus clamat, hoc ipsa docet ratio. Et nullus
est saniore iudicio qui repugnet. Sed frustra consensus bonorum ingeniorum hoc
censet. Nam rigidus stupor velut moles opponitur. Non quia isti inscij sunt
earum linguarum, nam nec Hebraice sciebat Augustinus, and Graece minus quam
mediocriter. Sed non est in hijs ea modestia animi quae in Augustino. Hic
vndiquaque paratus erat doceri, isti nusquam volunt doceri, vbique docere quod
ignorant. That is, This Hierom earnestly ( vz. that more credit and authority
be given to the Hebrew in the old, and Greek in the new Testament, than to any
translations) this reason it self teaches. And there is none of any sound
judgment, that will deny the same. But in vain does the consent of good wits
thus think. For stiff sturdines as a bulwark is set against it. The which
they do not, because they be ignorant of those toongs. For neither S. Augustine
did understand the Hebrew any thing, and but meanly the Greek. But there is
not in these men that modesty of mind which was in Augustine. He was ready
and willing any ways to be taught: these men will never be taught, but will
always teach that which they do not understand. Hitherto Lud* Viues.

Erasmus also who too much continued under the obedience of the Romish church,
writes thus: Erasmus in praefatione in Annotat. Noui Test.
Testamentum quod vocant Nouum, etc. That is, The new Testament as they call
it, we have recognized with as great, both diligence as we might, and
faithfulness as we ought, and that first according to the truth of the Greek,
whereunto for to fly, if any doubt fall out, not only the examples of famous
Divines do counsel us, but also Hierom and Augustine do often bid us, and the
very decrees of the Bishops of Rome do command us.

But now let us examine our Jesuits proofs for the confirming of this strange
Paradoxe.
Rhemish Jesuits.
THe proof heerof is evident, because most of the ancient heretics were
Grecians, and therefore the Scriptures in Greek were more corrupted by them,
as the ancient fathers often complain.

Answer.
LEt the good Christian Reader here consider the desperate dealing of the
Papists against the holy Word of God. First they have with all carefulnes and
diligence kept it under the bushel of a strange tongue, that the light thereof
might not shine in the eyes of the common people to the discovering of their
errors, Idolatries, and mockeries. But when through the great mercy of God
this light has been taken from under this bushel, and set upon a
candlestick, to give light to all that are in Gods house, to the directing of
their feet to walk in Gods ways: then they have fallen to rail on it, and
reprochfully to speak of it. John Ecchius calls the Scripture, Euangelium
nigrum and Theologiam atramentariam. That is, the black Gospel, and Inken
Divinity. Hierar. lib. 3. cap. 3 fol. 103.
Albertus Pighius another patron of the Popes cause, writes thus: Sunt
Scripturae, vt non minus vere, quam festiue dixit quidam, velut nasus cereus,
qui se horsum illorsum, and in quamcunque volueris partem trahi, retrahi,
fingique facile permittit. That is, The Scriptures be (as one no less truly
than pleasantly said) like a nose of wax, which maybe drawn this way, and
that way, and be applied to whatsoever part a man will. Ludouicus citatur ab
Illyrico in Nor. Concilij.
One Ludouicus a canon of the Laterane church in Rome, thus spoke in an oration
in the late goodly Council of Trident: Ecclesia est viuum pectus Christi,
Scriptura autem est quasi mortuum atramentum. That is, the Church is the lively
breast of Christ: but the Scripture is as it were dead ink. How contemptuously
writes Cardinal Hosius of those comfortable and sweet Psalms of David, which
be a precious part of the holy canonical Scripture? For whereas it was
objected for the proof of kings and princes power in Ecclesiastical causes,
that king David did not only deal in such causes for the restoring and
planting of Gods true worship and service, greatly decayed in the days of king
Saul a wicked hypocrite: but also did write Psalms, which pertain to the
canon of the Scripture, for the instruction and direction of Gods Church for
ever: Hosius answers in these words: Scripsit David Psalmos aliquot, Hosius
contra Brentium* lib. 2
si quid Athanasio credimus quinque tantum. Quid ni scriberet? Ne nunc quidem
regi prohibetur, aut principi, quominus aut rythmos, aut Psalmos aut carmina
scribat, quibus Dei lauds celebret. Scribimus indocti doctique poemata passim.
That is, David did write certain Psalms, if we believe Athanasius but five
only. Why might he not write? Even now a king or prince is not prohibited to
write either rimes, or Psalms, or verses wherewith he may praise God. We write
learned and unlearned poems apace. Thus contemptuously writes that popish
prelate and president in that Tridentine Conuenticle of the Psalms, comparing
them with rimes and verses that kings may or do now write: and thereunto
disdainfully and blasphemously applying that verse of Horace the profane poet.
Besides this contemptuous speaking of the holy Scriptures, our Papists be now
proceeded a step further: in accusing the original texts of the Scriptures to
be corrupted, the old Testament by the Jews, and the New by Greek heretics.
Is not this desperate dealing against the word of God? First to suppress it,
and keep it in a strange tongue, then reprochfully to speak of it, and now
lastly to accuse the original and autenticall copies thereof to be corrupted?
What can they do more utterly to deface and discredit the word of God contained
in the Scriptures: the which may seem to be the mark they shoot at, that by
pulling down the credit of the holy Scriptures, they may set up their own
vain inventions, and wicked traditions, wherewith their religion does much
better agree than with the Scriptures.

But now let us more particularly come to the examination of this assertion.
The proof heerof is evident (say our Rhemish Jesuits) because most of the
ancient heretics were Grecians, etc. I answer, that the disproofe heerof is
easy. For this is not the complaint as you most falsely affirm of ancient
fathers: but a false slander of ancient wicked heretics, as by the ancient
godly fathers does most plainly appear. Hieronimus aduersus Heluidium.
So did Heluidius as Saint Hierom shows, whose words I may aptly apply unto
you, which be these: Ac ne forte de exemplariorum veritate causeris: quia tibi
stultissime persuasisti Graecos codices esse falsatos: ad Ioannis Euangelium
venio. That is, But least peradventure you complain of the truth of the
copies, because thou have most foolishly persuaded thy self, that the Greek
books be falsified, I come to the Gospel of John. In which words you may see,
how that you who will be worshippers of the virgin Marie, join heerin hand in
hand with Heluidius, whom otherwise you would seem much to mislike, for
denying the perpetual virginity of her. And as Hierom said, that Heluidius
was most foolishly persuaded then, that the Greek books of the Testament were
corrupted: Even so may I say unto you, that this is an extreme folly thus to
judge now, as did Heluidius then: for what reason is it to think, that the
Greek heretics could corrupt all the Greek copies in the world? Or why shall
not we think, that the godly learned fathers were as careful to keep them
pure from corruption, as the heretics were to corrupt them? With Rainolds.
And whereas there were (as the Papists also do now) that thought the Jews had
corrupted the Hebrew in the old Testament, August. lib. 15. de ciuitate Dei
cap. 13.
S. Augustine answers thus: Sed absit vt prudens quispiam vel Iudaeos
cuiuslibet peruersitatis atque malitiae tantum potuisse credat in codicibus tam
multis and tam long lateque dispersis, vel septuaginta illos memorabiles viros
hoc de inuidenda gentibus veritate vnum communicasse consilium. That is, But
God forbid that any wise man should believe that the Jews, how perverse or
malicious soever they were, could do so much as to corrupt so many copies, and
so far and wide dispersed abroad, or that those worthy men the seventy
interpretors did take this counsel together to deprive the Gentiles of the
truth. Lud. Viues in illa August. verba.
Upon which words of S. Augustine, Ludouicus Viues writes thus: Hoc idem
responderi potest hijs, qui falsatos corruptosque and ab Hebraeis codices
veteris instrumenti, and a Graecis noui obijciunt, ne veritas sacrorum librorum
ex illis fontibus petatur. That is, This same may be answered to them, who do
object unto us (as our Rhemish Jesuits do now) that the books of the old
Testament were corrupted and falsified by the Jews, and the books of the new
Testament by the Grecians, to the end that the truth of those holy books might
not be fetched from those fountains. Thus you see how S. Augustine and
Ludouicus Viues, one otherwise of your own side, dissent from you in this your
shameless assertion of the corruption of the Greek copies. But let us see what
other holy fathers our holy Jesuits have followed, in accusing the Greek
copies of the Scriptures to be corrupted. Those monsters the Manichees were of
the same opinion, as appears by S. Augustine in these words: August.
Hieronimo. epist. 19.
Manichaei plurima diuinarum Scripturarum quibus eorum nefarius error
clarissima sententiarum perspicuitate conuincitur: quia in alium sensum
detorquere non possunt, falsa esse contendunt: ita tamen vt eandem falsitatem,
non scribentibus Apostolis tribuant, sed nescio quibus codicum corruptoribus.
Quod tamen quia nec pluribus sieve antiquioribus exemplaribus nec praecedentis
linguae autoritate (vnde Latini libri interpretati sunt) probare aliquando
potuerunt: notissima omnibus veritate superati confusique discedunt. That is,
The Manichees because they cannot writhe into another sense very many places of
the holy Scriptures, by the which their wicked error is by most plain and
evident sentences convinced, affirm the same to be false: yet so, that they
attribute the same not to the Apostles which wrote them, but I know not to what
others, who afterward corrupted them. The which notwithstanding, because they
cannot prove, neither by the most copies, nor by the most ancient, nor by the
authority of the former tongue (from which the Latin books were translated) they
are overcome and confounded by the truth, being made most manifest unto all
men. These be the fathers, whom our Rhemish Jesuits have followed, in accusing
the Greek text of the Testament to be corrupted. As for the godly and learned
fathers, you may see both by these places, and those which I have before
alleged, how far they dissent from them, who always appealed to the Greek in
the new Testament, and have affirmed that the Latin translations are to be
examined and reformed by it. And whereas you say, most of the ancient heretics
were Grecians, and therefore the Scriptures in Greek more corrupted by them,
as you say the ancient fathers complain. I say that you have not received this
frivolous cauillation, and false accusation from the godly ancient fathers, but
(besides those heretics whom I have named) from the barbarous absurd Gloser
upon Gratians decrees, Did. 9. cap. Vt veterum: the sum of whose words you
have alleged, which I will more largely lay down as they be there to be
seen. Glossa did. 9. cap. Vt veterum.
Hieronimus in 2. prologo Bibliae contra ait dicens quod emendatiora sunt
exemplaria Latina quam Graeca: and Graeca quam Hebraea. Sed Augustinus ad
primitiuam Ecclesiam respicit quando exemplaria Graeca and Hebraea non erant
corrupta. Sed procedente tempore cum populus Christianus mulium esset auctus,
and haereses essent factae inter Graecos, in inuidia Christianorum Iudaei and
Graeci sua exemplaria corruperunt. Et sic factum est, quod exemplaria eorum
magis corrupta sint quam Latinorum, ad quod tempus respicit Hieronimus. That
is, Hierom in the second prolog of the Bible says the contrary ( vz. to
Augustine) affirming the Latin copies to be more true than the Greek, and the
Greek than the Hebrew. But Augustine speaks in respect of the primitive
Church, when the Greek and Hebrew copies were not corrupt. But in process of
time, when the Christian people was much increased, and many heresies sprang
among the Grecians: the Jews and Grecians for envy of the Christians
corrupted their copies. And so it is come to pass, that their copies be more
corrupt than the Latins, the which time Hierom respects. Hitherto the Gloser:
from whom it most plainly appears, that you have borrowed this reason, or
rather accusation of the corruption of the Greek copies, which is an author
fit for you to follow: who has in these words delivered almost as many gross
absurdities and lies, as there Augustine and Hierom dissenting in judgment:
Augustine preferring the Greek and Hebrew copies, and Hierom the Latin:
attributing to Augustine a sentence which is not his, but Hieroms Ad Lucinium,
as I have before alleged, whose words again be these: Vt veterum librorum
fides, etc. As the truth of the books of the old Testament is to be examined
by the Hebrew books: so the truth of the new requires the trial of the
Greek tongue. And so this blind Gloser attributing to Augustine a saying which
indeed is Hieroms, makes Hierom contrary to himself. Secondly, in alleging
S. Hieroms words out of the Hieroms meaning. For there in that very place he
does affirm the clean contrary in these words: Hieronimus in prologo in
pentateuchum.
Sicubi in translatione tibi videor errare, interroga Hebraeos: diuersarum
vrbium magistros consule. Quod illi habent de Christo, tui codices non habent.
Aliud est, si contra se post a ab Apostolis vsurpata testimonia probauerunt,
and emendatiora sunt exemplaria Latina quam Graeca, and Graeca quam Hebraica.
That is, If so be that I seem to thee to err in my translation, ask the
Hebrews, consult with the Masters of diverse cities. That which they have of
Christ, thy books have not. It is another matter, if they have allowed the
testimonies afterward used by the Apostles against them, and that the Latin
examples be more true than the Greek, and the Greek than the Hebrew. Here S.
Hierom does infer this as absurd, that the Latin copies should be more true
than the Greek, and the Greek than the Hebrew, which the blind Gloser our
Jesuits Master thought he simply meant. And that the reader may perceive this
more plainly, I will set down some of Erasmus words in his scholies upon this
place of Hierom: Erasmus in illum locum Hieron.
Hunc locum insulsissime citat glossometarius quisquis is fuit in decretis
pontificum, did. 9. cap. Vt veterum librorum, putans Hieronimum vere sensisse
Graecorum exemplaria emendatiora esse quam Hebraea, and Latina emendatiora quam
Graeca. Et hunc nodum multis modis dissoluit, nugacissime nugans in re non
intellecta, vel dic, vel dic, vel dic. Tantumne est istis autoritatis vt cu^
remprorsus no^ intelligant, tamen illis ius sit quic quid lubitu^ fuerit
dicere? Nam Hieronimus inducit hoc velut (...), and dictu absurdu^ quo magis
refellat quod isti volebant. That is, This place the writer of the Gloss upon
the Popes decrees, Did. 9. cap. Vt veterum librorum, whosoever he was, does
most absurdly cite, supposing that Hierom did indeed think, that the Greek
examples and copies were more true than the Hebrew, and the Latin more true
than the Greek. And this knot he goes about to lose by many means, most
triflingly trifling in a matter that he did not understand, with his vel dic,
say so, and say so, etc. Have these men so great authority, that when they do
not at all understand a matter, yet it shall be lawfall for them to utter and
write what they list? For Hierom does bring in this as a thing impossible, and
absurd to be spoken, that he might the more confute that which they would
infer, etc. Hitherto Erasmus.

Augustine preferring the Greek and Hebrew copies, and Hierom the Latin, he
does very foolishly and preposterously. For Hierom in all his writings, and
also as appeered by his translations, did most earnestly maintain the
contrary: whereas Augustine by reason of his ignorance in the Hebrew, did
overmuch attribute to the Septuaginta interpretors in Greek, and wished that
Hierom had translated the old Testament rather out of them, than out of the
Hebrew, as appears by his own words in his Epistle to Hierom himself,
August. Hieronimo. epist. 10.
which be these: Ego sane te mallem Graecas potius canonicas nobis interpretari
Scripturas, quae Septuaginta interpretum autoritate perhibentur. That is, I had
rather that you did translate unto us the Greek canonical Scriptures, which
be confirmed by the authority of the Seventy interpretors. This is that
worthy writer upon the Popes holy Decrees, who has taught our Rhemish
Jesuits this lesson, and lent them this reason or rather accusation of the holy
Scriptures. A meet author for them to follow.

But how false this accusation of the corruption of the Greek text is, may
evidently appear partly by the writings of Chrysostom, Basil, Theophylactus,
and other ancient Greek and godly fathers, who generally agree with the Greek
text, and dissent from the Latin when they differ, as hereafter shall be
showed: and partly by those places of the Latin fathers before alleged. For
whereas most of the Greek heretics were before the time of Ambrose, Hierom
and Augustine, as by Epiphanius it does appear: yet in their days the Greek
books were sound, pure, and undefiled. Let them therefore show us in what age,
and by what heretics all the Greek books in the world were corrupted.

And if our Rhemish Jesuits may think that the Greek text has been
corrupted by old Greek heretics: why may it not also be thought, that the
Latin text has in like manner been corrupted by Latin heretics? But they will
say: There were not so many of them as of the other: Besides that it is not
greatly material for the multitude, yet what if it may be proved, that all
Papists be heretics, may not they in number be compared with the Greek
heretics? I will not enter into this discourse at this present, and the rather
for that it has been effectually showed, In his book against D. Saunders.
and pithily proved by my good and learned brother Master Whitakers of late:
and also was so largely and learnedly handled in Queen Mary's days, by that
reverend and learned father D. Poynet Bishop of Winchester, that it has
hitherto never been answered as far as I know: and therefore it shall be less
needful for me to prove it against M. Gregory Martin, the supposed and
reported author of these reasons and this translation. I will only refer him
and his fellows unto it: beseeching God that it may likewise effectually work
in them, that they may see their own errors and ignorance, and in time repent
their railing against Gods truth and servants.

Moreover, I say that all the Jesuits in Rhemes and Rome are not able to show
one such a foul corruption in all the Greek Testament, to the overthrowing of
any article of faith, as I can show a most notable place, concerning even the
very Deity of Jesus Christ corrupted fowly in the Latin, which our Corrupt
Rhemists in their English have followed. The place is 1. Timoth. 3.16. And in
Greek thus: (...). etc. That is, And without controversy great is the
mystery of godliness. God was made manifest in the flesh, justified in the
spirit, etc. The vulgar Latin is thus: Et manifest magnum est pietatis
sacramentum, Quod manifestatum est in carne, etc. And is by you englished thus:
And manifestly it is a great sacrament of piety, Which was manifested in the
flesh, etc. Here in stead of these words: God was revealed in the flesh, which
plainly prove both the Deity and Humanity of Jesus Christ, agreeably to that
other place of S. Paul to the Colossians: Coloss. 2.9.
In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, they have put these
words: Which was manifested in the flesh: and so seek to deprive us of this
most excellent testimony, which makes strongly against the Arrians and other
heretics, and corrupted the place which briefly, yet very pithily
comprehends the doctrine of our redemption. The which corruption is not only
contrary to all Greek copies, and the ancient Syrian translation: but also to
Chrysostom, to Theophylactus, to Theodoretus dialog. 1. and to the Greek
scholies which so allege it, and expound it. Such a place so like to be
corrupted by heretics, I dare say that all our Rhemish rout is not able to
show in all the Greek text.

Lastly, I omit to show what a wide window these popish Rhemists do open to all
heretics, by this their absurd assertion and accusation of the Greek
original text of the Testament, who if they be pressed with any plain place
to the confounding of their heresy, why may they not, as Heluidius and the
Manichees of old time did, and our Iebusites do now, say the same were
corrupted by ancient heretics. But woe be to them that cannot maintain their
doctrine but by such shameless shifts. But for the further manifestation of
this matter, and that the Christian reader may see what consent there is
between these Catholic fathers, I will set down a place or two out of John
Driedon a Louanian, Lib. 2. cap. 1.
who writes thus: Eisdem argumentis vtentes, possumus demonstrare Graecos noui
Testamenti codices non esse de industria vniuersaliter falsatos, etc. That is,
Using the same arguments we may prove, that the Greek books of the new
Testament have not been of purpose universally falsified, as though any truth
had been rased together out of all the holy Greek books, being dispersed so
far abroad, and kept in the Libraries not only of the Grecians, but also of
the Latins. Again the same Driedon of Louaine writes thus: Quantum vero ad
Nouum attinet Testamentum, verisimile est, si Graeci suos codices noui
Testamenti voluissent deprauare, etc. That is, But as touching the new
Testament, it is likely that if the Grecians would have corrupted their books
of the new Testament, they would chiefly have done it in those places, in which
matters be handled, wherein they have long agone begun to dissent from the
Latin Church: but we see and perceive such places to agree with the most
ancient Latin copies: Therefore neither any other place ought to be suspected
as corrupted by the common school of the Grecians. Lastly, the same Driedon
writes heerof thus: Nam Scriptura sacra si sit iam olim in suo font suaque
origin corrupta and deprauata, iam non erit vlla in illis canonica autoritas,
etc. That is, Now if the holy Scripture have been long ago corrupted and
depraved in her fountain and original language, then there will be no
canonical authority in it, neither shall it be needful for Latin men to
return to the fountain of the Greek tongue, wherein the new Testament was
written: or of the Hebrew, wherein the old Testament was set forth. Hitherto
Driedon. Whereby we may see, to what impudency our Rhemists be grown, who by
this impudent assertion, take all canonical authority from the holy
Scriptures. I might show what unfaithful keepers of Gods holy records they
have been: who have heertofore bragged, that they have kept the holy
Scriptures, and whence have we had them, but from them? And yet now of their
own accord, they confess that they have suffered the original and
autenticall copies of Christ's Testament to be corrupted. But omitting these
things, which might be more amplified, I come to their particular proof of
this their strange paradoxe, concerning the corruption of the Greek text.

Rhemish Jesuits.
TErtullian notes the Greek text which is at this day, Lib. 5. contr. Marc.
1. Cor. 15.47. to be an old corruption of Marcion the heretic, and the truth
to be as in our vulgar Latin: Secundus homo de coelo coelestis: The second man
is from heaven heavenly. So read other ancient fathers, Ambr. Hieron.
and Erasmus thinks it must be so. And Calvin himself follows it, Instit.
lib. 2. cap. 13. par. 2.

Answer.
HEre as touching Tertullian, upon whom does depend the special proof of this
pretended corruption, to speak in plain words, you make one notorious lie.
For Tertullian does not say, that the truth of that text is as in the vulgar
Latin translation, neither he in his book De resurrectione, does so allege
it, as hereafter I will show. Indeed I grant that Marcion did mangle that
place, and corruptly cite it, as Tertullian in these words shows: Tertull.
aduersus Marcionem, lib. 5.
Primus inquit homo de humo terrenus: secundus Dominus de coelo. That is, The
first man is of earth earthly: the second is the Lord from heaven. Here
Marcion denying the true manhood of Christ, did leave out this word Homo, that
is, Man, and so did mangle that place, the which is not omitted, but expressed
in all Greek copies. And therefore the Greek does not agree with Marcions
corruption, as Gregory Martin and his fellows corruptly judge. I grant also
that it seems Tertullian thought, that Marcion in the latter part did allege
this word Dominus, that is, Lord, which ought not: for his words after the text
before alleged be these: Quare secundus si non homo quod and primus? aut
nunquid primus Dominus si and secundus. That is, Why is he called the second,
if he be not man as the first? Or is not the first Lord, if the second be?
Heerby, I say, it seems, that Marcions corruption of this place, was partly
in leaving out this word Homo, which is expressed in the Greek, and partly (as
it seems Tertullian supposed) by putting in this word Dominus, which our
Greek copies also have. Now whether he did corruptly allege this word Dominus,
Lord, that is the question.

Marcions, for that it does no more maintain his blasphemous heresy, in
denying the true Humanity of Christ, than does the Latin. For how does this,
The second man is the Lord from heaven, seem more to favor Marcions false
doctrine, than the other: The second man is from heaven heavenly? Why might not
Marcion have abused this, to prove Christ to have brought his body from
heaven, and not to have taken flesh of the virgin Marie, as well as the other?
And therefore if this had been a corruption of Marcions, he would no doubt
have otherwise corrupted it to the further furthering of his heresy. Secondly,
I say that Adam and Christ, than does the Latin, In Annotat.
as Master Beza learnedly shows. Thirdly, whereas Marcion did corrupt
Tertullian in the same place) and yet the same corruption is not in the Greek,
but it is pure and sincere as it ought to be, it is not likely that this
corruption should any more remain than that. Fourthly, not only all Greek
copies, both old Marcions to be in all Greek copies, and in those very ancient
Syrian and Arabian translations, I leave it to the judgment of all men to
consider. And where you say that other ancient fathers have read according to
the vulgar Latin: I grant that some Latin fathers following the old translation
so do: but Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Greek Scholies, Damascenus De
orthodoxa fide, lib. 3. cap. 12. (who I trow were none of Marcions disciples)
agree with the Greek: And Tertullian your author alleges it thus: Primus
homo de terra choicus, id est, limaceus, id est, Adam: Tertullianus de
resurrect. carnis.
secundus homo de coelo, id est, sermo Dei, id est, Christus, differing from
the Latin, in leaving out this word, Coelestis. So reads both Cyprian and
Hilarious: Primus homo de terrae limo: Cypian. de zelo and liuore: and aduersus
Iudaeos and alios. Hilarious de Trinitate. lib. 10.
secundus homo de coelo. That is, The first man of the slime of the earth: the
second man from heaven. So that these three Latin fathers, as they differ from
the Greek in leaving out the word Dominus, Lord: so do they also dissent from
the Latin, in leaving out the word Coelestis, Heavenly: And yet whether either
of these words, or both of them be expressed or omitted, it is not repugnant to
any article of faith, nor to the sense of the Apostle. And therefore might
Erasmus be of that opinion, to think it should be as in the Latin: especially
having respect to the sound of the opposition of words between of earth
earthly: and from heaven heavenly. And M. Calvin might so allege it: And yet
the Greek may be the true reading, wherein the Apostle wrote, as no doubt it
is. But if I should grant, that this word, Lord, crept in either by Marcions
means or any others (which is utterly unlike, as has been showed) yet it must
needs be confessed to be but a small fault, to express this word, Lord, and
to attribute it to Jesus Christ, to whom it does so properly appertain: and of
small force to discredit generally the autenticall text of the Greek. Two
hundred greater corruptions may be found in the vulgar Latin.

Tertullian, I may justly say: that If by the law of God one man's witness be not
sufficient against a man: Deuteronomy. 19.
much less may it be against the original copy of the Testament of Jesus
Christ. Moreover, I may except against the credit of this one witness, as
insufficient to give testimony against the original text of Christ's
Testament. For whereas Heluidius alleged his authority in defense of his
opinion: S. Hierom answers him in these words: Hieronimus aduersus Heluidium.
Et de Tertulliano quidem nihil amplius dico, quam ecclesiae hominem non
fuisse. That is, And as touching Tertullian I say no more, but that he was not
a man of the Church. And so without more ado turns him over. If Hierom refuse
his credit as insufficient in that cause: surely we will as well reject him in
this, and not credit him in seeming to say that this word, Lord, came Marcions
means. Chrysostom. in Ioannem, hom. 38.
Lastly, I say that whereas Chrysostom does charge that great heretic Paulus
Samosatenus with corrupting a place, John 5.27. yet notwithstanding your vulgar
Latin and your own English do follow and allow that, which Chrysostom counted
to have been corruptly read and distinguished by the said P. Samosatenus. The
like may be said of Epiphanius, who thinks a place of S. Paul, 2. Tim. 4.10.
otherwise to be read, than either your vulgar Latin, Epiphanius lib. 2. Tom. 1.
haeres. 51.
or you do, whose words be these: Cresces inquit in Gallia. Non enim in
Gallatia, velut quidam decepti putant, sed in Gallia legendum est. That is,
Cresces says he, is gone into France, not into Gallatia, as some being
deceived do think, but it is to be read, In Gallia, into France. Now if you
will not judge these places to be corrupted, although Chrysostom and Epiphanius
did so think (who were fathers far more sound and sincere than Tertullian that
fell into the heresies of Montanus) why shall we be bound to think this place
of the Corinthians to be corrupted by Marcion, because Tertullian seems so to
say? Surely if you will not allow the judgment of Chrysostom and Epiphanius in
those places, we will not approve the opinion of Tertullian in this. The which
also may be said concerning the two testimonies of Hierom and Socrates
following, to the former whereof (having sufficiently spoken of this) I will
now come.

Rhemish Jesuits.
Again, S. Hierom notes that the Greek text, Lib. 1. cont. Iou^nia. cap. 7.
1. Cor. 7.33. which is at this day, is not the Apostolical verity, or true
text of the Apostle, but that which is in the vulgar Latin: Qui cum vxore est,
solicitus est quae sunt mundi, quomodo placeat vxori and diuisus est. That is,
He that is with a wife is careful of worldly things, how he may please his
wife, and is divided or distracted.

Answer.
HEre is brought in the only testimony of S. Hierom to discredit the Greek
text, the authority whereof he greatly magnified, and by which he labored to
reform the Latin books, as has been showed. But to this single testimony of
Hierom here produced, I may object a saying of Hierom himself, agreeable to
the law of God before alleged: Vni testi ne Catoni creditum est. That is,
Hieronimus aduersus Ruffinum. lib. 2.
Men believe not one witness, though he were Cato. And therefore both by the law
of God, and saying of S. Hierom himself, we are not bound to believe this
single witness of Hierom, especially in so great and weighty a matter, as is
the discrediting of the original text of Christ's Testament.

Secondly, to this one testimony of Hierom, I oppose translations of the
Syrian and Arabian, which both agree with it: but also S. Basil, who in his
Morals (...). and thrice in another book does so allege it as it is in the
Greek; Basil. (...).
also Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Greek Scholies: Epiphanius also contra
Hiera. haeres. 67. and Tertullian De virginibus veland. And lastly I oppose
Hierom to Hierom himself; who both in his book against Heluidius, and also Ad
Eustochium de seruanda virginitate, does allege this place as it is in the
Greek, referring the Greek word (...), to that which follows, and not to
that which goes before: The which S. Hierom ought not to have done, if he had
thought it not to be the Apostolical verity. But hereby it does appear,
that Hierom in that book against Iouinian, did deal with this place, Vide
supra page 3.
as he did with many other, which he wrested from the simple sense to serve his
own cause. For how Hierom in those books abused certain places of Scripture
to serve his purpose, and how hardly, or rather contemptuously he spoke of
Matrimony, any man of any judgment reading the books, may easily perceive.
Whereupon it came to pass, that even in those days those books were misliked
of them that were learned and godly, as appears by Hieroms own Apologies
unto Pammachius and Domnion: insomuch that the said Pammachius, Hieron. epist
ad Pammach. tom. 3.
being a godly man, and Hieroms great friend, went about to suppress them. But
least I should seem over hardly to charge Hierom (whom otherwise I confess to
have been a godly and learned father) I will set down for a taste two or three
places: Hieron. li. 1. aduersus Iouinian.
Bonum est, inquit, homini mulierem non tangere. Si bonum est mulierem non
tangere, malum est ergo tangere. That is, It is good, says he, for a man not
to touch a woman, then it is evil to touch her. Here Hierom does not only
wrest that place (for S. Paul does not there oppose, Good, to sin and evil,
but does take it for convenient, In Annotat.
expedient and commodious, as Erasmus shows:) but also does over injuriously
speak of matrimony, in saying it is evil to touch a woman, which God has
ordained and sanctified. Ibidem.
Again Hierom says: Si prudentia carnis inimicitia est in Deum, and qui in
carne sunt Deo placere non possunt: arbitror eos qui seruiunt officio
coniugali, quod prudentiam carnis diligant, and in carne sint. That is, If the
wisdom of the flesh be enimitie against God, and that they which be in the
flesh cannot please God: I think that they which do the duty of marriage,
love the wisdom of the flesh, and be in the flesh. How injuriously Hierom
here speaks of Marriage, and how he abuses these places of S. Paul, Romans 8.
it is so plain that I need not to show. S. Paul in the same place says: Vos
non estis in carne, You are not in the flesh, but in the spirit: speaking
generally of the faithful at Rome, of whom no doubt but many were married.
Lastly, to omit many other places hardly handled by Hierom, he writes thus:
Ibidem.
Quanquam and hoc pro nobis faciat. Qui enim semel venit ad nuptias, semel
docuit esse nubendum. That is, Although this make for us. For he that came once
to a marriage, has taught us but once to marry. Here we see how friuolously
Hierom would infer upon our Savior Christ's coming once to a marriage, that
none should but once marry: and so in effect with the Montanists condemns
second marriages, which Gods word does plainly allow. Now these things
considered, and well weighed, whether this one witness of Hierom not agreeing
with himself, and uttered in heat in that book, wherein through an
immoderate admiration of virginity, he so hardly or rather contemptuously
speaks of Matrimony, and so abuses other places of Scripture, be sufficient
to discredit the Greek text, confirmed with the Syrian and Arabian very
ancient translations, with Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Basil, Theophylactus, the
Greek Scholies, let the indifferent Reader judge. Now let us come to the third
pretended corruption, which our Jesuits think they have spied out in the
Greek text.

Rhemish Jesuits.
THe Ecclesiastical history called the Tripartite, Lib. 12. cap 4.
notes the Greek text that now is, 1. John 4.3. to be an old corruption of
the ancient Greek copies by the Nestorian heretics, and the true reading to
be as in our vulgar Latin: Omnis spiritus qui soluit Iesum ex Deo non est. That
is, Every spirit that dissolueth Jesus is not of God. And Beza confesses that
Socrates in his Ecclesiastical history reads so in the Greek, (...)^ Lib.
7. cap, 32.


Answer.
HEre be two witnesses brought in to disprooue the Greek text, whom they have
not far fetched: for they be brought unto their hand, the one by Erasmus, and
the other by Beza in their Annotations. But what if these two in show, be in
substance and deed but one. I assure thee good Christian Reader, that here is
but one witness: for the Tripartite story being by Cassiodorus gathered and
compiled out of Socrates, Theodoretus, and Sozomenus, it is most certain, that
he in the said story alleged this place out of Socrates: for in the other it
is not to be found. And therefore of what force this one single witness of
Socrates is to condemn the Greek text, has been before declared. I grant
that he writes as Master Beza, and our Jesuits out of him allege. But let us
examine the same: Provided always that although Erasmus and Beza allege, as
is aforesaid, the said reading, which is in the Latin, yet neither of them do
allow the same, but prefer that which is in the Greek.

The words of S. John be these according to the Greek: And every spirit that
confesses not Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh is not of God. For the
which in the vulgar Latin is that which our Jesuits set down: Et omnis
spiritus qui soluit Iesum ex Deo non est. That is, Every spirit that
dissolueth Jesus is not of God. Let us now consider whether of these two is
more likely to be the true text of the John, that the other. For in the verse
before, S. John's words be these: Hereby you know the spirit of God. Every
spirit that confesses Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh is of God. And then
immediately he adds these words which be in question: And every spirit that
confesses not Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh is not of God. Where we see
how this does aptly answer to that which went before. The which is a usual and
common phrase with S. John, to amplify one thing with comparing of
contradictories, to imprint the same the more in our minds: as for example a
little after in the same chapter, verse. 6. He that knows God hears us: He
that is not of God hears us not. Again, verse. 7. Whosoever loves, is borne
of God, and knows God: He that loves not, knows not God. Again, cap. 5.
verse. 10. He that believes in the son of God has the witness in him: He
that believes not the son of God has made him a liar, etc. Again, verse.
12. He that has the son has life: He that has not the son of God has
not life, etc. Even after the same manner S. John says in this place: Every
spirit that confesses Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh is of God: And
every spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh, is not
of God. Thus I doubt not but every indifferent reader may plainly perceive,
that this does more aptly agree both with the sentence before, and with S.
John's usual phrase and manner of speech, than that which is in the vulgar
Latin: Every spirit that dissolueth Jesus is not of God: and so does Erasmus
judge. Moreover, the Syrian translation does agree Cyprian does so cite it as
Erasmus shows: Theodoritus does so allege it: In Annot. Theod. dialogo 1.
Oecumenius the Greek Scholiast so has it. These fathers I trust our Jesuits
will not count to have been Nestorian heretics. Lastly, besides Socrates,
Socrates lib. 1. cap. 11. and Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 23.
and also Sozomenus the saying of that godly father and constant confessor
Paphnutius in defense of Ecclesiastical men's marriage: Alanus Copus one of our
Jesuits dear brethren, or as it is gathered now by certain letters, Master
Harpsfield a bird of the same nest, in the doughtie dialog written by the one,
and set out by the other, writes thus: Copus dialogo page 154.
Mihi nescio quo modo in dubium venit fides huius historiae de Paphnutio. Sunt
enim quae suspicionem important, eam esse Arianorum, aut impudicorum hominum
commentum. Tota enim haec res a Socrate pendet, and Sozomene: quorum alter
Nouatianus fuit: alter Theodorum Mopsuestensem a quinta Synodo damnatum magnis
laudibus extulit.That is, I know not how the truth of this story of Paphnutius
seems to me to be doubtful. For there be matters, which cause me to suspect
it to be a fained fable of the Arian heretics, or of some unchaste persons. For
the whole matter depends upon Socrates and Sozomenus: of whom one was a
Nouatian heretic: the other greatly commended Theodorus of Mopsuesta being
condemned in the fifth Council. Here M. Cope or Harpsfield make Socrates and
Sozomenus both heretics, and filthy unchaste persons, and therefore labor to
discredit them as not sufficient to bear witness in that matter of Paphnutius:
(...) Socrates.
And yet shall our Rhemish and Romish Jesuits so much advance his credit now,
thereby to discredit the autenticall and original copies of the word of God?
Surely if that matter of Paphnutius may not stand with them in the mouth of
those two witnesses, then this matter which tends to the discrediting of the
Greek text of the Testament, shall not be confirmed to us in the words of one
of them. And if they refuse him as insufficient in that: we will not admit him
for sufficient in this.

These three be the only places which our Rhemish Jesuits with all their
conference and diligence have piked out of the old writers, to discredit the
Greek text of Christ's Testament, and to convince it of corruption: the which
whether I have not sufficiently answered and discharged it of that shameless
slander, let the indifferent reader uprightly in the fear of God judge.

I have proceeded no further in answering the rest of that Preface, partly
because I had not any long use of that Testament, being lent unto me for a very
short time by a noble personage: by means whereof I did write out that which I
have here answered: and partly for that I doubt not, but this and the rest
will shortly be more fully and effectually answered by others, to the shame and
confusion of them that write it, and all their adherents. God confound al
errors, and give free passage in all places to his holy truth, Amen. Amen.

A discovery of Corruptions in the English new TESTAMENT set forth by the
Papists at Rhemes: divided into three parts.
1. The first of such places as be diverse, or contrary to the Greek.

2. The second of such places wherein words and sentences be omitted, which be
expressed in the Greek.

3. The third of such places wherein be superfluities, vz. words and sentences
which do abound, and be not in the Greek. In all which the Greek text is
approved and justified, by the testimonies, 1. of ancient translations in the
Syrian tongue, and in some books the Arabian: 2. of ancient godly fathers of
Christ's Church: and lastly of some ancient Latin copies alleged by Erasmus and
Hentenius a Louanian Doctor.

WHere let the good Christian Reader consider, whether the Greek text, wherein
they cannot deny, but the Apostles of Christ by the inspiration of Gods Spirit
did write, being compassed with such a cloud of sufficient witnesses, be to be
preferred and followed, or the stream of the Latin translation, troubled with
the filthy feet of many unclean beasts, which have waded in it, in
transcribing and writing it out: Remembering withal and diligently marking this
worthy saying of S. Hierom to Heluidius: Hieronimus aduers. Heluidium.
Licet tu mira impudentia haec in Graecis codicibus falsata contendas, quae,
etc. Although thou with marvelous impudency do earnestly affirm these
things to be falsified in the Greek books, which not only all the Greek
expounders in a manner have left in their works: but also some of the Latins
have so used them, as they be in the Greek. Neither need I now to entreat of
the variety of the examples, seeing the whole instrument of the old and new
Scripture was from thence translated into the Latin language, and the water of
the fountain is to be thought to run more pure than that of the river.
Hitherto S. Hierom, who withal wounds our Rhemists, which be not ashamed
with no less impudency to affirm these places in the Greek books to be
corrupted, being confirmed generally with the Greek writers; and sometimes the
Latin.

I do not lay down these places at large: but of many produce a few, that by
them the godly Reader may judge of the rest, and of the whole work.

The first part of diversities and contradictions between the Greek text and
the English Rhemish.
HEre I do first set down the translation which is in the Jesuits English
Rhemish Testament: Then, either the Greek, or that which is agreeable to it.
Lastly, I prove the Greek to be true, and so the Rhemish and Romish
translation false by the testimony of very ancient translations, of the old
Doctors, and sometime by ancient Latin copies, as is beforesaid.

Matthew. 8.15.
And ministered unto him. Graece (...). that is unto them. So is it in the
Ancient Syrian translation, in Theophylactus.

Cap. 14.22.
He commanded: Graec. (...). that is, Compulit: he urged or compelled. So has
the Syrian translation, Origin, Hierome, See the Latin Bible printed at
Antwerpe by Christopher Plantine, Anno 1567.
and Theophilactus. Hentenius the Doctor of Louayne who conferred and corrected
the Latin copies, shows that it was in seven of his Latin copies, Compulit,
that is, compelled. Erasmus also shows that it was Compulit in a Latin copy
that he had, which he calls Codex aureus, that is, the golden book.

Cap. 27.34.
Wine to drink. Graec. (...) that is, vinegar. So is the Syrian translation.
So read S. Chrysostom and S. Hierom.

Mark. ca. 5.35.
They came to the Archsynagog. Graece: (...). that is, from the Archsynagog, or
ruler of the synagog, meaning from his house. So reads Theophylactus: and
Hentenius the Louanian Doctor shows that it was in nine of his Latin copies:
ab Archisynagogo, that is, from the ruler of the Synagog. Erasmus in Annotat.
And Erasmus affirms that it was so in his latin Constance copy. He also
shows how some through ignorance not understanding the phrase of speech
corrupted the place, which yet our corrupt Rhemists thought best to follow in
the text, thrusting the true reading ( from) into the margent.

Cap. 12.29.
The Lord thy God is one God: Graec. (...), etc. The Lord our God is one Lord
or only Lord. So is the Syrian translation and Theophylactus. The place in
Hebrew out of which it is alleged, Deuteronomy. 6.4. is, Our God, and So it is in
some latin copies.

Who having heard. Graec. (...), that is, Luke. 1.29.
who having seen him. So is the Syrian translation. So has Theophylactus.
Ambrose also lib. 1. officiorum cap. 18. In Annotat.
So has also a certain Greek writer whose words be rehearsed in Catena
aurea, as Erasmus shows. Hentenius also the Louanian Doctor shows that it
was Vidisset, seen, in 2. of his Latin copies.

And thence do not depart. Graec. (...). that is, Cap. 9.4.
And thence depart. So has the Syrian translation, so reads and expounds
it Theophylactus: Hentenius shows that it was so in one copy. Erasmus
judges the Negative, Ne, in latin to have been a corruption of the writers,
which yet our corrupt Rhemists do follow.

The seventy two returned: Graec. (...). that is, Cap. 10.17. In Euthymius. In
moral. (...).
Seventy. So it is in the Syrian translation, in Ambrose, in Theophylactus. So
does S. Basil allege it. Dorotheus in Synopsi, and Eusebius Eccles. Hist.
lib. 1. cap. 12. name but seventy disciples. Hierom ad Fabiolam maus. 6.
Irenaeus and Cyrillus, In Annotat.
as Erasmus shows. Damasus also bishop of Rome. Epist. 4.

And to stop his mouth about many things. Cap. 11.53.
Grae. (...). that is, to provoke him to speak of many things. For the Greek
word (...) does not here signify to stop the mouth: for that does (...)
signify, as appears in S. Paul Tit. 1.11. But it signifies to provoke to
speak, or often to ask, as Erasmus does largly and learnedly prove, and
namely out of Theophylactus, who does expound the said Greek word (...) thus:
(...). that is, often to ask: and so the words following in the Evangelist do
plainly prove, which be these: Liyng in wait for him, and seeking to catch
some thing of his mouth, whereby they might accuse him. For they that would
catch something from ons mouth to accuse him, will rather provoke him to speak
of many things, whereby they may take advantage in some, than to stop his mouth
from speaking any thing.

Was buried in hell. and lifting up his eyes. Luke. 16.22.
falsely pointed and distinguished. Graece: (...), etc. that is, And the rich
man died also, and was buried. And being in hell lift up his eyes. So it is in
the Syria^ translation. So does Theophylactus read, who at these words, being
in hell, begins a new division of the text. So does also S. Augustine
distinguish it, as Erasmus shows.

John. 8.27.
And they knew not that he said to them that his father was God. Grae. (...).
that is, They knew or understood not that he spoke to them of the father. So
has the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and Euthymius: Yea
sundry old Latin copies had not the word Deum, God.

Cap. 10 29.
My Father, that which he has given me is greater than all. In the margent
they have these words: An other reading is, my father that has given me, etc.
Here the true reading is iustled out of the text into the margent. For the
Greek is* (...). My father which has given (them) me, is greater than all.
Heereunto agrees the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and
Nonnus. Hentenius also the doctor of Louaine shows that in one of his Latin
copies it was, qui dedit mihi mayor, etc. The circumstance and sense of the
place requires this reading.

Cap. 12.32.
Will draw all things to my self: Graec. (...), etc. that is, I will draw all
men to my self. So has the Syrian translation, Chrysostom and Theophylactus,
who expound it that he would draw not only Jews but also Gentiles to
himself. Theodoretus also in his tenth sermon (...), printed at Rome, does
twice allege it as it is in the Greek, (...) page 241. and page 243. This
error and the former may seem to have come by omitting in the Greek one
letter vz. ^. thereby writing (...), for (...): Here by writing (...) for (...).

John. 14.26.
Whatsoever I shall say unto you: Graec. (...). that is, I have said unto you.
So in sense is the Syrian translation. So does Chrysostom as appears by his
exposition in these words: Fortasse quae dixi non intelligitis, Sed ille
manifestus magister erit. that is, Peradventure you do not understand those
things that I have spoken, but he ( vz. the holy Ghost) shall be a manifest
teacher to you. Theophylactus also agrees with the Greek. But this Latin our
Remish and Romish Jesuits will rather follow, because it better serves to
prove their traditions and trifles than the Greek.

So I will have him to remain till I come what to thee. Cap. 21.2^.
Graec: (...) etc. If I will have him to remain til I come, what is it to thee?
Here it most plainly appears, that Si, by the negligence of writers was
turned into Sic, which easily might be done. But there is no such likeness,
between the Greek words (...), and (...). With the Greek agree the Syrian
translation, Cyrillus, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, Euthymius. Hierom also does
so allege it: Si eum volo, etc. Lib. 1. aduers. Iouinianum.
Erasmus also shows that the ancient Latin books had Si, if. And Hentenius
of Louaine shows that in two of his Latin copies it was Si. Finally the
sense of the place does plainly show that it must be read Si if, and not Sic
so, as Erasmus in his annotations proves. Hierom says well: Neque enim si
quid Scriptorum est errore mutatum, Hierom ad Suniam and Fretellam tom. 4.
stulta debemus contentione defendere. that is, If any thing by error of the
writers have been changed, we ought not through foolish contention defend it.
The which good counsel if our Rhemists had followed, they would never have
maintained this, which a blind man with his fingers may feel to be a
corruption. The which they do alleging in their margent, Ambrose and Augustine
for defense of it. But Erasmus in his annotations upon this place, and diverse
others does show, that such as have written out and copied the Latin fathers
finding them alleging places of Scripture otherwise than was in the vulgar
Latin which they used, have altered such places, and written them in the
fathers book as it was in the said translation: And namely in this place
Erasmus shows by the sense, that Augustine did read Si and non Sic, as the
Jesuits would have him, and some foolish writer has made him. Let the learned
Reader read Erasmus upon this place: and thereby he shall plainly perceive
what corrupt Cauillers our Rhemish Jesuits show themselves to be.

And our Lord increased them that should be saved together. Graece, (...). etc.
Act. 2.47.
The Lord added daily to the Church such as should be saved. So has the Syrian
translation, and also the Arabian which is very ancient. In the Latin
translation which our Rhemists follow be three faults. First, the changing of
this word Addebat, that is, he added, into this word augebat, that is, he
increased. Which was by the negligence and ignorance of some writer, and not of
the interpretor, as Erasmus thinks. Secondly, the omitting this word Church,
which is in all Greek copies, in Chrysostom, in the Arabian translation, and
in sense in the Syrian. Thirdly, in putting this, in idipsum, that is,
together, to that which went before, whereas it pertains to that which
follows, as plainly appears by Chrysostom, who with that (...), that is, in
idipsum, begins a new chapter, and so do the Greek books, the Syrian and
Arabian translations. Oecumenius also the Greek scholiast printed at Verona in
all points agrees with the Greek.

Cap. 4.21.
Because all glorified that which had been done, in that which was chanced.
Graece, (...). that is, Because all glorified God for that which was done. So
it is in the ancient Syrian and Arabian translations. So read Chrysostom, as
appears both by his commentary, and by the Greek text it self printed by
Arnold Birkman at Colen, Ann. 1567. Oecumenius also the Greek scholiast
printed at Verona, 1532. agrees with the Greek. And let the godly Christian
Reader consider, whether it is the more godly reading and sense to say, The
people glorified God for that miracle which was done: or that they glorified
the thing it self? Note also what a foolish and needless repetition is in
this Rhemish translation in these words: That which had been done, In Annotat.
in that which was chanced: which thing Erasmus does well observe.

Act. 13.32.
To our children. In the margent they put the Greek and true reading, To us
their children. Whereunto agrees the Syrian translation, and in sense the
Arabian thus: God has fulfilled it to their children in that he raised up
Jesus to us. With the Greek agree also Chrysostom, and Oecumenius the Greek
scholiast. Yet the true reading confirmed by these testimonies is thrust out of
the text, and feign to stand peering in the margent.

Act. 24.14.
I do so serve the father my God, believing. Graece, (...). etc. I do so serve
the God of my fathers. So are the Syrian and Arabian translations, and
Oecumenius the Greek scholiast. And the true reading here also they have
thrust into the margent.

The grace of God by Jesus Christ our Lord. Graec. Romans 7.25.
(...), etc. that is, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So has the
Syrian translation, so have Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Greek scholies.
Basil (...) does twice so allege it, fol. 114. and fol. 122.
Hierom also ad Algasiam, quaest. 8. agrees with the Greek both in alleging
and expounding the place. Erasmus also shows that the Greek reading was in
some of the truest Latin copies which he had.

Of one conception. Graec. (...), that is, Cap. 9.10.
Having conceived by one, even our father Isaac. So has the Syrian
translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Greek scholies. Erasmus
shows the Latin reading, which our Rhemists follow, to be a manifest
corruption. For the Greek (...) one, and (...) conception, be not only diverse
cases the genitive and the accusative, but also diverse genders, the masculine
and the feminine, and therefore can never agree together.

The love of thy neighbor works no evil. Romans 13.10.
Graec. (...). that is, Love does not evil to his neighbor. So is the Syrian
translation. So read Chrysostom and Theophylacte in Greek, and also the Greek
scholies.

But he that discerns if he eat is damned. Cap. 14.23.
Graec. (...). that is, He that doubts, in the Syrian translation it is he
that is divided, that is, doubts whether he may eat or not. Erasmus
translateth it, Qui haesitat, that is, that doubts.

Of Asia. Graec. (...). that is, Cap. 16.5.
Achaia. So is the Syrian translation. So read Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and
the Greek scholies.

Are ye not men. Graec. (...). that is, 1. Cor. 3.4.
are ye not carnal? which our Rhemists have put in the margent. With the
Greek, the Syrian translation and the Arabian agree. Chrysostom,
Theophylactus, the Greek scholies, Ambrose, and Augustine de continentia cap.
4. And both Erasmus and Hentenius of Louaine show that carnales was in sundry
Ancient Latin copies. Yet the false reading keeps possession in the text, and
the true thrust out of the door to stand in the margent.

The ministers of him whom you have believed. 1. Cor. 3.5.
Graec. (...). that is, But the ministers by whom you have believed. The Syrian
translation agrees with the Greek. So does the Arabian also using an hebrew
phrase: By whose hands ye have believed. that is, by whose ministry and labor
in preaching the Gospel. Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Greek scholies
agree with the Greek.

Glorify and bear God in your body. Graec. (...). Cap. 6.20.
that is, glorify God in your body and in your spirit, for they be Gods, or of
God. Here our Rhemish translation has this word Bear, which is not in the
Greek, and has omitted all this, and in your Spirit which are Gods: with the
Greek agree the Syrian translation, and the Arabian, Chrysostom,
Theophylactus, and the Greek scholies.

How he may please his wife, and is divided. Graec. (...). Cap. 7.33.
that is, How he may please his wife. A wife and a virgin are divided: or,
there is a difference between a wife and a virgin, of this place read before
page 45. and 46. etc.

That I speak with the tongue of you all. In the margent they put the true
reading agreeable to the Greek. Cap. 14.18.
With toongs more than you all. Which is approved by the Syrian translation,
and the Arabian, by Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Greek scholies, and lastly
by Hierom, who thus alleges it: Paulus etc. Gratias agit Deo, quod cunctis.
Apostolis magis linguis loquatur. That is, Paul gives thanks to God that he
spoke with toongs more than all the Apostles.

But if any man know not, he shall not be known, Graec. (...). Ibidem 38.
that is, Let him be ignorant. So is the Syrian translation, and the Arabian,
Chrysostom, Theophylactus and the Greek scholies.

Cap. 15.5.
Cephas: and after to the eleven: Graec. (...), that is, After to the twelve.
So is the Syrian translation, and the Arabian, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the
Greek scholies. Augustinus Quaest. in vet. Testamentum, lib. 1. and lib. 3. de
consensu Euang.

Ibidem 26.
The enemy death shall be destroyed last. Graec. (...), that is, the last
enemy that shall be destroyed is death. The Rhemish translation differs not
only from the Greek, wherewith agree the Syrian translation, and the Arabian,
Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Greek scholies, Epiphanius contra Ario. haeres.
69. Hieronimus in Esaiam, Augustinus in Psalm. 51. and alibi. Ambrose de fide ad
Gratianum lib. 5. But also from their own best copies, which read Nouissima,
and not Nouissime, as appears by the Bible printed by Plantine at Antwerpe,
and as Erasmus shows.

The second man from heaven heavenly. 1. Cor. 15.47.
Graec. (...). that is, The Lord from heaven. Hereof read before page 41.42.
etc.

We shall al indeed rise again: Ibid. 51.
but we shall not al be changed. Graec. (...), that is, We shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed. Lib. 2. aduersus Celsum.
So is the Syrian translation, and the Arabian. So does Origin allege it. So
Chrysostom both in his commentary upon that place reads, and upon the 11.
chap. to the Romans alleges it. Justinius martyr also, so has it. (...),
page 281. Theophylactus so reads. The Greek scholies so have it and expound
it. Of this place read before page 14.

Out of so great dangers. Graec. (...), that is, 2. Cor. 1.10.
From so great death. So is the Syrian translation, and the Arabian,
Chrysostom, Ambrose, and the Greek scholies.

That the children of Israel might not behold his face which is made void. Cap.
3.13.
Graec. (...). that is, That the children of Israel should not look unto the
end of that which should be abolished. So is the Syrian translation, and the
Arabian, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Greek scholies, and Ambrose.

But we measure our selves in our selves, 2. Cor. 10.12.
and compare our selves to our selves. Graec. (...), etc. that they measure
themselves with themselves, and compare themselves with themselves. So is the
Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Greek scholies, and
Augustine in many places, as Erasmus shows.

I have done nothing les than the great Apostles: Cap. 11.5.
Graec. (...) that is, That I was not inferior to the very chief Apostles. So
is the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Greek scholies,
Ambrose also who thus translateth it, aestimo enim me in nullo inferiorem
fuisse ab hijs qui valde sunt Apostoli. that is, I count my self in nothing to
be inferior to the chief apostles.

Galat. 3.21.
That could justify. Graec. (...). that is, That could have given life. So is
the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, and the Greek scholies. Yea and so is
their own Latin which they pretend to follow: Quae posset viuificare.

Cap. 4.14.
And your tentation in my flesh you despised not. Graece. (...). that is, And
the tentation, or trial of me which was in my flesh, etc. So is the Syrian
translation, Chrysostom, and the Greek scholies. Yea Hentenius The Louanian
Doctor shows that it was in one Latin copy meam. (...).
Basil in his Morals alleges it thus: (...). that is, And the tentation
which was in my flesh, etc. in sense all one.

Galat. 4.31.
But of the free: by the freedom wherewith Christ has made us free. Here
these words, By the freedom, etc. are referred to that which goes before, and
are made the end of the fourth chapter: which in the Greek are the beginning
of the fifth chapter, and referred to that which follows in this sort: Stand
therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Whereunto agree
the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, and Theophylactus. The Greek scholies so
read and expound it. (...).
Basil also in his Morals so alleges it.

Philip. 1.28.
The cause of perdition. Graec. (...), that is, A token or declaration of
perdition. So read Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Greek scholies. And
Ambrose also, who thus has it: Ostentatio interitus: And the Syrian
translation in sense agrees.

Cap. 3.15.
Who has revealed to you. In the margent they have put this word, Will, and so
put the false reading in the text, and the true in the margent, agreeable to
the Greek, (...), will reveal. So have the Syrian translation, Chrysostom,
Theophylactus, the Greek scholies, Hilarious de Trinitate, lib. 11. Augustinus
de verbis Apostoli, sermon. 15. Hentenius shows, Reuelabit to have been in
six of his Latin copies.

1 Thessalonians. 2.7.
We became children in the midst of you. In the margent they have put this
word, Mild, agreeing with the Greek, which is (...), Mild, and not (...),
Children: Here again the true reading is thrust out of the text into the
margent, which is confirmed by the Syrian translation, by Chrysostom,
Theophylactus, and Basil in his questions, (...). And Hentenius of Louaine
shows, that it was in some of his Latin copies, Lenes, that is, mild.

Chosen you first fruits. Graec. (...), from the beginning. 2. These. 2.13.
So is the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Greek
scholies. Ambrose also translateth it, a principio: from the beginning. Here
note, that whereas the Greek word being one in this manner (...), does signify
first fruits: but being two words thus, (...), the later being the genitive
case (as it is here) signifies, from the beginning. This old translator, or
else some other corruptor does here translate it, primitias, first fruits,
whereas being two words, it should have been translated, from the beginning.
But in the first of James, verse. 18. he translateth the Greek word, (...),
initium, that is, beginning, whereas being one word, it should have been
translated primitias, that is first fruits.

And manifestly it is a great sacrament of piety, 1. Tim. 3.16.
Which was manifested in the flesh, etc. Graec. (...), etc. that is, And
without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, God was manifested in
the flesh, etc. So is the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and
the Greek scholies, which so allege and expound it. Theodoretus does so
allege it. Dialog. 1.
Heerof read before, page 39.40.

O Timothy keep the depositum, Cap. 6.20.
avoiding the profane Novelties of voices. Graec. (...). that is, O Timothy,
keep that which is committed to thee, and avoid profane and vain bablings,
etc. Here first our Rhemists have fondly set down the Latin word Depositum,
whereby is understood the graces and gifts of Gods spirit committed to Timothy
for the profit of Gods Church. Secondly, they untruly translate, following
their corrupt Latin, Novelty of voices, whereas it is in the Greek (...),
vain words; and not (...), novelties of words. With the Greek agree the
Syrian translation, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Theophylactus, (...). page 195.
and the Greek scholies which expound it thus: (...), that is, vain speeches.

Philem. ve. 16.
Now not as a servant, but for a servant. Graec. (...), that is, above a
servant. So is the Syrian translation. Saint Hierom translateth it, sed plus
seruo, that is, more than a servant, In Annotat.
as Erasmus shows. And the sense of the place so requires it: for he
desires Philemon to receive Onesimus (whom he had won unto Jesus Christ) not
now as a servant, which he had been before, but above a servant, a beloved
brother specially to me, says he, how much more then unto thee, etc. And what
a vain contradiction there is in this Rhemish translation: Not as a servant,
but for a servant, let the Christian reader consider.

Hebr. 7.25.
Whereby he is able to save also for ever going by himself to God. Here
again is the true reading thrust out of the text into the margent, which is
this, them that go, which agrees with the Greek, (...), that is, those that
come (or go) unto God by him. So is the Syrian translation, so read Chrysostom,
Theophylactus, and Euthymius. Erasmus shows that the most ancient Latin books
had not accedens, but accedentes, that is, them that come. And Hentenius the
Louanian doctor affirms in 8. of his copies to have been accedentes. And so
the sense of the place requires. Yet notwithstanding all this, that which is a
manifest and gross corruption keeps possession in the text, when the true
reading is forced to stand without the door in the margent. So again in the
9. chap. verse. 14. they have thrust the true reading agreeable to the Greek
confirmed by the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, and the Greek scholies into
the margent: which also Hentenius shows to have been in 7. of his copies,
emundabit, shall cleanse: for the which some negligent writer did write
emundauit, has cleansed.

Hebr. 11.8.
By faith, he that is called Abraham obeyed, Graec: (...). that is, By faith,
Abraham being called, obeyed. So is the Syrian translation, Chrysostom and
Theophilactus.

Ibidem.
By faith Sara also hirselfe being barren received virtue in conceiving of
seed, yea past the time of age: because she believed, etc. Graec: (...). that
is, By faith Sara also received strength to conceive seed, and past the time of
age did bear a child, because, etc. Here first they have these words, Being
barren, which are not in the Greek. Secondly they have foolishly and falsely
translated this: received virtue in conceiving of seed. For, received strength
to conceive seed. For although the Latin word Virtus do sometimes signify power
and strength, and answers to the Greek word (...) which is here used: yet
in our English this word Virtue is not so used, but only answers to the
other Greek word (...). But more absurdly in the 18. of the Apoca. v. 3. they
translate thus: Rich by the virtue of her delicacies, Grae. (...), that is by
the power, greatness or abundance of her delicacies; Is not this fond and absurd
to attribute virtue to the delicacies of the great whore of Babylon of whom S.
John speaks? Thirdly, they have omitted this, bare a child, which is in the
Greek, whereunto agree Chrysostom, Theophylactus and the Greek scholies. And
also the Syrian translation saving that it has those words, being barren.

And beneficence and communication do not forget, Hebr. 13.16.
for with such hosts God is promerited. Graec. (...). that is, God is
delighted, or well pleased. Here for the maintenance of their Merits, they
translate, promerited: whereas the Greek word signifies to please or delight.
And that God is pleased with the good works of his children is confessed: but
that they merit and deserve any thing, that is (by reason of the corruption and
imperfection of them) denied: with the Greek agree the Syrian translation,
Chrysostom, and the Greek scholies. I omit to show how obscurely and
improperly they use these words, Beneficence, Communication, and Hosts, the
former two, for liberality and alms, the last for sacrifices. Where
Communication is improperly used for alms: for that in our English tongue it is
used for conference of speech, and not for distribution of alms. That sentence
we translate thus: To do good and to distribute forget not: for with such
sacrifices God is pleased. Let the godly and learned reader consider whether
is the truer, apter, and plainer translation.

You know my dearest brethren, and let every man, etc. James. 1.19.
Graec. (...), etc. that is, Wherefore my dear brethren, let every man be
swift to hear. So is the Syrian translation, and the Greek scholies. It
seems the old translator did read (...) for (...), but falsely, and without
sense.

James. 1.25.
He that has looked in the law of perfect liberty. Graec. (...). that is,
into the perfect law of liberty. So is the Syrian translation, and the Greek
scholies. Erasmus shows, that in one Latin copy it was, in lege perfecta.
Hentenius shows, that in one Latin copy of his, it was in legem perfectam,
that is, into the perfect law.

Cap. 2.20.
Is idle. In the margent they put, Dead, which is the true reading agreeing
with the Greek, with the Syrian translation, and five of Hentenius Latin
copies.

Cap. 3.5.
Behold how much fire what a great wood it kindles. Graec. (...), that is,
behold how great wood a little fire kindles or burns. In the margent they
have put this word, Little, which agrees with the Greek, and is confirmed by
the Syrian translation, by S. Hierom, who upon the 66. chapter of Esaie thus
cites this place: Paruus ignis quam grandem succendit materiam, that is, a
little fire what a great deal of wood or matter it burns. Beda also shows,
that in some copies it was written, modicus ignis, that is, a little fire. The
sense and circumstance of the place, and comparison which the Apostle uses,
requires it to be so: that as a little fire burns a great deal of stuff,
so the tongue being but a little member braggeth of great things, and does much
mischief. Erasmus does probably conjecture, that the interpretor did translate
it, Quantulus ignis, the which an ignorant or negligent writer did alter into
Quantus: and now by prescription the corruption possesses the text, and the
true reading is thrust out into the margent.

1. Pet. 2.23.
He delivered himself to him that judged him unjustly. Graec. (...), that is,
He committed (himself or his cause) to him that judges justly. So is the
Syrian translation, and Oecumenius the Greek scholiast. Augustine also Tract.
in Johan. 21. agrees with the Greek. Hereof read before, page 14.

Our Lord command. Jude verse 9.
In the margent they have put this word, Rebuke, which is the true reading,
agreeing with the Greek, (...), that is, The Lord rebuke thee. Hieron. apolog.
aduersus Ruffinum lib. 2. Epiphanius contra Gnostic. haeres. 26. does allege
it as it is in the Greek.
So does S. Hierom allege it, Increpet tibi Dominus, and the Greek scholies
so read it, as it is in the Greek. So is the Hebrew, Zachar. 3.2. out of which
S. Jude does allege it, (...) The Lord rebuke thee satan. In like manner,
Matthew. 8.26. the old translator has translated the same Greek word, (...),
Imperauit, and our Rhemists, He commanded, whereas it should be, He rebuked.

And these certes reprove being judged: but them save, Jude verse. 22.
pulling out of the fire. And on other have mercy in fear, hating also that
which is carnal the spotted cote. Graec. (...). that is, And have compassion
on some in putting difference: and others save with fear, pulling them out of
the fire, and hate even the garment spotted by the flesh. With the Greek agree
the Greek scholies.

Blessed are they that wash their stoles. Apocal. 22.14.
Graec. (...). that is, Blessed are they that keep his commandments. So
reads Arethas, and Cyprian lib. 2. aduers. Iudaeos, cap. 22.

A few places of many, in which words and sentences be omitted and want in the
Rhemish English translation of the new Testament, and be expressed in the
Greek, which is approved to be true by ancient translations, fathers, and
other testimonies.
Here I do first set down the text of Scripture agreeable to the Greek: and
then show what is omitted in the Rhemish translation of the Papists: And lastly
I bring in witnesses to confirm the Greek, and confound the other.
Matthew. 5.22.
He that is angry with his brother unadvisedly, etc. Here this word (...),
which may be translated unadvisedly, or without cause, is left out. The ancient
Syrian translation has it, retaining even the very Greek word (...)
Chrysostom, Euthymius, and Theophylactus also have it. Basil in his Morals does
so allege it. (...).
So does also Justinius Martyr, (...). page 5.

In the same chapter, verse. 44. these words be omitted: Bless them that curse
you, which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom and Theophylactus.

Cap. 6.12.
In the end of the prayer which our Savior Christ has taught us, be omitted
these words: For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever.
Which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, and Theophylactus.

Cap. 9.13.
I came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance: these words, (...),
that is, to repentance, be omitted. Which be expressed in Chrysostom,
Theophylactus. Justinius Martyr, Apolog. 2. p. 140. Moral. (...). and (...).
Lib. 2. aduersus Pelagianos.
and Basil do so allege it: Hierom also so alleges it, Sed peccatores ad
poenitentiam. Hentenius the Louanian Doctor shows, that he found them in two
Latin copies. And in the 5. of Luke, verse. 32. they in the Latin translation,
and their own English, and therefore here ought not to be omitted.

Cap. 12.22.
So that the blind and dum spoke and saw: these words, blind and dum, are left
out. Which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and in
S. Basil in his Morals, (...). fol. 19.

Jesus said unto them, understand ye all these things: Matthew. 13.51.
these words, Jesus said unto them, be left out, which be in the Syrian
translation, in Chrysostom and Theophylactus.

This people draws near unto me with their mouth, Cap. 15.8.
and honoreth me with their lips, etc. These words, Draws near unto me with
their mouth, be omitted, which be not only in all Greek copies, but also in
the place of Esaie the prophet, cap. 29.13. out of which it is alleged. They
be also in Chrysostom, and Theophylactus.

So likewise shall mine heavenly father do unto you, Cap. 18.35.
except ye forgive from your hearts, each one to his brother their trespasses.
These words, their trespasses, be omitted, which be in the Syrian translation,
in Chrysostom, and Theophylactus.

Go ye also into my vineyard, Cap. 20.7.
and whatsoever is right ye shall receive. These last words: and whatsoever is
right ye shall receive, be omitted, which be in the Syrian translation, in
Chrysostom, and Theophylactus.

These words left out, With my own, Ibid. verse. 15.
which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and
Augustine Sermon 59. de verbis Domini.

These words following be twice omitted: Cap. 20.22.
Be baptized with the baptism that I shall be baptized: Which be extant in the
Syrian translation, in Origin, Chrysostom, and Theophylactus. And in Mark.
10.39. where this story is rehearsed, in their own translation be expressed.

All this sentence following left out: Mark. 6.11.
Verily I say unto you, it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha at the day of
judgment than for that city. Which is in the Syrian translation,
Theophylactus, and in Matthew 10.15.

And again he sent unto them another servant, Cap. 12.4.
and at him they cast stones: these words, cast stones, omitted, which be in
the Syrian translation and Theophylactus.

And when they lead you, and deliver you up, Cap. 13.11.
take no thought before, neither premeditate what ye shall say. These words,
neither praemeditate, omitted, which be in the Syrian translation and
Theophylactus.

Moreover, Ibid. verse. 14.
when ye shall see the abomination of desolation (spoken of by Daniel the
prophet) standing, etc. These words, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, be left
out, which be in the Syrian translation, in Theophylactus, and are expressed in
Matthew. 24.15. where the same matter is rehearsed.

Mark. 14.70.
Surely thou art one of them: for thou art of Galile, and thy speech is like.
These words: and thy speech is like, are omitted, which be in the Syrian
translation, and in Theophylactus.

Luke 4.8.
But Jesus answered him and said: Hence from me satan, for it is written etc.
These words: Hence from me Satan, be omitted, which be in Theophylactus and the
4. of Matthew.

Ibid. verse. 41.
Thou art the Christ the son of God, These words, the Christ, omitted, which
be expressed in the Syrian translation and in Theophylactus.

Cap. 6.10.
And his hand was restored whole as the other. As the other, omitted, which be
in the Syrian translation and Theophylactus.

Cap. 8.48.
Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. These words, Be of
good comfort, omitted, which be in the Syrian translation and Theophylactus.

Cap. 9.54.
That fire come down from Heaven and consume them as Helias did. These words,
as Helias did, omitted in the text, and thrust into the margent, which be in
the Syrian translation, (...).
in Theophylactus, and in S. Basil in his morals.

Luke 11.2.
In the prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ all these words following be omitted:
Vide supra, page 15.
Our, which art in heaven, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, but
deliver us from evil. Which be all in the Syrian translation, in
Theophylactus, Euthymius, yea and some Latin copies.

Ibid. verse. 44.
Woe be unto you Scribes, and Pharisees Hypocrites. These words: Scribes,
Pharisees Hypocrites, omitted, which be in the Syrian translation and
Theophylactus.

Cap. 23.23.
And the voices of them, and of the high Priests prevailed, etc. These words:
and of the high Priests, omitted, which be in the Syrian translation, and
Theophylactus.

It may seem that our Rhemists were glad that these words were in the Latin
left out, that the simple people might not know, that the voices of the high
Priests prevailed to the crucifiyng of Jesus Christ: the which if they did,
they might gather that the high Priest of Rome may not only err, but also
seek to crucify Jesus Christ in his members, as he daily does.

Therefore the Jews did persecute Jesus, John. 5.16.
and sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the Sabbath day.
These words, and sought to slay him, be omitted, which be in the Syrian
translation, and in Theophylactus.

And the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world. These words, which I will give, Cap. 6.51.
be left out, but be expressed in the Syrian translation, and in Theophylactus.

Jesus showed himself again to his disciples at the Sea of Tyberias. These
words, to his disciples, be omitted, Cap. 21.1.
but be extant in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, and in some copies of
the old Latin translation. Hentenius of Louaine confesses that they were in 4.
of his copies.

Send therefore to Ioppa, Act. 10.32.
and call for Simon whose surname is Peter, (he is lodged in the house of Simon
a tanner by the sea side) who when he comes shall speak unto thee. These
last words, who when he comes shall speak unto thee, be omitted, which be in
the Syrian and Arabian translations, in Chrysostom, and in the Greek scholies.

Not to all the people, Act. 10.41.
but unto the witnesses chosen before of God. These words, unto the witnesses
chosen before of God, be omitted, which be in the Syrian and Arabian
translations, in Chrysostom, in Oecumenius, the Greek Scholiast, and in those
copies of their own Latin translation, which I have seen, as namely in the
Bible printed by Plantine at Antwerp 1567.

These words following be omitted: Saying, Cap. 15.24.
ye must be circumcised and keep the Law. Which be expressed in the Syrian and
Arabian translations, in Chrysostom, and in Oecumenius the Greek scholiast.

But bade them farewell saying, I must needs keep this feast that comes at
Jerusalem. These words: Cap. 18.21.
I must needs keep this feast that comes at Jerusalem, omitted, which be in
the Syrian and Arabian translations, in Chrysostom, and Oecumenius the Greek
scholiaste.

Cap. 20.15.
The next day we arrived at Samos and tarried at Trogillium, etc. These words,
and tarried at Trogillium, be omitted, which be extant in the Syrian and Arabian
translations, in Chrysostom, and in Oecumenius.

Act. 24.27.
He hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul, that he might
loose him. These words, that he might loose him, omitted, which be in the
Arabian translation, in Chrysostom and Oecumenius.

Cap. 25.7.
Laid many and grievous complaints against Paul: these words, against Paul,
omitted: in the Syrian and Arabian translations it is, against him. In
Chrysostom and Oecumenius the name of Paul is expressed.

Cap. 25.16.
It is not the manner of the Romans for favor to deliver any man to the death:
to the death, be omitted, which be in the Syrian and Arabian translations, in
Chrysostom and Oecumenius the Greek scholiast.

Romans 11.6.
All this omitted: but if it be of works it is no more grace, or else were work
no more work. Which is in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, in
Theophylactus, and in the Greek scholies.

Cap. 14.6.
All this omitted. and he that observes not the day, observes it not to the
Lord. Which is in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and in
Photius the Greek scholiast. (...). fol. 21.
S. Basil also in his Morals does so allege it.

Romans 15.29.
I shall come to you with abundance of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ.
These words, of the Gospel, be omitted, which are in the Syrian translation,
in Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Greek scholies.

1. Cor. 5.7.
For Christ our passover is sacrificed for us. These words, for us, be omitted,
which be in the Syrian translation, Page 166.
in Theodoretus alleging this place dialog. 2. and in the Greek scholies.

Cap. 11.19.
There must be heresies among you. These words, among you, omitted, which be in
the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom and the Greek scholies.

Cap. 15.54.
These words omitted. So when this corruptible has put on incorruption. Which
be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, in Theophylactus, in the Greek
scholies, in Augustine, Sermon. 43. in Ioannem and alibi. And Hentenius of
Louaine shows them to have been in one Latin copy.

I was a fool to boast my self, etc. These words, 2. Cor. 12.11.
to boast my self, be omitted, which be in the Syrian translation, in
Chrysostom, in Theophylactus, and the Greek scholies.

(...). that is, If a son, Galat. 4.7.
an heir also of God by Christ. Which they translate thus: and if a son, an
heir also by God. Here these words by Christ be omitted, and the other
falsely translated, by God, for, of God. With the Greek agree the Syrian
translation, Chrysostom, Hierom, and the Greek scholies.

If any faithful man, or faithful woman have widows. 1. Tim. 5.16.
These words, or faithful woman, be omitted: which be in the Syrian
translation, in Chrysostom, Theophylactus, Ambrose, and the Greek scholies
which so expound it, (...). that is, Well is this put, faithful man or
faithful woman.

Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Hebr. 7.21.
These words, after the order of Melchisedec, be left out, which be in the
Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, in Theophylactus, and in the Greek scholies.

All this omitted: which on their part is evil spoken of, 1. Pet. 4.14.
but on your part is glorified. Which is in Cyprian, lib. 4. epist. 6. and in
Oecumenius the Greek scholiast.

These words omitted: 1. John. 2.14.
I have written unto you fathers because you have known him that is from the
beginning. Which be in the Syrian translation, in the Greek scholies, in
Augustine, and Erasmus shows that he found them in some ancient Latin copies.

Many mo places there be wherein words and sentences be omitted in this Rhemish
English translation: but these shall suffice to show the corruption and
imperfection of it. And as I said before, let the Christian Reader consider
whether he is to believe the original text of the Greek, confirmed and
approved by these good and faithful witnesses whom I have produced: or the
corrupt stream, and myrie puddle of this translation, which often dissenteth
from the ancient copies of the Latin which they pretend and profess to follow.

Superfluities in the Rhemish English translation, vz. Words and sentences
abounding in the said translation, which are not in the Greek: which is
approved as before by sundry good and sufficient witnesses.
Matthew. 7.21.
These words added: He shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: which be not in
the Syrian translation, nor in Chrysostom, nor in Theophylactus, nor in Basil
who often alleges it, moral (...). and in Ase. (...): nor in Hierom, as
Erasmus shows.

Mar. 2.16.
Your master, added: which be not in the Syrian translation, nor in
Theophylactus. And Hentenius shows not to have been in six of his Latin
copies.

Luke. 4.19.
These words added: and the day of retribution, which be not in the Syrian
translation, nor in Theophylactus, nor in Hierom citing this place as Erasmus
shows.

Cap. 19.32.
These words added, the colte standing, which be not in the Syrian translation,
nor in Theophylactus.

Cap. 24.43.
In the Rhemish translation it is thus: And when he had eaten before, taking the
remains he gave to them. In Greek (...). that is, And he taking it did eat
before them. Whereunto agree the Syrian translation and Theophylactus.

Act. 2.43.
These words added: In Jerusalem, and there was great fear in all, which are
not in the Syrian translation, saving that Jerusalem is expressed, whereunto
agrees the Arabian translation. They are omitted also in Chrysostom and in
Oecumenius the Greek scholiast

Cap. 5.15.
These words added: and they all might be delivered from their infirmities,
which are not in the Syrian translation, nor in Oecumenius the Greek
scholiast, nor in some Latin copies as Erasmus shows, and Hentenius notes
them not to have been in 5. of his Latin copies.

Cap. 15.34.
These words added: and Judas departed alone, which be not in the Syrian
translation, nor in the Arabian, nor in Oecumenius, and Hentenius shows them
to have been omitted in 7. of his Latin copies.

These words added: Cap. 15.41.
commanding them to keep the praecepts of the Apostles and the ancients, which
be not in the Syrian nor Arabian translations, nor in Oecumenius the Greek
scholiast, nor in four of Hentenius Latin copies: they be taken out of the
next chapter, verse. 4.

These words added: Act. 18.4.
interposing the name of our Lord Jesus, which are not in the Syrian nor
Arabian translations, nor in Oecumenius the Greek scholiast, nor in some Latin
copies as Erasmus shows.

All this added: Cap. 23.25.
for he feared that perhaps the Jews might take him away, and kill him, and
himself afterward should sustain reproach, as though he would have taken
money, which is not in the Syrian nor Arabian translations, nor in Chrysostom,
nor in Oecumenius, and Hentenius confesses not to have been in 9. of his
Latin copies: friar Lyra also avouches not to have been in the truest Latin
books.

And vows, added: Cap. 24.17.
which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in the Arabian, nor in Oecumenius
the Greek scholiast.

To him, added: Romans 1.3.
which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in Chrysostom in Greek printed at
Verona, nor in the Greek scholies, nor in two of Hentenius Latin copies.

All this added: Cap. 4.5.
according to the purpose of the grace of God, which is not in the Syrian
translation, nor in two of Hentenius Latin copies, nor in the Greek scholies.

This added: as the stars of heaven, Cap. 4.18.
and the sand of the sea, which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in
Chrysostom, nor in Theophylactus, nor in Ambrose, nor in the Greek scholies,
nor in 7. of Hentenius Latin copies, nor in an old Latin book which John
Colete lent Erasmus out of the library of Poules.

All this added: and her that has not obtained mercy, Cap. 9.25.
having obtained mercy, which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in
Chrysostom, nor in Ambrose, nor in Origin, nor in Theophylactus, nor in the
Greek scholies, nor in Augustine, lib. 22. contra Faustum cap. 29. nor Ambrose
upon this place.

1. Cor. 15.23.
This word added, Believed, which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in
Chrysostom, nor in the Greek scholies, nor in 2. of Hentenius Latin copies.

Colos. 3.25.
With God, added: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in the Greek
scholies, nor in one of Hentenius copies.

1. These. 4.1.
These words added, as you do walk, which be not in the Syrian translation, nor
in Chrysostom, nor in Theophylactus, nor in the Greek scholies.

1. Timoth. 6.9.
Of the devil, added: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in Basil
alleging it in his Morals, (...). nor in the Greek scholies, nor in Ambrose.

Tit. 2.1.
Our Savior, added, or rather in the Latin the word Salutaris, agreeing with
the Greek (...), was changed into Saluatoris. For Hentenius the Doctor of
Louaine shows, that in two of his copies it was Salutaris. With the Greek
agree the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Greek
scholies.

James. 3.17.
These words added, consenting to the good: which be not in the Syrian
translation, nor in Oecumenius the Greek scholiast, nor in 4. of Hentenius
Latin copies, nor in an old Latin copy which Erasmus had.

1. Pet. 1.8.
And believing, added: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in
Oecumenius, nor in one of Hentenius Latin copies.

1. Pet. 3.22.
All this added, Swallowing death, that we might be made heirs of life
everlasting: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in the Greek scholies.

1. Pet. 5.2.
According to God, added: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in
Oecumenius the Greek scholiast.

1. Ioh. 1.4.
This added, That you may rejoice: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor
in Oecumenius, nor in two of Hentenius Latin copies, nor in an old Latin copy
of Constance which Erasmus had.

1. Ioh. 5.9.
This added, Which is greater: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in
Oecumenius.

Ibid. verse. 20.
God, added: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in Hilarious lib. 6. de
Trinitate, nor in Augustine lib. 1. de Trinitate, cap. 6. nor in Hierom in
Esaiae, cap. 65.

This added, In the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: Iudae verse. 14.
which is not in the Greek scholies, nor in 3. of Hentenius Latin copies, nor
in the Latin book of Constance, which Erasmus had.

This added, In Latin having the name exterminans: Apocal. 9.11.
which is not in Arethas. And it is most manifest to have been added by the
Latin translator, wherewith Laurentius Valla not without cause finds fault.

By these places which I have set down, it may sufficiently appear, that the
Latin books of the new Testament, as they were very diverse and corrupt in S.
Hieroms days, as by his complaint before alleged it is evident: even so they
be now. Praefatio in Iosue. Page 3.
For the right reformation whereof, we ought to return to the original
fountain of the Greek, Page 6.
as S. Hierom before alleged does exhort us: and as he, Erasmus, Valla, and
others have endeavored to do.

Strange words, and affected phrases,
which the Jesuits in their Latin translation of the English Testament have
without need used, as it may seem for these causes: First, to show their fine
eloquence, and thereby to move their simple readers and hearers to admire
them, who commonly have in admiration such strange things as they do not
understand. Secondly, to make the Scripture dark, and hard to be understood of
the unlearned people, and so to deprive them of that profit and comfort which
they might receive by it. And lastly, for that they would as much dissent, and
as little agree with us, as they might.


Matt. 1, 19 Dismiss her, for put away. 2, 2 Adore, for worship. 16 Deluded.
3, 1 Desert. 5, 30 Scandalize. 6, 11 Supersubstantiall. 8, 12 Exterior darkness.
10, 8 Gratis, for freely. 12, 4 Loaves of proposition. 19, 13 Impose his hands.
24, 14 Consummation, for end. 27 Aduent. 26, 2 Pasche. 17 Day of azymes. 27, 6
Corbona. 59 Syndon. 60 Monument. 62 Parasceue. Mark. 4, 34 Explicated. 7, 21
Auarices, impudicities. 9, 19 Incredulous. 49 Victime. 12, 33 Holocausts. 14,
14 Refertorie. 36 Transfer. 38 Infirm. 16, 14 Exprobrated. Luke 1, 14
Exultation. 58 Congratulate. 69 Erected. 78 The orient from an high. 79 To
illuminate. 3, 14 Calumniate. 5, 33 Make obsecrations. 6, 48 Inundation. 7, 34
A gurmander. 9, 31 Decease. 10, 1 Designed. 35 Supererogate. 12, 58 Exactor.
John 8, 46 Argue me of sin. 12, 40 Indurated their heart. 14, 16 Paraclete.
18, 1 The torrent Cedron. 28 Contaminated. Acts 1, 7 Times or moments. 9 He was
elevated. 25 Has preuaricated. 2, 37 Were compunct in heart. 7, 19
Circumuenting our stock. expose their children. 59 Inuocating. 8, 12
Euangelizing. 9, 21 Expugned those that inuocated this name. Acts 10, 10
Excess of mind. 11, 26 Conuersed there in the Church. 13, 8 Auerte the
proconsull. 45 Contradicted those things. Acts. 15, 29 Immolated to idols. 17,
3 Insinuating. 21, 28 Violated this holy place. 22, 3 An emulator of the Law. 4
Delivering into custodies. 23, 1 Have conuersed before God. Romans 1, 27 Working
turpitude. 31 Detractions, odible to God. 2, 3 Longanimitie, benignity. 23
Preuarication of the Law. 26 If then the prepuce keep the Justices of the Law.
4, 5 Impious. 6, 5 Complanted to the Similitude. 8, 18 Condign to the glory.
28 All things operiate unto good. 9, 18 Indurate. 21 Unto contumely. 11, 11
Emulate them. 12, 1 A living host. 1. Cor. 3, 9 Gods coadiutors. 2, 10 Yea the
profundities of God. 4, 9 Deputed to death. 4, 15 Ten thousand pedagoges. 5,
7 As ye are azimes, for our pasche Christ is immolated. 6, 3 Secular things. 18
He that does fornicate. 7, 22 Is the franchised of our Lord. 9, 13 Participate
with the altar. 22 Do we emulate our Lord. 11, 24 Commemoration of me. 14, 12
Be emulators of spirits. 15, 8 Of an Abortiue. 2. Cor. 1.12 Have conuersed in
this world. 2, 17 Adulterating the word of God. 4, 4 Illumination of the
Gospel. 6, 13 Be you also dilated. 7, 1 Inquination of the flesh. 11, 28 My
daily instance. Galat. 1, 13 Expugned it. 3, 1 Was proscribed. 5, 4 Euacuated
from Christ. 21 Ebrieties, commessations. 6, 1 Praeoccupated in any fault. 10
Domesticals of faith. Ephesians. 1, 3 In coelestials. 14 To the redemption of
acquisition. 18 Eyes of your heart illuminated. 2, 14 Euacuating the law. 3 6
Coheires and concorporate and comparticipant. 9 To the prefinition of worlds.
4, 19 To impudicitie, unto the operation of all uncleanness, unto avarice. 30
Contristate not the spirit. Philip. 2, 7 He exinanited himself. 17 If I be
immolated. congratulate with you all. 3, 6 According to emulation. conuersing
without blame. 9 Configurated to his death. 14 Supernall vocation. 1 Thessalonians. 2,
5 In the word of adulation. 4, 15 In the aduent of our Lord. 5, 1 Moments. 1.
Tim. 1, 9 To the wicked and contaminate. 3, 6 Not a Neophyte. 11 Not
detracting. 6, 20 Keep the depositum. 2. Tim. 1, 6 That thou resuscitate the
grace of God. 9 Secular times. 10 By the illumination of our Savior.
illuminated life. 15 Be auerted from me. 4, 6 Time of my resolution. Hebr. 2,
10 To consummate the author of their salvation. 17 That he might repropitiate
the Sins of the people. 3, 12 Be obdurate with the fallacy of Sin. 13 That
none of you obdurate your hearts as in the exacerbation. Hebr. 5, 11
Inexplicable to utter. 6, 17 He interposed an oath. 20 Where Jesus the precursor
for us. 7, 15 Of life indissoluble. 9, 2 Proposition of Loaves. 17 Whiles he
that tested lives. 28 To exhaust the sins of many. 10, 6 Holocausts and for
sin did not please thee. 35 Which has a great remuneration. 11, 30 By
circuiting seven days. 12, 4 Repugning against sin. 13, 16 And beneficence
and communication do not forget, for with such hosts God is promerited. James.
4, 11 Detract not one from an other. 1. Pet. 3, 16 Which Caluminate your good
conversation. 2. Pet. 2, 5 Original world. Bringing in the deluge upon the
world of the impious. 13 Coinquinations, delicacies. 3, 15 The Longanimitie of
our Lord. 1. John. 1, 5 This is the Annuntiation which. Jude ve. 14 Impious,
impiety, impiously. Apoc. 1, 10 Dominicall day. 13 Vested in a princely
garment. 16, 15 See his turpitude.
These be the fine words wherewith our fine Jesuits have sought to beautify
this there translation, of which I may say as S. Hierom sometimes said. Hieron.
lib. 1. aduersus Iouinian.
Rogo quae sunt haec portenta Verborum? that is, I pray thee what monstrous
words be these? And as Demosthenes said, these be not (...) but (...),
Nazianzen. de modest. seruanda in disput.
not words but wonders. This is not to obey the wise counsel of Gregory
Nazianzene who says: (...). that is, use native and common words. Nor to do
the office of a good interpretor, whose duty is as S. Hierom says, Hieron. ad
Marcellam, tom. 4.
Non quo ipse disertus appareat, etc. Not that he should seem to be eloquent
himself, but to make him that reads it, so to understand it, as he that
write it.

To the Christian Reader.
WHereas I did not purpose to make a full answer to the Rhemists whole
preface, which I hope hereafter will be performed by some other: I have thought
good to set down here a few places out of the holy scriptures, and ancient
godly fathers, partly to oppose for an answer to the first part of their said
preface, wherein they go about to show, that it is neither necessary nor
profitable to have the holy Scriptures in Vulgar languages to be read and heard
of all people: and partly to stir up them that be godly and faithful, to the
daily diligent and reverent reading of them, that they may thereby daily more
and more increase in the true knowledge and fear of God. If thou good
Christian reader receive any benefit and comfort by these my poor and simple
labors, commend me to God in thy faithful prayers.

John 5.39. Search the Scriptures: for in them ye think to have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me.


Certain places of Scripture, to show how requisite and profitable it is, for
all men diligently and reverently to read and hear the word of GOD.
Deuteronomy. 6.4. and 11.19. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only. And
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy might. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be
in thine heart, and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and
shall talk of them when thou tariest in thine house, and as thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall
bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between
thine eyes. Also thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon
thy gates.

Deuteronomy. 17.18. And when the king shall sit upon the throne of his kingdom, then
shall he write him this Law repeated in a book by the priests of the Levites.
And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life,
that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of
this Law, and these ordinances for to do them. That his heart be not lifted up
above his brethren, and that he turn not from the commandment, to the right
hand or to the left, but that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, He and
his sons in the midst of Israel.

Iosue 1.6. Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate
therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written therein. For then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall
thou have good success.

Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man that does not walk in the counsel of the
wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful.
But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he mediate day
and night.

Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul: the
testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the Simple. The
statutes of the Lord are right and rejoice the heart: the commandment of the
Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes. The fear of Lord is clean and
endures for ever: the judgments of the Lord are truth: they are righteous
altogether, and more to be desired than gold: sweeter also than honey, and the
honey comb. Moreover by them is thy servant made circumspect, and in keeping of
them there is great reward.

Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a young man redress his way? in taking heed
thereto according to thy word.

Ibid. verse. 130. The entrance into thy words shows light, and gives
understanding to the Simple.

Ibid. verse. 155. Salvation is far from the wicked, because they seek not thy
statutes.

Esai. 8.20. To the Law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to
this word: it is because there is no light in them.

Hierem. 8.9. Lo, they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is
in them?

Amos 2.4. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Judah, and for
four, I will not turn to it, because they have cast away the Law of the Lord,
and have not kept his commandments, and their lies caused them to err, after
the which their fathers have walked.

Matt. 22.29. Then Jesus answered and said unto the Sadducees, ye are deceived,
not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God.

Matt. 23.13. Woe be to you Scribes, and Pharisees, Hipocrits, because ye shut
up the kingdom of heaven before men: for ye your selves go not in, neither
suffer ye them that would enter, to com in.

Luke 11.52. Woe be to you interpreters of the Law: for ye have taken away the
key of knowledge: ye entered not in your selves, and them that came in, ye
forbad.

Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, are written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.

Colos. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plentiously in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing your own selves in psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, etc.

2. Tim. 3.14. But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and art
persuaded thereof, knowing of whom thou have learned them: and that thou have
known the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. For the whole Scripture
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to
correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute,
being made perfect unto all good works.

Act. 17.11. These were also more noble men than they which were at
Thessalonica, which received the word with all readiness, and searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so.

1. Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby. Vide Ioh. 5.3 and Act. 8.28.

2. Pet. 1.19. We have also a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye
do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place,
until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts.

Out of the first part of the third Homily of S. John Chrysostom, upon the
parable of the rich Glutton and poor Lazarus, written by Saint Luke, Cap. 16.
Therefore I do often foreshew you many days before the Argument whereof I
will entreat, that on the days which be betwixt, you taking the book, and
weying and considering the sum of the matter, after you understand what has
already been said, and what remains to be said, you may the better prepare
your mind to hear that which after shall be entreated of. Therefore I do
always exhort you, and will not cease to exhort you, that you would not only
mark the things which are here spoken, but also when you are in your houses,
you would continually give your selves to the reading of the holy scriptures.
The which thing I cease not to inculcate and beat into them who priuatlie have
company with me. Neither let any man say to me (for they be cold and vain
words, and ought altogether to be contemned) I am troubled with worldly
matters, I have in hand public affairs, I exercise an Art and occupation, I
have a wife and bring up children, I have care of family, I am a worldly man,
it is not my duty to read the scriptures: but theirs who have left the world,
who dwell in the top of the mountains and lead such a continent life. What
say thou O man? is it not thy part to read and study the scriptures, because
thou art troubled with many cares? yea it rather belongs to thee than to
them: for they do not so much need the help and defense of the scriptures as
you do, who are tossed as it were in the midst of the waves of worldly
affairs. For solitary men being free from the court and courtly causes,
having their cottages in the wilderness, and keeping company with none, but
in that quietness with much security do live a studious and divine life, and
as it were resting on the haven, do live very safely: But we on the
contrary part tossed as it were on the midst of the sea, and falling will we
nill we, into sundry sins, have always need of continual solace and
comfort of the scriptures. They sit far from the conflict, and therefore
receive not many wounds: But thou that stand always in the front of the
battle, and receiuest many strokes, have more need of remedy. For as much as
thy wife provoke thee, thy son greeueth thee, and moves thee to anger,
thy enemy lays wait for thee, thy friend enuieth thee, thy neighbor
contendeth with thee, thy fellow supplanteth thee, the judge often threateneth
thee, poverty troubles thee, the loss of some of thy family makes thee to
lament, prosperity puffs thee up, and adversity beats and presses thee
down: Breefelie seeing that sundry occasions, yea and necessities of cares,
troubles, sorrow, vexations, and fear do on every side compass thee, and
innumerable darts do on every part fly upon thee, thou have need
continually to receive armor from the holy scriptures. Eccles. 9.
Know therefore that thou art in the midst of snares, and walk on the
pinacles of the city: for the concupiscence, of the flesh do more vehemently
and sharply inuad them which live in the continual company of the people:
whom both the fair face, and bewtifull body by the eyes catches, and filthy
talk with artificial and sweet songs by the ears moves, and many times
overcomes. But what do I speak of these things? That which is more vile
than any of these, even the odor of ointments, which smells from wicked
women living in stews and seeking filthy lucre often inueigleth many, and
leads them captive. Seeing therefore there be so many things that do assault
our souls, we stand the more in need of those divine remedies, that we may
both heal the wounds received, and repel those that afterward shall be
inflicted, and by the continual reading of the scriptures extinguish the fiery
darts of the devil. For it cannot be, I say it cannot be, that any man can
obtain salvation although we be continually partakers of this divine
medicine. But if we be daily wounded, and be destitute of remedy, what hope
can we have of life or salvation. Do thou not see Ironsmithes, Goldsmithes,
and Siluersmithes, and all those that occupy any handie craft, how they
always have ready and keep whole all the instruments of their art, although
famine pinch them, and poverty afflict them, rather desiring to sustain any
adversity, than to sell any of the instruments of their occupation, and by
the money thereof to be nourished: Yea and many times they will rather take
upon usury, than put in pawn and pledge the smallest of their tools, and
this they do not without just cause: for they know that if they be sold, their
art is altogether unprofitable to them, and that the substance of their profit
is lost: but if they retain and keep them, it may be that by exercising
continually their occupation, at the last by progress of time they may
discharge their debt. But if they do sell their instruments to other before
their debt be discharged, there remains no means to help their hunger, and
ease their poverty. Even after the same sort ought we to be minded and
affected: for as the hammer, the puntch and the tongs, are instruments to them,
so the books of the Apostles and Prophets and all the holy Scripture which
comes by divine inspiration, and is very profitable, are instruments to us.
And as they by those their instruments do work and finish that which they
take in hand: even so we also by these our instruments do form and frame our
soul, and when it is depraved, we amend it, and when it is corrupted, we
correct and renew it. And they herein only do use their art to add a form
to things, for they cannot alter and change the matter and substance of
vessels, as to make Gold of Silver, but they do only make the form and
fashion of things. But thou may not only do that, but more to: for thou
may of a wodden at the last make a golden vessel, as Paul witnesses, writing
in this manner, 2. Tim. 2. In a great house are not only vessels of gold and
of silver, but also of wood and of earth, some for honor, and some for
dishonor. If a man purge him from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor,
sanctified and made meet for the Lord, and prepared unto all good works.
Therefore let us not neglect to prepare and get us those divine books, lest we
in things touching our life be wounded. Neither let us hide and dig gold in the
ground for us, but let us hide to our selves the treasures of those spiritual
books. Indeed gold when it most increases, it most deceives them that
possess it: but these divine books being reposed and kept do greatly profit
those that have them. For even as where the kings armor and munition is reposed
and laid, although there be none that have the oversight of it, yet it causes
much safety and defense to them that dwell there, whilst neither open thief,
nor privy piker, nor any wicked person dare assault the house: even so
wheresoever those spiritual books be, from thence all devilish power is
expelled, and to them that dwell there much comfort and consolation is added.
For even the very sight of those books makes us more slack and slothful
to sin, for whether we have attempted any thing which is prohibited and
forbidden us, and therewith have polluted our selves, when we return home, and
behold those holy books, our conscience does more sharply condemn us, and
we are thereby warned and admonished from committing the same again: or whether
we persist in holiness we are made by those books more firm and constant: for
as soon as one has touched the Gospel, by and by he frames his mind, and
withdraws it from worldly matters, and that only by the sight thereof. But
if diligent reading be joined thereto, the soul being occupied in those holy
and divine mysteries, is purged and purified, for as much as God speaks to it
by the Scriptures. But what then (say they) if we understand not the matters
which are contained in the scriptures? Yes verily although thou understand not
that which is secret and obscure, yet even by the reading thou may get much
godliness: and yet it cannot be that thou should equally and alike be
ignorant of all. For the gracious spirit of God has so disposed and tempered
the Scriptures, that even publicanes, fishers, tentmakers, shepherds,
apostles, and simple and unlearned men might by them be saved, that no simple
or unlearned man should fly to this excuse of difficulty and hardness, seeing
that the thing which in those divine books be uttered, are so easy for all
men, that even craftsmen, servants, women, and those that be most void of
learning may not a little profit even by the hearing of them read. For they
whom God from the beginning vouchsafed to indue with his spirit of grace, did
not write and compose these books for vain glory as did the ethnicks, but for
the salvation of those which should hear them. For those profane
Philosophers, eloquent Orators, and fine Rhetoritians, when they did write
books, did not seek what was most for the public profit of the people: but
only had a regard heereto and studied for this, even to be in admiration, and
therefore albeit they uttered any thing that was profitable, yet they did cover
and hide it in the darkness of their wisdom which they much used. But the
Apostles and Prophets did al things contrary, for they uttered things in clear
and manifest manner, and opened them to all men, being as it were the common
teachers of the world, that every man might learn the things that are set
forth by the only reading thereof. And this the prophet foreshewed before
saying, They all shall be taught of God, Ierem. 31.
and every one shall not say to to his neighbor, know God, for all shall know me
from the least of them to the greatest of them. And S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 2.
And I brethren when I came to you, came not in gloriousnes of words or of
wisdom, showing to you the mysteries of God. And again: My words and preaching
were not in the fair enticing speech of man's wisdom: but in the plain
evidence of spiritual power. And again: We speak (says he) the wisdom not
of this world, nor of the princes of this world, which come to naught. To whom
are not manifest the things that be written in the Gospel? Who hearing blessed
be the mild, blessed be the merciful, blessed be the clean in heart, and such
other saiengs, will require therein to be instructed, or to have the same
expounded? Also to whom be not signs, miracles and histories plain and
manifest? This is but a vain pretense, excuse and cloak or cover of
slothfulnes. Thou do not understand the things that are contained in the
Scriptures? How can thou ever understand them, when as thou will not once
vouchsafe lightly to look upon them? Take the book into thy hands, read the
whole story, and keeping in memory the things which thou understand, often
reuolue and read over the things which be obscure and hard. But if thou cannot
by continuance of reading attain to the sense and meaning of it, come to a
wise man, go to a learned man, and communicate with them the things which thou
have read, show them thy vehement desire and flagrant affection. And if God do
see thee having so willing a mind, and so desirous an affection, he will not
neglect thy vigilancie and carefulnes. But though no man should teach thee that
which thou seek, he without doubt will open it to thee. Act. 8.
Remember the Queen of Ethiopians chamberlain, who being a Barbarian, and
distracted with many cares, and on every side troubled with sundry affairs,
although he did not understand what he did read, yet nevertheless he sitting
in his chariot did read the divine Scriptures. If he showed such diligence
laboring by the way: consider what he would do being in his house? If in his
journey he would not cease or abstain from reading, much less would he
refrain being quiet in his house. If so be whilst he was ignorant, and did
not understand, yet notwithstanding did read, and ceased not from reading, much
less would he cease after he was instructed and did understand. For that thou
may know that he understood not what he did read, hear what Philip said to
him: Do thou understand what thou read? The which when he heard, he was
not abashed nor ashamed, but confessed his ignorance, and said: How can I,
unless I have an instructor, whilst as yet he had none to teach him, yet
notwithstanding he did read, and thereby quickly obtained an instructor. God
seeing his willing mind, embraced his good affection, and straight ways sent
him a teacher. And although Phillip be not now with us, yet the same spirit
which moved Phillip, is with us. Dearly beloved, let us not neglect our
salvation, al these things were written to put us in remembrance, whom the ends
of the world are come upon. The reading of the scriptures is a great defense
and safeguard against sin: the ignorance of the Scriptures is a very slippery
means to fall into sin, and a great gulf of sin. It is a great perdition
and destruction to salvation to be ignorant of the divine Scriptures: this
thing has bred heresies, brought in corrupt life, and has turned all things
vpside down. It cannot be, I say it cannot be, that any man which gives
himself to the daily and diligent reading of the Scriptures, should depart
without fruit. Hitherto Chrysostom in that place.

Chrysostomus in Genes. Homil. 21. LEt us not pretend the government of our
house, the care of wife and children: that we should think the same sufficient
to excuse our negligent and idle life. Neither let us allege those cold and
frivolous speeches, in saying I am a worldly man, I have a wife and care of
children, as many men use to speak, if at any time we exhort them to virtuous
exercises, or to bestow study and diligence in reading the holy Scriptures.
Then they say, That pertains not to me. Have I forsaken the world? Am I a
monk or a solitary man? What say thou O man? Does it only pertain to
solitary men, to please God? He will have all men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the truth, and that no man neglect virtue.

A little after. I beseech you therefore let us not deceive our selves, but the
more we be entangled with such cares, let us the more diligently seek remedies
by the reading of the holy Scriptures.

A little after. WHerefore I beseech you, let us not lightly run over those
things which be contained in the holy Scriptures, but attentively let us read
them, that attaining profit by them, at the last we may give our selves to
virtue wherewith God is pleased.

Chrysostom in Genes. Homil. 29. YOu have seen how whatsoever calamity
afflicts our humane nature, we may take a convenient remedy for the same out
of the Scriptures, and repel all the cares and griefs of this life, and not
be grieved with any that shall happen. Therefore I beseech you that often times
you would come hither, and diligently harken to the reading of the holy
Scripture, and not only when you come hither, but also at home in your houses,
take the holy Bible into your hands, and with earnest study seek to get the
profit which is contained in it. For from thence great gain is gotten. First
by reading the tongue and speech is reformed. Moreover the soul getting thereby
wings is lifted up on hie, and is lightened with the beams of the Sun of
righteousness, and during that time being delivered from the inticements of
filthy thoughts, enjoys great quietness and tranquillity. Moreover that which
sensible meat does to the increasing of the strength of the body, the same does
reading unto the soul. For it is a spiritual food, and makes the soul
strong and constant, and given to the love of wisdom: not permitting it to be
overcome of absurd affections: but making it light, and by wings causes it to
fly (as it is said) into the very heaven. Therefore I pray you let us not
through negligence loose so great gain and profit: but even in our houses let
us give our selves to the reading of the holy Scriptures. And when we be here
present, let us not spend the time in trifles and unprofitable talk. But to
the end that we be come together, let us mark diligently those things that be
read, that having gotten great profit we may depart.

Chrysostom upon Genes. homil. 35. Beloved the reading of the holy Scriptures
is a great good thing. For this makes the soul endued with good manners, this
lifts the mind into heaven, this makes a man thankful. This causes us not
to look upon any thing that is present, but to have our minds always upon
another life: and that looking to the Lords reward we should do all things, and
cheerfully take in hand virtuous exercises. Out of the Scriptures we may
learn the providence of God quickly helping us, the valiantnes of just men,
the goodness of our Lord, the greatness of his rewards. From hence we may be
stirred to the imitation and following of the good life of godly men, that we
wax not cold and careless in virtuous exercises and battles, but even before
they come upon us to put our confidence in Gods promises. Therefore let us give
our selves with great diligence to the reading of the divine Scriptures. For so
we get knowledge, if we read continually the things which be there contained.
Neither can it be, that he who with great study and fervent desire gives
himself to the reading of the holy Scriptures, should be alwais neglected, but
albeit we want the instruction of man, the Lord himself from an high entering
into our hearts, lighteneth our mind, illuminateth our understanding, reuealeth
those things which be secret, and teaches us the things which we do not
understand if we of our selves will do our own endeavor. For you shall not,
says he, call any man master upon earth. Therefore when we take that
spiritual book into our hands, all worldly care laid aside, let us keep our
cogitations, and restraining our mind that it be not carried away, let us with
good devotion and great attention give our selves to reading, that we may by
the holy Ghost be lead unto the understanding of the things that be written,
and receive great profit thereby. That Barbarian an eunuch to the Queen of the
Ethiopians, who was in so great glory, and did ride in his coach, yet in that
time neglected not reading: but having the prophet in his hand, used great
diligence, and that not knowing what was contained therein, yet he did his
endeavor, and used study, willingness, and attentiuenes. Consider I pray you,
how diligent he was in not neglecting to read as he was traveling in his
journey, and especially sitting in his coach. Let them hear and mark this
example, who cannot be persuaded to do this at home in their houses, but think
the reading of these things to be superfluous, because they either live in
marriage, or be appointed to warfare, or have care of children, servants and
other affairs, and therefore think that the reading of the holy Scriptures
does not appertain unto them. Behold this Eunuch, etc.

A little after. Whereupon he did not speak those things, which now many men
do, saying, I do not understand those things that be written, and I cannot
attain to the profound deepenesse of the Scriptures. Why should I in vain
take pains and trouble my self, I read and have none to direct me? That
Eunuch did think no such thing, being in tongue a Barbarian, but in mind a
Philosopher. But rather he thought he should not be neglected but helped with
grace from above, if he did his own endeavor, and used study and diligence.
Therefore our gracious Lord seeing his desire, did not forsake him, neither did
let him want his help, but straightwaies sent a teacher unto him.

A little after. YOu see what great profit the diligent reading of the holy
Scriptures brings.

A little after. LEt us not therefore, I beseech you, neglect the reading of
the Scriptures. But whether we understand the things therein contained or
understand them not, nevertheless let us be earnest in reading: for continual
meditation does not a little confirm the memory: neither seldom does it come
to pass, that that which we reading could not to day find out, to morrow
reading the same over again, we do quickly and plentifully perceive it, God
of his mercy secreatly inspiring it into our minds.

Chrysostom in his preface upon the Epistle to the Romans. But this greeueth
me and even tormenteth me, and makes me to mourn, that all men do not know
this man ( Paul) as they ought to do: but many be so ignorant of him, that
they do not well know the number of his Epistles. And this comes not by the
fault of ignorance, but because it likes them not continually to talk with
this blessed man.

A little after. ANd you if you would give your selves to reading with
cheerfulness and attentiveness, you should have need of no other teacher.
For the word of Christ is true, when he says: seek and you shall find, knock
and it shall be opened unto you.

A little after. HEnce innumerable evils have sprung, in that men be ignorant
of the Scriptures. Hence has come that great plague of heresies, hence
proceeds dissolutnesse of life and unprofitable labors. For as they that be
deprived of this outward light, cannot walk rightly: so they that look not
to the beams of the holy Scripture must needs often and much offend in that
they walk in far worse darkness, the which that it happen not to us, let
us open our eyes to the brightness of the Apostles words: For his tongue in
cleerenesse exceeded the sun, and in the deliverance of doctrine he excelled
all others. Infinite such other earnest exhortations for all men to read the
holy Scriptures might be alleged out of Saint Chrysostom, who of all other
was most earnest and vehement in this point: but these shall suffice, both to
stir up the godly to this holy and fruitful exercise: and to convince the
vanity of our Rhemists, and their foolish cauillations, In their Preface.
who say that he spoke these things not as a teacher in school, making exact
and general rules to be observed in all places and times, but as a pulpit man,
agreeable to that audience, and his peoples default, who were delicat, dull,
worldly, and much given to dice, cards, stage plays, and theaters, etc. What
vain cauils these be, let the Christian reader indifferently judge. And
seeing all the children of Adam through the corruption of their sinful nature,
be subject to the like vanities, vices, and maladies as that people of
Constantinople were, they stand in need of the same remedies, and preservatives
of reading, and knowing the holy Scriptures, which Chrysostom as a good
Physician prescribed. And for the further testifieng of this truth, and
conuincing of the vanity and folly of our Rhemists, I will ad a few moo
places out of the other ancient and godly fathers of Christ's Church, by the
which the Christian reader may discern who be their true children and
faithful successors, we or the Papists.

The Canons ascribed by the Papists to the Apostles, Canon. 84. (...). that is,
Let all of you both Clerks and lay men have the reverend and holy Bible.

Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 46. Seeing all the Scriptures both prophetical and
apostolical be plain and without ambiguitie, and may alike be heard of all men.

Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 12. THe ignorance of the Scriptures, and of Gods
disposition, has brought them into all these errors.

Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 66. REad diligently the Gospel which is given unto us
by the Apostles, and read diligently the Prophets, and you shall find all the
actions, doctrine, and passion of our Lord preached in them.

Tertullianus de baptismo. DOmini sermo non debet abscondi ab vllo. that is,
The word of God ought not to be hid from any.

Tertullianus apolog. aduers. gentes, cap. 39. WE assemble together to hear
the holy Scriptures, as the quality of the present times inforceth us, either
to forewarne, or to call to memory any thing. Surely with those holy words we
feed our faith, we lift up our hope, we confirm our confidence, yet
nevertheless we confirm the discipline of holy precepts by urgent
exhortations.

A little after. THey talk so, as they that know that God does hear them.
After washing and candles brought in, every one is provoked out of the holy
Scriptures, as he can to sing forth unto God, etc.

Cyprianus de duplici martyrio. IN like manner in other temptations object unto
the temptor the buckler of the Scriptures, in the which God speaks unto thee
no less faithfully, than if he spoke unto thee mouth to mouth.

A little after. Sobriety with earnest prayer, and continual meditation of
the Scriptures is a most safe defense of the heart. For all holy Scripture given
by divine inspiration is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct and to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, and instructed to
every good work. Out of it therefore we must gather sentences, which we may
always have at hand and in readiness, that by them we may beat down the
serpent lifting up his head against us. For there is no disease of the soul,
whereunto the holy Scripture does not minister a present remedy. Hence we must
get examples of godly men, especially of Christ, wherewith every one may
either encourage, or comfort himself.

Origines in Leuiticum. Homil. 9. Do thou think who come scarcely upon
the holy days unto the Church, and neither art attenti^^ (...) to hear the
word of God, nor indeuorest to keep his commandments, that the lot of the
Lord can come upon thee? Yet we wish, that by hearing these things you would be
diligent not only in the Church to hear the word of God, but also to be
exercised therein in your houses, and to meditate both day and night in the law
of the Lord, for there also is Christ, yea and he is every where to them that
seek him.

A little after. IF the divine reading be in thine hands, and the commandments
of God before thine eyes, then thou shall be found ready to cast away those
things that pertain to the devils lot.

In the same homily after. THe nourishments of the soul are divine reading,
continual prayer, the word of doctrine, with this food it is fed, becomes
healthie, and gets victory.

Theodoretus de curatione Graecarum affectionum. Lib. 5. WE do manifestly show
you the great power of the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets. For the whole
face of the earth which is under the Sun, is full of such words. And the
Hebrew books be translated, not only into the Greek, but also into the
Roman, Egyptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, Scithian, and Slauoi, and in a
word, into all toongs which the nations use unto this day.

And a little after. YOu may every where see our doctrines to be understood not
only of them, which be the teachers of the Church, and instructors of the
people, but also of Taylers, Smithes, weauers, and all artificers: Yea also of
all women, not them only which be learned, but also victuallers, puddingmakers,
hand maids and servants. Neither those men only which dwell in cities, but
also husbandmen, do well understand the same. One may find ditchers, and
heardmen, and planters of vines disputing of the trinity and of the creation
of all things, and having better knowledge of the nature of man, than Plato and
Aristotle had.

Saint Hierom in his preface upon Esaias to a woman called Eustochium. IF
according to the Apostle Paul, Christ be the power of God, and the wisdom of
God: and he that knows not the Scriptures, knows not the power and wisdom
of God, then the ignorance of the Scriptures is the ignorance of Christ.

Saint Hierom ad Iulianum. WE fly unto the gravity of the holy Scriptures,
where is the true medicine of our wounds, and the sure remedies of our griefs.

Saint Hierom upon the Epist. to Tit. cap. 1. THis place makes against them
who giving themselves to idleness, and sleep, think it a sin if they read
the Scriptures, and do contemn them as pratlers and unprofitable who meditate
day and night in the Law of God.

Saint Hierom in his Epitaphie of a woman called Fabiola. O good Jesus, with
what feruencie, with what earnest study did she give her self to the divine
books of the Scriptures? And as desirous to satisfy an hunger, she did run
through the Prophets, Gospels, and Psalms, propounding questions and hiding
the same being answered in the chest of her heart.

Saint Hierom in his Epitaphie of a woman called Paula. PAula could say the
Scriptures without Book, and she enforced me, that she and her daughter might
read over the old and new Testament hearing me expound it.

Saint Hierom to a woman called Celantia. IT is a great help unto righteousness
to fill thy mind with the holy Scriptures, and always to meditate in heart,
that which thou desire to execute in deed.

In the same place. LEt therefore the holy Scriptures be always in thy hands,
and continually meditated upon in thy mind.

Saint Hierom to Gaudentius touching the education of his young daughter called
Pacatula. WHen the ignorant and toothles girl comes to be seven years old,
and begins to be bashful, to know what she ought to keep in silence, and
to doubt what to speak, let her learn without book the Psalter, and until
she come to ripe age, let her make the books of Solomon, the Gospels, Apostels,
and Prophets the treasure of her heart.

Saint Hierom to a woman called Laeta concerning the bringing up of her
daughter. LEt her first learn the Psalter, and with those holy Psalms let her
withdraw her self from light songs. Let her be instructed in the proverbs of
Solomon, for the leading of her life. By the books of the Preacher let her
accustom to tread under feet the things of this world. In Job let her follow
examples of virtue and patience. Thence let her go into the Gospels and never
lay them out of her hand. Let her with the whole desire of her heart as it were
drink in the Acts of the Apostles and the Epistles. And when she has
enriched the storehouse of her heart with these riches, let her commit to memory
the Prophets, the five books of Moses, the books of the Kings and the
Chronicles, with the volumes of Esdras and Hester.

Saint Hierom in cap. 3. to the Coloss. upon these words of the Apostle. Let
the words of Christ dwell in you plentifully. HEre is showed that lay men
ought to have the word of Christ not sparingly, but plentifully, and to teach
and admonish one an other.

Saint Augustine lib. 3. de doctr. Christia. cap. 1. THe man that fears God,
diligently seeks his will in the holy Scriptures.

Saint Augustine in Psalm. 33. conc. 2. REad ye the Scriptures: Therefore God
would have the^ to be written, that we might be comforted by them.

Saint Augustine in Psalm. 64. Our father has sent from heaven Epistles unto
us, God has given the Scriptures unto us, by the which Epistles a desire to
come unto him should be wrought in us.

Saint Augustine de verbis domini secundum Johan. sermon. 45. YOu seek me and
shall not find me. Why? Because you search not the scriptures, which do bear
witness of me.

S. Augustine lib. de vtilitate credendi ad Honoratum. Cap. 6. Whatsoever,
believe me, is in those holy Scriptures, it is deep and divine: for truth and
discipline most meet both to refresh and reform our souls is wholly contained
in them. And surely they be so tempered that any man may as it were draw out
of them that which may be sufficient for him, if so be he come to read them
devoutly and godly, as true religion requires.

The Author of the book under the name of S. Augustine de salutaribus
documentis. Cap. 38. GReat confusion belongs to the souls of lay me^, which
say, what does it pertain to me to hear or learn by reading the books of
Scriptures, or to run unto Priests and Churches of saints? When I am a clergy
man, I will do those things which clergy men should do.

Bernardus ad sororem de modo been viuendi. Cap. 50. MOst dear sister, if thou will always be with God, always pray, and always read. The reading of the
holy Scriptures is very necessary for us. For by reading we learn what we
should do, what we should beware of, and whither we should go. Hereupon it is
said, Thy word is a light unto my feet. By reading our judgment and
understanding is increased: Reading instructs and prepares us to prayer and
to good works: Reading frames us both to active and contemplative life.
Therefore it is said in the Psalm: Blessed is the man that shall meditate in
the law of the Lord day and night. Reading and prayer be weapons wherewith the
devil is vanquished, and instruments whereby eternal blessedness is
obtained. By prayer and reading vices be forsaken, and virtues be norished in
our souls. Therefore beloved sister in Christ, use much to read and daily to
meditate in the law. Reading withholds our life from error, draws a man
from the vanity of the world, by reading our understanding and judgment do
increase. For Reading teaches thee what thou should do, admonishes thee
what to avoid, and shows thee whither thou should go: thou do greatly
profit when thou read, if thou do the things which thou read.

Josephus in his second book against Appion, of the Jews. Every week we
assemble to hear the Law: Every one of us being asked of the Law, can answer
as easily and readily as his own name. For we learning them wholly from our
tender years, and young age, have them as it were imprinted and graven in our
minds.

Erasmus Roterod. in paraclesi. I Could wish that all women did read the
Gospel and Paul's Epistles: and I would that they were translated into all
languages of all nations: that they might be read and known not only of
Scottish and Irish men, but also of Turks and Saracens.

That the good Christian Reader may the better prove and discern the spirits,
which be of God, and which not: I have thought good to set down a few sayings
of Popish writers, which let him compare with the former sayings, of the holy
Scriptures and faithful fathers, and consider how they agree therewith.

Doctor Standish in a book entitled A discourse wherein is debated, whether
it be expedient that the Scripture should be in English for all men to read
that will, Printed at London by Robert Ealie 1554. writes thus. WHereby we may
easily learn that all people should not have the Scriptures in their own
handlings at their pleasure, as they have had these dosen years past, Cap. 6.
probat. 1.
to their utter spiritual destruction.

Again. THat which ye have heard (says he) in secret places shall be
preached on the tops of the houses: Ibid. probat. 2.
See how this agrees with that Deuteronomy. 6.9.
he said not it shall be written in your Churches (as it has been Iewishlie
used on late here in England) nor written in Bibles to be read of every one in
his mother tongue, and set up for that purpose in every Church.

Again. I Cannot then but marvel that men to their own confusion are so
desirous to have the Scripture in their mother tongue. Ibid.


Again. THrough the damnable liberty of having it in the vulgar tongue, have
not all holy mysteries been despised? Ibid. probat. 3.
Have they not thereby utterly condemned all that has not been expressed in
the letter of their English Bibles?

Again. Ibid.
WHerefore away with the English damnable translation, and let them learn the
mysteries of God reverently by heart: Blasphemy.
and learn to give as much credit to that which is not expressed, as to that
which is expressed in Scripture: knowing that in three points the authority of
the Church is above the authority of the Scripture: one is in fortifieng
verities not written, to be necessary to salvation, etc.

Again. Probat. 9. Compare this with the saying of Theodoretus before.

This did the Antichristian Romish Synagog.


THe universal Church of Christ did never allow nor approve the Scripture to
be in the vulgar tongue, weighing the manifold inconveniences that have issued
thereof: but ever from time to time among other errors did tread that down and
suppress it.

Again. Probat. 28.
IT is the occasion of many heresies, to have the Scripture in the vulgar tongue.

A little after. ANd yet then seeing the rude ignorant sort be ever prone
peruersly to wrest the Scriptures, we must think that to have the Scripture in
English is to minister occasion to the common sort to fall into errors.

Again. Probat. 30.
LIke as God appointed the old Law to be written in stone, Ier. 31.
tables, or books: so did he appoint (as Jeremy witnesses) the new to be
written only in the heart of man. Why should the writing in books then be so
highly regarded? Mark this blasphemy.
But this carnal, this fleshly regarding by no means can be so well extenuate
or rather quite taken away, as by taking the Scripture forth of the vulgar
tongue, and forth of the handling of the lewd ignorant.

Again. In the conclusion.
ANd finally, seeing that by no means so soon as by the Scriptures in English,
heresies do both spring daily, and be also maintained, wherein should good men
be more diligent than in the extirpation thereof?

These saiengs out of that beastly book of that doltish doctor I have the more
largely laid down, that the Christian Reader may see what doctrine in Queen
Mary's days was published and allowed for Catholic. Whereunto I will ad a
saying of an other papist.

Alphonsus de Castro the Spanish friar writes thus: Aduersus haeres. lib. 1.
cap. 13.
Tertia demum haeresium parens and origo, etc. The third parent and beginning
of heresies is, the translating of the holy Scriptures into the vulgar tongue,
by means whereof it comes to pass, that they be read of all men with
respect or difference of persons. Hitherto the papists.

John 3.20.
Every man that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light
least his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to the
light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought according to
God. Tertullianus lib. de Trinitate. SEd enim Scriptura diuina haereticorum and
frauds and furta facile conuincit and detegit. that is, But the holy
Scripture does easily convince, and discover the deceits, and robberies of
heretics.

Theophylactus in Luc. cap. 16. NVnc nihil tam vtile est, vt Scripturarum
diligens scrutatio, etc. that is, Now there is nothing so profitable as the
diligent searching of the Scriptures, for the devil also can falsely and in
show cause the dead to rise, that he may seduce the foolish, sowing from hell
doctrines agreeable to his malice. But nothing can deceive them which do well
and diligently search the Scriptures. For they be the candell and light, which
shining the thief is taken and made manifest. Therefore we must believe the
Scriptures, and not apparitions from the dead.

FINIS.

