HENRICUS BVLLINGERVS


A most godly and learned Discourse of the woorthynesse, authority, and
sufficiency of the holy Scripture: Also of the cleerenesse, and plainness of
the same, and of the true use thereof. Wherein is discussed this famous
question: Whether the Canonical Scriptures have authority from the Church, or
rather the Church receive authority from the Scriptures. By occasion whereof
are touched the dignities and duties of the Church, touching traditions, with
answer to all objections. Translated out of Latin into English, by John
Tomkys: and dedicated to the right honorable Sir Richard Pipe, Knight, Lord
Mayor of the City of London.

Psalm. 119. Part 13. ver. 4. I am wiser then the Aged, because I keep thy
commandments.

Printed at London, for William Ponnsonby. 1579.

To the right honorable and worthy Magistrate, Sir Richard Pipe, Knight, Lord
Mayor of the City of London. Health and peace in our Lord Jesus for ever.
THere has been no age, right honorable, which has more plentifully tasted
of God his singular benefits and special grace, than this our age, wherein he
has caused, his unspeakable mercy of the light of his Gospel to shine in the
darkness of ignorance, that our minds might be lightened thereby, to receive
forgiveness of our sins offered unto us in his son Christ, our only, perfect
and sufficient Savior, to our endelesse comfort, and that our footesteeppes
might be directed to walk in the paths of righteousness all the days of our
life, to the glorifiing of his holy name. Neither has he dealt more graciously
with any nation, then with this our Realm of England, wherein the professors
of the Gospel live safe from the foraine enemy, and free from persecution at
home, as it were in a City of refuge, and a priueledged Sanctuary, when as
our neighbors round about us, taste either of the one, or feel the smart of
the other. And this has he brought to pass by the administration of his
faithful servant Queen Elizabeth, our most victorious Debora, who by the
mighty power of her Lord our God, has woorthily triumphed over Idolatry,
which is nothing else but spiritual tyranny, whereby the consciences of her
subjects were more grievously afflicted, than were the ancient Israelites by
the nine hundred iron charrets of cruel captain Sysara. God grant, that she
may judge us double the years, which Debora judged Israel, and that her hand
may still prosper and prevail against that Roomish Iabin until he be utterly
destroyed, and yet, all these his gracious gifts so abundantly bestowed upon
us notwithstanding, such is the corruption of our nature, and the
unthankfulness of our minds, that in some, pure Religion being despised, the
stinking root of Superstition remains still, and in other, in stead of
godly life, which is the true fruit of Faith, is spronge up the sharp
bryer of Atheism, even of the want of the true fear of God, so that there is
no Shire, no City, no town, almost no household, but it is either poisoned
with the one, or ouergrowen with the other, if not fully fraught with both. And
therefore may the godly well say with David: Psalm. 120.4.
Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech: and to have mine
habitation among the tents of Cedar. One chief cause of the great increase of
these two grievous sins, is the sinister opinion diversely conceived touching
God his word, when as the supersticious think it not sufficient, to lead us
to the perfect knowledge of all things, necessary for our salvation, and the
wicked worldlinges so little esteem it, that they make a jest of it. If this
crooked opinion of both these kind of men might be so streightened, that they
would at the last read and hear God his word, with a full persuasion, that
it is the perfect rule of Faith, and the plain direction of life, it is, to
be hoped, that these two naughty trees, Superstition and Atheism, would be
in short time, if not plucked up by the root forth of the Lords garden,
yet at the least so snagged and mangeled, that the pleasant trees thereof,
that is to say, the godly, should have the more room to spread abroad their
fruitful branches. Neither may we look to see this happy change in men
before God his word, to be read and heard with confidence and followed with
diligence. For if the earth, be it never so fat, it cannot bring forth fruit
before it have received seed, much less can man, being by nature barraine
ground, bring forth the fruits of righteousness, before he have received
into his heart Gods word, which is the incorruptible seed, whereby we are borne
anew. And as we rest in hope, after the seed is thrown into the ground, that
God will send down the dew of heaven to water the same, that it may bring
forth fruit in due season: so if men would receive the seed of Gods word
into their hearts, it were greatly to be hoped, that God of his mercy would
cause it to take root, and would with the dew of his grace so water it, that
the barraine soil would become good ground, and the noisome shrubbes become
pleasant trees, yielding forth the fruits of faith to GOD his glory in due
season. I need not further to commend this Book, considering that master
Bullinger has already commended it in his Epistle following. Neither shall
the Reader repent him of his labor, if it shall please him with diligence to
peruse it over. And because your Lordshippe has been a means of my
maintenance in study, whereby I have obtained that simple talent, which GOD
has bestowed upon m^, I esteemed it my duty to bestow upon you this my
travail, as a pledge of my grateful mind toward you, and some part of
discharge of my duty toward my Country. I trust you will receive it with
such an affection as I do offer it, and so much the rather, because it
comes from your poor country man, and was translated in the town where
your Lordship was borne, chiefly to profit the neighbors thereunto adjoining.
God keep your honor in good health, and guide you with his heavenly wisdom
in the well ordering of the great and weighty affairs unto your office
incident. From mine house in Bilston the 10. of February. 1579.

Your Lordships at commandment John Tomkis.

Henry Bullinger, Mini^^er of the Church of Zurich, to the gentle Reader,
wishes grace and peace from the Lord.
THis Book was brought me, gentle Reader, from a far distant and famous
City, certain weeks past, without the senders and authors name. This ^s his
only request, that if this Book ^ight be thought worthy to be set forth,
might be delivered to the diligent man ^. Christopher Froschouerus to be
printed (...) him. The title of the book was this: A ^scourse, whether the
holy Scripture ^aue authority from the Church: or ^^ther the Church receive
authority ^^om the holy Scripture? collected by a ^uer of godliness, for the
instruction of the ^nlearned and simple. Being much delited ^ith this holy,
profitable, and necessary argument, I began forthwith to read the Book with
great affection, and easily perceived, that the author being endued with
singular humanity and modesty, did (of purpose conceal his name, not
regarding to make it known. For he would not seek to get any praise of
the world, which many foolishly do by setting forth Books: but was rather
willing to further, extolle and set forth the glory of GOD only, and of
his word. I saw also in the man a fervent desire to bring the syncerenesse
of pure Religion to knowledge, and to further the manifest profit of the
lovers of godliness. To be brief, I acknowledged the gifts of God to
appear in this man, I mean his dexterity and happiness in handeling this
famous argument, having been long in controversy among the learned, and
diversely expounded. For whatsoever may be spoken thereof necessarily and
profitably, he has wholly contained it in this book, yea and that briefly,
evidently, plainly, and in very good order. For he has distinguished the
whole matter, being otherwise copious, into Chapters: then has ^ee placed
before every Chapter the Argument, so that even by these brief Chapters thou
may easily perceive the scope and end of the whole Book, the sum, and
manner of the handeling of the ^ame. Whereupon I have prefixed before this
work, the Title of the Book, fra^ed of the matter handeled therein, that
thou may even with one view, and forthwith in the beginning, behold all
things in a very brief sum, which are contained in this Book. He sets
forth plainly, and confirms all his matters, especially, as it is meet, by
the holy Scriptures, then also by fit testimonies of the blessed ancient
Fathers. Neither has this his profitable travail ^iked me only, but also
certain other godly and learned men, unto whom thou may worthily ascribe
more than unto me. I have therefore placed this mine Epistle before this
Book, least the work being set forth without ^he Authors name, should
either ^ee little regarded or suspected of thee. Neither shall this Book be
namelesse, if it meet with any stout adversary, which can assail it and
oppugn it. Those things which I have hitherto spoken in praise of this book,
thou shall by experience, and with admiration witness to be true, so that thou
read it diligently, and with a sincere mind, and also weigh it duly.
Farewell gentle Reader. From Zurich, the month of August. 1571.

A brief sum of the chiefest points handeled in this Book, as it is
divided by Chapters.
THE reasons of those, which do extol the authority of the Church, abooue
the Scriptures. Cap. 1. Fol. 1 The deceitfulness of them is reproved, which
do diminish the authothoritie of the Scripture, whereupon the authority of
the church does depend. Cap. 2. Fol. 4. That the authority of the Scripture
is greatest, because it contains the word of God, which in the beginning was
delivered to the church by lively voice. cap. 3. Fol. 8. The place of Hieremie
his 31. chapter is discussed, and also it is showed that the Apostles wrote the
Gospel by the will of God. cap. 4. Fol. 14. That all things, which concern
faith, godliness, and salvation, are fully and sufficiently contained in the
Scripture. cap. 5. Fol. 26. That the Scripture was given by inspiration, to
correct evil manners, and to confute heresies: that forth of it only
controversies must be judged. And that it is neither dark nor doubfull. cap.
6. Fol. 30. Whereupon the Scripture is called Canonical. Also testimonies of the
Fathers, touching the most excellent authority thereof. cap. 7. Fol. 42. That
the authority of the Canonical Scripture is more excellent then the Councels,
the Fathers, yea then the decrees and ordinances of all men. Cap. 8. Fol. 44.
That the Canonical Scripture has the chief perfection of her authority from
the holy Ghost, and of her self: And co^trarily that the Church receives
her authority from the Scripture. cap. 9. Fol. 51. How the Canon of the new
Testament was ordained, and that it has authority of it self, and from the
Authors thereof, and that the authority of the Church is maintained thereby.
cap. 10. Fol. 55. How ungodly and wicked it is, to preach without the warrant
of holy Scripture. cap. 11. Fol. 11. That the true Church is to be sought in
the Scripture, to be included ded therein, and to be esteemed by the
Scriptures. cap. 12. Fol. 65. Of the duties of the Church about the
Scriptures, and first of this, that she keeps the holy Books of the
scripture as a witness. cap. 13. Fol. 69. That the Church publishes the word
of God. cap. 14. Fol. 70. That the Church discerns the Books of holy
Scripture from Apocryphal and counterfaits. cap. 15. Fol. 71. Of the saying of
Augustine: I would not believe the Gospel, but that the authority of the
Church moves me also. cap. 16. Fol. 74. Of the gift of interpretation. Cap.
17. Fol. 77. Of the the saying of Christ: If he will not hear the Church, let
him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a Pubcan. Mat. 18.19. cap. 18. fol. 82.
Of the saying of Paul: The Church is the pillar and ground of the truth. 1.
Tim. 3.15. Chap. 19. Fol. 84. Of the saying of Paul: Brethren stand fast, and
hold the ordinances, which ye have taught, whether it be by our preaching, or
by our Epistle. 2. These. 2.15. Chap. 20. Fol. 86. That the doctrine, which the
Apostles taught by lively voice, and which they delivered in writing, is all
one: and that this is the form of the traditions of the Apostles, if they
agree with the holy Scriptures. Chap. 21. Fol. 88. A perfect proof of those
Traditions, which are indeed the Apostles, forth of the most ancient
Writers, Irenaeus, and Tertullianus. Chap. 22. Fol. 91. Of the subtlety and
deceitfulness of Sophisters, which use guilefully the word Tradition, which
is diversely taken. Chap. 23. Fol. 101. Of the uncertainty, repugnancie, and
variety of Traditions. Chap. 24. Fol. 104. That the Church has been deceived
even from the Apostles time, under the pretense of Traditions. Chap. 25. Fol.
106.
A Catalogue of the Doctors and writers, whose testimonies the author of this
Treatise does allege in this Book.
Ambrose Athanasius Augustine Basil Chrysostom Clemens Cusanus Cyprian Cyril
Epiphanius Enagrius Eusebius Gerson Gratian Hillarie Hyperius Jerome Irenaeus
Lactantius Nicephorus Origin Panormitanus Philaster Saluianus Sozomenus
Tertullian Theodoretus Theophilactus.
Whether the holy Scripture have authority from the Church, Or whether the
Church do rather take authority from the holy Scripture.
The first Chapter. The reasons of those, which do extol the authority of the
Church above the Scripture.
THE chiefest reverence, after God, and God his word, is due to the Church,
Christ his spouse, which God so dearly loved, that his will was, that his
only begotten son should be a sacrifice for the same, whom he endueth with
his spirit, that the said Church may be the temple and image of God, wherein
his will is to be celebrated both heree, and in the everlasting life.

Therefore it is godliness, diligently to collect and with thankful mind to
consider all the gifts, and all the riches wherewith the Church is adorned and
enriched. She has the son of God for her head, The praise of the Church of
Christ.
spouse and savior, unto whom she is married in faith: she has the joyful
news of the Gospel: she has the holy Ghost for her governor: she has the
ministry prolonged by the Fathers, the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles,
which have most plentifully bestowed upon her, as upon a rich treasure house,
(as says Irenaeus) all things apperteyning to truth, Irenaeus aduersus
haeres. lib. 3. ca. 4
that every one, which will, may draw forth of her the drink of life: she
has Pastors, and authority to call Ministers for the setting forth and
conseruing of the gospel, of whom it is written: How beautiful are the feet of
the^, Romans 10.15.
which bring good tidings of peace, and bring good tidings of good things: She
has excellent gifts, understanding, and ye inerpretation of doctrine given by
divine inspiration: she has also the administration of Sacraments, and a
certain jurisdiction of her own, and laws of her own. The holy Scripture
adorning her with marvelous praises, calls her thoroughly ^re, The paradise
of the great worke^n, The city of ye holy king, clear as ^e dawning of the
day, bright as the ^orning, beautiful as the Moon, elect the Su^ne, who
smells of ointments, ^tandeth at the right hand of the king, ^cked with
imbrodered gardes of diverse ^^lours, who has no obscure thing, and (...)
through Christ altogether most white.

Therefore, because the sweet name of the Church is full of worthiness and
re^erence, hereupon it comes to pass, that ^anie eloquent and learned men,
do with ^ately, plentiful and gorgious speech, ex^ll, amplify, and
exaggerate the majesty, ^reheminence, authority and dignity ther^f, so that
they do affirm, that she has ^orce and power above the written word ^f God,
and think that Christians ought ^o give place to her in all things. What the
adversaries gather of the authority of the Church.
For ^herevpon the adversaries of the truth gather, that the Church is more
ancient than the Scripture, and that the Scripture has her authority from the
Church, that the Church of the Fathers continued 2449. years, before any
thing was written touching religion.

Also, that the Church of the new Testament was gathered together many years
with the lively voice of the Gospel, before any thing was written by the
Apostles. And because the Church received the Scripture, and allowed it by her
own judgment, that the authority of the Church, which received and allowed,
is greater than the authority of the Scriptures, which were received and
allowed: And therefore, that the authority of the Church is not only not
inferior, not only equal, but rather superior, and better known, than the
authority of the scripture. For the Church has approved the chiefest
scriptures, to be Canonical, which approbation they neither had of themselves,
nor of their authors. Otherwise, what cause is there, why we should receive
the Gospel of S. Mark, which saw not Christ, and yet not receive the
Gospel of Nicodemus, which now also is extant, who notwithstanding both saw
Christ, and was his scholar? Moreover, why is the Gospel of Luke the disciple
admitted, and the gospel of Bartholomewe the Apostle rejected? Truly they
have ^r authority, not from the authors, ^n whom they come, but from the
^^urch. No holy Scripture does show (...) the rest of the Scriptures, which we
^e, are canonical, and worthy credit: (...) consent of the Church has made
them ^benticall. So that Augustine says ^ll, I would not believe the Gospel,
August. contra Epist. Manichaeorum fundament. cap. 5.
^re it not that the authority of the ^tholicall Church does move me ^o. And
especially because there were ^e in times past, which both rejected ^o written
gospels, and the Evangelists ^o, which wrote them, sticking forsooth ^ought
false religion to Christ only, who ^ither wrote him self, neither comman^^d to
be written, but to be preached, and ^^lled his doctrine, not scripture, that is
(...) say writing, but the Gospel, that is to ^y, joyful news. But if we
give place ^rein to the Church, as by right we ^^ght al to give place unto
her: why then ^ould we not also give place unto her in ^e matter of the holy
Sacraments, and in ^^her points? That the Apostles did ^rite certain things,
not that their wri^^ngs should rule our faith and religion, but ^at their
writings should rather serve our faith and religion. And that it is not to be
thought, that the Apostles were able to comprehend in their Epistles all the
precepts and mysteries of our faith, and of christian doctrine: that Christ
and his Apostles in so many years preached much more, than could be
comprehended wtin the narow room of the books of the new testament. And that
therefore so short an abridgeme^t of the gospel was put in writing: yt the
greatest part thereof, as a rich treasure, might be left to ye traditions
fastened in ye inward bowels of the church.

That therefore many things are to be believed, Many things say the
adversaries, are to be believed, which are not written
which are not written: that the constant sentence of the church, ought to be
accepted as the gospel: that therefore in matter of doubt, and in any raised
controversy, the authority of the tradition of the church, is more effectual
to cause credit to be given, and to prove certainly, then the scriptures,
because the tradition is more evident and plain, and altogether unflexible:
when as contrarily the Scriptures be oftentimes very obscure, and do suffer
them selves to be wrested and applied to a diverse meaning: yea and to that
meaning, which any shall presume with him self before hand, and easily to be
shifted of with (...) crafty exposition. And that therefore the common
sentence of the tradition of the church, is the certain and inflexible ^^le of
the Scriptures: And to be brief, that the exactest squier, pattern, and rule
of ^^ith is, not the scripture, but the judgment of the Church: That the
saying of Christ is: Mat. 18.17.
If he will not hear the church, let him be to thee as an heathen man and a
Publicane. 1. Tim. 3.15.
That the church is the pillar and ground of truth, and that ^he can not err,
Io. 16.7. and 13.
because Christ promised to her the holy Ghost, which should lead her into al
truth. S. Paul exhorts us saying, Brethren stand fast, and hold the
ordinances, which ye have been taught, etc. To be brief, they go about to
prove by the testimony of the Prophet Hieremie, Hierem. 31.33.
that this is the property of the doctrine of the new testament (which first
was published by Christ, and afterward by the instruction of the holy ghost,
was preached by the Apostles, and spread abroad throughout ye whole world)
whereby God would have it to be known from ye doctrine of the old testament,
yt it should neither be ingraued in tables of stone, nor written with ink and
paper. That the Apostles were commanded by Christ to Matthew. 28.19. Mark. 16.15.
preach, not to write. Finally they dispute much of the briefnesse,
insufficiency, flexiblenesse, ambiguitie, and obscurenesse of the Scripture,
and rolling in all their points of Rethoricke, do go about to prove the
necessity, authority, perfection, certainty, and plainness of unwritten
Traditions: that is to say, That we should fetch the rule of faith, not from
the word of God, but from the Traditions of the Church: and that there is so
much force in the Scripture, as is granted thereunto by the consentes and
voices of the Church.

The second Chapter. The deceitfulnes of them is reproved, which do diminish
the authority of the Scripture, whereupon the authority of the Church does
depend.
Against the persons of the adversary.
I Do not deny that they, which make these reasons, are prompt, witty,
^^arned, and eloquent: would to God ^^ey were all so upright and gentle
min^^d, that they would put to their furthe^^nce rather to buyld up the
kingdom (...) Christ, then to defend the kingdom of ^^e Pope: and that they
would rather ^llowe the sincere doctrine of the Gos^ell, then maintain
corruptions and ab^ses. But whilst they are willing to gratify these
antichristian rulers, they ^un on so far through the heat of their
contention, that through their wicked, cursed, and profane Rhetorike, they
^laspheme and ^pise the holy Ghost. For when they do so beset and besiege the
Scripture, that they call it a Labyrinth, in the which we may go out of the
right way: A nose of wax, which is apt to be bowed unto either side: A matter
of controversies: A nourse garden of discentions: obscure, doubtful,
intricate: What is this, if it be not a reproach against the holy Ghost, the
author thereof? Why they do attribute so much to the Church, and derogate from
the Scripture.
But the mark whereat they shoot, is this, that whereas they may be
perceived oftentimes to have decreed, and ordained far otherwise in the
Sacraments and doctrines, then holy scripture can bear, they are willing to
maintain, that it was lawful for them so to do, because the Church, which
makes the holy scriptures to be of authority and credit, can change therein
whatsoever shall seem good unto her. Therefore least the majesty of the
Scripture should let their lust, they are not afraid to diminish the
authority thereof: They do imitate herein the old heretics.
wherein they do seem to imitate the craftiness and naughtiness of the
ancient heretics, who being willing to eschew, least they being pressed with
the authority of the Scriptures should be overcome, presumed boldly to
deny certain books of the Bible to be canonical, rejecting them and with
great disdain disallowing them. Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap. 2.
For when as they are reproved by the Scriptures (says Irenaeus) they do
accuse the Scriptures, as though they were not well handled, neither be of
authority, and because they be diversely spoken, and because the truth can not
be found forth in them, by those which know not the tradition. Carpocrates,
Seuerus, Cerdo, and Manes, rejected as August. witnesses, Augustine. de
haerisib. ad quod vult Deum. Tertul. lib. de haeresib Philaster lib. 1. Eusebius
Historia Ecclesiae lib. 4. cap. 29.
the books of the law: although Tertullian report of Cerdo, as also does
Irenaeus of Marcio, that they rejected all the Evangelists but Luke. Philaster
reports, that Cerinthus allowed Matthew only. We read in Eusebius, that the
Seuerians disalowed Paul his Epistles, and the Acts of the Apostles. For they
did suppose it to be an advantage for the obteyning of victory, if they did
condition, that they, whose darts they saw were to be feared, might be
thrown forth of the camp of the Church, before they should come to the
battle: Even so also do these think, that they shall triumph, if they may
most unworthily slander the Scripture of uncertainty, imperfection,
ambiguitie, and obscurity. And even as those old heretics did co^tentiously
affirm, that the truth could not be found by them, which knew not the
tradition delivered not by writing, but by lively voice: in like manner do these
also maintain, that the Apostles have not comprehended in their writings all
things, which we ought to believe: and most obstinately contend, that all
things apperteyning to godliness, are not contained in the Scripture: that
thou may understand, that both the one and the other are enforced with the
self same spirit of error.

It is a pernicious error to contend that the authority of the scripture must
be supported by the determination of the Church.
Wherefore we must withstand them by all means possible. For it is a most
hurtful, and perilous error, to hold that the credit of Scripture, should
hang on the determination of the Church: which being granted, Christ shall not
be Christ, nor the Gospel the Gospel, neither shall we take the Apostles for the
Apostles, nor the writings of the Apostles for the Apostles writings, but so
far forth as they be allowed in their Councels, by their own consents and
judgments. Here truly must the servants needs be greater then the Lord, that
the Lord may not be believed, but only so far forth as his servants will
that he shall be believed: as though forsooth God his eternal and inviolable
truth should be grounded and stayed upon the judgment of men. Neither is it
lawful nor sure to dally in divinity, as shall please men's devises. ^. Cor.
2.14.
For the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, and all
the thoughts, sayings, Psalm. 62 9. and 116.10.
and deeds of men do more resemble lying then truth, for Romans 3.4.
God only is true. Neither ^^e the arguments strong and sound, which these
patrones of superstitions take for the defense of their opinion, ^ut rather
feeble and weak (as in discussing and examining them shall appear) although
the simple being delu^ed with the only show of truth, be hol^en still in
errors and superstitions, and ^lienated from the truth. But let not us ^uffer
our selves to be brought to this pass, that we grant, that the holy
scripture has received credit and authority from the Church, seeing that the
matter ^s far otherwise. For what authority or estimation soever the Church
has, it ^ommeth wholly from the word of God, whereof also the Church has the
beginning: Even as Peter says: 1. Pet. 1.23.
Ye are borne ^new, not of corruptible seed, but of ^ncorruptible, by the
word of God, which lives and lasts for ever. And ^aul says: 1. Cor. 14 15.
In Christ Jesus I have begot^en you through the Gospel. Therefore as is the
daughter to the mother, so is the Church to the Scripture. And since we do all
confess, that the Church is sustained by the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, truly if the doctrine of the Prophets and the Apostles be the stay of
the Church, it must necessarily follow, that the authority of the doctrine
does excel the authority of the Church. Neither is there any cause that
they should cavil, that the Church was 2449. years before Moses, and before
the Scripture, because they make Moses his books most ancient: which in deed
I do confess, in respect of those books, which now are extant. But how know
they, whether that ancient Church, which was before Moses had written his Moses
books are called the Pentatenche, because they are five in number. Numer.
21.14.
Pentatenche, had any books of holy Scripture or none? Moses does cite the
book of the wars of the Lord. And in Iosu. 10.^3.
Joshua is the book of the Just cited. And it may be that Noah, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob wrote those things, which did pertein to their times, as Moses did
afterward gather them together, and by the inspiration of the holy ghost set
them in order. What say you to (...) moreover, that Judas. 1.14.
Judas in his Epi^ alleges certain things forth of the ^ke of Enoch? Neither
is there any ^e, why ye should say unto me, that that ^e is These books are
called Apochyphal, whose authors are not known.
apochyphal. Peradventure that (...) was apochyphal, which was carried ^ut after
that age, wherein the Apo^s lived: but those things which Judas alleged, were
firm and certain. But be ^or I will not contend) that the word of (...) was
not written before Moses, but (...) only uttered by the mouth, and as it ^re
delivered from hand to hand. What ^keth this to the matter wc we have in ^d?
For the same word, when afterward (...) was put in writing, must needs be so
^erued and restrained, that nothing ^ght be altered therein by me^. The word
(...) God is inviolable, and clean without cor^tion, whether it be delivered by
voice, ^y writing, neither can it sound co^tra^ things. I confess that the In
Greek (...).
unwritten ^de was more ancient the^ that, which ^r was put in writing. But I
acknow^ge only between these two the diffe^ce of time, and not of efficacy or
authori^ But in that the church is gathered by the word of God, it must needs
follow, that the Church is later then the word of God, and inferior to it.
Wherefore it is most evident, that the Church takes her excellency and
dignity from the word of God.

The third Chapter. That the authority of Scripture is greatest, because it
contains the word of God, which in the beginning was delivered to the Church
by lively voice.
THe authority of holy Scripture is far greatest, The Scripture was
revealed from heaven by God.
because it contains the word of God him self, and took her beginning of
the holy Ghost. For the doctrine contained in holy Scripture was not uttered,
enlarged, and plainly set forth by Philosophers, which lived in Greece or
Italy, but published by God him self, and revealed from heaven to certain
chosen men. The heavenly Father did declare it with his own voice (...) the
Patriarchs and Prophets. The ^^erlasting in heaven, and in the very ^ome of
his father, I mean the only ^^gotten son of God, our Lord and sa^^ur Jesus
Christ, coming down to (...) showed it. The holy Ghost in all ages ^^spired
certain excellent men, who de^ered the word incorruptly. 2. Pet. 1.20.21.
Know ^s (says Peter) that no prophecy in the Scripture is of any private
inter^^etation. For the prophecy came not ^olde time by the will of man: but
^^ly men of God spoke, as they were ^oued by the holy Ghost. Wherefore ^ul
defines this doctrine: 1. Cor. 2.6.7.8 and 10.
The wise^^me not of this world, neither of the ^^nces of this world, which
come to ^ught, but the wisdom of God in a ^ysterie, even the hid wisdom,
which ^od had ordained before the world, ^^ich God has revealed by his spi^e.
The scriptures are the principles of divinity
Therefore all most excellent points ^e to be attributed to the Scripture, the
^cles and divine sayings whereof, are ^h in divinity, as are in every science
(...) principles of the same, which must ^edes be supposed and granted.

The law and the Prophets.
Moreover, until Christ came into the world, the Scripture was contained in
the law, and prophesies. So do we see that Moses and the Prophets are cited
by Christ and the Apostles as approved witnesses, whose writings were received
amongst the people of God without controversy, none otherwise then public
registers. The writings of the Evangelists and of the Apostles.
The Apostles did first witness with lively voice that, which was given them
in commandment. But after that the doctrine of Christ was spread wide and
broad, and confirmed with innumerable miracles and wonders: and after that the
Church was established, which took her beginning of the preaching of the word
by faith, but yet so, that the word went before, when as many false Apostles
rose up, who under the pretense of revelations and traditions of the Apostles,
brought monstrous toys into the Church, and corrupted the pureness of God
his word, it seemed good to the holy ghost, that the sum of the Apostles
preaching should be set forth in writing, that it might be left perfect
for ^^em, which should come after. Where^^^e by the instinct of the holy
Ghost, ^wo of the Apostles wrote, as witnesses of things, which they had
seen: and two of the Disciples and Aposto^^e men wrote also, as witnesses of
^^ose things which they had heard, (...) the Apostles, whom other do
affirm to have seen also the things that they wrote. Those writings make the
four Gospels, touching the which ^renaeus debateth many things in the
^leuenth Chapter of his third Book against Heresies: Irenaeus. li. 3. ca. 1*
where he shew^th, that there must be four Gospels ^nely, not because the
Church has recei^ed four only, but because God has so appointed.

Touching the Gospel of Mat^hewe, The Gospel after Matthew. Hieronymus.
Saint Hierome writes this History: Pantaenus, when he was sent by Demetrius
Bishop of Alexandria into India, found that Bar^holomew did preach there the
coming of Christ according to the Gos^el of Matthew, the which being also
written in Hebrew, he brought from thence with him to Alexandria. Hereunto
agree those things, Nicephor. lib. 4. cap. 32. and lib. 7. cap 36.
which Nicephorus shows in the 32. chapter of his 4. book. The same
Nicephorus reports in the 36. Chapter of his 7. book, that the Gospel of
Matthew was found in Barnabas his tomb, written with Barnabas his own
hands. Whereby may be gathered, how greatly Apostolik men did esteem this
Gospel. The Gospel after Mark. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 5
Eusebius forth of Clement does report, that Peter the Apostle did approve and
confirm by his own judgment the Gospel of Mark, and did ordeine, that it
should be read in the Churches. Nicepho. li. 2. ca. 1
Nicephorus says, that Peter indicted the Gospel of Mark, and decreed, that it
should from thenceforth be read in the Congregations. Irenaeus. li. 3. ca. 1.
Irenaeus says: Mark the Disciple and interpreter of Peter, has delivered
unto us those precepts, which were preached by Peter.

The Gospel after Luke. Irenae li. 3. ca. 14.
The same Irenaeus writes of Luke thus: The Apostles delivered to al men
simply, and envying no man, those things, which they themselves had learned
of the Lord. And therefore ^^ke also envying no man, delivered to us in like
manner, those things which he had learned of the^. The Gospel after John.
Eusebius. li. 3. ca. 24.
Furthermore John perused over the writings o^ ^he three Evangelists, and
witnessed t^^t they were true. Finally, he finished (...) writing of the
Gospel. Therefore he ^cludeth the History written by him ^^is: John. 20.30.
and 31
And many other things truly did Jesus before the eyes of his disci^l^s,
which are not written in this ^^ke. These are written, that ye might ^^^eeue,
that Jesus is Christ the son (...) God, and that in believing, ye might ^e
life through his name. Under ^^th words he comprehends not on^ ^is own
Gospel, but also the Gospels (...) ^he rest of the Evangelists, as also (...)
old writers have understood this ^ce. And then truly was the truth of (...)
Gospel acknowledged and received, ^^en as yet there remained alive, which (...)
both heard and seen the Lord (...) self in his mortal flesh: or had ^rde
the chosen Apostles and Disci^^^s, which were familiar and con^sant with him.

The writings of Paul.
And because also counterfeite Epistles, as though they had come from Paul and
from the other Apostles, were obtruded unto the Churches, Paul did note his
own natural Epistles with a peculiar sign of his own hand, least false
Epistles should be put in the place of those which were true. For this cause
read we in the end of the second Epistle to the Thessalonians: The salutation
of me Paul, with mine own hand, which is the token in every Epistle. So I
write. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. 2. These. 3.17.18.
Tertullianus lib. de praescriptione aduersus haereticos.
Amen. What say you to this moreover, that Tertullian reports, that the
authentike and original Epistles of the Apostles, that is to say, their own
hand writings, were kept even in his time, in those Churches, to whom they
were written? And the Epistles of Paul are approved by the expressed testimony
of Peter. 2. Pet. 3 15. and 16. The Epistle of John the Apostle. 1. John. 5.13.
And John concludes his Epistle thus: These things have I written unto you,
that believe on the name of the Son of GOD, that you may know, that you have
eternal life, and that you may believe (...) the name of the Son of God. ^^d
he finisheth the Revelation with ^^is most weighty calling to witness:
Revel. 22.18. and 19.
^ ^estifie unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this
^^oke, if any man shall add unto ^^ese sayings, God shall add unto him ^^e
plagues that are written in this book: And if any man shall take away from
the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away ^is part out of
the book of life, and ^ut of the holy City, and from the things which are
written in this book. Therefore that is the Gospel of the Ca^^olike Church,
which being put in ^riting, God has sealed for his word. And this is the
cause, that the Churches ^f all ages have taken the books of the ^ewe
Testament for authentike, which ^n these days we do with reverence ac^nowledge
for authentike, and which we do most constantly affirm, ought to he believed.

There is a most evident testimony touching this matter in Irenaeus: Irenaeus.
lib 3. in praefacione.
The Church (says he) learned the true and lively faith of the Apostles, The
Gospel preached by the lively voice of the Apostles is put in writing.
and distributed it to her children. For the Lord of all gave the power of the
Gospel to his Apostles, through whom we have also known the truth, that is to
say, the doctrine of the son of God, unto whom also the Lord said. Luke.
10.16.
He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, despises me: and
he that despises me, Irenaeus. li. 3. ca. 1.
etc. For we have not known the setting in order of our salvation by any
other, then by them, by whom the Gospel came to us, which then they did preach,
and afterward by the will of God, delivered unto us in the Scriptures, to be
the foundation and pillar of our faith. Thou hear by the testimony of this
most ancient and holy Bishop, that the Apostles did afterward by the will of
God deliver unto us in writing, the same Gospel, which first they published
with lively voice, that this written Gospel might be the foundation and pillar
of our faith. And although he does urge this point: That all Churches taught
and instructed by the Apostles, should keep the unity of (...) founded in
the Scriptures: yet does ^^twithstanding maintain this also: Irenaeus lib. 2.
cap. 47. and lib. 5.
^^at the Scripture is the schole of per^ and absolute wisdom.

Moreover, although all things that ^^ist did, be not written, All things in
deed are not written, notwithstanding those things, which are sufficient for
the Church, are written.
nor all the ser^^s, which he made, be not set down writing word for word,
least the num^^^ of books should be infinite, yet has (...) holy Ghost chosen
forth those things ^e written, which might suffice for the ^^^^ruction and
confirmation of the faith ^he elect, as Augustine plainly tea^^th forth of
the word of John 20.30. August. in Joan. tract. 49. John 20.30.31 and 21.25.
John the E^^^gelist? For whereas the Lord Jesus (^eth he) did many things,
all are not ^^itten, as even the self same holy E^^ngelist him self
witnesses, That the ^^rde Christ, both did and spoke ma^e things, which are
not written. But ^^ose things were chosen forth, and ^ritten, which did seem
to be suffici^^t for the faith of the faithful. There^^re even by the witness
and consent of ^ugustine, those things are plentifully ^ritten, which the holy
Ghost judged to (...) enough, for the obteyning of the true knowledge of
Christ and of the blessed life. Cyril. in Io. lib. 12
Cyrillus in his 12. book upon John does agree to Augustine: All things,
(says he) which the Lord did, are notwritten, but the writers thought those
things which are written sufficient, as well for manners, as for doctrine: that
we shining in right faith and good works, may come to the kingdom of heaven
through Jesus Christ: Thus much has he. Neither does it follow hereupon, that
those things which were not written were vain, and to no purpose. They were
then very profitable for the confirming and erecting of the Church of Christ:
Yet notwithstanding the whole Gospel was most faithfully drawn into that
sum, which might fully suffice them, that should come after.

The iiii. Chapter. The place of Jeremy his 31. Chapter is discussed: and also
it is showed, that the Apostles wrote the Gospel by the will of God.
^Ntichrist his guard sets upon us (...) in this place, and wresteth a dart
forth (...) Jeremy, The places of Jeremy chap. 31. verse 33. and 34. and of
the 2. to the Cor. chap. 3. verse 2. and 3. do not prove that the Apostles
ought not to write.
which we must needs ^e, how weak it is, to prove that, ^^^ch they go
about. Truly they abuse ^oo shamefully the holy oracles of ^^d, who by
wresting these words of (...) Prophet, unto a clean contrary, ^ishe, and
absurd sense, go about to ^^^re the eyes of the simple, and to di^ishe the
majesty of the Scripture. ^^d as they, which in schools give them ^^^ues to
show their fine wits, and which ^^ercise themselves in eloquence, do fight
^^ainst elequence, with the weapons of ^^oquence: even so do these by the
coun^^naunce of Scripture, endeavor to o^^rthrowe the authority of Scripture.
^ut they are clouds, easy to be scatte^^d with a very small blast of an
answer. ^ieremie does prophecy, that an other ^ouenaunt must be made in the
name ^f God, but not so as it was made in time ^ast with the fathers. And
amongst other ^hinges he says under the person of God: ^ will plant my law
in the inward parts of them, Iere. 31.33.34.
and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my
people: And from thence forth shall no man teach his neighbor or his
brother, and say, Know the Lord: but they shall all know me from the lowest
to the highest, says the Lord: for I will forgive their misdeedes, and will
never remember their sins any more. Unto this prophecy do they join the
place of Paul, in the second to the Corinthians, and third chapter: Ye are our
Epistle written in our hearts, understood and read of all men: For as much as
ye are manifestly declared, that ye are the Epistle of Christ ministered by
us, written not with ynke, but with the Spirit of the living God: not in stony
tables, but in fleshly tables of the heart. They would prove forth of these
places, that the property of the doctrine of the new Testament is so
appointed by God him self, that it can neither be written in tables, nor in
papers, nor with pen, nor with ynke, nor by any other means. What and if
some Libertine with the Euthusiastes make further exception, that the ^^^^rine
of God cannot be delivered by (...) voice, for so much as God his will ^^to
illuminate men's minds with ^^^^ledge, that they shall all know him (...) the
least to the greatest, so that no (...) shall have need to teach his neigh^
saying: Know the Lord: Ierem. 31.34.
What (...) they, I beseech you, answer for (...) traditions? yet dare they
go furth^^ insomuch that they say, that it was (...) without his
commandment, in (...) the Evangelists and Apostles did ^^mitte certain
things to writing, be^^^se the Lord commanded them to ^^eache, and not to
write, Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.15.
and also be^^^se the word of God contained in the ^^spell, is of such a
nature, that it can (...) be expressed in writing. And yet the ^^hour of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 8.8.
^he midst of his writing, whilst he ^^eth down the doctrine of the niewe
^^^enant in writing, alleges the self ^ne sentence of Hieremie. And Paul ^
now already written, both the E^^^tle to the Thessalonians, and the first
^pistle to the Corinthians, when he ^yed: Not with ynke, 2. Cor. 3.3.
but with the spirit of God, yea he did deliver the self same then not with
lively voice, but in writing, and did purpose to write more afterward. It is
therefore plain, that neither the Apostles did so understand the sentence of
Hieremie nor Paul his own, saying, as these triflers feign: that is to say,
that the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles cannot bear, to be comprehended
and delivered in writing. Certainly if their sentence may prevail, it will
follow, that the Apostles and Evangelists did wickedly, beside, yea rather
against the mind of the Lord, blemishe the doctrine of grace, in that they
did commit that word to writing and papers, which is unapt to be written,
and unto which such a property is allotted by God, that by no means it ought
to be committed to writing. And has hellish rage so blinded them, that they
cannot consider this? These are they forsooth, which bring the professoures of
the sincere doctrine into hatred, and accuse them of novelty, when as they
them selves do mock the Church with niewe, foolish, and (...) devises. Who
at any time be^^ them, did so understand or inter^^^ Hieremie? Augustine a
man of a (...) sharp wit, in that book, which ^ote of the spirit and
letter, handles place of the Prophet at large, and ^eaketh he not so much as
one word ^^is interpretation, neither does any (...) old writers agree with
them there (...) Where is then this consent of the ^^rche, which they so
greatly brag ^^nd require? Are these Giauntes so ^^de, to think that they
have seen (...) which has escaped the most excel^^^ lights of the Church? Fie
for shame, ^^e foolish and frivolous is that diffe^^^ce of the old and new
Testament, ^^ich they appoint? Truly this reward ^^e they for contemning the
scripture, ^^t they may stain the majesty thereof ^^h their wicked toys: you
may see ^^m (that I may use the words of Ba^^) weaue the lenowe web of the
spi^^t. Mat. 7.6.
But let us singularly reverence the ^earle trodden under foot by hogs, ^^d
keep it most religiously.

Let us therefore see the most sweet sentence of this excellent prophecy, The
place of Hieremie the 31.33. is discussed.
full of Evangelical and heavenly comfort. Therefore shall it appear, that
the Prophetment nothing less than that, which these go about to wreste forth
of his words: yea rather that this place is directly against them. Moreover,
no man will doubt, which shall hear Paul the Apostle, and the epistle to the
Hebrews, who are the most certain interpreters of this prophecy, 2. Cor. 3.3.
but that this prophecy does wholly appertain to the kingdom and time of
Christ, Heb. 8.8.
and that the divine Prophet did prophecy in this place, of the benefit of
Christ. And God does promise by express words, That he will make a new
covenant with his people, to heal the weakness of the first, and to correct
the corruptions, which were crepte into it, by no fault of God, but through
the noughtinesse of the people, who as league breakers were departed from it,
neither took him, according to the conditions of the league, for their God, in
believing him, worshipping him, and obeying his laws. For they ^ere weaker by
means of their natu^^ll vanity, corruption and stubburnesse, ^^en that they
could frame themselves ^^roughly to the following of GOD his ^ill, and to
perfect obedience. Where^ore that league was broken oftentimes through their
unfaithfulness. What ^houlde God therefore do? if he had bin willing to have
dealt according to extremity of law, and to have punished them for breaking
the league, he might forthwith have forsaken the people, which brake the
league, and, as they deserved, have cast them of, and have appointed them to
suffer everlasting torments. But the using his great mercy, such is his
goodness and love toward mankind, was rather willing to spare those
miserable men, and their weakness, then without mercy, and with severity to
revenge the injuries done unto him. Therefore he showed the remedy, when he
promised that he would make a niewe covenant with his people, which once he
chose unto himself. Which couenante, as touching the matter and substance is
most niew. For his will was not, by changing his purpose after the manner of
men, to back and to make frustrate that, which once he had decreed: neither
did he make a new covenant clean contrary to the first. For God his purpose
is unchangeable: although as touching the properties or qualities, Chrisost. In
Haebraeos. Homilia. 14.
it may be judged after a sort niewe. Which thing Chrysostom has expressed
by a very goodly similitude: Behold, says he, this also is niew, when as
some things thereof are taken away, and some things remain, as if one alter an
old and ruinous house thoroughly, and lay new fou^dations: we say forthwith, he
has made it niewe, when as he has but taken away some things, and changed
some things. Therefore GOD pitying the state of mankind, has daily joined
greater benefits, and has more and more polished that, which as yet to his
ancient benefits was rude, and only begone, and has made it perfect.

Three principal points of the new renewed league.
Of this new, or rather renewed league, there be chiefly three principal
points, whereby GOD cures all the inward diseases of mankind, and re^^oreth
him to perfect health. And these ^ointes are the inward reforming of ^ens
hearts, the lightening of their minds to the knowledge of God, and ^he free
forgiveness of their sins, of the which inestimable benefits, to be
bestowed in the time of the Gospel, not only Hieremie, but also the rest of
the prophets have prophecies. And of the reformation and correction of
hearts, that is to say, of regeneration and new birth, Ezechiel has
prophesied most clearly of all: Ezech. 36.25.26. and 27. The reformation of
hearts.
I will sprinckle (says he) clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean,
yea from all your uncleanness, and from all your idol^ shall I cleanse you: a
new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put into you: as
for that stony heart, I will take it one of your flesh, and give you a
fleshie heart: I will give my spirit amongst you, and cause you to walk in
my commandments, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. Esaie.
11.9.2. The lightening of the minds.
Of the lightening of the mind, is this prophecy of Esaie: John. 6.45.
The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, even as the Sea flows
over with water: Esaie 54.13. Acts. 2.7. and 18. Joel. 2.28. and 29.
Also, And they shall be all taught of God: Again this prophecy of Joel which
Saint Peter interprets: And it shall be in the last days (says God) of my
spirit I will power out upon all flesh: and your sons, and your daughters
shall prophecy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams: And on my servants, and on my handmaydens, I will power out of
my spirit. The remission of sins.
Of the free remission of sins Esai. 53.4.5.6.8.11.12. Dan. 9.26. Miche.
7.18. and 19.
Esaie has reasoned most plainly in his liii. chapter: And Daniel in his 9.
chapter: Micheas also in his last chapter, Who is such a God as thou (says
he,) that pardonest wickedness, and forgiuest the offenses of the remnant of
thy heritage? He keeps not his wrath forever: for his delight is to have
compassion. He shall turn again, and be merciful to us, he shall put down
our wickednesses, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea,

But what: did the holy fathers of the ^lde testament lack these benifits? Not
(...): For in obeying the commandments of GOD, and in believing rightly, they
did worship God purely, which thing they did not perform by the strength of
^ree will, nor by natural power. For had it not been that they had Gods laws
and promises written in their mind and understanding by the holy Ghost, and
also a good will to obey his commandments through the grace of God, they had
not bin able to have done such things. Therefore they wanted not the divine
light, The difference of the old and new Testament.
which lightened them to believe and obey: And their sins also were forgiven
them through Christ. Therefore they also enjoyed these good things. Why then
did he promise, that he would give these things in the new League? Truly
because the father showed forth the power of his spirit, much more plentifully
under the kingdom of Christ, and poured forth his mercy upon men: This
excellency is the cause, that that small portion of grace, which he
vouchesafed to bestow upon the fathers under the law, is not to be made
account of. Therefore the difference consisted herein only, even in the
largeness and plainness. For at that time those gifts were restrained to
very few: but now are the Gentiles also made partakers of them. They were in
that age somewhat dark and intricate, but unto us are they made plain and
clear, so that we need not any more the old Gal. 3.24.
schoolemaister like instruction. Therefore the difference of the old and new
Testament does consiste in this largeness, playnnesse, putting away of the
old schoolemaister like instruction, and excellent clearness of the Gospel:
and not in that cold and unsavory, (I will not say) wicked devise, of not
writing the doctrine of the Gospel, which these triflers do feign. For what?
Has GOD powered forth in the time of grace so great gifts by the means of
Enthusiastico modo.
immediate inspiration from GOD, or without any means? That may not be. By
what means therefore has he brought it to pass? Even by the ministry of
the Gospel. For by it has Christ most effectually showed forth the force of
his spirit, and has most clearly made himself know^^ to men, and has most
plentifully ^estowed all the treasures of his hea^enly riches upon mankind. So
that ^e ministry of the law and of Moses ^e Lawegiuer, in comparison of the
mi^isterie of the Gospel, may seem very ^arraine and dry, 2. Cor. 3.6.
and as Saint Paul ^earmeth it, only the dead letter desti^ute of the lively
juice of God his spi^ite. Wherefore the same Paul when he would commend the
efficacy of his ministry, alluded to the Prophecy of Jeremy, saying: Ye
are our Epistle, The place of Paul 2. Cor. 3. ver. 2 and 3. is discussed.
written in our hearts, understood and read of all men: Forasmuch as ye are
manifestly declared that ye are the Epistle of Christ ministered by us, written
not with ynke, but with the Spirit of the living GOD, not in stony tables,
but in fleshie tables of the heart. Here must we diligently note, that he
calls them forthwith the Epistle of Christ, whom a little before he called his
Epistle: moreover, he does straightway reconcile and expound those things,
which at the first sight seemed to be contrary the one to the other, when as he
adds: Ministered by us. It may be called his Epistle in this respect, that the
holy Ghost seems to use him in the writing thereof, as the writer and the
pen: and it may also be called the Epistle of Christ, because he is the
author of the said writing, and endited it to Paul by his spirit, and guided
the hand and pen of the writer, and moreover ingraued with his finger, the
healthful doctrine of the Gospel in the hearts of the Corinthians: by the
force whereof, it is not now printed in stony tables, as was the law before,
but in the fleshly tables of the heart.

August. De spiritu and littera cap. 26.
This is therefore to pertain to the new Testament, (says Augustine) to have
the law of God written, not in tables, but in the hearts, that is to say, to
contain the righteousness of the law in the inward affection, where faith
woorketh through love. This is that sweet goodness of the heart, even a 2.
Cor. 5.17.
niewe creature in Christ: This is that pleasant goodness of the mind, even
lightenyng: And this happy and ^^^ceiued goodness does not lead us ^^y from
the Law and testimony, to know not what) unsavory traditions, does delight
in the law of God, and ^geth to pass, that our will is in the ^we of the Lord,
Psalm. 1.2.
and that we exercise (...) selves therein day and night, although other Romans
7.23.
law strive still in our members ^^^inst the law of the mind, until the
^^wnesse, which from day to day is in^ased in the inward man, all oldnesse ^ng
changed, pass away, The grace God through Jesus Christ our Lord ^iuering us
from the Romans 7.24.
body of this ^ath.

Moreover, who is he now, Against them which go about to obtrude men's
traditions to the Church.
but he ^y see by the premises, how justly the ^rt may be turned back upon
our ad^rsaries, which they foolishly and rash^ wrested forth of the Prophecy
of Iere^ie? The Lord gives his law into ^^r hearts, and writes it in our
bowels ^ith his finger, and brings to pass, ^at we walk in his statutes,
and keep ^s judgments, and do them, he lights our minds with the
knowledge of ^^m, he freely forgiueth our sins, and puts away our
iniquities. Therefore let us sanctify and glorify him, and turn from these
iuglers, which thrust upon us a doctrine defiled and corrupted with the devises
of men, in stead of the true doctrine of Christ and his Church, endeavoring to
bring to pass, with fires, with flames, with water, with swoorde, and with
halter, more cruelly than ever did Nero, or Dioclesian, that we should receive
the said doctrine as God his word, because it is approved and confirmed by
the Decrees and Councels of men. So that we being become the Disciples and
scholars, not of Christ the chief and heavenly master, but of men, should
hang, not of the authority of GOD, but of men, and worship him, not after
that Religion, which was appointed by his own laws, but after that Religion,
which man's rashness and boldness has devised and counterfeited. With so
great Religion forsooth is the fierceness of cruelty clothed. The Samaritanes
being moved by a woman of their own nation, John. 4.24.
after that they had (...) Christ themselves, answered, that did no longer
believe Christ, because ^e woman's words, but because they heard Christ
themselves. But how ^h more rightly shall we answer these ^cers of minds,
which go about by ^eanes possible, not to lead us to ^ist, as did that woman
of Samaria, to turn us from him, that we do believe them, but Christ: and
that ^e do not for their sake embrace the ^^spel, but because we have heard
^ist himself teach: and that we do (...) therefore approve and receive
their ^^cked devises, because they set them ^ale under the pretense of the
Church (...) Councels, but that we do con^ntly refuse and detest them,
because ^y are manifestly against GOD (...) truth, and because they do their
^st endeavor to make the authority (...) GOD subject to the authority of ^n.

And what madness is this, The Apostles wrote by the commandment and will of
God.
in that ^^ey say, that it was done without the ^ill of GOD, that the Apostles
and Evangelists write the Gospel: when as in the first writing of the new
Testament, yt is to say, in the Epistle of the Synod of the Apostles this
gorgious flower is expressly read: Acts 15.28. 2. Tim. 3.16.
It seemed good to the holy Ghost. Paul also witnesses that all Scripture is
given by inspiration of God. To be brief, Revel. 1.11. and 2.1, 8, 12.18. and
3 1, 7, 41. Mat. 10.20.
John in the Revelation is commanded often to write for the instruction of the
Church. Yea, and the Lord himself witnesses: It is not ye that speak, but
the spirit of your Father he it is which speaks in you. And we place
speaking and writing both in one degree: Mark. 16.15.
so that he which said: God into all the world and preach, understood that
the Gospel was also spread abroad by writing, forsomuche as writing is
plainly contained under doctrine. To conclude the Catholic Church with one
consent does witness, that the books of the niewe Testament were written by
the instinct of the holy Ghost. Do these men, with whom* so often as they
list, it is a great offense to depart even a little from the consent of the
Church, not only ^^^^rt from it, but are directly contrary (...) it? I
mean in this place to repeat discuss the most beautiful sentence ^^enaeus
lately cited. And this is it: ^t is the only true and lively faith, Irenaeus.
li. 3. ca. 1
^^^ch the Church has learned of the ^^ostles, and distributed to her
chil^^^n. For the Lord of all gave to his ^^ostles the power of the Gospel,
^row whom we have also known truth, that is to say, the doctrine of (...)
son of God, to whom the Lord (...) also: he that hears you, Luke. 10.16.
hears (...): and he that despises you, despi^ me, and him that sent me. For
we ^e not known the disposing of our ^ation through any other, but tho^^w
them, by whom the Gospel came ^o us: which then they preached, ^d afterward
through the will of God ^iuered unto us in the Scriptures, to the foundation and
pillar of our ^th. This sentence of Irenaeus spea^h generally of the Scripture
of the (...) Testament: the authority, perfecti^^ and sufficiency whereof, he
shows (...) most strong demonstration. That is without controversy the only
true and lively faith, which the primitive Church received from the Apostles,
and distributed to her children. This faith was in the beginning conceived of
that doctrine, which the Apostles received from the son of God. And this
doctrine whereof the faith of the primitive Church sprang, did the Apostles
deliver first without writing by lively voice. Afterward they put the same
doctrine in writing. By what advise? Was it by the advice of man? No, but by
the will of God. But did they put the same doctrine in writing? Even the very
same, which being received from the son of God, they preached with lively
voice, out of the which only the Primitive Church received the true and lively
faith from the Apostles, and distributed it to her children. Whereunto tends
this? That these particular Churches only, Those things which are written by
the Apostles, are written for us also.
unto whom the Epistles of the Apostles were written, should use those writings
for their present necessity only? Not so: Unto us, say I, have the Apostles
delivered in the Scriptures, the self same which they ^^^ached. Remember that
the Epi^s of the Apostles (says Augustine) (...) not written for them only,
August. contra Cresco Grammat. lib. 1. ca. 9.
which ^ard them in the same time when ^^ey were written, but for us also:
nei^^er are they recited in the Church (...) any other purpose. And what
(...) of the said Scripture would the A^^stles should be in the Church?
Irenaeus loco supra citato.
Ire^us answers: that that which they ^iuered to us in the Scriptures, might
^e in time to come the foundation and ^er of our faith, even of that true and
^ely faith, which the Church received the Apostles, and distributed to her
chil^^en. Therefore we have the foundation ^d pillar of faith in the
Scriptures, ^iche the Apostles by the will of God ^^ue delivered to us.
Therefore that faith, ^^ich is conceived, proved, and confirmed, ^^th of any
other, then of the Scriptures ^iuered by the Apostles, is not the true ^ely
faith, ye Apostolic faith, and the faith the Primitive Church. These things
most manifestly and firmly agree together (...) Irenaeus his demo^stration. For
what purpose the Apostles wrote.
Therefore ^e* shows for what purpose ye Apostles delivered their doctrine to
us in the scriptures, and what they would the end of the said scripture should
be in the Church: even that it might be the foundation and pillar of our
faith, which hau^ not heard the lively voice of ye Apostles For we will
hereafter consider those things, which Irenaeus in the same place reports
of the accusers of the Scriptures.

Augustine refers the writings of the Apostles to the Lord the writer and
author thereof.
And that yet there wicked vaniti^ may more plainly appear, which dar^ affirm,
that it was not done by the commandment of Christ, that the Evangelists and
Apostles committed certain^ things to writing, I will bring concerning this
matter, the most clear witne^ of Saint Augustine. He, in the first book of
the consent of the Evangelist the last chapter, Augustinus de consensu
Euangelistarum lib. 1. cap. vlt.
says thus: Through the manhood, which he took upon him, he is the head
of all his Disciples, as of the members of his own body. Therefore when they
wrote these things which he showed and spoke: it may not be said that he
himself did not write: because his me^ber^ ^ote that, which they knew, the
head ^structing them. Consider,
For whatsoever he ^ould that we should read touching ^s deeds and words,
that did he ^^mmau^d them to write, as his own ^ndes. Whosoever shall
understand ^is fellowship of unity, and ministry ^f members agreeing in
diverse offi^s under one head, he will none otherwise take that, which he shall
read in ^he Gospel by the report of the disci^les of Christ, then if he had
beholden ^he very hand of the Lord, which he ^are in his own body, writing
it. Lo, what can be more evident then this wit^esse of this most holy man?
Christ wrote in his Disciples, inasmuch as ^hey wrote that, which he showed
and ^pake: yea and whatsoever he would, that we should read of his deeds and
words, that did he command them to write, as though they had been his own
hands, ^o that we ought none otherwise to take ^he report of the Evangelists,
then if we had beholden the very hand of the Lord writing it. Are not these
most vain men ashamed, to scatter clouds in so clear weather? Valerius
Maximus. lib. 6. cap. 3.
Marcus Scaurus, when he was accused of treason openly before the people of
Rome by one Varius, said thus: Varius Sucronensis says, that Marcus Aemelius
Scaurus has committed treason against the common wealth: Marcus Aemilius
Scaurus denies it, whether will you believe? At this word the people
forthwith stopped the accion. How much more justly may I in this controversy,
appeal to indifferent judges and say: Irenaeus and Augustine being most
ancient and holy fathers, yea, and the consent of all the Catholic Church, dee
affirm that the Apostles and Evangelists have comprehended in writing the
doctrine of Christ by the commandment and will of the Lord. The Herinates,
the Pighic^, the Peresies, the Lindanes, the Andradies, deny it. I pray, you
whether will you believe? Let them therefore lea^^ (...) to bark against so
clear truth, let them reasse to diminish the holy authority of Scripture:
yea, rather let them repent them of their error and madness.

The fifth Chapter. that all things, which concern faith, godliness, and
salvation, are fully and sufficiently contained in Scripture.
NOw our adversaries are cast forth of their fortress by the force of Truth,
we shall have more liberty to cope with them in the open field. It remains
therefore, that we handle now more at ^arge that, which lately we touched in
^ewe words: that is to say, that we prove, that all things which concern
^ayth and godliness, are fully and absolutely contained in the Scripture. And
God has given so perfect a law, that he has straghtly forbid any thing to be
added thereunto. And how severely the Lord has revenged this presumption, if
any thing have been added in the rites, (much more in ye doctrine) so many
most grave sermons of the Prophets, which are the interpreters of the law,
made touching these matters, all the holy Histories, yea and Christ himself
do most evidently witness. There must be the same judgment touching the
Gospel, for so much as it is much more excellent then the Law. Except we should
peradventure think, that God, after he had sent his Son into the world,
had less care for his Church: or should suppose, that the Apostles used less
diligence in that point, then did the Prophets. Tertullianus. de praescrip.
haeret.
Tertullian exclaimeth, saying: Happy is the Church, for whom the Apostles
have powered forth all the doctrine of GOD even with their blood. Acts. 20.27.
Ephesians. 3.4.
Paul witnesses that he has expounded to the Ephesians all the counsel of
God touching everlasting salvation, without any shifting dissimulation. Can it
be proved that Paul taught any thing, which he did not write? Can it be
denied, that the full doctrine of the Gospel is plainly comprehended in his
Epistles? But least I should be long, I will content my self to allege one,
but yet a very plain sentence of Paul: For that being thoroughly handled, will
plainly show the perfection and sufficiency of the Scripture. He ^^refore
about the end of his life, ^^en as the books of the new Testa^^nt were
written and set forth, spea^^th thus to Timothy the Bishop: The place of
the Apostle 2. Tim. 3.14 15, 16, 17. is discussed.
^t continue thou in the things, which thou have learned, which also ^ere
committed unto thee, knowing ^f whom thou have learned them. and that from an
infant thou have ^nowne the Scriptures, which are a^le to make thee wise unto
salvation, through faith which is in Christ Ie^^s. All Scripture is given by
in^piration of GOD, and is profita^le to doctrine, to reprove, to correc^ion,
to instruction which is in righ^eousnesse, that the man of God may ^e perfect,
thoroughly instructed unto ^ll good works. Romans 15.4.
Hereunto agrees ^he place, Romans 15. Whatsoever things have been written
before time, were written for our learning: that we tho^ough patience and (...).
comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. Which two places being weyed, it
will plain^y appear, that the Scripture is in ^ll points most perfect. For in
them does the Apostle comprehend all the use of holy Scriptures, and
deuideth it into five points. 1. Doctrine.
1. Doctrine, (...) signifies the documentes of our Religion, as when we
entreat of God, of Gods providence, of Predestination, of the Justification
and glorification of men, of the Law, of sin, of the Gospel, of Faith, of
charity, of hope, of Christ's incarnation, of his death and resurrection, of
the resurrection of all the dead, 2 Reproof.
and of such like matters. 2. Reprofe (...), is whereby we reprove and convince
them, which do not reason rightly, and which commit faults in gathering their
arguments. Whereupon Aristotle instituteth that part of Logike, wherein he
shows the way to discover the guiles and deceytes of Sophistes, (...), of
Elenghkes, that is to say, of Reprofes. It is therefore Reproof, whereby the
errors of Heretics, of Philosophers, or of any other, which judge evil of
Religion, are vanquished and confuted. 3. Instruction.
3. Instruction. (...), contains the teaching of godly life, (...) the
informing of manners: as when ^n of all degrees are put in mind of ^ir duty,
that every man may have ^ care for that which belongs unto ^m, as when we
teach what is seeme^ for the ministers of the Church, what ^r husbands, what
for wives, what ^r children, what for masters, what for ^^ruantes, what for
rich men, what for ^oore men. It is also instruction, when ^xhortations are
made to move men to ^raye, to do alms deeds, to fast, to o^ey the
Magistrate, to repent, and to ^mbrace all kind of virtues. For those ^hinges
which perteine to this place are ^erie large. For under instructions is
^omprehended all doctrine of virtues and vices: is comprehended whatso^uer
concerns the government of a man him self, of his house, of a state: ^is
comprehended whatsoever may be referred to the Church, to the common wealth,
to all kinds of life. Admonition.
Admonition, (...), is of the same nature as is Instruction, whereof 1. Cor.
10. 1. Cor. 10.11.
All these things (says Paul) happened unto them for ensample: but they are
written for our admonition. This does perteine to the instruction and
amendment of life: the which the examples applied by the Apostle, and all the
course of his speech does witness. For he says, 1. Cor. 10.2, 3, 4, 5.
that the Fathers which came forth of Egypt were baptized, and that they were
refreshed with the spiritual meat and drink, as well as we:
notwithstanding, when they did not keep them selves from sins, that they
were grievously punished through God his justice, and utterly destroyed by
death. Therefore does the Apostle admonish all Christians by their examples,
that although they be baptized, and fed with the spiritual food of the
body and blood of Christ, yet may they not esteem that sufficient to
salvation, but desire moreover to live godly and innocently, which except they
do, that they shall perish by the example of the old Fathers. 4. Correction.
4. Correction, (...), is whereby men are reproved, corrected, and reformed,
if any negligence or faults appear in their lives and manners. ^^erefore by it
are men reproved for de^^^ing the doctrine of religion, for hypo^^^e, pride,
ambition, covetousness, (...) such like. And by it is also showed ^e they,
which have offended, both ^^ght, and may be amended. 5. Consolation.
Consola^^^n (...), is whereby their ^ndes are comforted and confirmed, ^^ich
either through error in doctrine, through fault in actions, or through ^ne
inconvenience either spiritual or ^porall, were discomforted and discou^^ged.
To be brief, doctrine and re^^oofe are occupied in expounding docu^entes:
instruction, admonition and cor^^ction treat of life and manners, unto ^ose
two are referred the chief points (...) faith: and unto the other two, the
^eties of charity: as unto consolation ^e pertain properly those things
wher^y hope is stirred up. The first two con^^ine speculation, and instruct the
inward ^an: the other two contain action, and ^mploy all their labor in
instructing the ^utwarde man. The two first discern ^rue doctrine from false,
when as the one ^onfirmeth the truth stoutely, the other confuteth falsehood
pithily: The two other discern godly and honest deeds, from wicked and
dishonest deeds: for the one teaches and persuadeth honest deeds, the other
sharply reproves dishonest deeds, and does labor and endeavor to amend
them.

And these points have I written forth of the most learned Hyperius, touching
all the which since ye most plentiful fountain of the scriptures does yield
abundantly most wholesome and sweet precepts, Hyperius.
does it not largely minister that, whereby the whole man, as well the inward
as the outward, may be rightly instructed in faith, charity and hope? So that
Paul did wholesomely admonish Timothy to take heed to himself, 1. Tim.
4.16.
and unto doctrine: for in doing this, he shall both save himself and them that
hear him.

The fathers also witness, that the way of godliness is fully set forth in the
Scriptures.
Therefore the Authors lastly cited and Augustine also, do teach right well,
that those things are written by the Evangelists and Apostles, which they
judged to be sufficient for the salvation of the believers, as well for
manners, as for doctrine: that they shining in right (...), in words and
virtue might come ^e kingdom of heaven through Christ, (...) whom Chrysostom
agrees dis^ing of the worthiness of the Scrip^es: Chrysostom. In Matt. 22.
Homil. 1.
Whatsoever (says he) is requi^ for salvation, the same is fully con^ned in
the scriptures. Also: Chrysostom. Institutum Homil. 1.
The Gos^^ contains all things, both things ^esent and things to come,
honor, ^^dlinesse, and faith, and comprehends (...) things together under
the name of ^^dlinesse. Athanasius also accords ^rein, contra gentes:
Athanasius contra gentes.
The holy scrip^^res (says he) given from God by 2. Tim. 3.16.
in ^iration are sufficient for all instructi^n of truth. I omit many
testimonies, which I could allege here forth of the ^oly fathers, which give
in plain wit^es of the perfection, fulness and sufficiency ^f the Scripture. I
do therefore con^lude, that all things, which concern the perfection of the
man of God, are plenti^ully contained in the Scripture. So that Paul did most
wisely admonish the Evangelical pastor, 2. Tim. 3.15.
that it behooved him to be wise forth of the written word of GOD only,
wherein are perfectly set forth, whatsoever to pertain, as well to the
knowledge and establishing of true doctrines, and to the overthrowing of false
doctrines: as also to the correcting of evil manners, and instructing of good
manners. Therefore do the adversaries wrongfully complain of the straitness
and imperfection of the Scripture: and they do also vainly contend, that all
things, which concern faith, are not contained in the books of holy
Scripture. As by these things, which follow, more plainly shall appear.

The vi. Chapter. That the Scripture was given by inspiration to correct evil
manners, and to confute heresies: That forth of it only controversies must
be judged: And that it is neither dark nor doubtful.
Basilius Homilia in psalmum primum.
Basil Archbishop of Caesaria in Cappadocia in the beginning of his Homily
upon the first Psalm, say^^^ All the Scripture, being given (...) God by Tim.
3.16.
inspiration, and pro^^ble, is constantly received as it is ^^ten by the holy
Ghost, for this ^^ose only, that every one might ^ose forth of it, as
forth of a cer^^e common shop, for the curing ^oules, a medicine healthful
and fit ^his disease. Well and wisely said Ba^ for so much as all things, which
per^^e to the instruction of true godliness, (...) the framing of our life,
are fully com^^hended and set forth in the Scripture, does appear by those
things, which ^ have already spoken. 2. Tim. 3.14.15.16. and 17.
Scripture is ^e to make the man of God wise unto ^^uation, through faith,
which is in ^^rist Jesus, which was therefore given (...) inspiration of God,
that forth of it, a and only forth it, true doctrine ^^ght be confirmed,
and false doctrine ^nfuted: A worthy place of Saint John Chrysostom touching
the scripture. Chrysostomus In Matthaeum Homil^a 1.
and good manners might be ^ught, and evil manners reformed. ^s Chrysostom
teaches most finely (...) his first Homily upon Matthewe. It ^ad been meet
(says he) that we should ^ot need the help of writings, but that we
should lead so pure a life in all things, that we might use the grace of
the spirit, in steed of books. But because we have put this grace from us,
let us at the least set our minds on the second remedy. Even so God spoke
to the Patriarchs, not by writings, but by himself, because he found their
hearts naked. But after that all the people of the Jews were fallen into the
sink of sins, then were writings necessarily given, and the tables, and
that admonition, which is given by them. And we do understand plainly, that
this did not only happen to the holy men of the old Testament, but also of
the new. For neither did Christ deliver any thing in writing to his
Apostles, but promised Io. 14.26. Jeremy. 31.33. and 34. 2. Cor. 3.2. and 3.
to give the^ the grace of the holy Ghost in steed of writings. And that
this was much better for them. Hieremie chapter 31. and Paul 2. Cor. 3. do
witness. But because in process of time, 16. and 17.
some erred greatly in doctrine, and some in wickedness of manners: that
admonition also, which is in writing, was needful. And he ad^^^h: Consider
how great madness it ^n us, which have lost that first dig^^tie, not to be
willing to use the se^^nd remedy to salvation, but to de^ise the heavenly
writings, as given to no purpose and in vain. This ^ace of Chrysostom does
not only show (...) what cause, and to what end GOD ^^ue unto us the
Scripture, not only in ^e old Testament, but also in the new: ^t also
shows the vanity of the main^yners of the Pope, which reason forth (...)
Hieremie and Paul, that it is proper (...) the doctrine of the new Testament
^euen of God, to be possible to be writ^^n, neither in tables, nor in paper,
nei^^er with pen, nor with ynke, nor by any other means, but that it must be
kept wt^ut writing, and delivered from hand to ^and. These be toys: Because
by the ^estimonie of Chrysostom we have lost that first dignity, when as the
doctrine ^f the Apostles was delivered by lively voice only, so that now we
have need of admonition put in writing. But because ^ have reasoned of this
matter before, I will now spare to speak any more hereof.

Testimonies of other Fathers touching the same matter. Theophilactus.
And that which Chrysostom spoke at large, Theophilactus has comprehended, as
he is wont, in few words: Because, says he, There were heresies sprung up,
which might have corrupted our manners, it seemed very expedient, that the
Gospels should be written: that we learning the truth forth of them, should
not be deceived by the lies of heresies. Hieronymus.
Hieronymus also agrees hereunto: For as it was necessary (says he) that the
Gospel should be preached for the confirmation of faith, so was it also
necessary, that it should be written against Heretics. Augustinus in
Epistolam Iohannis Tractatu 2.
Hereunto also does Augustine give his consent, who upon the second Epistle
of John Tractatu 2. has these words: You ought chiefly to consider, and to
commit to your remembrance, that God his will was to put a chief stay in the
Scriptures against deceiptful erroures: against the which no man dare speak,
who in any sort is desirous to seem to be a Christian. ^or when he had
offered himself to be ^^ndled, it suffised him not, but that (...) did confirm
the hearts of the faith ^ll out of the Luke. 24.44.
Scriptures. For he did ^rouide for us, which were to come. that which we may
handle, we have ^ot: but that which we may read, ^ee have. Lo, God his will
was to put ^rong defense against the deceiptes of ^rroures in the Scriptures:
Therefore ^or^th of the Scriptures are all here^es to be confuted, and
doctrines to be ^^dged with this shield, with this sword, ^ith these weapons
must heresies be put ^acke. For the Scripture is as it were a ^peciall,
singular and sure preservative, ^efending us against the paysons of all kind
of errors.

Hereupon is it, In all controversies we must have recourse to the Scriptures,
not to the authority of men Acts. 9.22.
that the ancient fa^hers, so often as controversies rose in re^igion, fled
rather to the Scripture, then ^o councels, or to any authority of men,
because the Scripture only can judge firmly, soundely, and holily. Behold
Paul being furnished with the weapons of Scripture only, disputed against
the Jews, although they were roughe and ouerthwarte, Act. 17.11.
if Luke report the truth. And the holy Ghost commends the Jews of
Berrea, who, when they had received the word, with all readiness of mind,
searched the Scriptures, whether those things were so. Worthily says
Augustine unto Maximinus: Augustinus contra Maximinum Libro 3. cap. 14.
Neither ought I to allege the Council of Nice, nor thou, of Ariminum, as by
prejudice to hurt one another his cause: Neither am I bounden to the
authority of the one, nor thou, of the other. Let matter contend with matter,
cause with cause, reason with reason, by the authorities of Scriptures,
witnesses, not proper to any, but common to either. Cresconius the Grammarian
disputing with Augustine, objected unto him the authority of Cyprian.
Augustinus. Contra Cresconium lib. 2. cap. 32
Augustine answers: I am not bounden to the authority of this Epistle: for I
esteem not the writings of Cyprian as Canonical, but I consider of them
forth of the writings, which are Canonical: and that, which in them agrees
with the authority of holy ^criptures, I receive with his praise, ^ut that
which does not agree, I ^efuse by his leave. Against Faustus ^ib. 23. he
says: Augustinus contra Faustum Manichaeum.
That which Faustus ^ath set down touching the gene^ation of Marie, which is
not Canonical, binds me not. Augustinus in Psalmum 57.
Also upon ^he 57. Psalm he has these words: Let our own wrytinges be
taken away, let GOD his book be brought forth amongst us. Hear Christ
speaking, hear the truth talking. And woorthely does Augustine the man of
GOD write these things, forsomuche as it is meet to yield this honor to the
Scripture, that all things be tried by the examination thereof. Whatsoever is
proved by the authority thereof, may not any more be called in doubt. Again,
nothing but that which agrees therewith, may be received: and whatsoever is
contrary thereunto, must be accounted damnable, that all the definitions of
faith may depend therevppon, and consiste therein. So that they are found more
vain then vanity it self, which dare write, that the Apostles wrote
certain things, not that those their writings should rule our Faith and
Religion, but that they should be in subjection thereunto. Hist. Trip. lib. 2.
cap. 2. ex Sozomeno.
Sozomenus reports, that the sentences of them, which assembled at the
Council of Nice, were diverse: Some giving counsel to alter nothing from the
faith delivered (...) from the beginning: some other affirming, that they ought
not to stick to old opinions (...) rashely, with out search and examination:
whereupon the matter was protracted through diverse questions: Theodoritus
lib. 1. cap. 7. Hist. Trip. lib. 2. cap. 5. ex Theodorit.
therefore Constantine the Emperor, sitting amongst the Bishops, exhorted
them to confer quietly, and to search forth the truth, setting Sophistry
aparte, and bannishing the grudging of their minds. There are (says he) the
books of the Apostles and the decrees of the Prophets, which do instruct us,
what we ought to think of holy matters. Therefore setting envious contention
aside, let us search the solution of questions forth of the Scriptures, given
by 2. Tim. 3.16. Enagrius. lib. 2. cap. 16.
inspiratio^ from God. Enagrius writing of the Council of Ephesus and
Chalcedon, does in like manner rehearse the sentence of John Bishop of
Antioche approved by Cyrill: We do know that holy men have set down their
determinations touching the Lord forth of the words of the Evangelists and
of the Apostles. Cusanus.
And Cusanus writes that the form of the old general Councelles was, to
place the holy Gospels in the midst. And that the same was also observed in
private disputations touching religion: Augustine is a witness: Wheresoever
(says he) the place shall be appointed, let us cause the books of Canonical
Scripture to be ready: And if they can bring forth any proofs of either
side, all the rest set aparte, Epist.
let us make a full end of so weighty a matter. Therefore the examination of
Scripture is lawful for the trial of doctrines.

Let us therefore stand, Basilius. Epist. 80.
that I may use Basil his words to the arbitrament of Scripture given by
inspiration from God, 2. Tim. 3.16.
and let the sentence of truth be adjudged unto them, amongst whom doctrines
agreeing with God his word are found.

It likes me to set down in this place the most beautiful sentence of
Cyprian, A worthy saying of Cyprian. Cyprianus in Epi. ad Pompeium contra
Epist. Stephani.
which Augustine affirms to be without doubt most excellent. It is a short
way (says he) with religious and simple minds, both to lay away error, and
to find forth and try out the truth. For if we return to the head and
fountain of GOD his tradition, man his error cease: if the Conduit pipe of
water, which before did run plentifully and abundantly, do fail of a
souddeine: do they not go to the fountain, that the cause of the defecte may
forthwith be known, whether it be dry in the head, by means that the
veins of the well are dried up, or whether it run sound and full from
thence, and stop in the middle of his passage? The which thing also the
Priests of GOD must do: and if in any thing the truth shall totter and
shake, let us return to the fountain and welspring of the Lord, and of the
Euanlistes, and to the tradition of the Apostles: and from thence, let the
reason of our doing rise, from whence both the order and beginning sprang.
These things are written in his Epistle to Pompeius against the Epistle of
Stephanus. Therefore by the consent of all the old writers, the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles are the rules of judgments in every proof,
examination and trial of doctrines.

I know, The place of Tertullian is handled de praescrip, Haereti.
Tertullian writes elsewhere, that we must not appeal to the Scriptures,
neither offer in them to contend, wherein the victory is either none at all,
or uncertain, or at the least none very certain. But mark against whom he
reasons. For so has he a little before these words: This heresy does
not receive certain Scriptures: and if it receive any, it alters and
changes them craftily by putting to, and taking from for the framing of their
purpose. Although it do receive them, yet does it not receive the whole. And
though it do receive the whole after a sort, yet does it notwirhstanding,
peruerte them, devising strange expositions. As greatly is an adulterous
sense against the truth, as is a corrupt manner of writing. Diverse
presumptions will not acknowledge those things whereby they are overthrown
etc. Therefore for so much as proof forth of the Scriptures could nothing
prevail amongst such, he deemeth that controversies touching faith, are to
be discussed forth of the Scriptures, because those which were of the right
faith wearied themselves without fruit: and because the malapertnesse of
Heretics could not be brideled, but that they would still contend,
although they were an hundred times ouercommen. He would therefore have an
end of vain and unprofitable strifes and contentions, Tit. 3.10.
and especially, seeing that the Apostle forbid^eth, after the first or second
admonition, to reason any more with him, that is ^n Heretic. Otherwise what
does he himself in so many books? With what swoorde? with what weapons has
^e slain Marcion, Praxeas, Hermogenes, and others, but with the simple word
of God? Therefore when the matter so requires, he proves, not only the
words, but also by example, that we must both dispute and define, none
otherwise, but only forth of the word of God it self. Neither have all the
professors of the right faith used any other mean, when they defended the
right and pure faith against Heretics, as we ^aue already showed. The books
of God are open (says Augustine) let us not turn away our eyes: Augustinus
The Scripture cries, let us hearken. For they would not have the authority
of man, ^ut of God, to be able to end controuer^ies, and to heal men.

Yet do the Papists reclaim, Heretics must be confuted by the scriptures.
af^irming that controversies cannot be de^ermined forth of Scripture only, or
that judgment can be given forth of it touching the matter of faith. For they
say, that the Scripture is subject to the wicked and ambitious expositions of
Heretics, and that it may be wrested to diverse meanings, and that it is
doubtful and dark. Therefore do they call us back forthwith to the
definition of the Church: A false marime of Papists.
which as it is without all falsehood, so may it be taken for the true and
certain rule of faith. It is a solemn thing amongst these Sophistes, to
declaime of the doubtfulnesse, hardness, and darkness of the Scriptures, to
turn men's minds from the Scripture to the traditions of their Church, that is
to say, from the authority of God, to the authority of men: neither is this
shift of theirs new. Irenaeus. li. 3. ca. 2
The old Heretics also used the same, who, when they were reproved by the
Scriptures, used these cauillations: that the Scriptures are diuersely spoken,
that is to say, (according to the speech of our adversaries) doubtful, apt to
be applied every way, uncertain: moreover, that the truth can not be found
forth by the Scriptures, if a man know not the tradition, that is to say, (as
our adversaries now utter it) that the scriptures are not sufficient: and that
the truth was not delivered by writings, but by lively voice. For the which
cause (say they) Paul said: 1. Cor. 2.6. Augustinus aduersus Iulia. lib. 5.
cap. 1.
We speak wisdom among them that are perfect, not the wisdom of this
world. Iulianus also the Pelagian, (with whom Augustine had so great
conflictes, and whose words and arguments these our adversaries use in their
disputations very willingly) was wont to stand much upon this: that the
knowledge of holy Scriptures is very hard, and meet for a few of the
learned sort. Neither are these fellows ashamed to have the saying of an
Heretic in so great admiration. But Paul, when he affirms, Romans 10.17.
that faith comes by hearing God his word, does not only make it the true
and certain rule of faith, but the only rule thereof. But when we must
contend with Heretics (say the adversaries of the truth) then do the
scriptures little prevail, Ephesi. 6.17.
because they can so easily shift the^ off. Yet thought I yt the word of God is
that sword of yt spirit, wherewith Satan might be thoroughly overthrown. But if
it be the victorious and triumphant sword against the head Lord, and master
of all Heretics, how comes it to pass, that it is a dull weapon, and as it
were made of a reed, against his members? To what purpose is this worthy
testimony of Paul: 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to doctrine,
to reprove, to correction, to instruction, which is in righteousness, that the
man of God may be perfect? And although the slienesse of all Heretics and
Sophistes be great, in wresting and deprauing of the Scriptures, yet does not
God his truth lie so open to their mockes, but that it may stoutely be set at
liberty by the said Scriptures. Clouds may darken the Sun for a season,
but they can neither put out, nor choke up the light thereof, but that it will
at the last show it self again.

The scripture is plain, not obscure. Psalm. ^9.7.8
Now since Augustine teaches, that in those things, which are plainly set
forth in Scriptures, may be found all things, that contain faith and manners
of living, that is to say, hope and charity, that wickedness is it, to accuse
the ^cripture of darkness? He did not (...), which said: Psalm. 119. part.
14. verse. 1.
Thy word is a Lan^erne unto my feet: and a light unto any paths. Also:
Psalm. 19.7.
The Testimony of ^he Lord is sure, and gives wisdom ^o the simple. Again.
Psalm. 119. part. 13. verse. 3.4.
I have more ^nderstanding than my teachers: for ^hy testimonies are my study.
I am ^iser than the aged: because I keep ^hy commandments. Also Peter say^th:
2. Pet. 1.19.
We have also a right sure word ^f prophecy, whereunto if you take ^eede, as
unto a light, that shines in ^ dark place, ye do well, until the day ^awne,
and the day star arise in your ^eartes. And will they call the Scrip^ures so
obscure, intricate and hard, whereunto Peter ascribes clearenesse, ^s unto
those, which are able to guide us ^ertainly, that we go not out of the way, ^o
not in the greatest darkness in the world? For that Gospel, Mark. 16.15.
which the Lord commanded to be preached to eue^ie creature, has he also
promised to make known to every creature, John. 14.14.
if one will ask it, Therefore those things, which concern salvation, are so
aptly plainly, and abundantly proposed, expounded, and repeated in the
Scriptures every where, that for the understanding thereof, the only
declaration of the Evangelists, and continual reading of the rest of the
books of Scripture may suffice a mind, lightened with the light of faith,
without the which no point of Religion can be soundely understood, and
willing to obey GOD. Which two, namely faith, and her companion the study of
obedience, are very necessary for the right understanding of those things,
which belong to Christ, as these words of the Lord do well show: John.
7.16, 17.
My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any will do his will, he
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of GOD, or whether I speak of my
self. Also: How can ye believe, John. 5.44. 2. Cor. 4.3.4.
which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes of
God only? If our Gospel be hid, it is hid in them that are lost: In whom the
God of this world has blinded the minds ^f them, which believe not, least the
^ight of the Gospel of the glory of Christ should shine unto them. 2. Cor. ^.
In deed I do confess, that every one ^an not easily and aptly expound the
scrip^ures, and I will, that the consent of Churches have their place in
determi^ing and ending the questions of faith, ^ut yet so, that it be not
disioyned from the Scripture, without the which the authority of the church
has little strength. And ^orsomuch as all points of religion must ^e tried and
proved by the testimonies of ^cripture, as lately we have declared, it must
necessarily follow, that among all things which concern religion, the said
testimonies are most certain and clear.

Herevpo^ it rests, The fathers also commend the scripture for the clearnes
thereof.
that the holy fathers commend the scripture unto us because of ^he light, the
clearnes, the certainty, the plainnes thereof: so far off are they from
complaining, that it is uncertain, intricate, hard, apt to be applied both ye
ways. Very well said August. August. de peccatorum meritis and remiss. li. 2.
ca. 36
When disputation ^s had of an obscure matter, if the certain and clear
instructions of holy Scriptures do not further the cause, man his presumption
ought to stay it self, doing nothing by declining to either part. What place,
I beseech you, shall this sentence have, if God his truth have not firm and
constant certainty in the Scriptures, yea, and such certainty, as cannot be
battered with any engines? Therefore does he afterward conclude, that he does
believe that nothing is necessary to be known for salvation, which has not
most clear proof in the scriptures. We will yet add hereunto a few
testimonies, concerning the plainness and easiness of the Scripture. Cyrillus
contra Iulianum. lib. 7.
Cyrillus contra Iulianum libro septimo answering this objection, That the
Scripture has a base and common style and manner of speaking, says: That the
things therein contained might be known to all, little and great, they are
profitably uttered in familiar speech, so that they should not pass the
capacity of any. Unto the which saying, Lactantius agrees, Lactantius
diuinarum institutionum. lib. 6. cap. 21.
who says: What cannot God the framer of the mind, and of the voice, and of
the tongue, speak eloquently? nay rather his will was of his singular
providence, that those things which be divine should want painted and fine
speech, that all might understand, what he spoke to all. Basil. in Hexam.
Homilia. 3.
And Basilius in Hexameron Homil. 3. says: The doctrine of the truth is common
in speech, but stable and firm in knowledge. Chrysostom. Homil. 1 in Iohannem.
Chrysostomus Homil. 1. in Iohannem, speaking of the Gospel written by saint
John, says: His doctrine is clearer than the Sun, and plainer. And Ambrose
says: Ambrosius.
Paul in most points does expound himself in his own words, that he which
entreats of him can find nothing of his own, which he may add: or if he
would say any thing, he shall rather use the place of a Grammarian, than of a
disputer.

I cease to recite more testimonies, Against the adversaries.
touching the plainness and easiness of the scriptures: for what needs it?
Truly it is an horrible blasphemy to say, that the holy ghost has so
doubtfully set forth this his doctrine, which is the only and true wisdom,
and understanding of the church, that it must be expounded by man his wisdom:
and left it so obscure, that it must be made plain by man his cunning. This
is no less absurd, then if a man should go about to mende the brightness
of the Sun, by lighting of Torches. Yea, holy scripture of it self, being
set forth of the perfectest doctor of all, were able to make a man wise unto
salvation, 2. Tim. 3.15.
as Paul preaches. But that I may at the last come to the conclusion:
For So Much as all doctrines of Religion are to be examined and determined by
the judgment of Scripture, all questions of faith are to be defined by the
same, and all points of Religion are to be tried and proved by the
testimonies thereof, Truly it cannot be doubted, that the authority of the
universal Church, does stand and depend chiefly of the oracles and
authority of holy Scripture: and that the testimonies of GOD his word are
especially to be required in all things, which are set forth in the name and
authority of the Church.

The.vij. Chapter. Whereupon the Scripture is called canonical. Also
testimonies of the Fathers touching the most excellent authority thereof.
THe name of Canonical Scripture is of great r^nowne, Canon and canonical
writings. Aristoteles. 2. Politi. cap. 8.
which well proves and confirms whatsoever we have hitherto spoken of the
authority, perfection, and suffici^ncie thereof. Aristotle disputing in his
Politikes, whether it be better to govern a common wealth according to the
laws written, or according to the will of the governors, uses the word
(...). Therefore as the law written is the canon and rule of politic
judgments: even so is the scripture called Canonical, That is to say,
rule-like, because it is the certain and infallible canon and rule of faith.
And the naming of it so, is taken forth of the Scripture it self. In the 19.
Psalm. Psalm. 19.4.
Their sound is gone out into all lands. Here the Septuaginte interpreted it
by ye Greek word (...), but the Hebrew word

Kau, signifies a cord, a rule, a line. To the Galathians the 6. Gal. 6.16.
And as many as walk according to this rule, in Greek, (...) Peace be on
the^ and mercy. Philip. 3.16.
To the Philippians the 3. Let us proceed by one rule in Greek, (...)* And
wisely does Paul warn us, to walk according to this rule, for such is the
lightness and inconstancy of men on the one side, and their boldness and
desire of innovation and change on the other side, yt they would oftentimes
desire a new form of religion, were it not, that they are enclosed within
certain bounds of doctrine, as it were within certain hedges. And therefore
is the Scripture called Canonical, because the Church may use it as a Canon,
that is to say, as a squire, and rule, and as a perfect touchestone, whereby
every kind of doctrine, which is proposed to the Church, may be exactly
tried.

Cyprian. in sermon. de baptis. Christi.
From the which meaning, Cyprian does not dissent, whose words are these:
Christian religion has found, that the ^ules of all doctrines flow out of
this ^cripture, and that hence springs, and ^ither returns whatsoever
Ecclesi^stical discipline contains. Cyprian. in expositione Symboli.
The same Cyprian in the exposition of the Creed, after that he had rehearsed
the canonical ^ookes added: These are they, Cyprian. loco praedicto.
which the ^athers placed within the canon, forth of the which they would
that the ^roofes of our faith should be made ^nowen. Also: forth of these
fountains of God his word must the cups be filled. And Irenaeus says,
Irenaeus li. 3. ca. 1.
that the very self ^ame Gospel, which the Apostles deliue^ed unto us by the
will of God in the Scriptures, is the foundation and pillar ^f our faith.
August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 19. ca. 18.
And Augustine teaches that the canonical Scripture is the ^oundation of our
faith, when as he ^ayeth: The City of GOD has be^eeued the holy Scriptures,
the old and the new, which we call canonical, from the which faith is
received, by the which the just lives, through the which we walk without
doubting, so long ^s we are pilgrims from God. Also: August de ciuit. Dei.
lib. 11. cap. 5.
He even the son of God, having spoken first by the Prophets, then by
himself, afterward by the Apostles, so much as he judged sufficient, ordained
also the scripture, which is called Canonical, being of most excellent
authority, which we credit in things, wherein we may not be ignorant, and yet
of our selves are not able to attain the knowledge thereof. Again in an other
place: The Canonical authority of the old and new Testament, August. contra
Faustum. li. 11. ca. 5
confirmed in the Apostles time, by the successions of Bishops, and increasing
of Churches, is placed as it were aloft in a certain seat, whereunto every
faithful and godly understanding should submit it self. Therefore for so much
as God has established the Scripture to be the foundation, pillar, and rule
of faith, and has therefore placed it in a seat of most excellent authority,
and has advanced it, as the judgment of the holy Ghost: except we will be
dispitefull against God himself, we must needs confess, that it is so
perfect in every point, yt there m^^y neither be added to it, nor taken from
it, without doing of injury to the holy ghost. The rule and the squire (says
Basil) for so much as in them is no want, Basillius contra Ennonnium. li. 1.
to retain their name, admit no addition. For addition agrees thereunto,
wherein there is a defect: and these things, which be imperfect, shall never
be rightly called by the name of a squire or rule. And Theophilacte also
says: A rule and a squire can neither abide to have any thing put unto them,
Theophilactus.
nor taken from them. Therefore in the judgment of Basil and Theophilacte,
either the Scripture shall be perfect and full: or else not to be judged worthy
the name of Canonical. Yea, and the scripture is the canon, the rule, and the
squire, whereby the holy fathers would have all doctrines proved, and all
questions of faith defined. Neither have they judged any decrees or writings,
either of councils, or of men, although learned and holy, to be received by
their own authority. This honor have they yielded to the canonical
scripture only, yt they judged al things, with the scripture has set forth unto
us, to be received simply and without reasoning, eue^ because they are so
written: and have appointed the decrees and ordinances of all other men to be
referred to the Scripture of God, and forth of it to be discerned, as by their
own testimonies we will forthwith more at large declare. Therefore do we
worthily reverence the fullness and the authority of the Scripture, which is,
as it were, the highest law, and, as the Lawyers in their pleadings term it,
the definitive sentence, wherewith all men must content them selves.

The.viij. Chapter. That the authority of the Canonical Scripture is more
excellent than the Councels, the Fathers, yea then the decrees, and ordinances
of all men.
August. contra epist. Fu^damenti.
AVgustine against the epistle, which they call Fundament. says: Those things
which are defined in holy scripture, are preferred before al other things. And
that of right, because the catholic Church of Christ, that is to say, the
universal Church, does acknowledge no book as her own, wherein ^hee does
certainly propose unto the ^onnes of GOD the traditions of Christ and of the
Apostles, but only the Ca^onicall Scripture. All other writings ^re none
otherwise received by the Church of GOD, then so far forth ^o be of
authority in the Churches, and among all Christians, as the au^hours of them
shall be able to per^wade forth of holy Scripture, and ^y probable reasons.
And those things ^re probable, which like excellent men, and the brightness
of worthy ^ames pearseth the understanding, that ^hey seem good: but those
things ^nelie are esteemed certain and appro^ed in the Church of Christ,
which ^re plainly and undoubtedly conclu^ed forth of the Scripture. The
Scripture is as it were the Queen of all Cou^^els of all Churches, of all
writers. Neither have the holy Fathers judged any thing more worthy credit
in the Church, than the Scriptures: yea and whomsoever they took in hand to
instruct in religion, them did they always send, after the example of Christ
himself and of the Apostles, to the law, and to the writings of the
Prophets and of the Apostles. And to this meaning serve many godly sayings
of the Fathers, whereof we will noate some. Augustinus de Baptismo contra
Donatist. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Augustine in his second book and third Chapter touching Baptism against the
Donatistes says: Who knows not that the holy canonical Scripture, as well
of the old, as the new Testament, is contained within her certain bounds, and
that it is so much preferred before all the later writings of Bishops, that
there may neither doubt be made, nor disputation raised touching it, whether
any thing, which is well known to be written in it, be true, or right: And
that the writings of Bishops, which either have been written after the
confirmation of the the Canon, or which shall be written, may be lawfully
reproved both by the wyser speech of one peradventure more skillful in the
Scripture, and by the grauer authority of other Bishops, and by the wisdom
of the learned, and by Councels, if any thing in the said writings do by
chance vary from the truth: And that the Councels themselves, which are
holden by particular countries or provinces, do give place without all doubt,
to the more general Councels, which are assembled forth of the universal
Christian world: And that the latter general Councels are oftentimes made
better by the further, when as by some experimenr of matters, that which was
shut up, is opened, and that which lay hid is made known: without any
show of wicked pride, without any arrogancy of puffed up flesh without any
contention of spiteful envy with holy humility, with Catholic peace and
with Christian Charity? Hieronimus in Epistolam ad Galatas.
Hierome upon the Epistle to the Galathians says: It is the doctrine of the
holy Ghost, which is set forth in the Canonical Scriptures against the
which if Councels shall determine any thing, The testimonies of Augustine
touching this matter. Epist. 19.
I esteem it wickedness. Again August. writing to Hierom, has these words:
For I confess unto your charity, that I have learned to yield this fear and
honor to those books of the Scripture only, which are now called Canonical,
that I believe most firmly, that none of the authors of them, have committed
any fault in writing them. And if I find any thing in any of those books,
which may seem contrary to the truth: I make none other doubt but this, that
either there was a fault escaped in writing the book, or that the interpreter
did not attain to that, which was spoken or that I do not understand it. But
I read others so, that although they do excel in holiness and learning, I
do not therefore think it true, because they so thought, but because they
were able to persuade me, either by those Canonical authors, or by probable
reason, that it differs not from the truth. Neither do I suppose, my
brother, that thou do think any otherwise. This I say, that I do not take
it, that thou would thy books should be altogether so read, as the writings
of the Prophets, or of the Apostles, touching whose writings, to doubt whether
they want al error, it is a great heinous offense. This be far from godly
humility etc. In like manner in the proeme to his third book de Trinitate he
says: Augustinus in proemio in 3. lib. de Trinitate distinctione 9.
As I will not have my reader addict to me, so will I not be his correctour. Let
not him love me more then the Catholic faith: and let him not love himself
more then the Catholic truth. As I say to him: Be not addicted to my
writings, as to the Canonical Scriptures: But when thou shall find in the
Scriptures, even that which thou did not believe, believe it without
stackering. And when thou shall find in my books, which thou did not
esteem certain, except thou understand it to be certain, do not firmly
hold it: So say I to him also: Correct not my books by thine opinion or
contention but by the holy Scripture or by firm reason. If thou shall find
any truth in them, in that it is so, it is not mine: but in that it is
understood and beloved, let it be both thine and mine: But if thou shall
prove any falsehood in them, in that there was an error committed it shall be
mine: but in that it is now avoided, let it neither be mine, nor thine.
Augustinus a^ Fortunatianum. The writings of sincere Catholics how far
forth to be received.
He says also to Fortunatianus: For we ought not to make such accoumptes of
the disputations of any, although they be Catholic and laudable men, as of
the Canonical Scriptures* as though it were not lawful for us, saving, the
honorable reverence, which is due to such men, to improoue and refuse some
thing in their books, if by chance we shall find that they thought otherwise
the^ the truth is, being by God his help, understood either of other, or of
us, Such am I in other men's works, such would I, that the understanders of
my works should be in mine. And again to Paulina in the sixeteenth Chapter
he says: August. ad Paulina. ^ cap. 16.
Neither do thou so believe me, as thou do Ambrose* touching whose books
I have given those so great testimonies. Or if thou think that thou should
believe us both two alike, what will thou compare us in any wise to the Gospel,
or will thou match our writings with the Canonical Scriptures? Truly if
thou be a wise discerner, thou see us far of from that authority, and me
much more. But although thou may be^eeue either of us, yet may thou not
compare either of us to that excellency. Item against Cresconius in the second
book and xxxi. Chapter he says: Augustinus contra C^esconium lib. 2. cap. 31.
For we do Cyprian no injury, when we put difference between his writings,
whatsoever they be, and the canonical authority of holy scriptures. Neither
was the Ecclesiastical Canon without cause set down with so wholesome
watchefulnesse, whereunto the certain books of the Prophets and of the
Apostles do pertain, which we may not presume to judge at all, and according
to the which we may freely judge of al other writings either of the faithful or
of the unfaithful. In like manner to Vincentius the Donatist in his xlviii.
Epistle has these words: Show not thy self willing to collect pillars forth
of the writings of the Apostles, August. ad Vincentium Epist. 48.
against the testimonies of God. First because this kind of writings are
distinguished from the authority of the Canon. For they are not so read, as
though testimony might so be taken forth of them, that it may not be lawful
to think otherwise, if perhaps they savor otherwise. Six hundred such
testimonies are to be found every where in Augustine, which teach that the
Canonical scripture is the rule, whereby all the writings and decrees of all
men are to be tried.

Testimonies of other Fathers touching this point. ^asil. in Moral. Summa 72.
cap. 1.
Wherefore omitting him, let us hear also the sentences of the rest of the
fathers agreeing all in one. Basil in moralibus summa 72. cap. 1. pronounces,
that hearers learned in the Scriptures, ought to try those things, which are
uttered by the teachers: and to receive those things, which agree with the
Scriptures, but to refuse whatsoever does not agree thereunto. And he applies
to that rule the saying of Paul Gal. 1.8. Gal. 1.8.
Though an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Epiphanius haeresi. 65.
says: Epiphanius lib. 2. To. 2 haer. 65.
We can show the invention of every question, not by reasons of our own but
by the consequence of the Scriptures. Cyrill de recta fide ad reginas says: It
is necessary for us, Cyrillus de recta fide ad reginas.
to follow the holy scriptures, and in nothing to depart from their
determination. Ambrosius de officiis lib. 1.
Ambrose de officiis lib. 1. says: We may use, as we will, those things, which
we find not in holy scripture. Hieronimus in Psalmum 86.
In the commentaries upon the 86. Psalm, which are set forth in Hierom his
name, we read these words: This testimony is alleged after the
Septuaginte, and not according to the Hebrew verity.
The Lord shall rehearse it in the scripture of his people, and of the
Princes, which were in her. How shall the Lord rehearse it? Not by word,
but by writing. By whose writing? By the writing of his people: that is to say,
by the holy scripture, which is read to all people: that is, that all may
understand it. Plato wrote not to the people, but to a few: for scantly three
men understand him. But these, that is to say, the princes of Christ wrote not
for a few, but for all the people: not that a few might understand, but that
all might understand. And he says by the writing of his Princes, that is to
say, of the Apostles, and of the Evangelists, of them which were in her: See
what he says: which were not, which are: that, the Apostles only excepted,
what thing else soever shall be said afterward, might be cut off, and not have
authority. Therefore although any one be holy after the Apostles, although he
be eloquent, let him not have authority. Because the Lord rehearses it in
the Scripture of his people, and of the Princes, Cyrillus in Leuiticum cap. 5.
Leuit. 7.16. and 17.
which were in her. Cyrill, or whether it be Origin, in Leuiticum cap. 5.
says: If thou can not finishe all the flesh of the sacrifice the second
day, thou shalt eat none of it the third day. etc. I (says he,) do
suppose, This place is alledg^d accor^ to the (...)
that by this space of two days may be understood the two Testamentes,
wherein every word, which pertayneth to GOD, may be sought for, and
discussed, and all knowledge of things may be learned forth of them: And if
there be any thing over, the which holy Scripture cannot determine, that none
other third Scripture ought to be brought in for authority of the knowledge.
I could bring more such like sayings forth of the Fathers, but I trust, I
have thoroughly satisfied the indifferent Reader with these.

Therefore all the sayings, All the writings of other men must be tried by the
Canon of Scripture.
and writings of men, whatsoever they be, are to be examined and tried by the
law, and by the Prophets, and by the Apostles writings, as in the most
certain balaunce: and so have the most holy Fathers judged, one and all. For
greater is the authority of Canonical Scripture, then of any man, of any
Bishops, of any Synod, yea or of all the Church. Neither can the
authority of the universal church, although it be gathered together whollye
into one place, forth of all her members, which ever were, or be, or in years
to come shall be, deserve cre^ite in any thing without the testimonies of
Scripture. Panormitanus.
So that Panormitane said neither foolishely, nor falsely: More credit is to
be yielded to one Lay man alleging the scriptures, then to a general Council
representing the universal Church, if it bring no scriptures. Johannes G^rson
unto whom John Gerson agrees, when as he says: That the consent and voice of
one learned man, alleging the scripture fittly, is to be preferred before a
general Council. And it is proved by the example of the Nicen Synod, which
had received the superstitious law of ye single life of priests, had not
Paphnutius only withstoode it. S^zomenus historiae ecclesiasticae lib. 1.
cap. 22.
Therefore if the disputations of the Fathers, or their sentences, or their
expositions of the Scriptures, do disagree with the Canonical Scripture and
rule of faith, there is no cause, why any should obiecte their authority unto
us. For if the conte^tion be touching learning, holiness, and auncientnes: the
Prophets, Learning, holiness, antiquity, and consent of many Churches. of
what credit they be ought to be in matters of faith.
and the Apostles of Christ be more learned, more holy, and more ancient.
Neither is there any cause, why any should object unto us the consent of
many Churches, in this or that opinion: For the consent of Christ, of the
Prophets, of the Apostles, yea, and of the Patriarchs in sincere religion,
and in the holy sense of religion, revealed manifestly to us by the Scriptures,
is more to be esteemed, from whose godly and religious judgment we must
never depart. But if any reckon up many and whole kingdoms, which have
been of this or that opinion, we oppose against him the labors of Paul one
holy Apostle, Romans 15.1^.
who filled the greatest parts of the world with the simple sense of the
Gospel, even from Jerusalem and the coasts round about unto Illiricum. Aug.
de Baptism contra Donatistas lib. 2. cap. 3.
And for so much as by Augustine his authority, general Councels must be
sometime corrected by the later: (and those assemblies, which are to be
corrected, must needs be in error) it follows that all the authority of
the Church and of Councels stays it self by the Canonical Scripture, unto
the which only GOD his will is, that this happiness is peculiar, that in it
there is none error.

The ix. Chapter. That the Canonical Scripture has the chief perfection of
her authority from the holy Ghost, and of herself: And contrarily that the
Church receives her authority from the Scripture.
From whence the Scripture has, or has received so great authority.
Hitherto we have yielded many reasons for the most excellent authority of the
Canonical Scripture. Now the question is, from whence the scripture has or
receives this most excellent and perfect authority, or by whom the Canon was
made, whereunto the Canonical books pertayne? The Papists say that the
Scripture has her authority from the Church, and that therefore the
authority of the Church is greater then the authority of the Scriptures. As
though the word of GOD, Esaie 40.8.
which endures for ever, were subject to men's decrees, or as though GOD his
truth should entreat men to authorize it: It is not so. The word of GOD is
of it self most sure, and needs not the propping up of men, but holds
up all things. Mat. 2.4.35.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall in no wise pass away.
The Scripture receives her strength or authority chiefly from GOD, from whom
it was reueiled: that is to say, that it came not by the will of men, 2. Tim.
3.16. 2. Pet. 1.21.
but that the men of GOD, being moved by the holy Ghost, both spoke and
wrote: whom being chosen and elected for this office, GOD adorned with many
and sundry miracles and divine testimonies: So that there is no doubt at all,
but that those things were given from GOD by inspiration which they wrote and
set down. And the self same spirit, which has caused these things to be
written, assures us, that they are not the inventions of men. And when the
spirit of GOD does herein witness to our spirit, and seal up the Scripture
in our hearts, the faithful soul does marueilously rejoice, and is greatly
confirmed. Therefore we being illuminated by the virtue of the spirit, do not
now believe, either through our own judgment, or through the judgment of
other, that the Scripture is of God: but do most certainly persuade our
selves above man's judgment, none otherwise then if we did behold therein the
power of God, that the Scriptures are come unto us, even from the very mouth
of God by the administration of men. Therefore the Spouse in the Ballets says
with marvelous joy: My beloved said unto me. I say nothing of that, Cantic.
2.11.
which every one, which is lightened with the light of true faith, must needs
find by experience in himself. By this experience wrote once Augustine the
man of God, Confess. lib, 6. cap. 5.
how God by a little and a little tempered and disposed his heart with his
most meek and most merciful hand, and at the last thoroughly persuaded him, so
that at the last he knew and believed, that those books were delivered to
mankind by the spirit, and the only true and most true God. Therefore the
authority of the Scripture does depend not of the judgment of the Church,
but of the inward testifying of the holy Ghost. And John witnesses, that
Christ said thus, concerning the spirit: John. 8.42.43.
If God were your father, why do ye not know my speech? For it is most
certain, that we are adopted to be the sons of GOD, by the means of the
holy Ghost. Which when we have obtained, Christ witnesses in this place, that
we by the lightning of the same Spirit, may so discern his speech from a
strangers, that it may be manifest and certain unto us. In the which self
same sense, Christ says also in another place. John. 10.2, 3, 4, 5.
He that enters in by the door, is the shepherd of the sheep: To him the
porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep
by name, and leads them out, and when he shall put forth his own sheep, he
goes before the^, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. A
stranger will they in no wise follow, but fly from him, for they know not the
voice of strangers. Neither is it to be doubted, that we become Christ's sheep
through the power of the holy Ghost, that we follow not falsehood, errors,
corruptions, and heresies, which are the voices of strangers: but hear the
only voice of Christ, that is to say, embrace the true and natural sense of
the Scripture. Cor. 2.14, 15.
And Paul says to the Corinthians: The natural man perceives not the things
of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnes unto him: neither ca^ he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual,
discerns all things. And in the same place: ^. Cor. 2.10. Ihon. 14.26.
The spirit searches the deep things of God. And Christ also says: The
comforter, which is the holy ghost, shall bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you. 1. John. 2.27.
Also John has these words in his Epistle: The anointing teaches you of al
things. Again: 1. John. 4.6. Confess. li. 6. ca. 5.
He that knows God, hears us. To be brief, August. in the place lately
cited says: Therefore when as we were weak to find forth the truth by clear
reason, and when as we had need of the authority of the holy Scriptures, for
the same purpose, I began to believe forthwith, that thou would by no means
give ^o excellent authority unto that scripture throughout al lands, but that
thy will was, that thou would be sought by it, and would be believed by
it. Behold it is God, I say, it is God, which has established his holy books
with so great authority in all nations. And August. adds the cause why God
will be sought through them, and why he will be believed through them. I conclude
therefore* that the scripture has not her authority chiefly from the Church.
For the firmnes and strength thereof depends of God, and not of men. And the
word being both firm and sure, was before the church. For ye church was called
by the word. Epesi. 2.26.
And seeing the doctrine of the prophets and of the apostles is the foundation
of the Church, it must needs be, that the certainty of the Church must
consist in the said doctrine, as in her foundation and ground work, before the
said Church can take her beginning. Ephe. 2.20.
For if the Church of Christ were founded in the beginning by the writings of
the Prophets, and with the preaching of the Apostles: wheresoever the said
doctrine be found, certainly the allowing of the doctrine went before the
Church, without the which doctrine the Church could never have been. And
because the spirit of God wrought in the hearts of them, which heard the word
of God, and read it, that they might acknowledge that it was not the word of
man, but of God: undoubtedly the word of God receives authority from the
spirit, and not from the Church.

The.x. Chapter. How the canon of the new Testament was ordained, and that it
has authority of it self, and from the authors thereof, and that the
authority of the Church is maintained thereby.
THey, which reason, that we have received many things to be believed ^f
necessity, by the authority of the Church, which are expressed in no part ^f
the Scriptures, make this, as a great ^rgument, as they think: An objection of
the adversaries.
that there are ^ut four Gospels only, which may not ^e discredited without
the peril of loss ^f salvation: and that it appears by no Scripture, that
the other Scriptures, which we have, are Canonical, and wor^hie credit.
Neither are the titles there^f, the titles of the Scripture, but put to ^y
others. Therefore say they if we shall ^eceiue nothing, but that which is in
the Scriptures, then shall we not receive ^he scriptures themselves. Now that
I may disclose the deceitfulness of this argument, the indifferent reader must
know, that the Canonical Scripture has her ^uthoritie chiefly from the holy
Ghost, The canonical scripture has authority from the holy Ghost, and
imparteth it unto the authors thereof, etc.
^y whose motion and inspiration it was ^et forth, as lately we did declare.
And after that, from the writers, unto whom God gave certain and peculiar
testimonies of the truth. Whereunto is added the witness of the primitive
Church in whose time those books were published and received. And they which
have the spirit of faith, do not dispute peeuishly of the receiving of the said
books, who received them, or who rejected them: but acknowledge in them the
sweet sauouring force of the spirit, by whose instinct they were set forth.
The canon of the new Testament was ordained by the authority of God, and
received by the Church of the Apostles. Neither can I sufficiently marvel at
their rashness, which say, that the authority of the church, has given
canonical authority unto certain of the scriptures, yea, and those the
chiefest, which otherwise neither of themselves, neither of their authors,
they could have had amongst us. Words. Not the authority of every one, but of
the Apostles, is required, to make any writing in the new Testament Canonical,
or given by inspiration from God. Tertul. contra Marcionem. li. 1.
As well says Tertul. when as he confuteth the counterfeit gospel of Marcion.
First we do hold, that a true Gospel must have the Apostles, for the authors
thereof. John saw the writings of three Evangelists, and allowed them. And by
writing his Gospel, he ^ade an end of writing Gospels. And therefore says
he: John. 20.30.31.
And many other ^ignes truly did Jesus before the eyes ^f his disciples, which
are not written ^n this book. These are written that ye ^ight believe, that
Jesus is Christ the ^onne of God, and that in believing, ye ^ight have life
through his name. By ^e which words, if we believe the Fa^hers, John commended
unto the Church, ^ot only his own Gospel, but also the Gospels of the other
three Evangelists. Therefore by ye evident testimony of John, those things are
written by the four E^a^gelists with holy choice, which might suf^se the
salvation of men, and not satisfy their ^uriositie. Paul has signed his
Epistles (...) a peculiar mark: so have we: 2. These. ^. The salutatio^ of me
Paul, 2. These. 3.17, 18. Ambrosius.
with mine ^wne hand, which is the toke^ in every ^pistle. So I write. The
grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. Upon these words Ambrose
says: because of corrupters of the scriptures ^e witnesses that he
subscribeth the ^alutation himself always with his ^wn hand in every one of
his Epistles, that the Epistle might not be receive under his name, which was
not subscribed with his hand. Theodoretus.
And Theodoret says: This did he add moreover, because of them, which
presumed to carry about cou^terfeit Epistles, teaching them to look for the
subscription. For this, says he, is the sign of mine Epistles. For I write
the salutation my self in every Epistle. Therefore hereby we learn, Rom..
16.22.
that this, [The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen] is
usually written by him, in stead of fare well: Thus far Theodorete. Hereupon
is it, that in the end of the Epistle to the Romans, when as he had set down
his usual subscription, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all,
Amen. And had added new salutations in the behalf of other brethren, he
repeateth the subscription the second time. Romans 16.24.
In the end of the first Epistle to the Corinthians he subscribeth thus. 1.
Cor. 16.21.22.23.
The salutation of me Paul, with mine own hand. If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, the same be Anathema maranatha. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you. Ambrose upon the same words shows the cause: The usual
subscription of his own hand. Also Theodorete says: I have indicted the
Epistle my self, and put to the salutation with mine own hand, showing to
all men by those letters, that those things, which are written, are mine. He
subscribeth the Epistle to the Galathians with these words: Gal. 6.18.
Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, Amen. Upon
the which words Theodoretus says: Theodoretus.
He put unto his letters his usual blessing as a certain seal, putting them
in remembrance of the gift given them, which they received not by the law, but
by faith. Ambrose in the end of the first to Timothe says: Ambrosius.
He subscribed with his own hand saying: Grace be with thee, 1. Tim. 6.21.
Amen. And the Apostle subscribeth the second to Timothe after this manner: 2.
Tim. 4.22.
The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit: Grace be with you, Amen. Upon the
which words Ambr. notes: Ambrosius.
This is the subscriptio^ of the Apostle, for he says, it is his mark in every
Epist. Tertullianus de praescriptione*
And Tert. says, that the very hand writings of the Apostles were conserved,
even in his time, in the Apostolic Churches. To be brief, Paul does not
only confirm his Epistles with so great diligence by subscriptions, but also
has set them forth with much more rich and polished inscriptions, The Epistle
of Peter. 2. Pet. 3.15.
than other writers are accustomed. The same has Peter done also, who has
commended Paul his Epistles to the Churches in expressed words. John
concludes his canonical Epistle thus: 1. John. 5.13. The Epistle of John.
These things have I written unto you, that believe on the name of the son of
God, that ye may know, that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on
the name of the son of God. Why should not this Epistle be canonical, which
was written to this end by the instinct of the spirit of God, that the
faithful might be assured of their salvation in Christ through faith? The
Epistle to the Hebrews, The Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews.
whether it be Lukes, or Barnabasses, or Clements (the Church is uncertain of
the Author, but most certain of the spirit, and of the truth) sauoureth such
a grace of the Apostles divinity, that it easily defends it self from being
rejected. The Epistle of James, The Epistle of James.
being filled full of most wholesome precepts, well shows, that the author
thereof was James, the servant of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, whether he
were the son of Alphe, or that Oblias, the matter is not great. For they were
both worthy men: The one an Apostle, the other a Disciple, and the Lords
cousin, of great authority in the Church, and among the Jews also. I would
therefore, that they should tell me, which be those chief books of the new
Testament, which have authority from the church, which they could neither have
of themselves, nor of their authors. And it may be gathered forth of those
things, which I have alleged now forth of the new Testament, how the Canon
of the Scripture of the new Testament was made, and from whence the Canonical
Scripture has that excellent authority. Therefore the Church received this
Canon from the Apostles, confirmed by no Council, and delivered it, as it were
from hand to hand, unto the posterity. Wherefore John in the end of his
Gospel, adds both his own testimony, and also the witness of the Church,
when as he says: John. 21.24.
The same disciple is he, which testifies of these things, and wrote these
things, and we know that his testimony is true. The testimony of the Church
concerning the scripture.
And this testimony of the Church is not the devise of man, but necessary,
and such a confession, as is expressed by the truth of the thing it self,
whereof we will entreat more at large in the place convenient. And since they
do so peeuishly contend, that the authority of the Scripture does depend of
the Church, why do they not bring forth some canon, or decree of some council,
whereby holy scripture was approved, or confirmed? The primitive Church of the
Christians found the books of the old Testament, authentical and firm: and
by them approved and confirmed the articles of our faith. Afterward succeeded
the books of the Apostles, written by the inspiratio^ of the spirit of God,
which no decree of man confirmed. For Gods word is not subject to man's will and
pleasure, but contrarily, whatsoever the Churches ordained, they always were
careful, to prove it by the word of God, as it may be proved by the Councils of
best credit. So that well wrote blessed Siluianus Bishop of Marsiles: All
other things, that is to say, Siluianus de vero iudicio and prouidentia Dei.
lib. 3.
the sayings of men, have need of profes, and witnesses: but the word of God
is a witness to it self: for it must needs be an vncorrupt witness of
truth, which vncorrupt truth speaks In deed the Councels have made a
rehearsal of the books of holy scripture written by inspiration from God,
which some of the ancient fathers have done also: as of the Greeks, Melito,
Origines, and Eusebius Bishop of Caesaria: and of the Latins, Cyprian Bishop
and Martyr, and Hierome Priest. But long before their judgment, the books of
holy Scripture had divine authority among christians, which they would have
had, although Councels had never been celebrated. Notwithstanding the holy men
of God thought good to give forth their sentence also against the^, which were
wickedly bent against ye canonical books.

If the Church were able to bring to pass, that the Scripture might be
received, certainly she would have persuaded long before this time, Epicures,
Talmudikes, and Mahometistes to have received it. All the authority, which the
Church has, hangs on Gods word.
For the authority of the Gospel does not hang on the Church: but what
authority soever the Church has, it hangs wholly on the word of God. And if
the authority of God his word decay, the authority of the Church must
needs decay with it. For if thou demand of them, how they prove the
authority of the Church, or how they be certain, that it erreth not in the
understanding of holy Scriptures, and in discerning them from others? They will
say: because it is governed by the holy Ghost. And if thou say: And how
know you this? They will answer: because Christ has promised, Matthew. 28.20.
that he will be with the Church unto the end of the world. And because he
has said also: Where two or three are gathered in my name, Matthew. 18.20.
there am I in the midst of them. John. 16.7. and 13.
And: I will send the comforter unto you, and he will lead you into all
truth. These are the things, say they, which persuade the authority of the
Church. But whence take you these things, good men, but forth of holy
Scripture? Wherefore we must rather conclude, that the Church has her
authority from the Scripture. Therefore as no man deemeth, but the testimony
of the Church is greatly to be weyed about the word of GOD: so every man
well sees, that the authority of the Church is of great renown therefore,
because it is set forth by the clear light of God his word.

The.xi. Chapter. How ungodly and wicked it is, to preach without the warrant
of holy Scripture.
BY those things, which we have said of the worthiness of the scriptures, it
is manifest, that that doctrine, which the Prophets and Apostles have
delivered to us in writing, is the foundation of our faith. Wherefore the
Ministers of the Church, The Ministers of the Church must preach the word of
God only.
and Preachers, ought to learn hereby, what they should preach: even the
word of God only set forth in the Scripture, and not men's traditions,
although they presume to say, they be God his word, which by no means they
can prove, because they be uncertain, contrary one to an other, sometime
abolished, and sometime newly devised, which by no means can agree to the
word of God. Neither be there any Apostolic Churches, wherein the traditions
of the Apostles be sincerely kept. But we will speak of traditions more at
large in place convenient. John. 10.3.
Moreover, Christ his sheep are not quiet, until they hear the certain
voice of their shepherd. And the mind desiring to live to God, is not
certain, until it understand those things, which it hears to be grounded
upon this first principle of Divinity: Exodus 7.17.
Thus says the Lord. Christ his spouse can not be quiet in mind, until she
may say: Cant. 2.9.
I hear the voice of my beloved. Now his voice, according to the common rule
of God his disposition toward us, does not sound any where more cer^ainely
unto us, then forth of holy Scripture. Well said Chrysostom: Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 95.
If any thing be spoken without Scripture, the ^hought of the hearers halteth.
But whe^n the Testimony of God his voice ^s come forth of the scriptures, it
con^irmeth both the speech of the speaker, and the mind of the hearer. And
Esaie having admonished the people to ^eeke after none, but God only, adds
^he means also, saying: Get thee to the ^awe and testimony. Esaie 8.20.
August de vnitate ecclesiae cap. 6.
Wherefore well ^ayde Augustine: Let our books be taken away from among us,
and let God his book be brought forth among us, Hear Christ telling, ^eare
the truth speaking. He say^th also in an other place: Read us this ^oorth of
the law, forth of the Prophets, forth of the Psalms, forth of the
Gospel, read it forth of the Apostles writings, and we will believe ^t.
Again: Urge them to show some manifest testimonies forth of the Canonical
books. Luke 16.19.
Remember that this is the saying of the Lord. They have Moses, and the
Prophets, let them hear them. If an Angel from heaven preach any other
Gospel, Galat. 1.8.
Paul commands, that he be accounted accursed. Now if the Angels ought also
to be in subjection to God his word, and to obey it, then are they worthily
brought into this order, that if they do otherwise, They are judged Devils.
And although that cannot come to pass, yet such is the majesty of the Gospel,
that to set forth the dignity thereof, it is not unlawful after a sort to
abuse the name and dignity of Angels. Wherefore their wicked and cursed
rashenesse, which presume to preach in the church of GOD beside the Scripture,
is as it were, stoned to death with the most grave sentences of most holy
fathers. Let us therefore recite some testimonies of the Fathers. Testimonies
of the Fathers concerning this matter.


Tertullian against Hermogenes, says: I reverence the fullness of scripture.
Let Hermogenes his shop show that it is written: Tertullian.
If it be not written, let him fear the curse pronounced against them, Apo. 22
18. and 19.
which add, and take away from GOD his word.

Saint Augustine likewise against Petilian his letters in his third book and
sixth Chapter has these words: August. co^^a contra litteras Petil. an lib.
3. ca. 6.
If any, I will not say if we, but which Paul added, Gal. 1.8.
If an Angel from heaven, shall preach, either of Christ, or of his Church,
or of any other thing, which pertayneth to faith, or to the leading of our
life, otherwise then you have received in the holy Scriptures of the law and
of the Gospel, Let him be accursed. Whereunto agrees that also, which he
writes in an other place saying: Let him which preaches any other Gospel,
be accursed, August. de vnitate ecclesiae cap. 12.
or let him read it me in the holy Scriptures, and not be accursed. He says
also in his treatise of Pastoures. August. in Tract. de pastoribus.
Christ has appointed the mountains of Israel the authors of the holy
scriptures. Feed there that you may feed safely. Whatsoever you hear thence,
let that savor well unto you: whatsoever you hear not thence, refuse: that
you wander not in a cloud, gather your selves to the meaning of the scripture.
There be the dainties of your heart: There is nothing venomous, nothing from
the purpose: There be only the most fuitful pastures. Augustinus de bono
viduitatis cap. 1.
Also in his book of the goodness of widowehood, in the first Chapter he
says: What should I teach thee more, then that, which we read in the
Apostle? For the holy Scripture fashioneth the rule of our doctrine, least we
should presume to be wiser, than we ought. Therefore let it be to me nothing
else, to teach thee, but to expound to thee the words of the teachers.

In Gratian his xi. decree, and third question, Gratian.
which begins, Is qui post, you shall find these words: Let him be
accounted as a false witness, and a committer of sacrilege, which says any
thing, or commands a^ie thing, beside the will of God, or ^eside that, which
is evidently co^maun^ed in holy scriptures.

John Gerson in the first part of the ^xamination of doctrines, John Gerson.
cites a cer^aine gloss upon this place: There appea^ed unto them Moses and
Elias, Mat. 17.3. Mar. 9.4. Luke. 9.30.
talking ^ith him: which is this: Every reuela^ion is suspected, which the
law, and ^he Prophets, and the Gospel do ^ot confirm.

Hierome upon the Epistle to Titus ^aieth: Hierom.
Babbling without the authori^ie of the scriptures has no credit.

Basil in the sermon of the true and god^ie faith, says thus: Basil.
If the Lord be faith^ull in all his words, and if all his ^ commandments
be faithful, Psalm. 119. the 11 part and 6. ver.
then ^s the falling from the faith (in Greek (...)) and the crime of pride
manifest: namely either to refuse any of those things, which are written in
the Scriptures, or to bring in any thing, which is not written in the
Scriptures, considering that our Lord Jesus Christ has said: My sheep hear
my voice. John 10 27. John 10.5.
And a little before he said also: A stranger will they in no wise follow,
but will flee from him, for they know not the voice of strangers. And the
Apostle by a humane example does vehemently forbid, either to add any
thing to the holy scriptures, Galat. 3.15.
or to take any thing from them, when as he says: Though it be but a man's
Testament, yet if it be allowed, no man rejects it, or adds thereto. The
same Basil says also in his eighty rule of morals, Basilius Moralium Regula
80. cap. 21.
and xxi. Chapter: What is the property of the faithful? Even this, to be
thoroughly persuaded in his mind, that those things are true and effectual,
which are uttered in the Scripture, and to reject nothing, or to presume to
devise any new thing. Romans 14.23. Romans 10 17.
For, if whatsoever is not of faith be sin, as says the Apostle: and if
faith comes by hearing, and of hearing comes the word of GOD, without
doubt, when any thing is without the holy Scripture, which cannot be of
faith, it is of sin.

Theophilact.
Theophilact upon the Epistle to the Romans the last Chapter says: They which
bring any thing beside the doctrine of the Apostles, bring in offenses, and
heresies, and dissentions.

Chrysostom upon the Epistle to the Romans, the last Homily says: Chrysostom.
Therefor there will be none offenses, there ^ill be no discordes, except some
doctrine shall be devised, which is contra^y to the doctrine of the Apostles.

Origin upon Matthew, Origin.
the xxv. Ho^ilie faith: For the proof of all the ^oordes, which we utter in
our do^trine, we ought to bring forth the ^ense and meaning of the Scripture,
to ^onfirme that sense, which we expound ^or even as all the gold, whatsoever
^s without the temple, is not halow^d: so every sense, which is without ho^ie
scripture, although it seem to some ^oonderfull, is not holy, because it ^s
not contained in the sense of the Scripture. Therefore we may not for the
^onfirmation of our own doctrine, take ^ur own interpretatio^s: except it may
be showed, that they are holy, because they ^re contained in the holy
Scriptures, as in certain temples of God.

Ambrose.
Ambrose in his fourth book of Virginity, says: We do rightly condemn all
new things, which Christ has not taught, John. 14.6.
because Christ is the way to the faithful. Therefore if Christ have not taught
that, which we have, we our selves judge it also detestable. It appears also
by the most grave sentences of the Fathers, that it is a very great
wickedness, yea accursed and execrable ungodliness, to preach any thing in the
Church of God, beside the holy Scripture. An earnest and necessary admoniton.
Wherefore I exhort you, (whose usual manner is, and that with great
solemnity, to preach beside the Scripture, and to abuse the simplicity of
Christian people, whom you make mad with your dutifulness and subtle
reasoning, and whom you bewitch) being wakened with so many most grave
sentences of the men of God, to acknowledge your detestable boldness,
vanity, and rashenesse, and to leave it of. For if we believe Tertullian, you
ought to be afraid of that curse, A brief collection of the Fathers assertions
alleged in this Chapter.
which is pronounced against them, which add to the Scripture, or take from
it. If we give credit to Ambrose and Augustine, you are accursed, you are
detestable, you are wiser than you ought to be, and you walk in a cloud: If
we credit Gratian his decree, you are the false witnesses of God and
committers of sacrilege: If we will give ear to Basil, you are manifestly
fallen from the faith, you are stained with the crime of pride, and you teach
sins: If we hearken to Chrysostom, and Theophilact, you bring in offenses,
heresies, and dissentions: If we be of Origens and Hieromes mind, you be
profane and vain bablers, which deserve no credit. Therefore either cast
away and tread underfoot the authority and consent of the ancient
Fathers, by your wicked impudency, or else confess your selves to be, as you
are, even wicked and cursed persons, and repent with the true sorrow of the
heart, and with true groninges.

The xii. Chapter. That the true Church is to be sought in the Scripture, to
be included therein, and to be esteemed by the Scriptures.
John 8.47. John 10.4. and 5
CHrist pronounces in the Gospel, that they are of God, which hear God his
words: that they are his sheep, which confess his voice, to be the voice of
the Shepherd, and esteem the voice of every one else, to be the voice of a
stranger. By the same reason the spirit by the mouth of Paul does
pronounce, Ephe. 2.20.
that the Church is built upon the foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles.
Ephe. 5.26.
And that the Church is sanctified unto the Lord, in the fountain of water in
the word of life. He teaches us the same more plainly by the mouth of Peter
also, when as he instructs us, 1. Pet. 1.23.
that the people of God, are borne anew of incorruptible seed, by the word of
God, which lives and lasts for ever. To be brief, the preaching of the
Gospel is called Mat. 3.2. and Luke 17.21.
the kingdom of God, whereby the heavenly king governs his people. God his
word is the chiefest mark, whereby the Church is known. August de vnitate
ecclesiae cap. 3.
Therefore God his word is the chiefest mark to know the church by, commended
unto us, even by the Lord himself. For this cause Augustine disputing against
Petilian, what the church is, and where it is, will not have it sought and
pointed forth in the words and rumors of men, nor in Councels, nor in signs,
and wonders, but in the Canonical Scriptures. Let us not hear (says he) this
say I, this say thou: But this says the Lord: There be the books of the
Lord, unto whose authority both of us do agree, both of us yield credit.
There let us seek the Church, there let us discuss our cause. Again: Let
those things be taken away, which we recite one against an other, not forth of
God his Canonical books, but from some other places. Some man peradventure
will ask: And why will you have those things taken away? Because I will not
have the holy Church pointed forth by man's doctrines, but by God his oracles.
Also: John. 10.4. and 5.
Whatsoever they bring, or from whence soever they recite it, Let us rather
hear the voice of his Shephearde, if we be his sheep. Therefore let us search
forth the church in the holy Canonical scriptures. Augustinus de Pastoribus
cap. 4.
He says moreover in his book of pastors the iiii. Chapter. I ask after
the voice of the Shepherd. Read me this forth of a Prophet: Read me this
forth of a Psalm: Recite it forth of the law: Recite it forth of a Gospel:
Recite it forth of an Apostle. Forth of them do I recite the Church
dispersed in all the world, and the Lord saying: My sheep hear my voice,
and follow me. John. 10.27.
Let men's writing be taken away, let the voices of God sound. Again in the
xvi. Note.
Chapter he says: Let them prove their Church, if they can: not in the
speeches and rumors of the Africanes, not in the Councils of their own
Bishops, not in the writings of certain disputers, not in signs and deceitful
woonders (for against these things we are prepared and warned in the word of
the Lord) but in the appointment of the law, in the foretellings of the
prophets, in the songues of the Psalms, in the voices of the Shephearde
himself, in the preaching and labors of the Evangelists, that is to say, in
all the Canonical authorities of the holy books. Item, Let him not say: It is
therefore true, because this man, or that man wrought these or those miracles:
or because men do pray, and are heard at the memories of our dead: or because
these things or those things happen there: or because this man, or that woman
has either seen watching, or dreamed sleeping such a vision. Let these things
be taken away, being either the devises of lying men, or the illusions of
deceitful Spirits. For neither do we say, that we ought to be believed
therefore, because innumerable Bishops of our fellowship have commended that
church, which we hold: or because it is preched in the councils of our fellows:
or because so strange miracles either of granting of requests, or of
healinges be wrought, throughout all the world in holy places, which our
communion and fellowship do frequent. These be the documents, These be the
foundations, these be stays of our cause, says Augustine.

Chrysostom. Mat. 24.16.
Unto him agrees Chrysostom upon Matthew the forty nienth Homily. Let them
which be in Jury, flee into the mountains: That is to say, Let them which be
in the profession of Christ his Religion flee to the Scriptures. It follows:
And why does he command all Christians at that time to resort to the
Scriptures? Because in that time, wherein Heresy possessed the Churches, there
could be no proof of true Christian religion, neither could there be a^y
other refuge of Christians, being desirous to know the truth of faith, but
the divine Scriptures. For before it was showed many ways, which was the
Church of Christ, and which Gentilitie. But now they which are desirous to
know, which is the true Church of Christ, can know it by no means, but only
by the Scriptures. Why? Because all those things, which be proper to Christ
in truth, heresy have also in Schism Churches alike, and divine Scriptures
alike, Bishops alike, and all other orders of the Clergy: Baptism alike,
the Or sacrament of thankesgeuing in the Lords Supper.
Euchariste alike, and all other things, and to be brief Christ himself
Theref^re if a man be willing to know which is the true Church of Christ,
whence shall he know it in so great a confusion of similitude, but only by the
Scriptures? He adds moreover: The Church of Christ was known beforetime
even by the manners, when as the conversation either of all Christians, or of
many, was holy: which was not to be found among the wicked. But now are
Christians become, ey^her such, or worse, as are Heretics, and Infidels:
Yea, and there is greater sobernes of life found among them, although they be
in schism, then among Christians. He then, that is desirous to know, which is
the true Church, whence may he know it, but only by the Scriptures? Therefore
our Lord knowing, that there should be so great a confusion of things in the
last days, does therefore command, that they which be Christians, being
desirous to receive the confirmation of the true faith in That is, in the true
profession of Christ his religion.
Christianity, should flee to none other thing, but to the Scriptures.
Otherwise if they shall regard any other things, they shall fall into offense
and perish, not understanding which is the true Church. Hitherto Chrysostom.

It is therefore manifest, by these instructions of these most worthy doctors
of the Church, as also by the scripture it self, that the Church is to be
sought and proved in the Canonical Scripture, not in the speeches and rumors,
or manners of men, whatsoever they be: not in Councels, not in the successions
of Bishops, not in the writings and disputations of men, not in miracles, not
in visions, revelations, or any other thing. Because we are deceived by
likelyhoodes in so great a confusion of things, and because we can not know
certainly, by any other means, but only forth of the Canonical books of
Scripture, which is the true Church. That is therefore false, which the Papists
dream, that this or that ought therefore to be believed, because that visible
company, which has the title of the Church, has observed it, and does
observe it, although it can be proved by no testimony of Scripture. Augustinus
contra literas Petil. lib. 3. cap. 6.
For the late cited sentence of Augustine is true. If any, either Apostle, or
Church, yea, or Angel from Heaven, shall preach unto us of any thing, which
pertains to our faith, or life, otherwise tha^ we have received in the
scriptures of the law and of the Gospel, let him be accursed. Therefore
forsomuche as the Church is to be sought, and known, by the holy Scripture,
considering, that, as well by the testimony of the scriptures, as of the
Catholic Church her self, she ought to be sought and tried no where else:
Then must not the Scriptures be esteemed and depend of the Church, but the
Church rather of the Scriptures: and then truly shall not the Scriptures have
al her estimation and al her authority from the Church, but rather the Church
from the Scriptures.

The.xiij. Chapter. Of the duties of the Church about the Scriptures: and
first of this, that she keeps the holy books of the Scripture, as a witness.
We have hitherto declared by many strong and firm arguments, that the
authority of the Canonical Scripture is pearlesse, and most excellent, from
whence the authority and excellency of the Church comes, and whereupon it
stays it self. And the Church does not ouerrule our faith, as they
naughtely think. For although the duty of the Church be, to preach, to
admonish, to reprove, to witness, and to set forth the holy Scriptures
plainly, yet does she not require to be believed, but because she speaks ye
words of God. And the church has iiii. goodly offices about the Scriptures.
First, The four functions of the Church about the scripture.
she keeps safe the books of holy Scripture as a witness. Secondly, she
preaches and publishes them. Thirdly, she discerns them from counterfeites.
Fourthly, she interprets them. And these functions prove not, The Church
keeps the Scripture as a witness.
that the Church has authority over the Scripture, as many foolishly suppose.
For whereas the Church keeps the scripture safe as a witness, it cannot be
inferred thereby, that it is lawful for the Church, to pervert or change any
thing in the holy Scriptures. For so should she weaken the force of her
testimony, and show her self to be an untrusty witness: And this would be a
corrupting, and not witness bearing: For the pure and simple form of the
commandment, Ambrosius de Paradiso. cap. 12.
(says Ambrose) is denounced by earnest testimonies to be kept. A witness,
for the most part, when as he adds any thing of his own devising, to the
orderly report of things done, staineth the whole credit of his testimony, A
plain and apt similitude.
by the lying report of the part. Nothing must therefore be added, although it
be never so good. It is a common use to commit public and private evidences
to recorders, whom commonly men call Notaries, to keep and conserve with all
diligence: and yet no wise man will say, that they may lawfully change any
thing, that is contained in them. And it is not to be believed, that the
authority of the said Notaries is of greater strength, than was their wills,
which requested that those things might be so recorded. Neither is it any
matter, that the Church received the word of God delivered by lively voice,
before it was committed to writing. In deed the word ((...) that is to say)
unwritten, in time is before the word, which afterward was written: yet both
were bestowed upon the Church, being of one authority, and of like efficacy.
For the Scripture says of the word written: They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. Luke. 16.23.
And as it was then the duty of the Church, to hear GOD speaking in the
writings of Moses and the Prophets: so is it now the duty of the Church,
to hear Christ with all reverence speaking in the writings of the Evangelists
and Apostles, and to embrace the instruction of the spirit. Although the
honor of the Church be great, that she is chosen of God, to be, as it were,
the keeper and defender of this most excellent and worthy treasure, yet may
the Church by no means either wreith, or change, or corrupt those writings,
but ought as a faithful keeper, with chief care and provision, to keep the
books of holy scripture uncorrupted, for them which shall come after.

The xiiij. Chapter. That the Church publishes the word of God.
The Church publishes the scriptures.
WE said, that the second duty of the Church about the Scripture is, to publish
and preach the words committed to her by God. Wherein the Church is like to a
crier, who although he do proclaim the Edictes and commandments of Princes
and Magistrates, yet is he not above them, or of equal authority with them:
but all his endeavor is, to pronounce all things faithfully, as he has
received them from the Princes and the Magistrates: and if he do otherwise, he
may worthily be holden for a traitor. Well says Chrysostom: Chrysostom. in
Tit. Homilia. 1.
For as the crier proclaims to all that are present in the stage, so do we
(says the Apostle) proclaim publicly, with this condition, that we add
nothing, but that we proclaim those things only, which we have heard. For
this ^s the virtue of a crier, to publish those things truly, which are
committed to him, not to add any thing, or to change, or to take away.
Tertullian agrees with Chrysostom, saying: Tertul. de praescript. Haeretic.
Mark.
We may not follow our own appetite in devising any thing of our selves,
neither may we choose any thing, which any other has devised, we have the
Apostles of the Lord for our authors, who chose not any thing of their own
judgment, which they might bring (...), but faithfully assigned to nations ^he
doctrine received of Christ. Therefore though an Angel from heaven preach
otherwise, we may call him accursed. Let us therefore avoid them, which
intrude men's devises and traditions as necessary to be observed and believed,
and let us hear with all attentiveness the sincere preaching of the Gospel in
the Church, and reverence it.

The.xv. Chapter. That the Church discerns the books of holy Scripture from
Aprocryphal, and counterfeit.
The Church discerns the counterfeit books from the true.
THirdly, for so much as the Church is endued with the spirit of God, we do
confess, that it is her function, to discern the sincere and true books of
holy Scripture from the counterfeit, and Apocryphal. So has the Church
disallowed and rejected the Gospel of Thomas, of Bartholomewe, of Thaddee, of
the Nazarites, of Nicodemus as also the acts of Peter, the diverse revelations
of the Apostles, the Book of the Pastor, and such like. Contrarily, she has
allowed and received the four Gospels, which we have, and the writings of the
Apostles, which in these days we read in our Churches. And although the
conservation of the assured books of the Prophets and Apostles, as of a
certain divine Treasure, be the singular work and benefit of GOD,
notwithstanding both the diligence and authority of the church is to be
acknowledged herein, which has partly given forth her Testimonial of the
assured writings, and has partly by her spiritual judgment refused the
writings, which are unworthy, and which agree not with the rest of the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Which was so much the more easy,
because (as says Augustine, they wrote in such a time, To discern, is not to
be of greater authority.
wherein they were thought worthy to be allowed, not only of the Church of
Christ, but also even of the Apostles, who then remained alive. But to discern
Books, is not to be of greater authority, than are the said Books, as some
foolishly dream. For when as the King his letters be brought, some governors
of Cities, and presidentes of Provinces, are able by use and civil skill
sufficiently to judge, whether they be true letters or forged, which are
delivered them in the Kings name: and yet may they not at their own pleasure,
either change, or wrest them, when they shall perceive, that they are not
cou^terfeited or feigned. And we may not otherwise esteem of the Church. Who
although she have given forth her faithful testimony to the books of holy
Scripture, and not to the works of other, who peradventure did not only
digress from the truth of the history, but also reported many things, which
are clean contrary to the old testament, and to the other Evangelists: yet
may she not otherwise understand or ordain any thing, then God has defined
and taught in these books of holy Scripture. But if they, which being lighted
by the holy Ghost, acknowledged the holy Scriptures to be the words of God, had
been asked whether they would have preferred their own authority before the
scriptures? They would never have done it. Nay contrarily, having acknowledged
and received the said Scriptures, they submitted themselves wholly unto them,
and esteemed them as the most certain rule, guide, and direction of their
faith and life. Wherefore this is a weak and feeble argument. A weak argument.
The Church accepted, and discerned the books of holy Scripture from other:
Therefore the authority of the church is more excellent. For we also
acknowledge one true God, and allow Jesus Christ, and put difference between
him and Idols, and between him and the Devil, and yet cannot infer hereupon,
that we are more excellent than Christ, or God. In like manner our mind
allows and receives the prouocations and motions of the holy Ghost, to
read, to pray, to live chastely, and discerns them from the wicked
entisementes of the world, of the Devil, and of the flesh, and yet our mind
may not therefore be called, either better, or more excellent than the holy
Ghost. Again when a man endued with the perfect knowledge of Philosophy,
shall receive Plato or Aristotle or Galen, as noble Philosophers, and shall
prefer them before Epicure, Aristippus, and Democritus, shall he in
consideration, of this his judgment presume to prefer his own authority
before Galene, or Aristotle, or Plato? And there be many men of so perfect
judgment, that they can discern the counterfeite verses of Virgil or Ovid,
from their true verses, and yet are they in knowledge far inferior to Virgil
and Ovid Even so the Church ought not for this cause to prefer her credit,
or authority, before the holy Scriptures. This argument, as we said, is
weak, and the Maxim, A false Maxim.
with they gather hereof, is false. Those things, which the Church has
delivered and proposed, even without any testimony of Scripture, ought to have
the same authority, as has the Canonical Scripture, unto who^ the church
have given authority. In deed the holy Scripture is allowed by the common
consent of the Church, but this consent is not man's devise, but a necessary
confession, and an expressed testification proceeding of the truth of the
matter. And yet the Church, by means of this testification, has not reputed
her self greater, or more excellent then the Scripture, but has reverently
committed her self to the government of the Scripture.

It is therefore plain by the premises, The Sum.
how the Church stands toward the word of God written. She is the
faithful keeper and defendour of the word, she extolleth it, by witnessing
with it, by setting it forth, by preaching it, by defending it, by mainteining
it. And yet does she depend wholely of it, as of the rule of her faith: she
changes nothing, she alters nothing, she adds nothing, she takes away
nothing. She is as it were a Notarie, which keeps safely testamentes, when
as notwithstanding he has no authority above the last will of the testatour:
for if he should change or alter it, he should not be taken for a
faithful Notarie, but for a falsifier and a forger of testamentes.

The.xvi. Chapter. Of this saying of Augustine: [I would not believe the
Gospel, but that the authority of the Church moves me also.]
BEcause the Pope his side do see, that the Scripture makes against them to
diminish the authority thereof, they contend, that the authority of the
Church, the title whereof they do pretend by their devises and decrees, is
rather to be esteemed, than of the Scriptures, because the Scriptures cannot
retain their credit without the Church. But how vaynely they dispute hereof,
we have already showed by many most strong arguments. But they object unto
us the authority of the holy man of God Augustine, which wrote thus against
the Epistle of a Manichee, Augustinus conttra Epistolam Manichaeorum Fundamenti
cap. 5.
which they call Fundamenti: I would not believe the Gospel: but that the
authority of the Church moves me also, Notwithstanding Augustine thinks
not, that the authority of the Church is greater than the authority of the
word of GOD, neither does he grant unto the Church authority, to ordeine
any thing against the word of God, or to make new articles of the faith, or
to abolish the articles delivered in the word of God: he only deemeth the
Church to be a teacher and a witness. We could not believe the Gospel, were it
not, that the Church taught us, and witnessed that this doctrine was delivered
by the Apostles. Augustinus con. Faustum. lib. 28. cap. 2.
The same Augustine in the xxviii. book, the second chapter against Faustus
writes, that the Manichees ought so to believe the first Chapter of Matthewe
which those heretics received not, to be written by Matthew, as he did believe
the epistle, which they called Fundamentum, to be Manichees, because it was so
kept by their ancetours, and delivered from hand to hand. He writes that he
was also moved by agreeable testimonies of the first Church, not to doubt,
that these books were delivered by the Apostles, The primitive Church moves
us also to believe.
and by them which are worthy credit. Therefore hereupon it is, that the Church
moves us also to believe the Gospel, because she keeps the holy Scriptures
faithfully, preaches them, and discerns them from others. And he speaks of
the primitive and Apostolic Church, as Gerson Chancellor of Paris, Gerson.
a man in his age most excellent, does in the same place most wisely say: He
takes the Church for the primitive congregation of those faithful, which
heard Christ, and saw him, and were his witnesses. For whilst the Apostles,
and Disciples of Christ were yet living, when as diverse Gospels were set
forth in the Church, they, which had seen Christ, and heard his Apostles,
could witness, what was natural, and what was Bastardlike. In like manner
Tertullian and Irenaeus commend unto us the authority of the first Church,
Tertul. de praescript. Heret. Irenae lib. 3. cap. 3.
receive the writings approved by the Catholic consent of the first Church,
and did therefore send heretics to the Apostolic Churches, because they did
not receive the whole scriptures: Wherefore they would that they should
receive the estimation of the Scriptures, from those churches, wherein it was
manifestly known, that the Apostles taught. For it was evident, that those
Churches had been continually the witnesses and keepers of the books of holy
Scripture: and yet they did not for that cause ordeyne that the authority of
the Church ought to be preferred before the Scriptures. But if the Apostolic
Church be not preferred before the Scripture, much less ought this
congregation of mitred men, which are not so aptly termed the Church, as the
corruption and eating canker of the church, to be preferred before the said
Scriptures.

But they obiecte against us this rule, which is commonly spoken of by
Logicians: Whatsoever it is, A Marime in Logike.
that is the cause that any thing else is endued with a quality, the same
thing shall rather be judged to be endued with the same quality. Hereupon
they reason in this manner. A deceitful argument.
If the scripture have her authority because of the Church, then does it
follow, that the said authority is rather in the Church, then in ye
scriptures. But these fellows ought to know, that this sentence given forth
by the Logicians, has place in final causes. For if a man for healthes sake
use a medicine, he rather desires health, than the medicine. But that manner
of reasoning is not effectual in efficient causes, except the whole and
total cause be contained in the argument. For although men, which drink wine
vnmeasurably, become drunk, we cannot thereupon conclude, that the wine is
rather drunk than the men: because all the cause of drunkenness is not in the
wine, for it is required also, that it be concocted in the belly, and that the
vapors be sent up, which may trouble the brain. Molo the Rhetoritian
instructed Cicero in Orators art: and yet is it not concluded thereby, that
Molo was more skillful in that science, than was Cicero, because the master is
not the whole cause of learning, for wit, study, and diligence is also
required for the atteining thereof. Even so the Church is not the total and
whole efficient cause of that credit and authority, which the holy Scriptures
have among the faithful. God himself has laid the foundation of them with
so great authority, that their certeintie is confirmed by the inward
persuasion of the holy Ghost, as lately we showed. The Testimonies of men,
which are set forth for the confirmation of Scriptures, shall not be in vain,
if they follow that chief and sovereign Testimony of the holy Ghost, as
second helps of our weakness: wherefore Augustine wrote wisely: Except the
authority of the Church moved me also: For he said not simply, Moved me.
And even as Augustine among other things, moved by the authority of the
Church, witnesses, that he chooses rather to believe the Gospel, ^han the
Manichees: so ought we al by good reason to be moved by the authori^ie of the
same Church, to believe the divine preaching of the doctrine of the Gospel,
which shines now again among us, and of Christ, whom the church ^ommaundeth
us always to believe, rather then the devises and decrees of all Popes, and all
their partakers. And thus you see plainly, that this saying of Augustine, with
they wrongfully wrest for themselves, makes also against them as before we
have proved.

The.xvij. Chapter. Of the gift of interpretation.
The true understanding and interpretation of the scripture belongs to the
Church
FOurthly, the true understanding or interpretation of the Scripture belongs
to the Church. For she holds the foundation, and has the gift of
interpretation, but sometime purely, and some time vnpurely. According to this
gift the Church in times past determined and defined most chief, most grave,
and most hard controversies of doctrines forth of the Scriptures. For the
church (as says Irenaeus does always preach ye truth, Irenaeus. lib. 5.
and is the seauenfold lamp (...) bearing Christ his light. Apoc. 1.12.
So much the less are those wanton wits to be born with, which do despise the
catholic understanding and consent of the Church, and al councels without
difference, and devise new opinions wickedly wresting the Scriptures. Therefore
for so much as the gift of interpretation is in the Church, it is necessary to
hear the Church teaching, when she does either interpret those things,
which are set forth in the Scriptures, and holds forth the torch to put
away the darkness, brought into holy Scriptures by heretics: or else proposes
those things, which although they be not set forth in expressed words, are
yet proved by comparing of place with place. So do the godly receive most
willingly all the determinations of the Councels of Nice, of Constantinople, of
Ephesus, and of Chalcedon. But this gift is not bound to certain persons and
places, being at sometimes in more, at sometimes in fewer, sometimes better
known and more pure, sometimes less known and not so pure: Even as says
Paul, 1. Cor. 3.12.
that some build on the foundation hay and stubble. And two things, namely
the Testimonies of scripture truly agreeing and the Catholic consent, will show
who they are, which have this gift. The Catholic consent.
And the Catholic consent is the agreement of the Fathers, of the Prophets,
of the Apostles, and of all, whosoever agree with their Testimonies in
judgment and signification. But because this gift is not always manifest enough
and pure in the church, many cautions are needful.

The same also teaches, that Prophecies, How interpretations must be tried.
Romans 12.6.
that is to say, interpretations ought to be according to the proportion and
measure of faith. Romans xii. Therefore interpretations must be examined, whether
they be of the proportion of faith, whether they agreee with the rule of
charity, whether they consent with the Scripture given from God. For if any
thing be affirmed without god his word, the vain names of the Church, of the
fathers, and of Councels, are pretended to no purpose, Gal. 1.8.
wherein the Angels may not be heard. Neither is it the duty of the Church
to speak, but to hear her husband speak, according to this saying of the
Psalm: Hearken (O daughter, Psalm. 45.11.
and consider, Incline thine ear. And the Fathers of the right faith would not
have their writings to be read with any other condition, but that they might
be corrected in the balance of God his written word, as in the apt place we
have taught. It is not the part of Councels, to set forth a new word or
doctrine, but to maintain the word or doctrine received from their
auncetours, against Heretics, which withstand it. The Synodes, which have
done otherwise, be the councels of the ungodly, and the seats of the
scornful Psalm. 1.1.
which we are commanded to avoid, that we may be blessed. To be brief, so
far forth does the Church hold the true understanding, as it does carry
with her the light of Christ: without this light, it has stubble and
superstitious constitutions.

And this may not be affirmed, The interpretation of the Scripture is not in
subjection to tyrants.
that the true understanding of Scripture is in subjection to them, which are
willing to rule like tyrants, and not to submit them selves to the word of
God, but to have Gods word subject to their decrees. For these fellows carry
not the light of Christ, but darken the clear light, by their devises, yea
rather choke up Gods truth with their most gross darkness. These stately
men are the wicked deprauers of the truth which do not apply their mind to
the Scriptures, but draw and pervert the mind of the Scriptures to their will.
And what manner of interpretours they are, A Demonstration of the false
interpreting of the Scripture. Matt. 26.27. Mat. 14.23.
a man may easily perceive by these things, which I will allege. Christ
reaching forth the cup in the Supper says: Drink ye all of it. Mark
adds: And they all drank of it. But they in their interpretation say, not
al, but the Priests only. The Epistle to the Hebrews pronounces, that
Wedlock is honorable among al men. They say: Heb. 13.4.
Not in all men, but in Leie men only: Paul says: If they cannot abstain,
1. Cor. 7.9.
let them marry: But these fellows by their ordinances and expositions exclude
a good part of the world from marriage. Christ says to his Apostles: The
Kings of nations be Lords over them: Luke. 22.25.
But ye shall not be so: But they would have us to depart from the most
manifest meaning of the place, and to receive I know not what manner of
interpretations. The Law of God forbids the setting up of Images to be
woorshipped: but they will have Images to be, Exodus 20.4.5
and to be woorshipped in Temples and in Oratories. Paul says: Deuteronomy. 5.8.
and. 9.
Let no man judge you in meat or in drink: And yet they brought in the
superstitious choice of meats, Col. 2.16.
so that they account it an offense more heinous than adultery, to eat flesh
on the Friday, or in Lent. The Scripture decrees, Romans 3.24. Gal. 2.16. Ephesians.
2.8. et 9.
that we are justified by faith without works: but they by their exposition
contend that we are justified by works. I beseech you, is this to
in^erprete the Scriptures, or to shift them of? What man is there so blind,
which sees and perceives not, that their gloses be altogether clean contrary
to the text? They have adjudged his power of interpreting ye Scriptures ^o be,
as it were, their own of right, and ^o them only appertaining, that they ^ay
at their pleasure bring into the Church strange judgments and unknown
doctrines, and that they may, as shall seem best unto them, fight against the
word of God. For their right of authentical interpretation will take away
all scruple. Neither can there be any testimony objected to the contrary, be
it never so clear, be it never so strong, but they will by one means or by an
other shift it of. For they will very easily escape by one cavil or an other,
because against all contrary reasons this shall be a brazen wall. The
interpretation of the Church of Rome.
Thus the church judges. If any man have say they, the interpretation of the
Church of Rome, touching any place of Scripture, although he neither know, nor
understand whether it do, or how it may agree with the words of Scripture,
yet has he the very word of God. Now the interpretation of the Church of
Rome shall be: Luke. 22.38.
Behold here are two swoordes, that is to say the Bishop of Rome has the
administration of either swoorde, both of the spiritual, and politic.
Elizeus by a miracle made bitter waters sweet, 4. Reg. 2.21.
by casting salt into them: that is, there must be in the Church exorcised
water, and hallowed salt, whose efficacy we must believe to be of great force
against the Devil and against sins. Luke. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
This do in the remembrance of me, That is, Priests must offer in the Mass,
the body and blood of the Lord for the quick and the dead. If thou reclaim,
that these be corruptions, not interpretations, thou shall hear them say: The
Church so understands these places: And will thou reject the interpretation
of the Church? Therefore no man may presume to gainesay this Dictatourlike and
Pretorlike power of interpreting, which doubts not thus to pervert the words
of Scripture according to their own opinions.

The Priests, Scribes, Examples of false interpreting forth of the Gospel.
Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16.
and Pharisees of the Jews in times past dealt none otherwise: but Christ that
true Priest has confuted their wicked and perverse interpretations. God
commanded in the Law: Honor thy father and thy mother: but the Priests moved
through covetousness, set this commandment at large, and weakened it, by
absoluing the children from the burden of nourishing their Parents, persuading
them to offer dainty and fat oblations, which might profit their parents
more than food. The Lord has gainsayde them, and witnessed that the
commandment of GOD is corrupted and made of none effect by this crafty
interpretation. Matthew. 15.6. Mat. 7.13. Mat. 23.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
They did also dispense with oaths, and taught that some oaths were strong,
and some weak: and here the Lord opposed himself also against their false
expositions, and confuted their interpretations. They taught also, that the
Law of God is fulfilled by outward discipline, Matthew. 5. from the beginning to
the end.
if men do conform them selves thereunto by outward works only. But
Christ laying away their peevish gloses, has declared, that the Law does not
only require outward works, but also godly and holy motions of the mind.
Therefore let the Law of proouing interpretations remain inuiolated, neither
must we yield to all manner interpretations without judgment. For the Church
has the right and liberty to judge, 1. Cor. 14.29. Hieronymus in Apologia de
lib. contra Iouinianu^
as says Paul: Let the other judge. My purpose was (says Jerome) not to
draw the Scriptures to my will: but to say that which I understood the
Scriptures would. For it is the duty of a Commentatour, to expound, not what
he will him self, but what he means, whom he does interpret. Otherwise,
if he shall speak contrary things, he shall not be an interpreter, but his
adversary, whom he takes upon him to expound. Truly wheresoever I do not
interpret the Scriptures, but speak freely of mine own judgment, let him
reprove me, that will. Thus much has Jerome. Certainly you shall never find
in the Fathers, that the Scriptures are hereby to be understood, because this
or that Council, did thus, or thus interpret them. August. in lib. de
doctrina Christ.
And Augustine in his books of Christian doctrine does set forth very
many ways of interpreting the Scriptures, and yet does he never bind us,
either to Councels, or to the Church.

The.xviij. Chapter. Of the saying of Christ: [If he will not hear the Church,
Mat. 17.18
let him be unto thee, as an heathen man and a Publicane.]
THey, which seek a certain Lordlike government of all religion under the
counterfeit color of the Church, because they see little aid or none in the
Scripture, hold forth before us the masking visard of the Church, as a Gorgons
head, that we being amassed therewith, might rashly embrace all manner of
decrees, all kind of traditions, and interpretations, which please them
only, without examination, without inquisition, and without doubt. Therefore
that they may call us back from the Scripture, to the constitutions of the
Church, they say, That Christ said: If he will not hear the Church, let him
be unto thee as an heathen man, Christ speaks not of interpreting the
scriptures.
and a Publicane. Although Christ in that place entreated not of the exposition
of Scriptures, but only of brotherly correction, yet we grant, that the
Church is to be heard, so far forth as she judges, answers, and speaks
forth of GOD his word. But if she utter the devises of men, and traditions
only, we ought to pass by her with deaf ears: especially when she
proposes things contrary to GOD his word. For this saying of Paul stands
fast: Though an Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1.8.
preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed. Hieronym^
And the saying of Jerome is: That is the doctrine of the holy Ghost, which is
set forth in the Canonical Scriptures, against the which, if Councels decree
any thing, I count it wickedness. To be brief, we do enclose the Church in
the word of the Lord, which ought to be set before her eyes as a sure and
certain rule. Neither can the church, in so great variety and multitude of
sects and Heresies condemning one an other, be declared by any other means,
because men are every where, and because every one will swear, that the
Church is with them, John. 14.23.
as lately forth of Augustine and Chrysostom we have declared. What say you
to this, that the same Christ the Lord will hereby chiefly have his disciples,
and so consequently and undoubtedly his church also known and esteemed, if
they keep his sayings faithfully, and observe them. And does plainly
witness, John. 14.24.
that they are cast off, which will not keep his doctrine and follow it. As
for this power above the Scriptures, which these fellows claim unto themselves
by their subtle Sophistry, the ancient Fathers never knew nor sought, as
lately we have showed. Constantine the Emperor commanded the Fathers,
Theodor. Histor. Ecclesi. li. 1. ca. 7.
when as they were assembled in the Nicene Council, that they should define
the controversy of the one, and self same substance of the father and the
son, forth of the Prophetical and Apostolical Scriptures. And yet none
withstoode him there, saying, that the Church ought to discuss the
controversy by her own absolute authority, because she was not subject to
the Scriptures, but had them rather in subjection unto her. Neither did they
complain, that the Emperor did any whitte at all debase the Church, when as
he made her subject to the rule of the Scriptures. And how will these men
bring the Scriptures in subjection to the authority, judgment, and censure of
the Church, seeing Christ our Lord does not say, that the Church is judge
of his Doctrine, but pronounces rather, that his doctrine shall be judged of
all mankind in general? And thus may we understand, that Christ is not to
be judged by men, with what title soever or prerogative they be adorned, but
all mankind to be John. 12.28.
judged by him, according to the Doctrine of his word.

The.xix. Chapter. Of the saying of Paul: 1. Tim. 3.15.
(The Church is the pillar and ground of the truth.)
THey say, that the Church is the pillar and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3.15. How
the church is the pillar and ground of the truth.
and that it can not err. The Apostle speaks not of the Church of any one
time, or place, but of the Catholic Church of al times, and places, which also
contains the Prophets, and all the Apostles, with all their doctrine, and
Christ the Lord himself, as the chief and everlasting head, and therefore
her only head. This Church is the pillar and ground work of the truth of
the Prophets and Apostles doctrine. Wherefore we also following Augustine,
do confess, that we are moved by the testimony of this Church, (which also
before we said) rather to believe the Gospel, then the Popes, and their
Decrees, and all their Councels. But the Church of any one time, or place,
(especially after the Apostles) is not the pillar and ground of the truth,
but so far forth as she has the word of God with her, preaches it,
reteineth it, and conserueth it: and not because she strengthens it being
weak, or makes it to be of authority being unconstant: much less because she
usurps unto her self a censours rod over it, or sets down any thing
concerning it, after her own judgment.

Therefore as she speaks forth of God his word, she erreth not, How the
Chuch cannot err.
neither can she err: but either speaking or doing without it, she not only
can err, but does err. But these men, whilst they cloak their tyranny with
the beautiful title of the Church, feign unto us a Church, which although it
ordeine any thing beside, or against God his word, yet erreth not. And
therefore would they, that she should rather be believed, then the word of
God. But whilst they stay them selves upon this opinion, they differ as much as
may be from the old fathers, and from the consent of the Catholic Church. For
the fathers in their councels did always confirm their decrees by the
testimonies of Scripture. And although they yielded no small honor to
councels, yet ^n the greatest controversies, they did not ^o much appeal unto
councels, as to God ^is oracles, which are the Scriptures.

Hereof Augustine is witness, which would not that the authority of the
council (...)

Hilarious de Tritate. lib. 6.
And this which Hilarie wrote long ago, may much more truly be applied to our
times: For the grievous and perilous error in many, and the fall of many,
although it do understand it self, yet through shame to rise, presumes
authority to it self, having this impudency of the number, that whereas it
erreth, it would have it esteemed wisdom, and where as it erreth with many,
it affirms it to be the vnderderstanding of the truth, whilst less error
is supposed to be in the truth.

The xx. Chapter, Of the saying of Paul [Brethren stand fast, 2. These. 2.15.
and hold the ordinances, which ye have been taught, whether it be by our
preaching, or by our Epistle.
I Had almost passed over the place of Paul, which the defendours of
superstitions object unto us as a most strong and an vnanswearable argument,
And it is thus. 2. These. 2.15.
2. These. 2. verse. 15. Therefore brethren stand fast, and hold the ordinances,
which ye have been taught, whether it be by our preaching, or by our Epistle.
By this place it is manifest, say they, that all things, which are necessarily
to be holden, are not comprehended in the writings of the Apostles: but that
those things also which being delivered by the Apostles with lively voice,
are come unto us by traditions, are to be received with like reverence and
affection of godliness. But when as they can not prove, that those traditions,
which they defend, be Paul's, they are worthy to be laughed at and very
foolish, whilst they will hold up their stinking pillar of their superstitions
by the testimony of the Apostles. And when Paul wrote this Epistle, Paul in
the 2. These. 2. speaks not of the traditions of the Papists.
the Canon of the Scripture of the new Testament was not yet made. Which when
it was once made by the authority of the holy Ghost, as we have lately taught,
after the making thereof, we make men the authors of things to be believed,
not without the great reproach of the same spirit. Wherefore in this matter we
must consider with great heed that, which Paul wrote about the end of his
life, concerning the sufficiency of the Scriptures, 2. Tim. 16. and.17.
when as he says: All Scripture (is) given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable to doctrine, to reprove, to correction, to instruction, which is in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, instructed to all good
works. For if the Scripture make the man of God instructed, perfect, and
throughlye furnished to every good work, than does it not leave him to be
instructed, to be made perfect, and to be thoroughly furnished by traditions in
any good work. Wherefore so often as they bring in a work, which they contend
to be good, or any thing necessary to be believed, which can not be proved
forth of the holy Scriptures: I had rather say, that that, which they bring
in, is not good or profitable, then to pronounce otherwise of the most
excellent authority of the Scripture, than the Apostle has appointed
concerning the same. What say you to this moreover, that the doctrine, which
the Apostles taught, whether it were by preaching or by Epistle, was not
contrary, not diverse, not an other, but one and the self same? For although
they wrote not all things, yet had they an especial care, that what they
delivered by tradition, might be manifestly inferred forth of those things,
which were written by them selves, or in other holy Books of Scripture.
Otherwise diverse superstitions might be bragged off every where, as received
from ancient time, as delivered by the Apostles, which can be known by none
other means, but because they are not agreeable to the Scriptures, whereby, as
by a rule and squire, all traditions, constitutions, and rites ought to be
examined and tried: because the Church does not bind the consciences of the
faithful unto her constitutions, but only so far forth as they do agree
with the commandments of our Lord Jesus Christ. Psalm 119. the first part,
and 4. verse.
For she knows that it is written: Thou haste charged, that we shall
diligently keep thy commandments.

The xxi. Chapter. That the doctrine, which the Apostles taught by lively
voice, and which they delivered in writing, is all one: and that this is the
form of the traditions of the Apostles, if they agree with the holy
Scriptures.
WWhereas I have boldly affirmed, that it is one, and the self same doctrine,
which the Apostles taught, whether it were by lively voice, or by Epistles, it
may be proved both forth of the holy Scriptures, and by the testimonies of
the Fathers, and is also manifest by the consent of the Church. It is a
tradition of Paul, 1. Cor. 11.5. 2. Thef. 3.10.
that a woman have her head covered in the Church, and that Christians, The
traditions of Paul.
which are poor, labor with their hands, and live not idly: But whereas
he professes these traditions to be his own, does he propose them nakedly
and simply to the Churches, both without proof, and judgment only under this
title: he will have them received, because they be the traditions of the
Apostles? Not so: but he goes about to approve and confirm them, 1. Cor.
11.6. 1. Cor. 11.13.
by effectual reasons, yea and by proofs drawn forth of the Scripture, and
gives the Church leave to judge of them. The same Apostle writes also in an
other place, 1. Cor* 4.140.
that all things be done honestly, and in order. We have therefore the form
of the traditions of the Apostles forth of these: Namely, if they agree with
the holy Scriptures, if they be confirmed by substanciall reason, by aptness
of edifying by the example of Churches, by comlines and order. And we also
ought to examine the traditions of the Church by the very same proofs. But now
a days, when as testimony forth of the holy Scriptures is required touching
any thing: or when a reason should be yielded concerning abuses and
superstitions, Antichrists have always in their mouth: A common refuge of
Papists It is a Tradition, You may not enquire of it.
It is a tradition, you may not inquire of it. But the traditions, which are
proposed unto us, are to be examined by the rule of God his word, neither would
Paul, that they should otherwise be believed. And let our adversaries do this
also, if they would have their traditions to take place. And it is the consent
of the Catholic church, that the Apostles did not deliver to the Church, such
things as are strange and disagreable to those things, which are contained in
the Canonical Scripture. Concerning the which thing, I will allege some most
evident testimonies of certain old writers. Irenaeus. lib. 31. cap. 1.
Irenaeus declares, that the very same Gospel, which the Apostles preached
with lively voice, they did afterward deliver unto the Church in the
Scriptures by the will of God, that this written Gospel might be the ground
and pillar of our faith, even of that true and lively faith, which the Church
learned of the Apostles, and distributed to the children. Therefore the
Apostles taught nothing by lively voice contrary to those things, which they
have comprehended in the Scripture of the new Testament. The saying of the same
Irenaeus in Eusebius is worthy memory, Eusebius Ecclesiast^cae historiae lib.
3. cap. 20.
where he shows that Polycarpe preached those things, which he had learned
of them, who had seen the word of life themselves (...), that is to say,
all agreeable to the Scriptures.

This surely is a golden saying of Irenaeus, which also declares certain
sentences of old writers touching traditions, and does fully agree with that
form of traditions, which we have taught forth of Paul. Let the tradition
agree with the Scripture.
The Apostles taught many things with lively voice: Apostolic men received
them being so taught, which afterward they delivered over again to their
disciples: but Irenaeus says, that those things were all (...), agreeable to
the Scriptures. Therefore by the testimony of Irenaeus, the Apostles delivered
nothing to the church by lively voice, which might dissent from the Scriptures.
Wherefore if ye Papists would have us to receive and reverence as Apostolic, the
traditions, which they have undertaken to defend, let the^ show their (...)
agreablenesse with the Canonical Scripture. And if they can not show this, let
the^ with shame acknowledge their vanity. For no traditions are to be esteemed
necessary, for salvation, which are not proved firmly and strongly forth of
the scripture. For Tertullian says: We have no need of curiosity after
Christ, Tertullianus lib. de praescrip. Haereticorum.
nor of inquisition after the Gospel. When we believe, we desire nothing beyond
our belief. For this we believe first, that there is nothing, which we ought
to believe more. Well says Ierom: the sword of God, Hieronymus in primo cap.
Aggaei.
which is the lively word of God, strikes those things, which men of their
own accord find forth and feign, as it were by the tradition of the
Apostles, without the authority and testimonies of the scriptures. And
Augustine pronounces a curse against all Angels and men, Augustinus contra
literas Petiliani lib. 3. ca. 6.
which shall preach unto us any thing, either of Christ, or of his Church, or
of any other thing, which pertains unto faith, or to our life, besides that
which we have received in the scriptures of the law, and of the Gospel. We
alleged lately more testimonies of the Fathers, which the diligent Reader may
consider in their place. The Apostles ^eliuered nothing but what agreed with
the scriptures.


We have therefore by the tradition of the Apostles preached none other
Gospel, then that which is contained in the canonical Scripture, and that by
the said Scripture we may judge, which be the traditions of the Apostles. If
our adversaries did reverence the consent of the Church with all their heart, as
in words they take upon them, would they despise it at their pleasure, with
such impudency? They brag of their tradition unto the Church, as though they
came from the Apostles, which even by their own witness, can be proved by no
Scriptures. Are they so senseless and blockishe, that they understand not,
what the Catholic consent does pronounce touching them? We lastely heard,
that such like traditions, are to be stricken with the sword of God his word,
and that the preachers thereof are subject to the curse, and to be sent into
the tents of Heretics. O foolish and miserable lovers of darkness, O
blasphemous corrupters of the Scriptures, when will you wax wise, when will
you acknowledge your error? when will you examine your doctrines, and
traditions by the Touchstone of the Scripture? Are you so mad and blind, that
you will never confess and reverence with the Catholic Church of God, the
fullness, the perfection, and sufficiency of the Scripture? will you still be
turned from the most pure wheat of God his word, to the chafe and coddes of
traditions?

The xxij. Chapter. A perfect proof of those traditions, which are in deed
the Apostles, forth of the most ancient writers Irenaeus and Tertullian.
IRenaeus and Tertullian most ancient writers, and nearest to the Apostles
time, do most plainly prove unto us, what traditions are most ancient, and
the Apostles in deed. For they, when as they did contend with Heretics about
Doctrines, do allege the tradition of the Apostles and of the Church, that
they might by the authority thereof confirm their cause, and do with great
honor make mention of the same.

But it is worth the while to consider, by what occasion, for what cause, in
what sort, and with what moderatenesse they do it. For so shall it plainly
appear, that the Church at that time, had no doctrines by traditions, no
mysteries of Faith, but what were grounded in the Scripture. What kind of
adversaries and enemies Saint Irenaeus had.
Irenaeus had to deal with most wicked Heretics, which were neither moved
with the authority of the Scripture, nor with the consent of the universal
Church. Therefore they did either slylye shifte off, Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap. 2.
or impudently refuse, what so ever was objected. If they were overthrown and
convicted by the Scriptures, they did debase their authority, yea they did
accuse them, as not Authentical, or as having an obscure and an uncertain
meaning, or as insufficient. But they bragged, that they had by tradition,
wisdom more high then the Apostles, and more perfect. If they were called
back, to the consent of the Church they said, that it was no marvel, if the
Church do not keep the pure doctrine, which received it corrupted and sowered
with leaven, not only of the Disciples, but also of the Lord himself. And
therefore they boasted, that they were the correctours of the Apostles. And
what says Irenaeus hereunto? Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 1.
We have (says he) the dispensation of our salvation by none other, then the
Apostles, which what they published by preaching, afterward they delivered unto
us in writing, to be the ground and pillar of our faith. Afterward he urges
this part also, that all Churches, taught and instructed by the Apostles, did
embrace the unity of Faith, grounded in the Scriptures. And yet so, that he
confuteth the doting opinions of Heretics by the Scriptures, as by the rule of
perfect and absolute wisdom.

Tertullian also strove with the like monsters. Tert. de praescrip. haeritic.
Their usual manner was to escape by subtle shifts. If they were pressed with
the authority of the scriptures, they did either refuse them: or if they did
receive them, they did pervert them, by putting to, and taking away, for the
framing of their own purpose: or else corrupted them by their perverse
interpretations. Therefore because Tertullian could not well go forward
against such mangling of the Scriptures, he does his diligence, to confirm
the doctrine, certainly set forth in the Scriptures, among the simple and
weak, by this note also, that the Apostles delivered it by lively voice from
hand to hand. Wherefore because in these disputations the Heretics refused
the Scriptures, as not in all points to be received, and as though they were
of an obscure and doubtful meaning, by whom only the truth could not be
known, except one knew the Tradition, both the sides appealed to the
tradition. And because both the parties brag of traditions, this question was
disputed of: Which was the true tradition of the Apostles? Which is the true
tradition of the Apostles.
Irenaeus and Tertullian, prove, that that is the true tradition only, which
Christ received of God, and delivered to the Apostles: and which the Apostles
again delivered to the Churches, and which was kept in the Churches by the
succession of Bishops. And does this tradition contain a doctrine contrary
to that, which is set forth in the Canonical Scripture? No. For, for this
cause they did condemn those traditions, which the Heretics bragged of, as
erroneous and forged. Therefore what does the Tradition, alleged in
disputation against the Heretics, contain? No doctrine contrary and
disagreeable to that, which is taught in the Scripture, but the self same
articles of faith, which do (as it were) comprehend the sum of all the
Scripture. For both of them do show, what that Tradition is, which the
Church received of the Apostles, and also kept sincere, and they be the same
points of doctrine, which the Apostles Creed does contain. And no man
doubts, but they are set forth in the Scripture by many manifest
testimonies. They do not then prove any other doctrine of faith, besides
those, which are contained in the Scripture, but they show, and prove by
tradition, the very same doctrines, which are comprehended in the Scripture.
And what needs that? Forsooth, that they might prove the consent of the true
Apostolical Tradition with the Scripture: so that the doctrine, which the
Scripture does teach, and that which the Primitive Church received by the
preaching of the Apostles is all one. And this is diligently to be considered,
that our position of the authority, perfection, and sufficiency of the
scriptures, is most strongly maintained, by this disputation of Irenaeus and
Tertullian: and also that the disputations of the Papists touching Traditions,
which can be proved by no Testimony of Scripture, are refuted. For the
Traditions of the Apostles, and the Scriptures, prove the consent, so that
the Tradition be not opposite against the Scripture, as though the Scripture
were either false, or doubtful, or imperfect, as the Heretics quareled: but
the truth, the authority, the certainty, and absolute perfectness of the
Scripture, is proved and confirmed by the tradition. Wherefore when as there
be traditions proposed, which do not agree with the Scripture, and which
cannot be showed and proved forth of the Scripture: it is most certain,
that those traditions are not the Apostles. These are sure and sound reasons,
which can not be overthrown with any subtle shifts of Sophisters.

Now if you ask, which that true, ancient, and Apostolic tradition is: it is
not needful to search it without the scripture. For Irenaeus and Tertullian in
that disputation, whereof we spoke, speak not only generally: but declare
specially, evidently, and in expressed words, what that tradition of the
Apostles is. Let us then hear Irenaeus expounding the tradition of the truth,
which the Church having received it from the Apostles, Iren. li. 1. ca. 2.3.
Irenaeus shows what is the true Apostolic tradition.
keeps. The Church (says he) being sowed throughout the whole world unto
the ends of the earth, received both of the Apostles, and of their disciples,
that faith, which is in one God, the father almighty, which made Heaven and
earth, the sea, and all things which are in them: And in one Jesus Christ the
son of GOD, incarnate for our salvation, and in the holy Ghost, which
preached by the Prophets the appointmentes of God, and the coming of his
beloved Jesus Christ our Lord, and that his generation which is of the virgin,
and his passion, and his resurrection from the dead, and his ascension in the
flesh into Heaven, and his coming from Heaven in the glory of the Father, to
finishe all things, and to raise up again all flesh of mankind: that unto
Christ Jesus our Lord, and GOD, and Savior, and King, according to the will
of the invisible Father, every knee may be bowed, of things in heaven, in
earth, and under the earth, and that every tongue may confess him, and that
he may do just judgment in all: and that he may cast the Angels of spiritual
wickedness, having transgressed, and being become Apostataes, and also
ungodly, and unjust, and wicked, and blasphemous men, into eternal fire. And
that he may bestow as a gift incorruption upon the just and upright, having
kept his commandments, and continued in his love, some from the beginning, and
some by repentance, giving them life, and may cloth them with everlasting
clearenesse. Where as the Church has received this preaching, and this faith,
as we have before said, being dispersed into the whole world, she does
diligently keep, as dwelling in one house, and in like manner believes these
things, even as having one soul, and one heart: and agreeably preaches, and
teaches, and delivers the same, as possessing one mouth. For although there
be unlike speeches in the world, yet the virtue of the tradition is all one,
and the very same. Neither do those Churches, which are founded in Germany,
believe otherwise, or teach otherwise, nor those which are in Spain, nor those
which are in France, nor those which are in the East, nor those which are in
Egypt, nor those which are in Lybia, nor those which are placed in the midst of
the world: but as the Sun being the creature of God, is all one, and the
self same in the universal world, even so the light also, that is, the
preaching of the truth, shines every where, and lighteneth all me^, which are
willing to come to the knowledge of the truth. Neither does he, which
excels in speech, among the^ which govern the Church, say any other things
but these. For no man is above his master: neither has he, which is weak in
speaking, lessened the tradition. For seeing that the faith is al one, and the
self same, neither he which can say much, makes it more: nor he which can
say less makes it less. Thus far Ire. This is therefore the tradition of
the Apostles, this is the true antiquity of ye Church, this is the catholic
consent. And this is worthy to be considered, that he affirms, that those
which were most eloquent among them, which govern the Churches, will say none
other things, but these. Therefore so often as the Papists fable touching other
trifles, they are to be judged to depart from the tradition of the Apostles,
from the unity of faith, and from the Catholic consent.

What common places the Pastors of the Primitive Church handeled.
And Irenaeus rehearses in the next Chapter, as it were the common places,
which the Pastors of the Primitive Church were accustomed to handle. And of
what matters did they then dispute? Of Purgatory? Irenaeus. li. 1. ca. 4
Of the worshipping of Images? Of holy water, and of other Popish trifles?
Not so. Of what then? Of the Apostacy of the Angels, which transgressed, of
the fall and disobedience of the first men, of the temporal, and heavenly, and
earthly promises, of the diverse appearinges of GOD, of the difference of the
Testamentes, why GOD concluded all things under unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all, of the cause of the incarnation and passion of the word, why
the Son of God came in the last times, and not in the beginning, of the
calling of the Gentiles, of the end of the world, of the resurrection of the
flesh, and of other questions of the like sort drawn forth of the midst
of the Scripture. Whereby it is plain, that nothing was accustomed to be
handled then in the Church beside the Scriptures.

Again the same Irenaeus says lib. 3. cap. 4. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 4. Here
is declared again forth of Irenaeus which is the true, ancient, Apostolic
tradition.
For So Much therefore as there be so great proofs, we must not still seek this
truth among other, which we may easily receive from the church, considering
that the Apostles most plentifully laid up in her, as in a rich storehouse
all things, which appertain to the truth, that every one that would, might
take forth of her the water of life. For she is the entrance of life, and all
others are thieves and robbers, for the which cause we must avoid them, and
must love with great diligence those things, which are the churches, and to
hold fast the tradition of the truth. For what and if any man reason of any
small question, ought he not to have recourse to the most ancient Church,
wherein the Apostles were conversant, and to take from them touching the
present question, that which is certain and very plain? But what and if the
Apostles had not left unto us the Scriptures, ought we not to follow the order
of the tradition, which they delivered to them, unto whom they committed the
Churches, unto the which ordinance many nations of those barbarous people,
which believe in Christ, do assent, having salvation written in their hearts
by the spirit without character or ynke, and keeping diligently the old
tradition, believing in one God, the maker of heaven and earth, and of all
things, which are in them, through Christ Jesus the Son of God* which for
the most tender love toward his own workemanshippe Man sustained that
generation, which was of the Virgin, he himself of himself uniting the
manhood to the Godhead, and suffering under Pontius Pilate, and rising again,
and in clearness received in glory, to come the Savior of them, which are
saved, and the judge of them, which are judged, and sending into eternal fire
the counterfeiters of the truth, and the dispisers of his Father, and of his
coming. They which believed this faith without writing, as touching their
speech are barbarous: but as touching their judgment, and custom, and
conversation, through their faith are most wise, and please GOD, walking in
all uprightness, and chastity, and wisdom. Here have thou again the true
and ancient tradition of the Apostles described by Irenaeus, which delivers
nothing without, and beside the Scripture, but contains the sum of the
whole Scripture.

Now it remains likewise that we hear Tertullian, bearing witness of the
tradition of the Apostles also: The rule of faith, The testimony of Tertul.
touching the tradition of the Apostles. lib. de praescript. Haeret.
(says he,) is even this, whereby we believe that there is but one God, and
none other but the maker of the world, which brought all things forth of
nothing by his word, first of al sent forth: that that word was called his
son, in the name of the same God, was diuersely seen of the Patriarchs, was
always heard in the Prophets, was lastly brought by the spirit and power of
God into the Virgin Marie, was made flesh in her womb, and was borne man of
her, and was Jesus Christ: and that afterward he preached the new law, and
the new promise of the kingdom of heaven, wrought miracles, was fastened to
the cross, rose again the third day: that he being taken up to heaven
sits at the right hand of the Father: that he has sent the power of the
holy Ghost in his steed, to govern the believers: that he shall come in
brightness to take the Saints into the fruition of everlasting life, and of the
heavenly promises, and to judge the profane with perpetual fire, the
resurrection of both parts being wrought with the restoring of the flesh.
This rule ordained by Christ, as it shall be proved, has no questions among
us, but what heresies bring in, and which make heretics. Thus far
Tertullian, who thoroughly agrees with Irenaeus in describing the tradition of
the Apostles.

And the testimonies of these most ancient writers do show, from whence the
brief sum of our belief comes, which commonly they call the Apostles
Creed, The Apostles Creed.
which certainly is the most ancient tradition, which being received from
Apostolic men, the Church keeps still. And Tertullian adds in the same
book of prescriptions: Tertul. li. de praescripti. Haeretico.
The Church has known one GOD the creator of all things, and Christ Jesus
of the Virgin Marie, the Son of God the Creator, and the resurrection of the
flesh. She intermedleth the law and the Prophets, with the writings of the
Evangelists and the Apostles, and from thence does she drink the same faith,
she signeth with water, clotheth with the holy Ghost, feeds with the The
Sacrament of thanksgiving.
Euchariste, exhorts with martyrdom: and so does she receive none against
this institution. By the which words it is clear that the primitive Church
acknowledged no traditions, which were not founded in the Scripture.

Although I have handled these things at large: yet, because the Papists
oftentimes hold forth as Ajax his shield, the place of Paul 2. These. 2.15.
against the Scripture for their traditions, 2. These. 2.5.
whereas he says: Stand fast, and hold the ordinances, which ye have been
taught, whether it were by our preaching, or by our Epistle: can I not omit,
but must evidently show forth of the same Irenaeus, that Paul preached to
the Gentiles with lively voice, the same and none other doctrine, which he
taught them also by his Epistles. For Irenaeus does most plainly describe
Paul his tradition in two places, in the fifth Chapter of the third book,
and also in the forty one Chapter of the fourth book. These are the chief
points of his description: Irenaeus touching Paul his tradition. lib. 3. cap.
5. and lib, 4. cap. 41.
that the Gods of the Gentiles are not only Gods, but the Idols of Devils. And
that there is one true God, which is over all, and above every name that is
named, and that he only is to be woorshipped. That they would therefore
depart from the superstition of idols, leave their vain wood and stones,
which they supposed to be Gods, and would woorshippe one true God the maker
of heaven and earth, and the framer of every thing that is made. Which ordained
and made all mankind. and by his framing of them, nourished and increased
them, and steadfastly gave them, being. And that his word is his Son, by whom
he made all things. And that he in the last times, (although he were
naturally the invisible word) was made visible and palpable man, among men,
and humbled him self to death, eue^ to the death of the cross, reformed
mankind, destroyed and overcame man his enemy, and gave unto man, whom he
made, victory against his adversary: that they, which believe in him, shall
be incorruptible, and impassible.

That they should therefore set before themselves this law, as the rule of
life. Not to commit adultery, not to steal, not to deceive, and that al
things, which are done to the hurt of our neighbors, are evil, and hated of
God. The truth shows that these deeds are evil, and hurtful, and
unprofitable, and damnable to them that do them. That they should therefore
live blameless, and look for the Son of God Jesus Christ, which redeemed us
from Apostacy and going astray by his blood, to this end, that we might be
also a sanctified people, to ascend to heaven in the virtue of the Father,
which shall judge all men, and shall give unto them which have kept his
commandments, those good things, which are from GOD. Behold Paul his
tradition delivered to the posterity by Irenaeus a most ancient writer of the
Church. And does he not every where teach with all diligence the very self
same things in his Epistles? So that the doctrine is all one, which he taught
with lively voice, and which he committed to writing: Yea the tradition
described by Irenaeus may seem to be the brief sum of those things which he
wrote. So that he wrote most truly, that those things, which the Apostles
taught, were all (...) agreeable to the Scriptures. Therefore all traditions
which are given forth, as the Apostles, have been, are, and ought to be such.
And for this cause they are always to be examined, whether they have this
Irenaeus his (...) agreement with the Canonical Scriptures.

The.xxiii Chapter. Of the subtlety and deceitfulness of Sophisters, which
use guilefully the word [Tradition] which is diversely taken.
WE have hitherto showed, that it is all one doctrine, which ye Apostles
published with lively voice, and which the Canonical Scripture sets forth.
We have also declared, how vaynely the Papists reason, that many things,
which are necessary for the instruction of faith and ordering of manners,
although they can be proved by no testimony of Scripture, are nevertheless
to be received and believed forth of the naked tradition. Wherefore this is
always to be holden, which we cited lately forth of Augustine. Augustinus
cont. l^teras Petiliani. lib. 3. cap. 6.
That faith is learned forth of the Scriptures. There is often times mention
made of traditions by the ancient Writers, but not to this end, that our faith
should run out of the Scriptures, wherein they always enclosed it. And
where as this word Tradition is diversely used among the old writers, and all
Traditions are not of one kind it is a detestable sophistry, by the mixture
of them all to deceive. Therefore it is to be considered, what testimonies of
old writers do pertain unto what kind of Traditions, and what is to be
thought of every one of them, least all without difference be applied to the
defense of corruptions, abuses and superstitions. Let us therefore distinguish
Traditions into certain kinds.

First, There be diverse kinds of Traditions. The Scripture is a tradion.
Cyprianus ad Pompeium. John. 1.8.
the fathers by this word Tradition oftentimes understand the Canonical
Scripture of the new Testament: as when Cyprian to Pompeius says: From whence
is this Tradition? Whether descending from the authority of the Lord and of
the Evangelists, or coming from the commandments and Epistles of the
Apostles? For that those things ought to be done, which are written, GOD
witnesses and proposes to Iosuah, saying: Let not the book of this Law
depart out of thy mouth, that thou maiste observe and do according to all
that is written therein. Therefore if it be either commanded in the Gospel, or
contained in the Epistles and Acts of the Apostles, let this holy tradition be
also observed. Basilius contra Eunomium. lib. 3. Matthew. 28.19.
Also Basil in his third book against Eunomius has: Our Baptism is
according to the very tradition of the Lord, in the name of the father, and of
the Son and of the holy Ghost. And it is a point of diligence to mark
where the old Writers use the word Tradition in this sense. For wheresoever
the Papists find this word, they wrest it forthwith to their traditions,
with they cannot prove forth of the Scripture.

The articles of our ^aith are a Tradition.
Secondly the old writers by this word Tradition understand the articles of
our faith, which are contained in the Apostles Creed, as we have lately
declared more clearly than the light it self, forth of Irenaeus and
Tertullian. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 4. Tertullianus. lib. de praescrip. Haeret.
Which writers propose the said badge or Creed as a perfect rule of faith,
whereunto there may nothing be added, and from the which there may nothing be
taken, which remaining whole, men may safely inquire of all things.

That which is derived forth of God his word, is a Tradition.
Thirdly, by the word Tradition the fathers understand a sentence or meaning,
not expressed word for word in the holy Scriptures, but gathered by the
true interpretation thereof, which the Apostles preached with lively voice, and
their auditors and successors delivered unto us, and conserved, as for
example that (...) signifies a person, that there are in the divine nature
three persons, and yet one, and the self same substance: that the Son is
coequall with the Father, and of one substance with him: that there be two
natures in Christ the Lord, and yet but one person: that the holy Ghost is to
be woorshipped and glorified together with the father and the Son, that the
flesh of Christ is of one substance with us: that infantes ought of right to be
baptized, and others of this kind, which although we read not expressed in
the oracular scripture, yet have we learned by the authority of the ancient
Fathers, and most grave Councels, that they are to be understood by the meaning
and understanding of the Scriptures. And this understanding is not to be
separated from the scripture it self, for so much as it may be contained
therein, either as the definition in the definitive, or as the conclusion in
the premises. And although the tradition of the Church have showed unto us the
scripture and understanding thereof, yet has it not bestowed authority upon
it, which it has greffed in it from God. For they, from who^ we have received
this tradition, are only witnesses of the heavenly doctrine, and not authors
thereof. Whereof we have reasoned plentifully in the place belonging thereunto.

Old rites are Traditions.
Lastly, where the old writers make mention of traditions, they do not
entreat of the doctrine of faith, to be received without and beside the
Scripture, although it can be proved by no testimony of Scripture, but they
speak of certain old rites, which for their antiquity, they ascribed to the
Apostles: Part of the rites seem to take their beginning from the Apostles,
and part of them are unworthy such authors. But we have declared already,
by what rule such manner of rites are to be proved and examined. Now since
that this word Tradition is so diversely used of the fathers, truly it is
wicked sophistry, to intermeddle all these things without difference, that
superstitions, being derived partly from the Jews, and partly from the Ethniks
may have their defense and maintenance without the scripture, under the cloak
and title of traditions.

The xxiiii. Chapter. Of the uncertainty, repugnancie and variety of
traditions
AND their madness is to be noted and avoided, which will have the ^ertaintie
of doctrine to depend rather of ^e authority of traditions, and of those things
which they call (...) unwritten, tha^ of ^e scriptures, this especially
considered, yt ^^ey cannot prove unto us the traditions of (...) apostles
gathered and described any where ^se but in the scriptures, neither can they
^ooue, that the traditions, which by this ^tle they commend, come from the
Apostles ^^eir authors. There be traditions reci^^d by the fathers in diverse
places, as re^^iued from the Apostles, but those traditi^^s wc they gather are
partly abolished, partly do not well agree one with an other: ^hervpon it comes
to pass, that al tra^^tions are not to be esteemed Apostolic, ^ither can the
faith of christians be hol^ up with so weak and feeble a foundation, What
traditions were in old time. Tertullianus contra Marcione lib. 1. and. lib. de
coron^ militis.
as ^e traditions, which faith must stand vn^nquered against all the engines of
hell. ^here was a tradition in Tertullia^s time, ^t milk and honey should be
given forth ^^th them which were baptized, where with, as he says, they
might be fed like infantes. It was a tradition in the time of Cyprian and
Augustine, that the That is, the Sacrament of thanksgiving Hieronymus in
Matthaeum cap. 25.
Euchariste, and that under both kinds should be given to infantes, and
should be so given as necessary to salvation. Hierom in his Commentaries
upon Matthewe, Chapter 25. says, that the tradition of the Apostles
remained, That in the day of the vigiles of Easter, it was not lawful to let
the people go looking for the coming of Christ, before midnight. Although
these and other like be read in old writers under the title of the traditions
of the Apostles, yet are they a bolished and are observed now in no nation, so
that Tertullian wrote well in his book Of covering virgins: Tertullianus. lib.
de velandis virginibus.
There is altogether one rule of faith, only immovable, and irreformable, to
believe in one God almighty, maker of the world, and in his Son Jesus
Christ, borne of the Virgin Marie, crucified under Pontius Pilate, raised
again the third day from the dead, received in heaven, sitting now at the
right hand of the Father, to come to judge the quick and the dead, even by
the resurrection of the flesh. This Law of faith remaining, al other points of
discipline and conversation admit the newness of correction, the grace of God
working and profiting even unto the end. Thus much has that flourishing
Septimius Tertullian. Therefore ye only rule of faith grounded in the
Scripture, has run on, even from the beginning of the Gospel, unchangeable,
immovable, and vnreformeable, when as in the mean season rites and traditions
be mutable, variable, and such as may sometimes be taken away, and sometimes
restored again. The west churches in progress of time enjoined the Law of
single life to the ministers of Churches: co^trarily the east Church even unto
this day will have marriage to be lawful for them. Whereupon Stephanus Bishop
of Rome says: Distin. 31. cap. Aliter. The marriage of Priests.
The Tradition of the east Churches is after one sort: and of this holy Church
of Rome after an other sort: For their Priests Deacons, and Subdeacons are
married: but none of the Priests of this Church or of the west churches, from
the Subdeacon to the Blshop has license to marie. It was an Apostolical
tradition at Ephesus and in Asia, that Easter should be kept after the manner of
the Jews. Again the Apostolical tradition in the church of Rome was said to
be otherwise. The place of S. Augustine is worthy memory in his. 76. Epist.
Augustinus ad Casulanum. Epist. 76.
to Casulanus, where he entreats of fasting, and says: If it be answered
that James taught this at Jerusalem, John at Ephesus, and the rest in other
places, which Peter taught at Rome, to wit that men should fast on the sabbath
day: but that other countries were departed from this doctrine, and that Rome
continued in it still, and it is replied to the contrary that rather certain
places of the west, wherein Rome is, kept not that which the Apostles delivered,
but that the countries of the East, from whence the Gospel began to be
preached, have remained without any variety in that, which was delivered by
all the Apostles with Peter himself, that men should not fast upon the Sabbath
day: this is an endless contention ingendering strifes, not ending questions.
Therefore since there is so great variety and diversity of Traditions, al
cannot be judged to be Apostolic. Certainly Paul witnesses, that he taught
every where, and in every Church the self same. 1. Cor. 4.17. Cyprianus ad
Pompeium
Therefore Cyprian wrote wisely to Pompeius, that he would not allow
traditions, but what were contained in the gospels, the Epistles of the
Apostles, or in the Acts of the Apostles. Whereunto thou maiste add those
which are necessarilily inferred forth of the holy Scriptures. Whatsoever
else are brought in are uncertain, and not every where received: yea if the
matter be well wayed, we shall confess, that traditions have ministered occasion
of very many superstitions in the Church, of errors and controversies.
Therefore neither the rule of faith, nor the certainty of doctrine does depend
of the custom of the Church, but if a just consent ought to be kept in the
Church, it is necessary, that we stick firmly and constantly in the oracular
Scripture only.

The xxv. Chapter. That the Church has been deceived even from the Apostles
time, under the pretense of Traditions.
NOw for so much as the name of Traditions has always been a Patron of
superstitions in the Church, and because now adays all kind of abuses,
corruptions, and superstitions is defended under their title, we had need to
use herein very great attentiveness, and wariness. And in very deed
whilst the Apostles yet lived, false prophets feigned many corruptions, which
they obtruded to the Churches, and extolled for this consideration, as though
they had been delivered by lively voice from the Apostles, the which thing the
Epistles of Paul do manifestly show. Which was the cause, that the Apostles
began to comprehend their doctrine in writing. And Paul, when he began first
to write, gave a very wholesome admonition saying: 2. These. 2.2.
That ye be not suddenly moved from your mind, nor be troubled, neither by
spirit, nor by word, nor yet by letter, as from us. A caution in deed most
worthy consideration, foreshewing three manner of crafty deceites whereby
counterfeiters were woonte for the most part to deceive. Three kind of
guiles, whereby forgers are wont to deceive.. Col. 2.81.2.3. 2. Pet. 2.
The first is a spirit, that is to say a revelation or a prophecy: the second
is a word, that is to say, a reason or man's conjecture: the third is an
Epistle, that is to say a forged writing, and counterfeite Traditions. Of with
kind of leigerdemain except the churches take very dilligent heed, they cannot
choose but be deceived very perilously and dangerously. Yea and he warns the
Church of the Colosians forth of bands, that they take heed, least they be
spoiled through vain deceit after the tradition of men. And Peter, when as now
the end of his life approached, when he wrote his last epistle, forewarneth that
there should come false teachers, which with feigned words should make
merchandise in the Church. And experience shows that those forewarninges of
the Apostles were not vain. For when as the doctrine of the Apostles was yet
in so fresh memory, that the pureness thereof might be proved even by the
succession of Bishops, yet did heretics, that notwithstanding, begin to
obtrude pestiferous doctrines unto the Churches under the pretense of
traditions. ^enaeus lib. 3. ^p. 5.
If there were objected unto them the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, ^he
shift of he^^tikes.
delivered to ye Churches by the succession of bishops, they did cauil, or,
that I may speak more truly, they falsely accused the Apostles, saying, that
they used the room of teachers in hypocrisy and dissimulation, not as the
truth it self was, but after the capacity of the hearers, and that they so
framed their doctrine and answers, as every one was affected: teaching blind
things to the blind according to their blindness: to the feeble according to
their feebleness: to those which were in errors, according to their errors,
and that they opened the mysteries to them only, which were worthy, and could
understand them, ^^enaeus. lib. 3. ^p. 2.
than the which what can be devised more unworthy and more impudent against
the most holy and most faithful Ambassadors of Christ? But if they were
urged with the scriptures, they accused the scriptures, as not being well, as
spoken diversely, and as such, forth of the which the truth cannot be found by
them, which are ignorant of the tradition, even of the tradition, not delivered
by writing, but by lively voice, whereof Paul says: We speak wisdom among
them that are perfect. 1. Cor. 2.6. Irenaeus. lib. 1. cap 24. The heretics
called Carpocratians. Tertullianus de praescrip. Haereticorum. Eusebius. 5.
cap. 28. Clemen. Stromat 7.
Yea and the Carpocratians did defend their errors by this color, affirming
that Jesus spoke such things privately to his Apostles in a mystery: and that
the Apostles delivered the same secretly, not to all, but to them only which
were worthy, and agreed thereunto. The like pretenses of heretics does
Tertullian also make mention of. And so did the heretics following take the
impostumes of their corruptions with this galand color of tradition. Artemon
referred his doctrine to the foregoers, yea even to the Apostles themselves,
Basilides bragged that his master was one Glaucias, with had been the
interpreter of Peter. Valentinus bosteth that he was one Theodatus scholar who
was of Paul's familiar acquaintance. The Marcionites gloried that they had to
their masters the disciples of Matthias, and that they held the doctrine
delivered by them.

How say you by this, that not only heretics seduced men by this pretense,
but this cloak of traditions deceived Apostolical men also, and ministered
occasion of error? Let Papias Bishop of Hieropolis, John his scholar be an
example, Papias Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 39.
whose words in Eusebius are these: I thought that I should not receive so
much profit by books as by lively voice. You see that Papias preferred
traditions before the Scripture, wherefore he made inquiry chiefly of the
traditions of Andrew, Philip, Thomas, and of other Apostles, of whom there are
no writings extant. But mark whither so great admiration of traditions drew
him. Papias adds (says Eusebius) many Paradoxes, and certain other
things, as brought to him by Tradition not written: and certain strange
Parables and doctrines of our Savior, with some other fabulous matters, The
Chiliastes held this erroneous opinion, that the Son of God should reign in
the earth as a king a thousand years after the general judgment, with his
elect in the holy city, which he should build Lactantius institutionum lib.
7. cap. 24. Papias seduced many worthy men by traditions.
among the which also is the opinion of the Chiliastes. Therefore Papias being
blinded with over much search and estimation of unwritten traditions, brought
doting and fabulous devises into the Church, and did not err himself only
from the sincerity and pureness of the faith, but gave occasion of erring to
many worthy men also. For Irenaeus, Tertullian, Apollinarius, Victorinus,
Lactantius, and many other famous and worthy men, as Hierome witnesses,
embraced this doting toy of the thousand years, as a tradition of the
Apostles. Good God, what men became companions of this error, pretending, as
Eusebius says, the antiquity of the error of so worthy a man, even of
Papias their guide. Behold whether the authority of traditions not written
once received, may lead us out of the way. O laudable agreement of traditions
with the Scripture, spoken of by Policarpe, an Apostolical man also, which
kept him in the kings high way.

Therefore this deceit and guile of vnwritte^ traditions stuck in the church,
which gave occasion of going out of the right way, even to them which seem to
defend the Church, which may be proved by many examples, whereof I will
recite one or two, which are plain. The fame of Clement of Alexandria is great
in all antiquity. Clement of Alexandria a favorer of traditions.
And he was a man which both most diligently searched forth, and greatly
reverenced unwritten traditions. Wherefore he says, that the labourer, which
is sent forth into the Lords harvest, has a double husbandry, (...)
unwritten and written: And he yields this reason, why he searched other
traditions touching the doctrines of faith beside the Scripture: because
forsooth the Lord did not reveal to many those things, which did not belong
to many. (...) Secrets, (says he,) are committed to word, not to
writing. Clemens lib. Stroma. 5
Also, Mysteries are delivered mystically. And in his fifth book of Stromates
he disputes at large, that even as the Philosophers did so hide certain
secrets touching their doctrines, that they should not be known to all men,
so does the Apostle also reteining that ancient conceyling say: 1. Cor. 2.6.
We speak wisdom among them that ^re perfect. He cites also forth of a
^ertaine Apocriphall Gospel this pre^ept of the Lord: My mystery is mine
own, and the Sons of mine house. But if it may please you to compare the one
with the other, you shall find that these are the very self same things,
Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 2. Tertul. de praescrip. Haeretic.
which in Irenaeus and Tertullian, the Valentinians, Carpocratians, and other
Heretics allege for the defense and confirmation of their doctrines.
Therefore although this judgment in Heretics were then gravely repressed by
Irenaeus and Tertullian, Clemens lib. Strom. 6.
yet Clement his talk does show, that the infection stuck in the Church to
the posterity. And Clement does extol in many words a certain kind of
Gnostikes, whom in these words he describes: That is the knowledge which
makes a true Gnostike, which comes delivered without writing, by succession
to a few from the Apostles. This description of Clement is to be noted. For
although the heresy of the Gnostikes were condemned in the Church, yet
certain seeds of this plague remained in the Church, and that in great men.
Therefore Clement does magnify unwritten traditions, Whether Clement is
thrown down headlong through traditions Clemens li. 1. Strom.
and does not only make them equal with the Scriptures: but see whither this
rule of traditions does lead him out of the way, yea casts him down
headlong. I will report of many things a few, whereby it shall appear how
perilous a thing it is, to follow (...) things unwritten. He intermedleth the
Gospel with the decrees of Philosophy, and makes it equal with the law of
God. For (says he) as the law was an instruction for the Jews to Christ, so
was philosophy for the Greeks also. lib. 2. Strom.
And he attributes power to justify to both, as well to the law as to
Philosophy, which is most manifestly against the doctrine of Paul. He
^enieth, lib. 3. Strom.
that men committing sin after ^aptism ought to be received into grace, which
also is contrary to the doctrine of ^e Gospel, and the consent of the Catho^^ke
Church. He yields place to re^entance after this life in his sixth book.
lib. 6. Strom.
^e contendeth in many words, that the ^reekes were saved through
Philoso^hie, which judgment if we do embrace, (...) not Christ dead in vain,
Galat. 2.21.
according to ^e doctrine of Paul? Is not Christ be^^me unto us of none
effect, and do we ^t fall from grace: to make short he reue^ceth many doting
toys as traditions (...) the Apostles. Lo whither they fall, which will be
wise beyond the scripture.

Origin his wit, Origin depraved by traditions.
than the which ^here was skant any other among the fa^hers of the Church,
either more fine, or ^ore excellent, was depraved by this Clement, who had
unwritten traditions in so ^reat admiration. For he has stuffed full his
books every where with strange ^octrines, which he had received from
Clement under the title of the traditions of the Apostles, whereupon he is so
often noted, reproved, and nipped, both of the old writers and of the new
Hierom calls Origin his doctrines impoysoned. Hieronymus ad Auitum,
Pammachum, Ocoeanum, etc.
But from whence supped he his poison, but from the instruction of Clement? And
by whom was Clement deceived, but by the admiration, study, and reverence of
such traditions? The allegorization of the scripture comes from traditions.
In deed the Apocriphall book of Hormas the Pastor does teach, that in the
interpretation o^ Scripture we must depart from the letter, and search
forth the allegory. Clement received this as a tradition of the Apostles, and
delivered it to Origin under the same title. Herevppon was kindled an
incredible desire in this man, to transform the Scriptures into allegories:
with the infection of the which disease, it is wonderful, how he corrupted
afterward the minds of all doctors. For after they had once tasted the
sweetness of allegories, as of a more lofty understanding, they vaunted
themselves immoderately, and brought every thing to allegories, so that every
one thought, that he might lawfully say what he would herein. And this evil
did not stay it self within the East, but invaded Afrike, Italy, Divinity
transformed into Philosophy.
France, and Spain also. So by a little and a little the pureness of
Christian Theology was transformed into a certain Philosophy. And we may
thank such traditions for this fruit:

And Epiphanius was a great boaster of such traditions, Epi. given to
traditions.
who sometime alleges things under this title, which are taken forth of
Apocriphall writers. What need many words? Whosoever have been bewitched
with the admiration of such like traditions, they have all turned from the
pureness of the Apostles doctrine, unto strange opinions and unsavory follies.
A very apt similitude.
So that these traditions seem unto me, to be like the meteorologicall fire,
which will burn nothing, which natural Philosophers call leaping goats. For
as that fire appears in the night over moist and fe^nie places and leads
travelers in the night out of their way, if they marvel at it, and be
afraid to behold it, upon the which fraud it is called in Duitche
Droechliecht, deceitful light: even so the Ghost or fantastical appearance
of Tradition leads them, which have it in admiration, out of the way from
truth, and throws the^ into errors And this is yt worthy wisdom, which
hitherto has filled the minds of the blind Jews with most foolish
knowledges, and has caused worthy men otherwise in the Church and a great
multitude following them, to depart from the truth, and to go out of the way.
So that it is a most sure way, to examine all traditions, by what title so ever
they be commended, according to the rule of Scripture, that that, which has
not authority by the Scriptures, may be by the same facility contemned:
whereby it is proved, Hieronymus
as Hierome his saying well warns us.

Chrysostom. in Matt. cap. 23.
For the counsel of Chrysostom is wise, which says. Therefore the Lord
knowing that there would come such a confusion in the last days, does command
that the Christians which are in Christianity willing to receive the strength
of the true faith should run to nothing, but to the Scriptures, otherwise if
they shall regard any thing else, they shall be offended and perish. Again
Jerome says: The sword of GOD strikes other things, Hieronymus in 1. Cap.
Aggaei.
which men find and devise of their own accord without the authority and
testimonies of the Scriptures, as though they came by the tradition of the
Apostles. Therefore at all times, and in every doubtful matter, we must fly
to the Scripture, which executes the office of the chief Judge in every
controversy of Divinity, to whose sentence all traditions, all Churches, all
Councels, all devises of men ought to stand, and from the which it is not
lawful to appeal to any other, nor to depart from the word of God, and to
give our selves greedily to the traditions of men. For he which hears the
scripture, hears the holy Ghost the author of the Scriptures, and
reuerenceth him: and contrarily, he, which despises the judgment seat of the
Scriptures, and the judgments given in the Scriptures, and will not quiet
himself therewith, despises the spirit of God, and uses himself more
reprochfully against him, than can be uttered. And he, which will not suffer
himself to be led as it were by the hand, by the guiding of the Scripture,
forth of the thorns and briers of doubts, errors, superstitions,
corruptions, abuses, is very well worthy to wander out of the way, he knows
not whether, and to stray perpetually.

The Conclusion.
A brief rehersall of all those things, which have been handeled and disputed
of, touching the holy Scripture, and the Church.
I have proved by a very large and contentious disputation, that the holy
Scripture is God his word, wherein is enclosed a full and a perfect sum of
heavenly wisdom. Neither is there any thing necessary to salvation, which is
not set forth in the Scriptures. For if there had been any thing needful to
be known, God would not had omitted it, since his will was to teach us
thereby, not to the halfes, but fully whatsoever his pleasure was, that we
should know, and which he knew to be profitable for us. This is the only
foundation and pillar of the lively faith: this is the sure bulwark against
the deceites of errors. Forth of this ought Heresies to be confuted: forth
of this ought doctrines chiefly to be discerned: forth of this ought
definitions of faith, and assertions to be taken. The Scripture is of most
clear and pearelesse authority, so that all godly and faithful understanding
ought to serve it. And it is the Catholic consent of the Fathers, yea, and of
all the Church, that the Canonical Scripture ought to be preferred before all
Churches, all Councels, although they be general, all Traditions, Decrees,
devises, writings of all men, although they excel in learning and holiness.
The Church does so reverence and adore the fullness, perfectness, and
soundness of the Scripture, that she does accurse as wicked and false
witnesses of God, as detestable authors of offenses, Heresies, and
dissentions, as proud, vain, and fallen from the faith, so many as do preach
beyond the scripture. Yea, and she suspecteth every revelation, every
prophecy, every Tradition: to be brief, every rule of faith which is not
grounded in the Law, and the Prophets, and the Gospel. And the high perfection
of the chief authority of the Scripture does not depend of the Church, or
of any testimony of man, but chiefly of the witness of the holy Ghost. For
the allowing of this doctrine went before the Church, which was called, sprung
and increased by the word, and which is stayed up by the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, as by a ground work or proppe.

Although we do not deny, that the authority of the Church is then of some
weight, when as it consents and agrees with the authority of the Scripture,
both for this purpose, that the scriptures may be believed, and also for this,
that the Scriptures may be well understood. But the Church does not make
new articles of the faith, or a new interpretation, but is a witness and a
restorer of the true and incorrupt meaning, delivered in the Scriptures, and by
the voice of the Apostles, and carries before her the light of the word, to
put away the darkness brought into the Scriptures by Heretics. And this is
the care of the Church always, to confirm by Scripture whatsoever she
appoint. For she does reverently acknowledge, that her authority does stay
it self by the word, and does depend of the word. For the Scripture is a
plain, sure, and infallible note of the Church. For in the Scripture, and no
where else, in so great variety of sects and repugnancie of opinions, is the
Church to be sought, known, and proved, and by it to be esteemed. Where the
Scripture is heard, there is the Church, there do the sheep know the voice
of the shepherd. And if the doctrine of truth be buried, the Church
vanishes forthwith from men's eyes.

Neither does the Church reign over our faith, neither does she require to
be believed, but so far forth as she speaks the words of God. For when
as she does confess, that she receives her authority and credit from the
Scripture only, she submits her self obediently to the holy Scriptures.
Therefore whatsoever she affirms, or denies, whatsoever she appoints or
commands, or disappointeth or forbids, she would have it known and
believed, that she brings forth therein, not her own, or any other man's,
or creatures, but the words and sense of God, but of Christ. Therefore the
Church does not err, for she follows her own judgment in nothing, but
every where and in all things obeys Gods word, wherein there is no
darkness, no errors. And if she do otherwise, this saying of Scripture is
true: Romans 3.4. 1. Tim. 3.15.
Let every man be a liar, and God only true. In deed the Church is the
pillar and ground of truth: because she is keeper of sound doctrine: and
publishes it to them, which come after, least it should fail in the world.
And that is the holy and divine Scripture, which the consent of the Church
does allow and approve: but this consent and this approbation is not the
devise of man, but a necessary confession, and a testification expressed by
the force of the truth, which does not bring to pass, that the authority of
the Church is greater or of like credit with the authority of the Scripture.

But the Church of the wicked, The malignant Church.
which not only hears not God his word, but most cruelly persecuteth and
kills them which believe the Gospel, and besides this is grounded wholly upon
men's traditions, declares manifestly that she is of him, of whom it is
written: John. 8.44.
Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father will ye do: he
was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth: because there
is no truth in him. For she is known what she is, by the fruits of her
Herodlike cruelty, vanity, bewitchings, and corruptions. But the spouse of
Christ, hears the voice of her bridegroom, and submits her self to him,
as it is meet. Her chastity is not to be withdrawn from the singleness of
Christ, as Paul witnesses. 2. Cor. 11.3.
Therefore she erreth not, which follows God his truth for a rule, from the
which, if she depart, she is no longer a spouse, but becomes an harlot.
Therefore he which judges, that ye definitions of the reuolting church ought
to be heard without choice and any exception, compels the faithful, Christ
being denied, and Gods truth forsaken, often times to stick fast to
iniquity, so that the judgment of such a Church can in no respect be a most
exact rule of faith. 2. Tim. 3.15.16.17.
But the holy Ghost says plainly of the Scripture, that the man, which
bestows his diligent travail in the holy Scriptures, becomes learned to
salvation, which is prepared after this life: then (...) that is to say,
perfect, lastly furnished, instructed, and as Ambrose yields it, Ambrosius.
thoroughly appointed and provided to every good work.

Thou have here, gentle reader, a treatise of the authority of the Scripture,
and of the Church, penned by me very grossly and almost rudely, which God
grant it may recompense the largenes thereof with due commodity and profit.
I could excuse the infancy, and the disordered inditing thereof, but that I
fear to enlarge it by excusing the same. Therefore I beseech the learned ears
to pardon my baren want of eloquence, and the rudeness of my style. For I have
not written these things for the learned, but being my self rude and simple,
for the rude and simple. The Lord Jesus break in pieces, the most hurtful
cord of contention, with the spirit of truth and of true concord, and pluck
up by the root, and put away from all us which profess his name, the
offense of discentions among us, that we may all speak one thing, and be
joined together with one mind and judgment in him, to whom be praise,
honor, and glory, for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Certain additions by the Translator.
August. de vnitate Eccles. cap. 16.
AVgustine in his Book Of the unity of the Church the 16. Chapter urging the
Donatistes, says: Let them show none otherwise but by the Canonical books of
the Scriptures, whether they have the Church. For neither do we say, that we
ought heerevpon to be believed, because we are in the Church of Christ: because
Melenitanus, Optatus, or Ambrose of Millane, or other innumerable Bishopes of
our fellowship, commended that Church, which we have. Or because it is preached
by the councels of our fellows in office. Or because so great miracles either
of hearings or of healings are wrought through out all the world in holy
places, which our fellowship does frequent. Or that men ought to depart from
Donatus his side, because such an one saw a dream, and such an one being
ravished in the spirit heard a voice. Whatsoever of this sort are done in the
catholic Church, are therefore approved, because they are done in the Catholic
Church, the Catholic Church, is not therefore made known, because these
things are done in her.

The Lord Jesus him self when he rose from the dead, John. 20.27.
and offered his body to be beholden with his disciples eyes, and to be
touched with their hands yet lest they should think, that they were any whit
deceived or deluded, judged that they ought rather to be confirmed with the
testimonies of the law and Prophets, and Psalms, Luke. 24.26.
showing that those things were fulfilled concerning him, which had been
foretold so long before. So did he commend his Church also, saying, that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name, etc. He
has witnessed, that this is written in the law, and the Prophets, and the
Psalms, this do we hold being commended by his mouth. These be the
documentes of our cause, these be the foundations, these be the confirmations.

We read in the Acts. 17.11.
Acts of the Apostles spoken of certain which believed, that they searched
the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. What Scriptures, I pray
you, but the Canonical Scriptures of the law and the prophets? Hereunto are
added the Gospels, the Epistles of the Apostles, the Acts of the Apostles, and
the Revelation of John. Search all these, and pick out some manifest Proof
whereby you may show, that either the Church remained only in Afrike, or that
she should come forth of Afrike. But bring forth somewhat which needs not
an interpreter, nor whereby you may be convicted, that it was spoken of an other
matter, and that you go about to wreast it to your own sense. Hieronymus ad
Mimerium et Alexandrum.


Hierome to Mimerius and Alexander says: Neither according to the scholars of
Pythagoras, is the prejudicial opinion of the teacher to be wayed but the
reason of the doctrine. But if any of a contrary faction murmr, saying, Why
should I read their e^clamations, unto whose opinions I do not assent: Let him
know, that I do willingly hear this saying of the Apostle: Examine all
things: 1. These. 5.21.
hold fast that, which is good* and the words of our Savior saying: try ye
the coin so well, that if there be any counterfeit money, and have not Caesar
his image, neither be signed with the common coin, it may be reproved. And
that that money, which does represent the face of Christ in the clear light,
may be laid up in the purse of our heart.

And a little after he says: My purpose is, to read the ancient Writers, to
try all things, to hold those things which are good, and not to depart from
the faith of the church.

Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes in the vine- tree, by Thomas Dawson,
for William Pounsonby. 1579.


