FIFTY GODLY AND LEARned Sermons, divided into five Decades, containing the
chief and principal points of Christian Religion, written in three several
Tomes or Sections, by Henry Bullinger minister of the Church of Tigure in
Swicerlande.

WHEREUNTO IS ADJOINED A TRIPLE or three-folde Table very fruitful and
necessary.

Translated out of Latin into English by H. I. student in Divinity.

printer's or publisher's device ET INVENTA EST PERIIT



MATTHEWE. 17. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: Hear him.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON BY RALPHE Newberrie, dwelling in Fleete-streate a little
above the Conduite.

Anno. Gratiae. 1577.

A Praeface to the Ministry of the Church of England, and to other well
disposed Readers of GDOS word.
WHat just cause there is, that all spiritual sheepeherdes, and especially
these of our time, should see carefully to the feeding of the flocks committed
to their charge: may easily appear to him that shall but a little stay his
consideration upon this matter. For first, the commandments of the Almighty
touching this thing are very earnest, the authority of which should greatly
enforce. Secondly, the rewards which he proposes to vigilant and careful
pastors are large and bountiful, the sweetness of which should much allure.
Thirdly, the plagues and heavy judgments which he denounces against
slouthful and careless shepeheards are grievous and importable, the terror
whereof should make afraid. Then the nature and condition of the sheep over
whom they watch, the vigilancie of the wolf against whom they watch, the
conscience in taking the fleece for which they watch, and this time and age
wherein they watch being rightly considered, will give them to understand
sufficiently, that they have good occasion to watch. How earnestly God
commands, appears, Esaie 58. Where he says, Cry aloude, spare not, lift
up thy voice like a trumpet, show my people their transgressions, and the
house of Jacob their Esai. 58.
sins. And Esaie. 62. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem,
Esai. 62.
which all the day and all the night continually shall not cease: ye that are
mindful of the Lord keep not silence. And John. 21. Feed my lambs, Feed my
John 21.
sheep, and if ye love me, Feed. And 2. Tim. 4. Preach the word: be
instant, 2. Tim. 4.
in season out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort, etc. How sweetly with
rewards he allureth, does appear in the 12. of Daniel: They that be wise shall
shine Dan. 12.
as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness
shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. And ^. Tim. 4. Take heed to thy
self 1. Tim. 4
and to doctrine, in them occupy thy self continually. For in so doing thou
shall save thy self and them which hear thee. How fiersly also he urges and
drives on the sluggish and careless sheapheards with terrible plagues and
whips threatened unto them: appears Ezechiel. 3. Where he says: Son of
man, I have made thee a watche-man unto the house of Israel: therefore hear
the word of my Ezech. 3.
mouth, and give them learning from me: When I shall say unto the wicked, thou
shall surely dye, and thou give him not warning, nor speak to admonish the
wicked of his wicked way, that he may live: the same wicked man shall dye in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand. And Jeremy. 1. ver. 17.
Thou therefore trusse up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all Ier^.
1.
that I command thee: be not afraid of their faces, least I destroy thee
before them. And 1. Cor. 9. ver. 16. Though I preach the Gospel, I have
nothing to rejoice ^. Cor. 9.
of: for necessity is laid upon me, and woe is unto me if I preach not the
Gospel: for if I do it willingly, I have a reward: but if I do it against
my will, notwithstanding the dispensation is committed unto me. Now the sheep
whereof spiritual sheepheards have undertaken charge, are not beasts, but men:
the very Images of God himself endued with everliving souls, Citizens with
the saints and blessed angels, clothed with Gods liuerie, beautified with his
cognizance, and all the badges of salvation, admitted to his Table, and to no
meaner dishes than the body and blood of the undefiled lamb Christ Jesus,
bought also and redeemed out of the wolves chawes with no less price, than of
that same blood more precious than any Gold or silver. Sheep also of that
nature they are, that being carefully fed and discreetely ordered, they prove
gentle and loving toward their sheepherds, and serviceable toward the chief
sheepherd Jesus Christ: but being neglected and left to the^ selves, they
degenerate into bloody wolves, watching ever opportunity when they may rent
in pieces their sheepherds, and all other sheep which are not degenerated into
their woluishe nature. As for the spiritual wolf against whom they watch,
which is Satan, He, (as the Apostle Peter witnesses, 2. Epistle, cap. 5.)
Never rests, but as a roaring Lion, walks ^. Pet. 5.
about, seeking ever whom he may devour. And for that cause also is he called
Apoc. 20. ver. 2, A dragon, Which beast naturally is very malicious, crafty
and Apoc. 20.
watchful: so then, if the spiritual shepherd must watch whiles the
spiritual wolf does wake, he can promise unto him self no one moment of
security, wherein he may be careless. God by his Prophet Ezechiel cap. 34.
says, Woe be unto the sheepherds of Israel that feed themselves: should not
the sheepherdes feed the flocks? Ezech. 32.
ye eat the fat, and ye cloathe you with the wool: ye kill them that are
fed, but ye feed not the sheep. This sentence should awake the sleepie and
careless consciences of many sheepherds. For as the priest that serves the
altar, is worthy to live upon the offeringes: and the soldier that ventereth,
is worthy his wages: and the husbandman that toyleth, is worthy the harvest:
and the shepherd that feeds the flock, is worthy to be fed with the
milk, and clothed with the wool: so questi^nlesse, the priest that serves
not, is worthy no offerings: the soldier that fights not, is worthy no
wages: the husbandman that loytereth, is worthy of weeds: and the sheepherd
that feeds not, can with no good conscience require either the milk or the
fleece: but his due reward and just recompense is punishment, for that through
his default the sheep are hunger-sterued and destroyed of the wolf. But let
the ministers of our time well weighe the condition and manner of the time, and
then no doubt, they shall see that it is high time to bestyrre them to the
doing of their duties. This time succedeth a time, wherein was extreme famine
of all spiritual food, so that the sheep of this time can never recover
themselves of that feebleness whereinto they were brought, but by some great
and extraordinary diligence. This time succedeth a time, wherein the multitude
of wolves and ravenous beasts was so great, and their rage, and fury so fell
in every sheepfolde, that the good sheepherdes were either put to flight, or
pitifully murth^red: so that the sheep being committed to wolves, did either
perish, or degenerate into wolves: so that to regenerate them again into
sheep, requires no small labor. The Church in this time is like land that
has lain (time out of mind,) unmanured, vncompassed, untilled, by reason
whereof it is so out of heart, that it requires arms of iron, and legs of
brass to recover it again: or like a ship soworne with winds and tempests,
so rent with rocks, so cracked and utterly decayed, that it seems a rare
piece of cunning to make her take the seas again. No remedy then but the
ministry of this time, if there be any love or fear of God in them, if they
would not have all things run to ruin, if they regard either God, themselves,
or their brethren, must forthwith without further delay set the^ selves to
feed their flocks, to teach, to exhort, to strengthen, to bind up, to
build, to plant, to water, to set, to graffe, to leave nothing undone that
apperteineth to the feeding and fatting of the Lords flocks, to the pla^ting of
the Lords Paradise, tilling of the Lords husbandry, dressing of the Lords
vineyarde, raising and rearing up of the Lords Temple. What great want there
is in many, to discharge their duties in this behalf, is very lamentable,
and by some means (as much as is possible) to be supplied and remedied,
rather than to be made a common theme and argument of railing, which at this
day many do. Wherein they show them selves like unto those, which find
fault at other men's garments, not for that they love them, or mind to give
the^ better: but for that they are proud of their own, and would scornefully
shame and vex other. The cause of this great want needs not here to be
disputed: but in very deed, any man may judge how impossible it was for so
populous a kingdom, abounding with so many several congregations, to be all
furnished with fit and able pastors, and that immediately after such a
general corruption and apostacy from the truth. For unless they should have
soudenly come from heaven, or been raised up miraculously, they could not have
been. For the ancient preachers of king Eduardes time some of them died in
prison, many perished by fire, many otherwise: many also fled into other
countries, of whom some there died and a few returned, which were but as an
handful to furnish this whole Realm. The Universities were also at the first
so infected, that many wolfes and foxes crept out, who detested the ministry,
and wrought the contempt of it euerie-where: but very few good sheapherdes
came abroad. And whereas since that time, now eighteen years, the
Universities being well purged, there was good hope that all the land should
have been ouer-spred, and replenished with able and learned pastors: the devil
and corrupt patrones have taken such order, that much of that hope is cut
off. For patrones, now a days, search not the Universities for a most fit
pastor: but they post up and down the country for a most gaineful chapman. He
that has the biggest purse to pay largely, not he that has the best gifts
to preach learnedly is presented. The Bishops bear great blame for this
matter, and they admit (say they) unworthy men. See the craft of satan,
falsely to charge the worthiest pillars of the church with the ruin of the
church: to the end that al church-robbers and caterpillars of the Lords
vineyard may lie unespied. There is nothing that procures the bishops of our
time more trouble and displeasure, than that they zealously withstand the
covetousness of Patrons, in rejecting their insufficient clerks. For it
stands them upon of al other, that the Church of God does prosper, in the
decay and fall whereof they can not stand but perish. But how so ever it
comes to pass, certain it is, that many are far behind in those gifts
which are necessary for their function, and small likelyhoode is there yet
that the Church shall be served with better, but rather with worse. For it
seems not, that Patrones here-after will bate one penie, but rather more and
more raise the market. The case standing thus, their labor surely is not
woorst bestowed, neither do they promote the glory of God, or profit the
Church least, which to that end apply their endeavor, that the ministry
which now is in place, may come forward, and be better able to do their
duties: I mean such, as either set forth godly and learned treatises, or
expositions of the holy scriptures, compiled by themselves in our mother
tongue: or else such as translate the worthy works of the famous divines of
our time: both these sorts of men, no doubt, do much aedifie all the godly,
and do greatly help forward all those ministers, which either not at all, or
very meanly understand the Latin tongue: so that amongst them are found
many, which by painful industry and diligent reading of such books, do God
good service in the Church, and so might all the rest of them do also if
sloth and worldly affairs did not hinder them. Some of that sort complain,
that Caluins manner of writing in his institutions is ouer-deepe and profound
for them: Musculus also, in his commonplaces is very scholastical: the
commentaries of Marlorat upon John, of Peter Martyr upon the Judges, of Gualter
upon the small prophets, and other many are translated and extant, which
altogether do handle most points of christian doctrine excellently well: but
this sort of ministers for the most part are so bare bitten of their patrones,
that to buy the^ al would deeply charge them. Therefore questionless, no writer
yet in the hands of men can fit the^ better, than master Bullinger in these
his Decades, who in the^ ame^deth much Caluins obscurity, with singular
perspicuitie: and Musculus scholastical subtilitie, with great plainnes and
even popular facility. And all those points of christian doctrine, which are
not to be found in one, but handled in all: Bullinger packeth up al, and that in
good order, in this one book of small quantity. And where as diverse of the
ministry which lack knowledge and some also which have knowledge, but yet
lack order, discretion, memory, or audacitie, cannot by reason of those
wants, either expound or exhort, or otherwise preach, but only read the order
of service: the Decades of Master Bullinger in this respect may do more good,
than shall perhaps at the first be conceived. For in very deed, this book is a
book of Sermons: Sermons in name, and in nature: fit to be read out of the
pulpit unto the simplest and rudest people of this land: the doctrine of them
very plain, without ostentation, curiosity, perplexity, vanity, or
supersluitie: very sound also, without Popery, Anabaptisme, Seruetianisme, or
any other haeresie: and in number, 80. eueri^ Decade containing (as the word
imports) ten: so that they may easily be so divided, as there may be for
every Sunday in the year one. Neither is it material, what those Phanatical
fellows say, which can away with no Homilies or Sermons, be they never so
sound, pithy, and effectual to be read in Churches. They are like Physicians,
which forbid their patients all those meats which they may have, and would do
them good: and appoint them only such, as by no means they can obtain: for
it will not yet be, that every parish shall have a learned able preacher
resident and abiding in it. And in the mean time it cannot be denied, but that
an Homily or sermon penned by some excellent clerk being read plainly,
orderly, and distinctly, does much move the hearers, does teach, confirm,
confute, comfort, persuade, even as the same pronounced without the book,
does. Perhaps some hearers which delight more to have their eyes fed with the
preachers action, than their hearts aedified with his sermon, are more moved
with a sermon not read: but to a good christian hearer, whose mind is most
occupied on the matter, there is smalods. Better is a good sermon read than
none at all. But nothing (say they) must be read in the open congregation, but
the very Canonical scriptures. That rule is somewhat strait and praecise. Then
may not either the Creed, called the Apostles creed, or the Nicene creed, or
the creed called Athanasius creed, or any prayers, which are not word for word
contained in the canon of the scriptures, nor any co^tents of chapters be read
in the Congregation. The church and Congregation of the Colossians, were
enjoined by S. Paul, Col. 4. ve. 16. to read amongst them the Epistle written
from Laodycea, which Epistle (as Calvin thinks) was not written by Paul, but
by the church of Laodycea, and sent to Paul, and is not con^eined in the Canon
of the scriptures. The Church of Corinth also, and other churches of the
godly, soon after the Apostles times (as appears out of Eusebius, lib. 4.
cap. 23. and the writers of the Centuries, Cent. 2. cap. 10.) did use to read
openly for admonition sake, certain Epistles of Clement, and of Dionysius
Bishop of Corinth. Master Bucer in his notes upon the communion book in King
Edwardes time, writes thus: It is better, that where there lackes to expound
the scriptures unto the people, there should be godly and learned Homilies
read unto them, rather than they should have no exhortation at al in the
administration of the supper. And a little after, he says: there be two few
Homilies, and too few points of religion taught in them: when therefore the
Lord shall bless this kingdom with some excellent preachers, let them be
commanded to make more Homilies of the principal points of religion, which may
be read to the people, by those pastors that cannot make better themselves. And
that worthy martyr doctor Ridley Bishop of London, speaking of the Church of
England that was in the reign of king Edward (as he is reported by master
Fox in his book of Acts and Mo: To 2. Page 1940.) says thus: It had also
holy and wholesome Homilies in commendation of the principal virtues, which
are commended in scripture, and likewise other Homilies against the most
pernicious and capital vices, that use (alas) to reign in this Church of
England. So long therefore as none are read in the Church, but such as are
sound, godly, and learned, and fit for the capacity of the people: and whiles
they are not thrust into the Church for Canonical Scriptures, but are read as
godly expositions, and interpretations of the same: and whiles they occupy no
more time in the church, than that which is usually left and spared, after the
reading of the Canonical scriptures, to preaching and exhortation: and whiles
they are used, not to the contempt, derogation, or abandoning of preaching, but
only to supply the want of it: no good man can mislike the use of them, but
such contentious persons as defy all things which they devise not themselves.
And if it be said, there be already good Homilies, and those also authorized,
and likewise wholesome expositions of sundry parts of scripture t^ the same
purpose: I grant there be so. But store is no sore. And as in meats, which are
most deintie, if they come often to the table, we care not for them: so in
sermons which are most excellent, if the same come often to the pulpit, they
oftentimes please not: others are desired. But, to end: these sermons of
master Bullingers are such, as whether they be used privately, or read
publicly: whether of ministers of the word, or other Gods children:
certeinely there will be found in them such light and instruction for the
ignorant, such sweetness and spiritual comfort for consciences, such
heavenly delights for souls: that as perfumes, the more they are chafed, the
better they smell: and as golden mines, the deeper ye dig them, the more
riches they show: so these, the more diligently ye peruse them, the more
delightfully they will please: and the deeper ye dig with daily study in
their mines, the more golden matter they will deliver forth to the glory of
GOD, to who^ only be praise for ever and ever, Amen.

Of the four general Synodes or Counsels.
SINCE THE TIME OF THE APOSTLES, MANY Counselles have been celebrated in
sundry Provinces. Those (Counsels) then were Synodes or assemblies of Bishops
and holy men, meeting together to consult for keeping the soundness of Faith,
the unity of Doctrine, and the discipline and peace of the Churches. Some of
which sort the Epistles of the blessed martyr Cyprian have made us acquainted
withal.

The first general or universal Synod therefore, is reported to have The
Nicene counsel.
been called by that most holy Emperor Constantine in the City of Nice, the
year of our Lord 324. against Arius and his parteners, which denied the
natural Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ. And thither came there out of all
nations under heaven 218. Bishops, and excellent learned men, who wrote the
Creed commonly called the Nicene Creed.

Hitherto the Creed of the Apostles sufficed, and had been sufficient to the
church of Christ even in the time of Constantine. For all men confess that
all the churches used no other Creed than that of the Apostles (which we have
made mention of and expounded in the first Decade,) wherewith they were
content throughout the whole world. But for because in the days of Constantine
the great, that wicked blasphemer Arius sprange up, corrupting the pureness of
Christian faith, and perverting the simple truth of doctrine taught by the
Apostles, the Ministers of the churches were compelled of very necessity, to
set themselves against that deceiuer, and in publishinge a Creed, to show
forth and declare out of the Canonical Scriptures, the true and ancient
confession of faith, condemning those novelties brought in of Arius. For in the
Creedes set forth by the other three general counsels presently following,
neither was any thing changed in the doctrine of the Apostles, neither was
there any new thing added, which the churches of Christ had not before taken
and believed out of the holy Scripture: but the ancient truth being wisely
made manifest by co^fessions made of faith, was profitably and godly set
against the new corruptions of heretics. Yet were the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles the Spring, the Guide, the Rule, and Judge in all these
counsels, neither did the fathers suffer any thing to be done there according
to their own minds. And yet I speak not of every Constitution and Canon, but
namely of those ancient Confessions alone, to which we do attribute so much
as is permitted by the Canonical Scripture, which we confess to be the only
rule how to judge, to speak, and do.

The second general counsel was held in the royal city Constantinople,
under Gratian the Emperor, in the year of our Lord 384. The counsel of
Constantinople.
There were assembled in that Synod (as witnesses Prosperus Aquitanicus) 180.
fathers or Bishops, which condemned Macedonius and Eudoxius denying the holy
ghost to be God.

And about the year of our Lord 434. in the very same year that the blessed
father Augustine died, when that godly Prince Theodosius The counsel of Ephesus.
the great was Emperor, there came together at Ephesus the third Synod, of
200. Priests or thereabout against Nestorius, which tare the mystery of the
Incarnation, and taught that there were two sons, the one of God, the other
of man: whom this Counsel condemned, together with the Pelagians helpers of
this doctrine as cousin to their own.

The fourth general counsel was assembled at Calcedon, in the year The
counsel of Calcedon.
of our Lord 454. under the Emperor Martian, where 630. fathers were gathered
together, who according to the Scriptures condemned Eutyches, which confounded
the natures in Christ for the unity of the person.

Beda de ratione temporum, and many other writers do join with these four
universal counsels, two general Synodes more, the fifte and the sixte,
celebrated at Constantinople. For the fifte was gathered together when
Justinian was Emperor, against Theodorus, and all heretics, about the year
of our Lord 552. The sixte came together under Constantine the son of
Constantius, in the year of our Lord 682. And there were assembled 289.
Bishops against the Monothelites. But there was nothing determined in these
Synodes, but what is to be found in the four first counsels, wherefore I have
noted nothing out of them.

The Nicene Creed taken out of the Ecclesiastical and tripartite history.
WE believe in one God the father almighty, maker of all things visible and
invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, the only begotten
son of the father, that is, of the substance of the Father, God of God,
light of light, very God of very God, begotten not made, being of the same
Essence and substance with the Father, by whom all things were made, which are
in heaven, and which are in earth: Who for us men, and for our salvation came
down, was incarnate and manned (was made man.) He suffered and rose again
the third day, he ascended into Heaven, and shall come to judge the quick and
the dead. And (we believe) in the holy Ghost. As for those that say, it was
sometime when he was not, and before he was borne he was not: and which say,
because he was made of things not being (of nothing) or of an other
substance, that therefore the son of God is either created, or turned, or
changed, them does the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church curse or
excommunicate.

The Creed of the counsel held at Constantinople, taken out of a certain
copy written in Greek and Latin.
I Believe in one God, the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of
all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ the only
begotten son of God, borne of his father before all worlds, light of light,
very God of very God, begotten not made, being of the same substance with the
father, by whom all things were made. Who for us men and for our salvation,
came down from Heaven, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost and the virgin
Marie, and was made man. He was also crucified for us under Pontius Pilate. He
suffered and was buried: and he roase the third day, according to the
Scriptures. And he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God
the father: and he shall come again with glory to judge the quick and the
dead, whose kingdom shall have no end. And (I believe) in the holy Ghost the
Lord and giver of life, who proceeding from the father, is to be worshipped and
glorified together with the father and the son, who spoke by the prophets, in
one Catholic and Apostolic church. I confess one baptism for the
remission of sins. I look for the resurrection of the dead: and the life of
the world to come.

The confession of faith, made by the Synod at Ephesus.
IN as much as because here I note all things briefly, I could not in writing
place with these that large Synodall Epistle written by S. Cyrill to Nestorius,
wherein is contained the full consent of the general Counsel held at Ephesus:
I have therefore rather chosen out of the 28. Epistle of the same Cyrill, a
short confession sent to the Synod and allowed by the whole Counsel. Before
the confession are set these words. Even as in the beginning we have heard
out of the divine Scriptures and the tradition of the holy fathers: so will we
briefly speak, not adding any thing at all to the faith set forth by the
holy fathers in Nice. For that does suffice as well to all knowledge of
godliness, as also to the utter forsaking of any heretical ouerthwartnesse.

And a little after this, the Confession is set down in these words. We
acknowledge our Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of GOD, to be
perfect God and perfect man of a reasonable soul and body, borne of the
father according to his Godhead before the worlds, and the very same
according to his humanity borne in the latter times of the virgin Marie for
us, and for our salvation. For there was made an uniting of the two natures.
Wherefore we confess both one Christ, one Son, and one Lord. And according
to this understanding of the unconfounded unity, we acknowledge the holy
virgin to be the mother of God, because that GOD the word was incarnate and
made man, and by the very conception gathered to him self a body taken of
her. But for the speeches uttered by the Evangelists and Apostles touching the
Lord, we know that the Divines do by reason of the two natures divide them,
so yet as that they belong to one person, and that they do refer them, some
because they are more agreeable to the divinity, to the Godhead of Christ,
and other some (because they are) base to his Humanity.

To this confession Cyrill adds these words. When we had read these holy
words of youres (even in the Synod to which the confession was sent) and did
perceive that we our selves were of the same opinion (for there is one Lord,
one faith, and one baptism) we glorified GOD the savior of all (men)
rejoicing together in our selves, for that the Churches both ours and youres
do believe agreeably to the Scriptures of God and tradition of the holy
fathers.

A Confession of faith made by the Counsel of Chalcedon, taken out of the
book of Isidore.
AFter the rehearsal of the Creeds set forth by the Synodes of Nice and
Constantinople, with a few words put between, straight way the holy
Counsel of Chalcedon does prescribe (their Confession) in these words.

We therefore agreeing with the holy fathers do with one accord teach to
confess one and the same son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and him (to be) perfect
GOD in the deity, and the same also very man of a reasonable soul and body:
touching his Godhead (being) of one nature with his Father: and the same as
touching his manhood of one nature with us, like to us in all things except
sin. Touching his Godhead borne of his Father before the worlds: and the
same in the latter days made man for us and for our salvation. (We teach) to
consider that he is the one and the same Christ the son (our) Lord the
only begotten son in two natures, neither confounded, nor changed, nor
divided, nor separated, and that the difference of the natures is not to be
taken away because of the unity, but rather, the property of both (his)
natures remaining whole and meeting together in one person and one substance,
that he is not parted or divided in two persons, but is one and the same Son
the only begotten son God the word (Our) Lord Jesus Christ: even as the
prophets from the beginning (have witnessed) of him, as he himself has
instructed us, and the confession of the fathers has taught us. These things
therefore being ordered by us with all care and diligence, the holy and
universal Synod does determine that it should not be lawful for any man to
profess any other faith, or else to write, to teach, or speak to the
contrary.

That the Decree of the Synod of Calcedon is not contrary to the doctrine of
the blessed bishop Cyrill, taken out of the fifte Book of the holy Martyr
Vigiluis against Eutyches.
But now let us consider the last article in the decree of the Synod of
Calcedon. We confess that Christ our Lord the only begotten Son is to be
understood to be one and the self same in (his) two natures neither
confounded, nor changed, nor divided, nor separated, not making void the
difference of the two natures because of the unity, but keeping sound the
property of both natures coming together into one person and substance, not
as being divided or separated, but (as being) one and the same only
beegotten Son God the word (our) Lord Jesus.

In this article this displeases them, because they said: The property of
both natures remaining sound, Or, The difference of the natures not being
made void. And that they may persuade us yt those things (which they mislike)
are assuredly so, they using their accustomed largeness of words, and vain
assertions do bring in many testimonies out of the articles of Cyrill, wherein
he denies not the two natures in Christ, but teaches that there is but one
person. To the intent therefore that we may not confute them with our
disputation alone, let us set down also the words of Cyrill, that even as
they lean to the testimony of Cyrill, so by the testimony of Cyrill they may
be overcome. In the Synodall epistles of Cyrill to Nestorius, thus it is
(written.) For we do not affirm (says he) that the divine nature is turned or
changed into flesh, nor yet that it is transformed into the whole man, which
consists of body and soul, but we say rather that the reasonable soul
has coupled to it self the substance of living flesh, that it is vnspeakablie
and vnconceiuably made man, and is also called the son of man, not of bare
will alone, nor by the only taking on of the person, but because the two
natures do after a certain manner come together in one, so that there is one
Christ, and one Son of both (the natures) by joining them in one, not in
making void or taking away the difference of the natures, but because they,
that is, the Godhead and the manhood, together by that hidden and unspeakable
knitting to the unity, have made to us one Lord, and (one) Christ, and (one)
son. What could be spoken more plainly than this? What could be showed more
clearly out of the Epistles of Cyrill to agree with the determination of the
Counsel of Calcedon? For see, neither are words to words, nor sentence to
sentence any thing contrary, but even as they had one meaning of faith, so
use they in a manner the self same words.

The holy Synod said: The difference of the two natures being no where made
void. Saint Cyrill said: The difference of the natures not being made void,
or taken away by joining them together. The holy Synod said, Both the
natures meeting together in one person. S. Cyrill says, Not of a bare will
only, nor yet by the only taking on of a person, but because the two natures
after a sort do meet together in one. The holy Synod said, Not being
divided into two persons: but being one and the same Christ. S. Cyrill said,
So that of two, that is to say (of two) natures is one Christ the son. And
again, Because they, that is, the Godhead and the manhood together have made to
us one Lord, (one) Christ, and (one) Son etc.

The Creed of the first Counsel held at Toledo, when Honorius and Arcadius
were Emperors, taken About the year of our Lord
out of the book of Isidore.
WE believe in one very God the father almighty, and the son, and the
holy Ghost, maker of things visible and invisible, by whom all things were
made in heaven and in earth. We believe that there is one God and one trinity
of the divine substance. And that the father himself is not the son, but that
he has a Son, which is not the father. That the son is not the father, but
that the son of God is of the nature of the father. And also that the holy
Ghost is the comforter, which neither is the father him self, nor the son,
but proceeding from the father and the son. The father therefore is
unbegotten, the son begotten, the comforter not begotten but proceeding from
the father and the son. The Father is he from whom this voice was heard
out of Heaven, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him.

The Son is he which said, I went out from the Father, and came from GOD
into this world. The comforter is the holy Ghost of whom the son said,
Unless I go away to the father the co^forter shall not come. We believe in this
trinity differing in persons (but) all one in substance not divided nor
differing in strength, power and majesty, (and) we believe that beside this
there is no divine nature, either of Angel, or of spirit, or any power, which
may be believed to be God.

We therefore believe, that this son of God, being God begotten of his
father all together before all beginning, did sanctify the womb of the virgin
Marie, and that of her he took upon him very man, begotten without the seed
of man, the two natures only, that is of the Godhead and manhood coming
together into one person only, that is, our Lord Jesus Christ. Neither (do
we believe) that there was in him an imagined or any fantastical body, but a
sound and very (body) and that he both hungered, and thirsted, and taught,
and wept, and suffered all the damages of the body. Last of al, that he was
crucified of the Jews, and was buried, and rose again the third day, and
afterward was conversant with his disciples, and the fortieth day after his
resurrection ascended into heaven. This son of man and also the son of God,
we call both the son of God and the son of man.

We believe verily that there shall be a resurrection of the flesh of
mankind: and that the soul of man is not of the divine substance, or of God
the father, but is a creature created by the will of God,

The Creed of the fourth Counsel kept at Toledo, taken out of the book of
Isidore.
AS we have learned of the holy fathers, that the father, and the son, and
the holy ghost are of one Godhead and substance, (so) is our confession,
believing the trinity in the difference of persons, and openly professing the
unity in the Godhead, neither confound we the persons, nor divide the
substance. We say that the father is made or begotten of none: we affirm that
the son is not made, but begotten of the father: and we profess that the
holy ghost is neither created nor begotten, but proceeding from the father
and the son. And (we confess) that the Lord him self Jesus Christ the
son of God, and the maker of all things, begotten of the substance of his
father before all the worlds, came down from his father in the latter times
for the redemption of the world, who (nevertheless) never ceased to be with
the father. For he was incarnate by the holy ghost and the glorious virgin
Marie the holy mother of God, and of her was borne alone the same Lord Jesus
Christ, one in the trinity, being perfect (man) in soul and body, taking on
man without sin, being still what he was, taking to him what he was not:
touching his godhead equal with the father, (and) inferior to his father
touching his manhood, having in one person the property of two natures. For
(there are) in him two natures, God and man. And yet not two sons or two
Gods, but the same (God and man) one person in both natures, who suffered
grief and death for our salvation, not in the power of his godhead, but in the
infirmity of his manhood. He descended to them below to draw out by force the
Saints which were held there. And he rose again, the power of death being
overcome. He was taken up into the Heavens, from whence he shall come to judge
the quick and the dead. By whose death and blood we being made clean have
obtained forgiveness of (our) sins, and shall be raised up again by him in
the last day, in the same flesh wherein now we live, (and) in that manner
wherein the same (our) Lord did rise again, (and) shall receive of him, some
in reward of their well-doing life everlasting, and some for their sins the
judgment of everlasting punishment. This is the faith of the Catholic
church, this confession we keep and hold, which whosoever shall keep
steadfastly, he shall have everlasting salvation.

A declaration of the faith or preaching of the Evangelical and apostolical
truethe, by the blessed martyr Irenaeus, taken out of the 2. Chap. of his first
book Contra Valent.
THe church dispersed through the whole world even to the ends of the earth,
has of the Apostles and their Disciples About the yeate of our lord 185.
received the belief which is in one God the father almighty, which made
Heaven, and earth, the Sea, and all that in them is. And in one Jesus Christ
the Son of God (who was) incarnate for our salvation. And in the holy Ghost,
who by the prophets preached* the mystery of the dispensatio^ and the coming
of the beloved Jesus Christ our Lord with his nativity of the virgin, and
his passion, and resurrection from the dead, and his ascension in the flesh
into the Heavens, and his coming again out of the heavens in the glory of
the father to restore all things, and to raise up again all flesh of
mankind: so that to Christ Jesus our Lord, both God, and savior, and king,
according to the will of the invisible father, every knee may bow, of things in
Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that every
tongue may praise him, and that he may judge rightly in all things, and that
he may cast the spirits of naughtiness, with the angels which transgressed
and became rebels, and wicked, unjust, mischiefous, and blasphemous men into
eternal fire: and that to the just and holy ones, and such as have kept his
commandments and remained in the love of him, partly from the beginning, and
partly by repentance, he may grant life, bestow immortality, and give
glory everlasting. The Church, although it be dispearsed throughout the whole
world, having obtained, as I have said, this confession and this faith, does
as it were dwelling together in one house, diligently keep them, and likewise
believe them, even as if it had one soul and the same heart, and does preach,
teach, and agreeably deliver these things, even as if it had al one mouth. For
in the world ye tongues are unlike, but the force of teaching is one and the
same. Neither do the Churches whose foundation is laid in Germany believe
otherwise, or teach to the contrary: neither those in Spain, nor those in
France, nor those in the East, nor those in Aegypte, nor those in Libya, nor
those which are in the world (beside,) but even as the Sun (which is) the
creature of God is one and the selfsame in all the world, so also the
preaching of the truth shines every where, and gives light to all men,
which are willing to come to the knowledge of the truth. And neither shall he,
which among the chief overseers of the Church is able to say much, speak
contrary to this. For no man is above his master. Neither shall he which is
able to say little, diminish this doctrine any whit at al. For seeing yt faith
is all one and the same, neither does he which is able to say much of it, say
more than should be said: neither does he which says little, make it ever a
whit the lesser. Read further in the fourth chapter of his third book Contra
Valent. and you shall perceive that by the term of Apostolical tradition, he
means the Creed of the Apostles.

A rule of faith after Tertullian taken out About the year of our lord 210.
of his Book De praescriptionibus haereticorum.
THe rule of faith is, that we out of hand profess openly what our belief
is, which is that in deed, whereby we believe that there is one God only, and
not any other beside the maker of the world, which by his word sent out
first of all brought forth all things of nothing. That word being called
his Son, being seen after sundry sorts of the Patriarchs, being always
heard in the Prophets, and lastly by the spirit and power of God the father
being brought into the virgin Marie, being made fleash in her womb and borne
of her, became Jesus Christ, (which) afterward preached the new law and the
new promise of the kingdom of Heaven, wrought miracles, sat at the right
hand of the Father, was nailed to the cross, roase again the third day, was
taken into the heavens, sits at the right hand of the Father, sent the power
of the holy Ghost to govern the believers in his own steed, shall come with
glory to take the saints into the joy of eternal life and heavenly promises,
and to condemn the wicked to everlasting fire, when both the parties are
raised up and have their fleash restored again.

This rule, as it shall be proved, being ordained by Christ, has among us no
doubts at all, but those which heresies bring in, and which make men become
heretics.

The Creed of the blessed Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, taken out of his
books. about the ^are of (...) lord (...).

Whosoever will be saved: before all things it is necessary that he hold the
Catholic faith.
Which faith, exeept every one do keep holy and undefiled: without dout he
shall perish everlastingly.
And the Catholic faith is this: that we worship one God in trinity, and
trinity in unity.
Neither confounding the persons: nor dividing the substance.
For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of
the holy Ghost.
But the godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, is all
one: the glory equal, the majesty coeternall.
Such as the Father is, such is the Son: and such is the holy Ghost.
The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate: and the holy Ghost uncreate.
The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible: and the holy Ghost
incomprehensible.
The Father eternal, the Son eternal: and the holy Ghost eternal.
And yet they are not three eternalls: but one eternal.
As also there be not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated: but one
uncreated, and one incomprehensible.
So likewise, the Father is almighty, the Son almighty: and the holy
Ghost almighty.
And yet are they not three almighties: but one almighty.
So the Father is God, the Son is God: and the holy Ghost is God.
And yet they are not three Gods: but one God.
So likewise the father is Lord, the Son Lord: and the holy Ghost Lord.
And yet not three Lords: but one Lord.
For like as we be compelled by the Christian verity: to acknowledge every
person by him self to be God and Lord.
So are we forbidden by the Catholic religion: to say there be three Gods or
three Lords.
The father is made of none: neither created, nor begotten.
The son is of the father alone: not made, nor created, but begotten.
The holy Ghost is of the father and of the son: neither made, nor created,
nor begotten, but proceeding.
So there is one father, not three fathers: one son, not three sons: one
holy ghost, not three holy ghostes.
And in this Trinity none is before or after other: none is greater or less
than other.
But the whole three persons be coet^rnall together: and coequall.
So that in all things, as is aforesaid: the unity in trinity, and the
trinity in unity is to be worshipped.
He therefore that will be saved, must thus think of the trinity.
Furthermore it is necessary to everlasting salvation: that he also believe
rightly in the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For the right faith is, that we believe and confess: that our Lord Jesus
Christ the son of God, is God and man.
God of the substance of the father, begotten before the worlds: and man of
the substance of his mother borne in the world.
Perfect God and perfect man: of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh
subsisting.
Equal to the father as touching his godhead: and inferior to the father
touching his manhood.
Who although he be God and man: yet he is not two, but one Christ.
One, not by the conversion of the godhead into flesh: but by taking of the
manhood into God.
One altogether, not by confusion of substance: but by unity of person.
For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man: so God and man is one Christ.
Who suffered for our salvation, descended into hell, rose again the third
day from the dead.
He ascended into heaven, he sits on the right hand of the father, God
almighty: from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies: and shall give
account for their own works.
And they that have done good, shall go into life everlasting: and they that
have done evil, into everlasting fire.
This is the Catholic faith: which except a man believe faithfully, he can
not be saved.
The Creed of the blessed Damasus bishop of Rome, taken out of the second
Tome of S. Hierome his works.
WE believe in one God the father almighty, and in one Jesus Christ our Lord
the son of God, and in the holy ghost. We worship About the year of our
Lord 336.
and confess God, not three Gods, but the father, the son, and the holy
ghost one God: one God, not so as though he were alone, nor as one which is
himself father to him self, and son him self also: but him to be the
father which begot, and (him) to be the son which was begotten: but the holy
ghost to be neither begotten, nor created, nor created, nor made, but
proceeding from the father and the son, coeternall, coequal, and working
together with the father and the son: because it is written, By the word of
the Lord the heavens were established, that is, by the son of God, and by
the breath of his mouth all the powers thereof. And in another place: Send
forth thy breath and they shall be created, and thou shall renew the face of
the earth. And therefore under the name of the father, of the son, and of the
holy ghost, we confess one God, which is the name of the power, and not of the
property. The proper name of the father, is the father: and the proper name of
the son, is the son: and the proper name of the holy ghost, is the holy
ghost. In this trinity of persons, we worship one god (in substance,) because
that which is of one father, is of one nature with the father, of one
substance, and one power. The father begat the son, not by will or
necessity, but by nature.

The son in the last time came down from the father to save us and to
fulfill the scriptures, who (nevertheless) never ceased to be with ye father.
And he was conceived by the holy ghost, and borne of the virgin, he took upon
him flesh, and soul, and sense: that is, he took on him very man, neither
lost he what he was, but began to be what he was not, so yet that in respect of
his own properties he is perfect God, and in respect of ours, he is very man.
For he which was God is borne man, and he which is borne man, does work
miracles as God, and he that woorketh miracles as God, does die as a man, and
he that dies as man, does rise again as God. Who in the same flesh wherein
he was borne and suffered, and died and roase again, did ascend to the
father, and sits at his right hand, in the glory which he always had, and
yet still has. By whose death and blood we believe that we are cleansed: and
that at the latter day we shall be raised up again by him in this flesh
wherein we now live. And we hope that we shall obtain a reward for our good
deeds: or else the pain of everlasting punishment for our sins. Read
this, believe this, hold this, submit thy soul to this faith, and thou shall
obtain life and a reward at Christ his hand. S. Peter Bishop of Alexandria
taught and believed the very same with the blessed Athanasius and Damasus, as
it may be gathered out of the 37. chapter of the 7. book, and the 14. chapter
of the 8. book of the Tripartite history.

The Jmperiall decree for the Catholic faith, taken out of the Tripartite
history, lib. 9. cap. 7.
THE noble Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, to the people of the
city of Constantinople. We will all people whom the royal authority of our
clemency does rule, to be of that religion, which the religion brought in by
(Peter) him self does at this time declare, that S. Peter the Apostle did
teach to the Romans, and which it is evident that bishop Damasus and Peter the
bishop of Alexandria a man of Apostolical holiness do follow: that is, that
according to the discipline of the Apostles and doctrine of the Evangelists,
in the equality of the majesty and in the holy Trinity, we believe that
there is (but) one godhead of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost.
Those which keep this law, we command to have the name of catholic
Catholics.
Christians: But for the other whom we judge to be mad and out of their wits,
(we will,) that they susteining the infamy of heretical doctrine, be punished
first by Gods Haeretiques.
vengeance, and after that by punishment according to the motion of our
minds, which we by the will of God shall think best of.

Given the third of the Calendes of March at Thessalonica, Gratian the
fifte,Valentinian, andTheodosius Aug. Coss.
FINIS.
THE FIRST TABLE Containing the arguments and sum of every Sermon, as they
follow one an other in every Decade, throughout the body of the whole book.
The first number is referred to the Sermon, the second to the Page where it
begins.
The first Tome, and first the sum or contents of the ten Sermons of the
first Decade.
1 OF the word of God, the cause of it, and how and by whom it was revealed
to the world. Page. 1. 2 Of the word of God, to whom and to what end it was
revealed, also in what manner it is to be heard, and that it does fully teach
the whole doctrine of godliness. 14 3 Of the sense and right exposition of the
word of God, and by what manner of means it may be expounded. 23 4 Of true
faith, from whence it comes, that it is an assured belief of the mind,
whose only stay is upon GOD and his word. 30 5 That there is one only true
faith, and what the virtue thereof is. 40 6 That the faithful are justified by
faith without the law and works. 44 7 Of the first articles of the Christian
faith conscined in the Apostles Creed. 55 8 Of the latter Articles of the
Christian faith, contained in the Apostles Creed. 67 9 Of the latter Articles
of the Christian faith contained in the Apostles Creed. 77 10 Of the love of
God and our neighbor. 91
The sum or contents of the ten Sermons of the second Decade.
1 OF laws, and first of the laws of Nature, then of the laws of men. 100 2
Of Gods law, and of the two first commandments of the first table. 109 3 Of
the third precept of the ten commandments, and of Swearing. 126 4 Of the
fourth precept of the first table, that is, of the order and keeping of the
Sabbath day. 136 5 Of the first precept of the second table, which is in order
the fifth of the ten commandments, touching the honor due to parents. 144
6 Of the second precept of the second table, which is in order the sixte of
the ten Commandments: Thou shall not kill. And of the magistrate. 163 7 Of
the office of the Magistrate, whether the care of religion apperteineth to him,
or no: and whether he may make laws and ordinances in cases of religion. 177
8 Of judgment, and the office of the Judge: That Christians are not forbide^
to judge. Of reuengement and punishment. Whether it be lawful for a magistrate
to kill the guilty. Wherefore, when, how, and what the magistrate must
punish. Whether he may punish offenders in religion, or no. 191 9 Of war,
whether it be lawful for a magistrate to make war. What the scripture
teaches touching war. Whether a Christian man may bear the office of a
magistrate. And of the duty of subjects. 207 10 Of the third precept of the
second table, which is in order the seventh of the ten Commandments. Thou
shall not commit adultery. Of wedlock. Against al intemperancie. Of
Continency. 222
The second Tome, and first the sum or contents of the ten Sermons of the
third Decade.
1 OF the fourth precept of the second table, which is in order the eighth of
the ten commandments: Thou shall not steal. Of the owing and possessing of
proper goods, and of the right and lawful getting of the same. Against sundry
kinds of theft. 259 2 Of the lawful use of earthly goods: that is, how we may
rightly possess, and lawfully spend the wealth that is rightly and justly
gotten. Of restitution and alms deeds. 279 3 Of the patient bearing and
abiding of sundry calamities and miseries: and also of the hope and manifold
consolation of the faithful. 270 4 Of the fifth and sixth precepts of the
second table, which are in order the ninth and tenth of the ten
Commandments, that is: Thou shall not speak false witness against thy
neighbor, And: Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc. 318 5 Of the
Ceremonial laws of GOD, but especially of the Priesthood, time, and place
appointed for ye Ceremonies. 327 6 Of the Sacraments of the Jews, of their
sundry sorts of sacrifices, and certain other things perteyning to their
Ceremonial law. 354 7 Of the Judicial laws of God. 387 8 Of the use or
effect of the law of God, and of the fulfilling and abrogating of the same. Of
the likeness and difference of both the Testamentes and people, the old and
the new. 400 9 Of Christian liberty, and of offenses. Of good works, and the
reward thereof. 440 10 Of sin, and of the kinds thereof, to wit, of
original and actual sin, and of sin against the Holy Ghost. And lastly,
of the most sure and just punishment of sins. 477
The sum or contents of the ten Sermons of the fourth Decade.
1 Of the Gospel of the grace of GOD, who has given his Son unto the world,
and in him all things necessary to salvation, that we believing in him,
might obtain eternal life. 525 2 Of repentance, and the causes thereof, of
confession and remission of sins, of satisfaction and indulgences, of the
old and new man, of the power or strength of me^, and the other things
perteyning to repentance. 561 3 Of God, of the true knowledge of God, and of
the diverse ways how to know him: That God is one in substance, and three in
persons. 604 4 That God is the creator of all things, and governs all
things by his providence: where mention is also made of the good will of God to
usward, and of Predestination. 635 5 Of adoreing (or worshipping,) Of
inuocating (or calling upon,) And of serving the only, living, true, and
everlasting God. Also of true and false religion. 648 6 That the son of God
is unspeakably begotten of the father, that he is consubstantiall with the
father, and therefore true God. That the self same son is true man,
consubstantiall with us, and therefore true God and man, abiding in two
unconfounded natures, and in one undivided person. 677 7 Of Christ King and
Priest, of his only and everlasting kingdom and priesthood, and of the name
of a Christian. 698 8 Of the holy Ghost, the third person in Trinity to be
worshipped, and of his divine power. 714 9 Of good and evil spirits, that is,
of the holy Angels of God, and of devils or evil spirits, and of their
operations. 731 10 Of the reasonable soul of man, and of his most certain
salvation after the death of his body. 759
The third and last Tome and first the sum or co^tents of the ten Sermons of
the fifth and last Decade.
1 Of the holy Catholic Church, what it is, how far it extends, by what
marks it is known, from whence it springs, how it is mainteyned and
preserved, whether it may err. Also of the power and studies of the Church.
812 2 That there is one Catholic Church, that without the Church there is no
light or salvation. Against Schismatiques. Wherefore we depart from the
vp-start Church of Rome. That the Church of God is the house, vineyard, and
kingdom of God: and the body, sheepefolde, and spouse of Christ, a mother and
a virgin. 841 3 Of the ministry, and ministers of Gods word, wherefore, and
for what end they are instituted of God. That the orders given by Christ unto
the Church, in times past were equal. Whence and how the prerogative of
ministers sprang and of the supremacy of the bishop of Rome. 870 4 Of calling
unto the ministry, of the word of god. What manner of men, and after what
fashion ministers of the word must be ordained in the church. Of the keys of
the Church. What the office of them is that be ordained. Of the manner of
teaching the Church, and of the holy life of the Pastors. 891 5 Of the
form and manner how to pray to God, that is, Of the calling on the name of the
Lord, where also the Lords prayer is expounded, and also singing,
thanksgiving, and the force of prayer is entreated. 914 6 Of signs, and the
manner of signs, of Sacramental signs, what a sacrament is, of whom, for
what causes, and how many Sacraments were instituted of Christ for the
christian church: Of what things they do consist, how they are consecrated,
how the sign and the thing, signified in the Sacraments, are either joined
together or distinguished, and of the kind of speeches used in the
Sacraments. 955 7 That we must reason reverently of Sacraments, that they do
not give grace, neither have grace included in them. Again, what the virtue and
lawful end and use of Sacraments is. That they profit not without faith, that
they are not superfluous to the faithful, and that they do not depend upon the
worthiness or unworthiness of the minister. 995 8 Of holy Baptism, what it
is, by whom, and when it was instituted, and that there is but one baptism of
water. Of the baptism of fire. Of the rite or ceremony of baptism, how, of
whom, and to whom it must be ministered. Of Baptism by Midwiues, and of
infants dying without baptism. Of the baptism of infantes: against
Anabaptisine, or Rebaptising, and of the power or efficacy of baptism. 1032 9
Of the Lords holy Supper, what it is, by whom, when, and for whom it was
instituted, after what sort, when, and how often it is to be celebrated, and of
the ends thereof. Of the true meaning of the words of the supper: This is my
body: O^ the presence of Christ in ye supper. Of the true eating of Christ's
body. Of the worthy and unworthy eaters thereof: and how^ every man ought to
prepare him self unto the lords supper. 1063 10 Of certain institutions of the
church of God. Of schools. Of Ecclesiastical goods, and of ye use and abuse of
the same. O^ Churches and holy instrument^ of Christians. Of the admonition
and correction of the ministers of the Church, and of the whole Church. Of
matrimony, Of widows. Of virgins. Of Monks. What the church of Christ
determines concerning the sick, and of funerals and burials. 1112
The second table containing such places and testimonies of Scripture both of
the old Testament and the New, as are used of the Author every where
throughout this his whole work.
The first number is referred to the Chapter, the second to the Page.

Out of Genesis. 1 IN the beginning God created heaven and earth, etc. Page
632. 1 Let there be light: and there was light, etc. 977 1 Let us make man in
our Image after our own likeness, etc. 490. 633 2 Of the institution of
marriage. It is not good for man to be alone, etc. 222. 2 Thou shall not eat
of the fruit of the tree of knowledge, etc. 483. 484. 488 3 Ye shall not die
ye death, for God does know that the same day that ye eat thereof, your eyes
shall be opened, etc. 751 3 The Serpent was subtiler than all the beasts of the
field, etc. 749 3 The woman whom thou gave to be with me, gave me of the
tree, etc. 479 3 For dust thou art, and into dust thalt thou be turned again,
etc. 764 3 The seed of the woman shall crush the serpents head, etc. 687 4 The
voice of thy brothers blood cries out of the earth, etc. 167 5 Adam begat a
son in his own similitude, etc. 500 6 I will destroy all flesh, wherein
there is breath of life, etc. 715 8 I will set my raine-bowe in the clouds,
that when I see it, I may, remember, etc. 957 9 The eating of beasts, or any
thing that lives and moves is granted, etc. 385 9 The Lord rayned upon
Sodom and Gomor, brimston and fire, etc. 633 9 Whatsoever man it be of ye house
of Israel, or of the strangers, etc. 385 12 Pharao the king of Egypt
commanded Sara Abraham's wife to be taken and carried to his palace, etc 231 14
Give me the souls, and take ye substance or goods to thy self, etc. 755 16
And she called the name of the Lord which spoke unto her, Thou God look on
me, etc. 743 16. Have thee to Zoar and save thee self there: for I can do
nothing, etc. 640 17 I will make my covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee in their generations, etc. 1051 17 The uncircumcised man child,
in whose flesh the foreskinne is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off
from his people, etc. 1041. and 1046 18 Abraham saw three, but with them three
he talked as with one, and worshipped one, etc. 633 18 Will thou destroy the
just with the wicked? That be far from thee etc. 520 18 And shall I hide from
Abraham what I mind to do? etc. 3 20 Lo, thou shall die because of ye woman
which thou have taken away etc. 232 22 In thy seed shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed, etc. 545 645. 687. 22 God tempted Abraham, etc. 485 30
Give me children or else I die, etc. 658 30 Am I in Gods steed, which has
denied thee (or withholden from thee) the fruit of the womb? etc. 658 33 And
he going before them, bowed himself seven times to the ground, etc. 649 34
Sichem defiled Dina ye daughter of Jacob, etc. 235 39 Joseph being provoked to
adultery, by his masters wife, etc. 232 44 Ye will bring my gray hairs with
sorrow to hell, or the grave, etc. 65 48 Le^ my name be called upon them, etc.
655
Out of Exodus. 3 THus shall thou say to ye children of Israel, The Lord God
of our fathers, the God of Abraham etc. 612 3 And Moses said to God, Behold,
when I come unto the children of Israel (to whom thou do now send me) and
shall say unto them, etc. 608 4 Every manchild whose foresain shall not be
circumcised shall be cut off, etc. 1029 4 And GOD hardened Pharaos heart, etc.
493 4 A bloody husband art thou unto me, etc. 1044 6 I am Jehovah. And I
appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as God Schaddai: but in my name Jehovah
I was not known unto them, etc. 611 9 I have now sinned: the Lord is just, but
I and my people, etc. 493 12 When your children: shall say unto you what
means this worship, etc. 160. 364 13 Sanctify to me al ye first borne etc.
160 17 Whosoever sacrifices to any God, etc. 200 18 Look over all the people,
consider them diligently, and choose, etc. 175. 389. 894 19 Talk thou with us
and we will hear, but let not God talk, etc. 870 19 Moses ye holy servant of
God is commanded to sanctify the people, etc. 19 19 Set bounds unto the
people, round about the mounteine, and say unto them, Take heed to your selves
etc. 606 20 Thou shall not bow down nor worship them, etc. 650 21 He that
curses father or mother, etc. 153 21 The punishment of that kind of theft,
which the Lawyers call Plagium. 272. 278 22 Thou shall not have to do with a
false report, etc. 390 22 If any man shall give to his neighbor a beast to
keep, etc. 131 22 Restitution is flatly commanded of the Lord in the Law, etc.
280 22 Thou shall not suffer a witch to live, etc. 197 22 Thou shall not
afflicte the widows, nor fatherless children, etc. 158. 509. 23 Thou shall
not follow a multinide to do evil, etc. 194 23 Thrice in the year shall
every male appear before the Lord, etc. 352 30 Whosoever shall make for him
self a composicion (or perfume) of incense, to smell therew etc. 658 31 Ye
shall keep my Sabb^^hes: because it is a sign, etc. 144 32 And Moses said
unto the Levites, Consecrate your hands, etc. 331. 33 Thou can not see my
face. For no man shall see me and live, etc. 607 616. 34. Behold, I will send
mine Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, etc. 741
Out of Leuiticus. The chiefest Chapiters of Leuiticus, are expounded in the
Sermon of the Ceremonial Laws.
6 CHarge given to the priests to keep the holy fire always burning, etc. 368
7 Touching vowed sacrifices, or sacrifices offered by covenant, etc. 379 10.
Thou, and thy sons that are with thee, shall drink neither wine nor, etc.
336 10 The sons of Aaron burnt and scor^^h^ up with fire from heaven, for
offering strange fire, etc 962 11 Of the clean and unclean creatures, etc.
382 12 13. 14 15. and 16. Touching cleansing sacrifices for bodily de^ilinges,
373. 13 The priests did judge betwixt cause and cause and between clean and
unclean, etc. 338 17 Whosoever of the house of Israel shall kill an o^e, or a
sheep, etc. 344. 3. 7. 17. 19. The eating of blood and strangled is forbidden,
etc. 385 18 The abominable sin of Sodomie, and meddling with beasts also is
plainly forbidden, etc. 236 19 Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment,
etc. 194 19 Ye shall not steal, ye shall not lie, no man shall deal, etc. 273
19. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, true balances, true weightes,
etc. 270 20 Of the punishment of adultery. 236 20 Of ye punishment of incest.
236 20 A law against Sodomie. 236 20 The soul that works with a spirit, or
that is a Southsayer shall die, etc. 755 22 Let no deformity be in ye thing
that thou shall offer, etc. 368 24 Of the punishment of such as blasphemed Gods
name, etc. 129 26 I will smite you for your sins seven times, etc. 936 27 Of
vows, etc. 380
Out of Numerie. 3 ANd thou shall give ye Levites unto Aaron and to his sons,
etc. 232 3 The Leuits shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle, etc.
338 6 And ye Lord spoke unto Moses saying: speak unto Aaron and his sons
saying: On this wise ye shall bless the children, etc. 336 6 Touching the
discipline of the Nazarites, etc. 380 10 The trumpets wherewith the
congregation was called together, were in the Levites hands, etc. 338 11 Gather
unto me threescore and ten men of the elders of Israel, etc. 878 15 He that
brake the Lords Sabbath by gathering of sticks, was stoned to death, etc. 141
19 How to make the holy clensing water against al defilings, etc. 376 24 Baalam
foretold ye overthrow of Jerusalem, etc. 414 27 Let the God of the spirits
of all flesh, set a man over the congregation, etc. 177. 389 27 Joshua, the
Captain of Gods people, is set before Eleazar. etc. 181 30 Touching Votories,
and when their vows are of force, etc. 380
Out of Deuteronomie. 1 BRing men of wisdom, of understanding, and of an
honest life, etc. 176. 389. 894 1 Hear the cause of your brethren and judge
righteously, etc. 192. 390 4 The Lord spoke unto you from the midst of the
fire: and a voice of words ye heard, but likeness saw ye none, etc. 2. 119 5
These words spoke the Lord with a loud voice from out of the midst of the
fire, etc. 2 5 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, thou shall not, etc.
324 5 I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have
spoken, etc. 870 6 Hear, Israel, the Lord our God etc. And thou shall show
them unto thy children, etc. 56 160. 623 6 Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, etc. 93 8 Man lives not by bread only, but by every word
that comes out of the mouth of, etc. 947 8 When thou have eaten therefore,
and filled thee self, etc. Beware that thou forget not, etc. 283 8 Say not
thou in thine heart: Mine own strength, and the power, etc. 471 9 The Lord
had determined to destroy you, therefore I made intercession, etc. 916 10 And
Now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, etc. 668. 475 10
Circumcise ye foreskin of your hearts, and harden not your, etc. 361. 1025. 10
Thou shall worshipp the Lord thy God, him shall thou fear, etc. 655 12 Every
man shall not do that which is righteous in his own eyes, etc. 472 12 and
15. The eating of blood and strangled is forbidden, etc. 385 13 The Lord
commands that every city which departs from God, and the worship of God,
should be set on with warriors, etc. 211 13 Follow ye the Lord your God, fear
him, etc. 113. 671 14 Of clean and unclean creatures, etc. 382 15 Beware that
thou harden not thine heart, nor shutt to thine hand for etc. 288 16 God also
forbad the magistrate to plant groaues, etc. 179 16 Thou shall appoint thee
Judges, etc. 894 17 When the king sits upon the seat of his kingdom, he
shall, etc 252. 391 19 If a false witness be found among you, then shall you
do unto him, etc. 320 20 Laws made for war, etc. 213 21 The parents them
selves are commanded to bring their disobedient children before the Judge,
etc. 162 24 No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge, etc.
272 24 Thou shall not deny, nor withhold the wages of an hired servant etc.
272 25 Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of weightes, etc. 270 28 If
thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe
and do, etc, 641 30 The Lord thy God shall circumcise thine heart, and the heart
of thy seed, etc. 359. 454 32 See now how that I, I am God, and there is
none other God but I, I kill, etc. 623. 658
Out of Joshua. 1 SEe that thou do observe and do according to all the Law,
etc. 184 2 Let not the book of this Law depart out of thy mouth, etc. 252 2
Give me a sign by oath, that ye will show mercy unto me: And they gave her
a roape to hang out of her window, etc. 956 5 Make thee sharp knives (of
stone and go to again, and circumcise the children of Israel the second time,
etc. 1059 28 Of the Lords Tabernacle at his apointment erected in Silo, etc.
342 23 When ye shall come in among these nations, see that, etc. 133
Out of Judges. 6 HE is called Lord who before was called an angel. etc. 743 14
And the spirit of the Lord came upon Samson, etc. 382 17 Micha instituted unto
the true God a kind of service of his own etc. 676
Out of the first book of Samuel. 1. and 3. OF the Lords Tabernacle, at his
appointment erected in Silo, etc. 342 3 And the sin of the children of Helie
was too abhaminable before the face, etc. 910 4 The elders of Israel said,
Wherefore has the lord cast us down, etc. 996. 4 So the people sent into Silo,
and brought from thence the arcke, etc. 996 4 And the Philistines fought, and
Israel was smitten down and fled etc. 996 4 and 5. The use and abuse of ye
arc etc. 346 6 The Lord smote fifty thousand three score and ten men of
Beth-shemesh. etc. 997 15 Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offeringes
and sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? etc. 472 677 16 The
good spirit of God departed from Saul, and the evil spirit succeeded, etc.
722 19 David does not despise the aid and shifts of his wi^e Michol, etc. 640
23 When Abigael saw David, she hasted and lighted off her a^^e, etc 649 28
Samuel, or rather Satan cou^terfecting Samuel, raised up by a witch, etc. 247
Out of the second book of Samuel. 6 OZa perished for handling the arche of
the Lord otherwise than was commanded in the law, etc. 676 7 I will be his
father and he shall be my son, etc. 57 7 Who am I O Lord God? and what is the
house of my father, etc. 952 8 David's sonns were called priests, etc. 880 12
The sword shall not depart from thy house, etc. 522 12 The Lord has taken thy
sin (...), etc. 522 12 Take thou ye city Rabah, least I take it and my name
be called upon it, etc. 655 15 Carry bache the arcke of God into the city
again. If I shall find etc. 308 15 If I shall find favor in the eyes of the
Lord, he will bring me, etc. 926
Out of the first book^ of kings. 3 SOlomon loved the Lord, etc. only he
sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places, etc. 343 3 And when he was
come in to the king, he worshipped (or made obeysaunce) etc. 650 4 And under
Solomon they increased, and were many in number, as the sand, etc. 284 6 David's
devotion was great toward the ark of the Lord, etc. 824 6. 7. etc. The
description of Solomon's temple, etc. 344 8 If the heavens of heavens are not
able to contain thee, how much less, etc. 659. 943. 1004 8 And Solomon made a
solemn feast, and all Israel with him, etc. 284. 8 And they drew out the
staves, that the ends of them might appear, etc. 340. and 341 11 Ahia the
Silonite says to Jeroboam: Thus says the Lord, thou shall reign, etc. And if
thou hearken unto all that I command thee, etc. 185 12 Jeroboam sacrificed unto
God, but because he sacrificed not lawfully, he was, etc. 676. 824 12 In the
kingdom of Israel king Jeroboam thrust out of their offices the teachers and
preachers of the Law of the Lord, etc. 854 16 And Achab served Baal, and
worshipped him, etc. 667 18 How long do you halt on both parts? If the Lord be
God follow him, etc. 653 19 I have been very jealous for ye Lord God of
hoasts, for that the, etc. 855 19 I have left unto me self seven thousand men
in Israel. etc. 855
Out of the second book of Kings. 5 NAaman the Syrian was commanded to wash
himself seven times, etc. 972 5 Heliseus, by most wholesome counsel refused
the reward of Naaman, etc. 888 5 Am I a God, that I should be able to kill, and
to give life, etc. 658 6 Fear not, for they that be with us are mo^ than they
that be with them, etc. 741 6 Lord I beseech thee open his eyes that he may
see: and the Lord opened his eyes, etc. 741 17 Israel walked in the ordinances
or ceremonies, which they themselves had made, etc. 329 17 And yet they served
the Lord, and they appointed out priests, (eue^ of the basest) unto themselves,
for the high places, etc. 675 16 Achas king of Judah shutvp the temple of the
Lord, and took away the holy altar, etc. 854 21 Under Manasses the nephue of
king Achas, true doctrine and administration of the sacraments was banished,
except only circumcision, etc. 854 21 This is the house of the Lord God, and
this altar is for the sacrifice, etc. 344
Out of the first book of Chronicles. 15 THe Lord has chosen ye Levites, etc.
Therefore see that ye be holy that ye may, etc. 997 15 The priests and Levites
sanctified themselves to fetch the arc, etc. 997
Out of the second book of Chronicles. 1 ANd Solomon, with all the
congregation went to the high place that was at Gabaon, etc. 343 8 And Solomon
set the sorts or priests to their offices, as David his father, etc. 182 11
Jeroboam thruste the teachers and preachers of the Law of the Lord out of
their offices, etc. 954 19 Take heed what ye do: For ye execute not the
judgments of man, etc. 194 28 Achas king of Judah shutt up ye temple of the
Lord, etc. 854 29 The Levites did sing, and that at the commandment of God,
etc. 932 29 Be ye sanctified, and sanctify ye the house of the Lord our God,
etc. 182 33. and 34. Under Manasses, the nephue of king Achas, true doctrine
was banished, etc. 854 36 The Lord God of their fathers sent to you by his
ministers, rising up betimes, etc. 154. 155
Out of Nehemias. 5 A Notable example in Nehemias, suppressing the
covetousness, cruelty, etc. of usurers, etc. 276 8 Esdras the priest brought
the Law, the book of Moses, etc. 24 8 Touching the solemn celebrating of the
feast of Tabernacles, or seventh month, etc. 353 8 And Esdras, with the
Levites, said to all the people which was sad and sorrowful, etc. 284. 285
Out of the book of Job. 1 Satan came and showed himself among the children
(or servants of God, speaking with the Lord, etc. 747 1 Naked came I out of
my mothers womb and naked shall I turn to the earth again, etc. 312 4 Behold,
he found no truth in his servants, and in his angels there was folly, etc.
745 9 If I will justify my self mine own mouth will condemn me, etc. 467 9
If I have any righteousness, I will not aunsweare, but humbly besee^h my
Judge, etc. 560 10 Thy hands O God have made me, and fashioned me round about,
etc. 760 10 Thou have given me life and grace, and thy visitation has
presenued my spirit, etc. 760 14 Who can make or bring forth a pure or clean
thing of that which is unclean, etc. 496 19 I know that my redeemer lives
and that in the last day, etc. 86 25 I know verily that a man compared to God
cannot be justified, etc 401 26 His spirit has garnished the heavens, etc 716
31 If mine heart have been deceived by a woman: or if I have laid wa^te, etc.
232 33 The spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has
given me life, etc. 716 34 Nothing is more contrary to the nature of God, than
sin and naughtiness. etc. 482
Out of the Psalms. 2 BE wise O ye kings, be learned ye that are Judges of
the earth, etc. 699 5 The unrighteous shall not stand in thy sight, O Lord: thou
hate, etc. Thou shall destroy al them yt speak lies, etc. 129 5 Thou art the
God that have no pleasure in wickedness: neither shall etc. 482 8 O Lord our
governor, how excellent is thy name in all the world? For thy glory, etc 637.
952 9 The heavens are thine, O God, and the earth is thine: thou have laid the
foundation, etc. 637 10 The Lord loves the just, etc. Upon the ungodly he
shall rain snares, etc. 520 14 The fool has said in his heart, There is no
God, etc. 605 15 Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, etc. Even he that
walks etc. 669 16 The Lord is always at my right hand: Therefore my heart is
glad, etc. 433 18 Who is God besides the Lord? and who is mighty (or a rock)
save our God? etc. 658 18 The way of God is vncorrupt: the word of the Lord is
tried, etc. 861 18 He bowed the heavens, and came down, and there was
barckenesse under his feet, etc. 738 19 The law of the Lord is perfect
converting the soul, etc. 21 19 The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows forth the works of his hands, etc. 620 19 Who knows his
sins? Cleanse me from my hidden faults, etc. 578 22 Thou art he that took me
out of my mothers womb, thou wast my hope, etc. 306 22 Our fathers hoped in
thee, they hoped in thee and thou did deliver them, etc. 306. 657 27 In my
trouble I will call upon the Lord, and I will cry unto my God, etc. 657 27
Because my father and my mother have left (or forsaken) me, the Lord has
taken me up, etc. 660 31 I have hoped in thee, O Lord, I have said Thou art my
GOD, etc. 640 32 I have made my fault known unto thee, and mine unrighteousness
have I not hidden, etc. 572 33 By the word of the Lord were the heavens made,
and all the hoastes of them by the breath of his mouth etc. 633. 34 This poor
man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles, etc.
741 37 A good man is merciful, and lends, and guides his words with
discretion, etc. 288 37 Yet a little and the ungodly shall be no where: and when
thou look in his place, etc. 300 38 Rebuke me not in thine anger (O Lord)
neither chasten me in thy etc. 919 38 Thine arrows stick fast in me and thine
hand does press me sore, etc. 565 45 All the beasts of the woods are mine,
and the cattle etc. 127 45 The Lord shall reign for ever, and his kingdom is a
kingdom of all ages, etc. 638 45 Thy God has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows, etc. 705 50 Offer to the Lord the sacrifice of
praise, and pay thy vows, etc. 113. 657. 922. 50 Why do thou take my
cou^naunt in thy mouth, etc. When thou saw a thief, thou consentedst unto
him, etc. 237 50 Whosoever offers me thanks and praise, he honors me, etc.
953 51 Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thine holy spirit from
me, etc. 722 51 Behold, I was borne in wickedness, and in sin has my mother
conceuied me. 496 51 Make me a clean heart (O Lord, and renew a right spirit
within me. 819 51 Have mercy upon me, O God, according to the greatness of
thy mercy. For I* etc. 572 54 O come, lee us sing unto ye Lord let us heartily
rejoice in God eure salvation, etc. 651 61 Thou, O Lord, shall not leave my
soul in hell, neither shall thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption, etc.
764 62 Put your trust in God always power out your hearts before him, etc.
282 67 God be merciful unto us, and bless us, snewe us the light of his etc.
944 72 Touching the infelicitie of the ungodly, thou verily have set them in
slipperie places, etc. 300 73 Touching the prosperity of the wicked, my feet
were almost gone, my treadings, etc. 292 75 Make vows and pay them, etc. 381
78 The things that we have heard and known, and such as our fathers have
^ould us etc. 622 79 Help us, O Lord of our saluasion, for the glory of thy
name, etc. 921 81 In thine extremities and troubles (O Israel) thou calledst
upon me, and I delivered thee, etc. 657 82 Man is ye lively image of god,
etc, 650 89 Thou Lord rulest the raging of the sea, thou stillest the waves
thereof, when they arise. etc. 639 91 Call upon me in the day of trouble, and
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, etc. 657 91 There shall no
evil come unto thee, neither shall any plagne com^ near thy dwelling, etc.
741 91 Thou art my hope, O Lord: thou have set thine house very high^ etc. 305
94 Understand ye unwise among the people, ye fools, at length be wise, etc.
614 97 Thou Lord art higher than all that are in the earth, Thou art exalted
far above all Gods, etc. 610 102 Hear my prayer O God and let my cry come
unto thee, etc. 914 103 The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to
anger, and of great kindness, etc. 644. 942 103 Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and all that is within me bless, etc. 952 103 Even as the father pityeth his
children, so does the Lord pirie them, etc. 57 103 Praise the Lord, O my
soul, and forge^t not the things that he has done for thee, etc. 567 103 O
praise the lord all ye angels of his, ye that excel in strength, ye that
fulfill his commandment, etc. 738 104 Of the fruit of thy works, O God, shall
the earth be filled, etc. 639. 104 All things wait upon thee, that thou
may give them meat in due season, etc. 947 104 Which makes his Angels
spirits, and his ministers a flaming fire, etc. 714 110 The Lord swear and
will not repent hun, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech
etc. 704 110 The Lord said to my Lord: sit thou at my right hand, etc. 59. 633.
692. 699. 110 In the mighty power of holiness the dew of thy birth is to
thee of the womb of the morning, etc. 62 113 The idols of the heathen are
silver and gold, the works of men's hands, etc. 118 113 The Lord is higher than
all nations, and his glory is above the heavens. etc. 610 116 Only God is
true, and every man a liar, etc. 834 118 The pathe of life shall thou make
known to me, the fullness, etc. 71 118 The stone which the builders refused,
is the head of the corner, etc. 861 119 Seven times in a day do I praise
thee, etc. 936 119 It is good for me (Lord) that thou have troubled me, etc.
294 119 I have longed after thy commandments, etc. 324 119 The praise of Gods
word, etc. 253 120 Lord deliver me from lying lips, and a deceiptfull
tongue, etc. 324 123 Our GOD is in heaven, he has done what soever pleased
him, etc. 945 128 The labors of thine hands shall thou eat: O well is thee
and happy, etc. 269 135 I know that the Lord is great and that he is above al
Gods, etc. 639 136 Oh praise the Lord for he is good: because his mercy
endures for ever, etc. 164. 570 138 Whether shall I go from the breath of thy
mouth? and whether shall I flee from thy countenance? etc. 610 139 Thou, O
Lord, know my downe-sitting, and mine vp-rising: thou spyest out all my
ways, etc. 638 141 Let my prayer be directed in thy sight as incense, and the
lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice, etc. 658 141 The righteous
shall sinite me friendly, but the precious baulmes of the wicked, etc. 324 142
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living,
etc. 467. 555 145 When thou give it them, they gather it: when thou openest
thy hand they are filled, etc. 714 145 The Lord is nigh unto all that call upon
him, unto all such as, etc. 922 145 The Lord is just in all his ways, and holy
in all his works, etc. 494 145 The eyes of all things do look up unto thee, O
Lord, and thou give, etc. 947 145 The Lord vpholdeth such as fall, and
lifts up all those that be down, etc. 639 147 Great is our Lord, and great
is his power, and of his wisdom there is none end, etc. 639
Out of the Proverbs of Solomon. 1 MY son if sinners entice thee, consent
not unto them, etc. 168 3 My son refuse not the chastening of the Lord,
neither faint, etc. 295 3 Whom ye Lord loves he chasteneth, whom he
chasteneth, etc. 919 3 Honor the Lord with thy substance, and the firstlings
of all thine increase, etc. 289 3 Let mercy or well doing, and faithfulness
never depart from thee etc. 289 5 Be glad with the wife of thy youth, let her be
as the beloved hind and pleasant Roe, etc. 238 6 God hates a false witness,
etc, 320 6 Go to ye Emmet, thou sluggard, consider her ways, and learn to be
wise, etc. 269 6 He that goes in to his neighbors wife and touches her,
cannot be vnguiltie, etc. 232 6 May a man take fire in his bosom, etc. Even so
he that goes in to his neighbors wife, etc. 232 16 Prophecy is in the lips
of ye king: therefore his heart, etc. 219 16 God created al things for his
own sake: yea the ungodly against, etc. 494 17 The Lord does as greatly hate
the magistrate that acquiteth a wicked person, as him that condemns an
innocent man, etc. 168 17 Whosoever rewards evil for good, evil shall not
depart from his house. etc. 153 18 The name of ye Lord is a strong tower, the
righteous runs, etc. 659. 951. 19 The thought of a fool is sin, and a
slanderer is hared of men, etc. 323 19 A false witness shall not escape
unpunished, etc. 320 20 Two manner of weightes and two manner of measures, etc.
271 20 Godliness and truth preserve the king, and in godliness, etc. 178 20 He
that despitefully ta^nteth his father, and despises the old age of his mother,
etc. 153 21 The kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, like as ye rivers of
water, he may turn it, etc. 638 21 Whosoever stops his care at the cry of
the poor, he shall cry, etc. 289. 918. 23 Who has woe? who has sorrow? who
has strife, etc. 239 24 My son, fear thou the Lord and the king, and keep
no company, etc. 219 24 The just man falls and rises seven times in a day,
etc. 700 25 As it is not good to eat much honey: so etc. 605 25 A man that
refraineth not his appetite, is like a city which is broken down, etc. 715 28
The words of a talebearer be as though they were simple, etc. 323 28 He that
turns his care from hearing the Law, his prayer shall be etc. 923 28 Whosoever
hides his iniquities (or does as it were defend the^:) nothing shall go well,
etc. 571 29 The rodd and correction gives wisdom: but the child that tunneth
at randon, etc. 161. 30 Two things have I required of thee, deny ^^e them not
before I die. etc. 947 31 The praise of a good housewife, etc. 268
Out of Solomon's Ecclesiaste, or Preacher. 7 IT is better to hear the rebuke
of a wife man, than the song of a fool, etc. 323 12 The words of the wi^e are
like pricks and nails that go through,, etc. 978
Out of the Canticles or Ballads of Solomon. 4 ONe is my done, and my beloved,
etc. 841
Out of the Prophet Isaie. 1 IF ye will b^e willing and obedi^nt, ye shall
eat the good of the la^^, etc. 641 1 Thus says the Lord, Though your sins
be as redd as scarlet, they shall be made wh^ter, etc. 567 1 Though ^^ make many
prayersm yet will I hear nothing a^ all. etc. 918. 923. 2 Their land is full
of vain^ gods (o^ idols, before the works of their hand have they bowed* etc.
650 2 They shall turn their swords into spades and their (...) unto syth^s.
etc. 207 3 I will give them children to be their kings and infantes shall rule
them. etc. 173 3 (...) to the just, that it shall go^ we^l with him ^or he
shall eat. etc. 4^3 3 The Lord shall en^er into judgment wi^h the elders and
p^inc^s of the people* etc 280 4 Let thy name be called upon us etc. 655 5 The
vine^ard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel. etc. 863 6 Holy, holy,
holy, is the Lord God of Sabbath, Heaven and earth are full of his glory
etc. 740 7 Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son. etc. 63 688.
692 9 A child is borne unto us, and a son is given us. etc. 692 11 The
spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and
vnder^^anding. etc. 727. 729 16 And in mercy shall the seat be pr^pared, and
he shall sit upon it in truth. etc. 669 5. and 28. Gods threateninges against
drunkards. etc. 241 23 Their occupying also and their wares shall be holy unto
the Lord, etc. 288 26 Go my people, enter into thy chambers, and shutt the
doors after thee. etc. 310 29 This people honors me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me. etc 652 33 The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our Law giver. etc. 905 38 Thou shall die, and not live. etc. 917 40 Who has
measured the waters with his (...)? Who has measured h^auen with his spanne?
etc. 622 40 Behold, al people to wit compared to GOD, are in comparison of him
as a drop of a bucket full. etc. 119 40 Lift up your eyes on high, and consider
who has made these things. etc. 621 41 They cannot foretell or know things
to come hereafter, neither yet can do good or evil. etc. 676 42 I the Lord, HV
(or, I my self) is my name, and my glory I will not give to an other, etc.
609. 623. 658. 686 42 The Lord shall come forth l^ke a Giant, he shall take
stomache unto him, like a man of war, etc. 610 42 I, I am he that blott out
thy transcressions and that for mine own sake. etc. 568 42 Behold my son
whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul is pleased. etc. 634 41 I
will power water upon the th^rstie, and floods vpppon the dry ground, etc.
707. 725 44 None considers with h^mselfe of this matter, and says: One pe^ce
of the wood I have burnt in the fire. etc. 650 44 I will power my spirit upon
thy seed, and my blessing upon thy stcke, etc. 725 45 I have sworn by mine
own self, the word of righteousness shall go out of my mouth etc, 686 45 I am
I am the Lord, and there is no Savior without me. A last God and a savior.
etc. 685. 45 Have not I the Lord? and there is none other God beside me. etc.
494. 624. 658. 49 Kings are called noursing fathers, and Queens noursing
mothers. etc. 432 49 I will lift up mine hands unto the Gentiles, and set my
sta^dard to the people. etc. 180. 699 49 Can a woman forget her child, and not
have compassion on the son. etc. 644. 919 52 The delivery of Israel out of
Egypt, compared with the redemption of all the world wrought by Christ. etc.
114 53 He is a man of sorrows, and has felt calamities. etc. 64 53 And with
the blewnesse of his stripes are we healed. etc. 47 53 Whereas he never did
unrighteousness, nor any deceiptfulnesse was found. etc. 371 53 We have all
gone astray like sheep, we have turned every one to his own way etc. 374 645
58 The fastings of the Jews displeased GOD. etc. I have nor chosen such a
manner of fasting. etc. 244. 59 I will make this covenant with them: My spirit
that is come upon thee. etc. 821 61 The spirit of the Lord upon me, because
he has anointed me, to preach the Gospel etc. 525. 634. 705. 63 And it
shall come to pass, that before they call, I will aunsweare them. etc. 922 63
Thou, O GOD, art our father. Though Abraham be ignorant of us and Israel know
us not, etc. 660 64 What the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, etc. 90 65
He that will bless himself, shall bless in the Lord etc. 133 66 He that
kills a bullock is as if he sieve a man. He that sacrifices a sheep, as if
he cut off a dogs neck, etc. 677 66 Upon whom shall my spir^te rest? Even
upon him that is poor* and of a lowely troubled spirit, etc. 711
Out of the Prophet Jeremy. 2 Hear ye the word of the Lord O house of
Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel, etc. 674 3 In those days
they shall make no more boast of the arcke of the Lords Cou^nan^, etc. 413 3 If
an^ man put awa^ his wife, and she marry to another mann, will her first
husband turn to her aga^ne? etc. 569 4 And the Nations shall bless themselves
in him, and in him, etc. 135 4 Thou shall swear: The Lord lives, in truth, in
judgment and righteousness etc. 133 4 If, Israel, thou will return, return
to me, etc. 563 4 Be ye circumcised to the Lord, and cut away the foreskinne
of your heart, etc 361. 1025 5 Turn us, O Lord, and we shall be turned, etc.
564 5 Sincere turning to God is the only way to remedy and shake off war,
etc. 210 7 Thou shall not pray for this people, neither give thanks, etc. 923
7. Heap up your burnt offerings with your sacrifices, and eat the slesh, etc.
322. 1000 8 They have rejected the word of God, therefore what wisdom, etc.
447. 834 8 How say ye, we are wise, we have the law of the Lord among us,
etc. 600 8 Do men fall so that they may not rise again? Does any man go so
astray that he may, etc. 565 8 Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom: nor
the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches: but let him,
etc. 622 10 Thus says the Lord: ye shall not learn after the manner of the
Heathen, etc. 481 10 O Lord there is none like unto thee. Thou art great, and
great is thy name with power, etc. 621 12 O Lord, thou art more righteous,
than that I should dispute with thee, etc. 300 12 But draw them out O Lord,
like a sheep to be slain, and ordeine etc. 300 17 Thus says the Lord:
curssed be the man that trusts in man, etc. 687. 861 17 Thus has the Lord
said unto me: Go and stand under the gate of the sons of the people. 142 17
The heart of man is evil and unsearchable, etc. 578 18 I will speak soudenly
against a nation or a kingdom for to pluck it up, etc. 917 20 The Lord with me
is a strong Giant, 610 22 Keep equity and righteousness, deliver the
oppressed, etc. 194 22 Woe to him that builds his house with
unrighteousness, etc. 239 22 As truly as I live says the Lord, if Chonenias
the son of Ieh^ak^m king of Judah, etc. 1011 23 Behold the time comes, says
the Lord, that I will raise up the righteous branch of David, etc. 699 23
Christ the son of David called JEHOVAH, and our righteousness, etc. 686 23
I have not sent them and yet they run, etc. 893 23 The Prophet yt has a
dream let him tell a dream, etc. 904 23 Am I GOD, that sees but the thing
that is nigh at hand only, and not the thing that is far off? etc. 610 25
Take this wine-cup of indignation from my hand, and make all the people, etc.
316 26 If they turn from evil, I will also repent me of the evil, which I
meant, etc. 562 29 Ye shall call upon me, and ye shall live: ye shall pray
unto me, and I will hear you, etc. 657 29 Build up houses, etc. and pray to
the Lord for Babylon, etc. 151. 219 31 This is my covenant that I will make with
them, after these days, etc. 568. 726 31 Leave of from weeping, for thy
labor shall be rewarded thee, etc. 468 31 Turn thou me, O Lord, and I shall
be turned: because thou art the Lord, etc. 564 31 No man shall teach his
neighbour^ for all shall know me, etc. 876 31 They shall come and rejoice in
Sion, and shall have plenteousnesse, etc. 284 44 When GOD will punish the sin
of the fathers in the children, etc. 125
Out of the Prophet Ezechiel. 3 THou shall hear the word at my mouth, and
give them warning, etc. 904 3 Blessed be the glory of the Lord out of his
place, etc, 740 7 They shall not satisfy their soul, neither shall their
bellies be filled, etc. 756 13 Woe unto them that say to the people, Peace,
Peace, when there is no peace, etc. 323 14 If I send a pestilence unto this
land, and if Noe, Job, and Daniel, etc. 923 18 A b^adrowe of good works, knit
up by the Prophet, in ample manner, etc. 475 18 The son shall not bear the
iniquirie of the father, but every man shall dye, etc. 497 28 The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth, etc. 124 28 I saw satan as it
had been lightening, falling down from heaven, etc. 746 34 Thus says the
Lord God: Woe be unto the shepeheards of Israel, etc. 906 34 Seems it a small
thing unto you, to have eaten up the good pasture, etc. 26 34 I will feed my
flock my self alone, etc. my servant David shall feed it, etc. 686 34 I will
raise up over my sheep a shepehearde, who shall feed them, etc. 864 36 I will
sprinckle clean water upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your
uncleanness, etc. 568
Out of Daniel. 2 Wisdom and strength are the Lords, it is he that changes
the times and seasons, etc. 639 4 Let thy sins be redeemed in
righteousness, and thine iniquities in showing pity to the poor, etc. 584 4
Nabuchodonosor saw in a vision a watchman coming down from heaven, etc. 742
7 Thousand thousands, and hundred thousands did minister unto him, etc. 609.
737 7 Daniel describes the rising and falling of all kingdoms, and of
antichrist, etc. 703 7 He shall think that he may change times and laws,
etc. 887 9 We have sinned, we have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly,
etc. 308 9 Thou verily O Lord art righteous, thou ar^e true, and thy
judgments just, etc. 564 9 I turned my face unto the Lord God, and sought him
by prayer, etc. 924 9 We do not present our prayers before thee, in our own
righteousness, etc. 921 9 As I was yet a speaking, making supplication, and
confessing mine own sin, etc. 736 9 A people upon whom the name of God is
called, etc. 656 10 His body was like the Turkish or Jasper stone, his face to
look upon was like lightening, etc. 737 10 Angels are brought in as princes and
presidentes, or governors of kingdoms, etc. 742 12 And many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, etc. 747
Out of Osee. 2 I Will not have compassion upon her children, because they are
etc. 869 3 Thou shall be without Ephod and Ter^ph^m, etc. 333 6 I desire mercy
more than sacrifice, and the knowledge of god more than, etc. 475 14 Take these
words with you and turn ye to the Lord and say, etc. 953
Out of Joel. 1 PRoclayme an holy fast, gather the people together, etc. 238 2
Blow the Trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn, etc. 927 2 Turn
ye to me (says the Lord) with all your hearts, with fasting with weeping,
etc. 595 2 Every one that calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved,
etc. 645. 657
Out of Abdias. 1 HE says that Saviors shall ascend into the monne Sion. etc.
871
Out of Jonas. 3 THE men of Niniuie believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put
on sackcloth from etc. 595 3 Let neither man nor beast taste any thing, neither
feed, nor yet drink water, but let, etc. 595 3 And God saw their works, that
they turned from their evil ways, and he repented of, etc 596 4 The Lord
says that he has a consideration and respect to such as are not yet come to
years of discretion, namely to infantes, etc. 1045
Out of Amos. 2 Under Ietoboam, the second of that name, Amos the prophet, a
neatchearde of Tecoa, taught and preached, etc. 855 2 I taysed up of your
sons for Prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites. 1114 3 There is no
evil in a city, but the Lord does it, etc. 493 3 They store up treasures in
their palaces by violence and robbery. Therefore, etc. 280 6 I am no Prophet,
neither the son of a Prophet, etc. 1114 7 Get thee quickly hence, and go
into the land of Judea, and propheete, etc. 855 8 Hear this, Oye that swallowe
up the poor, and make the needy of the land, etc. 276 9 The temnaune of the
men shall seek after the Lord, and at the heathen, etc. 425
Out of Micheas. 4 ALI people walk in the name of their God: as for us, we will
walk in the name of our God, etc. 685. 686 4 And the Lord shall reign over
them in mount Sion, etc. 699 4 A man shall sit under his vine, etc. 72 5 And
thou Beth lehem Ephrata art little to be among the thousands of Judah, etc. 678.
692 6 For what cause GOD sends waree as a plague upon people, etc. 209 6
Threatenings of grievous punishments against them that use deceites in
weightes and etc. 271 6 I will them thee (O man) what is good, and what the
Lord requires of thee: namely, etc. 475. 668
Out of Malachie. 1 WHen ye bring the blind for sacrifice, do ye not sin?
and when ye bring the lame and sick, etc. 368 1 I have no pleasure in you,
says the Lord of hoastes: neither will I, etc. 953 1 The son honors the
father, and the servant the master, Therefore if I be a father, etc. 565 2 My
covenant was with Levy of life and peace, and I gave him fear, etc. 904 3 It
is but vain to serve GOD, and what profit is it that we have kept his
commandments, etc. 292 4 The day of the Lord shall come, in which the proud,
and those that work wickedness, etc. 300
Out of Sophonie. 1 I Will out off those that worship and swear by the Lord,
and swear by Malchom, etc. 133
Out of Haggee. 1 COnsider your own ways in your hearts, ye so we much, but
ye bring little in, etc. 285 2 I will take thee to my servant Zorobabel thou
son of Salathiel, etc. 1011
Out of Abacuche. 1 O Lord how long shall I cry, and thou not hear? how
long shall I cry out to thee, etc. 292 2 What profits the Image: for the
maker of it has made it, etc. 122 123
Out of Zachary. 1 AN Angel of the Lord is brought in sorrowful for the
misery of the captures in Babylon, etc. 739 3 Behold I bring forth the
branch, my servant. For lo, the stone, etc. 375 7 Thus says the Lord of
hoastes, execute true judgment, show mercy and loving kindness, etc. 475 7.
8 Hypocritical fastings found fault withal, I have not chosen, etc. 241 12
Behold, I make Hicrusalem a cup of poison unto all the people, etc. 316 12 Of
wars to be made against all nations by the Apostles, etc. 831 11 Take to
thee yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd: For lo, I will raise up a
shepherd, etc. 829 13 Arise, O you sword, upon my shepherd, and upon the man
that is my fellow, etc. 680
Out of Ecclesiasticus, or Jesus of Syrache. 1 Seek not out the things that
are too hard for thee: neither search after, etc. 642 7 God created man good,
but they sought out many inuentio^s of their own, etc. 482 11 When the clouds
are full, they pour out rain upon the, etc. 771 15 Say not thou: It is the
Lords fault that I have sinned, for thou shall not do the thing, etc 491 15
God made man in the beginning, and left him in ye hand of his counsel, etc. 483
12 The dust shall be turned again unto earth from whence it came, etc. 715
Out of the book of Wisdom. 1 GOD has not made death, neither has he
delight in the destruction of the living. etc. 481 482 3 The souls of the
righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them, etc.
766
Out of the book of Tobie. 4 BE merciful after thy power, if thou have much,
give plentiously, etc. 290 4 Who so ever works any thing for thee, give him
his hire immediately, etc. 273
Out of the book of Judith. 8 WHat manner of sentence is this, whereunto Ozias
has consented? etc. 926
Out of the first book of Machabeis. 2 OF prayer for the dead or departed
this life, etc. 774
Out of the second book of Machabeis. 2 The obedience and faith in the
Machabeis, in old Eleazat and certain other etc. pleased the Lord, etc. 383.
511
Out of the new Testament, and first out of the Gospel after Saint Matthewe.
1 THat which is conceived within her, is of the holy Ghost, etc. 688 1 Marie
shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus, etc. 60 3 All
Jury came out to John, the (...) of the Lord, and were baptized of him, etc.
573 3 This is my beloved son, in whom I am pleased: bear him, etc. 527.
628. 682 3 I baptize you with water, but he shall baptize you with the holy
Ghost, etc. 983 3 The Lord is said to have a vanne is his hand, and
cleanses the flower, etc. 819 4 All these will I give thee, if thou falling
down, wilt worship me, etc. 653 4 Anoyd satan, For it is written: Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, etc. 653. 671 5 The father sends rain upon the
just and vnuist, etc. 641 5 Blessed are you when men shall revile you and
persecute you, etc. 468. 910. 5 ye are the light of the world, a city that is
set on an high hill, etc. 910 5. 6. 23 Hypocrutes much and often spoken against
in the Gospel, etc. 817 5 ye have heard what was said of old, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, etc. 130 5 Ye are the salt of the earth, if the salt
become unsavory, etc. 908 5 Ye have heard that it was said to them of old:
Thou shall not commit adultery, etc. 234 5 To hun that will sue thee at the
law, and take away thy coat, etc. 195 5 Blessed are they that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake: for etc. 307 5 Be ye perfect, even as your
father which is in heaven, etc. 405 5 Who so ever is angry with his brother,
shall be in danger of judgment, etc. 326. 508 5 Think not that I am come to
destroy the law or the, etc. 409 410 5 Therefore, if thou bring thy gift unto
the altar, and there, etc. 574. 924 5 Let your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, etc. 453. 476 6 When ye pray, say: Our father
which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc. 703. 941 6 Ii ye forgive men
their trespasses, your heavenly father will also to give you, etc. 574 6 No man
can serve two masters etc. 653 6 Ye can not serve God and Manimon at once.
etc. 263 6 But then what thou pravest, enter into thy chamber, and when, etc.
914. 927 6 Hoorde not up for your selves treasures in earth, where the rust
and moth, etc. 264 6 The light (or candle) of the body, is the eye: if
therefore thine eye be single, etc. 264 6 If ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly father shall also, etc. 924 6 Fastings must be without
superstition and feigned hypocrisy, etc. 243 7 Ask, and it shall be given
you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you, etc.
647 7 Every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, etc. 545 7
What so ever ye would that me^ should do to you, do ye the same to them, etc.
102 7 Cast not your pearls before sw^ne, neither give that which is holy,
etc. 961 7 Strive to enter in at the straight gate, for wide is the gate, and
broad is the way, that leads to destruction, etc. 712 8 It is no reason that
thou should come under my roof, etc. 36 8 Go thy way, and as thou haste
believed, so be it unto thee, etc. 776 8 I say unto you, that many shall come
out of the East and out of the West, etc. 432 9 Beware of false Prophets
which come to you in sheep clothing, etc. 858 9 I came to seek that which
was lost, etc. 645 9 They that are whole need not the Physician, but they that
are sick etc. 568 9 The children of the bride chamber do fast, when the bride
is taken from them, etc. 242. 243 9 Behold, a certain ruler came to Jesus,
and worshipped him, etc. 649 10 Freely ye have received. etc. 1119 10 The son
of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his soul a
redemption for many, etc. 690 10 Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing?
and one of them shall not light on the ground, etc. 638 648 10 If they have
called the Lord of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of
his household, etc. 910 10 He that hears you, hears me: and he that
despises you, etc. 154 10 It shall be easier for the land of Sodom in the
day of judgment, then for the, etc. 508 10 For it is not you that speak, but
the spirit of your father, he it is which speaks in you, etc. 719 10 Fear
ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, etc. 765
10 I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at
variaunce, etc. 452 11 It shall be easier for Tire and Sidon in the day of
judgment, than for you, etc. 508 11 Come unto me all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden, and I will refreshe you, etc. 545. 644. 662 12 By thy deeds thou
shall be justified, and by the same thou shall be condemned, etc. 470 21 The
baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? etc. 963 12 If I through
Beelzebub cast out devils by whom, etc. 883 12 A disparation touching the
sabbaot^, betwe^en our savior Christ, and the Phariseis, etc. 143 12 Either
make the tree good, and the fruit good: or else the tree naught, etc. 817 12
The Prophets and the law prophesied unto John, since ye time the kingdom,
etc. 436 12 Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the
sin against, etc. 517. 568 12 As Jonas was three days, and three nights, in
the belly of the whale, etc. 69 13 To every one that has shall be given, and
he shall abound, and from him, etc. 476 646. 722 13 The son of man shall send
forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom al things that
offend, etc. 740 13 The kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, which being
cast, etc. 818 13 The parable of him which bought the precious pearl, etc. 21
13 Cockle grows up in ye Lords field, which he forbids to pluck up, etc.
818. 1132 13 Riches are the thorns yt choke the seed of the word of god, etc.
263 15 Whatsoever enters in by the mouth goes into the belly, and is cast
into the, etc. 325 15 Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, whoredoms, etc. 503 15 This people honoreth me with their lips,
but their heart is far from me, etc. 652. 925 15 In vain do they worship
me, teaching doctrines the precepts of men, etc. 19. 473 827. 906 16 What so
ever ye shall loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven, etc. 871 16 If any man
will go after me, let him forsake him self, etc. 65. 309 16 Upon this rock I
will build my church, etc. 860. 861. 887. 890 16 And the gates of hell shall
not prevail against the church, etc. 816 16 Thou art truly the son of God,
etc. 652 16 Flesh and blood has not rellealed these things unto thee, but
my, etc. 827 16 I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and what
so ever, etc. 902 16 Who so ever will save his life, shall loose it: Again,
who so ever will loose his life for my sake, shall find it, etc. 765 17 Of the
transformation or transfiguration of Christ in ye, etc. 87. 88 18 There is none
good but one, etc. 657 18 Woe unto the world because of offenses. It must
needs be that offenses come, etc. 452 18 Derily, verily, I say unto you,
except you turn and become, etc. 881. 958. 1014. 18 If he that offends the
church will not regard when he is wa^^ed, and. 816 18 I say unto you, that if
two of you shall agree in earth as touching etc. 915 18 It is not the will of
my father which is in heaven, that one of these ^ittle ones should perish, etc.
104 18 Where so ever two or three be gathered together in my name, etc. 864 19
Verily I say unto you, a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven, etc. 263 19 If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments, etc
408. 478 19 If thou will be perfect, go and ^ell that which thou haste, and
give to the poor, etc. 263 20 Ye know not what ye ask, etc 919 21 The
Chanaanites cast out of Gods temple, etc. 698 22 He which had not on his
wedding garment, is suffered for a season among the other guestes, etc. 818 22
One only vineyarde, not two or diverse let out to husband men, etc. 842 22 GOD
is not the GOD of the dead, but of the living, etc. 432 22 Ye ^rre, not
knowing the scriptures. For in the resurrection they neither marry, etc. 732
22 What think you of Christ? whose ^onne is he? They said unto him the son
of David etc. 692 22 Give to God that which belong^^h to God, and to Caesar,
etc. 220 22 Love thy neighbor as thy sel^^, etc. 96 23 Woe to you Scribes and
Phariseis hypocrites, which (...) w^dowes houses, under etc. 507. 925 23 Woe
unto you Scribes and Pharise^s hypocrites, because ye (...) up the kingdom
of heaven, etc 901 23 The Scribes and the Pharise^s (...) Mo^es seat. All
therefore, etc. 846 23 I send unto you Prophets and wisemen, some of whom ye
shall, etc. 155 24 There shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and
shall show great signs, etc. 858 24 The Lord of that servant shall come in
the day wherein he looks not for him, etc. 817 24 Do ye not see all these
things? verily I say unto you, there shall not be left, etc. 415 24 Then, if
they shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or, there is Christ, do not
believe etc. 1092 24 Heaven and earth shall pass, but in word shall not pass,
etc. 37 25 Come ^e blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you
from the, etc. 469. 699 25 Depart from meye curssed into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the devil and his angels, etc. 747. 1104 25 Verily, I
say unto you, in that ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it
not unto me, etc. 1104 26 The Lord Jesus when he had taken bread, he gave
thanks, and brake it, etc. 969 26 Whom so ever I shall kiss, that same is
he, take him etc. 957 26 Put up thy sword into thy sheath: He that takes,
etc. 28. 832 26 Think thou that I can not pray unto my father, and he shall
send me more than twelve legions of Angels, etc. 737 26 And Peter remembered
the words of the Lord, which he had said unto him, before the cock crow,
etc. 564 26 He began to be sorrowful and heavy, And Jesus said, My soul is
heavy even unto death, etc. 690 27 Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me, etc. 625 27 So they went and made the Scpulchre sure, and sealed
the stone etc. 1012 28 Tell his disciples and Peter that he is ri^en, and goes
before you into Galilee, etc. 569 28 Teach ye all nations, baptisting them in
the name of the father, etc. 821 28 All power is given me both in heaven and in
earth, etc. 627. 836. 1053 28 I will re^aine with you continually unto the end
of the world, etc. 599. 699. 864. 1095
Out of the Gospel after Saint Mark. 1 John baptized in the wilderness,
preaching the baptism of Repen^ance, etc. 968 2 What have we to do with thee
thou Jesus of Nazareth, art thou come to destroy us? etc. 747 3 All sins
shall be forgiven unto the children of men, and blasphemies wherewith, etc. 517
3 My name is Legion, because we are many, etc. 748 3 He casts out devils by
the prince of devils, etc. 748 9 If thou can believe. All things are possible
to him that believes, etc. 35. 646 9 And whenever he takes him, he teareth
him, and he fometh and guatheth with his teeth, and pineth away, etc. 751 9 And
these shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life
everlasting, etc. 717 10 Verily I say unto you, there ^^ no man that has
forsaken house, etc. 312. 4^8 10 Suffer the young children to come unto me, and
forbid them not, etc. 1014 11 Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that
ye shall have it, etc 922 11 And when ye stand praying, forgive if ye have
ought against, etc. 924 13 They shall deliver you up to counsels, and in
their Synagogues, they shall scourge you, etc. 293. 294 14 The poor shall ye
have always with you, but me always ye shall not have, etc. 692 16 Go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel unto every creature, etc. 644. 905.
963. 968. 973. 978. 1053 16 He is not here, He is risen, etc. 697. 1091 16 He
appeared unto them as they sa^e together, and reproved them, etc. 902 26 And he
took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave to them, etc. 984
Out of the Gospel after Saint Luke. 1 OF the Conception of Christ, etc. 62.
63 1 The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
ouershadowe thee, etc. 628 That holy thing which shall be borne, shall be
called the son of God, etc. 692 1 Anna the daughter of Phanuel departed not
from the temple, but night, etc. 926 1 He shall go before the Lord, with the
spirit and power of Elias, etc. 871 1 And therefore God shall give unto him the
seat of his father David, etc. 688 1 And whence comes this to me, that the
mother of my Lord should come unto me? etc. 688 1 Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, for he has redeemed his people, etc. 717 1 That we being delivered out
of the hands of our enemies, might serve him, etc. 444. 591 1 With God shall
no word be imposs^ble, etc. 1 2 The manner of Christ his Nativity and birth,
etc. 63 2 Fear not, for behold, I bring you good tydinge of great joy, that
shall be, etc. 526 2 Glory be to God on high, and in earth pe^ce, and among
men good will* etc. 740 3 The Publicanes also came to John that they might be
baptized of him, etc. 276 4 Christ e^^ring unto the (...) at Nazareth stood
up to read, etc. 25 5 Go out from me, O Lord, for I am a sin^ull man, etc.
606 5 The children of the bridechamber do fast, when the bridegroom is taken
from them, etc. 243 6 The Lord called his disciples, and of them he chose
twelve, etc. 877 6 Can the blind lead the blind, shall they not both fall into
the dich? etc. 858 6 If you lend to them of whom you hope to receive again,
etc. 275 6. 13 A disputation touching the Sabbath, between our Savior and
the Phariseis, etc. 143 7 When the debtors were not able to pay, he forgave
the^ both their debtes, etc. 584. 948 7 Many sins be forgiven her, because
she loved much, etc. 584 8 The parable of the sower, and the seed sown, etc.
20 8 Riches are thorns, that choke the seed of the word of GOD, etc. 263 9
Christ said to his disciples, so it is written, and so it behooved Christ to
suffer, etc. 547 9 James and John would have commanded fire from heaven, to
fall down upon Samaria, if they had been able, etc. 838 9 He gave them power
and authority over all devils, etc. 836 9 No man that lays his hand to the
plough, and looks back, is fit for the kingdom of God, etc. 600 9 The son
of man came not to destroy men's souls, but to save the^ etc. 690 10 Woe unto
you interpreters of the law: for ye have taken away the key, etc. 901 10 Woe
be to thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Beth-saida: for if the wonders had been done
in Tire and Sydon, etc. 597 10 He that hears you, hears me: and he that
despises, etc. 871. 963 10 Of our neighbor, and whom we must take for our
neighbor, etc 94. 97 11 If I with the singer of GOD cast out devils, no doubt
the kingdom of God is come upon you, etc. 724 11 If thou can do any thing
lord, have compassion upon us, etc. 646 11 This one thing is necessary, Marie
has chosen the good part, which shall not be taken, etc. 671 21 Through your
patience possess your souls, etc. 304 12 Whosoever speaks a word against
the son of man, it shall be forgiven, etc. 517 12 The servant that knew his
masters will, and prepared not him self, etc. 508 12 Who is a faithful and
wise Steward, whom the Lord has made ruler, etc. 908 12 Who has appointed
me a judge between you and a diuider of land, etc. 195 12 Take heed and
beware of covetousness: for no man's life stands in the abundance, etc. 265
14 If any man comes to me, and hates not his father and mother, etc. 146 15
The Angels in heaven rejoice at the conversion and turning of me^ that be
sinners, etc. 739 16 Of Abraham's bosom, etc. 66 16 The parable of the rich
glutton, and poor silly Lazarus, etc. 521 16 I pray thee father Abraham that
thou would send Lazarus to my fathers house, etc. 776 16 And it came to
pass that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom,
etc. 736 16 Between us and you there is a great gulf steadfastly set, so that
they which would go from hence to you, can not, etc. 767 17 When ye have done
all things that are commanded you then say, etc. 467 17 As it happened in the
days of Noe and Lot, they did eat, etc. 240 18 God be merciful to me a
sinner, etc. 572. 918 19 It is written, My house shall be called the house of
prayer, but ye have made it, etc. 587 19 Touching Zacheus and his voluntary
restitution, etc. 230 20 The children of this world marry wives, and are
married: but they that shall be counted worthy to enjoy that world, etc. 735 22
With hearty desire have I desired to care this Passover with you before I
suffer, etc. 690 22 The Lord Jesus, when he had taken bread, he gave thanks,
and etc. 969 22 And there arose also a strife among the Apostles, which of
them etc. 865 22 Kings of nations have dominion over them, but ye, etc. 218.
887 22 Behold, Satan has earnestly desired to sift you, as it were wheat.
etc. 751 22 And the Lord turning him self about, looked upon Peter, etc. 564
22 I have prayed for thee (Peter,) that thy faith fail not, etc. 819 22 Ye are
come out as it were to a thief* etc. Christ calls the ordinary (...) the
power of darkness, etc. 172 22 Put up thy sword into thy sheath, etc. 831
23 Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, etc. 699 23 If they do
this in a moist tree, what shall be done in the dry? etc. 296 23 Jesus, when
he had vowed down his head, gave up the ghost, etc. 715 24 A spirit has
not flesh and bones as ye see that I have, etc. 87. 689. 1091 24 Then the Lord
opened their understanding, that they might understand, etc. 902
Out of the Gospel after S. John. 1 IN the beginning was the word and the word
was with God, and God was the word, etc. 678 1 The word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us, etc. 688. 691 1 I baptize with water, but he baptiseth with the
holy ghost, etc. 872 1 He which sent me to baptize with water, the same said
unto me, Upon whom so ever thou shall see the holy Ghost, etc. 1033 1 I am
not Christ, but am sent before him, to bear record of him, etc. 578 1 Behold
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world etc. 365. 568 2 Away
with these things from hence, and make not my fathershouse an house of
merchandise. etc. 586 3 He that comes from on high, is above al: He that,
etc. 527 983 3 I am the voice of a crier in the wilderness, make straight the
way of the Lord, etc. 983 3 Ye your selves are witnesses, that I said that I
am not the Christ, etc. 867 3 If I have told you of earthly things, and ye
believe not, etc. 964 3 This is condemnation, because the light came into the
world, etc. 546 3 He whom God has sent, does speak the words of God. For
God gives not the spirit by measure unto him, etc. 627 3 God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son, etc. 48. 546. 549 3 He that
believes in the son of God is not condemned, etc. 779 3 And as Moses lifted
up the serpent in the wilderness, etc. 48. 549 3 No man has ascended up into
heaven, but he that came down from heaven, etc. 696 3 Verily I say unto you,
Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, etc. 501. 1046. 1049 3 The
wind blows where it lusts, and thou hear the sound thereof, etc. 714 3
He that believes not, is condemned already, because h^e has not b^leeued in
the name, etc. 643 4 God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship
him in spirit and truth, etc. 416 427. 715 4 I know that the Messiah shall
come, which is caled Christ, etc. 539 4 Jesus him self did not baptize, but
his disciples. etc. 1056 4 The home comes, when ye shall neither in this
mounteine, neither at Jerusalem, worship, etc. 1004 4 He which drinks of
this water shall thirst again, etc. 1002 5 They that have done good, shall
come forth unto the resurrection of life, etc. 747 5 The father has given all
judgment to the son, that al might honor the son, as they honor the the
father, etc. 661. 686. 920 5 Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him,
not only because he had broken the Sabbath day, etc. 59. 683 5 Who so has
the son, has life, who so has not the son of God, has not life, etc. 643
5 My father works hitherto, and I work, etc. 638 5 Think not that I will
accuse you to my father: there is one that acc^^eth you, etc. 402 5 There is
one which accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye hope, etc 376 5 The Lord
conveyed him self away, while the people would have made him a king, etc. 218
5 We know that the son of god is come, and has given us a mind, that we
should know him, etc. 685 6 The words of our lord touching the eating of his
body, make much for the meaning of the words used in the sacramental supper,
etc. 54 6 He that eats me, shall live by me, etc. 49 6 I am the lively bread,
that came down from heaven, etc. 684 6 Ex^ept ye eat the flesh of the son
of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, etc. 1049 6 My flesh is
mea^e in deed, and my blood is drink in deed, etc. 696 6 He that cateth my
flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in, etc. 825 6 No man comes unto me,
unless my father draw him, etc. 589 6 This is the w^l of him that sent me,
the ^ather, that every one which s^^th the son, and believes in him, should
have everlasting life, etc. 48 643 6 Lord to whom shall we go, thou have the
words of eternal life: and we believe and know, etc. 569 6 Does this offend
you? What therefore if you shall see the son of man, etc. 69 7 The holy
Ghost was not yet, (there) because Jesus was not yet glorified, etc. 430 7 If
any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink, etc. 706. 725. 825 8 I am the
light of the world, He that follows me, does not walk in darkness. 686. 833
8 The devil was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth,
etc. 485. 746 8 We are not borne of fornication we have one father eue^ god,
etc 683 8 If ye abide in my saying, ye shall be my disciples in deed, and ye
shall know the truth, etc. 676 8 Verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I
am, etc. 678 8 He that is of God, does hear the word of God, etc. 822. 827 8
Abraham was glad to see my day, and he saw it, and rejoiced, etc 433 8 Verily
verily I say unto you, etc. if the son therefore shall make you free, etc.
444. 591 9 Master, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was borne
blind? etc. 293 9 Do thou believe in the son of God? etc. 59. 652 10 I am
the door, etc. 662 10 Many good works have. I showed you from my father: for
which of these good works do ye stone me? etc. 683 10 I and my father are one.
Then the Jews took up stones, etc. 59 10 How long do thou make us doubt?
etc. 538 10 I have power to forgive ^innes, to rai^e to life whom I will, and
to give righteousness, etc. 696 10 My sheep hear my voice, and I know them,
and they follow me, etc. 645. 822. 827 10 I give unto my sheep everlasting
life, neither shall they perish for ever, etc. 683 11 I am the resurrection and
the life: he that believes in me, etc 68 12 My soul is heavy, even unto the
death, etc. 64 12 I, when I shall be lift up from the earth will draw, etc. 64
12 Verily verily I say unto you, unless the seed of corn, etc. 65 13 Verily
verily I say unto you, He that receives whom so ever I shall send, receives
me, etc. 1104 13 About the end of the Supper, the devil entered into Judas,
etc. 80. 515. 1108 13 Verily I say unto thee, the cock shall not ^^^we, till
thou have denied me thrice, etc. 564 13 He that is washed, needs not save to
wash his feet, etc. 772 13 The Apostle (or messinger) is not greater than he
that sent him, etc. 877 13 A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love
one an other, as I have, etc. 826 14 Ye believe in God, believe and in me, etc.
692 14 That comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the father will send in
my name, etc. 627. 724 14 I will pray the father, and he shall give you an
other comforter, etc. 625. 723. 816 14 I go to prepare a place for you, and
will come again, etc. 70. 1092 14 Whosoever knows my commandments, and
ke^peth them, he it is that loves me, etc. 462. 822 14 The father is greater
than I, etc. 28 14 Lord show us the father, and it suffices, etc. 620 14 Let
not your heart be troubled, (or v^^ed) you believe in God, etc. 59 684 14 I
will receive you (even) unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also,
etc. 768 14 Have I been so long with you, and do ye not yet know me? etc. 620
14 I am the way, the truth, and the life, etc. 662. 920 17 For their sakes
sanctiste I my self, that they also might be sanctified in truth, etc. 706 14
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, etc. 707. 922 14 In that
day ye shall know that I am in my father, and you in me, etc. 825 15 I am that
true vine, and my father is the husbandman. Every branch, etc. 863 15 You
shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from, etc. 872 15 Now are ye
clean through the word which I have spoken unto you, etc. 974 15 This is my
commandment, that ye love one an other, etc. 96 15 The servant is not greater
then his master, if they have persecuted me, etc. 316 15 If I had not come and
spoken unto them, they had had wherwithall, etc. 510. 15 I am the vine, ye are
the branches, As the branch can not bear, etc. 454 15 He that has not the
spirit of Christ, is none of his, etc. 825 16 Verily verily I say unto you,
ye shall weep and lament, etc. 292 16 Hitherto have ye not asked any thing in
my name: ask and ye shall receive, etc. 434 16 I went out from the father, and
came into the world: I leave the world, and go unto the father, etc. 625 16
It is expedient for you that I depart. For if I go not away, the comforter
shall not come, etc. 728 1091 16 When the comforter shall come, whom I will
send unto you from the father, etc. 723 16 They shall drive you from their
Synagogues: and the time shall come, etc. 316 16 Lord, to whom shall we go?
Thou have the word of eternal life, etc. 819 16 I have many things to tell you:
but at this time you can not, etc. 18 17 This is eternal life, to know thee
the true GOD only, etc. 59. 620 17 Father, the hour is come, glorify thy
son, etc. 684 17 And now, O father, glorify you me with thine own self,
with the glory which thou gave me with thee, before this world was, etc.
686 18 For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world,
that I should bear witness unto the truth, etc. 701 18 Who so is of the
truth, will hear my voice, etc. 822. 827 18 My kingdom is not of this world,
etc. 218 18 If my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants surely
fight, etc. 700 19 We have a law, and according to our law he ought to dye,
etc. 683 19 In Christ there was not one bone broken, etc. 366 20 The Lord
came unto his disciples, and said: Peace be unto you, etc. 902 20 Whose sins
ye forgive, they are forgiven them, etc. 83. 871. 528 20 But these are written,
that ye might believe that Jesus, etc. 17 21 When thou wast younger, thou
g^rdedst thy self, and wentest whether, etc. 302 21 Feed my sheep, etc. 866.
878
Out of the Acts of the Apostles. 1 Depart not from Jerusalem, but wait for
the promise of the father, etc. 1032 1 Peter calling a Church together speaks
of placing an other Apostle in the stead of Judas, etc. 837 2 They were
continuing in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in communicating, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayer, etc. 1081. 1113 2 When they heard this, they
were pricked in their hearts, and said to Peter, and the, etc. 571 2 There
were dwelling at Jerusalem certain Jews religious men, of all nations that
are under heaven, etc. 1115 2 Repent, and be ye every one baptized in the name
of Jesus Christ, etc. 821. 902. 968. 989 1061 2 That Christ is risen again,
it is proved by the testimony of David, uttered by Saint Peter in a certain
Sermon, etc. 68 2 Save your selves from this froward (or untoward) generation,
etc. 858 2 All which believed, were joined in one, etc. 261 3 Men and brethren
what shall we do? To whom Peter answered: Repent, and be baptized, etc. 582 3
I know ye did it through ignorance: Now therefore turn you, etc. 517 4 None
of them said that any thing was his of that which he possessed, etc. 261 4 If
we, at this day, be examined of the deed done to the sick man, etc. 972 4 In
the name of the Lord Jesus, arise up and walk, and they, etc. 972 5 The
Priests put the Apostles in the common prison, but the Angel of the Lord, etc.
735 5 How is it that satan has filled thine heart, to lie unto the holy
Ghost, etc. 717 5 We ought to obey God more tha^ men, etc. 146 6 The Church of
Antioche ordeine and send Paul and Barnabas etc. 837 6 At Jerusalem there was
Colleges or Synagogues of Libertines, Cyreneans, Alexandrines, Cilicians, and
Asians, etc. 1115 7 And when forty years were expyred, there appeared unto
him in the wilderness of mount Sina, an Angel, etc. 743 7 They stoned Stephan,
calling on, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, etc. 715 7 He that is
highest of all, dwells not in temples made with hands, etc. 1004 8 And
devout men carried Stepha^ to his burial, and made great lamentation over
him. 697 8 The Eunuche of Candace, Gueene of Aethiopia, read the holy
Scriptures, etc. 871 8 See, here is water, what lets me to be baptized? etc.
1006 6 Give me this power also, yt on whom so ever I lay my hands, etc. 587 8
Thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God,
etc. 587 8 Thou have neither part nor fellow ship in this business, because
thy heart is not right in the fight of God, etc. 1051 9 Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? etc. 586 9 He will tell thee what thou must do, etc. 871
10 Ye know that I being called by GOD, did go to the Gentiles, etc. 424 10
Cornelius endued with Gods grace, he and his household, become the Church of
God, etc. 861 10 Of a truth I perceive that there is no respect of persons with
God, but in every nation, etc. 546 10 Arise Peter, slay and eat. etc. 980 10
Arise, I also myself am a man etc. 654. 890 10 That which God has cleansed
call not thou common or unclean, etc. 226. 1055 10 Thy prayers and thine alms
deeds are had in remembrance, etc. 924 11 Agabus foretold Saint Paul the
famine which was to come, etc. 878 12 Herod put Peter in prison, and Peter
slept between two soldiers, etc. 735 12 It is the voice of God, and not of
man, etc. 890 13 The Churches by the commandemente of the Apostles, ordained
doctors, etc. 837 13 Be it known unto you men and brethren, that through this
Lord, etc. 45. 408 13 The Jews being filled with indignation, spoke against
those things, etc. 903 13 The word of God ought first to be preached unto you:
but because you reject it, and judge your, etc. 1107 14 The apostles returned,
and strengthened the disciples souls again, etc. 1016 14 God left not him
self without witness, in that he showed his benefits from heaven, etc. 638
15 Dissension kindled by Paul and Barnabas, against them that taught
circumcision, etc. 1001 15 Paul preaching the word of God among the Gentiles,
went into the Synagogues, etc. 1114 15 We believe yt through the grace of our
Lord Jesus, etc. 50 15 Fornication forbidden by the Apostles, in that Synodal
Epistle, which they sent from Jerusalem, etc. 234 15 Blood and strangled
forbidden by the apostles, in that Synodal Epistle which they sent from
Jerusalem, etc. 421 16 Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and
thy whole, etc. 903 17 By God we live and move, and have our being, etc. 638.
685 17 God is not far from every one of us. For by him we live, we move,
and have our being, etc. 610 17 God that made the world, and all that therein
is, etc. 126. 1004 17 Fear not, Paul, thou must be brought before Caesar, and
lo, God has given thee all them that sail with thee, etc. 740 18 The Apostle
shook his rayme^t, and said, your blood be upon your etc. 903 19 The sonns of
Sce^a the priest were said to be exorcistes, etc. 884 972 19 The holy ghost
came upon the^, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied, etc. 1032 19 When
they heard these things, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, etc.
1060 19 John baptized with ye baptism of repentance, saying unto the people,
that they should believe, etc. 1031 20 God has purchased to him self a church
with his own blood, etc. 695 20 Take heed unto your selves, and to the whole
flock, whereof, etc. 866. 878. 901 20 I know this, that after my departing
shall grievous wolves enter in, etc. 829. 887 20 Paul preached, and brake
bread at Troas, etc. 1069 21 Paul being oppressed of the Jews in the Temple
of Jerusalem, is rescued, etc. 832 22 I received authority from the high
Priests, to bind al those that call, etc. 812 22 Paul being borne free in
the city of Tharsus, traueled to Jerusalem unto Gamaliels feet, etc. 1115 22
Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, by calling on the name, etc.
989. 1061 23 Atroupe of horsemen, and a certain company of footmen, sent with
the Apostle Paul, etc. 832 23 As thou have borne witness of me at Jerusalem,
so must thou bear record of me at Rome, etc. 640 23 The Saduceis say that
there is no resurrection, neither Angel, nor spirit, etc. 731 24 I believe all
that is written in the Law and the Prophets, etc. 89 26 Paul wishes that king
Agrippa were such an one as him self, except his bands, etc. 872 26 I send
thee unto the Gentiles, to open their eyes, that they may be etc. 871 27 S^rs,
I exhort you to be of good cheer, for there shall be no loss of any man's
life, etc. 640 27 There s^oode by me, this night, the Angel of God, whose I am,
etc. 743
Out of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans. 1 APpointed to preach the
Gospel of God, which he promised before by his Prophets, etc. 629 693 838 1 His
invisible things being understood by his works, through the creation, etc.
620 1 God verily promised the Gospel of God before by his Prophets, etc. 429 1
What so ever may be known of God is manifest, etc. 102 1 God gave them up unto
a reprobate sense, etc. 492 1 The wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against
al ungodliness, etc. 520 2 There are two sorts of Circumcisions, the one of the
letter, in the flesh, etc. 361 2 The circumcision of the heart, is the
circumcision which consists in the spirit, etc. 715 2 What, do thou
despise the riches of Gods goodness, etc. 125. 522 2 When the Gentiles which
have not the law, do of nature, etc. 101 3 Do we then destroy the law
through faith? God forbid, etc. 553 3 The righteousness of GOD by faith in
Jesus Christ, conuneth unto all, etc. 546 3 Is he the God of the Jews only?
Is he not also of the Gentiles? etc. 553 3 Where is the boasting? it is
excluded. By what law? Of works? 552 3 All have sinned and are destitute, (or,
have need) of the Grace of God, etc. 501 3 If our unrighteousness sets
forth the righteousness of GOD, what, etc. 482 3 Shall their unbelief make
the faith of God without effect? God forbid, etc. 1027 3 We do therefore hold
that a man is justified without the works of the law, etc. 553 4 To him that
works not but beleeu^th in him that justifies the ungodly, etc. 555 4 To him
that works, is the reward not reckoned of Grace, but of duty, etc. 554 4
What shall we say the^ that Abraham our father, as apperteyning to the flesh,
etc. 51 4 If Abraham were justified by works, etc. Abraham believed God, and
it was counted for righteousness, etc. 51. 457 554 4 Where no law is, there
is no transgression, etc. 502 4 Therefore by faith is the inheritance given,
that it might be by grace, etc. 52 5 Even as by one man sin ent^red into the
world, and death by sin, etc. 45. 482. 496. 502. 645. 1052. 5 Being
justified by the blood of Christ, we shall be saved, etc. 45. 54 5 We rejoice
also in tribulations, knowing that tribulation works patience. etc. 294 5 The
love of God is poured out into our hearts. etc. 92 5 Therefore being justified
by faith, we are at peace with GOD, etc. 1002 5 Christ, when as yet we were
sinners, dyed for us: much more therefore now being justified, etc. 662 5
Know ye not that all we which have bin baptized into Jesus Christ have been
baptized into his death, etc. 444. 709. 1025 7 Sin without the law was once
dead: and I once lived without law, etc. 502 7 O wretched man that I am: who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? etc. 409 7 With the mind, the
same I: or even I, do serve the Law of God, etc. 515 7 We know that the
law is spiritual, but I am carnal: sold under sin, etc. 405. 496 7 I
know, that in me (that is, in my flesh:) there is no good, etc. 482 589. 594.
7 I knew not sin but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the
law, etc. 325. 401 7 I find when I would do good, that evil is present,
with, by, and in me, etc. 515 8 Those which he knew before, he did also
predestinate, that they should be like, etc. 894 8 It is God that justifies,
who is he that can condemn? etc. 662 8 Who spared not his son, but gave him
for us all, how can it be that he should not also with him give us allthings,
etc. 644 8 You have not received again the spirit of bondage, unto fear: but
you have received the spirit of adoption, etc. 565. 660 8 If any have not the
spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, etc. 660. 925. 1055 8 As many as
are led by the spirit of GOD, they are the sons of God, etc. 718 8 They that
are in the flesh, can not please God, etc 728 8 Because ye are sons, GOD
has sent the spirit of his son into your hearts, etc. 723 8 Who shall
separate us from the love of GOD, shall tribulation? etc. 93. 311 8 The
affection of ye flesh is death, but the affection of the spirit is life, etc.
325 8 The law of the spirit of life, through Christ Jesus, has made me
free, etc. 446 8 We are saved by hope: but hope that is seen, is no hope. For
how can a man, etc. 305 8 What the Law could not do, in as much as it was
weak through the flesh. etc. 407 8 We sufferwith Christ, that with him we may
be glorified. For I am, etc. 310 9 It is not in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in God that shows mercy, etc. 644 9 They are not all
Israelits, which came of Israel: neither are they etc. 820 9 Which is God in
all things to be praised for ever, etc. 685 10 Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing comes by the word of God. etc. 827 10 With the heart man believes
unto righteousness, and with the mouth, etc. 974 10 But how shall they call
upon him in whom they have not believed? etc. 660 10 If thou shall knowledge
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, etc. 1007 10
The same Lord over all, is rich to all them, that call upon him, etc. 546. 11
We say that faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness, etc. 1011 11 I
have left unto me self 7000 men in Israel, who have never bowed, etc. 855 11 O
the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God, etc. 642 12 I
beseech you (brethren) by the mercies of god, that ye give up your bodies a
lively sacrifice, etc. 668 12 Dearly beloved, revenge not your selves but
rather give place un to wrath, etc. 197 12 For as we have man^ members in one
body, and all members have not, etc. 826 13 Owe nothing to any man, etc. for he
that loves another has fulfilled the Law, etc. 98 13 The magistrate is Gods
minister: give therefore to all men, honor to whom honor belongs, etc. 650
13 We must not obey the magistrate for anger only, but for ^onscience sake,
etc. 220 13 Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, etc. 170. 755 14
Let us follow the things that make for peace, and al things whereby we may one
edify, etc. 426 14 Him that is weak in faith receive ye, not to strifes of
disputations, etc. 451 14 All things are lawful for me, but all things are
not expedient, etc. 449 14 The kingdom of GOD is not meat and drink, but
righteousness and peace, etc. 699 16 Phebe a woman deacon of the Church of
Cencrea, etc. 879
Out of the first Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians. 1 THe Lord sent me to
preach the Gospel and not to ba^tise etc. 1055 1 Were ye baptized in the name
of Paul? etc. 627 1 I thancke God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and
Gaius, etc. 1033 1 Now we see in a glass, even in a darcke speaking, but then
we shall see face to face, etc. 608 1 After that in the wisdom of God, the
world through their wisdom knew not God, etc. 619 2 God has revealed them
unto us by his spirit: For the spirit searches all things, etc. 728 2 Had
they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory etc. 695 2 My
preaching was not in the enticeing words of man's wisdom, but in the showing of
the spirit, etc. 603. 825 2 I was among you (Corinthia^s) in weakness, and
in fear, and in much trembling, etc. 831 2 The natural man perceives not the
things of the spirit of GOD etc. 500. 589 3 As a skillful buildes I have laid
the foundation, etc. 860 3 For we together are Gods laborers, ye are gods
husbandry, etc. 860 3 Other foundation can no man lay, than that which is
laid, which is, etc. 861. 862 3 He which waters is nothing, nor he which
planteth, etc. 20. 3 Who is Paul? And who is Apollos? but the ministers by whom
ye believed, etc. 860. 873 983. 1137 3 Know ye not that ye are the temple of
God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you, etc. 717. 723. 861 3 Not that
we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, etc. 646
3. and 4. Ministers are fellow laborers with God, and disposers of the
secrets, etc. 873 4 Let a man so esteem of us as the ministers of Christ, and
disposers. etc. 881 4 For it is required in the disposers, that a man be found
faithful, etc. 895 4 I begat you in Christ Jesus thorough the Gospel. etc.
827 5 God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
sins unto them etc. 555. 569. 5 If any man that is called a brother, be a
thief, or a whoremonger, etc. 819. 1131 5 Therefore let us keep the feast not
in the old leaven, nor in the leaven of malice, etc. 367 6 Ye are bought with
a price, become (therefore) the servants, etc. 60 446. 1138 6 The holy and pure
use of the body seuearely requ^red, without all f^lthy and unclean, etc. 426 6
Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? etc. 235 6 Know ye
not that your bodies are the temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you etc.
717. 861 6 Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified, in the name of
the Lord etc. 989 7 Sorrow, which is to Godward causes repentance unto
salvation etc. 565. 593 7 Let every man walk according as he is called: And so
ordeine I in all Churches, etc. 441 7 He that is called a bondsman in the Lord,
is ye Lords freeman. Likewise he, etc. 441 7 To avoid whoredom let every man
have his own wife, and every woman her own husband. 226. 1132 7 Let the
husband give to ye wife due bene^olence: likewise also the wife to the husband,
etc. 226 7 The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbelieving wife* etc. 497 8 Knowledge puffs up but love edifyeth, etc. 846
8 There is none other God but one. And though there be that are called Gods,
whether, etc. 624 8 Meat commends us not to God For neither if we eat, etc
244 9 Have we not power and authority to eat and drink, or may we not
carry about with us a woman sister? etc. 1121. 1132 9 Who does go to war
at his own costs and charges? Or who p^anteth a vine^ard etc. 1121 9 Do I
speak these things according to man? does not the scriptur also say the
same? etc. 1121 9 Does GOD care for o^en? or does he not speak it altogether
for our sakes? etc. 1121 9 If others be partakers of the power toward you, why
rather are not we? etc. 1122 9 Know ye not that they which take pains in the
holy things do eat of the holy things? etc. 1122 9 If we sow unto you
spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things? etc.
1120. 1122. 10 Flee fornication, etc. 234 10 I would not (brethren that ye
should be ignorant, that our fathers etc. 435. 982 10 The rock was Christ,
etc. 861 862 10 God is faithful and will not suffer his to be tempted, etc.
174. 310 480 10 Though we be many, yet are we one bread and one body: for,
etc. 822 10 Are not they which eat of the sacrifice* partakers of the altar,
etc. 329 10 Flee from idolatry, I speak as unto them that have understanding,
judge ye what I say, etc. 1022 10 God does not suffer us to be tempted above
that we are able to bear, etc. 754 11 When we are judged, we are chastened of
ye Lord, that we should not. etc. 308 11 So often as ye shall eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup, declare the Lords death t^l he come, etc. 1106
11 Be ye the followers of me even as I am of Christ, etc. 828 11 I receuied
that of ye Lord, which I have also delivered unto you, etc. 963. 1061 11 For
this cause many are weak and feeble among you, and many sleep, etc. 1109 11
Whosoever eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drincketh his own damnation,
etc. 1026 1108 11 Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup. 1007. 1109. 1030 12 As the body is one and has
many members, and all the members of the body, etc. 1021 12 There are
diversities of gifts, but it is the self same spirit, etc. 716 12 Through
one spirit we are all baptized in one body, etc. 822. 1062 12 And all these
things works even one and the self same spirit, distributing, etc. 717 13
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy ghost be with you all, etc. 716 13 Love suffers wrong and is
courteous: Love enuyeth not, etc. 98 13 If I have all faith, so that I can
remove mounteines out of their places, etc. 46^ 14 Let the Prophets speak two
or three at once, and let the other judge, etc, 839 14 If I pray in a strange
tongue, my spirit or voice prays, but my, etc. 714. 931 14 I will pray with
the spirit and will pray with the understanding, etc. 925. 933 14 If therefore
when the whole church is come together in one, and all speak, etc. 916 15 Lo
I tell you a mystery, we shall not all verily sleep, etc. 86 15 S. Paul
confesses that he persecuted the Church or congregation of God, etc. 812 15
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of GOD, etc. 27. 89 15 If the dead
do not rise, neither is Christ risen: But Christ is risen being the first
fr^^tes of them that sleep, etc. 1091 15 It is sown in corruption, it rises
in incorruption: it is sown etc 88 15 Of the resurrection of Christ from the
dead. etc. 68
Out of the second Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians. 1 IT is God which
has annoin^ed us, which has also sealed us, and has given the earnest of
the spirit in our hearts, etc. 726. 1016 3 Paul calls the Law, the
letter, the ministration of death, etc. 402 3 Ye are the epistle of Christ,
ministered by us, written not with incke, etc. 874 3 The Lord has made us able
ministers of the new testament, etc. 715 4 We which live are always
delivered to death, for Jesus sake, etc. 86 4 We have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellency of the power, etc. 293 4 We preach not our
selves but Jesus Christ the Lord, and our selves your, etc. 874 4 We are
troubled on every side, yet are we not without shift, etc. 311 5 Though we have
known Christ after the flesh, now yet henceforth know we him no more, etc.
689 6 There is no agreement between Christ and Belial, etc. 817. 859. 1103. 6
So we as workers together beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God in
vain, etc. 646 6 Wherefore come out from among them and separate your selves
says the Lord etc. 859 11 But I fear least it come to pass, that even as the
serpent etc. 868 11 If any other be the ministers of Christ, I am more: in
labors more, etc. 3^4 11 I have coupled you to one man to present you a chas^e
virgin, etc. 868 11 I have robbed other Churches having received wages of them,
to the incent I might do you service, etc 1122. 12 Least I should be exalted
out of measure, through the abundance of revelations, there was given unto me
a prick to the ^lesh, etc. 753
Out of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Galathians. 1 Paul though taken up into
the third heaven. etc. is referred over unto a man, etc. 871 1 When it pleased
GOD that I should preach his son among the Gentiles, etc. 427 1 I m^ruaile
that ye are so some turned from Christ, which called you by grace etc. 423 1
Though we, or an angel from heaven, shall preach any other Gospel, etc. 559.
898 2 I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now
line in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God, etc. 454 763 825 2
If righteousness come by the law, then Christ died in vain, etc. 771 2
Titus, being a Greek, was not circumcised, because of incommers being false,
etc. 451 2 We know that man is not justified by the works of the Law, etc.
49 3 The seed of Abraham wherein we have obtained blessing is Christ Jesus,
etc. 687 3 All ye that are baptized have pu^ on Christ, etc. 1061 3 If there
had been a law given, which could have given life, then no doubt, etc. 40^ 3
For it is written: Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which, etc. 407 3 The Law was our Scholemaster unto Christ that we should,
etc. 1001 3 There is neither Jew, no^ Greek, neither bond man, nor free, etc.
813 3 O foolish Galathians, who has beewitched you, that ye should not
believe the truth, etc. 1020 3 The same our father Abraham was not justified
by the Law, etc. 51 4 The son of God is made of a woman, to wit, according
to man's nature, etc. 688 4 After that ye have known God, how chances it
that ye return again to weak and beggarly elements, etc. 1142 4 Because ye
are sons, GOD has sent the spirit of his son into your hearts, etc. 719
4 He feygneth that there are twoe mothers the one whereof does gender to
boundage, etc. 437 4 God sent his son made of a woman, that we by adoption,
might receive the right of sons, etc. 448. 629. 4 Ye despised not, neither
abhorred my trial which was in the (...), etc. 876 4 Jerusalem which is
above, is free: which is the mother of us all, etc. 827. 868 5 Brethren, ye
have been called unto liberty: only let not liberty be an occasion, etc.
448 5 Lo, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing, etc. 419 5 The flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, and the
spirit contrary to ye flesh, etc. 594. 718 5 The fruit of the spirit is
love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, etc. 729 6 While we have
time let us work good to all men, etc. 95. 289. 1125 6 Brethren, if a man be
prevented in any fault, ye which are spiritual, restoare such, etc. 574
Out of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians. (...) YE are sealed with ye
holy spirit of promise, which is the ^arnest of our inheritance, etc. 727.
^016 (...) God has chosen us in Christ, (...)efore the foundations of the
world were laid, etc. 643 (...) God raised Christ from the dead and s^t him on
his right hand in ^^auenly places. etc. 701. 865 (...) Christ dwells in our
hearts through faith, etc. 825 (...) Now therefore ye are no more ^^raungers
and forteners, but (...)ns, etc. 862 (...) Wherefore remember, that ye ^eing in
time passed Gentiles in ^^e flesh, etc. 1021 (...) We were by nature the
sons wrath, even as other, etc. 501 (...) We are created in Christ Jesus
^^to good works, which GOD (...)th before, etc. 473 (...) By grace are ye
saved through (...)th, and that not of your selves, etc 2 Christ is our peace,
which has made both one, and has broken down, etc. 413 4 Christ gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some pastors, etc. 41 828. 877. 3 By Christ we have
boldness and entrance with confidence by faith, etc. 921 3 God by revelation
showed the mystery unto me, as I wrote, etc. 18. 4 There is one body and one
spirit, even as you are called in one hope of your voc^tion, etc. 841 2 Christ
is the head of the church and the same is the Savior, etc. 865 4 He
instituted ministers for the gathering together of the Saints for the work,
etc. 875 4 Be ye tenned in the spirit of your mind, and put on that new
man, etc. 490 4 Layinglies a side, speak ye every man the truth to his
brother: for we are members, etc. 273 4 One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one
GOD and father of all, which is above all, etc. 624. 1033 4 This I say and
testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk,
etc. 503. 592 4 Be angry and sin not. Let not the Sin set upon, etc. 164 4
Let no filthy communication proceed out of your mouth, etc. 238 4 Grieve not
the holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption,
etc. 1016 5 Christ is the head of the church, and he it is that gives
salvation to the body, etc. 702 5 So must husbands love their wives, even as
their own bodies, etc. 230 5 Neither whoremongers nor adulterers shall inherit
the kingdom of God, etc. 235 5 Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for
it, etc. 80. 973 1061 5 Be not drinken with wine wherein is excess, but be
full-filled etc. 933 5 Let not fornication or any uncleanness, or
covetousness be once named, etc. 238 5 Give thanckes always for all things
unto GOD and the father, etc. 952 6 Children, obey your parents, for this is
right: Honor thy father etc. 158 6 Fathers, provoke not your children to
anger, etc. 161 6 Brethren be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might. Put on, etc. 594 6 Take unto you the whole armor of GOD, that ye may be
able to resist in the evil day, etc. 754
Out of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Philippians. 1 I Desire to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ, etc. 767. 777. 1 To you it is given for Christ, not
only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him, etc. 455. 591 2 When
Christ was in ye form of GOD, he made himself of no reputation, etc. 63 689
2 There is a name given unto Christ, which is above all names, that in the
name of JESUS every knee should bow, etc. 689 2 God works in us both to will
and to do, even of his good pleasure etc. 591. 646 2 An exhortation to love.
If, therefore, there be any consolation in Christ, etc. 99 3 Christ shall
transform this vile body of ours to make it conformable, etc. 85. 88 3 Our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. 71. 87. 690. 4 Let your requests be showed unto God, in prayer and
supplication, etc. 914 4 We have learned, in what estate so ever we are,
therewith to be content, etc. 312
Out of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Colossians. 1 IT pleased the father that
all fulness should dwell in the son, etc. 77 1 By Christ all things are
created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, etc. 733 1 GOD has
delivered us from the power of darckenesse, and has translated, etc. 502 1 I
fulfilled that which is lacking to the afflictions of Christ, in my flesh,
etc. 461. 586 2 In Christ ye are complete (or made perfect) in whom also ye
are circumcised, etc. 999 2 Ceremonies compared to an obligation or hand
writing, etc 413 2 Let no man therefore judge you in meat or drink, or in
part of an holy day, etc. 140. 417 2 If ye be dead with Christ from the
rudiments of the world, why as yet, etc. 446 2 He condemns the voluntary
religion etc. 473 2 Not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh, etc. 448
2 By Christ ye are circumcised, with circumcision made without hands, by putting
off the body of the flesh subject to finne, etc. 1056 3 Servants obey them
that are your bodily masters, with fear, etc. 441. 3 Mortify your members
which are upon ^he earth: cornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection,
etc. 592 4 Take heed to the ministry that thou have received in the Lord,
etc. 906 4 Continue in prayer, and watch in the same continually, etc. 914
Out of the first Lpistle of S. Paul to the Thessalonians. 1 They of
Macedonia, and other nations, show of you, how you are turned to God from
idols, etc. 668 2 When you did receive the word of God which you heard of us,
etc. 12. 871. 963. 2 Our exhortation was not by deceipte, nor by uncleanness,
nor by gui^e. etc. 831 2 They, as they have killed the Lord Jesus and their
own Prophets so do they, etc. 452 3 We have sent Timotheus our brother and
minister of God, to confirm or establish you, etc. 41. 1016 3 We behaved not
our selves inordinarly amongst you, neither did we take our bread for
nothing, etc. 1122. 1137. 4 This is the will of God, even your holiness etc.
246. 464 4 He therefore that despises these things, despises not man, but
god, etc. 871 4 We that live and shall be remaining in the coming of the Lord,
etc. 70 4 This I say unto you in the word etc. Because the Lord himself shall
come down, etc. 75 4 The Lord himself shall descend from heaven in a show^e,
and in the voice of an Archangel, etc. 738 5 The God of peace sanctify you
throughout, that your whole spirit etc. 246 5 Rejoice always, pray continually,
in all things give thanks, etc. 917. 926 5 I beseech you that you acknowledge
them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, etc. 154. 1123 Prove
all things, and keep that which is good, etc. 839
Out of the second Epistle of S. Paul to the Thessalonians. 1 Our Lord shall be
revealed from heaven with the Angels of his power etc. 75. 741 1 Quench not
the sp^rite, despise not prophecies, etc. 715 2 The coming of antichriste is
after the working of Satan, in all power and signs and wonders of lying, etc.
753 2 The adversary or enemy of Christ shall be revealed, and shall be, etc.
887 2 Antichriste has placed himself in the throne or temple of God, etc. 855
2 Antichrist the great enemy of God shall be destroyed with ye breath of Gods
mouth etc. 831. 913 3 Whosoever works not, let him not eat, etc. 95 3 W^e
charge you brethren in the name of our lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw,
etc. 266 3 If there be any man that obeys not our words, etc. 1131
Out of the first Epistle of S. Paul to Timothy. 1 THe end of the
commaund^ment is ye love of a pure heart, and a good etc. 96. 400 1 I thancke
him, because he has counted me faithful putting me into the etc. 510 1 God
will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, etc.
546 1 It is a sure saying, and worthy by all means to be received, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, etc. 569 1 I am ordained a
preacher and an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles etc. 872 1 The law is
not given for ye just, but for the unjust, etc. 186. 200. 410 2 I exhort you
that prayers be made for kings, and for all that are in, etc. 170. 219. 914 1
God would have all men to b^e saved, and to come to the knowledge etc. 14. 624.
662 2 One God, and one mediator of God and men, etc. 61 2 Touching the manner
and ordering of women's apparel, etc. 239 2 But I suffer not a woman to teach,
neither to usurp authority over the man, etc. 1043 2 The servant of the
Lord must not stri^e, but be gentle unto al men etc 909 2 Adam was not deceived
but the woman was seduced, notwithstanding, etc. 225 2 This teach and exhort.
Whoso^uer teaches otherwise, and holds not himself contented, etc. 1116 3
These th^nges hitherto have I written unto thee, that thou may^^^ know how*
etc. 833 3 If any man were faultlesse, the husband of one wife, watchful, etc.
838 3 For if a man cannot rule his own house, how shall he care, etc. 895 3
God was made manifest in the flesh, etc. 69^ 3 Let a bishop be the husband
(...) one wife, let him rule* etc. 227. 113^ 4 Now the spirit speaks
e^^dently that in the latter times th^^ shall rise, etc. 98^ 4 Godliness is
profitable to (...) things, having promise of the (...) that is, etc. 46^ 4
God is the savior of al men, ^^pecially of those that believe, etc. 546 5 Lay
hands soudeinly (or rashly on no man, etc. 8^^ 6 The elders that rule well, le^
them be counted worthy of doub^^ honor, etc. 879. 112^ 5 Care and
consideration is to (...) had who are to be helped, and (...) are not to be
helped etc. 11^^ 5 Thou shall not mousell y^ (...) of the ox treading out the
corn, etc 1120. 5 Them that sin rebuke openly that the rest also may fear
etc. 9^^ 6 God dwe^leth in the light th^^ no man can atteine unto, etc. 61^ 6
Command them that are ric^ in this world that they be not high minded, neither
put their trust (...) uncertain riches, etc. 263. 28^* 1125 6 For they that
will be rich, (...) into temptation and snares, and (...) to many foolish,
etc. 26^ 6 Let as many servants as (...) under the yoke, count their mais^er
worthy, etc. 4^ 6 Godliness is great l^cre (...) a mind content with that
that has. etc. 265. 31^
Out of the second Epistle of S. Paul to Timothy. 1 GOD has saved us, and
call^^ us with an holy calling, (...) according to our works, etc. 6^^ 2 Let
every one that calls vp^^ the name of the Lord, depart from iniqui^ie, etc.
6^^ 2 No man which goes a (...) fare intangleth himse^fe with (...) affairs,
etc. 9^^ 2 Study to show thee self approved unto God, A worke-man not to be
ashamed, etc. 908 2 Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was
raised, etc. 294 2 It is a faithful saying. For if we be dead with him, we shall
also live, etc. 469 3 All Scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable
to teach, etc. 17. 542 4 Paul could not deal against diseases as he would:
example of Trophimo; whom he left sick at Miletum, etc. 838 4 Be thou unto
them that believe, an ensample in word, in conversation etc. 901 4 The time
shall come yt, they shall not abide to hear sound doctrine, etc 324 4 I charge
thee therefore before GOD and before the Lord Jesus Christ. etc. 908 4 Till I
come give attendaunce to reading, to exhortation and doctrine etc. 911 4 I have
fought a good fight, I have fulfilled my course, I have kept the faith, etc. 468
Out of the Epistle of S. Paul to Titus. 1 REbuke them sharply yt they may be
sound in the faith, etc. 109. 1 For this cause I left thee in Creta that thou
should ordeine, etc. 894. 895 1 Who can deny that to the clean all things
are clean, etc. 226 1 That the mouths of vain ^alkers, stirrers of minds
must be, etc. 908 1 In words they confess that they know God, but in their
deeds they deny him, etc. 570 2 Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own
masters, and to please, etc. 273 2 Speak to the elder women that they may
teach honest things, etc. 225 2 The grace of God that brings salvation has
appeared, etc 61. 546 3 God according to his mercy has saved us by the
founteine of regeneration, etc. 629. 973. 1064 3 Warn them to be subject to
rule and power, and to obey magistrates etc. 170 3 Touching an heretic,
obiectons made out of S. Paul. etc. 203 5. Bring diligently Zenas the lawyer
and Apollo, upon their way, that they may want nothing etc. 1115
Out of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews. 1 GOD in times past, at sundry
times, and in diverse manners spoke unto, etc. 527 1 Are they not all ministering
spirits, etc. 714. 732 1 God by his son has made the worlds, and does rule
and vpphold them with the word of his power, etc. 638 2 For as much then as ye
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part
with them, etc. 448. 691 2 Thou made him little inferior to the angels, etc.
696 2 It became him in all things to be made like unto his brethren, etc. 61.
687 2 He does no where take on him the Angels, but the seed of Abraham etc.
63. 687. 691 3 Exhort ye one another daily, while it is called to day, least
any of you be hardened, etc. 710 4 To us was the Gospel preached, as well as
unto them: but the word, etc. 983. 1026 5 No man takes the honor to himself,
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, etc. 704. 893 5 In the days of
his flesh, when he did offer up prayers and supplications, with strong crying
and tears, etc. 707 6 It cannot be that they which were once illuminated, if
they fall away, etc. 27. 518 6 Men verily swear by the greater, and an oath
for confirmation, etc. 132 7 Christ ever lives, to make intercession for us
etc. 662 7 And among them many were made priests, because they were not
suffered to endure by reason of death etc. 707 7 Christ, for that he endures
for ever, has an everlasting priesthood etc. 663 7 Our high priest had no
need, as those high priests had, first to, etc. 373 7 The forerunner is for
us entered into heaven, after the order of Melchisedech made a priest for ever,
etc. 704 8 Because I will be merciful to their vnrighteousnesses, and I will
no more, etc. 438 8 Christ were no priest, if he were on earth, etc. 706 9
Christ entered not into ye Tabernacle made with hands, but into the very, etc.
373. 708 9 If the ashes of a young cow sprinkled, does sanctify them, etc.
377. 9 Christ appeared once before the end of the world, to put away sin by
offering up himself, etc. 1094 10 Every priest appears daily ministering, and
oftentimes offers one manner of offering, etc. 708 10 Christ being one only
sacrifice offered up for sin, ^^tteth for ever at the right hand of GOD, etc.
569. 1069 10 Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of
God, etc. 469 10 If we sin willingly, after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, etc. 518 10 Cast not away your confidence, which has great
recompense of reward, etc. 304 11 Whosoever will come to God must believe, etc.
1099 11 And all these holy fathers, having through hope obtained good report,
etc. 433 11 They wandered about in sheep skins, and goat skins, being,
etc. 312 11 Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things, etc. 30 11 These through faith did subdue kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, etc. 150 12 Ye are come into the city of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, etc. 737 12 God
speaks to you, as to his sons: My son despise not thou the chastening of,
etc. 307 12 The fathers of your flesh, did for a few days, chasten you after
their own, etc. 310 12 Ye came not unto Mount Sina, to a fire, to a
whirlewinde, astormie etc. 814 13 To do good, and to distribute forgett not:
for with such sacrifice God is pleased, etc. 1125 13 By Christ we offer the
sacrifice of praise always unto God, that is, the fruit of lips which
confess his name, etc. 659. 710. 952 13 He suffered without the gate, and
offered himself a lively and most holy sacrifice, etc. 706 13 Be mindful of
them that are in bonds, as bound with them, etc. 97 13 Wedlock is honorable
among all, and the bed undefiled, etc. 223. 226. 1132 13 Obey them that have
the rule over you, and give place unto them, etc. 154 13 The bodies of those
beasts, whose blood is brought into the holy place, etc. 374
Out of the Epistle of S. James. 1 If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask
of God etc. 16. 304 1 Every good guieing and every perfect gift, etc. 918 1 Let
no man say when he is tempted he is rempted of God, etc. 485 1 For when he is
cried, he shall receive the crown of life, etc. 949 1 Let every man be swift
to hear, slow to speak, etc. 238 1 Pure religion and undefiled before God
and the father, etc. 475. 668. 2 Abraham was not justified by faith only, etc.
465 2 See thou how faith was made perfect by works, etc. 461 2 Let him ask
in faith nothing wavering, etc. 922 2 Abraham and we are justified by works,
etc. 28 2 If a brother or sister be naked and destitute of daily food, etc. 97
3 Touching the properties of the tongue, etc. 238 3 For the tongue is a little
member and boasts great things, etc. 319 4 Ye ask and receive not, because
ye ask amiss, etc. 918 4 There is one law giver which is able to save and to
destroy, etc. 905 5 Behold the hyre of laborers, which have reaped down your
fields, etc. 272 5 How the faithful should behave themselves toward, etc. 1080
5 Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be
healed, etc. 574. 580 5 Ye have lived in pleasure upon earth and been wanton,
etc. 299. 300. 509. 5 If any be sick among you, let him send for the elders,
etc. 1139
Out of the first Epistle of S. Peter. 1 YE are redeemed, not with gold and
silver, etc. 60. 770 1 We are borne a new, not of corruptible seed, etc 21 827
1 The prophets did search, at what moment or minute of time, the spirit, etc.
363 1 Hope perfectly in ye grace which is brought unto you, etc. 305 2 Fear
God honor ye king, 151. 2 Christ his own self bare our sins in his body
upon the, etc. 568 2 Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, etc. 1106
2 Christians are called priests. 879 2 As free, and not as having the liberty
for a cloak of maliciousness, etc. 448 2 The foundation of the church is
Ch^is^, etc. 861 2 Submit your selves to all manner ordinance of man, etc. 107
3 The eyes of the Lord are upon the just, etc. 521 3 Touching the manner and
ordering of women's apparel, etc. 239 3 That the Lord went in the spirit and
preached unto the spirits, etc. 66 3 Baptism saves us, not the putting away
of the filth of the flesh, etc. 983. 989 4 Dearly beloved, think it not
strange, that ye are tried with fire, etc. 294 4 See that none of you be
punished as a murderer, etc 296 4 As every man has received the gift, even so
minister y^ same, etc. 905 4 The Gosp^ll was preached also to the dead, etc.
765 4 Charity covers the multitude of sins etc 584 4 The time is, that
judgment must begin at the house of God, etc. 298 5 Be sober and watch, for
your adversary the devil, etc. 749. 751 5 The elders that are among you, I
beseech, etc. 867
Out of the second Epistle of S. Peter. 1 THe prophecy came not in old time by
ye will, etc. 10. 26. 717. 1 No prophecy in the scripture is of any private
interpretation. 907 2 God spared not the angels which sinned, etc. 745 2 The
Lord knows how to deliver his from temptation, etc. 174 2 There were false
Prophets among the people, even as, etc. 587 2 These are wells without water,
etc. 449 3 In the Epistles of Paul many things are hard to be understood, etc.
23. 24
Out of the Epistle of S. Jude. THe Angels which kept not their first estate,
etc. 745 Jude says that the Angel fought with Satan the devil, etc. 747
Out of the f^^st Epistle of S. John. 1 That which we have seen and heard we
declare unto you 81 1 The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from every sin,
etc. 82. 552 2 If we say we have no sin, we deceive, etc. 401. 496. 917 2
They went out from us, but they were none of us, etc. 604. 819. 820. 2
Annoynting and anointed, etc. 180 2 And the annoynting which ye have received
of him, etc. 707. 726 2 By this we know that he dwells in us by the spirit
that he gave, etc. 825 2 My babes, these things write I unto you, etc. 664 2
If any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him, etc. 482. 483
2 Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is Christ? etc. 629 3 Now are
we the sons of god, and yet it does not appear, etc. 727 3 We know that
when he appears, we shall be like unto him. 608 3 If we receive y^ witness of
men, etc. 550 3 Who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother have, etc.
289. 1124 3 He that commits sin, is of the devil, etc. 485 3 My babes, let
us not love in word nor in tongue, but in deed. 96. 4 Believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits, etc. 715. 839 4 Whosoever confesses that Jesus
is the son of God, etc. 463. 825 4 Every one that loves him that begat, etc.
55. 826 4 By this we know his love, because he gave his life, etc. 150. 825 4
Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God, etc. 688 4 Little children, ye are of God, and have overcome in you, etc.
727 4 God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God etc. 825 5 If
any man see his brother sin a sin which is unto death, etc. 519 5 He that
believes not God, makes him a liar, etc. 48 5 For all that is borne of God,
overcomes the world, etc. 54. 709 5 This is the love of God that we keep his
commandments. 409 5 And this is the confidence yt we have in him, that if we
ask, etc. 54
Out of the Apocalypse of S. John. 1 Fear not, I am the first and the last,
etc. 836 1 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, etc. 608 1 Jesus
Christ, prince of the kings of the earth, loved us, etc. 708 1 John was
banished into ye Isle of (...), etc. 873 2 Remember from whence thou art
fallen, etc. 593 2 To him that ouercometh I will give to eat, etc. 863 3 These
things says he that is holy and true, etc. 836 4 And I saw another angel
flying through ye middst of heaven, etc. 653 6 How long (...) thou Lord, which
art holy and true, etc. 757. 766 7 After this I ^awe, and behold a great
company, etc. 813 14 And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the dead, etc. 780 17 Great Babylon the mother of whoredoms, etc.
869 18 Go out of her my people, etc 859 19 And I fell down before ye fee^e of
the angel, to worship him, etc 653 21 The fearful, and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and murderers, etc. 655 22 And after I had heard and seen I fell
down to worship, etc. 653 22 See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant,
etc. 743. 842. 890

The third and last table containing a short sum of such words or names and
matters as are mentioned in this book,
A. AAron a type or figure of Christ. 332 Aaron his rod. 332 Abraham how he is
justified. 3. 387. 554 Abia beleeuinge the ward of the Lord, overcomes
5000000. men of the^ribe of Israel. 253 Abigei what they are. 279 Abrogation of
the Law 409 Abrogation of the Judicial laws. 427 Abortion, what it is. 443
Abuse of Christian liberty. 449 Alsolom. 523 Abuse of the Church goods. 1128
Achaz. 254 Accusatio^s false and wrongful. 320 Accusations that be just. 322
Actual sin, and the cause thereof. 505 Adam and ^ethusalem. 649 Adoration
651 Adamonition before punishment. 202 Adultery spoken against. 231 Adultery
and fornication. 863 Adulcerie pardoned by Christ. 234 Adultery what things
are in it forbidden. 234 Arian heretics condemned. 775 Affinity that the
word of God has with sacraments. 291. 892 Afflictions. 292 293. 298 299. 307.
310. 311. 312. 313 316. Altar 348 Altar or table of the Lord. 1070 Allthinges,
of God, by God, and in God. 494 Amasias 254 Ammon the king rebelling against
the word of God after two years unfortunate reign, was murdered of his own
household servaunts. 255 Ambition works by private gifts 278 Anabaptists and
Nouations the me. (...) of Satan. 569 Angel and Angels. 732. 733. 734. 735.
etc. vsque 745. Anthropomo^phites. 118. 613 Antiochus Epiphanes. 511 Anthemius.
892 Annoynting or annoyling. 1136 Apostles of Christ. 11 Apostles how they
bind and loose. 902 Apostles what they be. 877 Apostles b^ptise infants. 1055
Apostles authority very great. 12 Apostles Creed. 55 Apostles receive wages
1121 Application of scripture necessary. 903 Appeal. 392 Appearing of
spirits. 392 Article of the Christian faith 55 2 Article. 59 3 Article. 60 4
Article. 63 5 Article. 67 6 Article. 69 7 Article. 74 8 Article. 78 9 Article.
78 10 Article. 81 11 Ar^icle. 84 12 Article. 90 Aristocracie. 169 Arcke. 345.
346. 996. Assembly. 1064 Assemblies that be holy. 915. 916 Ascension of
Christ. 69 Asturia. 235 Asa. 253 Ascend into heaven. 1088 Ancient laws. 387
Authority of ye Apostles very great. 12 Authority of fathers. 393 Auengment
taken by the magistrate 196 Augustines opinion of the right hand of the
father. 73 Augustines division of signs. 955 Augustines sentence touching
merits of Saints. 494 Auricular confession. 577. 578 581 Authority of
pastors. 912 Author of Sacraments God himself. 962 Ancient exposition of
the words of the Supper: This is my body. 1086
B. Backbiting, pernicions. 323 Bargaining, buying, and selling. 287 Baptism.
989. 1005. 1013. 1027. 1031. 1033. 1050. 1055. 1060. 1061. 1062. Baptising with
water unconsecrated. 1039. 1040. Baptiser. 1042 Baptized. 824. 1055. 1060
Ba^lards. 395 Ba^des and Curtisans have benefices at Rome. 900 Belongs to us
to know what was written to the^ in old time. 15 Believe in the son of God.
59 Belief of ours the second Article thereof. 58 Belief in the church
forbidden. 78 Bed in wedlock ought to be undefiled. 226 Ben^fits of God are to
be acknowledged. 952 Beginning of sin against the holy Ghost. 517 Beginning
of the ministry, from whom, and the worthiness thereof. 875 Behavior of the
godly in their calamities. 300 Bearing witness. 319 Birth of Christ. 63
Bishops. 878. 905. Blaspemie. 516. 517 Blessing and thanksgiving. 977 Blood
and strangled forbidden by the apostles. 421 Body of Christ. 689 Body glorious.
87. 88 Body natural and body spiritual. 89 Bodies of ye wicked rise again.
89 Bonauentures opinion of grace. 1003 Bondage. 395. 441. 442 Both kinds in
the supper given and received. 1066 Bow down to images what it is. 122 Bread
among the Hebrews what it signifies. 947 Bread and wine remain in their
substance after consecration. 984 Bread and wine are so called after
consecration. 985 Breaking of bread. 1063 Burial of Christ. 65 Buying and
selling, etc. 394
C. Catalogue of the books of the divine Scripture. 12 Cause of Christ's
incarnation. 60 Calling to the ministry. 891. 893 Cathechising. 907.
Calamities. 291. 293 Candlestick golden. 347 Carnal and fleshly people. 404
Cure of the body 448 Cauills of those that attribute justification to works.
458 Cause of sin and evil. 483 Catholic church what it is. 79. 813 Carnal
bondage and servile. 991 Carthage counsel for examining of bishops. 895
Celebration of the supper, etc. 1072 Ceremonies. 229. 328 329. 330. 364. 413.
415. 424. 1033. 1034. Confession of true religion. 366 Charity. 92. 98 Christ
as yet executes all the duties of a priest in the church. 872 Christ what he
receyn^th to himself from his ministry and apostles. 872 Christ is the
natural son of God 883 Christ re^eyneth both natures unconfounded together.
691 Christ in one person remains undivided 694 Christ is king of all. 698
Christ is a Monarch. 698 Christ is content to debate with Pilate of his
kingdom. 700 Christ called the only son. 59 Christ how he reigns on earth
in his kingdom. 700 Christ Jesus the high pressed 704 Christ is anointed but
with invisible oil. 705 Christ does the office of a priest that is, teaches,
makes intercession, blesses, sacrifices, and sancrifieth 705 Christ his
priesthood. 706 Christians are kings and priesis. 709 Christ compared with
Adam. 49 Christ died not in vain. 50 Christ by interpretation anointed 60
Christ is our Lord. 60 Christ's conception and the manner thereof. 62 Christ's
conception pure. 63 Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate. 64 Christ a Judge. 74
Christ conueyeth himself away, when ye people would have made him a king. 218
Christians have nothing to do with the iron like Philosophy of the Stoikes. 301
Christ commands us to bear his cross. 309 Christ and Paul examples to us.
314 Christ is the rock, not, Christ signifies the rock. 991 Christ the first
begotten. 331 Christ and his Apostles institute schools. 1115 Christ has taken
all burdens from our shoulders. 437 Christ fulfilled the law, and is the
perfectnes of the faithful. 407 Christ alone is our life and salvation. 543
Christ does fully work our salvation. 544 Christ is received by faith and not
by works. 548 Christ how he preached the Gospel. 548. 661. 862. Church,
Churches, and Congregation. etc. 667. 812. 813. 815. 816. 820. 821. 827. 831.
832. 833. 852. 860. 861. 863. 864. 866. 867. 868. 1118 1127 Circumcision. 355.
357. 358. 359. 360. 361. City and temple of Jerusalem destroyed. 413 Clearkes
what they were sometime. 883 Communicating of properties. 696 Counsel of the
priests forsaken by king Ioas, and what followed. 254 Conscience at quiet and
peace before God is ye work of the holy ghost. 723. Constancy of the
Apostles. 723 Consecrating of pastors begun with fasting and prayer. 897
Concupiscence. 108. 949 Consubstantiall and coessentiall 59 Communion of
saints. 80 Confession and acknowledging of sins. 81 Confession of true
religion. 366 Conscience 100 1 Commandment. 112. 113 2 Commandment. 116 3
Commandment. 126 4 Commandment. 136 5 Commandment. 144 6 Commandment.
163 7 Commandment. 222 8 Commandment. 259 9 Commandment. 318 10
Commandment. 318 Commandments of the Lord their order. 136 Coniurers and
witches. 116 Country native. 145. 151 Correction. 161 Cockering of children.
262 Consecrating of magistrates. 177 Constantine the great. 181 Common in goods
in the Apostles time etc. 161 Common weal devised. 216 Communion. 1063 Common
cost or treasure. 221 Continency. 237. 238. 239. 240 Consolations general
against afflictions and troubles. 306 Coue^ing. 324 Covet what it is not that
we must not. 325 Congregation or assembly. 335 Constancy of certain holy me^
absteining from things unclean. 383 Covenant or new people, all things therein
are more evident than in the old covenant or testament. 436 Corruption of
our own nature, what and how great. 499 Controversy between Augustine and
Pelagius, touching the Grace of God. 53^ Conversion to God, 562 Confession.
570. 571. 572. 573. 574 600. Consecration of bread and wine. 168 Counsels, of
what sort they have been in these latter ages. 600 Consultation. 574 Continual
succession of bishops. 828 Conjunction with Christ and the Church. 1021
Consecration or blessing, changes not the nature of things. 796 Counsel of
Nice touching baptism. 1005 Counsel of Later. in what year. 986 Comfort for
afflicted consciences. 1110 Corruption of schools. 1116 Creation of the world.
5. 637 Creed of the Apostles ^5. 56 Creatures clean and unclean. 382 Curious
questioning of God forbidden. 605 Cyprian expounds the ninth Article. 78
Cyprian his error touching Babtisme. 1031
D. Dagon. 117 Dangerous to speak against Jupiter. 170 Damage. 270. 275. 396.
David's adultery. 233 David his opinion of Justification. 555 David co^plaineth
of his forced absence from ye holy assemblies. 916 Descent lineall of Messiah.
6 Death of the cross reprochful. 64 Death of Christ fruitful. 64 Descension
of Christ into hell. 65 Democracie. 170 Devises of new fangled worships are
cursed of God. 185 Deliverance by Gods goodness. 293 Denial of Gods truth in
persecution, is no way to keep our goos. 312 Decree of the synod holden at
Jerusalem. 421 Deliverer of us, who he is. 441 Definition of sin. 408 Death
of madd men is unfruitful, and therefore to be construed to the best. 512
Definition of the Gospel. 526 Departure from the Romish church. 849. 851. 858
Deacons what is their office. 87^ Deprauation, is the blotting out of the Image
of God in us. 500 Demonstration of the figurative words, This is my body,
etc, in the Lords supper. 1087 Destiny. 480 Discretion and clemency of the
judge. 199 Dicing and carding. 474 Discommodities that the saints do suffer,
are recompensed with greater commodities. 311 Disinheriting. 393 Diuorcement.
394. 1133 Division of goods. 394 Difference of the old and new testament, and
people. 435 Differences of sin. 480 Difference between Paena and Culpa
peccati. 58^ Disagreeing places of faith and works reconciled. 463 Dionysius
of ye names of God. 615 Dignity and prerogative of bishop^ increased. 882
Devil and devils. 479. 744. 745. 746. 747. Difference to be made of the Lord
body. 1107 Discipline of the Nazarites. 380 Discipline in schools. 1116
Discipline and correction of ministers. 1129 Doctrine of Christ, the chief
contents thereof. 3^ Doctors opinion of justification by faith, 466 Doctrine
Catholic of original sin. 49^ Doctors and fathers of the church confess
with one assent original^ sin. 67 Doctrine of free justification without
works, why it is to be kept incorrupted in the Church of Christ. 557
Doctrine of verity is needful to repentance. 563 Doctrine of Chrysostom
touching consestion. 576 Doctrine touching the Trinity is most certain. 631
Doctrine of the ancient Church of Rome. 830 Doctors or teachers. 878 Donation
of Constantine. 888 Doctrine when it is to be teached. 904 Doctrine private and
public. 907 Doctrine for the life sake not to be received. 9. 12. 17 Doubting
in two sorts. 34 Drunkenness. 440 Drunken or made drunk, in the scriptures
is sometime taken for made merry. 285 Duty of parents to their children. 158
Duty of children. 162 Duty of a good pastor. 906
E. Ease and rest upon the Sabbath, what it signifies. 138 Eating of blood
and strangled forbidden. 385 Ecclesiastical privileges. 183 Ecclesiastical
power in what points it consists. 837 Ecclesiastical matters of diverse
sorts, to be disposed by the church. 839 Ecclesiastical goods. 1118 Election
of magistrates. 175 Elders, whereof they have their name. 878 Emperors law
for the keeping of the sabbath. 143 End of the ministry, wherefore
instituted. 875 End of prayer what. 819 End of the institution of sacraments
983 Ends of the Lords supper. 1083 Ephod. 333 Ephesus, the twelve men thereof
not rebaptised. 1059 Equin^ctiall. 363 Equalirie between bishops and elders.
880 Error gross of the Patris-passians. 624 Error in the Apostolic church*
1001 Essence of God one, has a distinction of persons. 624 Essence of
substance. 626 Ethnicks sentences of God are in some place maimed. 104 Evil in
two significations. 494 Evangelists what they are. 878 Evil spirits. 744.
878 Evil life of the minister scandalous and offensive. 912 Examples of true
faith. 36 Examples of war and of captains, out of the Scriptures. 215
Examples of gods deliverance. 309 Examples of afflictions in the patriarchs.
313 Examples of afflictions of the old Church. 314 Examples of God justly
punishing. 521 Examination of bishops to be elected. 895 Exercises of a bishop
or pastor. 911. Exercises of repentance outwardly. 595 Exhomologesis, what it
is. 575 Exhortation to live. 99 Expositions of the Scriptures, etc. 27. 28.
Exposition ancient of the words of the Lords Supper. 1086 Ezekias commended
of GOD and prospered for breaking Images down. 254
F. Father, what he first taught. 5 Faith. 4. 6. 8. 30. 31. 33. 35. 37. 38. 40.
41. 42. 43. 48. 52. 53. 54. 203. 204.. etc. Face of God. 91 Fasting. 242. 243
244. 245 351. False doctrine concerning riches and rich men condemned. 263
Fathers and we are all one church of one and the same Testament. 429 Fathers
and we have all one faith. 429. One spirit. 430. One hope and heritage. 431.
One manner of innocation. 434 Falling away from religion of diverse sorts. 859
False Christians. 712 False counselors unworthy of the name. 254 Fall of
Angels from heaven. 745 Feast of the 7. month, or Tabernacle. 353 Feast of
trompets. 353 Feast of clensing. 353 Feast of atonement, is the time of
preaching the grace of God. 376 Fear of God. 564. 565 Fear in Gods cause is
to be excluded. 890 Flaterie. 323 Flaterers. 890 Final impenitencie. 519
Fighting in defense of thy country, 149 Flesh and blood shall not be in
heaven. 89 Flesh taken in the scripture for the old man. 588 Flesh profits
nothing. 1101 Form of the Lords Supper. 1068 Forms and ways of knowing God.
607 Forgiveness of sins. 82 Fornication. 234 Friendship to be preserved. 102
Fre^dome that we have by Christ. 443. 445. 446. Free. 444 Freemen of Christ
abuse not their liberty. 445 Fruits that become repentance. 593 Fulgentius. 74
Furniture of them that would have access to God. 922
G. Gardiansor overseers of fatherless children. 145 Garment to be worn at
the Lords supper. 1071 Gentiles. 102. 104. 105. 106. 148. Gesture in prayer.
928 Gestures at the Lords supper. 1071 Gospel. 326. 527. 526. 528. 558. 530
547. 1010. Gifts of the holy Ghost. 729 Gifts of the new testament. 438 GOD.
481 God being good, created all things good. 481 God is said to make men
blind. 492 God is said to harde^, in what sense, 492 God sometimes afflicts
them, whose sins he has forgiven. 584. God governor of all things. 637 God
is one in substance, and three in persons. 56 God a father. 57 God the maker of
heaven and earth 58 God almighty. 57 Gods son. 59 God alone forgiueth
sins. 83 God alone to be loved. 94 God will not be likened to any thing, 118
God a rewarder of his true worshippers. 125 God is all in all to his
confederats 357 God did forbear the fall of man. 488 God does punish sinners
justly. 520 God exhibiteth grace by and in Christ 532 God shadowed in visions.
616 God gives his gifts freely, 616 God shows himself to Moses. 617 God
what he is. 618 God does evidently open himsel^e in Christ. 618 God is known
by his works. 620 God is shadowed to us by comparisons. 622 God is one in
essence or being 623 Gods good will learned by his providence. God draws by
means those that the pre^estuiared to life. 645 God only alone is to be
worshipped. 6^6 God only to be served. 671 God h^th, his church. 855 God
present in the ministry to the worlds end. 919 God is moved with the prayers
of the (...). God de^^^reth to hear once petitions. 919 Godhead and manhood
of Christ mitted. 691 Godliness. 18. 43 Good of the church. 156 Goods of
other man ought not to rema^ne in thy possession. 280 Goods serve to supplye
our necessity. 283 Goods must serve to relieve the poor. 288 Good to whom
it must be done. 289 Good how we ought to do it. 290 Good (...). 515. 457 Godly
(...) falsely charged to frussleare the sacraments. 1008 Governors of schools.
1114 Grace. 529. 530. 531. 360. 1000. 1003. 1006. G^atian Emperor. 181
Guiltiness, punishment thereof. 397
H. Hallowed be thy name, expounded. 943 Herod and Antiochus eaten of worms
alive. 218 Heretics and false prophets. 397 Head of the church. 864 Heaven,
the seat, throne, or palace of our king. History of the Lords tabernacle.
342. 343 History of Anabaptisme. 1057 Householder his charge or office. 138
141. Honor. 146. 147. 149. 151. 153. 154. 155. Honesty. 226 Hospitality. 286
Hope of the faithful vpholdeth Christian patience. 304 Hop^. 503. Holy day.
350 Holy things. 391 Holocaustum the burnt offering. 368 How God guieth men over
to a reprobate mind or sense. 491 How God is said to do evil. 493 How
Christ is received. 547 How often the Lords supper is to be celebrated. 1016
Holiness that is perfect whence it proceeds. 813 Holy church, how to be
understood. 814 Holy time. 1129 Holy buildings. 1126 Holy instruments. 1127
Holy Ghost. 715. 716. 718. 719. 722. Holy Ghost is called a comforter. 723.
724. Holy Ghost compared to water, fire, (...), a done. 725. 1016 Hoares
Canonical. 936 How Christ has given his flesh to be meare. 1098 How
Christ's body is eaten, and his blood drunken. 1098 How the unbelievers are
made guilty of Christ's body and blood. 1104 How we should prepare our selves
to the Lords supper. 1109 Humanity of Christ. 687 Humbling and acknowledging
of sins. 564 Heart of all kinds and sorts forbidden. 166 Hirelings wages.
397 Hire is due, but Heritage proceeds of the parents good will. 469
Hypocrites, how they are or may be counted of in the church of God. 817
I. Jacob. 4 James defended. 426 James no patron of auricular confession. 580
Idols teach not. 122. 266 Idolatry. 392 Idleness condemned. 266 Jesus, the
name of the only begotten son. 60 Jesus is Christ the looked for Messiah.
537 Jews deny that Christ is come, or that Jesus is Christ. 540 Images. 117.
120. 121. 122 Image of patience. 303. Image of God. 614. 489 Image of the
devil. 560 Imperial law against the Anabaptists. 1058 Impenitents are
unhappy. 597 Incest. 236 Infelicitie of the ungodly. 299 Institution of a king
and of princes 390 Inheritance. 393 Incarnation of Christ. 687 Indulgences.
585 Infants not believing, are baptized. 1014 Infantes departing without
baptism are saved. 1044 Infantes confessing or believing. 1052 Infants
understand not the mystery of baptism. 1054 Infants baptized from the time
of the Apostles, 1057 Intercessour. 660 Intercession of Christ. 665 Invocation.
185. 586. 656 Inward marks of the church. 824 Interpreting to whom it
per^eyneth. 907 Interpreret or teacher what he must not seek. 908 Institution
of baptism by whom 1033 Institution of sacraments. 965 Ioas. 254 Iosaphat.
253 Ioram. 253 Iothan. 254 Josias. 255 Ioiada. 254 Judas was present at the
Lords Supper. 1103 Justification. 44. 52. 457 Justify. 45. 1006 Justified.
49. 50. 51. 406. 532 Judge, Judgment, and to Judge. 74. 191. 192. 193. 194.
295. 388. 389. Judicial laws. 389. 397 Jubilee Romish. 417 Iustiman
Emperor. 129
K. Kaliad the grandfather of Moses. 4 Keys of the kingdom of heaven. 558
Keys of the church. 901 Keys are the ministry of preaching the Gospel.
902. 903 Kinsmen and Cousens. 146 Killing and to Kill. 166. 175. 198 Kinds of
Bishops. 885 Kinds of prayer. 914 Kinds of punishment. 199 Kings and
Kingdoms. 218. 252. 256 257. 390. 699. 700. 701. 702. 703. 944
L. Labor commended. 266 Lamb a type of Christ, etc. 365 Law and Laws, etc.
100. 101. 102 303. 107. 108. 109. 110. 166. 186. 188. 189. 190. 400. 403. 404
405 408. 409. 411. 446. 447. 448. 578 Lauer of brass. 349 Legion of Thunder.
215 League. 6. 355. 356. 331. 357. Learners two sorts in the church. 907
Levites. 331. 332 Liberty of Christians, or Christian Liberty. 408. 440. 443.
448 591 Light clearest of the first world were nine men. 3 Lie, Lying, and
kinds of Lies. 320 Licentiousness. 449 Life eternal, and the day of
judgment. 6 Life everlasting. 90 Life promised to them that keep the law. 408
Likeness and difference of the ^lde and new testament and people. 428 Love
and Charity. 92. 93. 95 The Lord has not burdened his Church with infinite
laws. 1112 Lords prayer expounded. 941
M. Majesty and dignity of the moral law 112 Magistrates or rulers. 145. 168.
169 170. 171. 172. 175. 177. 178. 187 188. 198. 216 Magistracy three kinds.
169 Marriage and Married folk 222 227. Marriage. 228. 229. 230. 231. 392
Martyrs. 724 Manasses. 255 Manner of ordeyning those that be called to the
ministry. 896 Manner of the ancient singing in the ancient church. 933
Manner of prayer. 938 Manner of Christ's death. 64 Man's last day. 779 Man old
and new what it is. 588 Man convinced of sin, etc. 326 Man, his power. 588
Man next or near to us our neighbor. 94 Marks belonging to the members of
God. 822 Matrimony, 227. 230. 11 32 Mancipation. 395 Manumission. 395
Mediator. 61. 920 Members of satan. 1024 Memorial of the Lords supper. 1063
Merits and rewards of good works. 497 Meteors. 641 Ministry, Ministers,
and Pastors of the church. 146. 872 875. 876. 895. 900. 912. 111. 983 870.
872. 1094 Moses and his law. 7. 8. 189. 401 402. 416 Moral law. 110
Monarchy. 196 Monhs teach that sacraments give grace. 997 Murder. 105. 166.
398 Midw^ues, whether they may baptize. 1043 Mystery of our redemption. 114 Of
sprinckling water. 377. Of circumcision. 359. Of the Paschal Lamb. 362. Of the
Trinity. 630 632. 634
N. Nature. 100. 107 Name and Names of God. 359 475. 944. 127. 128. 608 Name of
Jesus Christ what it signifies. 972 Names of Ecclesiastical functions
^ntercha^mgably used in the scriptures. 880. 711 Names given to ye holy ghost.
725 Names given and taken in baptism. 1018 Neighbor. 94. 95. 96. 97 Newbyrth.
590. 1048 Noe and Some. 4 No man must hasten his own death. 512 No man living
perfect and unspotted. 401
O. Objection. 464. 486. 491. 665. 917 180. Obedience. 208. 220 Obstmate and
shibborne persons. 451 Ochosias. 253 Operations of the holy Ghost. 727
Offense, Offenses, and Offenders. 449. 450. 451. 452 Operation of the devil.
751. 173 Opportunity of prayer ministered of the spirit, in no wise to be let
pass. 929 Opinions of diverse sorts concerning God. 605 Opinion of the
Papists touching transubstantiation confuted. 983 Opinion of bodily presence,
confuted. 1084 Orders, and offices, instituted of God in his church. 877
P. Passion of Christ. 64 Parables. 1012 Patience. 303. 304 Patience of the
Saints. 303 Parish whereof it consists 815 Particular church. 815 Passover.
364. 365. 369 988 Pastoral office no Lordly dignity. 867. 897 Pastor and
pastors and their office. 878. 909. Pasquill. 322 Perilous for a subject, to
speak against his prince. 170 Persecutions of ye church. 314 Peculatus. 278
Persecutours recompensed. 316 People carnal and freshly. 397 People of god
where they be 1050 People of the new testaunent are after the name of Christ
called Christians. 437. 438 Pelagians. 1046 Peccata aliena, others sins. 510
Pentecost. 552 Penitents. 594. 597 Performance of promises when god defetreth
it, then he stays us in the Lords leisure. 906 Peter the chief of the
Apostles in what sense. 887 Peter called satan. 748 Person of Christ
notdiuided. 696 Petitions accepted of god, by who^, and from whom. 920 Pharao
his heart hardened. 493 Pity foolish in magistrates. 197 Plagium. 278. 392
Place to worship God in, is free for every man to chose where he likes. 416
Pleasure, all sense and feeling thereof is not forbidden. 284 Plagues of sames.
520 Pledges and pawnes. 371 Place of celebration of the Lords supper. 106^
Pleasures certoine granted of god 238 Pluralities of benefices. 900 Power.
834. 835. 836. 978. 836. 838 839. Power of the devil lunitted. 753 Pope not
head of the church. 865 Popes dying of the pocks, bewrays their chastity.
318 Polygainie. 228 Popish orders refused and why. 898 Popish regular priests.
084 Poly-histor. 10 Poor. 932. 1123. Preface of the Lords prayer. 941 1
Petition. 943 2 Petition. 944 3 Petition. 945 4 Petition. 947 5 Petition. 948 6
Petition. 949 7 Petition, etc. 950 Prayer and prayers. 665. 910. 914 916. 917.
918. 623. 924 925. 926. 927. 929. 930. 932. 939. 953. Priesthood abrogated. 415
Promises touching Christ our savior. 532 Preaching of the first glad tidings.
533 Proofs that there is a God. 605 Providence of God. 678. 916 Prodestination
or Gods foreappointment. 642 Prophetical, apostolical, and orthodoxicall
church. 828 Primacie of ye Romish church. 865 Prophets. 9. 10. 878 Priests and
Priesthood. 332. 333. 334. 335. 336. 338. 346. Prevogatiue of bishops. 881.
Princes. 182. 254. 700. 890 Proceeding of ye holy ghost. 719. 720 Preaching.
1020 Preachers called angels. 732 Procreation and bringing up of children.
225 Promises made to ye afflicted. 308 Prodigality. 269. 282 Promise and
communion of the Lord witnessed to us by bread and wine. 1083 Presence of
christ in ye supper. 1095 Punishment. 47, 129. 200. 201. 397 326. 519. 996.
295. 297. 1108 Purgatory. 770 Pythagoras. 103
R. Rape. 235 Religion and Religious. 40. 672 Resurrection. 67. 84 Reward and
punishment. 76. 467. 468. 470 655 Rebels. 152. 397 Restituation. 208. 281. 282.
396 Regeneration. 548. 590 Repent and Repentance. 561. 562 563. 594. 596. 598.
Reformation in religion, o^ght not to stay for a general counsel. 599
Reformation of Churches to be made. 1125 Rising out or from ye dead. 68. 85. 86
Right hand of God, what it signifies. 72 Riches and Richmen. 264. 282. 283
286. 909 Righteousness. 403. 555 Rites and Ceremonies. 415. 968 Riot. 269
Roboam. 253 Robberic and deceit. 274 Romans. 654 Rome is not the church of
god. 851 Rome is not ye mother church. 969 Rule of Saint Augustine for
figurative speeches. 992
S. Satisfaction for sins. 47. 84. 583 Sanctum sanctorum. 111 Sabbath. 14.
136. 137. 139. 141. 142. 143. 350. 351. etc. Sacrilege. 277. 396 Sanc^uarie.
166. 398 Saints, Sanctification, and Sanctify. 425.. 640. 672. 723. 935. 293
313. 742. 1030. Sacrificing in high places what it is. 416 Salvation to the
fathers. 432 Salvation preached in the Gospel belongs to all. 545 Samson. 381
Samuel. 778 Saturn. 611 Satan. 748. 749 Sacrament, Sacraments, Sacramental
signs, and Sacramental speeches. etc. 356. 823. 965. 966. 968. 959. 969. 970.
979. 986 989. 993. 994. 995. 997. 998. 100^. 1008. 1010. 1011. 1013. 1015 1017.
1027. 1028. 1029. 1063. 1082. Sacrifice, Sacrifices, and Sacrificing. 337. 378.
369. 371. 376. 775 767. 416. 658. 988. 1082. Saul. 252 Scriptures. 13. 23. 26.
28. 250. 603 Schools. 184. 1115. Slaunderers and rebels. 398 Scelera and
delicta. 509. Scaddai. 611 Schism and Schismatiques. 843 844. 846. 847. 848.
Senator Noble. 217 Seal of Gods grace. 1004 Seals whereunto they serve. 1011
Serve and Service, etc. 122. 509 667. 668. 670. 675. Secular priests. 884
Seu^ritie in Magistrates is not cruelty. 197 Sephora. 1044 Show bread. 347
Sin, Sins, and Sinners. 5. 46 50. 82. 83. 295. 296. 344 445. 477 486. 509.
507. 508. 513. 516. 518 522. 567. 917. Sunoniaches. 277 Singing in ye church.
932. 933. 935 Sign and Signs. 956. 957. 958 959. 969. 981. 982. Sitting of
Christ at the right hand of God, what it signifies. 71 Sodomie. 236
Soldiers. 214. 215. 960 Solomon and his temple. 253. 344 Soul and Souls.
754. 756. 757 758. 756. and us; 781 Spirit. 921. 714. 722. 728. 779 Spirits
good and bad. 732. 733. 734 735. 736. 737. 738. 739. 740. 741 742. etc. vsque.
754. Strange Gods. 115 Storke 148. Sto^kes. 301 Stipends assigned to ye
priests. 338 Study of ye church, and Students. 840. 1123 Subjects. 219 Sum
of the gospel. 145 Superstition. 673. 916 Swearing and to Swear. 130. 131 132.
Sword. 196 Supper of the lord. 420. 989. 1063 1065. 1066. 1067. 1068. 1073.
1078. 1079. Symbol, 961. Synodes. 1130 Synagogue. 263. 339. 813 Synaxis. 1019.
1063
T Tabernacle. 334. 339. 341. 862 Table of the Lord. 1063 Tables of Gods laws.
111. 112 Tale carriers. 322 Testament. 49. 463. 1064 Testimonies. 106. 364.
443. 669. 764. Teaching. 909. 910 Temples of Christians. 1126 Thanksgiving.
951. 652 653. 1063. Theft and deceipte. 106. 270. 395 Th^uma and Thnupha. 378
Theodosiu, Emperor. 181 Time holy. 417. 349. 1129 Torments nothing dismaye
the Apostles. 723 Tongue. 319. 1071 Toward what part of the world we must pray.
1127. Traditions. 5. 18. 447 Treasures heavenly, all given us of God in Christ.
77 Trial of oureselues by afflictions. 294 Trinity. 612. 627. 628. and ce
True worship and adoration. 652 True religion. 672 True understanding of the
Lords words, This is my body. 1085 True eating of Christ's body. 1097 True
end of schools. 1117 Tyranny. 169
V. Valentinian Emperor. 181 Verbum what it is. 1 Vengeance taken of bloody
Rome 319 Virtues of the pastor. 911 Vestal virgins. 368 Vessels belonging to
the Lords Supper. 1070 Vice is to be rebuked sharply and seasonably. 894
Vigilius. 74 Virgins and Virginity. 1134 Vows and vowed sacrifices. 379 380.
135. 421. 1137 Voluntary sin. etc. 497. 511 Vncleanethings. 386 Unity ought
to be kept. 849 Understanding. 589 Uncircumcised soul. 1048 Vrim and Thummim.
334 Usury and Usurers. 274. 275. 276
W. War, Wars, and Warriors. 207. 208. 209. 210. 211. 212. 213. 214. 215.
etc. 399. Wages of hirelings. 396 Water and the Word. 971 Ways of eating the
Lords Supper. 110^ Weight and measure. 397 Wedlock. 222. 223 etc. 227. 1133
1134 Wealth by inheritance. 266 Who elected to life. 643 Who an Heretic, and
who a Schismatique. 850 Who to be baptized. 1050 Why God created man so frail.
487 Whoredom and adultery. 393 Who do not rightly preach Christ 544 Why all
men are not saved. 546 Widows and Widowhoode. 1134 Wisdom of God. 619. 96^
Without the church no light or salvation. 843 Wicked are not partakers of the
things signified in the Sacraments. 98^ Witness and Witnesse-bearing. 39^ Wife
the arm of her husband. 224 Witches and Sothsayers. 397 Word, Words, and the
Word of God. etc. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. etc. vsque. 22. 24. 25.
26. etc. vsque 29. 525. 528. 823. 940. 971. 975 978. 1102. Works. 53. 54. 98.
406. 453. 454. 456. 457. 620 Worship, Worshipping, and Worshippers. 6. 652.
658. 744 Women-deacons and their office. 875 Worms take vengeance of Gods
enemies. 890 Worthy and unworthy eating and drinking of ye Lords supper. 1106
Writings of the old Testament given to Christians. 15 Wrath of God upon
kingdoms for usury. 276
Y. Year of Jubilee. 354
Z. Zuinglius. 502. 1015. 1020. 1204

FINIS.
The first Decade of Sermons, written by Henry Bullinger.
Of the word of God, the cause of it, and how and by whom it was revealed to
the world.
The first Sermon.
ALl the decrees of Christian faith, with every way how to live rightly,
well, and holyly, and finally, all true and heavenly wisdom, have always been
fetched out of the testimonies or determinate judgments of the word of God:
neither can they, by those which are wise men in deed, or by the faithful,
and those which are called by God to the ministry of the Churches, be drawn,
taught, or last of all, soundly confirmed from else where, then out of the word
of God. Therefore, whosoever is ignorant what the word of God, and the meaning
of the word of God is, he seems to be as one, blind, deaf, and without
wit, in the Temple of the Lord, in the schole of Christ, and lastly, in the
very reading of the sacred Scriptures. But whereas some are nothing zealous,
but very hardly drawn to the hearing of Sermons in the Church, that springs
out of no other fountain than this, which is, because they do neither rightly
understand, nor diligently inoughe weigh the virtue, and true force of the
word of God. That nothing therefore may cause the zealous desirers of the
truth, and the word of God to stay on this point: but rather that that
estimation of Gods word, which is due unto it, may be laid up in all men's
hearts, I will (by Gods help) lay forth unto you (dearly beloved) those
things, which a godly man ought to think, and hold as concerning the word of
God. And pray ye earnestly and continually to our bountiful God, that it may
please him to give to me his holy and effectual power to speak, and to you
the opening of your ears and mynds, so that in all that I shall say, the Lord
his name may be praised, and your souls be profited abundantly.

First I have to declare what the word of God is. Verbum in the scriptures,
Verbum, what it is.
and according to the very property of the Hebrew tongue is diversely taken.
For it signifies what thing soever a man will, even as among the Germans, the
word Ding, is most In English a thing.
largely used. In S. Luke, the Angel of God says to the blessed Virgin, with
God shall no word be impossible, which is all one, as if he had said, all
things are possible to God, or to God is nothing impossible. Verbum also
signifies a word, uttered by the mouth of a man. Sometime it is used for a
charge, sometime for a whole sentence or speech, or prophecy: whereof in the
Scriptures there are many examples. But when Verbum is joined with any thing
else, as in this place we call it Verbum Dei, the^ is it not used in the same
signification. For Verbum Dei, the word of God, does signify The word of God
what it is.
the virtue and power of God: it is also put for the Son of God, which i^ the
second person in ye most reverend trinity. For ye saying of the holy
Eua^angelist is evident to al me^, The word was made flesh. But in this
treatise of ours, ye word of God does properly signify ye speech of God, and
the revealing of gods will, first of al uttered in a lively expressed voice by
ye mouth of Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, and after that again registered
in writings, which are rightly called holy and divine Scriptures. The word
does show the mind of him out of whom it comes: therefore the word of God
does make declaration of God. But God of him self naturally speaks truth,
he is just, good, pure, immortal, eternal, therefore it follows, that the
word of God also, which comes out of the mouth of God, is true, just, without
deceit and guile, without error or evil affection, holy, pure, good,
immortal, and everlasting. For in the Gospel says the Lord, Thy word is
truth. And the Apostle Paul says, The word of God is not tied. Again the
Scripture every where cries, The word of the Lord indureth for ever. And
Solomon says, Every word of God is purely cleansed: Add thou nothing to his
words, least peradventure he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. David
also says, The sayings of the Lord are pure sayings even as it were silver
cleansed in the fire, and seven times fined from the earth.

This you shall more fully perceive Of ^he (...) of (...)
(dearly beloved) if I speak somewhat more largely of the cause, or beginning
and certainty of the word of God. The word of God is truth: but God is the
only welspring of truth: therefore God is the beginning and cause of the
word of God. And here in deed God, since he has not members like to mortal
men, wants also a bodily mouth: yet nevertheless, because the mouth is the
instrument of the voice, to God is a mouth atributed. For he spoke to men in ye
voice of a man, that is, in a voice easily understood of men and facioned
according to the speech usually spoken among men. This is euidentlye to be
seen in the things wherein he dealte with the holy fathers, with whom, as
with our parents Adam and Eua, Noe and the rest of the fathers, he is read to
have talked many and often times. In the mount Sina the Lord him self preached
to the great congregation of Israel rehearsing so plainly, that they might
understand, those ten Commandments, wherein is contained every point of
godliness. For in the. 5. of Deuteronomy. thus we read: These words (meaning the.
10. Commau^dements) spoke the Lord with a loud voice, from out of the mids
of the fire, to the whole congregation. And in the 4. Chapter: A voice of
words you heard, but no similitude did you see beside the voice. God verily
used oftentimes the means of Angels, by whose ministry he talked with
mortal men. And it is very well known to all men, that the son of God the
father being incarnate, walked about on the earth, and being very God and man,
taught the people of Israel almost for the space of. 3. years. But in times
past, and before that the Son of God was borne in the world, God by little
and little, made him self acquainted with the hearts of the holy Fathers, and
after that with the minds of the holy Prophets, and last of all by their
preaching and writings, he taught the whole world. So also Christ our Lord
sent the holy ghost, which is of the father and the son into the Apostles, by
whose mouths words and writings, he was known to all the world. And al these
servants of god, as it were the elect vessels of God, having The word of God
revealed to the world by men.
with sincere hearts, received the revelation of God, from God him self, first
of all, in a lively expressed voice delivered to the world the Oracles, and
word of God which they before had learned, and afterward, when the world
drew more to an end, some of them did put them in writing for a memorial to
the posterity: And it is good to know how and by whom all this was done. For
by this narration, the true cause, certainty and dignity of the word of God
does plainly appear.

There are not extant to be seen the writings of any man from the beginning of
the world, until the time of Moses, which are come to our knowledge:
although it be likely that that same ancient and first world was not altogether
without all writings. For by S. Jude the Apostle and brother of S. James, is
cited the written prophecy of our holy father Enoch, which is read to have been
the seventh from our father Adam. Furthermore, the writing or history of Job,
seems to have been set forth a great while before. But how soever it is,
all the Saints in the Church of God, give to Moses the faithful servant of
God, the first place among the holy writers.

From the beginning therefore of the world, God by his spirit, and the How
and by whom the word of God has been revealed from the beginning of the world,
ministry of Angels, spoke to the holy fathers: and they by word of mouth
taught their children, and childers children, and all their posterity, that
which they had learned at the mouth of God: when they verily had heard it,
not to the intent to keep it close to themselves, but also to make their
posterity partakers of the same. For God oftentimes witnesses, that He will
be the God of the fathers and of their seed for evermore. This is most plainly
to be seen in the history of Adam, Noe and Abraham, the first and great
grandfathers. In the. 19. of Genesis, verily we read: that the angel of God,
yea and that more is, that eue^ the Lord him self did say to Abraham, And
shall I hide from Abraham what I mind to do? since of Abraham Abraham.
shall come a great and mighty people, and all the nations of the earth shall
be blessed in him? And this I know, that he will command his children, and
his posterity after him, to keep the way of the Lord, and to do justice,
judgment, and the rest. Abraham therefore, a faithful and zealous worshipper
of God, did not (even as also those old fathers of the first world did not)
wax negligent at all herein, but did diligently teach men the will and
judgments of God: whereupon of Moses, yea and of God him self, he is called a
prophet. That devout and lively tradition of the fathers from hand to hand,
was had in use continually, even from the beginning of the world, until ye time
of Moses. Moreover, God of his goodness did provide, ye no age at any time,
should be without most excellent lights, to be witnesses of the undoubted
faith, and fathers of great authority. For the world before the deluge The
clearest lights of the first world.
had in it. 9. most excellent, most holy, and wise men, Adam, Seth, Enos Kenam,
Malaleel, Iared, Enoch, Methusalem, and Lamech. The chief of these, Adam and
Methusalem do begin, Adam and Methusalem.
and make an end of all the. 1656 years of the world, before the deluge. For
Adam lived. 930. years. He dies therefore the. 726. year before the flood.
And Methusalem lived. 969. years. He dies in the very same year that the flood
did ouerflowe: and he lived together with Adam. 243. years, so that of Adam he
might be abundantly inoughe instructed as concerning the beginning of things,
as concerning God, the fall and restoring again of mankind, and all things
else belonging to religion, even as he was taught of God him self. These two
fathers with the rest above named, were able sufficiently inoughe, to instruct
the whole age in the true salvation and right ways of the Lord.

After the deluge, God gave to the world again excellent men, and very great
lights. The names of them are, Noe, Sem, Arphaxad, Sale, Heber, Palec, Reu,
Saruch, Nachor, Tha^e, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Here have we. 13. most
excellent Patriarchs, among whom the first two, Noe and Sem are the chief,
next to Noe.
whom Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were more notable then the rest. Noe lived.
950. years in all. He was. 600 years old, when the flood drowned the world.
He therefore saw and heard all the holy fathers of the first world before
the deluge, three only excepted, Adam, Seth and Enos. And also he lived many
years together with the other, which had both seen and heard them, so that
he could be ignorant in no point of those things which Adam had taught. Noe
dies (which is marvel to be told, and yet very true) in the. 59. year of
Abraham's age. Sem the son of Noah, lived ^em.
many years with his father. For he lived in all. 600. years. He was borne to
Noah about. 96. years before the deluge. He saw and heard therefore, not only
his father Noe, and his grandfather Lam^ch, but also his great grand siar
Methusalem, with whom he lived those. 96. years before the deluge. Of him he
might be informed of all those things which Methusalem had heard and learned
of Adam, and the other Patriarchs. Sem dies after the death of Abraham, in
the. 52. year of Jacob, which was. 37. years after the death of Abraham, in
the. 112. year of Isaac his age: So that Jacob the Patriarch might very well
learn all the true divinity of Sem him self, even as he had heard it of
Methusalem, who was the third witness and teacher from Adam. Furthermore,
Iaacob the Patriarch, delivered to his Iaacob.
children that which he received of God, to teach to his posterity. In
Mesopotamia there is borne to Iaacob his son Leui, and to him again is born
Kahad, which both saw and heard Iaacob. For Kahad lived no small number of
years with his grandfather Iaacob. For he is rehearsed in the roll of them,
which went with Iaacob down into Egypt: but Iaacob lived. 17. years with his
children in Egypt. This Kahad is the grandfather of Moses, the father of Amram,
Kahad. Amram. Moses.
from whom Moses did perfectly draw that full and certain tradition by hand, as
concerning the will, commandments and judgments of God, even as Amram his
father, had learned the^ of his father Kahad, Kahad of Iaacob, Iaacob of Sem,
Sem of Methusalem and of Adam the first father of us all: so now that Moses is
from Adam the seventh witness in the world. And from the beginning of the
world to the birth of Moses, are fully complete 2368. years of the world.
And who so ever shall diligently reckon the years, not in vain set down by
Moses in Genesis and Erodus, he shall find this account to be true and right.

Now also, it behooves us to know those chief principles of that lively
tradition, delivered by the holy fathers at the appointment of God, as The
chief contents of the holy fathers lively tradition.
it were from hand to hand to all the posterity. The fathers taught their
children, that God of his natural goodness, wishing well to mankind, would
have all men to come to the knowledge of the truth, and to be like in nature
to God him self, holy, happy, and absolutely blessed. And therefore that God
in the beginning, did create man to his own similitude and likeness, to the
intent that he should be good, holy, immortal, blessed, and partaker of all the
good gifts of God: but that man continued not in that dignity and happy
estate, but by the means of the devil, and his own proper fault, fell into
sin, misery, and death, changing his likeness to God, into the similitude
of the devil. Moreover, that God here again, as it were of fresh, began the
work of salvation, whereby mankind being restored and set free from all evil,
might once again be made like unto God: and that he meant to bring this
mighty, and divine work to pass, by a certain middle mean, that is, by the
word incarnate. For as by this taking of flesh, he joined man to God, so by
dying in the flesh, with sacrifice he cleansed, sanctified, and delivered
mankind, and by giving him his holy spirit, he made him like again in nature
to God, that is immortal, and absolutely blessed. And last of all, he works
in us a willing endeavor, aptly to resemble the property, and conditions of
him, to whose likeness we are created, so that we may be holy both body and
soul. They added moreover, that the word should be incarnate in his due time,
and appointed age. And also, that there did remain a great day for
judgment, wherein though all men were gathered together, yet the rightuous
only should receive that reward of heavenly immortality. So the^, this is
the brief sum of the holy fathers tradition, which it is best to untwist
more largely, and to speak of it more diligently, as it were by parts. First
therefore, the fathers taught, God.
that the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are one God in the most
reverend Trinity, the maker and governor of heaven, and earth, and all
Creation of the world
things which are therein, by whom man was made, and who for man did make all
things, and put all things under mankind, to minister unto him things
necessary, as a loving father and most bountiful Lord. Then they taught that
man consisted of soul and body, and that he in deed was made good according
to the image and likeness of God, but that by his own fault, and egging
forward of the devil, Sin and death.
falling into sin, he brought into the world death and damnation, together
with a web of miseries, out of which it can not rid it self: So that
now, all the children of Adam, even from Adam are borne the sons of wrath
and wretchedness. But, that God whose mercy abounds according to his
incomprehensible goodness, taking pity on the misery of mankind, did even
of his mere grace, grant pardon for the offense, Grace, life, and redemption
by Christ.
and did lay the weight of the punishment upon his only son, to the intent
that he, when his heel was crushed by the Serpent, might him self break the
Serpents head. That is to say, God does make a promise of seed, that is, of a
son, who taking flesh of a peerless woman, I mean, that Virgin most
worthy of commendations, should by his death, vanquishe death, and Satan the
author of death, and should bring the faithful sons of Adam out of
bondage: yea, and that more is, should by adoption make them the sons of God,
and heirs of life everlasting. The holy fathers therefore, taught to believe
in God, and in Faith.
his son the redeemer of ye whole world: when in their very sacrifices they did
represent his death, as it were an unspotted sacrifice, wherewith he meant to
wipe away, and cleanse the sins of all the world. And therefore had The
lineall descent of Messiah
they a most diligent eye to the stock and lineall descent of the Meschias.
For, it is brought down, as it were by a line, from Adam to Noe, and from Noe
by Sem even to Abraham him self: and to him again it was said, In thy seed
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed: in which words the promise once
made to Adam, as touching Christ the redeemer, and chaunger of Gods curse into
blessing, is renewed and repeated again. The same line is brought down from
Abraham by Isaac unto Jacob, and Jacob being full of the spirit of God, pointed
out his son Judah to be the root of the blessed seed, as it is to be seen
in 49. of Genesis. Lastly, in the tribe of Judah, the house of David was noted,
out of which that seed and branch of life should come. Moreover, the holy
fathers taught, that God by a certain The league of God.
league has joined him self to mankind, and that he has most straightly
bound him self to the faithful, and the faithful likewise to him self
again. Whereupon, they did teach to be faithful to God ward, to honor God,
to hate false Gods, to call upon the only God, and to worship him devoutly.
Furthermore, they taught, The worship of God.
that the worship of God did consist in things spiritual, as faith, hope,
charity, obedience, upright dealing, holiness, innocence, patience, truth,
judgment, and godliness. And therefore did they reprehend naughtiness, and
sin, falshoode, lack of belief, desperation, disobedience, vnpatientnesse,
lying, hypocrisy, hatred, dispitefull tauntes, violence, wrong, unrighteous
dealing, uncleanness, riottousnesse, surfeiting, whoredom, unrighteousness,
and ungodliness. They taught, that God was a rewarder of good, but a punisher
and revenger of evil. They taught, that the souls of Life eternal and the
day of judgment.
men were immortal, and that the bodies should rise again in the day of
judgment: therefore they exhorted us all, so to live in this temporal life,
that we do not lose the life eternal. This is the sum of the word of God
revealed to the fathers, and by them delivered to their posterity. This is ye
tradition of the holy fathers, which co^prehendeth al religion. Finally, this
is the true, ancient, undoubted, authentical, and catholic faith of the
fathers. Besides this, the holy fathers taught The true ^ystoricall ^arration
^eliuered by the fathers to their children.
their children, and childers children, the account of the years from the
beginning of the world, and also the true historical course, as well
profitable as necessary, of things from the creation of the world, even unto
their own times, least peradventure their children should be ignorant of
the beginning and succession of worldly things, and also of the judgments of
God, and examples of them which lived, as well godly as ungodly. I could
declare unto you all this evidently, and in very good order, out of the first
book of Moses called Genesis if it were not that thereby the sermen should be
drawn out somewhat longer then the use is.

But I suppose that there are few, or rather none at al here present, which
do not perceive that I have rehearsed this that I have said, touching the
tradition of the ancient fathers, as it were word for word out of the book
of Genesis, so that now, I may very well go forward in the narration which I
have begone.

So then, what so ever hitherto was Moses in an hystory compileth the
traditions of the fathers.
of the fathers delivered to the world by word of mouth, and as it were from
hand to hand, that was first of all put into writing by the holy man Moses,
together with those things, which were done in all the time of Moses life, by
the space of. 120. years. And that his estimation might be the greater
throughout all the world, among all men, and in all ages, and that none
should but know, that the writings of Moses were the very word of God it
self, Moses was furnished, and as it were consecrated, by God with signs, and
wonders to be meruelled at in deed, which the almighty by the hand, that
is, by the ministry of Moses did bring to pass: and verily, he wrought them
not in any corner of the world, or place unknown, but in Egypt, the most
flourishing and renoumed kingdom of that age. Those miracles were greater and
far more by many, then that they can be here rehearsed in few words:
neither is it needful to repeat them, because you, dearly beloved, are not
unskillful or ignorant of them at al. After that also, God by other means
procured authority to Moses. For many and often times, God had communication
with Moses: and amongst the rest of his talk said he, Behold, I will come to
thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear me talking with thee, and
may believe thee for evermore

Neither was the Lord therewith content, but commanded Meles to call together
all the people, six hundredth thousand men, I say, with their wives and
children. They are called out to the mount Sina, where God appears in a
wonderful and terrible fashion, and he him self preaching to the
congregation, does rehearse unto them the ten Commandments. But the people
being terrified with the majesty of God, does pray and beseech, that God him
self would no more afterward, preach to the congregation with his own mouth,
saying, that it were inoughe, if he would use Moses as an interpreter to them,
and by him speak to the Church. The most high God did like the offer, and
after that, he spoke to the people by Moses, what soever he would have done.
And for because that the people was a stifnecked people, and by keeping company
with Idolaters in Egypt, was not a little corrupted, Moses now began to set
down in writing, those things which ye holy fathers by tradition had taught,
and the things also which the Lord had revealed unto him. The cause why he
wrote them was, least peradventure, by oblivion, continuance of time, and
obstinancie of a people so slow to believe, they might either perish, or else
be corrupted. The Lord also set Moses an example to follow. For what so ever God
had spoken to the Church in Mount Sina, that same did he straight way after,
write with his own finger in two tables of stone, as he had with his finger
from the beginning of ye world written the same in the hearts of the fathers.
Afterward also in plain words, he commanded Moses to write what soever the
Lord had reveled. Moses obeyed the Lords commandment and writ them. The holy
Gheste which was wholye in the mind of Moses directed his hand as he writ.
There was no ability wanting in Moses, that was necessary for a most absolute
writer. He was abundantly instructed by his ancestors. For he was borne of
the holiest progeny of those fathers, whom God had appointed to be witnesses
of his will, commandments, and judgments, suppose Amram, Kahad, Jacob, Sem,
Methusalem, and Adam. He was able therefore, to write a true and certain
History, from the beginning of the world, even until his own time.
Whereunto he added those things, which were done among the people of God in
his own life time, whereof he was a very true witness, as one that saw and
heard them. Yea and that more is, whatsoever he did set forth in his books,
that did he read to his people, and amongst so many thousands, was there not
one found, which gainsayed that which he rehearsed: so that the whole consent
and witnesse-bearing of the great congregation, did bring no small authority
to the writings of Moses.

Moses therefore, contained in the The au^horitie of Moses, very great.
five books called the five books of Moses, an history from the beginning of
the world, eue^ unto his own death, by the space of. 2488. years. In which he
declared most largely, the Revelation of the word of God made unto men, and
whatsoever the word of God does contain and teach. In which, as we have the
manyfolde Oracles of God him self, so have we the most lightsom testimonies,
sentences, examples, and decrees, of the most excellent, ancient, holy, wise,
and greatest me^ of all the world, touching all things, which seem to
appertain to true godliness, and the way how to live well and holily. These
books therefore, found a ready prepared entrance of belief among all the
po^^eritie, as books which are authentical, and which of them selves have
authority sufficient, and which without gainsaying, ought to be believed of
all the world. Yea, and that more is, our Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten
son of God, does refer the faithful to the reading of Moses, yea, and that
in deed in the chiefest points of our salvation: The places are to be seen
John. 5. Luke. 16. In the. 5. of Matthew he says, Do not think that I am
come to destroy the law and the prophets, sor I am not come to destroy them,
but to fulfill them. For, verily I say unto you, though heaven and earth do
pass, one jot or title of the law shall not pass till all be fulfilled. Who
so ever therefore, shall undo one of the least of these commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven.
There have verily some been found, that have spoaken against Moses the servant
of God But God has imputed that gainsaying, as done against his divine
Majesty, and punished it most sharply. The proofs hereof are to be seen in
Exodus. 16. and Numerie the. 12. And first of the people murmuring against
Moses: the^ of Marie Moses sister, speaking against her brother. But to the
people it was said, Not against the Ministers, but against the Lord are your
complaints. As for Marie, she was horribly stricken with a Leprofie.
Theotectus was stricken blind: and Theopompus fell to be mad, because he had
irreverently touched the word of God. For although the word of God ^e
reveled, spoken, and written by men, yet does it not therefore cease to be
that, which in deed it is, neither does it therefore begin to be the word
of men, because it is preached and heard of men: no more then the King his
commandment, which is proclaimed by the Criar, is said to be the
commandment of the criar. He despises God, and with God al ye holy
Patriarchs, whosoever does contemn Moses, by whom God speaks unto us, and at
whose hands we have received those things, which the Patriarchs from the
beginning of the world, by tradition delivered to the posterity. There is no
difference between the word of God, which is taught by the lively expressed
voice of man, and that which is written by the pen of man, but so far
forth as the lively voice and writing do differ between themselves: the
matter undoubtedly, the sense, and meaning in the one and the other is al one.
By this (dearly beloved) you have perceived the certain history of the
beginning of the word of God.

Now let us go forward to the rest, that is, to add the history of the
proceeding The proceeding of the word of God.
of the word of God, and by what means it shined ever and anon very clear and
brightly unto the world. By and by after the departure, of the holy man Moses
out of this world into heaven, the Lord of his bountifulness gave most
excellent Prophets unto his Church, which he had chosen to the intent that
by it he might reveal his word unto the whole world. And the Prophets were to
them of the The Prophets.
old time, as at this day amongst us are Prophets, Priests, wisemen,
Preachers, Pastors, Bishops, Doctors or Divines, most skillful in Heavenly
things, and given by God to guide the people in the faith. And he whosoever
shall read the holy history, will confess, that there flourished of this
sort no small number, and those not obscure even until the captivity at
Babylon. Amongst whom are rekoned these singular and excellent men, Phinees,
Samuel, Helias, Heliseus, Esaias, and Ieremias. David, and Solomon were both
Kings and Prophets. In time of the captivity at Babylon, Daniel and Ezechiel
were notably known. After the captivity, flourished among the rest, Zacharias
the son of Barachias. Here have I reckoned up a few among many: who although
they flourished at sundry times, and that the one a great while after the
other, yet did they all with one consent, acknowledge that God spoke to the
world by Moses, who, God so appointing it, left to the Church in the world, a
breuiarie of true divinity, and a most absolute Sum of the word of God
contained in writing. All these Priests, Divines and prophets, in all that they
did had an especial eye to the doctrine of Moses. They did also refer all men
in cases of faith and religion, to the books of Moses. The law of Moses,
which is in deed the Law of God, and The Law.
is most properly called Thora, as it were the guide, and rule of faith, and
life, they did diligently beat into the minds of all men. This did they
according to the time, persons and place, expound to al men. For all the Priests
and Prophets before the incarnation of Christ, did by word of mouth teach the
men of their time, godliness and true religion. Neither did they teach any
other thing, then that which the Fathers had received of God, and which Moses
had received of God and the fathers, and straight ways after committing it to
writing, did set it out to all us which follow, even until the end of the
world: so that now, in the Prophets, we have the doctrine of Moses, and
tradition of the Fathers, and them in all and every point more fully and
plainly expounded and polished, being moreover, to the places, times and
pers^ns very fitly applied.

Furthermore, the Doctrine, and The au^^oritie of ^he holy ^^ophetes ^as very
great.
writings of the Prophets have always been of great authority among all wise
men throughout the whole world. For it is well perceived by many arguments, yt
they took not their beginning of ye prophets themselves as chief Authors, but
were inspired from God out of heaven by the holy spirit of God. For it is God,
which dwelling by his spirit in the minds of the Prophets, speaks to us by
their months. And for that cause have they a most large testimony at ye hands
of Christ, and his elect Apostles. What say ye to this moreover, that God by
their ministry has wrought miracles and wonders to be marueiled at, and
those not a few? That at the least by mighty signs we might learn that it
is God, by whose inspiration the Prophets do, teach, and write whatsoever
they left for us to remember. Furthermore, so many commonweals, and
congregations gathered together, and governed by the Prophets according to the
word of God, do show most evident testimonies of God his truth in the
Prophets. Plato, Zeno, Aristotle, and other Philosophers of the Gentiles, are
praised as excellent men. But which of them could ever yet gather a Church to
live according to their ordinances? And yet our Prophets have had the most
excellent and renowned commonweals, or Congregatio^s, yea and that more is,
the most flourishing Kingdoms in all ye world under their authority. All the
wysemen in the whole world, I mean those which lived in his time, did
reverence Solomon, a King and so great a Prophet, and came unto him from the
very vtmoste ends of the world. Daniel also had the preeminence among the
wisemen at Babylon, being then the most renoumed Monarchy in all the world.

He was moreover, in great estimation with Darius Medus, the Son of Astyages
or Assuerus, and also with Cyrus that most excellent King. And here it lyketh
me well to speak somewhat of that divine foreknowledge in our Prophets, and
most assured foreshewing of things which were to come after many years
passed. And now to say nothing of others, did not Esaias most truly foretell
those things which were afterward fulfilled by ye Jews in our Lord Christ? Not
in vain did he seem to them of old time, to be rather an Evangelist, then a
Prophet foretelling things to come. He did openly tell the name of king Cyrus
one hundred and threescore years at the least, before that Cyrus was borne.
Daniel also, was called of them in the old time by the name of one which
Polyhisto^
knew much. For, he did foretell those things which are, and have been done
in all the kingdoms of the world almost, and among the people of God, from his
own time until the time of Christ, and further until the last day of
Judgment so plainly, that he may seem to have compiled an history of those
things, which then were already gone and past. Al these things I say, do
very evidently prove, that the Doctrine, and writings of the Prophets are the
very word of God: with which name and title, they are set foo^the in sundry
places of the Scriptures. Verily, Peter the Apostle says, The prophecy came
not in old 2 Pet. 1.
time by the will of man: but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost. The word God revealed by the onne of God.


And although God did largely, clearly, plainly and simply, reveal his wo^d
to the world by the Patriarchs, by M^ses, by the Priests and Prophets, yet
did he in the last times of all, by his Son, set it forth most clearly,
simply, and abundantly to all the world. For the very and only begotten Son
of God the father, as the Prophets had foretold, descending from Heaven does
fulfill al what soever they foretold, and by the space almost of three years
does teach all points of Godliness. For says John, No man at any time has
seen God, the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he
has declared him. The Lord himself moreover, says to his Disciples, Al
things which I have herd of my Father have I made known to you. And again he
says, I am the light of the world: whosoever does follow me does not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. Our Lord also did teach, that to
him which would enter into The chief co^tents of Christ his doctrine.
Heaven and be saved, the heavenly regeneration was needeful: because in the
first birth, man is borne to death in ye second to life. But that that
regeneration is made perfect in us, by the spirit of God, which instrueteth
our hearts in faith, I say in faith in Christ, who died for our sins, and
rose again for our justification. He taught that by that faith they which
believe are justified: and that out of the same faith do grow sundry fruits
of charity and innocence, to the bringing forth whereof, he did most
earnestly exhort them. He taught furthermore, that he was the fulfilling or
fulness of the law and the Prophets, and did also approve and expound the
doctrine of Moses and the Prophets. To doctrine he joined diverse miracles and
benefits, whereby he declared that he him self was that light of the world,
and the mighty and bountiful redeemer of the world. And, to the intent that
his doctrine and benefits might be known to all the world, he chose to
himself witnesses, The Apostles of Christ.
whom he called Apostles, because he purposed to send them to Preach
throughout the world. Those witnesses were simple men, innocents, just,
tellers of truth, without deceit or subtilties, and in all points holy and
good: whose names it is very profitable often to repeat in the Congregation.
The names of the Apostles are these, Peter and Andrewe, James and John,
Philippe and Bartholomevve, Thomas and Matthew, James the son of Alphe and
Judas his brother, whose surname was Thaddaeus, Simon and Judas Iscariot,
into whose room (because he had betrayed the Lord) came Saint Matthias. These
had he by the space almost of three years, hearers of his heavenly doctrine,
and beholders of his divine works. These after his ascension in to the
Heavens, did he by the holy ghost send down from Heaven, instruct with all
kind of faculties. For, as they were in the Scriptures passing skilful: so
were they not unskillful or wanting eloquence in any tongue. And being once
after this manner instructed, they depart out of the City of Jerusalem, and
pass through the compass of the earth, preaching to all people and Nations
that which they had received to preach of the savior of the world, and the
Lord Jesus Christ. And when for certain years, they had preached by word of
mouth, then did they also set down in writing that which they had preached.
For some, verily, writ an history of the words and deeds of Christ. and some
of the words and deeds of the Apostles. Other some sent sondrie Epistles to
diverse Nations. In all which, to confirm the truth, they use the Scripture of
the law, and the Prophets, even as we read that the Lord oftentimes did.
Moreover, to the twelve Apostles are joined two great lights of the world,
John Baptiste, then whom, there was never any more holy borne of women, and the
^^hn Bap^^st and ^^ule.
chosen vessel Paul, the great teacher of the Gentiles.

Neither is it to be merueiled at, that the forerunner and Apostles of The
autho^^tie of the Apostles, ^^y great.
Christ had always very great dignity, and authority in the Church. For, even
as they were the ambassadors of the eternal King, of all ages, and of the
whole world: so, being endued with the spirit of God, they did nothing
according to the judgment of their own minds. And the Lord by their
ministry wrought great miracles, thereby to garnishe the ministry of them,
and to commend their doctrine unto us. And what may be thought of that,
moreover, that by that word of God they did convert the whole world gathering
together, and laying the foundations of notable Churches through out the
compass of the world? which verily by man's counsel and words, they had never
been able to have brought to pass. To this is further added, that they which
once leaned to this doctrine, as a doctrine giving life, did not refuse to die.
Besides that how many soever had their belief in the doctrine of the Gospel,
they were not afraid through water, fire, and swords to cut of this life,
and to lay hand on the life to come. The faithful Saints could in no wise have
don these things, unless the doctrine which they believed had been of God.
Although therefore, that the Apostles were men, yet their doctrine, first of
all taught by a lively expressed voice, and after that, set down in writing
with pen and yncke, is the doctrine of God, and the very true word of God.
For therefore the Apostle left this saying in writing, When ye did receive the
word of God which ye heard of us, ye received 1. These. 2
it not as the word of men, but as it is in deed, the word of God, which
effectually works in you that believe.

But now, the matter it self and place require that I gather also and The
roll of the books of the divine Scriptures
plainly reckon up those books, wherein is contained the very word of God,
first of all declared of the Fathers, of Christ himself, and the Apostles
byword of mouth, and after that also written into Books by the Prophets and
Apostles. And in the first place verily are set the five books of Moses. Then
follow the books of Joshua, of Judges, of Ruth, two books of Samuel, two of
Kings, two of Chronicles, of Esdras, Nehemias, and Hester one a piece. After
these come Job, David or the book of Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
Cantica. With them are numbered the four greater Prophets Esaias, Ieremias,
Ezechiel, and Daniel: then the twelve lesser Prophets, whose names are very
well known: With these books the old Testament ended. The New Testament
has in the beginning the Evangelical history of Christ the Lord, written by
four Authors, that is, by two Apostles, Mathewe and John: and by two
Disciples, Mark and Luke: who compiled a wonderful goodly and profitable
book of the Acts of the Apostles. Paul to sundry Churches and persons
published 14. Epistles. The other Apostles wrote 7. which are called both
Canonical and Catholic. And the books of the new Testament are ended with the
revelation of Jesus Christ, which he opened to the Disciple whom he loved,
John the Evangelist and Apostle, showing unto him and so to the whole church,
the ordinance of God touching the Church, even until the day of judgment.
Therefore in these few and mean, not unmeasurable: in these plain and
simple, not dark and vnkemmed books: is coo^prehended the full doctrine of
godlynes, which is the very word of the true, living and eternal God.

Also the books of Moses and the Prophets through so many ages, perils The
scripture is sound and uncorrupted.
and captiuities, came sound and vncorruptted even until the time of Christ
and his Apostles. For the Lord Jesus and the Apostles used those books as true
copies and authentical: which undoubtedly they neither would, nor could have
done, if so be that either they had been corrupted, or altogether perished. The
books also, which the Apostles of Christ have added, were throughout all
persecutions kept in the Church safe and uncorrupted, and are come sound and
uncorrupted into our hands, upon whom the ends of the world are fallen. For
by the vigila^t care and unspeakable goodness of God our Father, it is brought
to pass, that no age at any time either has or shall want so great a treasure.

Thus much hitherto have I declared unto you (derely beloved) what the word of
God is, what the beginning of it in the Church was, and what proceeding,
dignity and certainty it had. The word of God is the speech of God, that is
to say, the revealing of his good will to mankind, which from the beginning,
one while by his own mouth, and an other while by the speech of Angels, he
did open to those first, ancient, and most holy Fathers: who again by
tradition, did faithfully deliver it to their posterity. Here are to be
remembered those great lights of the world Adam, Seth, Methusalem, Noe, Sem,
Abraham, Isaac, Iaacob, Amram, and his Son Moses, who at Gods commandment,
did in writing comprehend the history and traditions of the holy Fathers,
whereunto he joined the written law, and exposition of the law, together with
a large and lightsome history of his own life time. After Moses, God gave to
his Church most excellent men, Prophets and Priests, who also by word of
mouth and wrytings, did deliver to their posterity that which they had
learned of the Lord, After them came the Only begotten Son of God himself
down from heaven into the world, and fulfilled all, whatsoever was found to be
written of himself in the Law, and the Prophets. The same also taught a
most absolute mean how to live well and holily: He made the Apostles his
witnesses. Which witnesses did afterward, first of all with a lively
expressed voice, preach al things which the Lord had taught them, and then, to
the intent that they should not be corrupted, or clean taken out of man's
remembrance, they did commit it to writing: so that now we have from the
Fathers, the Prophets and Apostles, the word of God as it was preached and
written. These things had their beginning of one and the same spirit of God,
and do tend to one end, that is, To teach us men how to live well and holily.
He that believes not these men, and namely the only begotten Son of God,
whom I pray you will he believe? We have here the most holy, innocent,
upright living, most praise worthy, most just, most ancient, most wise, and
most divine men of the whole world and compass of the earth, and briefly,
such men as are by all means without comparison. All the world cannot show
us the like again, although it should wholly a thousand times be assembled in
Counsels. The holy Emperor Constantine gathered a general counsel out of all the compass of the earth, thither came there together, out of all the world,
three hundred and eighteen most excellent Fathers. But they that are of the
wisest sort will say, that these are not so much as shadows, to be compared
to them of whom we have received the word of God. Let us therefore in all
things believe the word of God, delivered to us by the Scriptures. Let us
think that the Lord him self, which is the very living and eternal God,
does speak to us by the Scriptures. Let us for evermore praise the name and
goodness of him, who has vouched safe so faithfully, fully and plainly, to
open to us miserable mortal men, all the means how to live well and holyly.

To him be praise, honor, and glory, for evermore. Amen.

Of the word of God, to whom and to what end it was revealed, also in what
manner it is to be heard, and that it does fully teach the whole doctrine of
godliness.
The second Sermon.
Dearly beloved, in the last Sermon you learned what the word of God is,
from whence it came, by whom it was chiefly revealed, what proceedings it had,
and of what dignity and certainty it is. Now am I come again, and by Gods
favor and the help of your prayers, I will declare unto you (beloved) to
whom and to what end the word of God is revealed: in what manner it is to be
heard, and what the force thereof is or the effect.

Our God is the God of all men and nations, who according to the saying ^o whom
(...) word ^^ God is ^^ealed.
of the Apostle, would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge
of the truth: and therefore has he for the benefit, life and salvation of all
men, revealed his word, that so in deed, there might be a rule and certain
way, to lead men by the pathe of justice into life everlasting. God verily,
in the old time did show him self to the Israelites, his holy and peculiar
people, more familiarly then to other nations, as the Prophet says: To Jacob
has he declared his statutes, and his judgments to Israel: he has not dealt
so with any nation, neither has he showed them his judgments: and yet he
has not altogether been careless of the Gentiles. For as to the Ninevites he
sent Jonas, so Esaias, Ieremias, Daniell, and the other Prophets bestowed
much labor in teaching and admonishing the Gentiles. And those most ancient
Fathers, Noe, Abraham, and the rest, did not only instruct the Jewish people
which descended of them, but taught their other sons also, the judgments of
God. Our Lord Jesus Christ verily laying open the whole world before his
disciples, said: Teach all nations: Preach the Gospel to all creatures. And
when as Saint Peter did not yet fully understand, that the Gentiles also did
appertain to the fellowship of the Church of Christ, and that to the
Gentiles also did belong the preaching of the glad tidings of salvation,
purchased by Christ for the faithful, the Lord does instruct him by a
heavenly vision, by speaking to him out of heaven, and by the message which
came from Cornelius, as you know (dearly beloved) by the history of the
Acts of the Apostles. Let us therefore think (my brethren) that the word of
God and the holy Scriptures, are revealed to all men, to all ages, kinds,
degrees, and states, throughout the world. For the Apostle Paul also
confirming the same, says: Whatsoever things are written, are written for our
learning, that through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, we may have
hope.

Let none of us therefore hereafter say, what need I to care what is written
What have I to do what was written to the^ of old time.
to the Jews in the old Testament, or what the apostles have written to the
Romans, to the Corinthians, and to other nations? I am a Christian. The
Prophets to the men of their time, and the Apostles to those that lived in the
same age with them, did both preach and write. For if we think uprightly of
the matter, we shall see that the Scriptures of the old and new Testamentes,
ought therefore to be received of us, even because we are Christians. For
Christ our Savior and master, did refer us to the written books of Moses
and the Prophets. Saint Paul the very elect instrument of Christ, does apply
to us the Sacraments and examples of the old Fathers, that is to say,
Circumcision in baptism, Coloss. 2. and the Paschall lamb in the Supper or
Sacrament. 1. Cor. 5. In the tenth Chapter of the same Epistle he applies
sundry examples of the Fathers to us. And in the fourth to the Romans where he
reasons of faith, which justifies without the help of works, and the law,
he brings in the example of Abraham. And therewithal adds, Nevertheless
it is not written for Abraham alone, that faith was reckoned unto him for
righteousness, but also for us to whom it shall be reckoned if we believe. etc.

By that means, say some, we shall The writings of the old testament are also
given to Christians.
again be wrapped in the law, we shall be enforced to be circumcised, to
sacrifice flesh and blood of beasts, to admit again the priesthood of Aaron,
together with the temple, and the other ceremonies.

There shall again be allowed the byll of diuorcement, or putting away of a
man's wife, together with sufferaunce to marry many wives. To these I answer,
that in the old Testament we must consider, that some things there are,
which are for ever to be observed, and some things which are ceremonial and
suffered only till time of amendment. That time of amendment is the time of
Christ, who fulfilled the law, and took away the curse of the law.

The same Christ changed Circumcision into Baptism. He with his own only
sacrifice made an end of all sacrifices, so that now in stead of all
sacrifices, there is left to us that only sacrifice of Christ, wherein also
we learn to offer our own very bodies and prayers together with good deeds,
as spiritual sacrifices unto God. Christ changed the Priesthood of Aaron for
his own, and the Priesthood of al Christians. The Temple of God are we in
whom god by his spirit does dwell. All ceremonies did Christ make void, who
also in the nineteen of Mathewe did abrogate the bill of diuorcement, together
with the marriage of many wives. But although these Ceremonies, and some
external actions were abrogated and clean taken away by Christ, that we
should not be bound unto them: yet notwithstanding, the Scripture which was
published touching them, was not taken away or else made void by Christ. For
there must for ever be in the Church of Christ a certain testimonial, whereby
we may learn what manner of worshippings and figures of Christ they of the
old time had. Those worshippi^gs and figures of Christ must we at this day
interpret to the Church spiritually, and out of them we must no less then
out of the writings of the new Testament preach Christ, forgiveness of sins,
and repentance. So then to all Christians are the writings of the old
Testament given by God: in like manner as the Apostles writ to all Churches
those things which bore the name or title of some particular Congregations.

And to this end is the word of God To what and the lord of God is (...).
revealed to men, that it may teach them what, and what manner one God is
toward men, that he would have them to be saved, and that by faith in
Christ: what Christ is, and by what means salvation comes: what becomes
the true worshipers of God, what they ought to fly, and what to ensue. Neither
is it sufficient to know the will of God, unless we do the same and be saved.
And for that cause said Moses, Hear Israel the statutes and judgments
which I teach you, that ye may do them and live. And the Lord in the
Gospel confirming the same, cries: Blessed are they which hear the word of
God and keep it.

And here is to be praised the exceeding Gods goodness to be praised for
teaching us.
great goodness of God, which would have nothing hid from us, which makes
any whit to live rightly, well and holily. The wise and learned of this world
do for the most part bear envy or grudge, that other should attain unto the
true wisdom. But our Lord does gently, and of his own accord offer to us,
the whole knowledge of heavenly things, and is desirous that we go forward
therein, yea and that more is, he does further our labor, and bring it to an
end. For whosoever has, says the Lord him self in the Gospel, to him
shall be given, that he may have the more abundance. And every one that asks
receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be
opened. Whereupon S. James the Apostle says. If any of you lack wisdom, let
him ask of God, which gives to al men liberally, that is, willingly, not
with grudging, neither casts any man in the teeth, and it shall be given him.
Where, by the way, we see our duty, which is in reading and hearing the word
of God, to pray earnestly and zealously, that we may come to that end, for the
which the word of God was given and revealed unto us. But as touching that
matter, we will say somewhat more, when we come to declare in what manner of
sort, the word of God ought to be heard.

Now, because I have said, that All points of true godliness ^re taught ^s
in the holy scriptures.
the word of God is revealed, to the intent that it may fully instruct us
in the ways of God and our salvation, I will in few words declare unto you
(dearly beloved) that in the word of God delivered to us by the Prophets,
and Apostles, is abundantly contained the whole effect of godliness, and what
things soever are available to the leading of our lives rightly, well, and
holyly. For verily, it must needs be, that that doctrine is full and in all
points perfect, to which nothing ought either to be added, or else to be taken
away. But such a doctrine is the doctrine taught in the word of God, as
witnesses Moses Deuter. 4. and. 12. and Solomon Proverb. 30. What is he
therefore that does not confess that all points of true piety, are taught us
in the sacred Scriptures. Furthermore, no man can deny that to be a most
absolute doctrine, by which a man is so fully made perfect, that in this world
he may be taken for a just man, and in the world to come, be called for ever to
the company of God. But he, that believes the word of God uttered to the
world by the Prophets and Apostles, and lives thereafter, is called a just
man, and heir of life everlasting. That doctrine therefore is an absolute
doctrine. For Paul also declaring more largely and fully the same matter, ^
Tim. 3.
says: All Scripture given by inspiratio^ of god, is profitable to doctrine,
to reprove, to correction, to instruction which is in righteousness, that the
man of God may be perfect, instructed to all good works. Ye have (brethren) an
evident testimony of the fullness of the word of God. Ye have a doctrine
absolutely perfect in all points Ye have a most perfect effect of ye word of
God, because by this doctrine the man of God, that is the godly and devout
worshipper of God, is perfect being instructed, not to a certain few good
works, but unto all and every good work. Wherein therefore caust thou find
any want? I do not think that any one is such a sot, as to interpret these
words of Paul, to be spoken only touching the old Testament: seeing, it is
more manifest then the day light, that Paul applied them to his scholar
Timothy, who preached the Gospel, and was a minister of the new Testament.
If so be then, that the doctrine of the old Testament be of it self full, by
how much more shall it be the fuller, if the volume of the new Testament be
added there unto? I am not so ignorant, but that I know that the Lord Jesus
both did The Lord bothspake and did many things which ar^ not written.
and spoke many things, which were not written by the Apostles. But it
follows not therefore that the doctrine of the word of God, taught by the
Apostles, is not absolutely perfect. For John the Apostle and Evangelist does
freely confess, that the Lord did many other things also, which were not
written in his book: But immediately he adds this, and says: But these are
written that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that
in believing ye might have life through his name. He affirms by this
doctrine, which he contained in writing, that faith is fully taught, and that
through faith there is granted by God everlasting life. But the end of
absolute doctrine is to be happy and perfectly blessed. Since then, that that
comes to man by the written doctrine of the Gospel, undoubtedly that
doctrine of the Gospel is most absolutely perfect.

I know, that the Lord in the Gospel said, I have many things to tell you:
but at this time you can not bear them: But therwithal I know to, that he
immediately added this saying, But when the spirit of truth shall come, he
shall lead you into all truth. I know furthermore, that the spirit of
truth did come upon his disciples, and therefore I believe, that they
according to the true promise of Christ, were led into all truth, so that it
is most assuredly certain, that nothing was wanting in them.

But some there are, which when The Apostles set down in writing the whole
doctrine, of godliness
they can not deny this, do turn them selves and say, that the Apostles in
deed knew all things, but yet taught them not but by word of mouth only, not
setting down in writing al those things, which do appertain to true
godliness. As though it were likely that Christ his most faithful Apostles,
would upon spite, have kept back any thing from their posterity. As though in
deed, he had lied which said, These things are written, that in believing, ye
might have life everlasting. John therefore did let pass nothing which
belongs to our full instructing in the faith. Luke did omit nothing. Neither
did the rest of the Apostles and disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ suffer any
thing to ouerslip them. Paul also wrote fourteen sundry Epistles: but yet the
most of them contained one and the self same matter. Whereby we may very well
conjecture, that in them is wholly comprehended the absolute doctrine of
godliness. For he would not have repeated one and the self same thing so
often, to so many sundry men, if there had yet been any thing else necessary,
more fully to be taught, for the obtaining of salvation. Those things
undoubtedly would he have taught, and not have rehearsed one and the same
thing so many times. Verily in the third chapter of his Epistle to the
Ephesians he does affirm, that in the two first chapters of the same his
Epistle, he did declare his knowledge in the Gospel of Christ. God (says he)
by revelation showed the mystery unto me as I wrote before in few words,
whereby when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of
Christ. And this spoke he touching that one and only Epistle, yea and that
too touching the two first chapters of that one Epistle. Whereunto when the
most large and lightsome Letters or Epistles of Saint Paul him self, and
also of the other Apostles are added, who I pray you, unless he be altogether
without sense will once think that the Apostles have left in writing to us
their posterity, a doctrine not absolutely perfect.

As for those which do earnestly Against the lively and fai^^ traditio^^ of
the Apostles.
affirm, that all points of godliness were taught by the Apostles, to the
posterity by word of mouth, and not by writing, their purpose is to set to
sale their own, that is, men's ordinances in stead of the word of God.

But against this poison (my brethren) take this unto you for a medicine to
expel it. Confer the things, which these fellows set to sale, under the
color of the Apostles traditions, taught by word of mouth, and not by
writing, with the manifest writings of the Apostles, and if in any place you
shall perceive those traditions to disagree with the scriptures, then gather by
and by, that it is the forged invention of men, and not the Apostles tradition.
For they, which had one and the same spirit of truth, left not unto us one
thing in writing, and taught an other thing by word of mouth.

Furthermore, we must diligently search, whether those traditions do set
forward the glory of God, rather then of men, or the safety of the faithful,
rather then the private advantage of the Priests. And we must take heed of
men's traditions, especially since the Lord says, In vain do they worship
me, teaching doctrines the precepts of men: So that now, the surest way is to
cleave to the word of the Lord left to us in the Scriptures, which teaches
abundantly all things that belong to true godliness.

It remains now for me, to tell How the word of God is to ^e heard.
in what manner of sort, this perfect doctrine of godliness and salvation, I
mean, the very word of God ought to be heard of the faithful, to the intent
it may be heard with some fruit to profit them abundantly. I will in few
words contain it. Let the word of God be heard with great reverence,
which of right is due to God him self and godly things. Let it be heard very
attentively: with continual prayers between and earnest requests. Let it be
heard soberly to our profit, that by it we may become the better, that God by
us may be gloryfied, and not that we go curiously about to search out the
hidden counselles of God, or desire to be counted skillful and expert in many
matters.

Let true faith, the glory of God, and our salvation be appointed as the
measure and certain end of our hearing and reading. For, In Exodus Moses the
holy servant of God is commanded to sanctify the people, and make them in a
readiness to hear the sacred Sermon which God him self did mind to make the
next day after. Moses therefore comes, and demands of the whole people
due obedience to be showed as well to God, as to his Ministers.

Then commands he them to wash their garments, to abstain from their
wives. After that he appointeeh certain limits, beyond which it was not
lawful upon pain of death for them to pass.

By this we plainly learn, that the Lord does require such to be his
Disciples to hear him, as do especially show obedience and reverence to God
in all things. For he being God speaks to us men, all we men owe unto God
honor and fear. A man, unless he become lowly, humble, and obedient to God,
is altogether godless. Then is it required at the hands of those which are
meet hearers of the word of God, that they lay aparte worldly affairs,
which are signified by the garments: to tread under foot all filthynesse and
uncleanness of soul and body: to refrain for a season, even from those
pleasures which are lawful unto us. The holy Ghost does love the minds that
are purely cleansed, which yet notwithstanding are not cleansed but by the
spirit of God. Needful it is to have a sincere belief in God, and a ready
good will and desire to live according to that which is commanded in the word
of God. Moreover, we must be wise to sobriety. Over curious questions must be
set aside. Let things profitable to salvation only be learned.

Last of all, let especial heed be taken in hearing and learning. For says
Solomon, If thou will seek after wisdom as after gold, thou shalt obtain
it. Again he says, The searcher out of Gods majesty shall be overwhelmed by
his wonderful glory. And again he says, Seek not things too high for thee,
neither go about to search out things above thy strength: but what God has
commanded thee, that think thou always on: and be not over curious to know
his infinite works, for it is not expedient for thee to see his hidden secrets
with thine eyes. Whereupon the Apostle Paul says, Let no man think arrogantly
of him self, but so think that he may be modest and sober, according as God
to every one has given the measure of faith. And hereto belongs that which
the same Apostle says, Knowledge puffs up, but charity does edify.

But chiefly we must beware of those plagues, which choke the seed The
disea^es and plagues of the hearers of gods word
of the word of God, and quench it without any fruit at all in the hearts of
the hearers. Those plagues and diseases has the Lord rehcarsed or reckoned up
in the parable of the sower. For first of all, wanton and vain cogitations
which always lie wide open to the inspirations of Satan, and talk of
naughty men, are plagues to the word of God. Also voluptuous and deintie
lovers of this world, who can not abide to suffer any affliction for Christ and
his Gospel, do without any fruit at all hear Gods word, although they seem
to give ear unto it very joyfully. Furthermore, the care of this world, and
the deceit of riches, are most pestilent diseases in the hearers of the word
of God. For they do not only hinder the seed that it can not bring soorthe
fruit in their hearts, but also they do stir up and egg men forward to
gaynesay the word of God, and to afflict the earnest desirers of Gods word.
Here therefore we must take heed diligently, least being infected with these
diseases, we become vain and unthankful hearers of the word of God. We must
pray continually, that the bountiful and liberal Lord will vouchsafe to
bestow on us his spirit, that by it the seed of Gods word may be quickened in
our hearts, and that we, as holy and right hearers of his word may bear
fruit abundantly to the glory of God, and the everlasting salvation of our
own souls.

For what will it avail to hear the word of God without faith, and What the
power and effect of Gods word is.
without the holy spirit of God to work or stir inwardly in our hearts? The
Apostle Paul says, He which watreth is nothing, nor he which planteth, but
it is God which gives increase. We have need therefore of Gods watering,
that the word of God may grow to a perfect age, may receive increase, yea, and
may come also to the bringing forth of ripe fruit within our minds. The
same Apos^le Paul says, To us also is the word of God declared, even as
unto our fathers. But it auayled them nothing to hear the word, because it
was not joined with Faith in them that heard it: For they dyed in the desarte.
And immediately after, he says: Let us therefore do our best to enter into
that rest, so that no man dye in the same example of unbelief. If therefore,
that the word of God do sound in our ears, and therewithal the spirit of
God do show forth his power in our hearts, and that we in faith do truly
receive the word of God, then has the word of God a mighty sorce and
wonderful effect in us. For it drives away the misty darkness of errors, it
opens our eyes, it conuerteth and inlighteneth our minds, and instructs us
most fully and absolutely in truth and godliness. For the Prophet David in his
Psalms bears witness, and says: The law of the Lord is perfect converting
the soul, the testimony of God is true and gives wisdom un to the simple:
The commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes.
Furthermore, the word of God does feed, strengthen, confirm and comfort our
souls, it does regenerate, cleanse, make joyful and join us to god, yea and
obtains al things for us at Gods hands, setting us in a most happy state, in
so much that no goods or treasure of the whole world are to be compared with
the word of God. And thus much do we attribute to the word of God, not
without the testimony of Gods word. For, the Lord by the prophet Amos does
threa ten hunger and thirst, not to eat bread and to drink water, but to
hear the word of God. For in the old and new testaments it is said, that man
does not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of god. And the Apostle Paul says: that all things in the scriptures are
written for our learning, that by patience and comfort of the scriptures we
might have hope. Also Peter says ye are born a new, not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible, by the word of god which lives and lasts for ever. And
this is the word which by the gospel was preached unto you. The Lord also in
the gospel bears witness to the same, and says: Now are ye clean by the
word which I have spoken unto you. Again in the gospel he cries, saying: If
any man loves me, he will keep my saying, and my father will love him, and we
will come into him and make our dwelling place in him. Jeremy says also, Thy
word became my comfort. And the Prophet David says, The statutes of the Lord
are right and rejoice the heart, Whereunto add that saying of the Lords in the
gospel, If ye remain in me, and my words remain in you, ask what ye will,
and it shall be done for you. In an other place also the Prophet cries, saying:
If ye be willing and will hearken, ye shall eat the good of the land, but if
ye will not hear my word, the sword shall devour you. Moreover Moses does very
often and largely reckon up the good things that shall happen to them which
obey the word of God, Leuiticus. 26. Deutero. 28. Wherefore David durst boldly
prefer the word of God before all the pleasures and treasures of this world.
The fear of the Lord is clean and endures for ever, the judgments of the
Lord are true and righteous altogether: more to be desired are they the^ gold,
yea then much fine gold: sweeter also then honey and the dropping honey combs.
For by them thy servant is plainly taught, and in keeping of them there is
great advantage. Therefore is the law of thy mouth more precious unto me, then
thousands of silver and gold. Unless my delight had been in thy law, I had
perished in my misery. To this now does appertain that parable in the gospel
of him which bought ye precious pearl: and of him also which sold all that he
had, and bought the ground wherein he knew that treasure was hid. For, that
precious pearl, and that treasure are the gospel or word of God: which for
the excellency of it is in the scriptures called a light, a fire, a Sword, a
Maule which breaks stones, a Buckler, and by many other names like unto these.

Dearly beloved, this hour ye have heard our bountiful Lord and God, who
would have all men saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth, how he has
revealed his word to al men throughout ye whole world, to the intent that all
men in all places, of what kind, age, or degree so ever they be, may know the
truth, and be instructed in the true salvation, and may learn a perfect way
how to live rightly, well and holily, so that the man of God may be perfect,
instructed to all good works. For the Lord in the word of truth has
delivered to his Church all that is requisite to true godliness and salvation.
Whatsoever things are necessary to be known touching God, the works,
judgments, will and commandments of God, touching Christ, our faith in
Christ, and the duties of an holy life, all those things I say, are fully
taught in the word of God. Neither needs the Church to crave of any other,
or else with men's supplies to patch up that which seems to be wantinge in the
word of the Lord. For the Lord did not only, by the lively expressed voice
of the Apostles, teach our fathers the whole sum of godliness and salvation,
but did provide also, that it by the means of the same Apostles, should be
set down in writing. And that does manifestly appear, that it was done for the
posterities sake, that is, for us and our successors, to the intent that none
of us nor ours should be seduced, nor that false traditions should be popt into
any of our mouths in steed of the truth. We must all therefore beware, we must
all watch and stick fast unto the word of God, which is left to us in the
scriptures by the Prophets and Apostles. Finally let our care be wholly bent,
with faith and profit to hear whatsoever the Lord declares unto us. Let us
cast out and tread under foot whatsoever by our flesh, the world or the
devil, is objected to be a let to godliness. We know what the diseases and
plagues of ye seed of Gods word sowed in the hearts of the faithful are. We
know how great the power of Gods word is in them which hear it devoutly. Let
us therefore beseech our Lord God to power into our minds his holy spirit, by
whose virtue the seed of Gods word may be quickened in our hearts, to the
bringing forth of much fruit to the salvation of our souls, and the glory of
God our father. To whom be glory for ever.

Of the sense and right exposition of the word of God, and by what manner of
means it may be expounded.
The third Sermon.
DEarly beloved brethren, I do understand that by means of my doctrine of
the word of God, there are risen sundry thoughts in the hearts of many men:
yea, and that of some there are sown abroad very ungodly speeches. For some
there are, which do suppose that the scriptures, that is the very word of God,
is of it self so dark, that it cannot be read with any profit at al. And
again some other affirm, that the word plainly delivered by God to mankind,
does stand in need of no exposition. And therefore, say they, that the
scriptures ought in deed to be read of all men, but so, that every man may
lawfully invent and choose to himself such a sense, as every one shall be
persuaded in him self to be most convenient. These fellows do altogether
condemn the order received of the Churches, whereby the minister of ye church
does expound the Scriptures to the congregation. But I (dearly beloved) if as
ye have begoon, so ye will go forward to pray to the Lord, do trust by the
hope that I have in gods goodness, that I am able plainly to declare, that to
the godly the scripture is nothing dark at al, and that the lord his will is
altogether to have us understand it. Then that the Scriptures ought always to
be expounded. Where also I will teach you the manner, and some ready ways how to
interpret the scriptures. The handling of these points shall take away the
impediments which drive men from the reading of the word of god, and shall cause
the reading and hearing of the word of God to be both wholesome and fruitful.

And first of all, that Gods will is to have his word understood of man Gods
will is to have his word^ understood.
kind, we may thereby gather especially, because that in speaking to his
servant, he used a most common kind of speech, wherwithall even the very
idiotes were acquainted. Neither do we read that the Prophets and Apostles the
servant of God, and interpreters of his high and everlasting wisdom, did
use any strange kind of speech: so that in the whole pack of writers, none
can be found to excel them in a more plain and easy phrase of writing. Their
writings are full of common proverbs, similitudes, parables, comparisons,
devised narrations, examples, and such other like manner of speeches, then which
there is nothing that does more move and plainly teach the common sort of
wits among mortal men. There arises, I confess, some darkness in the
scriptures by reason of the natural property, figurative ornaments, and the
unacquainted use of the tongues. But that difficulty may easily be helped by
study, Difficulty in the scriptures
diligence, faith, and the means of skillful interpreters. I know yt ye
Apostle Peter says in the epistles of Paul Many things are hard to be
understood. But immediately he adds, which the unlearned, and those that are
imperfect or unstable, pervert, as they do the other scriptures also unto
their own destruction. Whereby we gather, that the scripture is difficulte or
obscure to the unlearned, unskillful, unexercised, and malicious or corrupted
wills, and not to the zealous and godly Readers or Hearers thereof. Therefore,
when S. Paul says, If as yet our gospel be hid: from them it is hid which
perish, in whom the Prince of this world has blinded the understanding of the
unbelievers, that to them there should not shine the light of the gospel of
the glory of Christ, who is the image of God. He does not lay the blame of this
difficulty on the word of God, but upon the unprofitable hearers. Whosoever we
are therefore, that do desire rightly to understand the word of God, our care
must be, that Satan possess not our minds, and close up our eyes. For, our
Savior also in the gospel said, This is damnation, because the light came
into the world and men loved darkness rather than light. Besides that, the
holy Prophets of God, and the Apostles, did not call the word of God or the
scriptures darkness, obscurenesse, or mistiness, but a certain brightness
and lightsomnesse. David says, Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet, and a
light unto my paths. And what I pray you is more evident than that which in
making doubtful and obscure things manifest, no man does refer to
darkness and uncertainties? Things uncertain, doubtful and obscure, are made
manifest by those things that are more certain, sure and evident. But as often
as any question or controversy does happen in matters of faith, do not all men
agree that it ought to be ended and determined by the scriptures? it must
therefore needs be that the scriptures are evident, plain, and most assuredly
certain.

But though the scripture be manifest, and the word of God be evident, The
word of God requires an exposition
yet notwithstanding, it refuses not a godly or holy exposition, but rather an
holy exposition does give a setting out to the word of God, and brings forth
much fruit in the godly hearer. And for because many do deny that the
scriptures ought to have any exposition, I will show by examples (which can not
be gainsaide) that they ought altogether to be expounded. For God him self,
having often communication with Moses by the space of forty days and as many
years, did by Moses expound to the Church the words of the law, which he
spoke in Mount Sina to the whole congregation of Israe^l, writing them in two
tables, which Moses left to us, the Deuteronomie and certain other books as
commentaries upon Gods commandments. After that, immediately followed the
Prophets, who interpreting the law of Moses, did apply it to the times,
places, and men of their age, and left to us that fellow, their sermons as
plain expositions of Gods law. In the eight A solemn exposition of Gods word.
Chapter of Nehemias we read these words. Esdras the Priest, brought the
Law, the book of Moses, and stood upon a turret made of wood, that is in the
holy pulpet. And Esdras opened the book before the congregation of men and
women, and who soever else had any understanding. And the Leuits stood with
him, so that he read out of the book, and the leuits instructed the people in
the law, and the people stood in their place And they read in the book of the
law distinctly, expounding the sense and causing them to understand the
reading. Thus much in the book of Nehemias Mark here by the way (my
brethren) that the lawful and holy ministers of the Church of God, did not
only read the word of God, but did also expound it.

This manner of reading and expounding the Scriptures or word of God, our
Lord Jesus Christ did neither abrogate nor contemn, when coming in the
flesh, he did as a true Prophet and heavenly master instruct the people of
his Church, in the doctrine of the New Testament. For entering into the
Synagogue at Nazareth, he stood up to read: and there was delivered to him
the book of the Prophet Esaias. So he opened the book, and read a certain
notable place out of the.lxj. Chapter. Then shutting the book, he gave it to
the Minister again, and expounded that which he had read, declaring how that
in him self now that prophecy was fulfilled.

Moreover, after that he was risen from death, he joined him self in company
to the two Disciples, which went to Emaus, with whom he talked of sundry
matters: but at length beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded
to them what so ever was written of him self throughout all the Scriptures. The
Apostles following this example of the Lord, did them selves also expound the
word of God.

For Peter in the second Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, does expound
the xvj. Psalm of Christ his resurrection from the dead. And Philip also
does plainly expound to the noble man of Ethiope the prophecy of Esaias,
whereby he brings him to the faith of Christ, and fellowship of the Church.
Whosoever does say that Paul does not every where interpret the holy Scripture,
he has neither read nor seen the deeds nor writings of Paul. Thus have I, I
hope, both plainly and substantially showed, that the word of God ought to be
expounded.

As for those which cry out against what their meaning is that will not have
the scriptures expounded.
the exposition of the Scriptures, and would not have the ministers of the
word and Churches, to declare the scriptures in open and solemn audience,
neither to apply them to the places, times, states, and persons, their fetch is
to seek somewhat else then the honor due unto God. They lead their lives
far otherwise, then is comely for godly men. Their talk is wicked,
unseemly, and dishonest. Their deeds are mischievous, and heinous offenses.
And this would they to do without punishment, and therefore desire to have
the exposition of the Scriptures to be taken clean away. For if a man do read
the words of the Scripture only, not applyinge it to the states, places,
times and persons, it someth that he has not greatly touched their ungodly
and wicked life. Therefore, when they cry that Sermons and expositions of the
scriptures, ought to be taken a way from among men, and that the Scriptures
ought to be read simplye without any addition, they mind nothing else but to
cast behind them the law of God, to tread under foot all discipline and
rebuking of sin, and so to offend freely without punishment: which sort of
men the rightuous Lord will in his appointed time punish, so much the more
grievously, as they do more boldly rebel against their God.

In the mean season, all the ministers of the Church must beware, The
scriptures are (...) to be ^orrupted with fortune expos^t^ons.
that they follow not herein their own affections any whit at all, or else
corrupt the Scriptures by their wrong interpretations, and so by that means
set forth to the Church their own inventions, and not the word of God. Some
such like offense it seems that the teachers of the ancient people in old
time did commit, because the Lord in Ezechiell accuses them saying, Seems
it a small thing to you to have eaten up the good pasture, but that ye must
also tread the residue of your pasture under your feet? and to drink the
clearer water, but that ye must trouble the rest with your feet? Thus my
sheep must be feign to eat the thing that is trodden down with your feet,
and to drink that which ye with your feet have defiled. A sore offense is
this, which the Lord according to his justice punishes most sharply. We
therefore the interpreters of Gods holy word, and faithful ministers of the
Church of Christ, must have a diligent regard to keep the Scriptures sound
and perfect, and to teach the people of Christ the word of God sincerely, made
plain I mean, and not corrupted or darkened by foolish and wrong expositions
of our own invention.

And now (dearly beloved) the The holy scriptures ^re not to be expounded
according to ^ens fan^^sies.
place and time require us to say somewhat unto you, touching the interpretation
of the holy Scriptures, or the exposition of the word of God. Wherein I will not
speak any thing particularly, of the skillful knowledge of tongues, or the
liberal sciences, which are things requisite in a good interpreter, but will
briefly touch the generalities alone. And first of al ye must understand,
that some things in the Scriptures or word of God, are so plainly set forth,
that they have need of no interpretation, neither will admit any exposition.
Which if any man go about with his own expositions to make more manifest, he
may seem to do as wittily, as he which with faggot light and torches, would
help the sun at his rising to give more light unto the world. As for those
things which are so set down, that they seem to require our help to expound
them, they must not be interpreted after our own fantasies, but according to
the mind and meaning of him, by whom the Scriptures were revealed. For Saint
Peter says, The prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Therefore the true and
proper sense of Gods word must be taken out of the Scriptures them selves, and
not be forceably thruste upon the Scriptures, as we our selves lust. And
therwithal ye must mark a few certain rules, which I mean briefly to touch
and to show unto you, in those few words which I have yet to speak.

First since the Apostle Paul would have the exposition of the Scriptures The
ex^^sition of the scripture (...) not be c^^trary to the arti^^^ of our belief.
to agree fitly, and in every point proportionally with our faith: as it is to
be seen in the twel^the to the Romans: And because again in the later
epistle to the Corinthians he says. Seeing then that we have the same spirit
of faith (according as it is written, I believed and therefore have I spoken) we
also believe and therefore do we speak: Let it therefore be taken for a point
of Catholic religion, not to bring in, or admit any thing in our expositions,
which others have alleged against the received articles of our faith,
contained in the Apostles Creed, and other co^fessions of the ancient fathers.
For sayt^ the apostle, in defense of the truth we can say somewhat, but
against the truth we are able to say nothing. When therefore in the Gospel
after S. John we read ye saying of ye Lord, The father is greater then I, we
must think that it is against the articles of our faith to make or admit any
equality in the Godhead betwixt the Father and the Son: and therefore, that
the Lord his meaning was otherwise then the very words at the first blush do
seem to import. Again, when we read this saying of the apostle, It can not be
that they which were once illuminated, if they fall away should be renewed again
into repentance: Let us not believe that repentance is to be denied to the^
that fall. For the Catholic Faith is this, that in every place, at every
season, so long as we live on this earth, a full pardon of all sins is
promised to all men which turn to the Lord. In like manner, when we read
that the Lord took bread, and said of the bread, This is my body, let us
presently remember that the Articles of our faith do attribute to our Lord
the very body of a man, which ascended into heaven, and sits at the right
hand of the Father, from whence it shall come to judge the quick and the
dead, and let us think that the Lord speaking of the Sacrament, would have
us to expound the words of the Sacrament Sacramentally, and not
Transubstancially. Also in reading that saying of the Apostle, Flesh and blood
can not inherit the kingdom of God, let us not by and by upon these words
take it simply as the words do seem to signify, but sticking to the Article
of our says, I believe the resurrection of the body, let us understand that by
flesh and blood are meant ye affections and infirmities, not the nature and
substance of our bodies.

Furthermore, we read in the gospel, that the Lord does gather a sum The
exposition must not be repugnant to the love of God and our neighbor.
of the law and the Prophets, saying: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind: this is the chief and
great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. In these two commaundeme^ts hangs the whole law and
the Prophets. Math. 22. Upon these words of the Lord, that holy man Aurelius
Augustinus in the. 36. Chapter of his first book De doctrina Christi. says*
Whosoever does seem to himself to understand the holy scriptures, or any part
thereof, so that that understanding he does not work these two points of
charity toward God, and his neighbor, he yet does not understand the
scriptures perfectly. But whosoever shall take out of them such an opinion, as
is profitable to the working of this charity, and yet shall not say the self
samethig which shall be proved that he did mean whom he reads in that place,
that man does not err to his own destruction, nor does altogether by lying
deceive other me^: Thus much writ Augustine. We must therefore by all means
possible, take heed that our interpretations do not tend to the overthrow of
charity, but to the furtherance and commendatio^ of it to al men. The Lord
says, Strive not with the wicked. But if we affirm that he spoke this to the
Magistrates also, the^ shall charity toward our neighbors, the safety of
them that are in ieopardie, and defense of the oppressed, be broken and clean
taken away. For thieves and unruly persons, robbers and naughty fellows, will
oppress the widows, the fatherless, and the poor, to that all iniquity
shall reign and have the upper hand. But in a mattter so manifestly known, I
suppose it is not needful to use many examples.

Moreover, it is requisite in expounding (...) expoun^^^g the ^^^^ptures ^e
must ^^rk that ^^at goes ^^fore and ^^lloweth ^^^er, and (...) the
circumsta^^es.
the Scriptures, and searching out the true sense of Gods word, that we mark
upon what occasion every thing is spoken, what goes before, what follows
after, at what season, in what order, and of what person any thing is spoken.
By the occasion, and the sentences going before and coming after, are examples
and parables for the most part expounded. Also, unless a man do always
mark the manner of speaking throughout the whole Scriptures, and that very
diligently too, he can not choose in his expositions but err very much out of
the right way.

Saint Paul observing the circumstaunce of the time, did thereby conclude
that Abraham was justified neither by Circumcision, nor yet by the Law. The
places are to be seen in the fourth to the Romans, and the third to the
Galathians: Again, when it is said to Peter, Put up thy sword into thy
sheath, He that takes the sword shall perish with the sword: We must
consider that Peter bare the personage of an Apostle, and not of a Magistrate.
For of the Magistrate we read, that to him is given the sword to reuengement.
But it would be over tedious and too troublesome, to rehearse more examples of
every particular place. The exposition of g^ds word ^^st be ma^^ by (...)
layin^ ^^ge^her of ^iuers places.


There is also beside these, another manner of interpreting the word of God,
that is, by conferring together the places which are like or unlike, and by
expounding the darker by the more evident, and the fewer by the more in number.
Whereas therefore the Lord says, The father is greater then I, we must consider
that the same Lord in another place says, My father and I are all one. And
whereas James the Apostle says, That Abraham and we are justified by works,
there are many places in Saint Paul to be set against that one. And this
manner of interpreting did Peter the Apostle allow, where he says: We 2. Pet.
1.
have a right sure word of prophecy, whereunto if ye attend, as unto a light
that shines in a dark place, ye do well, until the day dawne, and the day
star arise in your hearts.

That ancient writer Tertullian affirms, that they are heretics, and not
men of the right faith, which draw some odd things out of the Scriptures to
their own purpose, not having any respect to the rest. But do by that means
pick out unto them selves a certain few testimonies, which they would have
altogether to be believed, the whole Scripture in the mean season gaine-saying
it, because in deed the fewer places must be understood according to the
meaning of the more in number.

And finally, the most effectual rule of all, whereby to expound the The
scri^tures m^^ be expo^^ded wi^^ zealous ^ hertaf^^ earnest prayer.
word of God, is an heart that loves God and his glory, not puffed up with
pride, not desirous of vain glory, not corrupted with heresies and evil
affections: but which does continually pray to God for his holy spirit, that
as by it ye scripture was revealed and inspired, so also by the same spirit,
it may be expounded to the glory of God and safegarde of the faithful.

Let the mind of the interpreter be set on fire with zeal to advance virtue,
and with hatred of wickedness even to the suppressing thereof. Let not the
heart of such an expositor call to counsel that subtle Sophister the devil,
least peradventure now also he do corrupt the sense of Gods word, as
heretofore he did in Paradise. Let him not abide to hear man's wisdom argue
directly against the word of God. This if the good and faithful expositor of
Gods word shall do, then although in some points he do not (as the proverb
says) hit the very head of the nail, in the darker sense of the Scripture:
yet notwithstanding, that error ought not to be condemned for an heresy in
the author, nor judged hurtful unto the hearer. And who so ever shall bring
ye darker, and more proper meaning of the Scripture to light, he shall not by
and by condemn the imperfect exposition of that other: no more then he which
is author of the imperfect exposition, shall reject the more proper sense of
the better expositour, but by acknowledging it shall receive it with thanks
giving.

Thus much hitherto have I said touching the sense and exposition of Gods
word: which, as God revealed it to men, so also he would have them in any case
to understand it. Wherefore there is no cause for any man by reason of a few
difficulties, to despair to attain to the true understanding of the
Scriptures. The Scripture does admit a godly and religious interpretation. The
word of God is a rule for all men and ages to lead their lives by: Therefore
ought it by interpretation to be applied to all ages, and men of all sorts.
For even our God him self did by Moses in many words expound and apply to his
people the law, which he gave and published in Mount Sina. Furthermore, it
was a solemn use among the ancient Prophets, first to read, and then by
expositions to apply Gods law to the people. Our Lord Jesus Christ him self
expounded the Scriptures. The same did the Apostles also. The word of God
therefore ought to be expounded: as for those which would not have it
expounded, their meaning is because they would sin freely, with out controling
or punishment. But whereas the Scripture does admit an exposition, it does not
yet admit any exposition whatsoever. For that which sauoureth of man's
imagination it utterly rejects. For as by the spirit of God the scripture
was revealed, so by the same spirit it is requisite to expound it. There are
therefore certain rules, to expound the word of God religiously, by the very
word of God it self: that is, so to expound it, that the exposition disagree
not with the articles of our faith, nor be contrary to charity toward God
and our neighbor: but that it be thoroughly surueyed, and grounded upon that
which went before and follows after, by diligent weighing of all the
circumstances, and laying together of the places. And chiefly it is requisite,
that the heart of the interpreter be godly bent, willing to plant virtue, and
pluck up vice by the roots, and finally always ready evermore to pray to
the Lord, that he will vouchsafe to illuminate our minds, that Gods name
may in all things be gloryfied. For his is the glory, honor, and dominion,
for ever and ever. Amen.

Of true faith, from whence it comes, that it is an assured belief of the
mind, whose only stay is upon God and his word.
The fourth Sermon.
IN my last sermon I declared unto you, how that the perfect exposition of
Gods word does differ nothing from the rule of true Faith, and the love of
God and our neighbor. For undoubtedly, that sense of Scripture is corrupted,
which does square from Faith and the two points of charity. I have now
therefore next to treat of true faith and charity toward God and our
neighbor, to the intent that no man may find lack of any thing herein. And
first therefore by Gods help, and the good means of your prayers I will speak
of true Faith.

This word Faith or belief, is diversely used in the common talk of men: For
it is taken for any kind of religion or honor done to God. As we say, the
Christian faith, the Jewish faith, and the Turkish faith. Faith or belief
also, is taken for a conceived opinion of any thing that is told us, as when
we hear any thing rehearsed unto us out of the Indian or Ethiopian history,
we by and by say that we believe it, and yet notwithstanding we put no
confidence in it, nor hope to have any commodity thereby at all. This is that
faith, wherewith Saint James says that the devil believes and trembles.
Last of all, faith is commonly put for an assured and undoubted confidence in
God and his word. Among the Hebrews faith takes her name of truth, certainty
and assured constancy. The Latins call that faith, when that is done which is
said. Wheruppon one says, I demand of thee whether thou beleeuest or no? Thou
aunswerest, I believe, do the^ that which thou say, and it is faith. Therefore
in this treatise of ours, faith is an undoubted belief most firmly grounded
in the mind. This faith, which is a settled The de^nitions (...) faith.
and undoubted persuasion or belief leaning upon God and his word, is
diversely defined by ye perfecter divines. S. Paul says, Faith is the substance
of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. The substance or
hypostasis is the foundation, or the immovable proppe, which vpholdeth us, and
whereon we lean and lie with out peril or danger. The things hoped for are
things celestial, eternal, and invisible. And therefore Paul says, Faith is
an immovable foundation, and a most assured confidence of gods promises, that
is, of life everlasting and all his good benefits. Moreover Paul himself,
making an exposition of that which he had spoken, immediately after, says:
faith is the argument of things not seen. An argument or proof is an evident
demonstration, whereby we manifestly prove that, which otherwise should be
doubtful, so that in him, whom we undertook to instru^te, there may remain^ no
doubt at all. But now, touching ye mysteries of god revealed in gods word, in
themselves or in their own nature they can not be seen with bodily eyes: and
therefore are called things not seen. But, this faith by giving light to the
mind, does in heart perceive them, even as they are set forth in the word of
God. Faith therefore, according to the definition of Paul, is in the mind a
most evident seeing, and in the heart a most certain perceiving of things
invisible, that is, of things eternal, of God I say and all those things
which he in his word sets forth unto us concerning spiritual things. To
this definition of Paul's they had an eye, which defined Faith in this sort.
Faith is a grounded persuasion of heavenly things, in the meditation where of we
ought so to occupy our selves, for the assured truths sake of Gods word, that
we may believe that in mind we do see those things as well, as with our eyes
we do behold things sensibly perceived and easy to be seen. This description
does not greatly differ from this definition of an other godly and learned man,
who says: Faith is a steadfast persuasion of the mind, whereby we do fully
decree with our selves that Gods truth is so sure, that he can neither will nor
choose but perform that which he in his word has promised to fulfill.
Again, Faith is a steadfast assurednes of conscience, which does embrace
Christ in the same sort, wherein he is offered unto us by the gospel. Another
there is, which after the same manner almost defines Faith in this sort: Faith
is a gift inspired by god into the mind of man, whereby without any douting at
al he does believe that to be most true whatsoever god has either taught or
promised in the books of both the testame^ts. The very same author of this
definition therefore, does extend faith to three terms of time, to the time
past, the time present, and the time to come: For he teaches to believe that
the world was made by God, and what so ever the holy Scriptures do declare to
have been done in the old world: also that Christ dying for us, is the only
salvation of them which believe: and that by the same God at this day also,
the world and Church are governed or preserved, and that in Christ the
faithful are saved: Last of all, that that shall most assuredly light upon the
ungodly and the godly, what so ever the holy Scriptures do either threaten or
promise.

Out of all these definitions there-fore, The description of true faith.
being diligently considered, we may, according to the Scriptures, make this
description of faith. Faith is a gift of God, poured into man from heaven,
whereby he is taught with an undoubted persua^io^, wholly to lean to God and
his word* in which word God does freely promise life and all good things in
Christ, and wherein all truth necessary to be believed, is plainly declared.
Which description of faith, I will by Gods help in this that follows
unfold into parts, and by assertion of places out of the Scriptures, will
both confirm and make manifest unto you. Ye, as hitherto ye have done, so
still give diligent care, and in your hearts pray earnestly to God.

First of all, the cause or beginning The begi^ning and cause of faith.
of faith comes not of any man, or any strength of man, but of God him self,
who by his holy spirit, inspireth faith into our hearts. For in the Gospel
the Lord says, No man comes to me, unless my father draw him. And again,
flesh and blood (says the Lord to Peter, confessing Christ in true faith)
has not revealed this to thee, but my father which is in heaven. Whereunto the
Apostle Paul alludeth when he says, We are not able of ourselves to think any
thing, as of our selves, but all our ability is of God. And in another place,
To you it is given for Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer
for his sake. Faith therefore is poured into our hearts by God, who is the
welspring and cause of all goodness.

And yet we have to consider here, Faith is planted by the word of God.
that god in giving and inspiring faith, does not use his absolute power, or
miracles in working, but a certain ordinary means agreeable to man's
capacity: although he can in deed give faith without those means, to whom
when, and how it pleases him: But we read, that the Lord has used this
ordinary means, even from the first creation of all things. Whom he means
to bestow knowledge and faith on: to them he sends teachers, by the word of
God to preach true faith unto them. Not because it lies in man's power, will or
ministry, to give faith, nor because the outward word spoken by man's mouth,
is able of it self to bring faith: but the voice of man, and the preaching of
Gods word, do teach us what true faith is, or what God does will and
command us to believe. For God him self alone by sending his holy spirit
into the hearts and minds of men, does open our hearts, persuade our minds,
and cause us with all our heart to believe that, which we by his word and
teaching have learned to believe. The Lord could by miracle from heaven,
without any preaching at all, have bestowed faith in Christ upon Cornelius the
Centurion at Cesaria: but yet, by an Angel he does send him to the
preaching of Peter. And while Peter preaches, God by his holy spirit works
in the heart of Cornelius, causing him to believe his preaching. Verily Saint
Paul says, How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard. How
shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach if they be not
sent? So then, faith comes by hearing: and hearing by the word of God. In
another place also, Who is Paul (says he) or what is Apollos, but ministers,
by whom ye have believed, according as God has given to every one? I have
planted, Apollos watered, but God has given increase. So then he that planteth
is nothing, nor he that watreth, but God that gives increase. With this
doctrine of Saint Peter and Saint Paul does that agree which Augustine writes,
in the Preface of his book of Christian doctrine, where he says: That which
we have to learn at man's hand, let every one learn at man's hand without
disdain. And let us not go about to tempte him in whom we believe, neither
being deceived let us think scorn to go to Church to hear or learn out
of books, looking still when we shall be rapt up into the third heaven. Let us
take heed of such like temptations of pride, and let us rather have this in
our minds, that even the Apostle Paul him self, although he were cast
prostrate, and instructed by the calling of God from heaven, was nevertheless
sent to a man to be taught the will of God: and that Cornelius, although God
had heard his prayers, was committed to Peter to be instructed, by whom he
should not only receive the Sacraments: but should also hear what he ought
to believe, what to hope for and what to love: all which things notwithstanding
might have been done by the Angel etc. The same Augustine also in his Epistle
to the Circenses, says: Even he works conversion and brings it to pass,
who by his ministers does warn us outwardly with the signs of things, but
inwardly does by himself teach us with the very things themselves. Also in his
treatise upon the 26. of John: What do men (says he) when they preach
outwardly? What do I now while I speak? I drive into your ears a noise of
words: but unless he which is with in do reveal it, what say I or what
speak I? He that is without does husband the tree, but he within is the
creator of it. etc. This said he.

But, even as the Lord his desire is, We must ^raye for ^rue faith.
to have us believe his word, (for the Prophet cries out and says: To day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts:) So in like manner, he does
require of us al which hear his word, that we be not slack in praying. For in
hearing the word of God, we must pray for the gift of faith, that the lord
may open our hearts, convert our souls, break and beat down the hardness of
our minds, and increase the measure of faith bestowed upon us. Of this order
of prayer, there are many examples in the holy scriptures. When the Lord in
the gospel said to one, Can thou believe? to him that believes all things
are possible: He made answer, saying: I believe lord, help thou mine
unbelief. The Apostles also cry to the Lord and say: O Lord increase our
faith. Moreover, this prayer, wherein we desire to have faith powered into us, is
of the grace and gift of God, and not of our own righteousness, which before
God is none at all. This therefore is left unto us, for a thing most certain
and undoubtedly true, that true faith is the mere gift of god, which is by the
holy ghost from Heaven, bestowed upon our minds, and is declared unto us in
the word of truth, by teachers sent of God, and is obtained by earnest
prayers which cannot be tired. Whereby we learn that we ought often and
attentively to hear the word of God, and never cease to pray to God for the
obtaining of true faith.

But that this faith inspired from That faith is an undoubted persuasion of the
mind.
heaven, and learned out of the word of truth, does put into man's mind an
undoubted persuasion, that is, that whatsoever we believe in the word of God,
we do believe it most assuredly without wavering or doubting, being altogether
as sure to have the thing, as faith does believe to have it (for I use this
word persuasion, not as it is commonly taken, but for a firm assent of mind
inspired and persuaded by the holy ghost) that this faith I say, does put into
man's mind this undoubted persuasion, I mean to declare by the example of
Abraham's faith, which Paul in the fourth chapter to the Romans describes in
these words. Abraham contrary to hope believed in hope: and he fainted not in
faith, neither considered he his own body now dead, when he was almost an
hundred years old, nor the deadness of Saraes womb, he stackered not at the
promise of God through unbelief, but became strong in faith and gave the
glory to God, having a sure persuasion that he which had promised, was able
also to perform. In these words of the Apostle, there are certain notes t^
be observed, which do prove to us that Faith does bring an assured persuasion
into the mind and heart of man: and so, that Faith is an undoubted confidence
of things believed, whereto the heart is made privy, that is, that true faith
does not fly to and fro from place to place in the heart of man, but that being
deeply rooted in Christ, it sticks in the heart which is enlightened.

First, says the Apostle, Abraham contrary to hope believed in hope: that is
to say, there he had a constant hope, where notwithstanding he had nothing to
hope after, if all things had been weighed according to the manner of this
world. But, Hope is a most firm and undoubted looking after those things
which we believe: So that we see that the Apostle did make faith manifest by
hope, and by the certainty of hope did declare the assured constancy of
faith. After that says he, Abraham faynted not in faith, nor stackered at the
promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith.

There are two kinds of stackerings in mankind: The one is that which being
overcome by evil tentations does bend to desperation, and the despising of
Gods promises. Such was the stackering of those ten spies of the holy land, of
whom mention is made in the thirteen and fourteen chapter of Numbers. The
other stackering, is rather to be called a weak infirmity of faith, which
also is tempted it self: that now I may not make rehearsal to you, how that
in us all, by the spot of original sin, is naturally grafted a certain
kind of unbelief, and that man's mind is at no time so enlightened or
confirmed, but that cloudy mystes of ignorance and doubtinges do some times
arise: yet notwithstanding, faith yields not to tentation, neither is drowned
nor sticks in the of mire stackering, but laying hold upon the promised
word of truth, gets up again by struggling, and is confirmed. So we read,
that at the promise of God this came into Abraham's mind. What, shall there a
Son be borne to thee that art an hundred years old? this was that infirmity,
and stackering or weakness of faith. But here the Apostle commending Abraham's
faith, which overcame and yielded not, teaching us also of what sort true faith
ought to be, that is, a firm and most assured persuasion, says: Abraham
fainted not in faith, neither considered his own body now dead, when he was
almost an hundred years old, nor the deadness of Saraes womb. Lo, this
thought came into Abraham's mind. Shall a Son be borne to me that am an
hundred years old? But he faynted not in faith. The faith of Abraham began
not to droope by reason of this temptation. For, he considered not the
weakness that was in him self, nothing answerable to the promise of God. what
the^? He stackered not at ye promise of God through unbelief. That is, he gave
no place to unbelief to be tempted of it: he fell not to his own reasons and
doubtful inquisitions, as unbelievers are wont to do. For Gods promise
being once set before the eyes of his mind, so that I say he stuck
immovably, casting of all doubts and reasons of his own. For, faith has no
respect at all to the weakness, misery, or lack which is properly in man
kind, but sets her whole stay in the power of God. So then, I say,
Abraham was strong in faith, that is, he prevailed and got the upper hand
in his temptacion. For, this is an argument to show that he had the upper
hand: He faynted not, nor waxed weak in faith. It follows in the Apostle,
Abraham gave God the glory, to wit, in believing that God wishes well to man
kind, and that he is a true God and almighty.

For he gives God his glory, which attributes to God the properties of God,
and does not gainesay the word and promise of God. For John the Apostle says:
He that believes not in God, makes God a liar, Abraham therefore believed in
God, and in believing gave God the glory. The Apostle Paul goes forward and
says. He was thoroughly persuaded, or certified, that he which had promised was
able also to perform. Paul used the Greek word (...), which is all one as
if you should say, being certified. For, (...) does signify fully to
certify: whereupon (...) is an assured faith given unto us which is made by
way of argument, or by the thing it self, And they call that (...), which we
call a certification, as when a thing by persuasions is so beaten into our
minds, that after that we never doubt any more. Therefore faith did certify
Abraham, and with undoubted persuasions did bring him to the point, never to
doubt, but that God was able to perform what he had promised: in faith
therefore he stuck immovably to the promise of God, being assuredly
certified that he should obtain whatsoever God had promised.

It is certain therefore, and plainly declared by the words of the Apostle,
that true Faith is an undoubted persuasion in the mind of the believer: even
so to have the thing as his belief is, and as he is said to have it in the
express word of God. Whereby also we learn, that Faith is not Faith believes
not euerithing what soever.
the unstable and unadvised confidence of him which believes every great and
impossible thing. For, Faith is ruled and bound to the word of God, to the
word of God, I say, rightly and truly understood.

The godly and faithful therefore, do not by and by, out of the omnipotency
of God, gather what they list, as though God therefore would do every thing
because he can do all things, or that Faith should therefore believe every
thing, because it is written: All things are possible to him that believes.
For, his Faith is therefore a great deal more, because that which he does
believe, is so set down and declared in the word of God, as he does
believe.

Furthermore, where the Lord in the Gospel says. All things are possible
to him that believes, we must not take that saying to be absolutely spoken,
but to be joined to the word, will, and glory of God, and the safety of our
Souls. For, all things which God in his word has promised, all things
which God will have, and lastely, all things which make to the glory of God
and sauegarde of our Souls, are possible to him that believes. And for that
cause, the Apostle both openly and plainly said: Whatsoever God has promised,
that same he is able also to perform. For whatsoever he has not promised,
and whatsoever pleases not his divine majesty, or is contrary to the will and
express word of God, that cannot God do, not because he can not, but because
he will not.

God could make bread of stones, but we must not therefore believe that stones
are bread, neither are they bread therefore, because God can do all things.
This ye shall understand better and more fully, where as a little hereafter I
shall show unto you, that true faith strayeth not nor wauereth wandringly to
and fro, but cleaves close and sticks fast to God and his word.

In the mean season because we Examples ^f vndoub^ed says.
have showed out of Paul's words by the example of Abraham, that faith is a
substance and undoubted persuasion in the heart. And because many do stiffely
stand in it, that man is not surely certain of his salvation, I will add a
few examples out of the gospel, whereby they may plainly perceive that faith is
a most sure ground, and settled opinion touching God and our salvation. And
first verily the Centurion, of whom mention is made in the gospel, had
conceived a steadfast hope that his servant should be healed of the Lord. For
he understood how great and mighty things he promised to them that believe.
He gathered also by the works of Christ, that it was an easy matter for him to
restore his servant to health again. Therefore he comes to the Lord, and
among other talk says. It is no reason that thou should come under my
roof, yea do but say the word and my servant shall be made whole. These
words do testify, that in the heart and mind of the Centurion, there was a
sure persuasion of most assured health, which by a certain comparison, he does
make manifest and more fully express. For I my self am a man under the
authority of an other, and under me I have soldiers, and I say to one, go,
and he goes: and to an other, come, and he comes: and to my servant do
this, and he does it. When the lord perceived this certificatio^ of his mind,
by his words most sull of faith, he cries out, that in all Israel he has not
found so great faith. The same again in the gospel, speaks notably of the
woman's faith which was sorely plagued with the bloody flux. And that that
faith was an undoubted persuasion in her heart once illuminated, we may thereby
understand, because she (being first in deed stirred up by the works and
words of the Lord) thought thus within herself, if I do but touch his garment
I shall be whole. And therefore preassing through the thickest of the throng,
comes to the Lord. But why heap I together many examples? does not the
only faith of the Chananitish, or Syrophenissian woman, declare more plainly
then that it can be denied, how that faith is a most assured persuasion of
things believed? For being ouerpassed, and as it were contemned of the Lord,
she wauereth not in faith, but following him, and hearing also that the lord
was sent to the lost sheep of ye house of Israel, she goes on to worship him.
Moreover, being put back, and as it were touched with the foul reproach of dog,
she goes forward yet humbly to cast her self prostrate before the Lord,
requesting to obtain the thing that she desired. She would not have
perseuered so stiffely, if faith had not ben a certification in her believing
mind and heart. Wherefore, the Lord moved with that faith of hirs, cried:
Woman, great is thy faith, be it done to thee even as thou will. It is
manifest therefore, by all these testimonies of the holy Scripture, that Faith
is a steadfast and undoubted persuasion in the mind and heart of the believer.

This, being now brought to an end, ^herunto ^aith lea^eth, and what the ^biect
or ^oundation of faith (...).
let us see what it is whereupon man's faith does lean, and also how we may
clearly perceive, that faith is not a vain and unstable opinion (as a little
before we were about to say) of any thing whatsoever conceived in the mind
of man, but that it is tied up and contained within bounds, and as it were
certain conditions. In the definition therefore of faith, we said that faith
bends to Godwarde, and leans on his word. God therefore and the word of
God, is the object or foundation of true faith. The thing whereon a man may
lean safely, surely, and without all manner doubting, must needs be steadfast
and altogether immovable, which does give health, which does preserve, and
which does fill up or minister all fullness unto us. For this does faith seek
and request. But this is not else where the^ in god, On God alone therefore
does true faith bend and lean. God is everlasting, chiefly good, wise,
just, mighty and true of word. And that does he testify by his works and
word. Wherefore in the Prophets he is called a strong and immovable Rock, a
castle, a wall, a tower, an invincible fortress, a tresure, and a well that
never will be drawn dry. This everlasting God can do all things, knows all
things, is present in all places, loves mankind exceedingly, does provide
for all men, and also governs or disposes all things. Faith therefore,
which is a confidence of Gods good will and of his aid in all necessities,
and of the true salvation of mankind, bends on God alone, and cannot lean
to any other creature, in whom the things are not that faith requires. And
even as God is true of word, and can not lie, so is his word true and deceives
no man. In the word of God is expressed the will and mind of God: To the
word of God therefore has faith an eye, and lays her ground upon Gods
word, touching which word the Lord in the Gospel said: Heaven and earth
shall pass, but my word shall not pass. The word of God here is compared
with the most excellent elements. Air and Water are feeble and unstable
Elements: but Heaven, although it turn and move, does keep yet a wonderful
and most steadfast course in moving, and steadfast are all things therein. The
Earth is most stable and immovable. Therefore if it be easier for these
things to be loased, which can not be undone, then for the word of God to
pass: it follows that Gods word in all points is most stable, immovable,
and not possible to be loased. If (says the Lord in Jeremy) ye can undo the
league that I have taken with the day, or the covenant that I have made with
the night, so that it neither be day nor night at the appointed time, then may
my covenant be of none effect, which I have made with David. But not the whole
world laying all their strengthes together, is able to make it day when it is
once Night, nor cause the Day to break one hour sooner then ye course of
Heaven does command. Therefore not all this world with all the power and
pomp thereof, shall be able once to weaken or break, to change or abolish so
much as one tittle in the word of God, and the truth of Godds word. Faith
therefore, which rests upon a thing most firm or sure, can not choose but be
an undoubted certification. And since Gods word is the foundation of Faith,
Faith can not wander to and fro, and lean to every word whatsoever. For every
opinion conceived without the word of God, or against Gods word, cannot be
called true faith. And for that cause S. Paul the Apostle of Christ would not
ground the true or Christian faith upon any carnal proppes or opinions of men,
but upon the truth and power of God. With his words will I conclude this
place. Faith (says he) comes of hearing, and hearing by the word of God. By
the word of God, he says, and not by the word of man. Again to the
Corinthians: My preaching (says he) was not in entising words of man's
wisdom, but in the showing forth of the spirit, and of power, that your
faith should not be in the wisdom of man, but in the power of God. Whereby
also we learn, that some there are, which against all reason require faith at
our hands, that is, they would have us to believe that, which they are not
able to show out of Gods word, or that, which is clean contrary to the word
of God. To the better declaring of this that I have said, avails that short
abridgement of Gods word and of faith, which we in the definition of faith have
closely knitte up together. There are there rehearsed two chief Two chief
^^in^s of ^aith.
^oints of faith and of the word. And first of all that God in Christ does
freely promise life and every good thing. For God, who is the object or mark
and foundation of faith, being of his own proper nature everliving
everlasting, and good, does of himself from before al beginning, beget the son
like to himself in all points, who because he is of the same substance with the
father, is himself also by nature life and all goodness. And to the end he
might communicate to us, his Sons and brethren, both life and all goodness,
he became man, and being conversant very God and man among men, he testified
that God the Father, through the Son, does power himself wholly with all
good things into the faithful, True fai^^ seeks a^^ good things in (...)
through Christ.
whom he quickneth and fills with all goodness, and last of all does take
them up to himself into the blessed place of everlasting life. And that he
does frankly and freely bestow this benefit, to the end that the glory of his
grace may in all things be praised. This does true faith believe, and hereunto
belong no small part of the scriptures, which testify that God in Christ does
communicate to the faithful, life and al goodness. John the Apostle cries out
and says: In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and God
was the word. And the word became flesh, and dwelt among us. And we saw the
glory of God as the glory of the only begotten son of the Father, full of
grace and truth. And of his fullness have all we received etc. For the Lord
him self in the Gospel after Saint John, said: Verily I say unto you,
whatsoever things the Father does, the same also does the Son. For even as
the Father does raise the dead to life and quickneth the^, so also does the
son quicken whom he will: for, neither judges the father any man, but has
committed all judgment to the son, that all men may honor the son even as
they honor the father. He that honors not the son, the same honors not
the father which has sent him. Verily verily I say unto you, he that hears
my word, and believes on him that sent me, has life everlasting, and shall
not come into judgment, but is escaped from death unto life.

With these words of the Gospel, agrees that saying of S. Paul. In
Christ are laid up all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Because in
him dwells all fullness of the Godheade bodily, and ye in him are
fullyfilled. But that these great benefits of God are freely bestowed upon
the faithful, Paul that Vessel of election declares in these words. Blessed
be God, who has chosen us in Christ before the foundations of the world were
laid, and has predestined us into the adoption of children through Jesus
Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the
praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
beloved, through whom we have redemption in his blood etc. And again. All
have sinned and have need of Gods glory, but are justified freely through
his grace, by the redemption which is in Christ: And so forward. True faith
therefore does believe that life and every good thing does freely come to it
from God through Christ: which is the chief Article of our faith, as in the
Articles of ye belief is more largly laid forth.

The second principal point of Gods word and faith is, that in the word of ^rue
faith ^eleeueth (...) holy ^^riptures.
God, there is set down all truth necessary to be believed: and that true
faith does believe all that is declared in the Scriptures. For, it tells us
that God is, what manner one he is, what Gods works are, what his judgments,
his will, his commandments, his promises, and what his threatenings are,
finally what soever is profitable or necessary to be believed, that does Gods
word who lie set down unto us, and that does true faith receive, believing
all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets, in the Gospel and
wrytinges of the Apostles. But, whatsoever cannot be fetched or proved out of
those writings or whatsoever is contrary unto them, that do the faithful not
believe at all* For, the very nature of true faith is, not to believe that which
squareth from the word of God. Whosoever therefore believes not the fables
and opinions of men, he alone believes as he should: for he depends only
upon the word of God, and so upon God himself, the only fountain of all
truth. The matter, the argument and the whole sum of faith, is brieflye set
out unto us in the Articles of the Christian faith: whereof I will speak at
another time. I have this hour declared unto you (decrely beloved, and
reverend brethren in the Lord) the definition of faith, which to the end
that I may surely fasten in every ones mind, and that all may understand what
faith is, I repeat it here again, and therwithall conclude this Sermon. Faith
is a gift of God, powered into man from Heave, whereby he is taught with an
undoubted persuasio^ wholly to lean to God and his word, in which word, God in
Christ does freely promise life and every good thing, and wherein al truth
necessary to be believed is plainly declared. Let us all pray to God our father,
through his only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, that he will vouchsafe
from Heaven, to bestow true faith upon us all, that we by it knowinge him a
right, may at the last obtain life everlasting. Amen.

That there is one only true Faith, and what the virtue thereof is.
The fifth Sermon.
Being cut of with the shortness of time, and deteyned by the excellency
of the matter, I could not in my last sermon make an end of al yt I had
determined to speak touching Faith: now therefore, by the grace of the holy
spirit I will add the rest of the argument which seems yet to be behind.
Pray to the Lord, that that which by man's voice is brought to your ears, may
by the finger of God be written in your hearts.

True Faith is ignorant of all division, for there is says the Apostle, Faith
is ^ue alone.
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. For, there
remains from the beginning of the world even unto the end thereof, one and
the same faith in all the elect of God. God is one and the same for ever, the
only Well of all goodness, that can never be drawn dry. The truth of God,
from the beginning of the world, is one and the same, set forth to men in the
word of god. Therefore, the object and foundation of faith, that is God and the
word of God, remain for ever one and the self same. In one and the self
same faith with us have all the elect ever since the first creation of the
world believed, that unto us through Christ all good things are freely given,
and that all truth necessary to be believed is declared in the word of the Lord:
wherefore, the faithful of the old world, have always set led their faith on
God and his word: so that now without all doubt, there cannot be any more
the^ one true faith.

I know very well, that in the world (...) religions, but no more the^ one true
faith.
there are soweb many and sundry faythes, that is to say, religions. For,
there is the Indian faith, the Jewish faith, the faith of the Mahometists, and
the faith of the Georgians, and yet not withstanding there is but one true
Christian faith, the abridgement whereof is conteyued in the articles of our
belief, and is taught at the full in the sacred Scriptures of both the
Testaments. I know also that there are sundry beliefes of men, resting upon
sundry things, and believing that which is contrary to true faith: but yet
nevertheless, there remains but one true belief in God and his word,
(which is) an undoubted persuasion and confidence of things most true, and
assuredly certain.

This confidence does grow with increase Faith do^^ increase and decrease.
in the minds of the faithful, and contrarily decreaseth again and utterly
fails. And for that cause the Apostles besought the lord saying: Lord
increase our faith. And Paul the Apostle does in his writings every where, wish
to the faithful the increase of the spirit and faith. David also, before him
prayed, saying: O God create a clean heart within me, and take not thy holy
spirit from me. For he had seen how that from Saul, whom he succeeded in the
kingdom, the good spirit of God was departed, and that in steed thereof the
wicked spirit had entered into his mind which tormented him very pitifully.
Here unto belongs that saying in the gospel, To every one that has shall be
given, and from him that has not shall be taken away that which he has not, or
that he makes no account of, and shall be given to him that has. Neither was it
in vain, that the Lord said to Peter, I have prayed for thee Peter that thy
faith fail not. For Paul speaks of some in his time that made shipwreck of
their own ^aith, and overthrew the faith of other. And to what end I pray
you, do we daily hear the word of God, and make our humble petitions to the
Lord, but because we look for increase of godliness, and request his aid to
keep us that we fall not from true faith? verily Paul to the Thessalonians,
says: We pray earnestly day and night to see you personally, and to supply
that which is wanting in your faith. And a little before, he said: For this
cause I sent Timotheus, that I might be certi^^ed of your faith, least by any
means the tempter had tempted you, and so our labor had been of no effect. The
same Apostle also in his epistle to the Ephesians, says: Christ gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Pastors and teachers to the restoring of the
Saints unto the building of the body of Christ, until we all meet together
in the unity of faith, and the acknowledging of the son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of age of the fullness of Christ, so that now we
be no longer children. Therefore so long as we live, we learn that our faith
may be perfect, and if so be at any time it shall be weakened by temptations,
that then it may be repaired, and again confirmed. And in this diversity (I
mean) in this increase and weakness of faith, there is no partition or
division, for the self same root and substance of faith does always remain,
although it be at sometime more, and at sometime less. In like manner, faith
is not therefore General and particular faith
changed nor cut in sunder* because one is called general faith, and another
particular faith. For general faith is no other then that, which believes
that all the words of God are true, and that God has a good will to mankind.
Particular faith believes nothing contrary to this, only that which is
common to al, the faithful applies particularly to him self, believing that
God is not well minded toward others alone, but even unto him also. So then,
it brings the whole into parts, and that which is general into
particularities. For whereas by general faith he believes that all the words
of God are true: in the same sort by particular faith he does believe that the
soul is immortal, that our bodies rise again, that the faithful shall be
saved, the unbelievers destroyed, and whatsoever else is of this sort taught to
be believed in the word of God. Moreover, the disputation touching faith that
is poured into us, and Faith insp^red, and Faith gotten.
faith that we our selves get, touching formal faith, and faith without
fashion, I believe to be beaten out of them which of them selves do bring
these new disputations into the Church. True faith is obtained by no strength
or merit of man, but is powered into him of God, as I declared in my last
Sermon: and though man obtain it by harkning unto the word of God, yet
nevertheless, it is wholly impated to the grace of god. For unless this grace
do work inwardly in the heart of the hearer, the preacher that laboreth out
wardly does bring no profit at al. We read in the third chapter of S.
Augustins book, De praedestinatione Sanctoru^. That once he was in an error,
because he thought that that faith, wherewith we believe in God, is not the
gift of God, but that it was in us as of our selves, and that by it we do
obtain the gifts of God, whereby we may in this world live rightly and holily.
But this he confuteth in that book at large and that substantially. So then,
true faith which bends on God alone, and is directed by the word of God, is
formal enough or sufficiently in fashion. Verily the form of faith
(...)mall(...).
is engraven in the heart of the faithful, by the holy Ghost. And although it
be small and does not grow up to the highest degree, yet notwithstanding, it
is true faith having force in it as it were a grain of mustarde seed. The
thief that was crucified with our Lord, believed in the Lord Jesus, and was
saved, although the force of faith was strong in him but a very small season,
and brought not forth any great store of the fruit of good works: finally,
that faith of the thief was not any whit diverse or contrary from the faith of
Saint Peter and Saint Paul but was altogether the very same with theirs,
although their faith brought forth somewhat more abundantly the fruit of good
works. Peter and Paul were franckly and freely justified, although they had
many good works: freely was the thief justified, although his good works were
very few or none at all. Let us hold therefore, that true faith is one alone,
which notwithstanding does increase and is augmented, and again, may decrease
and be extinguished.

There remains now for me to The power and ef^ecte of faith.
declare, the virtue and effect of true faith. This has the holy Apostle
Paul done very excellently well, yea and that most absolutely too. But
although in the eleventh chapter to the Hebrews he had said very much, he is
compelled notwithstanding to confess that he can not reckon up all: therefore
at this time I mean to rehearse a few virtues of faith, leaving the rest
(dearly beloved) to be sought out and considered of your selves,

True faith before al things brings with it true knowledge and makes Faith
is the true knowledge that makes men wise.
us wise in deed. For by faith we know God, and judge aright of the
judgments and works of God, of virtues and vices. The wisdom that it
brings with it, is without doubt the true wisdom. Many men hope that they
can attain to true wisdom by the study of Philosophy: but they are deceived
as far as Heaven is broad. For Philosophy does falsely judge, and faultily
teach many things touching God, the works of God, the chief goodness, the
end of good and evil, and touching things to be desired and eschued. But the
very same things are rightly and truly taught in the word of God, and
understood and perceived by faith. Faith therefore is the true wisdom, and
makes us wise in deed. For Jeremy also says. Behold they have cast away the
word of the Lord, what wisdom therefore can there be left in them? The
wisdom of Solomon, is worshipfully thought of throughout the whole compass
of the world. And yet we read that the Lord in the Gospel after S. Math.
vttred this sentence against the Jews. The Queen of the South shall rise in
judgment with this generation and shall condemn it, because she came from the
ends of the world to hear the wisdom of Solomon: and behold there is one in
this place greater then Solomon. Christ is preferred before Solomon, and the
wisdom of Christ before the wisdom of Solomon. But it is well known that the
wisdom of Christ the son of God can not be attained to without faith. Faith
therefore brings with it the most excellent wisdom. But herein, this wisdom
of ours deserves a singular praise, because they that desire it are not sent
to foreign nations, with great cost and labor to learn it, as to the
priests of Egypt, the Gymnosophistes of India, the Philosophers of Greece, or
to the Rabines of the Jews. God has dispersed the word of God throughout the
whole world, so that now the word of faith is in the hearts of all the
faithful. For Paul the Apostle says. Thus says the justice that is of faith,
say not in thy heart who shall descend into heaven? that is, to fetch Christ
down from above. Or who shall descend into the deep? that is to bring Christ
from the dead again. But what says he? The word is nighe unto thee even in
thy heart: this same is the word of faith which we preach, for if thou
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and do believe with thy heart that
God has raised him from the dead thou shall be saved. Faith therefore does
not only make us wise but happy also, the Lord him self bearing witness thereunto
and saying to his disciples. Happy are the eyes that see the things that ye se.
For I say unto you that many Prophets and Kings have desired to se the things
that ye se, and to hear the things that ye hear and heard the^ not. We shall
therefore find in faith, a How man may attain to ^he chief goodness
most certain determination of ye most notable question stirred in, since ye
beginning of ye world, of learned and most excellent wits, which is: by what
means a man may live, be happy, attain to the chief goodness, be joined to
the chief goodness, and so be justified? There have been, yea and yet are,
diverse opinions touching this matter, contrary the one to the other. But we do
briefly and truly affirm, that by true faith a man does live, is happy,
attaineth to ye chief goodness, is conjoined to ye chief goodness, and also
justified: so ye god dwells in us, and we in him, and that by faith we are
both happy and blessed. What I pray you could have been spoken more excelle^tly
worthily or divinely, touching true faith? for se, faith quickneth us, makes
us happy, joins us to the chief goodness, so yt he in us and we in him may
live, and faith does also fully justify us. But now it is best to hear ye
testimonies out of ye scriptures. Faith makes us happy. For to S. Pet.
confessing ye Lord Faith makes happy.
Jesus by true faith it is said. Happy art thou Simon the son of Jonas. Flesh
and blood has not revealed this to thee, but my father which is in heaven. S.
Paul for ye proof of faith brings in that sentence of David. Happy are they
whose iniquities are forgiu^n and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man
to who^ the Lord shall impute no sin. Faith quickneth or makes alive. Faith
quickneth
Eor the just lives by faith This does Paul very often in his writings
allege out of the prophets. The same Paul also says. The life which now I
live in flesh, I live by faith in the son of god, who loved me and gave him
self for me. Faith joins us to ye eternal and chief goodness, and so makes
us to Faith joins to god.
enjoy ye chief goodness, yt god may dwell in us and we in God. For ye Lord
Jesus him self in the Gospel says. He which eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood dwells in me, and I in him. As the loving father sent me, so also I
live by the father, and he that eteth me shall live by me. But to eat and drink
ye Lord is to be leeue in ye Lord, ye he has given him self to death for us.
Whereupon John ye Apostle says. We have seen and do witness, that the father
has sent the son the savior of the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus
is the son of God, God dwells in him and he in God. Wherefore also Paul
said. I live now, not I, but Christ lives in me.

Moreover faith does justify. Faith i^stifieth.
But for because ye treatise thereof can not be fitlye and fullye made an end
of this hour, I mean to defer it till the next Sermon that shall be. At
this present (dearly beloved) ye must remember, that there is but one true
faith, that is, the Christian faith. For although there be said to be many
fayths, that is religions, yet notwithstanding there is only but one true and
undoubted faith. And that does increase and again decrease in some men. As
for those in whom it is rightly and godly observed, in them it shows forth
sundry virtues. For it brings with it true wisdom, finally, it quickneth
and makes us blessed and happy in deed. To God the father the author of all
goodness, and of our felicity, be all praise and glory through Jesus Christ
our Lord, for ever and ever. Amen.

That the faithful are justified by faith with out the law and works.
The sixte Sermon.
BEing ready here (dearly beloved) to speak unto you of faith, which
without works does justify them that believe, I call upon the Father, which
is in heaven, through his only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord,
beseeching him to open my mouth and lips to the setting forth of his
praise, and to illuminate your hearts, that ye acknowledging the great benefit
of God, may become thankful for it and holy in deed.

And first of all, I will speak certain Justification.
things chiefly necessary to this argument or treatise, touching this term of
justification. The term of justifying, very usual and common among the
Hebrews, and of a large signification, is not at this day so well understood of
all men, as it ought to be. To justify, is as much to say as to quite from
judgment, and from the denounced and uttered sentence of condemnation. It
signifies to remit offenses, to cleanse, to sanctify* and to give utterance
of life everlasting. For it is a law term belonging to courts where judgment
is exercised. Imagine therefore, that man is set before the judgment seat of
God, and that there he is pleaded guilty, to wit, that he is accused and
convinced of heinous offenses, and therefore sued to punishment or to ye
sentence of comdemnation. Imagine also that the son of God makes
intercession, and comes in as a mean, desiring that upon him may be laid
the whole fault and punishment due unto us men, that he by his death may
cleanse them and take them away, setting us free from death and giving us life
everlasting. Imagine too, that God the most high and just judge, receives the
offer, and tra^slatet^ (...) punishment together with the fault from us unto
the neck of his son, making therwithall a statute, that whosoever believes
that the son of God suffered for the sins of the world, brake the power of
death, and delivered us from damnation, should be cleansed from his sins,
and made heir of life everlasting. Who therefore can be so dull of
understanding, but may perceiu^ that mankind is justified by faith.

But that there may be no cause of doubt or darkness left in the mind of any
man, that which I have already spoken generally, by the parable and similitude
fetched from our common law. I will here particularly bring into certain
parts confirming and manifestly proving every one of them severally, out of
the holy Scriptures, so that even to the stoutest wits the power of faith and
work of justification, may be most evident.

And first I will show unto you that this term of justification, is taken in
What it is ^o justify.
this present treatise for the absolution and remission of sins, for
sanctification and adoption into the number of the sons of God. In the.xiij.
of the Acts, the Apostle Paul says: Be it known unto you men and brethren,
that through this Lord Jesus Christ, is preached unto you the forgiunesse of
sins, and by him, all that believe are justified from al things, from which
they could not be justified by the law of Moses. See, in Christ is preached
unto us the forgiveness of sins, and he that believes that, Christ preched,
forgiueth sins, is also justified. It follows therefore, that justification
is the remission of sins. In the fifth Chapter to the Romans says the same
Apostle. Being justified by the blood of Christ, we shall be saved from wrath
through him. But the blood of Christ washes away sins. Justification
therefore is the washing away or forgiunesse of sins. And again, in the same
Chapter says he more plainly, Judgment entered by one offense unto
condemnation, but the gift of many sins unto justification. He makes
justification the contrary to condemnation: therefore, justification is the
absolution and delivery from condemnation. What say ye to this moreover, that
he does plainly call justification a gift, that is, the forgiveness of
sins. Hereunto also belong those words of his, Even as by the sin of one,
condemnation came on all men: so by the righteousness of one, good came upon
all men to the justification of life. Here again is the justification of life
made ye contrary of condemnation unto death set as a peine upon our heads,
because of the transgression: justification of life therefore is an absolution
from sins, a delivery from death, a quickening or translating from death to
life. For in the fourth to the Romans, the same Apostle expounds
justification by sanctification, and sanctification by the remission of sins.
For entreating of faith, whereby we are justified, or which God imputes to us
for righteousness without works, he says, Even as David also does expound
the blessedness of that man to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without
works, saying: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose
sins are covered. What could be more plainly spoken then this? For he does
evidently expound justification by sanctification, and sanctification by the
remission of sins. Furthermore, what else is sanctification but the adoption
whereby we are received into the grace and number of the sons of God? What is
he therefore, that sees not that in this treatise of Saint Paul,
justification is taken for adoption? especially, since in the very same fourth
Chapter to the Romans: he goes about to prove, that an inheritance is due to
faith, whereunto also he does attribute justification. By all this it is made
manifest, that the question of justification contains nothing else, out the
manner and reason of sanctification, that is to say, whereby and how men have
their sins forgiven, and are received into the grace and number of the sons
of God, and being justified are made heirs of the kingdom of God.

And now, let us try whether that which we have said be taught in the ^hri^t
has (...) on ^im self and (...) sins.
Scriptures, ye Christ before the judgment seat of God, when sentence of
condemnation was to be pronounced against us for our offenses, took our
sins upon his own neck, and purged them by the sacrifice of his death upon
the cross, and that God also laid upon Christ our fault and punishment, so
that Christ alone is the only satisfaction and purging of the faithful. This
does the Apostle Paul teach most expressly, where he says: Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies. Who shall
condemn? It is Christ that dyed yea rather it is he which is raised up, and is
at the right hand of the father making intercession for us. And again he
says, Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, while he was made the
curse for us. For it is written, cursed be every one that hangs on the tree,
that upon the Gentiles might come the blessing of Abraham through Jesus Christ.
etc. This did the Apostle teach out of the writings of Moses. And Moses in his
books does often times make mention, ye the sins are laid upon the heads of
the beasts which were sacrificed. But those sacrifices bare the tipe or figure
of the death and sacrifice of Christ. Esaias also in his. 53. chapter says
expressly, He verily has taken on him our infirmities, and born our peines, He
was wounded for our iniquities, and smitten for our sins. For the peine of
our punishment was laid upon him, and with his stripes ar^ we healed. We all
went astraye like sheep, every one turned his own way, but the Lord has thrown
upon him all our sins. And immediately after, He has taken away the sins of
the multitude, and made intercession for the transgressors. Then these words I
think, nothing can be brought more to the matter, or more fit for our present
purpose. To this alludeth Saint Peter when he says, The Lord him self bare
our sins in his body upon the cross, that we being dead to sin may live to
righteousness, by the sign of whose stripes we are made whole. Hereunto aliuded
S. John the forerunner of the Lord, when he said: Behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world. Moreover the Apostle Paul bears
witness hereto saying: Him that knew not sin, he made sin for us, that we
through him might be made the righteousness of God Also in his Epistle to the
Colossians he says, It pleased the father that in Christ all fullness should
dwell, and by him to reconcile all things unto him self, having set at peace
through the blood of his cross by him, both things in earth and things in
heaven. These I suppose, are testimonies sufficiently evident, to prove that
upon Christ are laid our sins, with the curse or condemnation due unto our
offenses, and that Christ by his blood has cle^sed our sins, and by his
death has vanquished death, and the devil the author of death, and taken
away the punishment due unto us. The (...) and (...) of since ^re taken away by
Christ


Yet because there be some, and those not a few, which deny that Christ by
his death has taken from us sinners, both fault and punishment, and that he
became the only satisfaction of the whole world, I will therefore now
allege certain other testimonies and repeat somewhat of that that I have
before recited, thereby to make it manifest, that Christ the only satisfaction
of the world, has made satisfaction both for our sault and punishment. Esayas
verily witnessed, that both the fault of our offense and the punishment were
taken away, when he says: He bare our infirmities, and was wounded for our
iniquities: finallye the discipline of peace, that is, the discipline or
chastising or punishment bringing peace, or the penalty of our correction,
that is, the punishment due to us for our offenses, was laid on his neck.
Mark also what follows: And with the blewnesse of his stripes are we healed.
This does evidently teach, that by the peine of Christ our punishment is
taken a way. For look what peine penalty, punishment, or correction was due
to us, and the same was laid on the Lord him self: and for that cause was
the Lord wounded and received stripes. And with them he healed us. But he had
not yet healed us at all, if we should yet look for wounds, stripes and
strokes, that is to say, punishment for our sins.

The death of Christ therefore is a The death ^f Christ a ^^ll satis^^ction for
^ur sins
full satisfaction for our sins. But what I pray you should Christ avail
us, if yet we should be punished for our offenses. Therefore when we say,
that he did bear all our sins in his body upon the Cross, what else do we
mean I pray you, but that the Lord by death, that was not due unto him,
took from us Gods vengeance, that it might not light on us to our
punishment? Paul, as often as he makes mention of our redemption made by
Christ, is wont to name it (...), by which word he understands not, as the
common sort do, redemption barely and simply, but the very price and
satisfaction of redemption. Wherefore also he writes, that Christ him self
did give him self to be the (...) for us: that is to say, the price wherewith
captives are redeemed from their enemies in the war. For that which we do
commonly call raunsomes, the Greeks do name (...). So then that is (...) when
man for man and life for life is redeemed. But upon them that are thus
raunsomed and set at liberty, there is no punishment afterward laid, by
reason of the translation thereof from one to another. Furthermore, this is the
new Covenant that God in his Christ has made with us, that he will not
remember our iniquities. But how could he chose but remember our iniquities,
if he ceased not to punish them? So then, this remains not to be doubted of,
that Christ our Lord is the full propitiation, satisfaction, oblation and
sacrifice for the sins, I say for the punishment and the fault of all the
world, yea and by him self alone: for in none other is any salvation: neither
is there any other name given unto men whereby they must be saved.

I deny not, but that because of How punishment is laid on us.
discipline, chastisement and exercise, diverse sorts of punishments are laid
upon men's necks, and that they are diversely afflicted and vexed, because of
their offenses. But those afflictions, how so ever they be patiently suffered
of the faithful, do not yet wash sins away, nor make satisfaction for
misdeedes. S. Peter says, Marvel not that ye are tried by fire, which thing
is done for your trial, as if any new thing should happen unto you: yea,
rather rejoice herein that ye are partakers of the afflictions of Christ, that
in the revelation also of his glory, ye may rejoice and be glad. This I say, is
the end and use of afflictions. And by this means the glory of Christ indureth
pure and uncorrupted.

It remains now for me to prove God has ^ppointed ^^at he that belee^eth
should ^aue eternal life and be justified.
out of the holy Scriptures, that God the father has ordained that he
whosoever does believe in the only begotten son of God, shall be made
partaker of Christ his righteousness, that is, shall be instified by him, be
absolved from his sins, and be made heir of life everlasting. Esaias
therefore says, In the acknowleging of him, or in his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify the multitude, whose sins he him self shall
bear. But what else is the acknowledging or knowledge of Christ, but true
faith? Moreover, the Lord Jesus him self in the gospel after Saint John,
says: And as Moses lift up the Serpente in the wilderness, even so must the
son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish
but have life everlasting. There was none other remedy in the desert, against
the enuenomed bytings of the Serpents, but the contemplation or beholding of
the Serpent lift up and hanged aloft. No plaster did cure them that were
poisoned, no oblation made to God, not prayer it self offered to God, not any
work, nor any way else: the only beholding of the Serpent made the poison
harmless, that then had crept into all their limbs. In like manner, nothing
at all does save us from death but only faith in Christ. For by faith we
behold and see Christ lifted up upon the stake of the Cross, as it is to be
seen in the sixte Chapter of John. It follows in the words of our savior,
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son: that whosoever
believes should not perish, but have life everlasting. For god sent not his
son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved. He that believes on him is not condemned: but he that
believes not, is condemned already, because he believes not in the name of
the only begotten son of God. By these words now the third time is faith
beaten into our heads, by which we are made partakers of the Son of God, of
his life, salvation, redemption, and all good things beside. In the sixte
Chapter of the Gospel after John, our Lord again says: This is the will of
the father which sent me, that every one that sees the son, and believes
in him should have life everlasting, and I will raise him up at the last day.
Nothing can be alleged to make more for our present argument then these words
of his. For he says plainly, that the will of God the father is, that we
should believe in the son, and by this belief have our salvation. Whereupon
John the Evangelist and Apostle in his Canonical Epistle dares burst forth
into these words: He that believes not God, makes him a liar, because he
believed not the record that God gave of his son. And this is the record,
that God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his son. He
that has the son, has life: and he that has not the son of God, has not
life. Dearly beloved, note this. The eternal and unchangeable will of god is,
that he will give eternal life unto the world. But he will give the life
through Christ, who is naturally life it self, and can give life. The very
same God also will that we obtain and have life in us, and that we have it no
other ways then by faith. For the Apostle Paul taught, that Christ does
dwell in our hearts by faith. Moreover, the Lord himself also witnesses and
says: He that eats me shall live by me. But ye know (dearly beloved) that
to eat Christ is to believe in him. And therefore we knit up this place with
these words of Saint Peter. To this Christ do all the Prophets bear
witness, that whosoever believes in him, shall receive forgiunesse of sins
through his name. We have in these a most ample testimony of the whole sacred
Scriptures. By these I have evidently inoughe delared, that God has appointed,
that whosoever does believe in Christ, being cleansed from his sins, shall be
made heir of life everlasting. This will I make more evident Men are ^ustified
^y faith ^lone.
yet, by declaring how that faith alone that is, that faith for it self, and
not for any works of ours does justify the faithful. For it self I say,
not in respect that it is in us a quality of the mind, or our own work in
our selves, but in respect that faith is the gift of Gods grace, having in
it a promise of righteousness and life: and in respect, that naturally of it
self, it is a certain and undoubted persuasion resting upon God, and
believing that God being pacified by Christ, has through Christ bestowed
life and all good things on us. Therefore faith for Christ, and by the grace
and promise of God does justify: and so faith, that is that, which we
believe and wherein our confidence is settled, God I say him self by the grace
of god does justify us through our redemption in Christ: so that now, our
own works or merits have no place left to them at all, I mean, in
justification. For otherwise good works have their place in the faithful, as
we in place convenient do mean to show. For Paul the teacher of the
gentiles, does Christ compared with Adam.
in the way of opposition compare Christ with Adam, and shows, that of Adam
and so of our own nature and strength, we have nothing but sin, the wrath
of God, and death. And this does he show under the name of Adam to the intent
that no man should seek for righteousness and life in the flesh. And again,
on the other side he declares, that we by Christ have righteousness, the
grace of God, life and the forgiunesse of all our sins. In this opposition,
he does earnestly urge and often repeat this word, Of one, to no other end
verily, but that we should understand, that faith alone does justify.

To the Galathians he does very Gods Testament.
evidently use this kind of argument, To the last will and testament of a
man, if it once be proved, no body does add or take any thing away. Reason
therefore does rightly require that no man put to, or take away any thing from
the testament of God. But this is the testament which god confirmed that his
will is to bestow the blessing upon Abraham's seed, not in many, or by many,
but through one. For he says not. And to the seeds, as though he spoke of
many, but as speaking of one he says, And to thy seed, that is Christ.
Therefore it is a detestable thing to augment or diminishe any thing in this
testament of God: Christ alone is the only savior still: men can neither save
them selves nor other.

Again, in the same Epistle to the We are not justified by the works o^ the
Law^ but by Faith
Galathians he says, We know that man is not justified by the works of the
law, but by faith in Jesus Christ: in so much as no flesh shall be justified
by the works of the law. This is now the third time that Paul says, that
men are not justified by the works of the law. In which clause he
comprehends all manner of works of what sort soever. So then, no kind of
works do justify. But what is it then that justifies? Faith in Christ, and
that verily alone. For what else can these words import, We know that man is
not justified but by faith in Christ. For the force of these two speeches is
all one, Faith alone does justify: And, it is certain that we are not
justified but by faith in Jesus Christ. He adds the example of the Apostles,
And we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by says in
Jesus Christ: and not by the works of the law. In like manner also, Peter
argues by an example in the Acts of the Apostles, and says: We believe that
through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they.
Acts. 15.

Moreover, in the very same chapter Christ died not in vain
to the Gala. he says: I despise not the grace of God: for if righteousness
come of the law, then Christ is dead in vain. For if we in our selves had had
any thing whereby we might be saved, what needed the son of God to take our
flesh, to suffer and to die? But for because the son of God being incarnate,
did suffer and die, and died not in vain: therefore in our flesh there was
nothing that could obtain salvation for mankind. Wherefore the only son of
God is our Savior for ever: and by true faith makes us partakers of his
salvation.

Paul in the very beginning of his Epistle to the Romans does prove that al All
men are sinner^
men are sinners, that in men there remains no strength for them to be saved
by, and that the law of God it self, does dig up the knowledge of offenses,
that is, does apply them, bring them to light, and make them manifest, but does
not take them away, blot them out, or utterly extinguish them: and that
therefore, God for his own goodness sake, to the end that the work that he has
made, should not altogether perish, does justify the faithful freely by
faith in Jesus Christ. I will rehearse a few of the Apostles own words. The
righteousness of God (says he) is declared without the law, being witnessed
notwithstanding by the law and the Prophets, the righteousness of God, I say,
comes by faith in Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe. For
there is no difference. For all have sinned and have need of the glory of God:
but are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, who^ God has set forth to be a propitiatio^ through faith in his blud.
These words of the Apostle, I suppose, are most manifest to them that believe.
He plucketh justification from our own merits and strength, and attributes
it to grace, whereby the son of God is given to the world, unto the
punishment of the cross, that al they that believe that they are redeemed by
the blood of the son of God, may be justified. Again the Apostle immediately
after, adds: Therefore we hold that man is justified by faith without the
works of the law. Upon the neck of this again, he argues thus. Is he the
God of the Jews God iu^^^fieth as (...) the Gentiles as (...) Jews by faith.
only? Is he not also of the gentiles? Yes even of the Gentiles also. For it is
one God that shall justify Circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through
faith. To be God, is nothing else but to be life and salvation. But God is the
God of the Gentiles also, and not of the Jews alone: therefore God is the life
and salvation of the Gentiles. This life and salvation he does communicate to
us, not by the law or through circumcision: but by faith in Christ. Therefore
faith alone does justify. This may be proved by the example of Cornelius the
Centurion, who as soon as S. Peter had preched unto him, and he once believed,
was by and by justified, when as yet he had not received circumcision, or the
law, when as yet he had not sacrificed, nor merited righteousness by any work
that he did: For he was freely justified in faith through Jesus Christ For Peter
concluded his Sermon to him in these words. To this Christ do all the Prophets
give witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him shall receive
remission of sins. After all this, the Apostle Paul brings in that notable
and singular example By what means ^ur father ^braham, was iusti^^ed.
of our father Abraham, teching by what means our father Abraham was
justified. For this being once truly declared, it can not chose but be plain
and manifest to every one, by what means Gods will is to justify al men. For
the sons can not be justified any other way then the father before them was
justified. Abraham therefore was not justified by circumcision or receiving of
the sacrament. For it is said that he was justified before he was circumcised.

Afterward was added the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the
righteousness of faith, that is the sign or sealing, that all the seed of
Abraham is justified by faith. The same our father Abraham was not justified by
the law. For the law was. 430. years added to the promise, not to take away
sin or to work justification, but to make sin appear, and to make us
altogether empty, and when we are once made empty, to send and as it were
compel us to fly to Christ. Again, Abraham was not justified by his works.
And yet, in that most excellent Patriarch are found to be good works, yea and
those too good works of true faith, which are both notable and many in number,
such and so many as you shall scarcely find in any other.

Nevertheless yet the Apostle says. What shall we say then that Abraham our
father as pertaining to the flesh, who I say is our father touching the flesh,
did merit or find, for both those significations has the Greek word (...).
For, if Abraham were justified by works, the^ has he to boste, but not before
God. For God is only just and he that only justifies. Al me^ are corrupt yea
even Abraham is a sinner, and every man stands in need of the glory of God.
For which cause also the Prophet did plainly forbid to boast in any thing but
in the mercy of God. Wherefore, Abraham boasted not against God: he
acknowledged him self to be a sinner, and that he was to be justified freely,
and not for his own merits sake. The Apostle goes forth and says. For what
says the Scripture. Abraham believed in God, and it was reckoned unto him for
righteousness. Two things are here affirmed, First that Abraham believed in
God, Secondly that that was imputed to him for righteousness. By this it
follows that Abraham was justified by faith, and not by works. And that
does the Apostle prove after this manner. To him that by works does merit
righteousness, righteousness is not imputed. But to Abraham is righteousness
imputed: therefore he merited not righteousness by works. Again, To him
verily that woorketh not, but believes, his faith is counted for
righteousness. But Abraham believed in God, therefore his faith was reckoned
for righteousness.

In the same chapter, the same Apostle Neither is ^aith nor the promis of none
effect.
brings forth other arguments, altogether as strong as these, to prove that
faith justifies without works. If they (says he) which are of the law be
heirs, then is faith but vain, and the promise made of none effect. They are
of the law which seek to be justified by the works of the law. But faith
rests upon the mercy of God. What place then shall grace and the mercy of god
have left unto them, if we by works do merit justification? What shall I
need to believe that by the blood of Christ I shall be justified, if God by
my works be at one with me again, who for my sins was angry with me?
Finally salvation and righteousness are promised of God. But then the promise
ends, when our own merits begin to come in place. For the Apostle to the
Galathians, says: If the inheritance be of the law, then is it not now of
the promise. But God gave the inheritance to Abraham by promise: therefore
that the promise might remain stable, faith justifies and not merits.

Again, in the fourth Chapter to the Romans, he says: Therefore by faith is
the inheritance given, that it might be by grace, that the promise might be
sure to all the seed, not to that only that is of the law, but to that also
that is of the faith of Abraham. He rehearses here two causes, for which he
attributes justification to faith, and not to works.

The first is, that justification may be of free gift, and that the grace of
^ustification of free gift.
God may be praised. The latter is, that the promise and salvation may remain
steadfast, and that it may come upon the Gentiles also. But it should not be
given to the Gentiles, if it were due only to the law and Circumcision,
because the gentiles lack them both. Finally, the hope of our salvation, ought
to be steadfastly established. But it should never be surely grounded, or safely
preserved, if it were attributed to our own works or merits. For in them is
always something wanting. But in God, and in the merit of the son of God
can nothing be lacking. Therefore our salvation is surely confirmed, not to be
doubted of, and assuredly certain, if that we seek for it by faith in the
son of God, who is our righteousness and salvation.

To all these I will yet add an other testimony out of Saint Paul, which
is in deed, both most evident and easy to be perceived. In his Epistle to
the Ephestans, he says: By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should
boaste him self. For we are the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus
into good works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in
them. More then this I will not say, neither will I at large expound the
words of Paul. For these testimonies are more clear then the noone day, and
do most evidently testify, that we are justified by faith, and not by any
works.

But (reverend brethren in the Faith shows forth and expresses it self by
good works.
Lord) good works here come into no ieopardie to be little set by, because of
this doctrine, which teaches that faith alone does justify. Thus did the
Apostles of Christ teach, why then should not we teach so too.

As for them that think this doctrine, whereby we do constantly affirm that
faith alone without works does justify, to be contrary to religion, let the^
blame the Apostles of Christ, and not find fault with us. Moreover, whereas
Faith only justifies.
we say that the faithful are justified by faith alone, or else by faith
without works, we do not say, as many think we do, that faith is poaste
alone, or utterly destitute of good works. For where soever faith is, there
also it shows it self by good works: Because the righteous can not but
work righteousness. But before he does work righteousness, that is to say
good works, he must of necessity be righteous: therefore the righteous does
not attain to righteousness that goes before by works that follow after.
Wherefore, that righteousness is attributed to grace. For the faithful are
freely by grace justified in faith, according to that saying. The just shall
live by his faith, and after that they are justified they begin to bring
forth the works of righteousness. Therefore, in this discourse I mean not
to overthrow good works, which have their due place and dignity in the Church
among the faithful, before the face of God: but my mind is, by all the means
I may, to prove that the grace of God, and increase of the son of God is
overthrown and trod under foot, when we join our merits and works to the
merit of Christ, and to faith: by which we take hold on Christ. For what
can be more manifest then this saying of the blessed Apostle? If we be saved by
grace, then not now works. For then grace is no more grace. But if we be saved
by works, then is it now no grace, for the work is no more work. Rom^n.
Wherefore these two, grace and merit or work, can not stand together.
Therefore least we should overthrow the grace of God, and wickedly deny the
fruit of Christ his passion, we do attribute justification unto faith only,
because that fay the attributes it to the mere grace of God in the death of
the Son of God.

And yet for all this, we acknowledge Of good works.
that we are created, according to the doctrine of Paul, unto good works, to
those good works I say, which God has before ordained, which he in his
word has appointed, and does require us to walk in the same. In which
although we walk and are become rich in good works, yet notwithstanding, we
do not attribute to them our justification: but according to the doctrine of
the Gospel, we humble our selves under the hand of him that says. So ye also,
when ye have done all things that are commanded you, yet say, we are
unprofitable servants: We have done no more then we ought to do. So then, as
often as the godly does read that our own works do justify us, that our
own works are called righteousness, that unto our own works is given a
reward and life everlasting, he does not by and by swell with pride, nor yet
forget the merit of Christ, but setting a godly and apt interpretation upon
such like places, he does consider that all things are of the grace of God,
and that so great things are attributed to the works of men, because they are
received into grace, and are now become the sons of God for Christ his sake:
so that at the last, all things may be turned upon Christ him self, for whose
sakes the godly know, that they and all theirs are in favor, and accepted of
God the Father.

In this that I have said which is a little in deed in respect of the
largeness of the matter, but sufficiently long inoughe in respect of one
hours space appointed me to speak in, I have declared unto you (dearly
beloved,) the great effect of faith, that is to say, that it justifies the
faithful, where by the way I have rather briefly touched, then at large
discoursed upon the whole work of justification both profitable and necessary
for all men to know. Now therefore I pass over this and come to the rest.

True faith is the welspring and Faith the ^oore of al good ^o^kes.
root of all virtues, and good works, and first of all it satis^ieth the
mind and desire of man, and makes it quiet and joyful.

For the Lord in the Gospel says. I am the bread of life: he that comes to
me shall not hunger: and he that believes in me shall not thirste at any time:
For what can he desire more, which does already feel that by true faith he
possesses the very son of God, in whom are all the heavenly treasures, and
in whom is all fullness and grace? Our consciences are made clear and quiet,
so soon as we perceive that by true faith Christ the Son of God, is
altogether ours, that he has appeased the father in our behalf, that he
does now stand in the presence of the father, and makes intercession to him
for us. And for that cause says Paul. Being justified by says we have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Through the same Christ also by
faith we have a free passage unto the Father. Wherefore we pray to the Father
in his Sons name, and at his hand we o^taine al things that are auayleable
to our behoof. Very well therefore said the Apostle John. And this is the
confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will
he hears us. And if we know that he hears us whatsoever we ask, we know
also that we have the petitions that we requested at his hands.

They that want faith, do neither pray to God, nor yet receive of him the
things that are for their welfare. Moreover, faith makes us acceptable to
God, and does command us to have an eye to the well using of Gods good gifts.
Faith causes us not to Faith the victory (...) al Christians.
faynte in tribulations: yea also by faith we overcome the world, the flesh,
the Devil, and all adversities.

As the Apostle John says. For all that is borne of God overcomes the
world: And this is the victory that vanquisheth the world even your says.
Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the
Son of God?

Paul says. Some were racked, not caring by faith to be set at liberty,
that they might obtain a better Resurrection. Other some were tried with
mockes and stripes, with fetters and imprisonmentes, were stoned, were hewed in
pieces, were slain with the edge of the sword: they wandered in sheep
skins and goats skins, comfortless, oppressed, afflicted, of whom the
world was not worthy, wandering in deserts and mountains, and in the dens
and caves of the earth. For the Lord him self in the Gospel said: This spoke
I unto you, that ye might have peace in me. In the world ye have affliction,
but be of good confidence I have overcome the world.

Faith therefore both shall be and is the force and strength of patience.
Patience is the proppe, vplifting and preservation of hope. Of faith springs
charity. Charity is the fulfilling of the law, which contains in it the
sum of all good works. But unless we have a true faith in God, there is no
charity in us. Every one that loves him that begatte, says John the
apostle, loves him also that is borne of him. The hour is paste a good while
since, and no man is able in many hours, so substancially as it requires, to
declare the whole effect of faith.

Ye have heard (dearly beloved) that true faith is the justification of the
Church or faithful of God, that it is I say the forgiunesse of all sins, a
receiving into the grace of God, a taking by adoption into the number of the
Sons of God, an assured and blessed sanctification, and finally the welspring
of all good works. Let us therefore in true faith pray to God the father in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he will vouchsafe to fill our hearts
with this true faith, yt in this present world being joined to him in faith we
may serve him as we ought, and after our departure out of this life, we may
for ever live with him in whom we believe. To him be praise and glory for
ever. Amen.

Of the first Articles of the Christian faith contained in the Apostles Creed.
The seventh Sermon.
IN my two last sermons I entreated of true faith and the effects thereof, and
among the rest in one place I said, that the Articles of the Christian faith
are as it were a brief Summarie of true faith, now therefore I think it to
be not beside the purpose, and part of my duty, to lay before you those
twelve Articles of our belief. For they are the substance and matter of true
faith, wherein faith is exercised: which because it is the ground of things
hoped for, here is plainly and briefly declared in these Articles what things
those are that are to be hoped for. But let no man at this present look for at
my hand the busy and full discourse of the Articles of our faith: I will but
briefly go through them touching only the most necessary points. They are
in another place handled more at large by several parts. Pray ye with me to
the Lord that he will vouchsafe to show to us his ways, to guide and preserve
us in them, to the glory of his own name, and the everlasting salvation of
our souls.

First I have to say somewhat touching the common name whereby the The Apo^tles
(...)
articles of our faith are usually called the Symbol or Creed of the
Apostles. A Symbele is as much to say as a co^ferring together, or else a badge.
The articles are called a conferring together because by the laying together of
the Apostles doctrine they were made and written, to be a rule and an
abridgement of the says preached by the Apostles, and received of the
Catholic or universal Church. But what he was that first did thus dispose
and write these articles, it is not known nor left in writing of the holy
Scriptures. Some there are that d^e attribute it to the Apostles them selves,
and therefore do call it by the name of the Apostles Creed. Saint Cyprian the
Martyr in his exposition of the Apostles Creed, says: Our ancestors have a
saying, that after the Lords ascension, when by the coming of the holy ghost
the fiery tongues sat upon every one of the Apostles, so that they spoke both
diverse and sundry languages, whereby there was no foreign nation nor
barbarous tongue to which they seemed not sufficiently prepared, to pass by
the way they had a commandment from the Lord, to go unto all nations to
preach the word of God. When therefore they were in a readiness to depart,
they laid down among them selves a platform of preaching for them all to
follow, least peradventure being severed one from another, they should preach
diverse things to them that were converted to the faith of Christ. Wherefore
being there altogether and replenished with the holy ghost, they gathered one
every ones several sentence and made that Breuiarie (as I said) to be a
pattern for all their preachings to be framed by, appointing it for a rule to
be given to them that should believe. This says Cyprian. But whether they were
of the Apostles own making or no, or else that other the Apostles disciples
made the^, yet this is very well known, that the very doctrine of the Apostles
is purely contained and taught in them. These twelve Articles are called also a
badge, because by that sign as it were by a badge, true Christians are
discerned from false.

Now I will declare what order I will use in expounding them unto The
partition of the Apostles Creed.
you. This whole breuiatie or abridgement of faith, may be divided into four
parts, so that the three first parts may make manifest the mysteries of the
three persons in one godheade: and that the fourth may lay forth the fruits of
faith, that is to say, what good things we look for by faith, and what good
things God bestows on them that put their trust in him. And yet this
notwithstanding I will proceed herein, even orderly so, as the twelve Articles
are placed or set down.

The first article of Christian faith is this. I believe in God the father
almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And this first Article of the Creed
contains two especial points. For first we say generally, I believe in
God. Then we descend particularly to the distinction of the persons and add,
The father almighty. For God is one in substance, and three in God is one in
su^stance an^ three in persons.
persons. Wherefore understanding the unity of the substance, we say
plainly, I believe in God. And again, keeping and not confounding the persons
we add, In the father almighty, In Jesus Christ his only son: And in the
holy Ghost. Let us therefore be leeue that God is one, not many, and pure in
substance, but three in persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy ghost.
For in the law it is written. Hearken Israel, The Lord our God is one Lord.

And again in the gospel we read that the Lord said. Baptize them in the
name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost.

By the way this is singularly to be I believe in God,
marked of us, that when we pray we say, Our father which art in Heaven, give
us this day our daily bread: but that when we make Confession of our belief,
we say not we believe, but I believe.

For faith is required of every one of us, for every particular man to have,
wythonte dissimulation in his heart, and without double meaning to profess it
with his mouth. It was not enough for Abraham to have faith for all his seed.
Neither will if avail thee any thing, for an other to believe, if thou thy
self art without faith. For the Lord requires faith of every particular man
for himself. Wherefore so often as we confess our faith every one of us by
himself does say I believe. But what it is to brleeue I have declared
already in my fourth Sermon. It follows in the Confession. I believe in God.
God is the obiecte and foundation of our Faith, as he that is the
everlasting and chief goodness, never weary, but always ready at our need.
We therefore believe in God, that is to say we put our whole hope, all our
safety, and our selves wholly into his hands, as unto him that is able to
preserve and bestow on us all things that are requisite for our behoo^e.

Now it follows that that God God is called a father.
in whom we rest, and unto whose tuition we do all commit our selves, is The
Father Almightye. Our God is therefore called Father, because from before all
beginning he begatte the son like to himself. For the Scripture calls
God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. He, says the Apostle, is the
brightness of the glory of God, and the lively Image of the substance of the
father: to whom he said, Thou art my son this day have I begotten thee. And
again. I will be his father and he shall be my son. Also God is called father
in respect of the likeness that he has with our earthly father, to wit
because of our Creation, the favor, love, good will and carfulness, where
with he is affected toward us. For God has created us, God loves us, God
regards our affairs and is careful for us, yea and that more exceedinglye
too, then any earthly father is. For says David. Even as the father pitieth
his children, so does the Lord pity them that fear him, for he knows our
estate, remembering that we are but duste. Esaias also in his 49. Cap. says,
Can a woman forget her own infant, and not pity and be feign over the son
of her own womb? But admit she do forget, yet will not I forget thee. In this
is declared Gods good will to us ward: and we confessing that God is our
father, do also profess that God to us is both gentle, liberal and merciful,
who wishes us all things that are auayleable to our health, and purposes
nothing to us ward, but that which is good and wholesome: and last of all
that at his hand we receive, what good soever we have, either bodilye or
ghostly.

God is called Almighty, because by God is called Almighty.
his might he can do al things, because he is Lord of all things, and has
all things subject to his commandment. For the same cause also is he
called the Lord of Hosts. Heaven, Earth, and whatsoever is therein, Stars,
all Elements, Men, Angels, devils, al living Creatures, all things created,
are in the power of the most high and everlasting God. What soever he
commands that they do, nothing is able to withstand his will. What he will,
that must of necessity be done: and also these things he uses even as his
own will and pleasure is, and as his justice and man's salvation do require.

First we confessed that God does will us well, and now we acknowledge,
that whatsoever he will that he is able to bring to pass. For we say that
God is Almighty, that is, that there is nothing, but he ca^ do it, which is
profitable and necessary for us men, as he that is Lord of all, and our
strong helper.

But that God is our good father, ^od is the m^ker of heaven and earth.
liberal, gentle, merciful, strong, Almighty, Lord of all, and our defender
and deliverer, it is to be seen by his wonderful works. For he is the maker
of heaven and earth. And in the making of Heaven and earth, he has declared
the great love that he bears to mankind. For when as yet they were not,
nether were able with desartes and good tournes to provoke God to do them any
good, then God first of his own mere and natural goodness, made heaven and
earth, a most excellent and beautiful Palace, and gave it them to dwell in,
putting under man's dominion all ye Creatures of this whole world. But how great
power he showed in the making of all these things, it is evident by this, that
He spoke the word and they were made, he commanded and they were created.
Which if thou bring into parts and severally examine, what he made in those
six days, in what order, with what beauty, to how great commodity of
mankind, and finallye how almost with no labor at all he brought them al
forth, as it is at large written by Moses in the first of Genesis, thou shalt
be compelled to be amazed at the goodwill and power of God. And yet by the way
we must think the Creator of all things to be such an one, as by his
son, that is, by his eternal wisdom, has created al things both visible
and invisible, yea and that of nothing too: and does moreover at this very
present sustain, nourish, rule and preserve all things by his everlasting
spirit, without which every thing would presently fall to ruin and come to
naught. We do herein therefore confess also the providence of our eternal
God, and his exceeding wise government.

And thus in this first part I have declared unto you that which is proper to
the father. For he is a father, yea he is the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and our father also, being Lord of all things, maker of heaven and
earth, governor and preserver of all things, by whom all things are, and in
whom all things consist. Who from before all beginning begot the eternal son,
equal with the father, being of one substance, power and glory with the
father, by whom also he made the world: From both them preceedeth ye holy
ghost, as David witnesses and says: By the word of the Lord the heavens
were made, and by the breath of his mouth all the host thereof.

Now follows the second part, The second article of our belief
wherein are contained all the mysteries of Jesus Christ our Lord ye son of
God. For the second article of the Christian faith is thus word for word: And
in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord. This article also comprehends two
things. The first is, that we believe in the son of God: The second what the
son of God is. For we confess that we believe, that is, that we put our
whole hope and confidence of life and salvation, as well in the son as in the
father. And therefore we say plainly, I believe in To believe in the Sonn^ of
God.
Jesus Christ: even as before we said, I believe in God. etc. For the Lord
Jesus himself in the 14. chapter of John, says: Let not your heart be
troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. Again, This is the work of
God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent. And again, This is eternal
life, to know thee the true God only, and him whom thou have sent Christ
Jesus.

Moreover in the Gospel after S. John we read that the Lord speaking to the
blind whose eyes he opened, said: Doste thou believe in the son of God?
And that the blind having received his sight answered: Who is he Lord that I
may believe in him? whereunto ye Lord replied, Thou have seen him, and he it
is that talks with thee. And that then again the blind said, I believe
Lord, and there withal he worshipped him.

Therefore let us also believe and worship, let us believe that Jesus is the
very son of God the father, being of one power with the father, although in
person he differ from the father. Which David testifying, says: The Lord said
to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand etc.

But if we declare at large, who ye son of God is in whom we believe, Who
the Son of God is.
then must we note three things especially. The first is that he is called
the Only Son. If he be the son, yea and that too the Son of God, then
is his nature and substance, a divine nature and substance.

For in this signification does the Apostle call him: The brightness of the
glory of the father, and the lively image of his substance. Consubstantial and
^oesse^tiall


Very well therefore do the holy fathers say, that the Son is of the same
substance and being, with the father.

Whereunto belongs that, that he is called the only son, and in The
only Son.
another place the only begotten and first begotten son. For we also are
called sons, not by participation of nature, or likeness of substance, or
naturallye, but by adoption.

And therefore the Jews were not offended because he called himself the son
of God, in that sense that all the faithful are called, and are the sons of
God, but because they did perceive ye he did more extol himself in saying ye
he is the natural Son of God, equal to God, and God himself.

For thus we read in the fifthe of John. Therefore the Jews sought the more
to kill Jesus, not only because he had broken the Sabbath, but said also
that God was his father, and made himself equal with God.

Again, where the Lord in the tenth chapter said: I and my father are one,
then the Jews took up stones to stone him withal: But Jesus answered. Many
good works have I done unto you, for which of them do ye stone me? To which
the Jews replied: For thy good works sake we stone thee not, but for thy
blasphemy, and because thou being a man make thy self God.

These are most euidente testimonies of the natural Godhead of Christ, which
whosoever belieueth not, he has not the father. For he that honors the
son, honors the father: and he that is without the son has not the
father: and unless the son were God by Nature, he could not be the Savior
of the world.

Now the second thing that is to be Jesus.
marked is that the name of the only begotten son of God is opened, and he
is called Jesus Christ. The name is expressly set down, ye we may know who it
is in whom we believe, lest peradventure we might be deceived in ye person. It
is Jesus: which name was given unto him by Gods appointment from heaven, even
as also it was prefigured in Duke Iosue, and in Iosue, ye high priest. The
Angel in the Gospel after S. Matthew instructinge Joseph says: Mary shall
bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus. For he shall save his
people from their sins.

So then this son of God Jesus is Christ.
the savior of the world, who forgiueth sins and sets us free from all the power of our adversary the devil. Which verily he could not do, unless he
were very God. He is also called Christ, which is all one as if you say,
Anointed. The Jews call him Messiah. Which word is a title proper to a
kingdom or priesthood. For they of old were wont to annointe their kings
and priests: they were anointed with external or figurative ointment or Oil.
But very Christ was anointed with the very true oyntement, that is, with ye
fulness of the holy ghost: as is to be seen in the first and third Chapters
after S. John. Most properly therefore is this name Christ attributed to our
Lord. For first, he is both king and priest of the people of God. Then the
holy Ghost is powered fully by all means and abundantlye into Jesus, from whom
as it were by a lively fountain it flows into all ye members of Christ. For
this is that Aaron, upon whose head the Oil was powered, which ran down to
his bearde, and the nethermost skirts of his garment. For of his fulness we have
all received.

The last thing that is to be noted now in this second Article is, ye we call
ye Christ is our Lord.
son of God our Lord. The son of God verily is for two causes properly
called our Lord. First in respect of the mystery of our redemption. For Christ
is the Lord of all the elect, whom he has delivered from the power and
dominion of Satan, sin and death, and has made them a people of his own
getting for himself. This similitude is taken of Lords, which with their
monye buy slaves for their use, or else which in wars reserve captives, who^
they might have slain, or which deliver men condemned from present death. So
then by this, Lords are as it were deliuerers, redeemers or saviors. Hereunto
verily alludeth Paul where he says. Ye are bought with a price, become not
(therefore) the servants of men. And S. Peter says. Ye are redeemed not
with gold and silver, but with the precious blood of the unspotted Lamb.
Moreover Christ is called Lord in respect of his Divine power and nature, by
which all things are in subjection to the son of God. And for because this
word Lord is of a very ample signification, as that which conteyneth both the
divine nature and maiestly, we see that the Apostles in their writings use it
very willingly. Paul to the Corinthians says. Although there be many Lords,
yet have we but one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all things are, and we by him.

Now the third Article of Christian The 3. Article of our b^lie^
faith is this, Which was conceived by the holy Ghost: borne of the Virgin
Marie.

In the second article we have confessed that we believe in Jesus Christ
the son of God our Lord: wherein we have as it were in a shadow confessed,
that we believe assuredly, that God the father has for us and our Salvation,
given to the world his son, to be a Savior and redeemer. For hitherto belong
those names, Jesus and Lord.

Now therefore in this third Article I have to declare the manner and order how
he came into the world: to wit, by Incarnation. This article contains two
things, The Conception of Christ, and his Nativity. Of both which I will
orderly speak, after that I have brieflye declared unto you the causes of the
Lord his Incarnation.

Men were in a miserable taking, The causes of the Lord his incarnation
and all mankind should utterly have perished for sin, which we have all
drawn from the first man Adam. For the reward of sin is death. And for that
cause we that were to be cast into hell, could not enter into heaven, unless
the son of God had descended, unto us, and becoming God with us Immanuel.
had with himself drawn us into heaven. Therefore the chief cause of his
incarnation is to be a mediator betwixt God and men, and by intercession to
join or bring into one, the^ that were severed. For where a mediator A
mediator.
is, there also must needs be discord and parties. The parties are God and
men. The cause of this discord is sin. Now the office of the Mediator, is
to bring to agreemente the parties disagreeing: which verilye cannot be done,
unless that sin the cause of this variaunce be taken clean away. But sin
is neither cleansed nor taken away, except that blood be shed and death do
follow. This witnesses Paul in his 9. Chapter to the Hebrews. The mediator
ought therefore to take on him our flesh and blood, that he might both dye
and shead his blood.

Furthermore it is needful that this Advocate or mediator be indifferently
common to both the parties, whom he has to reconcile: wherefore our Lord Christ
ought to be very God and very man. If he had been God alone, then should he
have been terrible to men, and have stood them in little steed. If he had
been mere man, then could he not have had access to God which is a consuming
fire: wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ being both God and man, was a fit
mediator for both the parties. Which thing the Apostle witnessing, says: One
God, and one mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself
the price of redemption for all. The same Apostle in the 2, and 9. Cap. to ye
Hebrews, speaks many things belonging to this place. And in the second
Chapter, rehearsinge an other cause of Christ his incarnation, he says: It
became him in althings to be made likevnto his brethren, that he might be
merciful, and a faithful high priest in things concerning God, for to purge
the peoples sins. For in that he himself was tempted he is able to succor
them that are tempted.

An other cause wherefore our Lord was incarnate, was, that he might instruct
us men in all Godliness, and righteousness, and finally that he might be the
light of ye world, and an ensample of holy life. For Paul says. The grace of
God that brings salvation has appeared unto us, teaching us to renounce
ungodliness, and to live holilie. To conclude, he therefore became one with us
by the participation of nature, that is to say, it pleased him to be incarnate
for this cause, that he might join us again to God, who for sin were
separated from God, and receive us into the fellowship of himself, and all
other his goodness beside.

The next is for us to declare the The manner of (...) his ^^nceptio^
manner of his incarnation. This article of faith stands on two members. The
first is, He was conceived by the holy ghost. Al we men, Christ excepted,
ace conceived by the seed of man which of it self is unclean, and therefore
we are borne sinners, and, as Paul says: We are borne the sonns of wrath.
But ye body of Christ, I say, our Lord was not conceived in the Virgin Marie
by Iosephe, or by any seed of man, but by ye holy ghost: not that the holy
ghost was in place of the seed. For nothing is begotten of the spirit, but
what is spiritual. Neither has our Lord a fantastical, but a very true
body, and of the same substance with us. So then our Lord was conceived in the
womb of the Virgin by the holy ghost. For the holy ghost by his eternal
power did bring to pass that, the virginity of ye Virgin mother being
uncorrupted, she, I say, being made with child, conceived of her own blood,
and gave a pure and very humane body to the son of God. As is declared at
large by the Angel Gabriel in the first cap. after S. Luke Of which place
because I mean to speak else where more largely, I do now pass it over
untouched. God himself straight ways after the very beginning of the world
did foretell, that such should be ye manner of that co^ception. For he said not,
the seed of the man shall tread down the Serpents head, but the seed of the
woman. Moreover the Lord by ye Prophets says: I will raise up seed to David.
But Moses law for ye raysinge up of seed to the brother departed is well
known. For if the brother died without issue of Children, his brother
remaining alive, was compelled to marry the deceassed brothers wife, and of
her to beget children, which were called and counted not by the name of him
that was living, but of the dead brother. Wherefore when there was not to be
found ama^ of David's line, that was sufficiently meet to begett on the Virgin
the son of God, the fauiour of ye world, God himself raises up seed to
David, and by his holy spirit makes the Virgin with child: who although she
were not with child by a man of David's line, yet because she was a daughter of
David's stock, and because, God so workinge, she of her own substance, gave
substance to the son of God, this her child Christ both is and is called
the son of David. What does yt argue moreover that David in the 110. Psalm,
says? In the mighty power of holiness the deaw of thy birth is to thee of the
womb of the morning. Or, the deaw of thy birth is to thee of the womb of the
morninge in the mighty power of holiness. That is to say, By a certain mighty
power of holiness, and meruaylous means shalt thou be borne. For thy birth
shall be like unto the ingendring of the deaw which comes of the pure morning
as it were a child borne of the womb. For as in the day time the Su^ne draws
out of the earth a vapor, which by reason of the smallnes of the heat which
draws it upward, is by the coldness of the te^perat night or euenings,
drawn down again, and resolved into water. So God ye is the Sun of
righteousness, took blood of the earth, that is, of the body of the untouched
Virgin Marie, and by a wonderful means, did holilie and purely bring to
pass, that of her vnipotted womb should be borne and conceived the most
holy son of God.

The causes why this conception of The causes why Christ hi^ conceptio^ is
pure.
the son of God, in the womb of the holy Virgin is most pure, are these.
He that is conceived in the womb of a Virgin is God: but God is a consuming
fire which cannot take or suffer any uncleanness in it self. An other cause is
this, God came to cleanse our uncleanness, that is the uncleanness of us men,
he himself verily ought to be exempte from all original spots, and in all
points most holy, to the end that being the only unspotted Sacrifice
offered up for the sins of all the world, he might clean take away all the
sins of ye world. For that which is it self defiled, cannot cleanse the
thing that is defiled, but rather ye spot or filthiness does double his
uncleanness, by the coming too of that other unclean thing.

The second member of this third Of the birth of Christ.
Article is, He was borne of the Virgin Marie. The Lord was borne of Marie his
mother, and yet she a Virgin still. Hec is therefore very man which is borne
of Woman.

Moreover his birth is pure. For he was borne of the Virgin, so that together
she was a mother, and yet a Virgin too. For Esaias says, Behold a Virgin
shall conceive and bring forth a son. A Virgin says he shall do both,
Conceive and bring forth, so that nevertheless she may remain a Virgin
still. The birthe therefore of the son of God is most pure. Also his birthe
is a true birth verily and in deed. For he takes flesh of the substance
and womb of the Virgin. In which signification also our Lord Jesus Christ is
called the son of David.

He could not be called David's son, unless he had taken very humane
substance of Marie a maid or daughter of the stock of David. Which that the
Apostle John might most properly signify and express, he says: The Word
was made flesh. And the Apostle Paul says: He does no where take on him the
Angels, but the seed of Abraham. And in the same place again he affirms:
That the Lord was made like to his brethren in all things sin excepted. To
the Philippians he says: When he was equal with God, he made himself of
no reputation, taking on him the form of a servant, and made in the
likeness of men, and found in figure as a man. Again the Apostle John
bears witness and says. Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh, is of God, and every spirit which confesses not that
Jesus Christ is com in the flesh, is not of God. Luke in his 2. Cap. has at
large set forth the manner of his Nativity. And I do mean elsewhere to speak
of it at the full. Let us therefore confess yt Jesus Christ was conceived by
the holy ghost, and borne of the Virgin Marie.

The fourth article of Christian faith The fourth Article of our belief
is this: He suffered under Po^tius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried,
he descended into hell. In this fouth article is declared ye end, use and
chiefeste comodity of ye Lord his incarnation. For he became man yt he might
suffer and dye, and by dying and suffering might redeem us from eternal death
and the torments of hell, and make us (being once cleansed) heirs of life
everlasting. For this is ye end of the Lord his death, as I will by and by
show you, and as Paul does at large declare in the 9. chapter to the Hebrews.

This article also is divided into his ^^^ist did (...).
parts. First we confess that our Lord suffered in very deed, and not
pha^tastically to the appearaunce only, and that he suffered verily the
calamities and myseries of this world, and after that again the torments of
the slaughtermen, and death it self in most bitter panges. He suffered
therefore both in soulde and body, yea and that too in many facions. For Esaias
says: He is a man of sorrows, and has felt calamities. He bears our
infirmities, and has carried our sorrows. For the Lord himself also in the
Gospel said. My soul is heavy even unto the death. But verily he suffered
all this for us. For in him was neither sin, nor any cause else why he
should suffer.

Secondarily in this article is noted Christ sufered under P^nti^s Pilate.
the time, and Pontius Pilate the judge, under whom the Lord dyed, and
redeemed the world from sin, death, ye devil and hell. He suffered therefore
in the Monarchy of the Romans, under the Emperor Tiberius, when as now
according to the Prophecy of Jacob father of Israel, the Iewishe people
obeyed foreign kings, because there were no more kings or captains of the
stock of Judah, to have the rule over them. For he foretold that then the
Messiah should come.

What may be thought of that moreover that the Lord himself oftener then once
in the Gospel did foreshew that he should be delivered into the hands of the
Gentiles, and by them be put to death?

In the third point of this article, we do expreslye declare the manner of his
death, For we add: He was crucified and dyed on the Cross. But ye death of
the Cross as it was most reproachful, so also was it most bitter or sharp to
be suffered, yet took he that kind of death upon him, yt he might make
satisfaction for the world, and fulfill that, which from the beginning was
prefigured, that he should be hanged on the tree. Isaac was laid on the pile
of wood to be offered up in sacrifice. Moses also stuck the Serpent on the
stake of wood, and lift it up to be beheld. And the Lord himself said: I,
when I shall be lift up from the earth will draw all men unto me. Finally he
dyed on the Cross geeuinge up his Ghost to God. For he dyed verily and in
deed, as you shall streightway perceive. Where I have briefly to declare unto
you, what the fruit of Christ his death is. First we were accursed because
of sin: he therefore took our curse upon himself, being lift up upon the
Cross, to the end he might take our curse away, and that we might be blessed
in him. Then also the heritage bequeathed to us by Will, could not come unto
us, unless he which bequeathed it did dye. But God bequeathed it: who, yt he
might die, became man and dyed according to his humane nature, to the end that
we might receive the heritage of life. In an other place again Paul says.
Him that knew not sin, did God make sin for us, that we by him might be
made the righteousness of God. Our Lord therefore became man, by ye sacrifice
of himself to make satisfaction for us, On who^, as it were upon a Goat for
sin offering, when all the sins of the whoale world were gathered together
and laid, he by his death took away and purged them all: so that now the
only sacrifice of Christ has satisfied for the sins of the whole world. And
this verily is the greatest comoditie of Christ his death taught every where by
the Apostles of Christ. Next after that also the death of Christ does teach
us patience, and the mortification of our flesh: yea Christ by the
participation of himself does by his Spirit work in us that sin may not
reign in us. Touching which thing ye Apostle Paul teaches many things in
the sixth Chapter to the Romans. The Lord in the Gospel says: If any man will
follow me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me.
These and a few more are the fruits of the Lord his passion, or the death of
Christ.

Fourthly in this Article is added: Our Lord was buried.
He was buried. For our Lord dyed verily and in deed upon the Cross. The
very truth of his death was proved by the Soldier, which thruste him through
the side. After that he was taken down from the Cross, and laid in a
Sepulcher. In the Gospel are expressed the names of them that buried him,
Joseph and Nicodemus. There is also showed the manner how they buried him. The
fruit of this his burial, the Savior himself has taught in these words.
Verily verily I say unto you, unless the seed of corn cast into the earth
do dye, it remains alone. But if it dye it brings forth much fruit.
Whervppon the Apostle exhorts us to be buried with Christ in his death, that
we may rise again in the newness of life, yea that we may live and reign
with him for evermore. If therefore our bodies also be buried at any time, let
us not therefore be troubled in mind. For the faithful are buried, that they
may rise with Christ again.

The fifth part of this fourth article He descended into Hell.
some do put severally by it self, for the fifth article of our faith. I for my
part do see no cause why it should be plucked from that that goes before, nor
why it should make by it self a peculiar article of our faith. The words are
these: He descended into hell. Touching this there are sondrie opinions among
the expositors of the holy Scriptures. Augustine in his book De fide and
symbolo does neither place these words in the rule of belief, nor yet
expound them. Cyprian says thus: It is to be known verily that in the Creed
of the latin Church this is not added: He descended into hell, nor yet is this
clause received in the Churches of the East: but yet the sense of that clause
seems to be all one with that, where it is said: He was buried. This says
he.

So then Cyprians opinion seems to be, that To descend into hell is nothing
else but to be laid in the grave, according to that saying of Jacob: Ye will
bring my gray hears with sorrow to hell, or the grave.

But there are some that think this assertion to be without lawful proof.
For it is not lykelie that they would wrappe a thing once already plainly
spoken, immediately after in a darker kind of speech. Nay rather so often as
two sentences are joined together that signify both one thing, the latter is
always an exposition of the first. But in these two speeches, He was buried,
and he descended into hell, the first is the plainer, and the latter the more
intricate. Augustine in his 99. Epistle to Euodius, turmoyleth himself
pitifully in this matter. To Dardanus de Dei praesentia, he writes that the
Lord went into hell, but that he felt no torment. We shall more agreably to
the truth seem to understand this article, if we shall think that the
virtue of Christ his death, did flow even to them that were dead and profited
them too: that is to say that all the Patriarchs and holy me^ that died
before the coming of Christ, were for the death of Christ preserved from death
everlasting. As S. Peter also makes mention, That the Lord went in the
spirit, and preached unto the Spirits that were in prison. For verily they by
the death of Christ were made to know the sentence of condemnation justly
pronounced against them, because when they lived, they believed not with Noe,
and them that were with him, in the Savior that was to come. Or else otherwise
by the lower parts or by hell, we understand not the place of punishment
appointed for the wicked, but ye faithful that are departed, even as al so by
the higher parts we understand them that yet are remayninge alive. Wherefore
the soul of Christ descended into hell, that is to say, it was carried into
Abraham's bosom, wherein all the faithful already departed, were gathered
together. Therefore when he said to the thief that was crucified with him:
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, he promised him the fellowship of
life and of the blessed souls.

Touching Abraham's bosom, our Lord spoke at large in the sixtenth Chapter of
the Gospel after S. Luke For whereas the Lord is said to have descended, that
comes to pass by the manner of speakinge. For otherwise it is evident by
Luk, that Abraham's bosom is a place severed a great way from hell, and placed
up aloft.

But to inquire or reason over curiouslye of these things, is rather the point
of a curious fool, then of a godly minded man. We confess in this article
that the Souls are immortal, and that they immediately after the bodily
death, do pass to life, and that all the saints from the beginning of the
world being sanctified by faith through Christ, do in Christ and by
Christ, receive the inheritance of life everlasting.

I would add to these the fifte article, but that the hour is now already
spent. We will therefore differ it unto the next Sermon. And now let us
altogether pray to God our father which is in heaven, that he will vouchsafe
by his spirit to inspire us with ye true and quickening Faith, which is in the
father and the son: in the father as the maker of all things: in the son
as the savior of the whoale world, who therefore came down from heaven, and
was incarnate in the womb of the most holy Virgin Marie, to the end he
might be the mediator betwixt God and men, and reconcile or make them at one
again betwixt themselves, and that he might have wherewithal to make an
oblation to appease Gods justice, and to purge our sins: which he bare on
his body, yea which he took away, and made all the faithful, heirs of life
everlasting.

Let us now give praise to the grace of God, and thanks to the son of God.
To whom alone all honor and glory is due for ever and ever. Amen.

Of the latter articles of Christian faith, contained in the Apostles Creed.
The eight Sermon.
LEt us first of all pray to our God, yt he will vouchsafe to grant us an
happy, speedy, and very fruitful proceeding in the declaration of the
other Articles of Christian belief.

The fifte Article of our belief is: The fifth article of ou^ belief.
The third day he rose again from the dead. And this article verily of our
belief is in a manner the chief of all the rest. Neither are the Apostles so
busily occupied in declaring and confirminge the other, as they are in this
one. For it had not been enoughe, if our Lord had dyed only, The glorious
resurrection of Christ.
unless he had also risen from ye dead again. For if he had not risen from
the dead, but had remained still in death, who should have persuaded us men,
that sin was purged by the death of Christ, that death was vanquished,
Satan overcome, and Hell broken up for the faithful by the death of
Christ? Yea verilye we have foolish fellows that would never cease to
blaspheme the very God, to make a mock of our hope, and to say: Tushe who
did ever return from the dead, to tell us whether there be a life in an other
world after this or no, and what kind of life it is?

Because therefore we cannot find find that any man did ever return from the
dead, that is to be doubted of which these babblers do tattle touching the
life of the world to come. That the Lord therefore might declare to the whole
world, that after this life there is an other, and that the Soul dies not
with the body, but remains alive, he returned the third day alive again
to his Disciples: and at that instant showed them that sin was purged, death
disarmed, the devil vanquished, and hell destroyed.

For the stinge of death is sin. Or the reward of sin is death. The devil
has the power of Death, and shuts in Hell for sins. Now therefore, in
that Christ ryseth alive again from the dead, Death could have no Dominion
over him: and because Death by sufferinge the Lord to pass, is broken, It
must needs follow that the Devil, and Hell, are vanquished by Christ. And
lastelie that Sin, the strength and power of them all is purelie purged.

It is evident therefore, that the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ does
as it were, certify and by seal assure us of our Salvation and Redemption,
so that now we cannot any longer doubt of it. We confess therefore in
this Article, that our Lord Jesus Christ is risen again, and that he is
risen again for our behoof, that is to say, that he has wipte away our
sins, and that for us he has Conquered death, the devil and hell,
according to the saying of the Apostle.

God has saved us, and has called us with an holy calling, not according to
our works, but according to his own purpose and favor, which was given unto
us through Jesus Christ before all beginning, but is declared openly now by
the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has verily put out death, and
brought forth life, light, and immortality by the Gospel. There are many
more like this in the 4. of his Epistle to the Romans, and in the 15. of his
first to the Corinthians. For the Lord also in the Gospel after S. John says:
I am the resurrection and the life: he that belieueth in me although he be
dead shall live: and every one that lives and belieueth in me shall not die
for ever.

Now also let us thoroughly consider every word of this article severally
by it self. We confess ye Lord, What a resurrection ^s.
his resurrection. But a resurrection is to rise again. That rises which
falls, The body of Christ fell, therefore the body of Christ rises, yea it
rises again: that is to say, the very same body of Christ which before it
fell did both live and stir, does now rise again, it does I say both live
and stir again. For truly said Tertullian of the resurrection of the
flesh, that this word Resurrection is not properly spoken of any thing, save of
y^ which first fell. For nothing can rise again but y^ that fell. For by
rising again, because it fell, we say the resurrection is made. Because this
syllable, Re, is never added, but when a thing is done again. Wherefore the
women in the Gospel, when they went to annointe the body of the Lord, which
honge upon the Cross, did hear the Angel of the Lord say. Why seek ye
the living among the dead? he is not here but is risen etc.

This history of the Lords resurrection is set forth in ye 24. after Luk, and
the 16. after Mark. Peter the Apostle also in the second of the Acts
affirminge the Lords resurrection by the testimony of David, does expresslye
show that the Lord is verily risen again.

After this we say again, that he is risen out of, or from ye dead. Which
Out of from the dead.
member does express the truth, both of his death and resurrection. For the
body or flesh dies or is destroyed: but being dead is raised up again: this
body therefore, or flesh, is raised up again: as though he that makes
confession of his belief should say, Our Lord died even in the very same
condition of nature that other mortal men do die in, but he tarried not, nor
yet stack fast among the dead. For the very same mortal flesh which he had
taken unto him, and by dyinge had laid aside, he now takes again
immortallie. As David had foretold before saying. Because thou shall not
leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption.

For Christ is the first begotten of them that rise again, in whom as in the
head, there ought to be declared, He was ^rucified dead, toke^ down and laid
^^ his gran^ upon (...) Friday, where his body ^ay* Saturday that is E^^er
eue^, and one Sunday which is Easter day in the morning he rose again from
death to life.
in what sort the resurrection of all Christ his members, shall be in the day of
judgment.

And we confess that this resurrection was made the third day, I mean the
third day after his death. For upon the day of Preparation he is taken
down from the Cross, and carried into a sepulcher, where his body rests the
whole Sabbath day, and about the beginning of the first day of sabbothes,
which I say, is the first day of the week, and among us at this day is called
Sunday, in the morning he rose again from the dead. Whereas therefore in the
twelfth Chap. of the Gospel after S. Mathewe we read that the Lord said:
As Jonas was three days and three nights, in the belly of the Whale: So shall
the son of man be in the heart of the earth three days, and three nights:
Yet notwithstanding in the sixtenth, and twenteth Chapters expoundinge
himself, as having spoken that by Synecdoche he says: I must go to
Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Scribes and elders, and be killed,
and raised up again the third day.

The sixth Article of our faith is: He The sixte article of our belief.
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the father
Almighty. That body which is of the same substance with our bodies, taken
out of the Virgin Marie, and taken verily of the substance of the Virgin,
which honge upon the Cross, and dyed, and was buried, and rose again, ye very
same body I say, ascended into the Heavens, and sits at the right hand of
God the father. For after that by the space of 40. days our Lord had
abundantly enoughe instructed his Disciples touching the truth of his
resurrection and the kingdom of God, he was taken up into Heaven.

By that ascension of his. he declares to ye whole compass of the earth, The
glorious ascension of Christ.
that he is Lord of all things, and that to him are subject al things that
are in Heaven and in earth, that he is our strength, the power of the
faithful, and he of whom they have to boast against the gates of Hell. For
he ascendinge into Heaven has lead Captivity captive, and by spoylinge his
enimyes has enriched his people, on whom he dailye heapeth his spiritual
gifts. For he sits above, that by powringe his virtue from thence into us,
he may quicken us with the spiritual life, and deck us with sondrie gifts
and graces, and lastly defend the Church against all evils. For God is our
Savior, king and bishop.

Whereupon when as once the Capernaites were offended, because the Lord had
called himself the bread of life, that came down from Heaven to give life
unto the World, He says: Does this offend you? What therefore if you shall
see the son of man ascend thither where he was before? As if he should
say, then verily ye will gather by my quickeninge, resurrection, and glorious
ascension into the Heavens, that I am the bread of Life brought down from
Heaven, and now again taken up into the Heavens, there to remain the Savior,
life, and Lord of Heaven and earth.

Moreover S. Peter the Apostle in the Acts says: Let all the house of Israel
know for a surety, that God has made the same Jesus whom ye have Crucified
Lord and Christ. The for^ of Christ his ascension into heaven.


Furthermore he did not only rise again from death, and come to his
Disciples, but also ascended into Heaven as they beehelde and looked on him, to
the end that we thereby might be assuredly certified of eternal salvation.
For by ascending he prepared a place for us, he made ready the way, that is,
he opened the very Heavens to the faithful.

God has placed in heaven the very humanity that he took of us: which is in
deed a liuelye and unreprovable testimony, that all mankind shall at the
last be translated into Heaven also. For the members must needs be made
conformable to the head.

Christ our head is risen again from the dead: therefore We his members
shall also rise again. And even as a cloud took away the Lord from the sight
of his Disciples: So shall we that believe be carried in the Clouds to meet
the Lord, and shall whoal^e in Soul and body be, and for ever dwell in
Heaven with our head and Lord Christ Jesus.

And this does John evidently teach him that reads his fourtenth chapter
where the Lord says: I go to prepare a place for you, and will come again to
you, and take you unto my self, that wheresoever I am, ye may also be.

Paul the Apostle also witnesses and says: We that live and shall be
remayninge in the coming of the Lord, shall be carried in the Clouds together
with them that are raised up from the dead to meet the Lord in the air. We
confess therefore in this article, that Jesus Christ being taken up into
Heaven is Lord of all things, the king and bishop, the deliverer and
Savior of all the faithful in the whoale world. We confess that in Christ
and for Christ we believe the life everlasting, which we shall have in this
body at the end of the world, and in soul so soon as we are once departed
out of this world.

But now by the way we must weighe the very words of this article. He
ascended, we say. Who He ascen^ed into ^eauen.
ascended I pray you? He that was borne of the Virgin Marie, that was
Crucified, dead and buried, that rose again from the dead: He (I say)
ascended verily both body and soul. But whether ascended he? Into Heaven.
Heaven in the Scriptures is not taken always in one signification.

First it is put for the Firmament, and that large compass that is over our
heads, wherein the birds fly too and fro, and in which the Stars are
placed, that are called the furniture and host of Heaven. For says David: God
is clothed with light as with a Garmente, he spreads forth the Heavens as
it were a Courteyne. He says also. I shall see thy Heavens, the work of thy
fingers, and the Moon and Stars which thou haste laid. And again: Which
covers the Heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth. And
again: The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmamente shows forth
the works of his hands. Then also, Heaven is taken for the throne and
habitation of God, And lastly for the place, seat, and receptacle of them
that are saved, where God geeueth himself to be seen and enjoyed of them that
be his.

For David witnessinge again, says. The Lord has prepared his seat in
Heaven. Whereupon the Lord in the Gospel says: Swear not by Heaven for it is
Gods seat. And the Apostle Paul says: We know if our earthly mansion of
this tabernacle be destroyed, that we have a dwellinge place for ever in
Heaven, builded by God, not made by hands.

And therefore in this signification Heaven is called the Kingdom of God, the
kingdom of the father, Joy, Happiness and felicity, Eternal life, Peace and
Quietness.

And although God in deed be not shut up in any place. For he says: Heaven
is my Seat, and Earth the footestoole of my feet. Yet because the glory of
God does most of all shine in the Heavens, and because that in Heaven he
gives himself to be seen and enjoyed of them that are his, according to that
saying: We shall see him even as he is. And again. No man shall see me
says the Lord and live, Therefore God is said to dwell in Heaven.

Moreover Christ our Lord touching his Divinity, is not shut up in any
place: but according to his humanity once taken, which he drew up into
Heaven, he is in the very local place of Heaven, neither is he in the mean
time here in earth and every where bodily, but being severed from us in
body, remains in Heaven. For he ascends, which leauinge that which is
below, does go to that above.

Christ therefore leaving the earth, has placed a seat for his body above
all Heavens. Not that he is carried up beyond all Heavens, but because
ascendinge up above all the Circles into the vtmoste and highest Heaven, he
is taken (I say) into the place appointed for those that are saved. For Paul
the Apostle speakinge plainly enoughe to be understood says: Our
conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior to come etc.

In the same manner also Luk the Evangelist says: And blessing them he
departed from them, and was carried into Heaven.

But why do I make so much ado He sits at the right hand of God the father
Almighty
about expounding that which is most euidentlye declared in the very Creed by
that which follows. For the next is: He sits at the right hand of God
the father Almighty.

For by this we understand what kind of place Heaven is, and what our Lord
does in Heaven.

It is not surely for our frailty over narrowly to seek out or discuss the
secrets of Heaven, and yet it is not against Religion to inquire after that
that is taught us in ye Scriptures, and so perfectly to remember it as it is
taught us. Our Lord is simply said to sit, and that too, to sit at the
right hand of the Father Almighty.

Let us therefore see what the right hand of the father is, and what it is to
sit at the right hand of the father.

The right hand of the Father in the Scripture has two significations. The
definition of gods right hand take here for the places name.
First the right hand of God is the place appointed for them that are saved,
and the everlasting felicity in Heaven.

This did S. Augustine set down to be marked, long before us, who in the
twenty and sixth Chapter of his book De Agone Christiano writes. That the
right hand of the Father, is the everlasting felicity given to the
Saints: even as also the leaft hand is most rightlye called the continual
misery allotted to the ungodly: not so that by this means that I have said
the right or leafte hand is to be understood in respect of God himself,
but in respect of his Creatures capacity. And this did S. Augustine speak
according to the Scriptures. For David says: The path of Life shalt thou
make known to me, the fulness of joys is in thy sight, and at thy right
hand is gladness for ever.

What else is this than if he had said, Thou shall bring me into life, I say
into the very Heavens, where I shall be filled with joys, both by saying and
beholdinge thee, and also by enjoying thee. At thy right hand in eternal
blessedness are joys everlasting. In the Gospel also we read, that the
Sheep are placed by the Judge at the right hand, and the Goats at the left.
And when the right hand is taken in this sense, Then To sit does signify to
rest from all labors, To sit is to be at rest and enjoy felicity.
and to live quietly and in happy state. For that saying of the Prophet is
very well known: A man shall sit under his Vine. As if he should have said,
all things shall be at peace, in safety, and at quiet. So then this that I have
said, is mente by the right hand of the father: and where we confess that
the son does sit at the right hand of the father Almighty, we do
acknowledge that our Lord being delivered from all trouble and mortal
infirmities, does now in his humanity, both rest and rejoice in the very
local place of Heaven, where we believe that both our souls and bodies shall
be, and live for ever.

For the Lord himself in the Gospel witnesses, that in his fathers house
there are many ma^sions, which he goes to prepare, that they may have a
place, and although he did depart, yet that he would return to them
again, and take them unto him self, that where he is, they also might be in
the same place with him.

Wherefore we believe that Christ is at rest in Heaven, where he has
prepared a place of rest for us also, to remain in joys everlasting. And
for because our bodies shall not be every where in felicity, but in the only
appointed place, therefore said S. Augustine truly, that Christ our Lord
according to the measure of his very body is in some one place of Heaven. And
S. Cyprian says: To sit at the right hand of the father is the mystery of
his flesh taken up into Heaven.

Secondarily the right hand of God is put for the virtue, kingdom, protection,
Gods right hand the name of his power; and in this signification to sit is to
reign
deliverance, and power of God. For David says: The Lords right hand is
high, the Lords right hand does mighty things. And Moses said: Thy right
hand (O Lord) is magnified in power, thy right hand (O Lord) has broken the
enemy. And when the right Hand is put in this sense, then To sit does
signify to reign, to deliver, to use power, and do the office of a Prince.

For says David: The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand,
till I make thine enemies thy footestoole. And the Prophet Zachary says:
Behold the man, that is called the branch, he shall budde out of his place,
and build the Temple of the Lord, and sit and rule upon his Throne, and be
a priest upon his seat. In this sense the right hand of God is infinite and
contained in no measure of place: and whereas we confess that our Lord does
sit at the right hand of the father, we do profess that the son is
exalted above all things, having all things subject under himself, as
Paul in his first Chapter to the Ephesians says: and finallye that the son
being so exalted ca^ do al thing, does reign in the universal Church, does
deliver them that are his, does make intercession to ye father in heaven, and
in the power of his Godheade is present in all places. For therefore did the
Creed add almightinesse to this setting of his, where it is said, He sits
at the right hand of the father almighty. And in Saint Matthew the Lord
says, To me is given al might in heaven, and in earth, go therefore and bring
all nations unto me.

So then I suppose that briefly thus I have well declared what manner of place
heaven is, to wit, a place of quietness, joy, and everlasting felicity,
wherein the son of God does sit, does dwell, and is in his humanity, as we
also, that are the members of Christ, shall be in the very same place without
all dolor and grief in joy for evermore. And although our Lord be delivered
from all grievous business, yet we mean not that he sits idly leaning on
his elbowes. For he is a King, a Priest, and very God in the very temple of
God: he can not choose therefore of his natural property and office but work
salvation in the elect, and do all things, that lie God, a king, and Priest in
hand to do. So then now we all know what our Lord does as he sits in
heaven. Neither is it any trouble to him at all to do and work that which he
does, for he works not of compulsion, but naturally and of his own accord.

Thus and no otherwise did the ancient Saint Hierom of the ^ight hand of the
father.
interpreters of the holy Scriptures handle this Article of our belief. Some of
whose testimonies I will here allege. Saint Hierome in his exposition of
Paul's first Chapter to the Ephesians, says: He has declared the power of God
by the similitude of a man: not because a seat is placed and God the father
sits there on, having his son sitting there with him: but because we can not
otherwise conceive how the son does judge and reign, but by such words
applied to our capacity. As therefore to be next to God, or to depart far
from him is not to be understood according to the distance of places, but after
men's merits, because the Saints are heard by him, but the sinners (of whom
the Prophet says, Behold they that get them selves from thee shall perish)
are removed far enough for coming near him at all. Even so likewise to be
either at the right or left hand of God is to be taken so, that the Saints
are at his right hand and sinners at his left. As our Savior him self also
in the Gospel affirming the same does say, that at the right hand are the
sheep, and the goats at the left. Moreover, this very word (to Sit,) does
argue the power of a kingdom, by which God is beneficial to them on whom he
does vouchsafe to sit, in so much as verily he does rule them, and has them
always in his guiding, and does turn to his own beck or government, the
necks of them that before ran out of the way at randon, and at liberty.
Saint Augustine of the right hand of (...) father.


Saint Augustine in his book De Fide et Symbolo says. We believe that he
sits at the right hand of God the Father. Yet not so therefore as though we
should think that God the Father is comprehended within the limits of a man's
body: so that they that think of him should imagine that he has both a
right and a left side: And whereas it is said that the Father sits, we
must not suppose that he does sit with bended hammes, least peradventure we
fall into the same sacrilege for which the Apostle accurseth them that have
changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of a
corruptible man. For a detestable thing it is to place God in such a likeness
in a Christian Church: and much more wicked is it to place it in the heart,
where the temple of God is verily and in deed, if it be cleansed from earthly
desires and error. We must therefore understand, that at the right hand is as
much to say as in greatest happiness, where righteousness and peace and
gladness is: eue^ as also the Goats are placed at the left hand, that is in
misery for their iniquities to their peine and torment. Whereas God therefore
is said to sit, thereby is not meant the placing of his limms, but his
judicial power, which his majesty never wants in bestowing worthy rewards
on those that are worthy of them. And so forth.

The blessed Bishop Fulgentius in ^^int Fulgentius. His humanity i^ l^cal,
that is, ^^^teined i^ space of ^lace, but ^^s Godhead inco^prehe^sible as that
that is every where, (...) not (...) in any place. Saint vigilius.
his second Book to King Trasimundus, says: The Lord, to show that his
humanity is local, says to his Disciples, I ascend to my father and to
your father, my God and your God. And by and by after declaring the in
comprehensibilitie of his Godhead, he says to his Disciples: Behold I am with
you always even unto the end of the would.

The blessed Martyr and Bishop of Trent Vigilius in his first book against
heresies, says: This was to go to the Father, and to depart from us, to take
away out of this world the nature which he took of us. Thou see therefore
that it was proper to the same nature to be taken away, and to depart from us,
according to the words of the Angels which said, This Jesus who is taken up
from you, shall come again even as ye see him go into heaven. For see the
miracle, See the mystery of both his properties: The Son of God in his
humanity is departed from us: according to his divinity he says to us,
Behold I am with you always even unto the end of the world. If he be with us
how says he? The time shall come when ye shall desire to see one of the days
of the son of man and ye shall not see it. But both he is with us, and not
with us. Because them, whom he has left and departed from in his Godhead, he
has not left nor forsaken in his manhood. This says he.

The seventh Article of our faith is this. From thence he shall come to The
seventh Article. Christ a Judge.
judge the quick and the dead. In the former Articles there is set forth and
confessed the divine goodness, bountifulness and grace in Christ: now also
shall be declared the divine justice, severity and vengeance that is in him.
For there are two co^mings of our Lord Jesus Christ. First he came basely in
the flesh to be the redeemer and savior of the world. At the second time he
shall come gloriously to judgment to be a judge and revenger that will not be
entreated against all unrepentant sinners and wicked doers. And he shall come
out of heaven from the right hand of the Father in his visible and very humane
body, to be seen of all flesh, with the incomprehensible power of his
Godhead, and being attended on by all the Angels. For the Lord him self in the
Gospel says: They shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of heaven
with great power and glory, and he shall send his angels with the great sound
of a tru^p. etc. But now to judge To Iudg^ what it (...)
is to sit in the tribunal seat, to hear and discuss matters, to take up
strifes to determine and give sentence, and lastly to defend and deliver, and
again to chastise and punish, and by that means to keep under and suppress
injury and malice. We believe therefore that our Lord Jesus Christ in that
day shall deliver all the godly, and destroy all the wicked: according to the
words of the Apostle who says, Our Lord shall be revealed from heaven with the
Angels of his power, with a burning flame, and shall lay vengeance on them that
have not known God: And again, the same just judge shall give a crown of
righteousness to al them that love his coming. The manner of this judgment
The pic^ure of ^he last ^^dgeme^t.
the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles do tell us, shall be in this
sort. When once the wickedness of this world shall come to the full, and that
Antichrist shall have deceived the world, so that there is but little faith
remaining, and that the wicked shall say peace and quietness, then shall a
soudaine destruction come. For our Lord the judge shall send his Archangell, to
blow the tru^p and to gather together from ye four winds all flesh to
judgment: by and by after shall the judge him self our Lord Jesus Christ
follow with all the host of heaven: and he shall descend out of heaven into
the clouds: and sitting aloft in the clouds as in a judgment seat, shall be
easily seen of al flesh. For they that shall be then living at the day of
judgment shall in a very prick of time be changed, and stand before the
judge: and all the dead shall in a moment rise up again. Then shall the judge
divide the sheep from the goats: and according to justice shall give judgment
with the sheep and against the goats saying: Come ye blessed. etc. And, Go ye
cursed. etc. Presently after shall follow execution. For the sheep shall by and
by be caught up into the clouds to meet ye Lord in the air, and shall ascend
with him joyfully into heaven to the right hand of God the father, there to
live for ever in glory and gladness. The bottom of the earth shall gape for
the wicked, and shall suck them all up horribly, and send them down to hell,
there to be tormented for ever with Satan and his Angels. All this shall be
done not by any long, troublesome, or change able process, as is used in our
Courts of law, but even in the twinkling of an eye. For then shall all men's
hearts be laid open and every man's own conscience shall accuse him self. This
is more at large set out in Math. 24. and. 25 Wis. 3. and. 5. 1. Cor. 15. 2.
Cor. 5. 1. The. 4 5. Romans 2. 2. Pet. 3. etc. Now we do The quick and dead are
judged
simply confess that the quick and the dead shall be judged. This do some
expound of the godly and ungodly. But the Symbol or Creed, was ordained for
the most simple of understanding. And simple things are fittest for to teach
simple men. Therefore we say simply yt the dead are al they, that from the
beginning of the world even until the last day are departed out of this
mortal life. And the living are they, which at that day shall be alive in this
world. For the apostle says, Behold I tell you a mystery, we shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed by the last trump in a moment of time and
in the twinkling of an eye. For the trumpe shall sound, and the dead shall
rise again incorruptible, and we shall be changed.

And again in another place the same Apostle says. This I say unto you in the
word of the Lord, that we, which shall live and be remaining at the coming of
the Lord, shall not prevent them which are a sleep. Because the Lord him
self shall come down out of heaven with a great noise, and the voice of an
Archangel and the trump of God, and first shall the dead in Christ rise up
again, then shall we which shall be a live and be remaining, be caught up
together with them in the clouds into the air to meet the Lord: and so
shall we be with the Lord for evermore.

We confess therefore in this seventh The reward and punishment is most
certain.
Article that we believe there shall be an end of all things in this world,
and that the felicity of the wicked shall not endure for ever. For we believe
that God is a just God who has given all judgment unto his Son, to repay to
every one in that day according to his works, pains to the wicked that never
shall be ended, and to the godly joys everlasting. And so in this Article we
profess that we look for a deliverance, a ceasing from troubles, and the
reward of life everlasting. For how should he destroy them that believe in
him, his people, and his servants, who in the most true Gospel says.
Verily I say unto you that ye* which hane followed me in the regeneration, when
the Son of man shall sit on the seat of his majesty, ye also shall sit upon
twelve seats judging the twelve tribes of Israel. There are most certain
rewards and penalties appointed for the godly and ungodly in the word of
truth. He can not lie that said to Esaias, Say to the righteous that it shall
go well with him, for he shall inioye the fruit of his study. But woe be to
the wicked, it shall be evil with him, for he shall be rewarded according to
the works of his own hands. And thus much touching the second part of the
Creed. Now are we come to the third part.

The eight Article of our belief is this, I believe in the holy Ghost. This
the eighth article of our faith.
third part of the Creed contains the property of the third person in the
reverend Trinity. And we do rightly believe in the holy Ghost, as well as in
the father and the son. For the holy Ghost is one God with the Father and
the Son: and rightly is faith in the holy Ghost joined to faith in the
Father and the Son. For by him the fruit of Gods salvation fulfilled in the
Son is sealed to us, and our sanctification and cleansing is bestowed on us,
and derived from him to us by the holy Ghost. For the Apostle says. God which
anointed us, is he also which has sealed us, and has given the earnest of the
spirit in our hearts. And again, Ye were in deed defiled with naughtiness
but now ye are cleansed and sanctified, and lastely justified through the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. The Father in deed
does sanctify too, but by the blood of Jesus Christ, and pours the same
sanctification out of him into us by the holy Ghost: so that it is as it were
the property of the holy Ghost to sanctify, whereupon he is called Holy or
the sanctifier. Therefore so often as we hear the holy Ghost named, we must by
and by think of the power in working, which the Scripture attributes to him,
and we must look after the benefits that from him do flow to us. For the
power, operation, or action of the spirit is that, what so ever the grace of
God does work in us through the Son: so that of necessity we must believe in
the holy Ghost. And in this eight Article we do profess, that we do verily
believe that all the faithful are cleansed, washed, regenerated, sanctified,
enlightened, and enriched of God with diverse gifts of grace for Christ his sake,
but yet through the holy Ghost. For without him there is no true
sanctification: wherefore we ought not to attribute these gifts of grace to
any other means: this glory belongs to the holy Ghost only. Of whom I will
more largely and fully discourse in my other Sermons.

The hour is spent which warns me to wrappe up briefly and make an The
father in Christ has fully given us all heavenly treasures.
end, therefore I exhort you al to have your faith religiously bent upon the
Lord Jesus: for him has the heavenly father sent to us, in him has he wholly
expressed and showed him self to us, and him does the holy Ghost printe in
our hearts and keep in our minds. And in Christ is all man's salvation and
every part thereof contained: wherefore we must beware that we derive it not
from any thing else. It pleased the father (says the Apostle) that all
fullness should dwell in the Son, and in him to recapitulate and as it were
to bring into a sum all points of salvation, that in him all the faithful
may be fulfilled. For if salvation be sought, then even by his very name are we
taught that salvation is in his power. For he is called Jesus, that is a
savior. If we desire the holy spirit of God and his sundry gifts, we shall
find them also in the anointing of Christ. For he is called Christ, the
anointed I say, the holy of holies, and the sanctifier, or else the
annoynter of us with his spirit. If any man have need of strength and might,
of power and deliverance, well he has to look for it in Christ his
dominion. For Christ is Lord of all. In the same Christ we find redemption.
For he has redeemed us that were sold under Satan's yoke. In his conception
we have purity, in his nativity we have sufferance. For he became like to us,
that he might suffer grief as well as we. For in his passion we have
forgiunesse of sins, in his condemnation we have absolution, satisfaction in
his offering or cleansing sacrifice, cleansing in his blood, and an universal
reconciliation in his descending into hell. In his burial we have the
mortificatio^ of our flesh, the newness of life, yea rather the immortality
of the soul, and resurrection of our bodies in his glorious resurrection. We
have also the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom, with the assured sealing
thereof in his ascension and sitting at the right hand of the father. And there
is he our mediator, priest and king, our safegarde and our head, our
defender and most sure rest.

From thence he pours into us his holy spirit, the fullness of all good
things: and does communicate him self wholly to us, joining us unto him self
with an indissoluble knot. From thence we do with confidence and joy look for
him to be our judge, to be I say our patron and deliverer, which shall
condemn and send down hedlong into hell all our enemies with satan: but
shall take us and all the faith full of every age up into heaven with him self,
there to sing a new song, and to rejoice in him for ever and ever. To him be
glory for ever. Amen.

Of the latter Articles of Christian faith contained in the Apostles Creed.
The nynth Sermon.
LEt us call to our Father in heaven through our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
will vouchsafe to pour his grace into us, that we may to our no small profit,
dispatch and expound the last part of the Articles of Christian belief.

The nynth Article of faith is this, The ninth ^rticle of ^ur belief,
The holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints. After the confession of
our belief in the holy Trinity, and in the mystery of the Son of God our
Lord Jesus Christ, and lastly in the holy Ghost the sanctifier and restoarer
of al: now in the fourth part is reckoned up the fruit and power, the effect
and end of faith, and what does come to, and is bestowed on the faithful.
There comes to them communion of God and all Saints, sanctification,
remission of sins, the resurrection of the flesh and life everlasting. Of
which I will speak in order as they lie so far forth as ye bountiful Lord
shall give me ability. Now then here we have to rehearse out of the eight
Article this word I believe, we must (I mean) say, I believe the holy
Catholic Church. Some unlearned there are which hold opinion that in this
point of our confession we should say, I believe in the ^ee must ^ot in our
^onfession ^y I be^^eue in ^he church
holy Church. The reason that leads them so to think is this, because they
find written in the Constantinopolitane Creed, And in the holy Ghost the
Lord that gives life, who proceeds from the father and the son who
together with ye father and the son is to be worshipped and glorified, who
spoke by the Prophets in one Catholic and Apostolic Church. For these
words they do so distinguishe that as they do repeat out of the premises
these words, I believe, and make this the sense, I believe in the holy Ghost
the Lord: even so here again they do repeat these words, I believe, making
this to be the sense, I believe in one Catholic and Apostolic Church. But
this is more then needs, yea and against all godliness do they wrest these
words of the Creed. For this, In one Catholic and Apostolic Church, is
not referred to the Verb, I believe, but to the holy Ghost, because he spoke
by the Prophets in one Catholic and Apostolic Church. For our meaning is,
and we confess that one and the same spirit did all things in both
Testamentes, contrary to the opinion of them which imagined that there were
two spirits contrary one to the other.

Moreover, Saint Cyprian in his Cyprian.
exposition of the Apostles Creed, says: He said not in the holy church, nor
in the remission of sins, nor in the resurrection of the body. For if he had
added the preposition, In, then had the force of those clauses been all one
with the force of that that went before. For in those words wherein our
belief touching the Godhead is set down we say, in God the Father, In Jesus
Christ his Son, and in the holy ghost: but in the rest where the speech is not
of the Godhead, but touching the creatures or mysteries, the preposition In is
not added, that we may say In the holy Church, but that the holy Church is to
be believed not as we believe in God, but as a congregation gathered together to
God, and that the forgiunesse of sins is to be believed, not that we ought to
believe in the forgiunesse of sins: and that the resurrection of the flesh is
to be believed, not that we ought to believe in the resurrection of the flesh.
So then by this syllable, In, the Creator is discerned from the Creatures, and
that that is Gods from that that is man's. This says Cyprian.

S. Augustine in his book De Fide Augustine
et Symbolo has, I believe the holy Church, not I believe in the holy Church.
There are alleged also his words in his epistle Ad Neophytos, touching
consecration, Distinct. 4. ca. 1. We said not that ye had to believe in the
Church as in God, but understand how we said, that ye being co^uersant in the
holy Catholic Church should believe in God.

Much more evidently does Paschasius Paschasius
in the first Chap. of his first book De Spiritu Sancto say, We believe the
Church as the mother of regeneration: we do not believe in the Church as the
author of salvation. He that believes in the Church, believes in man. For
man has not his being of the Church, but the Church began by man. Leave of
therefore this blasphemous persuasion to think that thou haste to believe in
any worldly Creature: since thou may not believe neither in Angel nor
Archangel. The unskillfulness of some have drawn and taken the preposition,
In, from the sentence that goes next before, and put it to that that
follows, adding thereto also too too shamelesly somewhat more then needed.
This has Paschasius in that book of his which Saint Gregory the great
Bishop of Rome liked ^^int Gre^orie.
very well of.

What say ye to that moreover that Thomas of Aquine reasoning of faith, ^homas
^quine.
in the second book Part. 2. Artic. 9. quest. 1. says? If we say, I believe
in the holy Church, we must understand that our faith is referred to the
holy Ghost which sanctifies the Church: and so make the sense to be thus: I
believe in the holy spirit that sanctifies the Church. But it is better and
according to the common use not to add at all the syllable, In, but simply to
say the holy Catholic Church: even as also Pope Leo Pope Leo.
says. This has Thomas.

So now ye have heard the opinions of the ancient Doctors of the Church,
Cyprian, Augustine, Gregory, Paschasius, Pope Leo, and also of Thomas of
Aquine which taught now in the later times. And (dearly beloved) ye do
understand by proofs taken out of the Canonical Scripture, that we must
acknowledge and confess the holy Catholic Church, but not believe in the
holy Catholic Church.

And now we have to see what that is that is called the Church, and what is
called the Catholic church.

Ecclesia, which word we use for The Catholic Church.
the Church is properly an assembly, it is I say where the people are called
out or gathered together to hear somewhat touching the affairs of the common
weal. In this present treatise it is the company, communion, congregation,
multitude, or fellowship of all that profess the name of Christ. Catholic
is as much to say as, this fellowship is universal, as that that is extended
through all places and ages. For the Church of Christ is not restrained into
any corner among the Donatists in Aphrica: it stretches out it self through
the compass of the world and unto all ages, and does contain all the
faithful from the first Adam even unto the very last Saint that shall be
remaining before the end of the world.

This universal Church has her particular churches, I mean the church of
Adam and of the Patriarchs, the Church of Moses and of the Prophets before
the birth of Christ, the Christian Church which is so named of Christ him
self, and the Apostolical Church gathered together by the Apostles doctrine
in the name of Christ. And finally it contains these particular Churches, as
the Church of Jerusalem, of Antioch, of Alexandria, of Rome, of Asia, of
Aphrica, of Europe, of the East, of the West. etc. And yet all these Churches
as it were members of one body under the only head Christ (for Christ alone
is the head of his Church not only triumphant, but militant also) do make one
only Catholic Church: in which there are not to be found either heresies
or schismies: and for that cause is it called the true Church, to wit, of the
The true Church.
right and true opinion, judgment, faith and doctrine. For in the Church only
is true faith, and without the Church of God is neither any truth, nor yet
salvation.

So then in this Article we confess that all the faithful dispersed through
out the whole compass of the earth, and they also that at this time live in
heaven, as many I say as are already saved, or shall even until the very end
of the world be borne to be saved, are one body, having gotten fellowship and
participation with God and a mutual communion among them selves. And for
because no man can be made one with God, unless he also be holy and pure, even
as God is holy and pure, therefore we believe that the Church We believe the
Church to be holy.
is holy, that is, that it is sanctified by God the Father in the blood of the
Son, and the gift of the holy Ghost. We have heard testimonies enough in the
former Sermons. Therefore this one of Paul shall be sufficient which he
writes to the Ephesians. Christ loved the Church, and gave him self for it,
to sanctify, and to cleanse it in the fountain of water through the word, to
make it unto him self a glorious Church not having spot or wrinckle. etc. By
which words we understand that the church is called undefiled and altogether
clean, not in respect of it self, but because of Christ. For the Church of
Christ is so far forth holy as that yet every day How the Church (...) holy.
it does go forward in profiting, and is never perfect so long as it lives
on the earth. And yet notwithstanding the holiness of it is most absolutely
perfect in Christ. Whereunto verily belongs that notable saying of the Lord.
He that is washed, has no need but to wash his feet only, for he is wholly
clean. For the faithful are purely cleansed by Christ, who washes them with
his blood, but yet because the flesh does strive with the spirit so long as
life remains on the earth, therefore the godly have need with faith and the
holy Ghost to wash and wipe their feet, that is, the relics and spots
wherewith they are disteined by their daily conversation in this world.

But now whereunto belongs this that is added? The communion The communion
of (...)
of Saints? These words are neither read in Cyprian, nor Augustine, nor yet
by them expounded. Wherefore it is likely that they were added for the better
understanding of that which went before: for that it might appear that the
Catholic Church is the fellowship or company of the faithful he added The
communion of Saints, as if he should have said, which church is a communion of
Saints. Paul called them Saints, which for their faith are sanctified by
the blood and spirit of God. Also this word Communion is very evident and
comfortable. For first the meaning thereof is that betwixt God and us there is a
Communion, that is a fellowship and participatio^, and so consequently a
parting betwixt us of all good and heavenly things. And then also we
understand, that we are fellows and partakers with all ye Saints, that are
living either in heaven or on earth. For we are members of the^ under one head
Christ. For the Apostle John says: That which we have seen and heard we
declare unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and that your
fellowship may be with the father, and his son Jesus Christ. Hereunto
appertains that trim similitude of the body and members under one head,
which ye Apostle Paul handles at large in deed: but what is he that can
worthily enoughe set forth the great goodness of Gods gift and benefit, in
yt we are made fellow partners of God, with whom we are most nerely conjoined,
and have a part in all his good and heavenly things? what can be more
delightful to our ears, then to hear that all yt Saints as well in heaven
as in earth, are our brethren, and that we again are members, partners and
fellows with the^? Blessed be God which has so liberally bestowed his
blessing on us in Christ his son. To this place belongs the discourse
upon the Sacraments, of which, and of the Church, I mean at an other time
more fully to entreat. This for the present time is sufficient. For this yt I
have said does abu^dantly enoughe express and set out the fruit of faith in
the father, the son, and the holy ghost, to wit yt we have participation
with God, and all the Saints, and that in this fellowship we are sancti^ied
(...) all filth or uncleanness, being cleansed and holy in Christ our Lord.

Now follows the tenth article of The tenth ^rticle of our belief.
our belief, which is: The forgiveness of sins. The second fruit or
commodity of our belief in God the father, ye son, and the holy ghost, is
here set forth, that is the remission of sins, which, although it be
contained in sanctification spoken of in the last article, is in this place
notwithstanding, more lively expressed. Without the Church as it were without
the ark of Noah is no salvation: but in yt Church, I mean in yt fellowship of
Christ, and the saints is full forgiveness of all offenses. That this may be
the better understood I will divide it into some parts.

First of all it is needeful to acknowledge and confess that we are sinners,
and The acknowledging and confessing of our sins.
that by nature, and our own proper merits, we are the children of wrath and
damnation. For S, John does not in vain nor without a cause call every one a
liar yt says he has no sin. And God which knows the hearts of men has
commanded us even till the last gasp to pray, saying: Forgive us our debtes.
Moreover, in the Gospel we have two excellent examples of me^ openly
confessing their sins to God, ye prodigal son, I say, and the Publican in
S. Luke Let us therefore think that we are all sinners, as Paul also taught:
yea, as he has evidently proved in the first Cap. to the Romans, and let us
freely confess to God our sins with David in the 32. and 51. Psalm. saying:
My sin have I made known to thee, and mine iniquity I have not hid. I have
said: I will confess mine unrighteousness against my self, and thou haste
forgiven the iniquity of mine offense. Have mercy on me O God, accordig to
thy great mercy. etc. The Psalm is known.

Secondarily let us believe that al O^r sins ar^ forgi^e^ of god (...) for ^ur
own merits but for Christ his sake.
these sins of ours are pardoned and forgiven of God, not for the
acknowledging and confessing of our sins, but for the merit and blood of the
son of God: not for our own works or merits, but for the truth and mercy
or grace of God. For we do plainly profess, saying: I believe the forgiveness
of sins: We say not, I buy, or by gifts do get, or by works obtain the
forgiveness of sins, but I believe ye forgiveness of sins. And the word
remission or forgiveness does signify a free pardoning, by a metaphore taken
of creditours and debitours. For the creditour forgiueth ye debitour, when he
is not able to pay: therefore remission is a forgiving according to yt saying
of our Savior in the Gospel: A certain lender had two debitours: and when
they were not able to pay, he forgave them both. Hereunto belongs that also
in ye Lords prayer: And forgive us our debtes. For our debts are our sins,
them do we request to be remitted, that is, to be forgiven us. In this sense
also says S. Paul: To him that works is the reward reckoned not of grace
but of due debte: But to him that works not, but belieueth on him that
justifies the ungodly, his says is counted for righteousness: Even as David
describes the blessedness of that man unto whom God imputes righteousness
without works, saying: Blessed are they whose unrighteousness are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered. Blessed is that man to whom the Lord will not impute
sin. Wherefore in respect of us which have not wherewithal to repaie, our
sins are freely forgiven, but in respect of Gods justice they are forgiven
for the merit and satisfaction of Christ.

Moreover it is not the sins of a All sins are forgeuen.
few men, of one or two ages, or a few and certain number of sins are
forgiven only, but the sins of all men, of all ages, the whole multitude of
sins, whatsoever is, and is called sin, whether it be original, or actual,
or any other else, to be short all sins are forgiven us. Which we do hereby
learn, because the only sacrifice of Christ is effectual enough to wash away
all the offenses of all sinners, which by faith come to the mercy seat of Gods
grace. And yet by this we do not teach men to sin, because the Lord has
long since made satisfaction for sins: but if any man do sin, we teach him
to hope well and not to despair, but to flee to the throne of Grace. For there
we say that Christ sitting at the right hand of the father, is that Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of ye world. And in the Crade verily it is
expressly said: I believe the forgiveness of sins, and not of sin. For
when we say of sins, we acknowledge that God forgiueth all sins. For to
let pass the proofs hereof out of the 3. and 5. of Paul to ye Romans, those
out of S. John the Apostle and Evangelist shall be suffcient, who in his Epistle
testifies and says: The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from every sin.
Lo, he says from every sin. He, I say, that says from every one,
excepteth none, unless it be yt which ye Lord himself excepted, I mean the
sin against ye holy Ghost, for which the very same S. John forbids us
to pray. Again also he says: If we acknowledge our sins, God is faithful
and just, to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from al our unrighteousness.
The Apostle thought it not enough to say barelie, To forgive us our sins, but
that he might declare the thing as it is in deed so plainly, that it might
easily be understood, he adds moreover this saying: And to cle^se us from
al our unrighteousness. Lo, here he says again from all unrighteousness. And
for because some cauiller might peradventure, make this objection and say,
This kind of doctrine makes men sluggish and slow to amendment. For men
under the pretense of Gods grace will not cease to sin: therefore John in his
2. Chap. answers their objection and says. Babes, these things write I to
you that ye sin not: and if any man sin, we have an advocate with the
father Jesus Christ the righteous. And he is the atonement for our sins:
and not for our sins only, but also for the sins of all the world.
Wherefore it is assuredly true that by the death of Christ all sins are
forgiven them that believe.

Moreover ye Lord alone forgiueth God alone and not man forgeueth sins.
sins. For it is the glory of God alone to forgive sins, and of unrighteous
to make men righteous. Therefore whereas me^ are said to forgive sins, that is
to be understood of their ministry and not of their power. The minister
pronounces to the people, that for Christ his sake their sins are forgiven:
and in so saying he deceyueth them not: For God in deed forgiueth the sins
of them that believe: according to that saying: Whose sins ye forgive they
are forgiven them. And this is done so often as the word of the Gospel is
preached, so that there be no need to feign that auricular confession and
private absolution at the priests hand is necessary for the remission of
sins. For as auricular confession was not in use among the Saints before the
coming of Christ, so we read not that ye Apostles heard private confession,
or used private absolution in the Church of Christ. It is enough for us to
confess our sins to God, who because he sees our hearts, ought therefore
most rightly to hear our confessions. It is enough if we, as S. James
teaches us, do one to another betwixt our selves confess our faults and
offenses, and so after pardon asked: return into mutual favor again. It is
enough for us to hear the Gospel, promising ye forgiveness of our sins
through Christ, if we believe. Let us therefore believe the forgiveness of
sins, and pray to the Lord yt he will vouchsafe to give and increase in us
this same belief. These things were of old and in the Primitive Church
effectual enough to obtain pardon and full remission of sins: and as they
were, so are they undoubtedly, at this day sufficient too.

Furthermore, the Lord does so pardon How sins are forgeuen.
our sins, not that they should not be any more in us, nor leave their
relics behind them as a sting in our flesh, but that they should not be
imputed to us to our damnation. Concupiscence sticks fast, and shows it
self in our flesh, striving still with the good spirit of God, even in the
holy ones so long as life lastethon this earth. Here therefore we have need
of long watching and much fasting, to draw from the flesh the nourishment of
evil, and often prayers to call to God for aid, that we be not overcome of
the evil. And if any man shall hap to fail for feebleness, and be subdued of
temptation, let him not yield himself by lying still, to be caught in the devils
net, let him rise up again by repentance, and run to Christ, believing that
by the death of Christ this fall of his shall be forgiven him. And so often shall
he have recourse to him as he shall be vanquished by concupisce^ce and sin.
For to this end shoot all the exhortations of the Prophets and Apostles,
calling on still to return to the Lord.

Finally, the Lord does so forgive We make not satisfaction for punishment
our sins, that he will never once remember them again. For so he foretold
us by Iere. in his 31. Ca. H^e therefore does not punish us. For he has not
only forgiven the fault, but also ye punishment due for the sin. Now then
whereas the Lord sometime does whip us with his scourges, and whippeth us for
our sins in deed: as the holy Scripture does plainly declare, he does it
not to the intent that with our affliction we should make satisfaction for the
sins we have committed: For then should the death of Christ be of none
effect: but yt Lord with whipping does chastise us, and by whipping us does
let us understand, that he likes not of the sins which we have committed,
and he does freely forgive: By whipping us also he makes us examples to
other least they sin too, and cutteth from us all occasion of sinning, and by
the Cross does keep our patience in ure. This thus far, touching the
forgieuenesse of sins. Of which I have said somewhat in my sermon of faith
that justifies: and else where.

The eleventh article is this. The The ele^enth arti^le of our ^aith.
resurrection of the flesh. These two articles, this and the twelfth shut up
as briefly as may be the most excellent fruit of faith, and sum of all
perfection, they wrap up I say, the end of faith in confessing life
everlasting, and the full and perfe^t salvation of the whole me^. For ye whole
man shall be saved, as well in Soul as body. For as man by sin did perish both
in body and soul, so ought he to be restoared again both bodily and
ghostly: and as he ought so was he by Christ restored again. The Soul of
man verily is a spirit and dies not at al: the body is earthly and therefore
dies and rotteth. For which cause many hold opinion that the bodies die,
never to be made partakers of joy or pain in the world to come. But we in
this article profess the contrary, acknowledging that those our bodies, and
so that flesh of ours shall rise again, and enter into life everlasting.

Of this word Resurrection or rising again, I have spoken in the exposition
The resurrection of the flesh.
of that Article, The third day he rose again from the dead. But now this
word flesh does a great deal more significantly express the resurrection of
this flesh, then if we should say the resurrection of the body. Verily
Cyprian says, that in some Churches of the East, this article was thus
pronounced: I believe the resurrection of this flesh. And Augustine also in the
tenth chap. of his book De fide and Symbolo, says. We must without doubting
believe that this visible, which is properly caled flesh, shall rise again.
The Apostle Paul does seem, as it were, with his finger to point at this
flesh, when he says: This corruptible must put on incorruption. When he
says, This: he does, as it were, put out his finger unto this flesh. This
has Augustine. Moreover Saint Hierome compels John, Eishoppe of Jerusalem
openly to confess the resurrection of the flesh, not of the body only.
Flesh says he has one definition, and the body an other. Al flesh is a
body: but every body is not flesh. That is flesh properly, which is compacte
of blood, veins, boanes and synewes. A body, although it be called flesh,
yet sometime is said to be of like substance to the firmament or to the air,
which is not subject to touching or seeing: and oftentimes too, may be both
touched and seen. A Wall is a body, but it is not flesh. Thus much out of
Hierome. Let us therefore believe that men's bodies which are taken of the
earth, and which living men bear about, wherein they live and are, which
also die, and turn into dust and ashes, That those bodies (I say) are quickened
and live again.

But thou demaundest how this flesh being once resolved into duste Whether
the same bodies that do ^ut^ifie rise again.
and ashes, and so into nothing, can rise again in the former shape and
substance: as when it is torn with the teeth of beasts, or consumed to
nothing with the flame of fire, and when in the grave there is to be found but
a small and little quantity of dustie powder. I refer thee to the
omnipotency of God, which the Apostle spoke of where he says: Christ has
transformed this vile body of ours, to make it conformable to his glorious
body, by the power wherein he can make all things subject to himself.
Wherefore he that in the beginning, when as yet there was not a man in the
world, could bring forth man out of the duste of the earth, although the same
man be again resolved into that, out of which he was taken, I mean into
earth, as the saying is, Dust thou art, and into dust shall thou return
again: Yet notwithstanding, the same God again at the end of the world, is
able to raise man out of the earth. For the Lord in the Gospel says
plainly: The hour shall come wherein all they that are in the graves, shall
hear the voice of the son of God, and shall come forth, they that have done
good to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the
resurrection of judgment. And now by faith we are thoroughly persuaded, As the
Apostle says: that he that has promised is able also to per form. There are
moreover lively examples of this matter, and most evident testimonies of the
holy Scripture. Jonas is swallowed up of the Whale in the Syrian sea, but ye
third day after he is cast up again alive upon the shore out of the
beasts entrails, which is a token that the flesh shall verily rise again.

Wherefore that is not hard to be believed, that in the Apocalipse is said, yt
The Sea casts up her dead. The force of fire had no force to hurt the three
companions of Daniel, yea the rage of wild beasts (contrary to nature)
absteyned from bytinge Daniell himself: What marvel is it therefore, if at
this day, neither the force of fire, nor rage of wielde beasts, is able to
resist the power of God being disposed to raise his creatures up again? Did
not our Lord Christ raise up Lazarus when he had lain three days in the grave,
yea and stancke too, to life again? Did not he himself having once broken ye
tyranny of death, rise up again the third day from the dead? did he not
rise again in the same substance of flesh, and form of body, wherein he
hanged on the Cross, and being taken down from the cross was buried? Not
without good cause do we look back to Christ, which is called the first
begotten among ye dead, so often as we think in what manner the resurrection
of our flesh shall be. For the members shall rise again in the same order,
that the head is risen up before them in: We verily shall not rise again
the third day after our death, but in our manner and order shall we rise at
the last day, yea and that too in the very same body wherein now we live.

I will add a few testimonies to Testimoni^s of the true resurrection.
prove the resurrection of our flesh. Job confessing his faith touching the
resurrection of the dead in his great weakness, affliction and sickness,
says: I know that my redeemer lives, and that in the last day I shall rise
out of the earth, and shall be clad again with my skin, and in my flesh I
shall see God: whom even I my self shall see, and my eyes shall behold and none
other. This hope is laid up in my bosom. This testimony is so evident as
that it needs no larger an exposition.

No less evident are those testimonies out of Esaie, Cap. 26. Ezech. 37.
Psalm. 15. Matthew. 22. John. 5. 6. 11. Throughout the Acts in every place is
often repeated the resurrection of ye dead. S. Paul in the 15. Chap. of his
first Epistle to the Corrinthians, does make a full discourse of this
resurrection. In the fourth Chapter of his 2. Epistle he says: We which live
are always delivered to death, for Jesus sake, that the life of Jesus also
might appear in our mortal flesh. See now what could be spoken more
plainlye, then that the life of Christ shall be made to appear in this mortal
flesh of ours? For by and by after he says: We know that he that raised up
the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by the means of Jesus. And in the
fifth Chapter again: We must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ (says he) that enerye man may receive the works of his body,
according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. Therefore these
very bodies of ours shall rise again in the day of judgment.

And now (dearly beloved) I have to declare unto you in what manner our bodies
shall rise again, and of what sort they shall be in the resurrection. In the
shuttinge up and end of all In what sort our bodies shall rise again.
ages or of this world, our Lord Jesus Christ shall come to judgment with
great majesty, and then whomsoever that day shall find alive, they shall in a
momente of time be changed, and first (I say) shall all they, that dyed from
the first Adam to the last that shall dye, rise up again, and in their
own flesh stand among the lyuinge that are changed before the Tribunal
seat of Christ, lookinge for that last pronounced sentence in judgment.

This does Paul set down in these words: Lo, I tell you a mystery, we
shall not all verily sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment of time,
in the twinkling of an eye, at the sound of the last trump: For it shall
sound, and the dead shall rise again incorruptibly, and we shall be changed.
For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality. Of what facion our bodies shall be in the resurrection.


By this evident testimony of the Apostle, we may gather in what facion our
bodies shall be in that resurrection: Verily our bodies shall be none other in
the resurrection then now they be, this only excepted, that they shall be
clean without all corruption, and corruptible affection. For the Apostle
says: The dead, shall rise again: And, we shall be changed.

And again pointing expressly and precisely to these very bodies which here
we bear about, he says: This corruptible, This mortal, Yea This body I
say, and no other, as Job also witnessed, shall rise again: and that shall
rise again incorruptible, which was corruptible: that shall rise again
immortal, which before the resurrection was mortal. So then this body of ours
in the resurrection shall be set free from all evil affections and passions,
from all corruption: but the substance thereof shall not be brought to naught,
it shall not be changed into a Spirit, it shall not loose the own and proper
shape. And this body verily because of that purification and cleansing from
those dreggs, yea and rather because of these heavenly and divine gifts, is
called both a spiritual body and also a glorious and purified body. A
glorious body.


For Paul in the third to the Philippians says: Our conversation is in
Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall change our vile body that it may be made like unto his glorious body.

See here, the Apostle calls not our resurrection from the dead, a
transubstantiation, or loss of the substance of our body, but a changing:
then also showing what kind of body that changed body is, he calls it a
glorious body, not without all shape, and void of facion, but augmented in
glory: yea he sets before us the very body of our Lord Jesus Christ,
where in he shows us what facion our bodies shall have being in glory. For
in plain words he says: He shall make our vile body like to his
glorious body.

Let us therefore see what kind of body our Lord had after his
resurrection: it was neither turned into a Ghost, nor brought to nothing,
nor yet not able to be known by the shape and figure: For showing them his
hands and feet, that were easily known by the printe of the nails
wherewith he was crucified, he said: See, for I am even he, to wit, cladde
again with the same body wherein I hong upon the Cross.

For speaking yet more plainly, and proving that that body of his was not a
spiritual substance, he said: A spirit has not flesh and bones as ye
see that I have. He has therefore a purified body, flesh and bones, and the
very same members which he had when as yet his body was not purified. And
for this cause, did the same Lord offer to Thomas his side, and the scarres of
his five wounds, to be fealt and handled, to the end that we should not
doubt but that his very body was raised up again. He did both eat and
drink with his Disciples, as Peter in the Acts witnesses before Cornelius,
that all men might know that the very self same body, that died, rose from
death again.

Now although this body be comprehended within a certain limited place, not
dispersed all over and every where, although it have a just quantity, figure
or shape, and a just weight with the own kind and nature, yet notwithstanding
it is free from every passion, corruption and infirmity. For the body of the
Lord once raised up, was in the Gardeine, and not in the Sepulcher, when the
women came to annoint it, it meets them by the way as they return from the
Sepulcher, and offers it self to be seen of Magdalene in the Gardeine: it
goes in company to Emaus, with the two Disciples that iourneyed to Emaus: in
the mean time while he was with them in body, he was not among the other
disciples: when they twain are returned to the eleven, the Lord himself at
evening is present with them: He goes before his Disciples into Galile:
presently after he comes into Jury again, where his body was taken up from
Mount Oliuet into Heaven. All this does prone the certain verity of Christ's
his body. But because this body (although it be a true and very body, of the
own proper kind, place, disposition, and of the own proper shape, and
nature) is called a glorified and glorious body, I will say somewhat of that
glory, which verily is incident to the true shape and substance of the body
once raised up again.

First glory in this sense is used for What a glorious ^^dy is
a lightsomnes and shining brightness. For Paul says, that the children of
Israel for the glory of Moses countenance, could not behold with their eyes
the face of Moses: so then a glorious body is a bright and shining body. A
very good proof of this did our Lord show, even a little before his
resurrection, when it pleased him to give to his Disciples a small taste of the
glory to come, and for that cause took aside certain whom he had chosen into
the top of a certain hill, where he was tra^sfigured before them, so yt yt
the facion of his countenance did shine as the Sun, and his clothes were
white and glistered as the light. The Lord verily, had still the same bodily
substance, and the same members of the body, but they were transfigured.

But it is manifest that that transfiguratio^ was in the accide^ts: For light
and brightness was added, so that the shape and substance of the countenance
and body remaining as it was, the countenance and body did glister as the
Sun, and the light. And although we read not that the body of ye Lord did
within those 40. days, wherein he showed himself alive again to his
Disciples, make manifest and spread abroad the brightness which it had, and
that by reason of the dispensation, whereby also he did eat with his
disciples, not withstanding that clarified bodies need not food or
nourishment at all: yet nevertheless his body shines now in Heaven as John
in the first of the Apocalipse witnesses, and the sacred Scriptures lay an
assured hope before us, that even our bodies also shall in the resurrection be
likewise clarified. For the Lord himself in the Gospel alledginge the words
of Daniell says: Then shall the righteous shine as the Son in his fathers
kingdom. For this cause the glorious bodies are called also clarifyed of the
clearenesse of that Heavenly brightness, wherewith they glister and are
adorned.

Secondarilie glory and vileness are made contraries. For Paul says:
Glorious bodies rest free from vileness.
He shall change our vile body, to make it in facion like to his glorious
body. In these words, Vileness and Glory, are set the one against the the
other. Vileness comprehends the whoale pack of miseries and infirmities,
passions and affections, which for sin was laid upon the body. From all
which our bodies are purged in the resurrection of life: so that then the
glorious bodies are bodies dreyned from the dregs of all corruption, passions
and infirmities, and clad with eternity, heavenly feelinge and glory. For the
Apostle says: It is sown in corruption, it rises in incorruption: it is
sown in dishonor, it rises in glory: it is sown in infirmity, it rises
in power: it is sown a natural body, it rises a spiritual body. The gifts
therefore of the glorious and clarified bodies are very great and many, as
incorruption, glory, popower and the quickening spirit. For the Apostle
himself showing what he meant by the natural and spiritual body, adds this
immediately and says: There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body:
as it is written. The first man Adam was made a living Soul, and the last
Adam was made a quickening spirit. And yet again more plainly he says:
Howbeit that is not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and
then that which is spiritual. The first man is of the earth earthy: the
second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they that are
earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as
we have borne the image of the earthy, so shall we bear the image The natural
and spi^^tuall body.
of the heaue^lie. So then Paul calls that natural body an earthy body,
which we have of our first father Adam, whose quickening is of the soul and
by it does live. And he calls the spiritual body, an Heavenly body, which
we have of Christ, and made to the likeness of the body of Christ, which
although it be a very body in deed, and the flesh thereof be very flesh
in deed, yet notwithstanding it is quickened and preserved by the spirit of
Christ, and needs not any power vegetative.

Although therefore these very bodies and members which now we bear Flesh and
^^oud ^hal not be (...) heaven
shall after the resurrection be in Heaven, yet nevertheless because they are
clarified and cleansed from all corruption, and feelinge of the natural S^^su
ani^^li.
body, there shall not be verily any natural or corruptible sense or
affection, nor use of the carnal body and members. Animalis.
And this does the Lord affirm against the Sadduces that dreamte of marriages
in Heaven, or rather by that absurdity made a mock of the resurrection, where
he says: The sons of this world marry wives, and give in marriage: but
they that shall be thought worthy of that world and of the resurrection from the
dead do neither marry wives, nor give in marriage: neither can they die any
more. For they are equal to the Angels, and are yt sons of God, as soon as
they be the sons of resurrection. To which effect also Paul says: Flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. And least peradventure any man
should mistake his words, and think that he spoke of the substance of the
flesh, he adds immediately this for interpretation thereof, and says,
Neither shall corruption inherit incorruption. Wherefore flesh and blood,
that is to say, the affections and lusts of the flesh, shall not be in the
Elect that live in Heaven. For the joys of Heaven do differ a great deal
from the joys of the earth, and are so far forth of an other condition, that
they cannot admit such corrupt Creatures to be inheritours of them, and for
that cause the corruptible bodies must first be purged from all corruption,
and by that means purely clarified. The Turks therefore are deceived that
look for earthly joys.

Moreover the bodies of the wicked The bodies of the wicked shall also rise
aga^n.
shall also rise again. For Paul in the Acts says: I believe all that is
written in the Law and the Prophets, hopeing in God that the resurrection of
the dead, which they themselves look for also, shall be both of the just and
unjust. See here, the Apostle says of the unjust also. But in this
resurrection there shall not be taken out of their bodies, the infirmity,
corruption, dishonor and misery: for even then that very body risinge again
in dishonor, shall by the judgment and power of God be surely shut in
dishonor, and corruption, and so be condemned for ever to bear endless
torments, and in death and corruption shall neither dye nor yet corrupt: that
even as on earth are found certain bodies that do endure even in the fire,
so the cursed bodies of the wicked shall not be worn out nor broken with any
torments what so ever, for every minute they shall receive new strength to
suffer, and so by continual suffering shall abide their deserved punishments
for ever and ever and without all end. For the Lord in the Gospel says,
They that have done evil shall rise again to the resurrection of damnation,
that is, to an enduring and everlasting damnation. And Daniell before him
said, And the multitude of them that sleep in the duste of the earth shall
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. And
in the Gospel again, the Lord says: Their worm dies not, and their fire
is not quenched. And the very same words used Esaias before him in his. 66.
Chapter. We must always therefore have that saying of the Lord in our
hearts, Fear him that can destroy both the body and the soul in Hell. Thus
much hitherto touching the resurrection of ye flesh.

The last Article of our belief, which with good luck shuts up the rest,
is The t^elfth article of our belief.
this, And life everlasting. We have heard and understood that the souls of
men are immortal, and that our bodies do rise again in the end of the
world. We have confessed that this is our belief. It felloweth now in the
latter end of the Creed, whether it is, that the immortal soul, and body
raised up again shall come. Therefore in our confession we say. And life
everlasting, that is, I believe that I Life eue^lasting.
shall have life, and live for ever both in body and soul. And that
euerlastingnesse verily is perpetual and has no end, as a little before is
proved out of the holy Scriptures.

Moreover, the souls are made partakers of this eternal life immediately after
they are departed out of the bodies, as the Lord him self witnesses saying,
He that believes in the Son of God shall not come into judgment, but has
escaped from death to life. As for the bodies they are buried and do putrify,
and yet so notwithstanding, that they shall not be without life for ever. But
they shall then at length be received into eternal life, when being raised up,
they shall after the time of judgment be caught into the air, there to meet
Christ that they may for ever be with the Lord. For then do the souls return
out of Heaven every one to his own body, that the whole, perfect and full man
may live for ever both in soul and body. For the soul of Christ dying on the
Cross did out of hand depart into Paradise, and the third day after
returned to the body, which rose again and ascended into heaven. Even as
therefore, eternal life came to the head Christ, so shall it also come to all
and every member of Christ.

Now, whereas Paul citing Esai, says: What the eye has not seen, nor the
ea^e heard, nor has at any time come into the heart of man, that has the
Lord prepared for them that love him. I suppose verily if all were said
touching eternal life, that might be spoken by all the men of all ages that
ever were or shall be, yet that scarcely the very least part thereof has or
shall be thoroughly touched.

For how so ever the Scripture does with eloquent and figurative speches, with
allusions and hard Sentences most plainly show the shadow of that life, and
those joys, yet notwithstanding, all that is little or nothing in comparison
to speak of, until that day do come wherein we shall with unspeakable joy,
behold God him self, the creator of al things in his glory, Christ our
savior in his Majesty, and finally all the blessed souls, Angels,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, our Fathers, all nations, all the
h^ast of Heaven, and lastly the whole divine and heavenly glory. Most truly
therefore said Aurelius Augustine, Lib. de Ciuitat. Dei. 22. Cap. 29. When it
is demanded of me what the Saints shall do in that spiritual body? I
answer not that which I now see, but that that I believe. I say therefore
that they shall see God in that spiritual body. And again, If I should say
the truth, I know not in what sort that action, quietness and rest shall be.
For the peace of God does pass all understanding. To be short, we shall see
God face to face, we shall be filled with the company of God, and yet be never
weerie of him. And the face of God is not that The face of God.
countenance that appears in us, but is a most delectable revealing and
inioying of God, which no mortal tongue can worthily declare. Go to then
(dearly beloved brethren) let us believe and live, that when we shall depart
from hence we may in very deed have trial of those unspeakable joys of the
eternal life to come, which now we do believe.

Hitherto have I throughout the four last Articles declared unto you the
fruit and end of Christian faith. Faith leans upon one God the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, which sa^ctifieth the faithful, and purges and
halloweth a Church to him self, which Church has a communion with God and
all Saints. All the offenses of which Church God pardons and forgiueth. And
does preserve it both soul and body. For as the Saints Souls can not dye,
so God rayseth up their bodies again, and makes them glorious and
everlasting, to the end that the whole man may for ever live in heaven, with
the Lord: To whom be praise and glory world without end. Ame^.

Of the love of God and our Neighbor.
The tenth Sermon.
IT remains since I have in some sermons discoursed of true faith, yt I do
now also add one Sermon touching love toward God and our neighbor. For in
my fourth Sermon I promised so soon as I should have done with the exposition
of faith, that then I would speak of love toward God and our neighbor:
because the exposition of the Scriptures ought not to go awrye out of faith
and charity, which are as it were the right and holy marks for it to draw
unto. Ye, as hitherto ye have done, so cease not yet to pray, that this
wholesome doctrine may be by me taught as it should be, and by you received
with much increase and profit.

And first of all I will not curiously put any difference between Charity Love
and c^antie.
and Love. I will use them both in one and the same sense. S. Augustine De
doctrina Christiana says. I call Chatitie a motion of the mind to delight in
God for his own sake, and to delight in himself and his neighbor for Gods
sake. And therefore I call love a gift given to man from Heaven, whereby with his
heart he loves God before and above all things, and his neighbor as him
self. Love therefore Love from whence it is
springs from Heaven, from whence it is powered into our hearts. But it is
enlarged and augmented partly by the remembrance and consideration of Gods
benefits, partly by often prayer, and also by the hearing and frequenting of
the word of Christ. Which things them selves also are the gifts of the
spirit. For the Apostle Paul says, The love of God is powered out into our
hearts by the holy Ghost which is given us. For verily the love of God
wherewith he loves us, is the foundation and cause of our love wherewith we
love him, and of both these jointly consists the love of our neighbor. For
the Apostle says: We love him because he first loved us. And again, Every one
that loves him which begot, loves him also that is borne of him.

Hereby we gather again, that this Double charity.
gift of love can not be divided or severed although it be double. For he that
loves God truly, hates not his neighbor: and yet nevertheless this love,
because of the double respect that it has to God and our neighbor, stands
of two parts. And because of this double Charity, the tables of Gods law are
divided into twain: the first whereof contains four commaunde^^nts touching
the love of God, the second comprehends six precepts touching the love of
our neighbor. Of which I will speak in their own place. But at this time
because the love of God and of our neighbor are twain, I will first speak of
the love of God, and then of the love of our neighbor. In these two
commandments, says the Lord, hang the law and the Prophets.

With that which we call the love The le^ of God*
of God we love God entirely well, we cleave to God as the only, chief and
eternal goodness, in him we do delight our selves and are well pleased, and
frame our selves to his will and pleasure, having evermore a regard and desire
of him that we love. With love we love God most hartelie. But we do hartelie
love the things that are dear unto us, and the things that to us seem
worthy to be desired, and we love them entirely in deed, not so much for our
commodity, as for because we do desire to join, and as it were for ever to
give and dedicate our selves whoalie to the thing that we so dearly love. So
verily we desire for ever to be joined with God, and are in charity fast
lincked unto him: as ye Apostle says: God is charity, and he that dwells in
charity dwells in God, and God in him. And that is the way whereby we cleave
to God as to the only chief and eternal goodness, in whom also we are
delighted, and that not a little. On him we rest thinking assuredly, yt
without him there is no good at all: and again, that in him there is to be
found all manner of goodness. Wherefore our hearty love is set on no good
thing but God: And in comparison of him whom we love, we do lightly loath and
tread under foot all things else that seem to be good in the whole world:
yea verily ye love of God in us does overcome all By the love of God all
euilles are overcome.
the evils which otherwise seem invincible. Let us hear Paul with a a
vehement motion proclaming this and saying: Who shall separate us from the love
of God? shall tribulation? or anguish? or persecution? or hunger? or
nakedness? or peril? or sword? (As it is written, For thy sake are we killed
all day long, and are counted as sheep for the slaughter.) Nevertheless, in
all these things we overcome through him that loved us. For I am sure that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor rule, nor power, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Hitherto have I recited the words of Paul.

The love of God works in us a The love ^f God fa^oneth us (...) the will
(...) plea^^re of ^od.
will to frame our selves wholly to the will and ordinances of him whom we do
heartily love. Yea, it is pleasant and sweet to him that loves God, to do
the thing that he perceives is acceptable to God if it be done. He that
loves, does in mind reverence him whom he loves. His eye is never of him
whom he loves. He does always and in all things wish for his dearling whom
he loves. His only joy is as often as may be to talk with God, and again to
hear the words of God speaking in the Scripture. For the Lord in the Gospel
says: If any man love me he will keep my word, he that loves me not, does not
keep my words. Again, Abide ye in my love. If ye keep my commandments,
ye shall abide in my love, even as I also have kept my Fathers commandments
and do abide in his love. And again, If any man love me, he will keep my
word, and my father will love him, and we will come to him and make our dwelling
in him.

But now let us hear Moses the The manner how to love God.
servant of God declaring and teaching us the way and manner how to love God,
to wit, how great love ought to be in the elect. Thou shall says he, love the
Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength. The very same words in a manner did our Lord in ye Gospel repeat,
and said: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind. By this we understand
that the greatest love that may be, is required at our hands to God ward: as
that which challenges man wholly how big so ever he be and all the parts of
man as peculiar unto it self. In the mind is man's understanding. In the
heart is the seat of his affections and will. The strength of man contains
all man's ability, as his very words, deeds, counsel, riches, and his whole
substance. Finally, the soul is the life of man. And we verily are commanded
to employ all these upon the love of God, when we are bidden to love God with
all our soul, with all our strength, with our whole mind, and our whole
heart. Nothing is ouerslipt, but all is contained in this. We are Gods wholly
and altogether, let us altogether therefore and wholly love God. Let nothing in
all the world be dearer to us then God, let us not spare for Gods sake any
thing of all that which we possess how dear to us or good soever it be, but
let us forsake, spend, and give it for Gods sake, and as the Lord by his word
appoints. For in doing so we love God before and above all things. We are
also commanded to stick to God only and to embrace him alone. For to whom we
do G^d alone to be loved.
wholly owe all that we have, to him is all the whole sincerely, simply and fully
to be given. Here are they condemned, whosoever will not once love God and the
world together. The Lord requires the whole heart, the whole mind, the whole
soul, and all the strength, finally he requires al what soever we are, or
have in possession: he leaves nothing therefore for thee to bestow on other.
By what right then will thou give to the flesh, the devil, to other Gods or
to the world the things that properly are Gods own? And God verily alone is
the chiefest, eternal, greatest, mightiest, creator, deliverer, preserver,
most gentle, most just, and best of all. He alone does give, has given, and is
able to give to man all that is expedient for the safegarde of his body and
soul.

God alone does minister to man ability to live well and blessedly: and
therefore God deserves to be loved alone, and that too before and above al
other things. This love of God does bless all the haps and chances of men, and
turns them to their profit, according to that saying, To them that love God
all things work for the best This love of God also contains this, that it
suffers us not to honor, worship, reverence, fear, or call upon any, neither
to trust in, obey, or stick to any other, but to the one and only God, to
whom all glory is due.

But now before we speak of the Who is our neighbor.
love of our neighbor, it is requisite that we first show who it is that is
our neighbor, touching which I see some men to doubt and stick uncertainly.
For some there are that t^ke their kinsfolks to be their neighbors. Other some
there are that think that their benefactours are their neighbors, and judge
the^ strangers yt do them any harm. But our Lord Jesus Christ tells us, yt
every one, yea, though he be our enemy is nevertheless our neighbor, if he
stand in need of our aid or counsel. For he imagines that a Jew, lighting
among thieves and lying on the high way half dead, and covered with wounds
and swelling dry blows, was not regarded of his own country men, a Leuite,
and a Priest that passed by him, but at last was taken up and healed by a
Samaritane. Now there was a deadly enimitie between the Jews and the
Samaritanes: yet notwithstanding this Samaritane does good to the Jew because
he saw that the case and necessity of the afflicted man did so require. Now
therefore the Lord applying this to his own purpose demanded of him, that
desired to learn who was his neighbor, and says, which of these three
seems to thee to have been this man's neighbor? He answered, He that showed
mercy, Then said the Lord, Go thou and do the like. As if he should have
said, like as the Samaritane judged even his enemy to be his neighbor, and
dealt friendly with him when he stood in need of his friendship: so see that
thou take every one that needs thy help to be thy neighbor, and do him
good. Aurelius Augustine therefore, according to the right sense of the
scripture said, we take him to be our neighbor, to whom we show mercy when
need requires, or to whom we should show mercy, if at any time he should
need. We Suitzers do most properly express it, when we call our neighbor,
Den nachsten menschen, The (...)
that is, any man without difference whosoever by hap shall light into our
company. Moreover in our country speech we will call our neighbor, Der
abenmensch, namlich ein any one that is a ^^an as well (...) we.
yeder der so wol ein mensch is it als wir. Meaning thereby any man what soever
whether he be our friend or enemy. Hereunto belongs that saying of
Lactantius in the eleuenthe Chapter of his sixte book. Why make thou choice
of persons? why look thou so narrowly on the limbs? Thou must take him to
be a man, whosoever beseeches thee, therefore that he may think thee to be a
man, Give to the blind, to the impotent, to the lame, to the comfortless, to
whom unless thou be liberal, thou shall dye undoubtedly. Again he says, If
so be we will rightly be called by the name of men, then must we in any case
keep the law of civil humanity. And what else I pray you is it to keep
humanity but therefore to love a man because he is a man, and the very same
that we our selves are. The Lord in the Gospel verily speaking of the love of
our neighbor says, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, pray for them that hurt you. And again, Give to every one
that asks of thee. And if you love the^ that love you, what thank is that to
you. For sinners also love them of whom they are loved. So then every man who
so ever stands in need of our aid, both is, and is to be counted our
neighbor.

And yet all this notwithstanding An order and mea^^re in (...).
there is no cause but that there ought to be an order, a measure and decent
regard in love and well doing. For rightly said Saint Augustine in the 27.
Chapter of his book De doctrina Christiana. No sinner in that he is a sinner
is to be loved. And in the. 28. Chapter. All men are to be loved alike, but
since thou can not do good to all men, therefore thou must especially do good
to them, to whom thou art as it were by lot more nearly joined by opportunity
either of time, of place, or of any other thing what soever. And this did Paul
before Augustine teach, where he says: Who soever works not let him not
eat. And again, While we have time let us work good to all men, but
specially to them of the household of faith. And in another place he commands
us not to bestow on others, and to lack our selves at home. But rather he
charge every one to have a godly care of his own house. The place is known
in the fifth Chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy.

Now since I have declared who How our neighbor must be loved.
is our neighbor, let us see also in what sort this neighbor of ours ought to
be loved. Our neighbor must be loved simply without any colored deceit, with
the very self same love wherewith we love our selves, or that wherewith Christ
has loved us. For in all things we must stand our neighbor in steed, and do
him pleasure so far as the law of humanity shall be found to require. In
this declaration there are four things more fully to be noted.

First that love of our neighbor The love of our neighbor must be sincere.
that is looked for at our hands ought to be so sincere as that it be without
all manner guile, deceit and colored craft. For there are many to be found,
that have the skill to talk to their neighbors with sugared tongues, and to
make a face as though they loved them, when as in deed they do utterly hate
them, meaning nothing else but with fauning words to beguile them, that
thereby they may work the things that they desire. Paul and John therefore,
the Apostles of Christ go about earnestly to sever hypocrisy from love. For
Paul says, Let not your love be feigned. Again, The end of the commandment
is love of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith not feigned. On the
other side, John cries out saying: My babes let us not love in word nor in
tongue, but in deed and in verity. Moreover, in this sincerity we contain a
free willing and merry cheerfulness that nothing may seem to be done
unwillingly or by compulsion. For Paul says: Let every man do with a good
purpose of mind, not of trouble or necessity. For God requires a cheerful
giver.

Secondarily, it is to be looked for of We must love our neighbor as our self.
us that we should love our neighbor as our selves. For the Lord has said.
Love thy neighbor as thy sel^: that is, most entirely and as dearly as by any
means thou may. For there is not any affection that is of more force or
vehemency then self love is. Neither was it the Lord his mind that the love
of our neighbor should be any whit lesser the^ the love that we bear to our
selves: but rather by this he gave us to understand that we ought to bestow on
others as ardent love as may be, to wit, the very same affection that we bear
to our selves and our own estate, and that we ought to be ready to do good to
other, or to keep them from harm with the same care, faith, and diligence,
with the same zeal and goodwil, wherewith we provide for our selves or our
own safety. Whereupon the Lord in another place says. What soever thou
would have done to thee self, that do thou to another. And what so ever
thou would not have done to thy self, do not thou the same to another. And
herein does the lord require two things at our hands, not to hurt, and to do
good. For it is not enough not to hurt a man, but also to do him good, so much
as lies in us to do. For we our selves desire not only to keep our selves
from hurt, but to do our selves good also.

But if so it be (dearly beloved) that We must love ou^ neighbo^^ as Chris^^
has love us.
ye do not yet sufficiently understand the manner how we ought to love our
neighbor, then mark (I beseech you) the third part of my description of
this love, where I said, That we ought to love our neighbor with that same
love wherewith the Lord Christ loved us. For in the Gospel after S. John the
Lord says. This is my commandment that ye love one another, as I have loved
you. So then here ye have the manner of our love, we must love our neighbors
as Christ has loved us. But in what sort has Christ loved us? Here again
in the Gospel he says. No man has greater love then this that a man bestow
his life for his friend. So then, such must the manner of our love toward our
neighbor be, as that we shall not doubt to give our life for our neighbor. And
i^ so it be then* that for our neighbors sake we owe the loss of our life,
there is nothing verily that we owe him not, considering that to a man nothing
is more dear the^ life. For sooner will he loose all that he has the^ once to
put his life in ieopardie. Whereupon the Apostle John cries out, and says:
Hereby perceive we love, because he laid down his life for us: and we ought
to lay down our lives for the brethren. This is easy to be understood by
reason of the most evident example. Let us pray earnestly and continua^ly to
the Lord stand by the word of God, least peradventure the same Apostle
condemn us who says, Who so has this worlds good and sees his brother have
need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
in him?

And now let us also declare yt fourth How we ought to stand our n^ighbour in
steed
and last manner how we ought to stand our neighbor in steed, and how to do
him good in showing our dutiful love and civil humanity. That has the Lord
already very finely set out, in ye very same parable wherein he taught us who is
our neighbor. For he has briefly, and yet very evidently touched all the
points of the love that we owe to our neighbor. First the Samaritane at the
sight of the wounded man, was moved with pity.

There is therefore required of us a merciful motion of pity, so to regard
other men's calamities as though they were our own: it is looked for at our
hands, that we should be as sorrowful minded for another man's trouble, as he
that feels the misery, according to that saying of the Apostle. Be mindful
of them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and of them which suffer
adversity, as though ye your selves also being in the body suffered
adversity. Secondarily the Samaritane passes not by, but comes unto him, he
does not with sorrowefull words wish health to the wounded, and so letting him
lie, depart to dispatche his own affairs: For James the Apostle says. If a
brother or sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of you say
unto them, depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled: and yet notwithstanding
give them not those things that are needful to the body, what shall it
profit? The Samaritane therefore conuneth unto him, sets to his hand, and
shows the skyll that he has (which was not much ywis) to heal the silly
ma^gled man. He does not loath and turn his face from the yllfauoured color,
bloody matter, corrupted filth and stenche of his wounds, but binds them up
him self, not letting them alone for another to do. He makes not his excuse
that he is no Physician: but does what he can in that necessity, using such
medicine as for the time present he had in a readiness, til more conveniently
he might come by better. Wine and Oil he had taken with him when he began
his journey, which in that necessity he does use, and that not very
inconueniently, because wine purges wounds and oil does make them supple.

Moreover, whatsoever he has that does he employ to the silly man's behoof,
and to do him ease does even disease him self. For he alighteth from the
back of the beast whereon he rode, and makes him to serve the maimed man's
necessity. He also with his own hands lifts up from the ground the man
that was too weak to stand, and sets him on the beast. And lastly he him
self becomes his guide to lead the way, not suffering any other to take
charge over him. For when as he could not readily bring him to his own house,
yet did he conueigh him into a common Inn. Where again he spares not for any
cost or pains taking. For he him self takes charge of the miserable man,
because in common Innes sick folks, for the most part, are slenderly looked
unto. But when his earnest business calls on to make have in his journey, he
takes out so much money as he does think to be sufficient till his return,
and gives it to the Inkeeper. And not being therewithal content, he gives to
his host an especial charge of the sick man: and also binds him self for
him, saying: whatsoever more then this, thou shall lay out about things
necessary for his recovery, thou shall not loose one myte: For at my return,
I will pay thee all again to the uttermost farthing. So then he promises to
return, and therwithall declares that he shall not be quiet, until he see
him thoroughly healed of all his wounds. Ye have here (dearly beloved) in this
the Lord his parable, a most goodly and absolute example of love. For the
Samaritane does liberally, and willingly employ his whole service upon his
needy neighbors necessity: We therefore owe our selves wholly and all that we
have, to our neighbors behoof, which if we bestow on him, then do we
fulfill the duties of love and civil humanity.

To this we will yet add some testimonies of the Scripture, that thereby The
pith of Charity
we may more fully understand the very innermost pith of love, if yet
peradventure any thing may seem to be wanting in that, which hitherto I have
alleged. Paul therefore writing to the Corinthians, says: Love suffers
wrong and is courteous, love enuieth not, love does not frowardly, love swells
not, deals not dishonestly, seeks not her own, is not provoked to anger,
thinks not evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth,
suffers all things, believes all things, hops all things, indureth all
things. And again, the same Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, says: Love
strives to go before in giving honor to other, love distributeth to the
Saints necessity, is given to hospitality, speaks well of her persecuters,
and curses not them that persecute her, love rejoices with them that do
rejoice, and weepeth with them that weep, and applies it self to the weaker
sorts infirmity. And again, Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another.
For he that loves another, has fulfilled the law. For Love the fulfilling of
the la^
this, Thou shall not commit adultrie Thou shall not steal, Thou shalt not
kill, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shall not lust: and if there
be any other commandment, it is comprehended briefly in this saying: namely,
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thee self, Love works no ill to his
neighbor, therefore the fulfilling of the law is love or charity.

Hitherto also pertains the works Works of mercy
of mercy, which as they flow out of love, so are they rehearsed of the Lord
in the Gospel after Matthew, and are especially these that follow, To feed
the hungry, To give drink to the thirsty, To harbor the harbourlesse and
strangers, To cover or cloathe the naked, To visit the sick, and to see and
comfort imprisoned captives. Hereunto Lactantius lib. Institut. 6. cap. 12.
has an eye where he says. The chiefest virtue is to keep hospitality, and
to feed the poor: To redeem captives also, is a great and excellent work
of righteousness: And as great a work of justice, is it to save and defend the
fatherless and widows, the desolate and helpless, which the law of God does
every where command. It is also a part of the chiefest humanity, and a great
good deed to take in hand to heal and chearish the sick, that have no body to
help them. Finally, that last and greatest duty of piety, is the burial of
strangers and of the poor. Thus much hitherto touching the duty of civil
humanity, which true love shows to his neighbor in necessity.

But it is not enough (my brethren) An exhortation to Love,
to understand how we ought to love our neighbor (though we ought often to
repeat it) but rather we must love him exceedingly, and above that that I am
able to say. Let us hear the Apostle, who with a wonderful goodly grace of
speech, with a most excellent, exquisite, and holy example of Christ does
exhort us all to the showing of charity to our neighbor, and says: If
therefore there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy, fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord and mind,
let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in meekness let every
man esteem one the other better then him self, look ye not every man on his
own things, but every man also on the things of others. For let the same
mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made him self of no
reputation, taking on him the form of a servant, and made in the likeness of
men, and found in figure as a man: he humbled him self, made obedient unto
death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also has lightly exalted
him, and given him a name which is above every name, that in the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth, and that every tongue should confess, that the Lord Jesus
Christ is the glory of God the father. To him alone be honor and power for
ever and ever. Amen.

The end of the first Decade of Sermons.
The Second Decade of Sermons, written by Henry Bullinger.
Of laws, and first of the law of Nature, then of the laws of men.
The first Sermon.
THE sum of all laws is the love of GOD, and our neighbor, of which and
every part whereof because I have already spoken in my last Sermon, the next
is that now also I make a particular discourse of laws, and every part and
kind thereof. Let us therefore call to God who is the cause and beginning of
laws, that he through our Lord Jesus Christ will vouchsafe with his spirit
always to direct us in the way of truth and righteousness.

A heathen writer, no base author What law is.
ywis, made this definition of law, that it is an especial reason placed in
nature co^mau^ding what is to be done, and fordidding the contrary. And verily
the law is nothing but a declaration of Gods will, appointing what thou have
to do, and what thou ought to leave undone. The beginning and cause of laws
is God him self, who is the fountain of all goodness, equity, truth, and
righteousness. Therefore all good and just laws come from God him self,
although they be, for the most part, published and brought to light by men.
Touching the laws of men, we must have a peculiar consideration of the^ by
the^ selves. For of laws, some are of The division of ^awes.
God, some of Nature, and some of Men. As concerning Gods law, I will speak of
it in my second Sermon: at this present I will touch first the law of Nature,
and then the law of Men.

The law of Nature is an instruction The la^ of natu^^
of the conscience, and as it were a certain direction placed by God him self,
in the minds and hearts of men, to teach them what they have to do, and what
to eschew.

And the conscience verily is the Conscie^c^
knowledge, judgment, and reason of a man, whereby every man in him self, and
in his own mind being made privy to every thing that he either has
committed, or not committed, does either condemn or else acquit him self. And
this reason proceeds from God, who both prompteth and writes his judgments
in the hearts and minds of men.

Moreover, that which we call Nature, is the proper disposition or inclination
Nature.
of every thing. But the disposition of mankind being flatly corrupted by
sin, as it is blind, so also is it in all points evil and naughty. It
knows not God, it worshippeth not God, neither does it love the neighbor,
but rather is affected with self love toward it self, and seeks still for
the own advantage. For which cause the Apostle said: That we by nature are
the children of wrath. Wherefore the law of nature, is not called the law of
nature, because in ye nature and disposition of man there is of, or by it self
that reason of light exhorting to the best things, and that holy working: but
for because God has imprinted or engraven in our minds some knowledge, and
certain general principles of religion, justice and goodness, which because
they be grafted in us and borne together with us, do therefore seem to be
naturally in us.

Let us hear the Apostle Paul, who bears witness to this, and says: When
the Gentiles which have not the law, do of nature the things contained in the
law: they having not the law are a law unto themselves, which show the works
of the law written in their hearts, their conscience bearing the^ witness,
and their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing in that same day, when the
Lord shall judge the secrets of me^ by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel. By
two arguments here does ye apostle very evidently prove, that the gentiles are
sinners. For first of all, least peradventure they might make this excuse, and
say that they have no law, he shows that they have a law, and that, because
they transgress this law, they are become sinners. For although they had not
the written law of Moses, yet notwithstanding they did by nature the things
contained in the law. The office of the law is to disclose the will of God, and
to teach thee what thou haste to do, and what to leave undone. This have they
by nature, that is, this know they by the law of nature. For that which
follows makes this more plain: They, when they have no law, are to them
selves a law. That is, they have in the^ selves that which is written in the
law. But in what sort have they it in them selves? This again is ma^e manifest
by that which follows. For they show the work of the law written in their
hearts. But who is he that writes in their hearts, but God alone who is the
searcher of all hearts? And what I pray you writes he there? The law of nature
forsooth, the law I say it self, commanding good and forbidding evil, so
that without the written law by the instruction of nature, that is, by the
knowledge imprinted of God in nature, they may understand what is good, and
what is evil, what is to be desired, and what is to be shunned. By these
words of the Apostle, we do understand, that the law of nature is set
against the written law of God, and that therefore it is called the law of
nature, because it seems to be, as it were, placed or grafted in nature. We
understand that the law of nature, not the written law, but that which is
grafted in man has the same office that the written law has, I mean to
direct men and to teach the^, and also to discern betwixt good and evil, and
to be able to judge of sin. We understand that the beginning of this law,
is not of the corrupt disposition of mankind, but of God him self, who with
his finger, writes in our hearts, fasteneth in our nature, and planteth in us a
rule to know justice, equity and goodness.

Then also the Apostle makes his second argument, whereby he proves the
Gentiles to be guilty of sin, and this argument he fetches from the
witness bearing of their conscience. For the conscience being instructed by
the law of nature, does accuse and condemn the evil committed: because this
conscience only and alone is in steed of a thousand witnesses. And again,
it excuses, that is, it absolueth and acquiteth them if nothing be committed
contrary to the law. But although in this present life we do set light by
the judgment of our conscience, yet verily we may not the^ despise or lightly
pass over the consciences accusations, when the Lord shall come with justice
and equity to judge the world. So then by all this it follows, that all
nations are sinners, whom unless the Son of God, the common and only
Savior and deliverer of all the world do cleanse from their offenses, it can
not be but that all nations must needs perish in their sins.

But now we come again to the Two especial points of the law of nature.
law of Nature, of which there are two points especially, for you to be put
in mind of. The first is, Acknowledge God and worship him. The second is,
Keep or maintain society and friendship among me^. Touching the first, we
have these words of Christ his Apostle: Whatsoever may be known of God, is
manifest among them (to wit, among the Gentiles) for God has showed it to
the^. For his invisible things being understood by his works, through the
creation of the world are seen, that is, both his eternal power and Godhead,
so that they are without excuse: because that when they knew God
(notwithstanding) they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful. etc.

So then the Gentiles knew God, yea, they knew what so ever might The
Gen^^l^s knew God.
be known of God. But what teacher had they, or what master? They had God to
their master. In what order taught he them, or out of what book? Not out of
the written books of Moses, or the Prophets, but out of that great and large
book of Nature. For the things that are not seen of God, in which sort are
his everlasting eternity, his virtue, power, majesty, goodness and Godhead,
those he would have to be esteemed of according to the visible things, that
is, the things which he has created. For Gods eternal Godheade is known by
man's creation, by the continual moving of Heaven, and the perpetual course of
rivers. For it must needs be, that he is most mighty which susteineth all
these things, which moves, strengthens, and keeps all things from
decay, and which with his beck shakes the whole world. Finally, who does not
see the goodness of him which suffers the Sun to rise upon the good and
the evil? But to what intent reuealeth he these things to the Gentiles? To
the intent forsoothe that they may acknowledge him to be God, that they may
glorify and worship him as God, and be thankful to such a benefactour. When
therefore they do not this, they are inexcusable and perish deservedly for
their unbelief and unthankfulness sake. So then it is manifest, that the law
of Nature does expressly teach that there is a God, which is to be
acknowledged, and reverently worshipped.

Touching the latter of these two especial points, that is, for the
preserving Friendship and societ^^ of men t^ be prese^ued.
of friendship and society among men, the Lord in the Gospel says: What so
ever ye would that men should do to you, do ye the same to them. This
sentence did Alexander Seuerus the Emperor turn and express thus: What
soever thou would not have done to thee self, that do not thou to another.
Which saying he loved so well, that he commanded it to be written up in his
Palace, and common houses of office. Moreover to that general law belong
these that follow, Live honestly, Hurt not another, Give every man his own,
Provide things necessary for life, and keep it from distress. But now
because the law of The Law of nature answerable to the written Law.
Nature is made opposite to the written law of God, it is requisite that it be
aunswerable also to the law of God: let us therefore see what the wise men and
law giuers of the Gentiles have left in writing, to counteruaile the ten
Commandments, and how far their writings are answerable to the law of God.

Pythagoras in S. Cyrils first book Contra Iulianum, writes thus of God. God
verily is one: and he too is not 1 Of God.
as some do imagine, without the government of the world, but being wholly in
every place of it, does view all the generations in the whole compass thereof,
and is him self the moderation of all ages, the light of his own virtues, the
beginning of all works, the light in heaven, the father of all things, the life
and quickening of all things, and lastly, the moving of all the circles. See
here Pythagoras confesses that there is but one God, who is the maker,
preserver, and governor of all things, the father of al, and the light and
life of al things. Zaleucus in the Preface of his laws writes as follows.
It is necessary that all men, which inhabit any city or region what soever,
be thoroughly persuaded that there are Gods: which is evident to be seen by the
contemplation of heaven, and all the world, and by the goodly disposition and
order of that that is therein. For it is not convenient to think that these
are the works of Fortune or man's ability. Then also the Gods must be
worshipped and honored, as they that are the causes of all good things that
are done to us by any manner of means. Every one therefore must do his best to
have his mind purely cleansed from all evil. For God is not honored of a wicked
man, he is not worshipped withsu^ptuous cost, neither is he delighted with the
sight of solemn tragedies as a wicked man is, but his delight is in virtue and
in a mind that purposes to do good works and righteousness. Wherefore every
one must endeavor him self as much as he may, both to do well and will well, if
he desire to have God to his friend. etc. Cicero in his second book De natura
deorum, says: The best worshipping of the Gods and the most holy and pure
religion is always to honor them with a pure, perfect, and uncorrupted mind
and voice. Seneca also in his fifte book Ad Lucil. says. Our usual custom
is to teach men how the Gods are to be worshipped. Let us give commandment
that on holy days, no man set pearchers or taper light before the Gods, for
they are much delighted with lights, as men half smouldered have pleasure in
smoke. Let us forbid these morning greetings, and solemn knelings at the
Temple doors. This more then neding fiddle faddle smacks somewhat of ambition.
He worshippeth god that knows god. Let us forbid to bring napkins and rubbars
to Jupiter, and to hold a looking glass to Juno. God seeks not such service.
Why so? Because he him self forsooth does serve and supply all men's
necessities. He is present every where, and at hand with all me^. Let every man
hear therefore how he ought to worship God as he should. He shall never verily
be sufficiently clear from troublesome superstitions, unless he in his mind
think of God as he should do, that is, that he has all things, that he gives
all things, and that he bestows benefits freely, not looking for any
recompense at all. What is the cause that the Gods do good? Their nature
forsothe. He is deceived who so ever thinks that they either will, or
possibly can do harm: they can neither take wrong, nor yet do wrong. For to
do harm and to suffer harm, are coupled together. The chiefest and most
excellent nature of al, is the nature of them, which are themselves exempt from
peril, and are not by nature hurtful to others. The first point of worship due
to the Gods, is to believe that there are Gods: then to give them the majesty
due unto them, and to ascribe to them their goodness, without the which their
majesty is none at all. To confess that they are they that govern the
world: that they rule all things as their own, that they do generally look
to the safegarde of all mankind, and sometime to are careful for peculiar
men. They neither do nor have any evil at all. But some they chastise, keep
under, and punish sometime by whipping, in hope to make them good. Will thou
please the Gods and make them thy friends? Be good thy self the^. He has
sufficiently worshipped them, whosoever has imitated them in goodness.

In these words of Seneca, although The Ethnickes sent^nces are in some pl^ces
ma^^^ed.
notable in deed and agreeable to true religion, I find default
notwithstanding of two things. The first is, because not so seldom as once he
makes mention of Gods, when as nevertheless, in an other place he does
frankly confess, that God is one in substance and no more. Neither dare I
undertake for him that he spoke after the manner of the Scripture, which
calls God Elohim, as if you should say Gods, because of the mystery of the
most reverend Trinity. And yet I know very well, that learned men of our
religion, have gone about to prove eue^ by the testimonies of the Gentiles,
that the Gentiles also did acknowledge the mystery of ye Trinity. The second
is that (for as much as I can see) Seneca with the other wise men of the
Gentiles, does not expressly set down, and teach the sound trust, and
confidence that should be had in God.

Moreover, there was not among the Romans any image of God in any 2 The
Gentiles against idols.
temple that they had for the space of. 170. years after Rome was builded. For
Plutarch in the life of Numa Pompilius, says. As for the decrees that Numa
made touching Images of the immortal Gods, how like are they almost in every
point to the doctrine of Pythagoras? Pythagoras thought that that first
beginning (he means God) is not subject to sense or any troublesome
affection, but is an invisible and uncreated spirit. And on the other side,
Numa forbad the Romans to think that the shape of God has the likeness of a
man, or else the figure or similitude of any living thing. Neither was there
among them of the old time any painted or fashioned Image of God, but in the
first. 170. years they builded Temples, and set up houses for service to be
done in unto the Gods, but bodily similitudes they did not make even as if it
were a detestable thing to liken the better unto the worse, and as though God
could not otherwise be perceived, but by reason and knowledge only.

The very same does Marcus Varr^ testify touching the Romans in the 31. chap.
of Augustines book De Ciuitate Dei. For he says: That the Romans worshipped
the Gods. 170. years without any Images at all: and going further he adds
this: Which if it had endured till now, the Gods verily should have been more
purely reverenced. Neither doubts he to conclude that place with these
words, and to say: That they which first brought in Images among the people,
diminished devout fear, and augmented foolish error in the Cities where they
governed: Wisely iudgging thereby that the Gods may easily be despised under
the fondness of imagined likenesses. etc.

Now as concerning the name of God, how much the Gentiles did set 3 The name ^f
God ^ighly es^eemed.
by it, it is evident to be seen by the great religion that they had in
taking or giving an oath. There is extant to be seen a notable discourse of
this in ye 18. Cap. and the 7. book of Gellius: where among the rest this is
to be found written. An oath among the Romans has been had and kept holy and
uncorrupted: which is declared by many laws and customs. And if so be that
among the Gentiles any man should speak opprobriously against God, he was
reputed faulty most sharply to be punished.

Furthermore the Gentiles had their religion, their festival days, 4 The
Gen^^les, kee^ers of re^^gion.
ceremonies, and priests of their religion. Melchizedech, and Iethro were
notable priests of the Gentiles. And although Paul does flatly say, that the
things which the Gentiles offered, were not offered to God but to devils: yet
notwithstanding, because they had in reverence religion, and holy ceremonies,
they did thereby declare that God had printed in the minds of men a familiar
knowledge of reverence and religion, which afterward is corrupted by false
doctrine and wrong opinions, touching God and his holy service.

For the honoring of Parents and Magistrates, for the bringing up of 5 The
hono^ring of parents.
children, and touching the duty of children, there are excellent precepts
and sentences of the wiser sort of Gentiles. Hierocles among his other
writings, says: If any man shall call his Parents, certain second, or earthly
Gods, he shall not do amiss, considering that for the nighe affinity betwixt
us, they ought to be (if it be lawful so to say) more to be honored of us the^
the Gods the^ selves. And it is necessary to be persuaded that we must with a
continual readiness of mind do our endeavor, to repay the benefits
received at their hands with the like again. And although we shall do very much
for them, yet notwithstanding, all will be too little in comparison of that we
ought to do. And so forth as follows: For sooner will the time fail me,
then that I can conveniently rehearse this and the like belonging hereunto out
of heathen writers: neither did I purpose to reckon up all.

Against murder, wrong, and injury, 6 Murder and adultery
very severe laws have been made by the Gentiles. From them also came the law
called Lex Iulia, against adultery and detestable buggerie. They ordained
excellent laws for the contracting and observing of Matrimony. And the word
of truth does expressly declare, that the Chananites were wiped away because of
their incest in marriage and horrible lusts. Leuit. 8 Lycurgus also, Solon,
and the Romans, did publishe laws for the restraint of outrageous expenses in
riotous persons. And here, of purpose, I ouerpasse that which is naturally
ingraffed in all men, the begetting (I mean) and nourishing of their issue and
offspring.

Against theft, deceit, and usury, for the lawful getting and possessing 8
Theft.
of goods, for the distributing of riches, and for bargaining, the Gentiles
have very commendable laws. That saying of Ausonius is notably known.

If greedy gaping after gain to get another groate,
Makes usury dispatch apace to cut the poor man's throat.
All the Gentiles in their writings 9 Lies. False witnesses.
do worthily commend the truth: and do by all means they can, cry out on, and
condemn lying, slaundering, and all such kind of knauerie. The law of the
twelve tables is that a false witness should be cast headlong down from the
top of Tarpey. Charondas A hill in Rome. Cata^a a Town in Sicilie.
Catanaeus, among other excellent sayings of his own has this also. Let every
one (says he) love honesty and truth, and hate dishonestie and lying. For
they are the marks whereby virtue is known from vice. We must therefore begin
with children while as yet they are little ones, and inure our selves to
chastise them, if they delight to lie, and to make much of the^ for telling
the truth, that thereby the best and fruitfullest branch of virtue may be
graffed in every several mind, and so be turned as it were into their nature.

The wiser sort of the Gentiles do utterly condemn concupiscence 10
Concupiscence.
and evil affections: which the Poet in his Satyrs blames as the root of
all mischief, where he says: From thence, almost, comes every cause of
mischief, for no vice
That reigns in man, so many times could frantic heads entice,
To mingle poison privily to stop another breath,
Or else in armor openly to work his riuals death,
As beastly raging lust has done.


So then by all this we may easily gather, that even in the Gentiles minds
also were graven a certain knowledge of God and some precepts, whereby they
knew what to desire, and what to eschew: which notwithstanding they did
corrupt, and make somewhat mystie with the evil affections and corrupt
judgments of the flesh. For which cause God also beside the law of nature
did ordeine other means to declare his will, I mean, the lively tradition of
the Fathers, the aunsweres of Angels, the voices of Prophets, wonderful
miracles, and written laws which he published by wise and very devout
Patriarchs. All these did God ordeine to be a help to the law of nature. What
soever therefore is to be found among the Gentiles agreeable to truth and
honesty, that is to be referred to God the author of all goodness: and on the
other side, whatsoever is contrary to the truth that must be attributed to
the corrupt nature and evil affections of mankind. In all this that I have
said, ye have to note especially that here I speak of knowledge and not of
ability. The knowledge of the law is after a sort manifest in the Gentiles,
but the consent, the will, and ability to fulfill the law is weak and not
easy to be found in them. Wherefore as we affirm that the understanding of ye
law must be inspired from heaven, so also we say that ability to fulfill the
law must of necessity be given of God above. Nature without grace, is herein
without force and effect. But Nature without grace of none effect
whereas some of the Gentiles bear the name and praise of righteousness, as
Melchizedech, Job, Iethro and other more, they have that not of their own
ability, but of the grace of God: as by the history of Job, we may evidently
gather by probable arguments. Wherefore if any of the Gentiles be saved, then
are they saved, not by the works of nature, or their own deserts, but by the
mercy of God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

Moreover, the law of nature is not graffed of God in man, to the intent that
it without grace and Christ should work man's salvation, but rather to teach
us what is good and what is evil, thereby to convince us to be sinners, and
without excuse before the Lord. Paul verily, proving that the Gentiles by the
law of nature are guilty of sin, as well as the Jews by Moses law, does
show that in Christ alone the son of God, is justification, life, and all
good else. Thus far touching the law of nature.

The laws of men (for my promise was, that in my second part I would ^awes of
^en.
speak of them) are those which are by men ordained and published to the
preservation of the common weal and Church of God. Touching these they are of
diverse kinds. For there are politic laws, there are ecclesiastical laws,
and men's traditions. Politic ^awes of ^licie.
laws are those which the magistrate according to the state of times places,
and persons, does ordeine for the preserving of public peace and civility.

Of this sort there are an innumerable company of examples in the civil law
and constitutions of the Emperors, especially of Justinian. All which ought to
come as near as may be to the laws of God and Nature, and not to be contrary
to them, or to have any smacke of impiety or cruel tyranny. To such laws
Saint Peter wills us to obey, where he says: Submit your selves unto al
manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the king, as
having the preeminence, or unto rulers as they that are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, but for the praise of them that do well. For
although the Apostle by ordinances or men's constitutions does inclusiuely
mean the kings and magistrates them selves, as in the second clause of the
sentence, he does immediately declare, yet notwithstanding, he does bid us
therefore obey good laws and just, because by them the Magistrates support
and rule the common weal.

Moreover, just and honest politic laws are an help to love and
tranquillity, do preserve fellowly society among men, do defend the good,
bring inordinate persons into better order, and lastly do not make a little
only to the setting for ward of religion, but do also abrogate evil
customs, and utterly bannish unlawful mischiefs.

Hereof we have examples in the deeds of Nabuchodonosor, Cyrus, Darius,
Artaxerxes, and other Princes more. But touching the Magistrates power, his
laws, and office, I will speak of them in an other place.

Ecclesiastical laws are those Ecclesias^^cal La^^
which being taken out of the word of God, and applied to the state of men,
times and places, are received and have authority in ye church among ye people
of God. I call these ecclesiastical laws and not traditions of men, because,
being taken out of the holy scriptures, and not invented or brought to light by
the wit of man, they are used of that Church which hears the voice of the
sheepehearde alone and knows not a strangers tongue. The congregation comes
together to hear the word of God, and unto common prayers, at Morning, at
Evening, and at such appointed hours as are most convenient for every place
and every people, and that the church holds as a law. The Church has
solemn prayer times, holy days, and fasting days, which it does keep by
certain laws. The Church at certain times, in a certain place, and
appointed order, does celebrate the Sacraments according to the laws and
received custom of the Church. The Church baptiseth infantes: it forbids
not women to come to the Lords Supper: and that it holds as a law. The
Church, by Judges conveniently appointed, does judge in causes of matrimony,
and has certain laws to direct them in such cases. But it deriueth these and
al other like to these, out of the Scriptures, and does for edification apply
them to the estate of men, times, and places: so that in diverse Churches ye may
see some diversity in deed, but no discord or repugnancie at all.

Furthermore, Ecclesiastical laws have their measure and certain marks,
beyond which they may not pass, to wit, that nothing be done or received
contrary or differing in any jot from the word of God, sounding against
charity and comeliness, either in little or much: that lastly this rule of
the Apostle may be effectually observed. Let all things be done decently
according unto order and to the edification of the Church. If therefore any man
shall go about under a colored Superstitious law^^
pretense of ecclesiastical laws tobring in and pop into the mouths of the
godly, any superstitious, busy, and unseemly traditions of men, which withal
do differ from the Scriptures, their part shall be, first to try that deceit
of theirs by the rule of Gods word, and then to reject it.

There remain now the traditions of men, which have their beginning, Men's
^^^ditions.
are made and invented of men at their own choice, of some foolish intent, or
some fond affection of mankind, contrary or without the holy Scriptures, of
which sort you shall find an infinite number of examples, I mean the sects,
the dominion, and single life of spiritual men, the rites and sundry fashioned
customs used in their Church. Touching all which the Lord in the Gospel,
citing the Prophet Esaie, says. Why transgress ye the Lords commandment for
your own tradition? ye hypocrites, rightly did Esaias prophecy of you, where
he says. This people comes nigh unto me with their mouth, and with their
lips they honor me, but their heart is far from me: but they worship me in
vain, teaching doctrines the precepts of men. The blessed Martyr Cyprian
alluding to these words of Christ, Epistolarum lib. 1. epi. 8. says. It is
corrupt, wicked and robbery to the glory of God, what soever is ordained by
the giddie madness of men's heads, to the violating of Gods disposition. Depart
as far as may be from the infectiue contagiousnes of such fellows, and seek
by flight to shun their talk, as warely as an eating cancker, or infecting
pestilence, for the Lord forewarneth and tells you that they are blind
leaders of the blind. Paul also in his Epistle to Titus, says: Rebuke them
sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, not taking heed to Iewishe
fables, and commandments of men, turning from the truth. I do of purpose
here let pass the words of Paul in his second chapter to the Colossians,
because the place is known of all men.

I will not trouble you (dearly beued) with too large and busy an exposition
hereof. For I suppose that this little that I have said touching the laws of
nature and of men, I mean laws politic, Ecclesiastical, and mere
traditions of men, are sufficient to the attentive and faithful hearers, who at
their coming home, do more diligently think of every point by the^ selves,
and also read the places of Scripture often cited by me, and devoutly
expounded. The Lord for his mercy grant that we do never despise the
admonitions of natures law graffed in our hearts, nor yet be entangled in
men's traditions, but that we in walking lawfully in upright politic laws and
holy Ecclesiastical ordinances, may serve the Lord:

To whom be all glory, honor and dominion, for ever and ever. Amen.

Of Gods law, and of the two first commandments of the first Table.
The second Sermon.
THE law of God openly published and What the Law of God is.
proclaimed by the Lord our God him self, sets down ordinary rules for us
to know what we have to do, and what to leave undone, requiring obedience and
threatening utter destruction to disobedient rebels. This law is divided into
the Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial laws. All which parts and every point
whereof Moses has very exquisitely written, and diligently expounded. The
Moral law is that which teaches men manners, and lays The mo^all law.
down before us the shape of virtue, declaring therewithal how great
righteousness, godliness, obedience, and perfectness God looks for at the
hands of us mortal men. The Ceremonial laws, are they which are The
Ceremonial Law.
given concerning the order of holy and Ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies,
and also touching the ministers and things assigned to the ministry and other
holy uses. Last of all, the Judicial laws give rules concerning The Judicial
Law.
matters to be judged of between man and man, for the preservation of public
peace, equity, and civil honesty. Touching the two latter of these, I will
speak of them in place convenient. At this time I mean to discourse upon the
Moral law.

First of all therefore, let no man The Law was, even before Moses time.
think that before Moses time there was no law, and that the law was by
Moses first of all published. For the self same especial points of the
Moral law, which Moses sets down in the ten Commandments, were very
well known to the Patriarchs even from the beginning of the world. For they
worshipped the one ^rue God alone for their God, whom they reverenced, and
called upon him. Jacob took away with him the Syrian Idolles of Laban out of
his house, and hid them in Bethel under an oak or Terebinth tree which was nigh
to Sichem. Abraham in taking an oath used always a reverend fear, and a
spiced conscience, whereby it follows that to him the name of the Lord was
holy and not lightly taken. All the holy fathers did both diligently and
devoutly solemnize and observe holy rites and sacrifices. Cha^ has his fathers
curse, because he did irreverently behave him self toward his father. Cain is
reproved for murdering his brother. Noe gives commandment not to shead
blood. Joseph is highly commended for refusing to lie with another man's wife, I
mean the wife of his master. Ruben is rebuked because he did with incest
defile his fathers bed. Jacob was not angry without a cause with Laban his
father in Law, when he suspected him of theft. All the Patriarchs have utterly
condemned liars and false witnesses, as well as evil lusts and concupiscence.
Wherefore the patriarchs ever from the beginning of the world even until Moses
time, were not without the precepts of the ten commandments: although they
had them not graven in tables, or written in parchments. For the Lord with his
finger writ them in their hearts, which the lively tradition of the fathers
did exquisitely garnish and reverently teach. The law is every where the
same, and the will of God is always one, because God is but one and is never
changed. Nevertheless, the commandments were first of all set down in
tables by God, who was the beginner and writer of them, and after that again,
were written into books by Moses.

Likewise also the old and holy The Patriarchs before Moses had the
Ceremonial and judicial Laws.
Patriarchs that were before Moses, did not want the ceremonial and judicial
laws. For they had their Priests, I say their fathers of every kindred or
household, they had their ceremonies, their altars, and sacrifices, they had
their solemn assemblies, and purifications. They had their laws for
succession in heritage, for the division and possession of goods, for
bargayning and contractes, and for the punishing of evil doers. All which,
Moses gathered together, into a certain number of decreed laws: setting down
many things more plainly then they were before, and ordeining many things
which the Patriarchs were either altogether without, or else had used in
another order. Of which sort were, the Tabernacle, the holy vessels, the Arc
of the covenant, the table, the Candlestick, the Altar for burnt offerings
and for incense, the Leuiticall Priesthood, the holy vestments, with the
feasts and holy days: and what so ever else is like to this: all which verily
are abrogated by Christ, as in place convenient I mean to declare. But for
because manners can not consist if the The Mo^al Law endure^ still.
ten Commandments be broken, therefore the Moral law, although it have
properly the name of a law, is notwithstanding not abrogated or broken. For
the ten Commandments, are the very absolute and everlasting rule of true
righteousness, and all virtues set down for all places, men and ages, to frame
themselves by. For the sum of the ten Commandments is this: To show our
love to God, and one love another: and this does the Lord require at all
times, and every where of all kind of men.

Moreover, this is to be noted touching The ma^estie and ^ignitie of ^he moral
^awe.
the dignity of the Moral law contained in the ten Commandments, that
whereas all the Ceremonial and Judicial laws were revealed of God to Moses
by the Angels, and by Moses to the people, and that again by Moses, at Gods
commandment, they were inserted into written books: yet notwithstanding the
Moral law of the tonne Commandments was not revealed by man, or any means
of man, but by God him self at the Mount Sina, who there among other mighty
and marvelous wonders, did openly in a public and innumerable assembly of
men and Angels, rehearse them word for word, as they are now to be seen.
Furthermore, they were written not by the hand of Moses, but with the finger
of God in tables, not made of matter easy to be dissolved, but made of stone
to endure for ever. Those tables also were kept as the most precious treasure
in that Arc, which of ye tables of ye covenant (containing in the^ the chief
articles of ye eternal league) was named the Arc of the covenant. Which Arc
again was laid up in the holy of holiest. All which circumstances (...) the
^^st holy (...) in (...) of (...).
tend to nothing else, but to commend unto us the excellency of the. 10
Commandments, and to warn us to reverence that God which published this
Moral law, as him that is ye Lord of heaven and earth, and which at his own
will and pleasure does order the disposition of all the elements against
disobedient rebels: these circumstances also do admonish us, that even now in
our time also, we have to esteem of the ten Commandments, as of the dearest
iuels to be found in all ye world. For ye holy relics ye are remaining in the
church of Christ, are ye. 10. Commandments, the Apostles Creed, the Lords
prayer, and lastly, the whole contents of the sacred Bible. Touching ye
proclamation or first edition of the. 10 Commandments, we have a wonderful and
large discourse of Moses, Exo. 19 and Deuteronomy. 4. and. 5. chap. Now the tables,
Two Tables of Gods law.
wherinto the. 10. Commandments of Gods law be disposed, are in number two.
Whereof the first contains. 4. Commandments, and the latter. 6. For the
last commandment which some divide into twain, is in very deed but one alone
and undivided. For first the Lord does generally command and say, Thou shall
not covet: and the^ he descends particularly, and does by enumeration reckon
up yt things yt we must not covet, to wit, our neighbors wife, his house, his
lands, his cattle and his substance. Beside yt too, this does argue that it
is so, because according to yt Hebrew diposition, this commandment is
altogether one whole verse not divided into twain. With this division of ours
agree Joseph. Antiqui. li. 6. ca. 3. Origenes in Exodus Homelia. 8. Ambros. in.
6. cap. Epist ad Ephe. But the master of sentences having divided this last
commandment He puts 3. in the first table and 7. in the last, which added
to gether d^ make up ten.
into twain, does therefore place in yt first table. 3. comaundements and no
more. He did peradventure follow Augustine herein, who Question. in Exo. 71. and.
Epistola ad Ianuarium. 119 does also reckon up but three Commandments of the
first table alone, which he did in respect of the mystical Trinity. And yet
this notwithstanding he does not ouerslippe the commandment for abandoning
and not worshipping of images: for undoubtedly, he had always in his mind
those words of the Lord in the Gospel where he says: Verily I say unto you
though heaven and earth do pass, one jot or title of the law shall not
pass, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least
of these commandments and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least
in the kingdom of heaven. The same Augustine again, in Questionibus veteris
et noui testamenti. lib. 1. cap. 7. makes four commandments of the first
table, and six of the second. And again, he differs not much from the same
order in his third book, Ad Bonifacium. etc.

Now touching these Commandments, the Lord has divided them What the two
tables ^^ the la^ do con^eine.
into two several orders or tables, because of the several difference of
matters handled in either of them. For the first of the two appertains to
God, the second unto man. The first teaches us what we have to think
concerning God, and the worship due unto him, that is, it teaches us the
perfect way to live uprightly and holily in the sight of God. The second is,
the rule whereby we have to learn our duty toward our neighbor, which also
teaches us humanity, directing us in the way to live peaceaand ciuily one
with another. And in these two tables, are so nearely contained al and every
duty looked for at men's hands, that there can not so much as one jot be
added more by all the wise men of the world, concerning a godly life and civil
behavior, which is not contained in these ten commandments.

The first commandment of the ten, has the Lord him self expressly The
first commandment.
spoken in these very words that follow. I am the Lord thy God, which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, thou
shalt have none other Gods before me. This commandment stands of two
branches. The very first whereof also contains diverse matters. For first of
al God does simply offer him self to us, and prerisely set down what he will
be to us ward, thereby declaring what he is to all men. Whereupon we again do
gather what he on the other side does look for at our hands, and what our
duty is to him. Thirdly and last of al he adds an evident proof of that,
where he said that he is our God.

In the beginning, he cries out and says: I am the Lord thy God. Wherein he
declares what he is, and what he will be unto all men. These words are like
to the words of the covenant which God made with Abraham, and in Abraham with
all faithful believers. I am, says The (...) is this, I am a (...) God,
(...) the (...) of all things.
the Lord, a strong God, and I am Schaddai, as who should say, Saturnus a
saturando, which is to fill. For God is the abundant fullness that satisfies
all men and all things, he is the everlasting well of all good things which
never is drawn dry. And that does Jeremy declare at large in the second
chapter of his prophecy. All which verily, God in effect comprehends in
these few words: I am the Lord thy God. I, I say, which speak to thee from
within the fire, I and none other. Here is expressly meant, the unity of God. We
are here taught to acknowledge one God, and no more, to stick to one, and not
to suffer our hearts phantastically to dream of many. I am thy Lord, I am
thy God. He is a Lord, because he alone has the rule over all creatures, all
things are subject to him as to their Lord, all things do bend and obey him,
if once he do but beck. He as Lord alone, does govern and uphold all things
that are. So then, in this one word is contained the wisdom of God, his
virtue, his power and infinite majesty. Deus, which word we use for God, is
(peradventure) derived of the Hebrew word, Daij, which signifies sufficiency
or full ability. For God alone of him self, is unto him self most perfect
blessedness and absolute felicity: he is also sufficiently able to minister
all things most abundantly to all them, that seek after him in truth
sincerely, being of him self most liberally welthy, to all that call upon his
name. Therefore in this branch the sufficient and full ability, the
liberality, the goodness and mercy of God are to be noted: but most
especially in this yt he says, I am thy God, Thy God I say. For God is not
good to him self alone, but even unto us also. He desires to pour and
bestow him self wholly, with all his goodness and gifts of grace, upon the
faithful and sincere believers. He is no niggard, he is not envious, he
rejoices and is glad to bestow and divide him self among us abundantly, and
to our comfort, to fill us with the inioying of him self at all times and
seasons, but especially, in time of our necessity. And God verily says
expressly, Thy God, and not your God, that thereby every one of us may
understand, that the eternal, most mighty, and holy God both is and will be
the God and Lord of every particular man, that is, that he is and will be the
keeper, deliverer, redeemer, the unmeasurable mountain, and bottomless sea of
all good gifts of body and soul, to all them that either are, or else ever
shall be.

By this now in the second place that this commaundem^nt requires ofvs,
we have to gather, what the good and gracious Lord requires again at our
hands, and what our duty to him both is and ought to be. For this where he
says, Thy God, betokens an evident relation. For if he will be mine, then I
again of duty must be his. He will be my Lord and my God, therefore must I
again of duty make account of, and worship him as my Lord and my God.
Wherefore in this commandment there is required at our hands, that we do not
only acknowledge the true God to be the true God, and so to stay there, but
also that we do take and account him for our God, our Lord, our King, our
Creator, our preserver, and our Father, and that we do attribute to him his
properties, to wit, that he is one alone, the only fountain and giver of all
good things, that he lives, and is eternal, righteous, true, holy, happy,
merciful, mighty, most excellent and chief of all. Let us therefore stick
to him alone, let us obey him in all things, let us put our trust in him, let
us call on him alone, let us repute him to be the giver of all good things, and
crave all good gifts of him, let us thank him for all benefits whatsoever we
receive, let us reverence him, and lastly, honor him in fear sincerely, in
love most ardently, and in hope as constantly as may be. For hereunto belong
those sentences in the books of Moses, and the holy Gospel. Thou shall honor
the Lord thy God, and him alone shall thou serve. And again, Follow ye the
Lord your God, fear him, keep his commandments, hearken to his voice, serve
him, and stick to him. The Lord him self also in the Psalm cries out, and
says: Offer to the Lord the sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows unto the
highest. And call upon me in the day of trouble. etc.

And now touching the demonstration The true God is our God.
whereby he declares that he has been, is, and will be the God and Lord of us
all, of our fathers, and of our children that come after us, the proof thereof
is most evident by our delivery out of Egypt. Therein are contained all the
virtues of God, his wisdom, his goodness, his righteousness, his truth,
his power, and what not? He declares that he is the Lord in heaven and in
earth, in all elements and all creatures. His people the Israelites does he
graciously deliver, defend, with sundry gifts adorn, and mightily preserve,
even in despite and maugre all the heads of the whole Egyptian kingdom. And
on the other side, he does by sundry means very terribly, yet notwithstanding
justly punish the Egyptians, and last of all together with their king, he
ouerwhelmeth them in the red sea. By this one miracle of the Lords, the
Israelites might have gathered, as God is Almighty, and the mightiest of all,
so also that he would be their God, as heretofore he had been the God of their
Fathers. For by this wonder, he did declare what he was then, and of how great
power and goodness he is eue^ at this day among us, and also what he will be
in all ages, even unto the end. To us that live in these days the deliverance
which we have obtained by Jesus Christ our Lord, is far more fresh in
memorte, who has not delivered us from the bondage of any Egyptian kingdom,
nor from the tyranneus hands of any earthly Pha^ao, but has set us free from
the power of darkness, of sin, death, and the devil. Whereby we gather,
that as the eternal, true, excellent, high, and holy God is most mighty, so
also he is our God, that he wishes well to us, and that he cares for and
loves us according to that saying of the Apostle. Who spared not his own
son but gave him for us all, how can it be, but that with him he will give
us all things? Verily the mystery The mystery of our red^tion by Christ
contained in the first commandment.
of our redemption by our Lord Jesus Christ, is very manifestly contained in
the first precept of the ten Commandments. For it is evident ye the
Israelites free departure out of Egypt, was a type or figure of the delivery
of the whole compass of the earth, and of all the kingdoms of the world,
which should be wrought by Christ our Lord, who has now already set all the
world free from the bondage of sin and hell. But if any man dout of this,
let him diligently consider with him self the meaning of the Ceremony or
Sacrament of that bodily deliverance, I mean the very Passover. For what is
he that knows not, that the Paschall lamb did in a figure represent Christ
our redeemer? Are Paul's words unknown, who says: Christ our Passover is
offered up? Have not all the Apostles and John Baptist called our Lord, the
Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world? The words of ye
prophet Esai also in his. 52. Chap. are apparently known, where he compares
the delivery of Israel out of Egypt, with the redemption of all the world
wrought by Christ from the slavery of sin. Wherefore in this first precept of
the ten Commandments, is contained the mystery of Christ our Lord, and
our salvation: So that as often as those words of God shall be recited in our
ears, we ought not so much to set our eyes and minds upon the anncient
delivery of Israel out of Egypt, as upon the new and latter redemption, which
we have by Christ Jesus, thereby to quicken our hope, and not to despair, but
that the most excellent and mighty God, both is and will be our God, as
heretofore he has been theirs. The latter branch of this first commandment
Strange Gods are forbidden
flatly forbids us, and every one of us to have any strange Gods, that is,
it takes from us all extraordinary means, to seek the safegarde of our
lives where the working finger of God is not, and whatsoever else may be either
diuelishly devised, or unadvisedly chosen beside the very word of God. And
therefore the Lord uses a most vehement or earnest kind of speaking. For
says he, Thou shall not have any other Gods before me. See, he says, Thou
shall not have, and thou shall not have before me, or before my face, or with
me, or by me. We Germans say, Zu mir, oder nabend mir. Oder las; michs nit
sahen ver minen ouge^. For so do fathers speak in their anger, when they do
earnestly forbid a wicked and heinous thing. See say they that thou do it not
before mine eyes for me to see it. But now God is present every where, God
sees all things, yea, he beholds our hearts and hidden secrets of our
hearts. We must not therefore in any case, either openly or privily have any
strange Gods: that is, none of us must make account of any creature, either in
heaven or earth as of our God: none of us must attribute gods properties to his
creatures, nor yet the things which we of duty do owe to God him self. The
properties of God are these, to be all over, and every where, to see all, to
know all, to be able to do all, to give life, to deliver and cleanse from
sins, to save, preserve, to justify, to sanctify, and what so ever else is
like to these. On the other side, our duty to him is, to reverence God, to
call on God, to fear God, to worship God, to hope in God, to stick to God, to
hear God, to believe God, and to obey God.

The strange God therefore is that Strange gods wha^ they are.
which is not God properly and by nature, yea, it is what so ever we do make
to our selves to be our God, beside the very, living, and eternal God, wherein
we trust, wherein we hope, whereon we call, which we do love and fear,
whereon we scttle and fasten our minds, whereupon we do depend, whereof we
make account as of our treasure, help and safegarde both in prosperity and
our adversity. When Rahel asks children of Jacob, she has this answer at
his hand. Am I God which have made thee barren? And again, when Ioram king of
Israel had by Naaman received letters from Benhadad king of Syria, requesting
to cleanse the leprosy, he rent his clothes for anger, and cried out,
saying: Am I God, that I can kill and restore to life again? Let God alone
therefore be our God, that is, our life and safegarde, our help and refuge,
our protection and deliverance, our hope and love, our fear, our dread, our
trembling and all. These if we do attribute to others, and not to God alone,
then shall we make other Gods to our selves.

Moreover, what so ever is not ordained by God him self, yt is in the
Scriptures many times called strange, or other. In that sense it is said,
that strange fire was carried into the Labernacle, to wit, not that fire which
God had commanded for to kindle. In the Proverbs, she is called a strange
woman, whose company the Lord has not allowed thee to use. They therefore
are strange Gods, whom we have made to our selves to hang on, and to seek
aid of, when God, notwithstanding, has not appointed them to have the charge
over us. Wherefore the very Saints them selves triumphant now in heaven with
Christ our King, shall be reputed for strange Gods, the Saints them selves, I
say, not in respect of them selves, but to us they shall be strange Gods in
respect of us, which judge very fondly of them, and bestow on them the honor
due to God, in worshipping and calling upon them, as we should worship and call
upon our tutours and defenders. The very devils Coniu^^rs and witches.
and deuilish men shall be strange Gods, if we for fear shall stand in awe of
them more then of God, to who^ in deed our fear is due. The stars, the
Planets, and signs in the firmament shall be strange Gods, if we being
deceived with the Mathematicals shall wholly hang on them, and in all our doings
evermore have regard to the impressions of the sky, directing every minute of
our lives to the course of the stars. Likewise, if we shall honor and love
money or men, with honor or love due unto God, then shall this money and men of
ours be imputed to us for strange Gods. King Asa is blamed. 2. Paral. 7. for
putting too much confidence in Physic and Physicians. Physic and
Physicians therefore may be abused, and made strange Gods. The Jews are
rebuked by the Lord in Esaias. cap. 30. for trusting too much in the Egyptians
their confederates: Confederates therefore may be abused, and made strange
Gods. But most of all are condemned here the leagues and couenaunts made with
the devil by witchraft, to have him at commandment. Those blessings also
which of right, ought rather to be called cursings, I mean, superstitious
exorcismes, or coniurations, are utterly to be rejected, wherein also this is
blameworthy, that the name of the most high God is horribly abused and taken
in vain. But what is he that can exactly recko^ up every particular thing
wherein this first commandment is transgressed, considering that in it is
taught the perfect rule of godliness, which is the inward worship done to
God, to wit, to acknowledge God, to believe him, to think rightly of him, to
call upon him, to cleave unto him, and in all things to obey him?

The second precept of the ten Commandments The second commandment of God.
is, Thou shall not make to thee self a graven Image, nor any likeness of
those things, which are in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the
water under the earth: thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: I am
the Lord thy God, strong, and jealous, visiting the fathers sins in the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and
showing mercy unto thousands to them that love me, and keep my
Commandments. In the first commandment, the Lord did teach and draw out
before our eyes, the pattern of his inward worship and religion: now, here
in the second he amendeth that which might be amiss in the outward rites and
ceremonies. If we could have rightly judged of God, and have kept (as deuouth
as we should) the first Commandment, then should there have been no need
of the second: but because God knew our disposition and nature, he does
therefore expressly forbid the thing that otherwise we would have done. For many
there are which think, that God ought to be portraied in some similitude or
likeness, and to be worshipped with some bodily or visible reverence, in
offering gold, silver, pearls, yuorie, and precious things of price.
Wherefore the general end The end of the commandment is to draw us from
strau^g and foreign worshippinges.
of this commandment is, to draw them from those gross imaginations and
carnal worshippings of God, who as he is an incomprehensible power, and an
eternal spirit, so can he not be resembled to any corruptible similitude: he
will be worshipped in spirit and holiness. Under the name of the Ivole or
imagined likeness, is contained all the outward reverence done thereunto:
when therefore the Idols are forbidden, together with them is also forbidden
all outward honor irreligiously exhibited to the true and very God. For
whersoeuer an Idol is, there must the Idolaters set him up a pillour, place
him in a seat, erect him an altar, and build him a temple. And all these
again require keepers and overseers, Ministers or Priests, sacrifices and
offerings, ceremonies, furnitures, holy days, cost and labor that will never
be ended. In this sense did the Prophets say, that Idolatrous images were
endless labors and infinite miseries. For after images are once received,
there is no end or measure of expenses and toil. This does experience teach
to be true.

Now to proceed, this commandment stands of three several parts. God
forbids a graven Image,
For first of all, God flatly forbids to make a graven image or other kind
of Idol: that is, God does utterly forbid to set up or hallow to him any
image, of what shape or substance soever it be. For as God will not, so in
deed he can not be expressly represented in any manner of likeness. Now, in
this commandment are reckoned up, in a manner, all the similitudes of those
things, whereunto we are wont in portraying, to liken our pictures. Thou shall
not, says he, fashion like unto God any shape or figure of those things which
are in heaven, which are I say above us. Above us are the celestial bodies, the
Sun the Moon, the Planets, the Stars, and diverse birds of sundry
fashions. In all which figures and shapes, almost, no small number of the
Gentiles did solemnly honor, and reverently worship the name of God. Thou
shall not liken unto God, says he, any shape or fashion of those things that
are in ye earth. In the earth are men, beasts, herbs, shrubbes, trees, and
such like. Now it is manifest that the Gentiles worshipped God under the
likeness of men and beasts. Cornelius Tacitus writing of the Germans, says:
But by the greatness of the visible That is the Sun Moon and stars.
celestial bodies, they do conjecture and verily think, that the Gods are
neither enclosed in walls, nor yet in favor resembling men's visages, and
therefore do they hallow woods and groves, calling that hidden mystery by the
name of the Gods, which with outward eyes they see not, but with inward
reverence alone. Lo here our ancestors worshipped God in the likeness of
trees and woods: which nevertheless, men are forbidden here to do, even as
also we are prohibited to worship our God in the likeness of any thing, that
is in, or under the water. The Philistines worshipped God in the image of a
fish. For Dagon their God bare the shape of a fish. Egypt honored God in the
similitude of Serpents. All which and many other, Paul knitteth up together in
the first to the Romans, where he argues against the Gentiles, and says:
Their foolish heart was blinded: when they counted them selves wise they
became fools, and turned the glory of the incorruptible God unto the
likeness, not only of a mortal man, but also of birds, and of fourefooted
beasts, and of creeping beasts. Against this madness is the first part of
the law directly given.

But now the cause why God will The cause why God will not be likened to any
thing.
not be represented in any visible or sensible image is this. God is a spirit,
God is unmeasurable, incomprehensible, unspeakable, all over and every where,
filling heaven and earth, eternal, living, giving life unto and preserving all
things, and lastly of a glorious majesty exalted above the heavens. But what
is he that can portraye a spirit in any Image or substance? God is an
incomprehensible power, quickening and preserving all and every thing. But
David describing Images, says: The Idols of the heathen are silver and gold,
the works of men's hands. They have ears and hear not, noses have they and
smell not. They have hands and handle not, feet have they and walk not,
neither is there any voice in the throat of them. Wherefore if these be
compared to God, how like I beseech you are they unto him? To go about
therefore to express God in any visible likeness, is the next way to
dishonor God, and to bring him into contempt. Gods eye beholds all things,
Idols see nothing. Gods ears hear all things, Idols hear nothing. By God
all things live, move, and are preserved: the Idols them selves neither live
nor move, and unless they be vphelde by ye men that make the^, they fall and
are dashed in pieces. An Idol breaths not: GOD gives to other a breathing
spirit. How then, and wherein are these twain alike? In substance, or in
shape? If ye say in substance, I answer, is God then of gold, of silver or
of wood? If in shape, mine answer is, has the invisible power of God then,
put on visible and mortal members? How They were h^^tiques ^^firming that Go^
has m^^bers (...) to mo^^ men*
greatly therefore did the Anthropomorphites offend herein? If then there be
no similitude of God, how comes it to pass (I beseech you) that Images and
Idols be called the likeness and pictures of God?

Among us, he that calls another an Idol or an Image, does seem to have
spoken it too too despightfully in reproach of the other. For we know that
Idols are counterfaites of men and not men in deed: and therefore do we call
him an Image, that is a sotte, a fool, a dolte, an idiote, and one that has
no wit, nor knows any more then he hears of other. Why then henceforwarde
should we any more call Images the likenesses of God? God is living: Images are
monumentes of dead men, as Solomon the author of the book of Wisdom says.
God is glorious, and heaven and earth are full of the glory of his majesty:
but Idols are without all glory, and subject to the scoffs and mockes of men.
Images are tokens of absent friends. But God is present always and every
where. And the signs or tokens which God did of old ordeine, and give to his
people, were not simply the signs and Images of God, but tokens of Gods
presence, signifying that God who by nature is a spirit, and invisible,
incomprehensible and unmeasurable, is present still among them. Such a token
was the cloud, the smoke, the fire, and finally the very Arc of the
covenant, which also the Cherubim did cover with their wings, signifying
thereby, that no mortal man could look God in the face: and that therefore
the soul, and the mind and spirit ought, by contemplation, to be lifted up
into heaven there to behold him. For to Moses, who notwithstanding is said to
have seen God face to face, it was said: No man shall see me and live. When
once we are deceassed, then shall we see him as he is, according to the sayings
of the blessed Evangelist John. So then, these I say are the causes why the
Lord will not have him self represented or portrayed in any mattier or
likeness.

Hereunto now do appertain the places of Scripture, and testimonies of the
men that are the chiefest pillars of true religion and godliness, of Moses,
Esaias, and Paul, Moses in Deuteronomy. says: The Lord spoke unto you from the
midst of the fire: and a voice of words ye heard, but likeness saw ye
none, but heard the voice only. Take good heed therefore unto yourselues as
pertaining unto your souls (for ye saw no manner of image in that day) least
ye mar your selves by making you a graven image, the likeness of any manner
of figure, whether it be the picture of man or woman: the likeness of any
manner of beast that is on the earth: or the likeness of any manner of
feathered foul that flies in the air: or the likeness of any manner of
worm that creeps on the earth: or the likeness of any manner of fish that
is in the waters beneath the earth. Yea, and least thou lift up thine eyes
unto heaven, and when thou see the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, with
all the host of heaven, thou should begin to worship them and reverence
them, and should worship and serve the things, which the Lord thy God has
made to serve all nations under the whole heaven. Take heed therefore that ye
forget not the appointment of the Lord your God, which he has made with you,
and that ye make you no graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that the
Lord thy God has forbidden thee. This has Moses thus far.

Esaias also in his forty Chapter, says: Behold all people (to wit,
compared to God) are in comparison of him as a drop of a bucketfull, and are
counted as a little dust sticking on the balance, and weying nothing at all.
Yea, the Isles are to him as a very little thing. Libanus is not sufficient to
minister fire to his offering, and all the beasts thereof are not inoughe for
one sacrifice. All people in comparison of God are reckoned as nothing, in
respect of him they are less then nothing, and as that that is not. To whom
then will ye liken God? or what similitude will ye set up to him? Shall the
Caruer make him an Image, and shall the Goldsmyth cover it with gold or cast
it into a form of silver plates.

Moreover, shall the poor man, that he may have somewhat to set up, choose a
tree that is not ^otten, and seek out a cunning woorkeman, to carue there out
an Image that moves not? Know ye not this? heard ye never of it? And again, It
is he that sits upon the circle of the world, whose inhabitours are, in
comparison of him, but as Grasshoppers. It is he that spreads out the heavens
like a curtain, he stretches them out as a Tent to dwell in: It is he that
brings princes to nothing, and makes the judges of the earth as though they
were not. To whom now will ye liken me, and to whom shall I be like, says
the holy one. Lift up your eyes on high, and consider who has made those
things, which come out by so great heaps, and he calls them all by their
names. And so forth. Thus much out of Esaias.

Moreover, Paul the Apostle of Christ, disputing at Athens of true religion,
says: God that made the world, and all that therein is, seeing that he is Lord
of heaven and earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is
worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing since he himself
gives life and breath to al and every where, and has made of one blood all
nations of men, to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has determined the
times before appointed, and also the limits of their habitation, that they
should seek the Lord, if perhaps they might have fealte and found him: though
he be not far from every one of us. For by him we live, and move, and have
our being, as certain of your own Poets have said, For we are also his
offspring. For as much then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to
think that the Godheade is like to gold, or silver, or stone graven by Art
or man's device. These testimonies are so evident, and do so plainly declare
that which I purposed, that I need not for the further exposition of them to
say any more. They were great causes therefore that moved S. Augustine pr^cisely
to pronounce it to be horrible Sacrilege, for any man to place in the Church
the image of God the Father, sitting in a throne with bended hammes. Because it
is detestable for a man so much as to conceive such a likeness in his mind.
His very words I have rehearsed in the eight Sermon of my first Decade, where
I had occasion to speak of the right hand of the father, and to teach you
what it is to sit at the fathers right hand.

Now touching other images also which men erect to creatures or to ye All
other images (...) for bidd^^ to be wo^shipped.
heathen gods, they are no less forbidden then the pictures of God him self.
For if we may not hallow an image to the true and very God, much less shall
it be lawful for us to erect or consecrate an Idol to a strange or foreign
God. Man in his mind does choose him self a God, and of his own invention,
deuiseth a shape or figure for it, which lastly he frames with the
workmanship of his hands: so that it may truly be said that the mind
conceiueth an Idol, and the hand does bring it forth. But the Lord in the
first commandment, forbad us to have any strange Gods. Now, he that neither
has, nor chooses to him self any strange or foreign Gods, does not in his
imagination devise any shape for them, and so consequently erecteth no images.
For he thinks it a detestable thing, to make an image to the true and very
God, he is persuaded that it is a wicked thing to choose him self a foreign
God, and therefore he judges it to be most abominable to place the picture of
a foreign God in the Church or Temple of the true and very God. And that is
the cause that in the Church before Christ his time, we do not read that any
images were erected to any Saints, whereof at that time there were a great
number, (suppose) of patriarchs, Judges, Kings, Priests, Prophets, and whole
troops of Martyrs, Matrons, and modest widows. The primitive Church also of
Christ his Apostles had no images, either of Christ him self, or of other
Saints set up in their places of public prayer, nor in their Churches. The
deed of Epiphanius is very well known which he committed at Anablacha in
Syria. It is written in Greek in an Epistle to John Bishop of Jerusalem, and
translated into Latin by S. Hierome: He rent the veil that hong in the
Temple, bearing in it the image of Christ or some other Saint, testifying
therewithal that it is against Christian religion, for the picture of a man, to
hang in the Church of God* Saint Augustine in Catalogo haerese (...) makes
mention of one Marcella a follower of Carpocrates his sect, which, worshipped
the images of Jesus, Paul Homer, and Pythagoras, with falling down prostrate
before them, and offering incense unto them. Very well and wisely therefore,
did Erasmus of Roterodame being deeply seen in the works of Ecclesiastical
writers, when he had wittily spoken many things touching the use of images in
Churches, at the last also add this, and say: There is no decree, no not so
much as of men, which commands that images should be in Churches. For as it
is more easy, so is it less perilous, to take all images quite and clean
out of the Churches, then to be able to bring to pass that in keeping them
still, measure should not be exceeded, nor superstition covertly cloaked. For
admit that (as some say) the mind be clean from all superstition, yet
notwithstanding, it is not without a show of superstition, for him that
prays to fall down prostrate before a wooden Idol, to have his eyes
steadfastly bent upon that alone, to speak to that, to kiss that, and not to
pray at al but before an Idol. And this I add, that who so ever do imagine
God to be any other than in deed he is, they contrary to this precept, do
worship graven images. And again, in the same Catechism he says: Even
until the time of Hierom there were men of sound religion, which suffered not
in the church any Image to stand, neither painted, nor graven, nor woauen, no
not so much as of Christ, because (as I suppose) of the Anthropomorphites, But
afterward the use of Images by little and little crept up and came into the
Churches. This has Erasmus.

Furthermore, for Christ our Lord No imag^ must be made for Christ,
and very God, though he have taken on him the nature of us men, yet that
notwithstanding, there ought no Image to be erected. For he did not become man
to that intent. But he drew up his humanity into heaven, and therewithal
gave us a charge, that so often as we pray, we should lift up the eyes of our
minds and bodies into heaven above. Moreover, being once ascended, he sent his
spirit in steed of him self, unto the Church wherein he has a spiritual
kingdom, and needs not any bodily or corruptible things. For he commanded
that if we would bestow any thing on him or for his sake, we should bestow it
on the poor, and not on his picture or image. And now, since without all
controversy, our Christ is the very true God, and that the very true God does
forbid to hallow to him any likeness of man, that is, to represent God in the
shape of a man, it follows consequently that to Christ no Image is to be
dedicated, because he is the true and very God and life everlasting.

In the second part of this commandment, How far (...) it (...) law (...) to
^^ke Images.
we are taught how far forth it is unlawful, for us to make any Image of
God, or else of feigned Gods, and if so it be that any make or cause them to be
made, how and after what sort then we ought to behave our selves toward them.
Images ought not in any case to be made for men to worship, or otherwise, to
use as means or instruments to worship God in. But if so it happen, that any
man make them to the intent to have them worshipped, then must the zealous and
godly disposed, despise, neglect, not worship nor honor them, nor yet by any
means be brought to do them service.

For in this precept are two things set down especially to be noted. The first
is, Thou shall not bow down to them. To bow down, is to cap To Bow ^^wne,
what it is.
and to knee, to ducke with the head, and bend the body, to fall down, to
honor, to worship, and to reverence. The Saints of old did use to bow down
(that is to bend the knee, to uncover the head, and to fall down) to the
Magistrates, the Prophets, the Princes, and teachers of the people, and unto
all sorts of reverend men. And that they did partly, by cause God had so
commanded, who uses their ministry to common men's commodity: and partly
again, by cause men are the lively Image of God him self. But deaf, dumb,
and blind Idols are wood and stone, whereunto we are forbidden to bend or bow
down, how so ever we are made to believe, that they do bear the likeness of
God. The latter is, Thou shall not worship them, or else, Thou shall not do
any service unto them. In this clause is forbidden all the outward and
unlawful honor done to God, or to the Gods in the way of Religion, nay rather
in the way of superstition, and diuelishe hallowing of Churches, relics,
holy days, and such like trash and trumperie.

For to serve, is to worship, to reverence, To serve what it (...).
to attribute some majesty and divine authority to that which we do
worship, to have affiaunce in, to burn incense, to offer gifts, and to show
our selves dutifully serviceable to that which we worship. There is no man that
knows not what it is to serve, and what is meant by service in matters of
Religion. We are forbidden therefore to run in Pilgrimage to Idols, yea,
though they be the Images of God him self. We are forbidden to do them any
service, in offering gifts, or attributing unto them any one jot of Gods
preeminence, thereby to bind our selves to maintain and uphold their
unlawful honor, in mingling such superstitions with better points of true
religion. This therefore considered Ideles teach no^.
(since we may not attribute to Images any serviceable honor) I do not see
how we can ascribe to them the office of teaching, admonishing, and exhorting,
which are the offices and benefits of Gods holy spirit and word: For Abacuck
the Prophet, of whose writings Paul did make no small account, has left in
writing words worth remembering. What profits (says he) the image: for the
maker of it has made it an image and a te^cher of lies, though he that made it
trusts therein, when he makes dumb Idols* Woe unto him that s^yth to the
wood, awake, and to the s^n^el (...) stone, arise, Should that teach^ th^^^
Behold, it is covered with gold, and silver, and there is no breath in it.
But the Lord is in his holy temple, let all the earth keep silence before
him. What could be said more plainly and agreeable to the truth? Images
(says he) are mere and very lies. But how can that teach the truth, which
of it self is naught else but a lie. There is no moving, there is no life,
there is no breath in a picture or Image. But the Lord sits in his holy
temple, where he reigns and teaches by inspiration, and the preaching of his
word the sum of godliness, and where he lives for ever in the hearts of
all his Saints and servants. Let therefore all the tongues in the whole
world be stopte of them that go about to maintain and uphold superstitious
Idolatry, against the true and living God.

Now again in the third part of We have no cause to choose haunge Gods.
this commauncement, the Lord does briefly knit up the pithy handling of sundry
things. For first he shows yt men have no just or lawful cause, in turning
from God, either to make them strange Gods, or else to worship God, otherwise
then they ought to do.

I am (says he) the Lord thy God, a strong God. If I be the Lord, then
should thou of duty serve me, honor me, obey me, and worship me, so as
thou do understand that I do, desire to be worshipped and honored. If I be
God, then am I of sufficient ability, to minister to all men what so ever they
lack: What can thou want therefore, that thou may not find in me? why
then should thou turn to strange Gods? Thou haste no cause at all,
undoubtedly, to turn from me. I am, moreover, a strong God, a mighty, yea, an
Almighty God and Lord. Thou have no cause to seek a mightier or welthier
prince then me, by him to be delivered out of my hands, and by his liberality
to be farther enriched, then thou shall be by my good gifts and blessings. For
I am that true and eternal God, the invisible, and Almighty Prince of the
world, the true and only helper and deliverer, the liberal and bountiful
giver of all good gifts or benefits. I am also thy Lord, and thy God.

Those goods of mine are thine. For I am thine: yea, I am thy helper and
deliverer, out of al adversities and afflictions. Thou art mine. I have created
thee. I live in thee, I do preserve thee. Why then should thou turn away
from me, and seek after any strange God what so ever? What need thou any
more hereafter, to hunte after senseless Idols? Thou art the Church and
Temple of God. Doste thou not feel and perceive within thy self, that I do
dwell in thee, and have thine heart in possession? And what I pray thee has
the Temple of God to do with godless Images?

Then also he descends and does God suf^^reth not mate.
very severely, yet notwithstanding justly, threaten extreme and terrible
reuengement. I am (says he) a jealous God. This may be taken two ways very
well, and not amiss. For first the sense may be thus, I will not have thee to
seek any other Gods but me, neither will I have thee admit or receive any
foreign or unlawful worshipping of me.

The cause is, I am a jealous God, envious against my rival, not suffering
mine equal, nor by any means abiding to have a mate. I alone will be loved, I
alone will be worshipped, and that too, not after any other fashion, than I my
self have appointed to be observed. For no man is so ignorant, but that he
knows, how God in the Scripture does by the parable of wedlock,
figuratively set down the assurance and bond, wherein by faith we are bound to
God, God is our husband and bridegroom: we are his wife and chosen spouse. A
chaste and faithful wife, gives ear alone to her husbands voice, him alone
she loves, him alone she does obey, and him excepted she loves no man at al.
Again on the other side, a shameless, faithless, adultresse, and whorish
strumpet, not worthy to be called a wife, seems outwardly to stick and
cleave to her husband, but privily she makes her body common to many men, and
lou^th other more then her husband, and for the most part burns on the^,
being cold enough to him ward. But God is a jealous God, and will be loved,
and worshipped alone, without any partener to rob him thereof. That is
spiritual adultery and whore-hunting, when men do partly love and worship
God, and yet notwithstanding, do therewithal give reverence to strange and
other Gods. Against this faithless and double dealing, all the Prophets cry out
most vehemently, with words that represent a tyrrannous and cruel reuengeme^t.
For of all other sins that is most detestable. I would to God at this day
so many were not persuaded that this kind of honor is the worship that God
makes most account of. Or else otherwise the sense of those words may be thus:
I will not have thee to seek any other Gods but me, I will not have thee
worship me according to thine own inventions. The cause is, I am a icalous
God, that is, I am easy to be provoked, and will not suffer me self, and
mine honor to be rejected, without due punishment for the contempt. And to
this sense he seems to draw where he goes forward, and does at large
expound how he is jealous: for I visit, says he, the fathers iniquity in the
children unto the third and fourth generation of the^ that hate me. God
therefore is a sharp revenger, and a just judge against the^ that follow after
strange Gods, or serve God unlawfully or irreligiously, and also against all
them that swerve from the law of God. For he thundereth out this bitter
punishment, especially against Idolaters, but therewithal inclusiuely he
threateneth it to them, which break the rest of his commandments. For that
which the Lord utters here, is generally spoken, and is of force and effect
against all impiety and unrighteousness of all mankind. But for because Gods
case is far more excellent then man's, they therefore do more hainously offend
which break the first table, then they that sin against the second: and
thereby do deserve a far more grievous pain and heavy punishment.

Now, whereas we see that the Lord How (...) the fathers sins (...) the (...).
says that he will visit, and by inquisition punish the sins of the fathers
in the children, unto the third and fourth generation: we must not by and by
think that God is unjust and punishes another man's fault in afflicting the
innocent, that is, in whipping him that did not offend: as the Jews in
Ezechiel did wickedly tau^t and cavil with God, saying: The Fathers have eaten
sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. But it is not so. For
every man shall bear his own offenses, neither shall the son bear or abye
the fathers sin, nor the father the sons iniquity. This does the most true
God very often and earnestly beat into our heads throughout Ezechiel, and the
whole scripture beside. If therefore the children or childers children shall
abide in the crooked steps of their fathers, and shall, as their fathers did,
do service to Idols, and shall think that they shall be safe and remain
unpunished, because they learned it of their fathers, even as their fathers
also were Idolaters, and yet flourished in wealth and prosperity: then I say,
I will punish the sin of the fathers in the children, that is, I will sharply
revenge the sin, that the children have learned of the fathers, and wherein
they stiffly stand and abide, being encouraged thereunto by their fathers
example and good fortune, although for the very same sin, I did not once touch
their fathers before them. And for that cause is this expressly added, Of them
that hate me. Hereof have we very many and very evident examples, in the books
of Kings. The house of Jeroboam is utterly destroyed, because Jeroboam did
erect in Israel Idolatry and superstition. Immediately after, the whole stock
of King Baasa is clean cut off: and Achabs house is pulled up by the roots.
At length, the Israelites are made slaves to serve the Assyrians. Solomon the
most mighty, welthy, wise, and happy king of Judah, because of his Idolatry
and strange superstition, is of a soudeine, made a wretch of all other. There
is none, unless he never read the holy Scriptures, but does know what happened
to his son Roboam, to Ioram the son of Iosaphat, to Achas, Manasses, Iehoiachim
and Zedechias, because of idolatry, and foreign worshipping of God. Let us
therefore firmly hold and believe that the threatenings of God are true in
effect, and God that is both a severe, and just revenger, and punisher of
Idolaters, and wicked superstitious men, and finally, of all and every wicked
act done by every man. Although God do sundry times seem to wicked men to
slumber, and not to see them, yet notwithstanding, he does awake when he thinks
good, and pays home the wicked for all their offenses done and past. Although
he be long suffering, yet the righteous Lord does not always neglect the godly
and oppressed, neither does he always wink at ungodliness, and let the
wicked be unpunished for ever: But he gives them time to repent in, which who
soever do neglect, they do at length feel the greater pains and sharper
punishment: according to the saying of the Apostle. What do thou despise the
riches of Gods goodness, suffering, and gentleness, not knowing that Gods
goodness calls thee to repentance? But according to thy hardness and heart
that can not repent, thou heapest up to thee self wrath, against the day of
wrath, wherein shall be made manifest the just judgment of God, who shall repay
to every one according to his deeds. etc.

Again, the bountiful Lord promises A most large promise is made to the
godly worshippers of the Lord.
great and large rewards, to them that worship him, and steadfastly persevere
in true godliness, and perfect religion. I am God, says he, showing mercy, or
giving bountifully un to thousands. Here note, that his mercy is greater then
his vengeance. For where he is angry, there he punishes unto the third and
fourth generation: but where he is mercifully liberal, there he is bountiful
unto many thousands. For of his goodness and benefits, there is no measure or
end: and the mercy of God is far above all his works. Here yet again he
adds two things more, To the^ (says he) that love me and keep my
commandments. Here, I say, he requires two things at their hands that are
his. The first is, That they love God, and make account of, and take him to be
their God: which if they do, then shall there no room be left in the godly for
strange or foreign Gods. The second is, that they obey God, and walk in his
commandments: which if they do, then are all Idols and strange worshippings
utterly at an end, then does the Lord by his word, reign in the heart of every
godly man, whom the bountiful Lord does liberally bless, with all kind of
blessings and good gifts. And this clause verily, does especially belong to
this commandment, but inclusiuely also, it is referred to all the rest, as by
the very words of God we may easily gather. Let us hold, and verily think
therefore, that the infinite and vnspeable benefits of God are prepared for
them, that walk in the law of the Lord.

Thus much had I to speak of these two commandments of the first table, which
I can not now again recapitulate, because an hour and an half is already
spent, and for that I hope that I have so orderly proceeded in every point, and
taught every thing so evidently and plainly, that there is nothing which ye
do not very well perceive and understand. Let us now praise the Lord, and
thank him for his goodness, for showing us his ways, and let us pray, that we
walking rightly in them, may at the last, come to his eternal joys. Amen.

Of the third precept of the ten Commandments, and of Swearing.
The third Sermon.
THE third Commandment of the The third commandment of God.
first Table, is thus word for word. Thou shalt not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain. Because the Lord will not let him go unpunished, that
takes the name of the Lord his GOD in vain. In the second Commandment,
the Lord did set down the worship that he would not have, that he misliked of,
and did flatly forbid, to wit, a worldly, earthly, and carnal kind of honor,
a base and vile kind of worship, a service that is directly contrary to the
spirit, nature and majesty of God, that is, to think that God will in shape
resemble a man, or any other creature made of earth or corruptible stuff or
matter, and then again to worship him under those shapes and figures, with
corruptible things that were first ordained, and created for the use and
behoof of men, and not of God. For God is an eternal spirit, which goes all
over and preserves every thing, whom all the most excellent creatures of the
whole world, if they were joined together in one, are not able to resemble, nor
yet to represent the least jot of excellency in the living God. God is so
far from lacking any corruptible things, that he him self supplyeth the
want of all our necessities. It is a mere folly therefore to set up a percher,
a taper, or a smoakie torch before the maker and giver of light. It is a very
toy to offer flesh of beasts to that eternal spirit, who in the Psalms
says: All the beasts of the woods are mine, and the cattle in a thousand
hills, I know all birds upon the mountains, and in my power are all the
beasts of the field, if I be hungry, I need not to tell thee, since the
world is mine, and all that is therein. Now therefore in this third
Commandment, the Lord does very exquisitely, although very briefly, declare
the manner h^w he will be worshipped, that is, in holy reuerencing of his holy
name. The names whereby god is called, are God, Gods Majesty, Gods truth, Gods
power, and Gods justice. Now the charge of this commandment is, not to abuse
the name of God, and not to use it in light and trifling matters: but to
speak, to think and judge honorably, reverently, holily, and purely of God
and godly things. But the pithe and effect almost of the whole, lies herein
that he says, the name of the Lord thy god, to wit, which is thy chief
goodness and felicity, thy creator, thy redeemer, and thy tender father. Now
note that the Lord does not barely forbid to use his name, but he charge not
to use it lightly or in vain, that is, beyond necessary use or our behoof,
and beside the honor and glory of God. Let us see therefore how we ought to
sanctify the Lords name, and how we may devoutly use the name of God, and
last of all, so worship him, as he him self has appointed us to do.

First of all, we have to think of God, as of the chief felicity, and
infinite (...) the (...).
treasure of all good things, who loves us exceedingly with a fatherly
affection, always wishing, and by all means desiring to have us men saved, and
to come to the perfect knowledge of the very truth: whose judgments are true
and just, whose works for their excellency are wonderful, and whose words
are most true, and truth it self. Then must this holy name of God continually
be called upon in prayers, need, and requests. By that alone, we must look
to obtain whatsoever is needful for our bodies or souls. We must never cease
to give thanks to that, for all the good benefits that we do or shall receive.
For what good soever men have and enjoy, that have they not from else where,
than from God the fountain and giver of all. This glory must ever be given to
God. If we be nipped with any adversity, let us not by an by murmur against
Gods good pleasure, and his secret judgments, but rather suffering, and
submitting ourselves under his mighty and fatherly hand, let us say with the
Prophet David: It is good for me Lord that thou haste chastened me. Let not us
appoint God what he shall do, but wholly and always submit our selves to his
good will and holy pleasure. Let us in all things give God the glory, in
praising openly, and plainly professing his name and doctrine before Kings and
Princes, yea, and in sight of all the world, so often as occasion shall be
given, and the glory of God shall seem to require. Let us not be ashamed of God
our father, of his truth and true religion. Let us not be ashamed of Christ our
redeemer, nor yet of his cross. But let us be ashamed of errors, idolatry,
of the world and vanity, of lies and iniquity. Let us holily, reverently, and
devoutly, both speak and think of God, his works, and his word. Let the law
of God be holy to us, let his Gospel be reverend in our eyes, and let the
doctrine of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles be esteemed of us, as that
which came from God him self.

Let us not take the name of the Lord our God into our mouths, unless it be
in a matter of weight. Let us not blaspheme, curse, nor lie in the name of the
Lord: Let us not use, nay, rather abuse the name or word of God in coniuring,
iuggling, or sorcerie. For in these things, the name of God is most of all
abused. Let us precisely and holily keep the oath which we have made by the
name of the living and eternal God. Let us in all things tell truth and lie
not, that when this world that will not see, shall be enforced to see so great
a reverence and devotion in us to the name of our God, it may be compelled
thereby to glorify our father which is in heaven. And this, verily, is the
godly using of the Lords name, and the religion wherein our God is very well
pleased.

Now note by the way, that there are sundry ways, whereby we abuse How the
name of God is abused.
the name of God, and first of all we abuse it as often as our hearts are with
out all reverence to God him self, when we do irreverently, filthily,
wickedly, and blasphemously speak of God, of his judgments, of his word and
of his laws: when we do with scoffing allusions, apply Gods words to light
matters and trifles, by that means turning and drawing the Scriptures into a
profane and dishonest meaning. Moreover, we do disgrace yt name of ye Lord our
God, when we call not upon his name, but turn our selves rather to, I know
not what sort of Gods, to man's skill and succor, to things forbidden, to
Idols, and coniurers, which we fall a doing then especially, when being wrapped
in misery and calamities, either for our sins, or else because God will try
us, we do presently begin to murntur against God, and to accuse his
judgments, hardly absteining from open blasphemy, in grudging to bear the
things, that for our deserts we do worthily suffer. Here unto belongs the
abuse of beastly knaves, which do not stick to use the holy name of God in
obteining their filthy lusts, which they call love, and also the naughtiness
of them, that thereby seek to find and recover the things that are lost, or
else are stolen from them. We do vnhallowe the name of the Lord our God, when
we give not to him all honor and glory. We shall peradventure do some good
deed, there is perhaps in us something worthy to be praised: if we therefore
shall challenge the praise thereof to our selves, or at the least, shall pare
out a piece of that glory for our own share, and give the rest to God, not
referring it al and whole to God the author of all, then do we therein defile
the name of God, which ought alone to be praised for ever and ever.
Furthermore, if we deny the Lord, or blushe at, and be ashamed of his holy
Gospel, because of this wicked world and the naughty men therein: if also we
do spot our selves with a filthy and unclean life, which is to the slander of
Gods name, and the offense of our neighbor, then do we take the Lords name
in vain, yea, we abuse it to his dishonor and reproach. We do abuse the name
of the Lord, if we take a solemn oath in a trifle or matter of no effect, or
if we do not keep and perform the oath yt we have sworn. In our daily talk,
very often, and almost about godless matters, we mind: are wont to call and
take to witness, the dreadful name of God, having learned it of an ill
continuance and custom, or else being stirred up by some evil motion of our
naughty mind: we have an innumerable sort of deep and terrible oaths, as
wounds, blood, cross and Passion of the Lord, heaven, earth, Sacraments,
every Saint in heaven, and all the deuilles of hell. Beside all this, we abuse
the name of God also sundry and diverse ways in telling of lies. The preacher
or teacher of the Church lies, when he cries: Thus says the Lord: whereas
the Lord in deed says nothing so. He makes the name of God a cloak and a
color to hide his deceit, and does beguile poor simple souls. The Magistrate
cries out: All power is of God: and so under the pretense of Gods name, does
his subjects injury in playing the tyrant and not the Magistrate. The common
people deceive one another, under the name of the Lord, in contractes and
bargayning. And the sturdie roge unworthy of alms, will not stick to stand
and make Gods name an idle occupation for to get a penny. But who can reckon
up all the things wherein Gods name is foully abused? we must all therefore have
an eye that we defile not the name of God, but rather bless it and holily
worship it.

For it follows in the words of The punishment of them that abuse Gods ^ame.
the Lord, what punishment abides for them that so disgrace his name, Because
says he, the Lord will not let him go unpunished, that takes his name in
vain. And although this commination of the Lord is very horrible in deed, and
of it self effectual enough to make the godly sort afraid to pollute the
name of God, yet nevertheless, I will add one example or twain of them,
whom the Lord has punished for defiling his name. David cries out, and
says: The unrighteous shall not stand in thy sight O Lord: thou hate them
that work iniquity: thou shall destroy all them that speak lies. But how
much more likely is it, that the Lord will destroy all them that speak
blasphemy, and abuse his holy name? Saul verily because he called not upon
the Lord in his extreme necessity, but asked counsel of the Pythonisse, was
compelled to kill him self with his own hand, after he had seen his people
down right slain by the Phylistines his enemies, and his sons lie dead in
the mids of the people. Ananias lies to the holy Ghost, and defiles the
name of the Lord, and falling down soudainly dead to the ground, down he
goes with shame inoughe to the devil of hell. Sanherib blasphemeth the name
of the eternal God before the walls of Jerusalem, but anon after, he is for
his labor bereaft of his puissant army, and in his own Gods temple, is shot
through by his own sons. Iehoiachim and Zedechias both Kings of Judah, and
blasphemers of Gods name, are taken captives, and slain by Nabuchodonosor King
of Babylon. Achab, Iesebel, and the Priests of Baal are utterly wypte out by
king Iehu, because they under the color of god and godliness, blasphemed the
name of God, and persecuted the true religion. In the. 24. of Leuiticus, he
that blasphemed the name of god, was overwhelmed with stones to death.

And therefore the Emperor Iustiman In Nouellis co^stitu. 77. writing A pain
(...) by (...).
to ye citizens of Constantinople, says: Moreover, because besides unspeakable
lusts, some men lash out cursings and oaths of God, thereby provoking him to
anger, we therefore exhort the^ to abstain from cursings and oaths by his hair
and head, and such other words like unto these. For if reproaches done unto
men, are not left unrevenged, much more is he worthy to be punished, that
stirs God to anger with his villainy. And for such offenses as these, do so
many dearthes, erthquakes, and plagues come unto me^. We therefore admonish
them to abstain from those crimes, for who soever after this admonition of
ours shall be found faulty therein, they shall first show the^ selves unworthy
to be beloved of men, and after that to, suffer such punishment as the law
shall appoint. For we have given in charge to the right honorable the
Lieftenant of our royal city, to apprehend the guilty, and to punish them
extremely: least peradventure at length for such sinners contempt, and such
heinous offenses, not only this city, but also the whole common weal be
justly destroyed by Gods just vengeance. Thus much writes he. Now by this we
may gather, that not the least part of our calamities at these days do happen
unto us, because of our detestable cursings, and horrible blasphemies, which
very few magistrates, or none almost at al, do go about to redress, or
punish as they should do. The name of the living God is blasphemed, with
passing deep and horrible oaths of all sorts, of all kinds, and all ages, so
that I think verily, that from the beginning of the world there never was such
a blasphemous people, as are in this cursed age of ours. And therefore are we
vexed with unspeakable and endless calamities. For God is true, and can not
lie, which says, that they shall not escape fcotfree that take his name in
vain. The me^ of our time do not only take it in vain, but do of malice also
blasphemously defile it. I would to God the Magistrates would more sincerely
set forth the worship of God among the people: or else, if this may not be
obtained at their hands, yet then at least, that they would be no worse nor
godless then Caiphas, who when he heard (as he thought) blasphemy against
the name of God, did rent his clothes, and cry that the blasphemer was worthy
to dye. For surely, unless our Christian Magistrates do become more sharp
and severe against blaspheming villains, I do not see but that they must
needs be a great deal worse then the wicked knave Caiphas. Undoubtedly, the
Lord is true (as every one of you must severally think within your selves) and
he verily will punish in all men the defiling of his name, but much more the
malicious blaspheming of the same.

This very matter and place do now require, that I also speak Of an oath
somewhat here of taking an oath, or swearing, which is done by calling and
taking to witness of Gods name. Now in the handling of this matter, many
things are to be thought of and considered. For first of al I see yt some there
are, which doubt whether it be be lawful to take an oath or no: because
Whether it be lawful to swear.
in Matthew, the Lord has said: Ye have heard what was said of old, Thou shall
not forswear thee self, but shall perform thine oaths unto the Lord, but I
say unto you, swear not at all. etc. But the Lords mind in Matthewe, was not
to take clean away the true and ancient law, but to interpret it, and to
bring it to a saunder sense, because it was before corrupted and marred by
diverse forged and counterfaite gloses of the Pharisees. For the people being
taught by them, had evermore an eye to keep their mouths from perjury, but
touching superfluous, unprofitable and needless oaths, they had no care at
all, not thinking that it was amiss, to swear by Heaven and by Earth:
wherefore the Lord expounding his fathers law, says: That all oaths
generally are forbidden, to wit, those wherein the name of the Lord is taken
in vain, and whereby we swear when there is no need at all. In the mean
while, he neither condemned nor yet took clean away the solemn and lawful
oath. Now there is great difference betwixt a solemn oath, and our daily oaths,
which are nothing else but deep swearings, not only needelesse, but also
hurtful. But a solemn oath is both profitable and needful. The law of God
and words of Christ, do not forbid things profitable and needful, and
therefore they condemn not a solemn and lawful oath. Yea in the law too, is
permitted a solemn oath, where there is forbiode^ alone, the unprofitable
using of the Lords name. And Christ our lord came not to break the law, but
to fulfill the law. And therefore he in Saint Matthewe did not condemn an
oath: unless a man should go about to prove, that the Son taught a
doctrine clean contrary to the doctrine of his heavenly father, which is a
blasphemy against the father and the son, not to be suffered. Moreover, God
him self also swears, which undoubtedly he would not do, if an oath could
not be taken without any sin. For after a long exposition of the law, he
says: Be ye holy, for I am holy, be ye perfect, even as your heavenly father
is perfect. We read also, that the holiest men of both the Testamentes, by
calling and taking to witness the name of God in matters of weight, did
swear, and that they swear without any sin. An oath therefore in the law of
Christ is not forbidden, and it is lawful for a Christian man both to exact,
and also to take an oath. I rather verily do not see how that man is worthy to
be called a Christian, which being lawfully required to swear, will seem to
refuse it. But of this I have more fully disputed in another place against ye
Anabaptists. Secondarily, we have to consider for what causes we ought to
swear. In many common weals, it is an For what causes we ought to swear.
usual and received custom to take an oath upon every light occasion, and for
that cause, we see that an oath is lightly set by, and very little esteemed.
For what is this, but to take the name of God in vain? Let Magistrates
therefore learn and know that an oath ought not to be required, but in earnest
affairs, as when it stands for the glory of God, for the safety of our
neighbor, and for the public weal We must mark therefore, when and why the
people of God have sworn in the scriptures. Abraham swear when he made yt
league and confederacy with Abimelech. The people of God does very often
swear under their kings, in making a covenant with God, for ye keeping of true
religion. They of old time did clear themselves of heinous suspicions by
taking of an oath. In Exodus we read. If any man shall give to his neighbor a
beast to keep, and it shall dye, or be stoalne away, no man seeing it, then
shall an oath by the Lord go betwixt them twain, that he has not laid his
hand on his neighbors thing: which (...) owner of the thing shall take and the
other shall not restore it. For Paul in the 6. to the Hebrews, says: Men
verily swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation, is to them an end
of all strife. To this end therefore let Magistrates apply the use of an oath,
and let them have an especial regard, in giving an oath to do it reverently:
let the peers of the people keep inuiolably that which they swear, and let
them take heed, that they do not rashly require an oath of light headed
fellows, let the^ not compare any thing, or think any thing to be equal to
an oath, but let them reverently, and last of all, have their recourse to that,
as to the utmost remedy to find out the truth, and therewithal, let them use
sharp punishment against perjured persons. But woe to the peoples princes, if
through their wicked negligence, an oath be not esteemed. For he, without
doubt, will punish them sharply for it, who says: By cause I will not suffer
him to go unpunished, that takes the Lords name in vain.

Thirdly, I will tell you what an oath is, and what it is to swears. An What an
^^the is.
oath is the calling, or taking to witness of Gods name, to confirm the truth
of that we say. There is difference betwixt an oath, and that deep kind of
swearing, whereby God is blasphemed and torn in pieces. There is difference
too, betwirt an oath and those bitter speeches, where with we use to curse and
ban our neighbors. They are not worthy doubtless to be called oaths. But for
because this word Iuramentum is over largely used for any hynde of oath, as
well in the worse as better part, therefore the godly and lawful oaths, are
wisely called by the name of Iusiurandu^. For by (...) which signifies ye law
we are admonished that yt kind of oath is l^wf^ll and righteous. Now this
taking of Gods name to witness, has joined to it a calling on, and a vowing
our selves to Gods curse and vengeance. For this is the manner of an oath and
order of swearing, I will say or do ^t truly, in deed, and without deceit, so
God may help me. Therefore we put our selves in danger of Gods wrath and
vengeance, unless we do truly and in deed, both speak and do the thing,
that we promised to do or speak. A very deep and solemn promise making is
this, then the which verily there is not a greater to be found in the world.
Here also must be considered the circumstances and ceremonies Circ^^stances
ceremonies is swear^^^
in swearing. For our auncesters of old, were wont to lift their hand up unto
heaven, and to swear by the name of the Lord. The Lord our God dwells in
heaven. We therefore do manifestly declare, that as in the judges eyes we lift
our hand to heaven, even so in our minds we do ascend and swear in the
presence and sight of God, yea, we give our hand, and plight our faith to God
there, in taking an oath by the name of God. This ceremony used Abraham the
singular friend of God, and father of the faithful, when he was wont to
swear. I need not therefore to proceed any further, for to declare whether How
(...) ought (...) swear
we ought to swear by ye name of god alone, or else by ye names of saints, or
else by laying ye hand upon the holy Gospel? For it is manifest yt the faithful
must swear by the only eternal and most high god. Touching which thing we have
most evident precepts, commanding us to swear by the name of the Lord, and
again, forbidding us to swear by ye names of strange Gods. Of the first sort
are these. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, thou shalt serve him, and
swear by his name. Deuteronomy. 6. and. 10. Chapter. Also the Lord him self in Esaie,
says: To me shall every knee bend, and by me shall every tongue swear. And
again, in the. 65. chapter the same Prophet says: He that will bless him self,
shall bless in the lord, and he that will swear, shall swear by the true and
very God. Of the latter sort too, are these testimonies of the holy Scriptures,
Exodus 23. All that I have said keep ye, and do ye not once so much as
think of the names of strange Gods, neither let them be heard out of your
mouth. And Iosue in the. 23. chapter, says: When ye shall come in among these
nations, see that ye swear not by the name of their Gods, and look that ye
neither worship nor yet bow down unto them. In the. 5. of Jeremy the Lord
says. Thy sons have forsaken me, and sworn by other Gods which are no Gods
in deed: I have filled them, and they have gone a whoreing. etc. Moreover the
Prophet Sophonie brings in the Lord speaking and saying: I will cut off
those that worship and swear by the Lord, and swear by Malchom, that is, by
their king and defender. And no marvel though he do threaten destruction, to
them that swear by the names of creatures. For an oath is An oath is ^he
special honor ^one to God.
the chief and especial honor done to God, which therefore can not be
divided to other. For we swear by the highest, whom we believe to be the
chiefest goodness, the giver of all good things, and the punishing revenger of
every evil deed. But and if we swear by the names of other Gods, then verily
shall we make them equal to God him self, and attribute to them the honor
due to him. And for this cause the blessed martyr of Christ Polycarpus, chose
rather the flames of fire, than to swear by the power and estate of Caesar.
The story is to be seen in the fourth book and fiftene chapter of Eusebius.

Fourthly we have to consider how The conditions of an holy oathe.
we ought to swear, and what the conditions of a just, a lawful and an honest
oath are. Jeremy therefore says: Thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in
truth, in judgment, and righteousness. And the nations shall bless them
selves in him, and in him shall they glory. There are therefore four
conditions, of a just and a lawful oath. The first is, Thou shalt swear, The
Lord lives. Here now again is repeated that which has so many times been
beaten into our heads, that we ought to swear by the name of the living God.
The pattern of our ancestors oath was this, The Lord lives, as it is evident
by the writings of the Prophets. Let us not swear therefore by any other but
by God. The second condition is, Thou shall swear in truth. So then, it is
required, that not only the tongue, but also the mind should swear, least
happily we say, The tongue in deed did swear, but the mind swear not at all. Let
us be true and faithful therefore, without deceit or guile, let us not lie, nor
go about with subtlety to shifte off the oath that once we have made. We
Germans express this well when we say, On all gfard. Or else, On gfard. That
is, I will not use any double dealing, but will simply and in good faith
perform that I promise. There is an excellent pattern of a false and a
deceitful oath in Auli Gellij lib. noct. At. 7. cap. 18. The third condition
is, Thou shall swear in, or with judgment, that is, advisedly, with great
discretion, not rashly, nor lightly, but with consideration of every thing and
circumstaunce, in great necessity, and cases of public commodity. The
fourth condition is, thou shalt swear in justice, or righteousness, least
peradventure our oath be against right and equity, that is, least we sin
against righteousness or justice, which attributes that which is theirs
both to God and man, so that our oath do not directly tend against the love
of God and our neighbor. Here (dearly beloved) ye have heard me express in
few words (which God him self has also taught us) how we must swear, of what
sort and fashion our lawful and allowable oaths ought to be, and under what
conditions they are contained. But now if we shall swear against these
conditions appointed us by God, then shall our oaths and swearings be
altogether unlawful: and furthermore, if we shall go about to perform those
unlawful and vnalowable oaths, then shall we therwithall purchase and inincurre
the heavy wrath of the revenging Lord.

Now in these days it is usually of custom demanded, whether we Whether
wicked o^thes must be perfou^med.
ought to keep or perform wicked or ungodly, unjust or evil vows, or oaths:
as if for example, thy oath or vow should directly tend against God, against
true religion, against the word of God, or the health of thy neighbor?

I will here allege and rehearse the usual and accustomed answer, which
notwithstanding, is very true, and grounded upon examples of holy S^riptures,
as that that squareth not from the truth the narrow breadth of one small
hair. The answer therefore is this: if any man shall swear against the
faith and charity, so that the keeping of his oath may t^^d to the worse,
then it is better for him to change his oath, then to fulfill it. Whereupon
Saint Ambrose says, It is sometime contrary to a man's It is bent to (...) an
ill (...)
duty to perform the oath, that he has promised, as Herod did. Isidore also
says, In evil promises break thine oath, in a naughty vow change thy
purpose. The thing thou haste unadvisedly vowed, do not perform. The promise
is wicked that is finished with mischief. And again, That oath must not be
kept, whereby any evil is unawarely promised. As if for example, one should
give his faith to an adultresse, to abide in naughtiness with her for ever:
undoubtedly, it is more tolerable, not to keep promise, then to remain in
whordome still. Beda moreover says: If it shall happen that we at unawares shall
with an oath promise any thing, and that the keeping of that oath shall be the
cause of further evil, then let us think it best upon better advice to
change our oath without hurt to our conscience: and that it is better upon
such a necessity for us to be forsworn, then for avoiding of perjury, to
fall into another sin ten times worse then that. David swear by God, that
he would kill the foolish fellow Naball, but at the first intercession that
his wife Abigail wiser then him self did make, he ceased to threaten him,
he sheathed his sword again, and did not find him self any whit grieved
for breaking his hasty oath.

Augustine also says, Whereas David did not by sheading of blood perform
his promise bound with an oath, therein his godliness was the greater. David
swear rashly, but upon better and godly advice, he performed not the thing he
had sworn. By this and the like it is declared that many oaths are not to be
observed. Now he that swears so, does sin: but in changing his oath, he
does very well. He that changes not such an oath, committh a double sin,
first for swearing as he ought not, and then for doing that he should not. Thus
much hitherto have I rehearsed of other men's words, which al men verily
acknowledge to be true, and so in deed. Now by this ye do easily understand
(dearly beloved) what ye have to think of those monastical vows, and
Priests oaths, which promise chastity, (no farther Monastial vows.
ywis by their leave, than man's frail weakness will suffer them.) For it is
better, says the Apostle, to marry the^ to burn. And more commendable is it,
not to perform those foolish, hurtful, and vnpure promises, that drive them
perforce to filthy uncleanness, then under the color of keeping an oath
truly, to lie and to live unchastly God wot.

Fifthly and lastly, I have briefly to put you in mind, that ye endeavor ^ow
reli^iously we ^ught to ^epe our ^athes.
your selves, by all the means ye may, devoutly to keep that which ye swear:
and therewithal in few words, to let you understand what reward is
prepared for them, that do religiously and holily keep and observe the holy
oath once solemnly taken. If we love God, if we desire to sanctify his name,
if we take the true God for the very true God, and for our God, if we will have
him to be gentle and merciful to us ward, and to be our present deliverer and
ayder at all assayes, then will we have a most diligent care to swear with
fear devoutly, and holily to keep and perform the oath that we devoutly
make. But unless we do this, then terrible threatenings and sharp reuengement
of Gods just judgment, are thundered from heaven against us transgressors. The
very heathens shall rise up and condemn us in the day of judgment. For the
Saguntines, the Numantines, and they of Petilia chose rather to die with fire
and famine, then to break or violate their promise once bound with an oath.
Moreover, the laws of all wise and civil Princes and people, do adiudge
perjured persons to dye the death. How great offenses, how great corruptions,
how great and many mischiefs, I pray you, do rise through periuries? They
entangle, trouble, disgrace, mar and overthrow the estates both civil and
Ecclesiastical. Who so ever therefore does love the common weal and safegarde
of his country: who so ever does love the Church and good estate thereof, he
will above all things have an especial regard to keep religiously the promise
of his oath. Now to those that holily A large reward promised to such as
keep there Oaths.
do keep their oaths, the Lord does promise a large reward. For Jeremy
says: And the nations shall bless themselves in him, and in him shall they
glory. As if he should say, If the people of Judah shall swear holily and keep
their oaths, then will the Lord pour out upon them so great felicity and
abou^dant plenty of al good things that when as hereafter one shall bless or
wish well to another, he shall say, The Lord show thee his blessing, as of
old he did to the Jews. And who socuer shall praise another, he shall say:
That he is like to the Israelites. It is therefore assuredly certain, that
they shall be enriched with all good things, and worthy of all manner praise,
who so ever shall inui^lably keep their oaths and promyses.

Let us endeavor our selves my br^th^^n thren I beseech you, to sanctify the
Lords name, and to add to this third commandment your earnest and continual
prayers, saying as our Lord Jesus has taught us, O heavenly father, hallowed
be thy name, or let thy name be holily worshipped. To him be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

Of the fourth precept of the first table, that is, of the order and keeping of
the Sabbath day.
The fourth Sermon.
THE fourth Commandment of the The 4. precept.
first table, is word for word as follows. Remember that thou keep holy the
Sabbath day. Six days thou shall labor and do al thy works, but on the
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in which thou shall not do any
manner of work, neither thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man
servant, nor thy maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger which is
within thy gates. Because in six days the Lord made heaven, and earth, the
sea and all that is therein, and rested the seventh day, Therefore the Lord
blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

The order which the Lord uses The order of the Lord his commandments.
in giving these commandments, is natural and very excellent. In the first
precept, the Lord did teach us faith and love to God ward. In the second, he
removed from us Idols, and all foreign kind of worship. In the third, he
began to instruct us in the true and lawful worship of GOD: which worship
stands in the sanctifying of his holy name, for us to call thereon, and
holily and freely to praise it, and to think and speak of it as religiously
as he shall give us grace.

The fourth Commandment teaches us also the worship due to God, and the
hallowing of his holy name, but yet it bends somewhat to the outward honor,
although nevertheless, it frames to the inward religion. For the Sabbath does
belong both to the inward and outward service of God. Let us see therefore what
we The Sabbath.
have to think, that the Sabbath is, how far forth the use thereof
extends, and after what sort we have to worship our God, in observing the
sabbath. Sabbath does signify rest and ceassing from servile work. And this
here I think worthy to be noted, that the Lord says not simply, Sanctify the
Sabbath, but, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day: meaning thereby,
that the Sabbath was of old ordained, and given first of all, to the ancient
fathers, and the^ again renewed by the Lord, and beaten into the memory of
the people of Israel. But the sum of the whole Commandment is, Keep holy
the Sabbath day. This sum does the Lord by and by more largely amplify, by
reckoning up the the very days, and particular rehearsing of the whole
household, to whom the keeping of the Sabbath is given in charge.

The Sabbath it self has sundry significations. For first of all the
scripture The Sabbath is spiritual.
makes mention of a certain spiritual and continual Sabbath. In this
Sabbath we rest from servile work, in absteining from sin, and doing our
best, not to have our own will found in our selves, or to work our own
works, but in ceassing from these, to suffer God to work in us, and wholly to
submit our bodies to the government of his good spirit. After this Sabbath
follows that eternal Sabbath and everlasting rest, of which Esaie in his. 58.
and. 66. Chapters, speaks very much, and Paul also in the fourth to the
Hebrews. But God is truly worshipped, when we ceassing from evil, and obeying
Gods holy spirit, do exercise our selves in the study of good works. At this
time I have no leisure, neither do I think yt it is greatly profitable for me
to reason as largely, or as exquisitely as I could, of the allegorical
Sabbath, or spiritual rest. Let us rather (my brethren) in these our mortal
bodies, do our endeavor with an unwearied good will of holiness, to sanctify
the Sabbath, that pleases the Lord so well.

Secondarily, the Sabbath is the The Sab^oth is the ^utward ^^stituti^n of
re^^gion.
outward institution of our religion. For it pleased the Lord in this
commandment, to teach us an outward religion and kind of worship, wherein he
would have us all to be exercised. Now for because the worshipping of God ca^
not be without a time: Therefore has the Lord appointed a certain time
wherein we should abstain from outward or bodilye works, but so yet that we
should have leisure to atte^d upon our spiritual business. For, for that cause
is the outward rest commanded, that the spiritual work should not be
hindered by the bodily business. Moreover, that spiritual labor among our
fathers, was chiefly spent about four things, to wit, about public reading
and expounding of the scriptures, and so consequently, about the hearing of the
same, about public prayers and common petitions, about sacrifices, or the
administration of the sacraments, and lastly, about the gathering of every man's
benevolence. In these consisted the outward religion of the Sabbath. For the
people kept holy day, and met together in holy assemblies: where the Prophets
read to the^ the word of the Lord, expounding it, and instructing the hearers
in the true religion. Then did the faithful jointly make their common prayers,
and supplications, for all things necessary for their behoof. They praised
the name of the Lord, and gave him thanks for all his good benefits bestowed
upon them. Furthermore, they did offer sacrifices as the Lord commanded them,
celebrating the mysteries and sacraments of Christ their redeemer, and keeping
their faith exercised and in ure, they were joined in one with these
sacraments, and also warned of their duty, which is to offer them selves a
lively sacrifice to the Lord their God. Lastly, they did in the congregation
liberally bestow the gifts of their good will, to the use of the Church. They
gathered every man's benevolence, therewith to supply the Churches necessity,
to maintain the ministers, and to relieve the poor and needy. These were the
holy works of God, which while they (having their hearts instructed in faith
and love) did fulfill, they did therein rightly sanctify the Sabbath, and the
name of the Lord: that is, they did on the sabbath those kind works, which do
both sanctify the name of God, become his worshippers, and also are the works
in deed that are holy and pleasing in the sight of God. If any man require a
substanciall and evident example of the Sabbath or holy day, thus holily
celebrated, he shall find it in the eight Chapter of the book of Nehemias.
For there the Priests do read and expound the word of God, they praise the
name of the lord, they pray with the people, they offer sacrifice, they show
their liberality, and do in all points behave them selves holily and devoutly
as they should.

Now least any peradventure might make this objection and say, Ease bree ^^ere
is (...) to about in.
death vice. Or else, I must labor with my hands to get my living, least I die
with hunger, and my family perish: he answers, The Lord allows thee
time sufficient for thy labor, for thee to work in to get a living for thy
self and thy household. For six days thou may work, but the seventh day
does the Lord challenge and require to be consecrated to him and his holy rest.
Every week has seven days: But of those seven the Lord requires but one for
him self: Who then can rightly complain, I beseech you, or say, that he has
injury done unto him? More time is allowed to work in, the^ to keep holy the
Sabbath. And he that requires to have this sabbath kept, is God ye maker, ye
father and Lord of al mankind Furthermore, the Lord does precisely command and
give a charge to plant, ^he mais^^^ of the (...) must teach (...) his fa^^lie
the (...) the Sab^^th day.
and bring in this holy rest, this discipline and outward worship, into the
whole family of every several house. Whereby we gather, what the duty of a
good householder is, to wit, to have a care to see all his family keep holy
the sabbath day, that is, to do on the sabbath day those good works, which I
have before rehearsed. And for because the Lord does know that man's natural
disposition is, where it has the maistrie, there for the most part to rule
and reign over haufily and too too Prince like: therefore, least peradventure
the fathers or masters should deal too hardly or rigorously with their
households, or hinder them in observing of the sabbath, he does in express
words and exquisite steps of enumeration, command them to allow their
family, and every one in their family a resting time, to accomplish his holy
service. He does not exempt or except so much as the stranger. He will not
suffer nor allow among them the example of such dulheads as say: Let faith and
religion be free to all, let no man be compelled to any religion. For he
commands to bind the stranger within the gates of Gods people, that is, the
stranger that dwells in their jurisdiction, to the holy observing of the
sabbath day. Now this ease or rest Ease, or rest.
is not commanded in respect of it self, (for Idleness always has been found
fault withal) but it is ordained for the aforesaid especial causes. Gods
pleasure is, that there should be a place and time reserved for religion:
which time and place are not open to them that are busy about bodily and out
ward works. He is not conversant in the congregation, he hears not the word
of God, he prays not with the church, neither is he partaker of the
Sacraments, which at his masters commandment takes a journey, or in the
market sells his wares, or in the barn does threshe or winnowe his corn, or
in ye field does hedge or ditch, or does stand at home beating the anuile, or
else sits still sowinge shoes or hosen. Faith therefore and religion bid
thee to give rest to thy servants and family, yea, they command thee to
egg and compel them, if they be slow to the holy and profitable work of the
Lord. Moreover, the Lords mind is, that they which labor should also refresh
and recreate them selves.

For things that lack a resting time, can never long endure.

Wherefore the bountiful Lord, whose mind is to preserve his creatures, does
teach a way to keep them, and does diligently provide, that his creatures be
not too much afflicted, by the hard handling or covetousness of their owners.
Moses in Deuterenomie adds the pitiful affection of mercy, saying:
Remember that once thou thee self wast a servant in the land of Egypt.
Charity therefore and civil humanity do crave a measure to be kept, so that we
do not with endless labors, ouerlade and weary our household servants.
Moreover, it is manifest, that the goodman of the house by planting godliness
in his family, does not a little advance and set forward his private profit,
and own commodity. For wicked servants are for the most part pickers, and
deceitful, whereas on the other side ye godly, are faithful, whom in his
absence he may trust to govern his house. In the reckoning up of ye household
also is mention made of beasts and cattle, which is done, not so much
because their owner is a man, and ought therefore to use them remissely and
moderately, as for because beasies can not be labored, without the working hand
of men to guide them. So then men are drawn from the solemnising of ye sabbath
day by helping their cattle: wherefore to ye intent that they should not be
drawn aside, we are here precisely commanded to allow our cattle that
resting time.

Last of all, yt Lord does add his own The Lo^^ did ke^p the Sabbath day.
example, whereby he teaches us to keep holy the sabbath day. Because (says
he) in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in
them is, and rested the seventh day. Therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day
and hallowed it. The Lord our God wrought six days, in creating heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and the seventh day he rested, and
ordained that to be an appointed time for us to rest in. On the seventh day, we
must think of the works that God did in the six days, the children of God
must call to remembrance what and how great benefits they have received yt
whole week, for which they must thank God, for which they must praise God,
and by which they must learn God. We must then dedicate to him our whole body
and soul, we must consecrate to him all our words and our deeds. As that day ye
Lord did rest from creating, but he ceasied not still to preserve: so we upon
that day must rest from handie and bodily works, but we must not cease from yt
works of well doing and worshipping of god. Furthermore, yt heavenly rest was
no prejudice at al to ye things created: neither shall yt holy day or sabbath
spent in gods service be any let or hindera^ce to our affairs or business. For
ye Lord The Lord blessed the Sabbath day.
blessed the sabbath day, and therefore shall he bless thee, and thy house, al
thy affairs and business, if he shall see thee to have a care to sanctify his
sabbath, yt is, to do those works which he has commanded to be don on ye
sabbath day. They therefore do err from ye truth, as far as heaven is wide,
whosoever do despise the religion and holy rest of the sabbath day, calling it
an idle case, and do labor on the sabbath day, as they do on working days,
under the pretense of care for their family and necessities sake.

For all these things must we (...).
apply to our selves, and our churches. It is most sure, that to Christians the
spiritual sabbath is given in charge, especially and above all things. Neither
is it to be doubted, but that the good Lords will is, that even in our
Churches at this day, as well as of the Jews of old, there should be kept
and appointed order in all things but especially in the exercising of outward
religion. We know that the sabbath is ceremonial, so far forth as it is
joined to sacrifices and other Jewish ceremonies, and so far forth as it is
tied to a certain time: but in respect that on the sabbath day, religion and
true godliness are exercised and published, that a just and seemly order is
kept in the Church, and that the love of our neighbor is thereby preserved,
therein I say it is perpetual and not ceremonial. Even at this day verily we
must ease and bear with our family, and even at this day we must instruct our
family, in the true religion and fear of God. Christ our Lord did no where
scatter abroad the holy congregations, but did as much as he could, gather them
together. Now, as there ought to be an appointed place, so likewise must
there be a prescribed time for the outward exercise of religion, and so
consequently an holy rest. They of The Sun^^y.
the primitive Church therefore did change the Sabbath day, least
peradventure, they should have seemed to have imitated the Jews, and still to
have retained their order and ceremonies: and made their assemblies and holy
restings to be on the first day of Sabbothes, which John calls Sunday, or
the Lords day, because of the Lords glorious resurrection upon that day. And
although we do not in any part of the Apostles writings, find any mention
made that this sunday, was commanded us to be kept holy, yet for because in
this fourth precept of the first table, we are commanded to have a care of
religion, and the exercising of outward godliness, it would be against al
godliness and Christian charity, if we should deny to sanctify the Sunday:
especially, since the outward worship of god can not consist without an
appointed time and space of holy rest. I suppose also, that we ought to think
the same of those few feasts and holy days, which we keep holy to Christ
our Lord, in memory of his Nativity or Christ^^^ day, New-yeares (...) Good
Friday, East^^ day, As^^^sion day, (...) day.
Incarnation, of his Circumcision, of his Passion, of the Resurrection and
Ascension of Jesus Christ our Lord into heaven, and of his sending of the
holy Ghost upon his Disciples. For Christian liberty is not a licentious
power, and dissoluing of godly Ecclesiastical ordinances, which advance and
set forward the glory of God and love of our neighbor. But for because the
Lord will have holy days to be solemnized and kept to him self alone, I do
not therefore like of the festival days, that are held in honor of any
creatures. This glory and worship is due to God alone. Paul says: I would not
that any man should judge you in part of an holy day or of the Sabbothes,
which are a shadow of things to come. And again, Ye observe days, and
months, and years, and times, I fear least I have labored in you in vain.
And therefore we at this day, that are in the Church of Christ, have nothing
to do with the Jewish observation, we have only to wish and endeavor to have
the Christian observation and exercise of Christian religion, to be freely kept
and observed.

And yet as the hallowing of the The sanc^^fication of the christian Sabbath.
Jewish sabbath, so also the sanctifying or exercise of our Sunday, must be
spent and occupied about four things, which ought to be found in the holy
congregation of Christians, if their Sunday be truly sanctified and kept holy
as it should be. First let all the godly Saints assemble them selves together
in the congregation. Let there, in that congregation so assembled, be preached
the word of God, let the Gospel there be read, that the hearers may learn
thereby what they have to think of God, what the duty and office is, of them
that worship God, and how they ought to sanctify the name of the Lord. Then
let there in that congregation be made prayers, and supplications, for all the
necessities of all people. Let the Lord be praised for his goodness, and
thanked for his inestimable benefits which he daily bestows. Then if time,
occasion, and custom of the Church do so require, let the sacraments of the
Church, be religiously ministered. For nothing is more required in this fourth
commandment, than that we should holily observe, and devoutly exercise the
Sacraments: and holy, lawful, profitable, and necessary rites and ceremonies
of the Church. Last of all, let entyre humanity and liberality, have a place
in the Saints assembly, let all learn to give alms privately, and relieve the
poor daily, and to do it frankly and openly, so often as opporunitie of time
and causes of need shall so require. And these are the duties wherein the
Lords sabbath is kept holy even in the church of Christians, and so much the
rather, if to these be added an earnest good will, to do no evil all the day long.

This discipline now must be brought (...) office
in and established by every householder of every householder.
in all our several houses, with as great diligence as it was with the Jews.
Touching which thing, I have nothing to say here, since I have before so
plainly handled this point, as that ye perceive that it agrees even to the
Church of us that are Christians. This one thing I add more, that it is the
duty of a Christian magistrate, or at leastwise of a good householder, to
compel to amendment the brekers and contemners of Gods sabbath and worship.
The peers of Israel, and all the people of God, did Nume. 15.
stone to death (as the Lord commanded them) the man that disobediently did
gather sticks on the sabbath day. Why then should it not be lawful for a
Christian Magistrate to punish by bodily imprisonment, by loss of goods, or
by death, the despisers of religion, of the true and lawful worship done to
God, and of the sabbath day? verily, though the foolish and indiscreet
Magistrate, in this corrupted age do slackly look to his office and duty,
yet notwithstanding, let every householder do his endeavor to keep his
several family, from that ungodly naughtiness: let him punish them of his
household, by such means as he lawfully may. For if any one householder dwell
among Idolaters, which neither have, nor yet desire, to have or frequente the
Christian or lawful congregations, the^ may he in his own several house,
gather a peculiar assembly to praise the Lord, as it is manifest that Lot did
among the Sodomites, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the land of Chana^n, and in
Egypt. But it is a heinous sin and a detestable schism, if the congregation
be assembled, either in cities or villages, for thee then to seek out bywayes,
to hide thy self and not to come there, but the abu^^s ^f the ^^^^^th day.
to contemn ye church of God and asse^blie of saints: as ye Anabaptists have
taken a use to do. Here therefore I have to reckon up the abuses of the sabbath
day, or yt sins committed against this commandment. They transgress this
commandment, yt cease not from evil works, but abuse ye sabboths rest, to the
provoking of fleshly pleasures. For they keep the sabbath to God, but work to
ye devil, in dicing, in drinking in dancing, and feeding their humors with the
vanities of this world, whereby we are not only drawn from ye company of ye
holy congregation, but do also defile our bodies, which we ought rather to
sanctify and keep holy. They sin against this precept, which either
exercise any handie occupation on the sabbath day, or else lie wrapped in bed and
fast a sleep till the day be almost spent, not once thinking to make one of
Gods congregation. They offend in this precept, that awe their servants to
work, and by appointing them to other business, do draw them from the
worship of God, preferring other stinking things, before the honor due to
God. And they above all other offend herein, which do not only, not keep holy
the sabbath day them selves, but do also with their ungodly scoffs and evil
examples, cause other to despise and set light by religion: when they do
disdain and mock at the holy rites and ceremonies, at the ministry,
ministers, sacred Churches, and godly exercises. And herein too, do both the
goodmen and goodwiues offend, if they be slack in their own houses to call
upon, and to see their families keep holy the sabbath day. Who so ever do
contemn the holiness of the sabbath day, they give a flat and evident
testimony of their ungodliness, and light regard of Gods mighty power.
Furthermore, the Promises and thre^^nings added to the Sabbath day.
keeping or despising of the sabbath, does always carry with it, either ample
rewards, or terrible threats. For the proof whereof, I will recite unto you
(dearly beloved) the words of Jeremy in his. 17. cha. Thus has the Lord
said unto me, says he, Go and stand under the gate of the sons of the
people, through which the kings of Judah go in and out, and under all the gates
of Jerusalem, and say unto them, Take heed for your lives that ye carry no
burden upon you on the Sabbath day, to bring it through the gates of
Jerusalem, and that ye bear no burden out of your houses on the Sabbath day,
look that ye do no labor therein, but keep holy the Sabbath day, as I
commanded your fathers. Howbeit they obeyed me not, neither hearkened they unto
me, but were obstinate and stubborn, and would not receive my correction.
Nevertheless, if ye will hear me, says the Lord, and bear no burden through
this gate upon the Sabbath, but hallow the sabbath, so that ye do no work
therein: then shall there go through the gates of this city, Kings and Princes,
that shall sit upon the throne of David, they shall be carried upon chariots,
and ride upon horses, both they and their Princes: there shall come men from
the cities of Judah, and the land of Benjamin which shall bring sacrifices and
shall offer incense and thanksgiving, in the house of the Lord. But if ye will
not be obedient unto me to hallowe the sabbath, so that ye will bear your
burdens through the gates upon the sabbath day, the^ will I set fire upon the
gates of Jerusalem, which shall burn up the great houses thereof, and shall not
be quenched. Very justly therefore did ye devout Princes Leo and Anthemius, The
Emperour^ ^aw for ^he kee^ing of ^he Sab^oth.
writing to Arsemius their Lieftenant in these words give charge. That the holy
days ordained in honor of the high Gods majesty, should not be spent in any
voluptuous pleasures, nor be unhallowed with troublesome exactions. We
therefore do decree and ordein, that the Lords day or sunday, as it has always
ben accounted well of, so it shall still be had in estimation, so that upon that
day no office of the law shall be executed, no man shall be summoned, no man
arested for suretiship, no man attached, no pleading shall be heard, nor any
judgment pronounced. etc. And by and by after again, Neither do we in giving
this rest of the holy day, suffer any man to wallow in any kind of wanton
pleasures at al. For on that day stage plays are not admitted, nor fencers
prises, nor bear baitings: yea to, and if it happen that the solemnising of
our birth day fall upon the Sunday, then shall it be diferred til the next day
after. And we have determined, that he shall sustein the loss of his dignity,
and have his patrimony confiscate, whosoever shall on the Sabbath day, be
present at any sight or play, or what sommoner soever of any judge whatsoever,
shall under the pretense of any business, either public or private, do any
thing to infringe the statutes in this law enacted And yet nevertheless, they
that are Christians, do not forget the words of ^^e Sab^^^^ made (...) and
(...) man (...) ^he ^^^both.
Christ, in the Gospel where he says: The sabbath was made for man, and not
man for the sabbath, and that the son of man too, is Lord of the sabbath.
The godly do very well know, that God ordained the sabbath, for the
preservation, and not for the destruction of mankind, and that therefore he does
dispense with us for the sabbath, as often as any urgent necessity, or saving
of a man shall seem to require it. Touching which matter, our Savior Christ
him self has fully satisfied the faithful, in ye. 12. of Matthew, and ye. 6.
and. 13. chap. after S. Luke. In such things verily Christians may use their
liberty, to occupy them selves in, on ye sabbath day. Since the priests and
Levites are held excused, which do in the temple openly both kill, fley, burn
and boil beasts, in making their sacrifices, so yt they are not thought to
break yt Sabbath day, because they may without offense to God, even on the
sabbothes, dress and make ready ye things serving to yt outward worship of
the Lord: so likewise may we on the sabbath dress and make ready meat and
other necessaries, which our bodies cannot lack. We may also minister physic
to the sick, visit the weak, and help ye needy, that so we may preserve y^
creature of God. Herein did our savior give us an example to follow, who did
on yt sabbath work y^ deeds of charity and mercy, we have more then one
example of his to be seen in ye Gospel, but especially in Luke. 6. and. 13.
and. John the. 5. chap. If the^ on ye sabbath day it be lawful to draw out of a
pit a sheep or an ox in danger of drowning, why should it not be lawful
likewise on yt sabbath, to underset with props, a ruinous house yt is ready to
fall? why should it not be lawful on ye sabbath day to gather in, and keep from
spoiling y^ hay or corn, which by reason of unseasonable wether, has lain too
long abroad, and likely to be worse, if it stay any longer? The holy Emperor
Constantine, writing to Elpidius, says: Let all judges in courts of law, and
citizens of all occupations rest upon the Sunday, and keep it holy with
reverence and devotion. But they that inhabit the contrie, may freely and at
liberty To plow land on the Sab^oth day*
attend on their tillage upon the sabbath day. For often times it falls out,
that they can not upon an other day so commodiously sow their seed. or plant
their vines, and so by letting pass the opportunity of a litletime, they may
hap to loose the profit given of GOD for our provision. Thus says the
Emperor. Now we must consider that he does not license husbandmen, by all kind
of toil, continually to defile the sabbath day. For of the countrymen as well
as of the townsmen, are looked for due honor done to GOD, and the keeping of
the fourth commandment: only this must be remembered, that liberty is
granted in causes of necessity. But a godly mind and charity, shall be
excellent dispensors and mistresses to lead us in such cases as these, least
under the colored pretense of liberty and necessity, we do deeds not to be
borne withal on the sabbath day, and exercise the works of greedy
covetousness, and not of sincere holiness. And thus much had I to say,
touching the second use of the sabbath day.

Thirdly, the sabbath has a very ^^d does ^^^ctifie ^r make ^oly.
ample or large signification. For it is a perpetual sign, that god alone is
he that sanctifies those that worship his name. For thus says the Lord to
Moses: Ye shall keep my sabbothes, because it is a sign betwixt me and you to
the^ that come after you, to know that I am the Lord, which sanctify you.
And so forth, as it is to be seen in the. 31. of Exodus, and is again
repeated in the. 20. of Ezechiel. And to this end does ye Lord mutually apply
him self as is before said, in the declaration of the sabbothes second use
and signification. For God does by his holy spirit, sanctify his faithful
folk and constant believers: which he declares unto the Church, by the
preaching of the Gospel, bearing witness thereunto, and sealing it with his
Sacraments, so that he commands us with continual prayers, incessantly to
crave of him that glorious sanctification. All which things, verily, are
practiced and put in ure, upon the sabbath days especially, to the intent that
we may be sanctified of god, who is the only sanctifier of us all.

Hitherto have I declared unto you (dearly beloved) as briefly as I could, the
first table of Gods commandments, wherein we have very exquisitely laid down
before us, the worship due to the name of God. But for because they are not the
children of God which know his mind, but they that do it, let us beseech our
heavenly father, so to illuminate our minds that we may faithfully and in
deed, worship our Lord and God, who is to be praised world without end. Amen.

Of the fifth precept of the second table, which is in order the fifte of the
ten Commandments, touching the honor due to parents.
The fifte Sermon.
Now follows the second table of Gods law, which (by the good help of Gods
holy spirit) I will declare as briefly unto you, as I have already gone
through the first. And as the first contained the love of God, so does the
second teach us the charity due to our neighbor, instructing all men what
they owe every one to his neighbor, and how we may in this world live
honestly, ciuily, and in quiet peace among our selves. For our good God would
have us to live well and quietly. But we, that will not know how to live well,
nor yet obey his good commandments, do with our sins and iniquities, never
cease to heap upon our own pates, an infinite multitude of miserable
calamities. This table contains sire co^maundeme^ts, the first whereof is:
Honor thy father The fifth ^^ecept.
and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God
shall give thee. Very well and rightly does the Lord begin the second table,
with the honoring of our parents. For after our duty to God, the next is the
reverend love that we owe to our parents, of whom next after God we have our
life, and by whom we are from our infancy, brought up with incredible care and
exceeding great labor. Now the very order of nature does require that the most
excellent and dearest things should always have the first and chiefest place.
And that this commandment may the more easily be understood, I mean to divide
my treatise thereof into three parts. In the first whereof, I will declare what
degrees and kinds of men are comprehended under y^ name of parents.
Secondarily, I will search out what kind of honor that is, and how far it
extends, which the Lord commands to give to our parents. And lastly, I
will both touch the promise made to godly children, and thereupon conjecture
and gather the punishment appointed for the ungodly and disobedient offspring.
There is none so ignorant, that is (...) by (...) name parents
but knows what parents are. The Lord our God has given us them for us to
take of them our beginning of life, that they might nourish and bring us up,
and that of rude and almost brutish things, they might make us ve^^e men.
Greater are the good turns that parents do for their children, greater is the
cost and labor that they bestow on them, and greater is the care, grief, and
trouble which they take for them, tha^ any man, how eloquent soever he be, is
able to express. And here is not the name of the father only, but also the
name of the mother in express words set down in the law, least she
peradventure should seem and be contemptible without any offense to God, because
of the weakness of her frail sex. The godly and virtuous mothers, do feel
and abide more pain and grief in the bearing bringing up, and nourishing of
their children, than the fathers do. For no small cause therefore have we the
name of ye mother, precisely expressed in this commandment. We do also
comprehend herein the grandfather and grandmother, ye great grandsire and great
granddame, and all other like to these. In the Our native Country.
second place we do contein every ma^s country wherein he was borne, which fed,
fostered, adourned, and defended him. Thirdly, we take Princes and Magistrates
Magisrates, or Rulers.
into the name and title. For the Senators and Princes are in the holy
scriptures, called the fathers and pastors of the people. Xenopho^ was
persuaded, that a good Prince did differ nothing from a good father. Fourthly,
there are to be reckoned under ye name Gardians, or overseers of fatherless
children,
of parents those gardians, which are usually called overseers of fatherless
children, or orphans. For they supply the place of departed parents, taking
upon the^ the charge and defense of their children, whom they must (for that
affection ought to be in them) bring up, defend, and advance even as they would
do to their own, and those that they themselves did once beget. Among whom
also we must make account of such masters and workmen as teach them an Art or
occupation. For of the^ young men and striplings learn some honest science, for
every one to get his living honestly, and by them they are taught good manners,
being thereby, after a certain sort, out of rude unpolished stuff, made
perfect seemly me^. Fifthly, Ministers and pastour^ ^^ the Church.
the ministers, doctors, and pastors of the Churches, are taken for parents.
whom Paul him self did call by the name of fathers, not so much for the care
and love wherewith they are affected toward the disciples and sheep of Christ
his flock, as for because we are by the^ through the gospel begotten in
Christ. In the sixte place, we must think of our cousins and kinsfolks,
brother and Cousins and (...)
sister, nephues and neeces, mother in law, and daughter in law, father in
law and son in law, who are by alliance knit together, as the members of the
body are fastened with sinews. Finally, in the last place, old folks and
widows, fatherless children and impotent Aged per^^ns or old folks.
weak persons, must be reputed among our parents: whose cause and tuition, the
Lord has in more places then one, commended unto us. So then (my brethren)
here ye have heard who they be that in this first precept of the second
table, we have to take for our parents, and who and how many are comprehended
and commended to us under that name: and now shall ye hear what honor we owe
to them, and what the honor is that we should attribute unto them.

To honor, in the scriptures is diversely To honor what it is.
taken, but in this treatise it signifies to magnify, to worship, to esteem
well, and to do reverence, as to a thing ordained by god: and also to
acknowledge to love, and to give praise as for a benefit received at Gods hand,
and as for a thing given from heaven that is both holy, profitable, and
necessary. To honor, is to be dutiful and to obey, and so to obey, as if it
were to God him self, by whom we know that our obedience is commanded, and to
whom we are sure that our service is acceptable. Otherwise we have not in any
case to obey either our parents or magistrates, The honor of God (...) before.
if they the^ selves shall do or else command us to do, the things that are
wicked and unjust. For still the later commandments have a relation to those
that went before. In the second commandment we learned, that God would visit
ye sins of the fathers in ye children, and therefore children ought not to
obey their parents, if they command any thing contrary to god, or
prejudicial to his law. Jonathan obeyed not his father Saul's commandment,
who charged him to persecute David: and therefore is he worthily commended in ye
holy scriptures. The three companions of Daniel obeyed Nabuchodonosor in all
that he said, they loved him, and reverenced him as a most mighty, puissa^t,
and bountiful king, but so soon once as he charged them to fall to Idolatry,
they set not a button by his commandment. And S. Peter, who taught us yt
honor and obedience yt we owe to our parents and magistrates, when he was
commanded by y^ princes and fathers of ye people, not to preach Christ
crucified to ye people any more, did answer them, that we ought to obey God
more the^ men. But what need I thus to stand reckoning up this, when the Lord
him self in one short sentence, has knit up this, and al other like to this?
If any man (says he) comes to me, and hates not his father and mother, his
wife, his children, his brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life, he can
not be my disciple. Furthermore, thou do honor thy parents, when thou do
not co^temptuously (...) the^, unthankfully neglect (...) think scorn of
the^, if peradventure they happen to fall into adversity. Thou honor thy
parents, when with thine help and counsel, you aydest the^ in their old age and
vnweildie crookednesie, when you easest the^ in time of their need, or
succourest the^ otherwise in any case else. For yt in deed is ye true and
proper honor due to our parents, ye Lord him self bearing witness thereunto in
ye. 15. of Mat. and co^cluding, yt we ought to provide and have a care for our
parents, to save and defend them, and wholly to give our selves and hazard our
lives in their behalf. And now yt this yt I have said may be more easily and
evidently understood, I will confer and apply this honor to those. 7. several
kinds of me^, which we do comprehend under the name of parents, yt thereby
every one may see what and how much honor he ought to bestow upon his parents,
his cu^try, ye magistrates therein, and those sorts of people yt are before named.
Whereas The honor due to parents
of duty we ought to honor our parents, yt duty is paid if we do so
worshipfully esteem of the^ as to think yt they are given to us of God to y^
end yt we should reverence, love, and always have an eye to them, although for
nothing else, yet only for ye Lords sake, who is and does think him self
despised, so long as we go on to contemn our parents, and to think vilely of
them. Neither does it make any matter to us, whether they be worthy or
unworthy, whom ye lord commands us to honor. For be they as they may be, yet
notwtsta^ding, they did not without ye providence of god, chance to be our
parents, in respect of which parentage, the lawgiuer him self will have the^
to be honored. Whatsoever therefore children shall have occasion to speak to
their parents, let it always savor of humble reverence and childely
affection: and let the^ with such affection and reverence obey their parents.
If they seem to us to be somewhat bitter and ungentle, yet let us wisely wink
at it, and not seem to know it, by little and little still declining from ye
evil, which by force they seem to compel us unto, and let us so discretely
handle ye matter, yt we may give them as small occasion as may be to be offended
at us. We have Ionathas y^ son of Saul, to be an example to us of a godly and
obedient child. He did with great grief and trouble of mind, behold his
fathers madness upon David, and wrongful dealing against him self, yet did he
for ye presit discreetly sustain and wisely dissemble it, finding occasion at
another time and in a place convenient to tell him of it, he never aided his
father in any conceived mischief, he claue always to the just man and righteous
causes, he bewailed his fathers stubbornness, and sought not over boldly to
resist him and strive against him, when he offered to deal by violent
extremity with him, but saved him self by fleeing away, and yet for all this,
he loved his father never ye worse, but prayed still to God for his health and
welfare, showing him self in all things an obedient son to his crabbed
father. This verily is ye duty of a godly son. This ought every one of us
most diligently to follow in doing our duty and humble obeisance unto our
parents, how froward or crooked soever they be. Let none give a rough answer
stubbornly, yea, let none so much as mu^ble an answer or mutter against his
parents Let none curse or speak evil of his father or mother, unless he will
perforce seek ye way and means, to make high and mighty Gods curse hang over
and light upon his pate. If happily our parents be poor, if misshapen in limbs,
or otherwise diseased with any infirmity, let none of us therefore in mockery
floute at, or disdaynefully despise them.

Let us not show our selves unthankful to them, to whom for their good deeds
to us ward, we are of duty bound for ever. Let us nourish, chearishe, and
aid them in all their necessities: yea, let us wholly bestow our selves and
all that we have, to do them good withal. For all that we possess
undoubtedly is theirs: and all that we have, we enjoy by them, for if they were
not, then should not we be: Let us here call to remembrance the charge that the
Lord in Matthe we Math. 15.
gives us, touching this commandment. Let us consider what is meant by the
Gentiles, (...), which is, to requite one good turn with another, and
especially, to nourishe and chearishe them, by whom thou thee self in thy
youth, wast brought up and tendered. There is among the Gentiles a law extant
worthy to be called the mistress of piety, whereby it is enacted, that the
children should either nourishe their parents, or else lie fast fettered in
prison. This law many men do carelessly neglect, which the Storke alone among
all lyning creatures does keep most precisely. For other creatures do hard
and searcely know or look upon their parents, if peradventure they need their
aid to nourish them, whereas the Storke does mutually nourishe The Stork he
ensign of natural love.
them being struc^en in age, and bear them on her shoulders, when for
feebleness they cannot flee.

There are to be seen among the The Gen^iles sen^ences touching ho^^ur due ^o
parents
Gentiles, very religious and excellent sentences, touching the honor due unto
parents. Isocrates says. Show thee self such an one to thy parents, as thou
would wish to have thy children show them selves to thee. Ana^imenes said,
He loves his father exceedingly well, which does his endeavor to make him
joyful without any trouble at all. Plato also in his laws thinks, That he
has a great treasure in his house, whosoever does nourishe at home in his
house, his father or mother, or any of their parents in their impotent old
age, and does suppose that he needs no other picture of any of the Gods to
reverence in his house, because he should turneal his care and diligence to
honor his parents. And again, in another place: Let us pay, says he, to our
parents, while they are alive, the oldest, first, and greatest debts, that we
owe them, for our being and bringing up. For every one must think, that al
which he has is theirs, who did beget and bring him up, so that according to
his ability, he must supply and minister to them, all that he does possess:
first of all, the external goods of fortune, then of the body, and lastly,
those that do belong unto the mind, thereby restoring all that he borrowed, and
recompencing them in their old age, for all their old cares and grief
sustained for him. It is seemly also and requisite that even in words so long
as we live, we should show reverence unto our parents. For after light and
foolish words used to them, does commonly come a terrible plague. For before
every man does Nemesis (the executrice of judgment) stand, and does thoroughly
think upon all their offenses. We must therefore give place to our Parents,
when they be angry without a cause, or do what they list, whether it be by
word or deed, knowing always that the father is rightfully angry with his
son, though he be angry for nothing else, but by cause he thinks that his
son has done to him the thing that he should not.

Let us therefore erect to our parents, even when they be dead, monuments
seemly for their estate while they were alive: which if we shall do, then shall
we, undoubtedly, be worthily rewarded at the hands of the gods. Thus much has
Plato. Saint Hierome says: Pay to mothers the reverence that ye owe them, who
serving you with the pain of their own The pains (...) trauails ^f Mo^hers in
^hildbirth.
wombs, do bear the weight of your bodies, and carrying about the infant
unknown, do as it were become servants to them that shall be borne. At that
time the mother hungreth, not to the filling of her own belly, neither does
she alone digest and feed upon the meat that she eats. With the mothers
meat is the babe nourished that lies within her, his members are fed with
another bodies eating, so that the man that shall be, is filled with the
morsels that the mother swalloweth. What should I rehearse the nurishment that
they give to their children, and the sweet injuries of way ward infancy,
that they take and put up by means of their little ones? Why should I speak
of the meat digested of the mother, which coming from the other parts of her
body into her paps, is turned there into milk and moisture, to fill the weak
and tender jaws, with thin and liquide food for nourishment? By nature, the
infantes are compelled to take of their mothers, that which they drink, and
when as yet their toothlesse gummes are not able to byte, then do they with
the laboring of their lips, draw that from their mothers breasts that they
need not to chewe. The mothers dugge does serve the child, and still
attends upon the swathled babe, her hands to hold, and her back to bend, are
ready still to dandle the sucklings limbs, that she loves full well God wot.
The mother desires often and earnestly to have her yongling grow, and wishes
full many a time to see him a man. For these so many and so great good deeds,
ought the child, once come to age, to apply him self to do her service, with
a good and ready mind and heart. Let natures debt be paid, let them that
follow have their due. Pay child that which thou owe, and show thy bounden
duty by all manner of service, what soever it be. Because no man is able to
pay to his parents, so much as he owes them. Thus far out of Hierome.

Now touching the country, wherein every one is borne and brought up, For the
honoring of our Country
every man does well esteem of it, love it, and wish to advance it, every man
does deck it with his virtue and prowess, every one does help it with all
sorts of benefits, stoutly defending it, and valiantly fighting for it, if
need Fighting in defense of our Country.
be, to save it from violent robbers. What is (I pray you) more to be delighted
in, then the good platform of a well ordered city, wherein there is (as one
did say) the church well grounded, wherein God is rightly worshipped, and
wherein the word of God in faith and charity is duly obeyed, so far forth
as it pleases God to give the gift of grace? wherein also the Magistrate does
defend good discipline and upright laws, wherein the citizens are obedient
and at unity among the^ selves, having their assemblies for true religion and
matters of justice, wherein they use to have honest meetings in the Church, in
the Court, and places of common exercise, wherein they apply them selves to
virtue and the study of learning, seeking an honest living by such sciences
as man's life has need of, by tillage, by merchandise, and other handie
occupations, wherein children are honestly trained up, parents recompen^ed for
their pains, ^he poor maintained of a^mes, and strangers harbored in their
distress. There are therefore in this common weal, virgins, married women,
children, old men, matrons, widows, and fatherless children. If any (by ye
naughty disposition of nature) transgress the laws, they are worthily
punished, the guiltless are defended, peace, justice, and civility does
flourish and is vphelde. Now what is he that can abide to behold such a common
weal, the country wherein he is borne and bred up to be troubled, vexed,
torn and pulled in pieces, either byseditious citizens or ferreine enemies. In
civil seditions and foreign wars, all virtue and honesty is utterly
overthrown, virgins defiled, matrones vnciuily dealt withal, old men
derided, and religion destroyed. Wherefore the valiant captain Ioab, being
ready to fight against the Syrians in defense of his country, speaks to his
brother Abisai, saying: If the Syrians be stronger than I, the^ shall thou
help me: but if the sons of Ammon be to strong for thee, then will I come
and aid thee. Be courageous therefore, and let us fight lustily for our people
and for the cities of our God. And let the Lord do the thing that is good in
his own eyes. Moreover, Judas Machabeus, a man among the Israelites worthily
esteemed, and a famous warrier, being singularly affected toward his country,
encouraging his soldiers and countrymen against their enemies, said: They
come upon us wrongfully in hope of their force, to spoil and make havoc of
us, with our wives and children, but we fight for our lives and liberty of
our laws, and the Lord will destroy them before our faces. The people also
among them selves exhorting one another, do cry out and say. Let us take this
affliction from our people, and let us fight for our nation and our religion.
Let not any man make an objection here, and say: Tush these are works
pertaining to the law, which we that are in the church of Christ, have nothing
to do withal. For the Apostle Paul speaking to the Hebrews, as concerning
Christian faith does say. These through faith did subdue kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, Heb. 11 ^. Cor. 4
were valiant in fight, and turned to flight the armies of aliaunts. Now since
our faith is all one, and the very same with theirs, it is lawful for us as
well as for them, in a rightful quarrel, by war to defend our country and
religion, our virgins and old men, our wives and children, our liberty and
possessions. They are flatly unnatural to their country and countrymen, and
do transgress this fifth commandment, whosoever do (under the pretense of
religion) forsake their country afflicted with war, not indeuouring to
deliver it from barbarous soldiers and foreign nations, even by offering
their lives to the push and pike of present death, for the safeguard thereof.
Saint John says: By this we know his love, by cause he gave his life for us,
and we ought to 1. John. ^
give our lives for the brethren. The hired soldiers, who fight unlawful
battles for pay of wages, and sell their bodies for greediness of money, shall
judge the men that leave their country in peril and danger. For the one put
less of life and limbs in adventure for gain of a few odd crowns: whereas
the other deintie fools and effeminate hearts, will not hazard the loss of a
limme for their religion, magistrates, wives, children, and all their
possessions. What I beseech you, shall those traitors to their country say in
that day, wherein the Lord shall reward the lovers and the unnatural traitors
of their country and countrymen, when before their eyes, they shall see the
Gentiles to excel them in virtue and love to their country people? Publij
Decij, the Father Lovers of their Country.
and the son, gave their lives freely for the safeguard of the common weal,
and died willingly for the love of their country. Codrus, the natural and
loving king of the Atheniens, when he understood by the Oracle of Apollo, that
Athens could not be saved but by the kings death, and that therefore the
enemies had given commandment that no man should wound the King, this Codrus
laid aside his kinglike furniture, and clothing him self in base apparel,
rushed into the thickest of his enemies, and found the means by egging to
provoke one of them perforce to kill him. The two brethren called Phileni chose
rather to lengthen their country with a mile of ground, then to prolong their
lives with many days, and therefore did they suffer them selves to be buried
alive. But what suffer we for the health and safegarde of our country?
Hierocles says. Our country is as it were a certain other God, and our first
and chiefest parent. Wherefore he that first called our country by the name of
Patria, did not unadvisedly give it that name, but called it so in respect of
the thing which it was in deed: for Patria our country is derived of Pater a
Father, and has his ending or termination in the Feminine Gender, thereby
declaring, that it takes the name of both the Parents. And this reason does
covertly lead us to think that our country, which is but one, ought to be
reuereneed and loved as well as both our Parents, jointly knitting them
together, to make them equal in honor.

Furthermore, we must make our earnest prayer for the safegarde of We must pray
for our Country.
our country. Babylon was not the country of the Jews, but yet for because
the Jews for their sins were banished by God to Babylon for the space of
seventy years, Babylon was counted to them in steed of their country. And
therefore says the Prophet Jeremy. Build up houses, and dwell therein,
plant gardeines and eat the fruit thereof, marry wives, and beget sons and
daughters, and give them in marryage, that they may get children. Seek the
peace of that city to which I do carry you, and pray to the Lord for it,
because your peace and safegarde is joined with the peace thereof. Chapter
twenty and nine. Traitors to their country therefore sin exceedingly,
whom the laws of the realm do command for their foul offense, to be
hanged and quartered.

Touching the Magistrate and his For the honor due to Magistrates.
office, I nieane to speak of them in another place: so much as it is
necessarily requisite for this present time, Saint Peter utters where he
says: Fear God, honor the King. Let us therefore acknowledge and confess,
that the Magistrates office is ordained of God for men's commodity, and that
GOD by the Magistrate does frankly bestow on us very many and great
commodities.

The peers do watch for the common people, if they do rightly discharge their
office, not showing them selves to be detestable tyraunts, they judge the
people, they take up controversies, they keep justice in punishing the
guilty, and defending innocents, and lastly, they fight for the people. And
for the excellency of their office, which is both the chefest and the most
necessary, God does attribute to the Magistrate the use of his own name, and
calls the princes and Senators of the people, Gods, to the intent that they
by the very name should be put in mind of their duty, and that the subjects
might thereby learn to have them in reverence. God is just, good, righteous,
and one which has no respect of persons. And such an one ought the good Judge
or Magistrate to be. Monks and Heremites do praise their profession and
solitary life, extolling it above the skies: but I think verily, that there is
more true virtue in one politic man, who governs the common weal, and does
his duty truly, than in many thousands of of Monks and Heremites, who have
not so much as one word expressed in the holy Scriptures, for the defense of
their vocation and vowed order of living: yea, I am ashamed that I have
compared the holy office of Magistrates with that kind of people, in whom
there is nothing found worthy to be compared with them, in so much, as they
flee from the labor and ordinance that God has made profitable for their
people and countrymen. Truly, if the Prince do faithfully discharge his
office in the common weal, he heapeth up to him self a number of very good
works, and praise that never shall be ended. Therefore the Magistrate must be
obeyed, and all his good and upright laws. No sedition or conspiracies ought
in any case to be moved against him. We must not curse or speak evil of the
Magistrate. For God him self in his law does charge us, saying: Thou shalt
not speak evil of the Gods, nor curse the Prince of the people. If he chance
at any time to sin, let us behave ourselves toward him, as to our father. Of
whom I have spoken a little before.

It happens often times, that Against seditious rebels.
Magistrates have a good mind to promote Religion, to advance common justice,
to defend the laws, and to favor honesty, and yet notwithstanding, they are
troubled with their infirmities, yea, sometime with grievous offenses: Howbeit,
the people ought not therefore to despise them, and thrust the^ beside their
dignity. David had his infirmities, albeit (otherwise) a very good Prince. By
his adultery, he indamaged much his people and kingdom: and for to make his
trouble the more, Absolon sinned grievously, and went about to put him beside
his crown and kingdom. So likewise in other Princes, there are no small
number of vices, which nevertheless neither move nor ought to move godly
people to rebellious sedition, so long as justice is maintained, and good laws
and public peace defended. We ought to pray earnestly and continually for the
Magistrates welfare. We must aid him with our help and counsel, so often as
need shall serve and occasion be given. We must not deny him our riches or
bodies to assist him with all. The Saints did gather their substance in common,
to help the Magistrate, so often as public safeguard did so require. The
Israelites of all ages, did always fight for their Judges, for their Kings,
and other Magistrates, and so did all other people upon good advice taken: and
likewise on the other side, did the Princes fight for the people. I would
therefore that those offices of godly naturalnes were of force, and did
flourish even at this day in all kingdoms, cities, and commonweals. Let
every nation give to his Magistrate that which by law, or by custom, or by
necessity it owes him. For Paul the Apostle says: Give to every one that
which ye owe, tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to whom custom,
fear to whom fear, and honor to whom honor is due. Romans 13.

Now for because the gardians or The ho^our due (...) Gardi^^ans and masters
^f occupations.
overseers of Orphans, do supply the room of parents, and execute the offices
of deceassed parents to the children that remain, they do worthily deserve to
have the reward that is due to parents, whether it be love, reverence, thanks,
or obedience. The same also do I judge, touching workmen and masters of
sciences, who for the fatherly affection, love, goodwill, faith and diligence
showed to their scholar or apprentice, ought mutually of their scholars to be
regarded as a master, to be reverenced, feared, and hearkened unto as a loving
father. But in these vnhappaie days of ours, it is abominable to see the
negligence of masters in teaching their scholars, and intolerable to behold
the peeuishe rudeness of untoward scholars. Let masters therefore learn
here to show ^^e office (...) duty ^asters (...) schol^^^.
themselves to be fathers, not being otherwise affected toward their scholars,
then toward their own children. Let them teach their apprentices their
science or occupation, and train them up in manners, and all points of
civility, with the very same care and diligence, that they use in bringing up
their own. On the other side, let youths learn to break their natural
ingraffed rudeness, and to bridle their youthful lusts: let the^ learn to be
humble and subject, to keep silence, to reverence, to fear, to love, and obey
their masters. Let them always remember that their masters are given them of
God, and therefore that God is despised in their contemned masters. Let them
be diligent, earnest, and trusty in their work. Let them give their masters
cause to perceive their earnest desire, and ready good will, that they bear
to him, their occupation and principles of their science. Let every one think
upon, and diligently practice in deed, the thing that their master teaches by
word of mouth. Let the^ not grudge to watch and take pains. Let not the
masters be grieved, so often as they be asked how to do a thing, to show it
readily in every point as it should be done. Unthankfulness and lack of
diligence in the scholar, does many times make the master unwilling and
negligent to teach him. Observe this, and in the rest, fear God, and have an
eye to sound religion. When thou art abroad, come not in company of
blasphemous and ryotous tosspots, behave thy self honestly, provoke no man to
anger, ^espise no man, speak ill by no man, desire peace and quietness, honor
all men, and strive to do good to every one. When thou art at home, help
forward thy masters commodity, do not indamage him nor his affairs, if any
man either hurt, or does go about to hinder him, give him warning of it
betimes: seek to appease and hide as much as thou can, all occasions of
falling out and chidings: what soever thou hear at home, do not blabbe it
abroad, and make no tales at home, of that that thou hear abroad. Be
silent, quiet, chaste, continent, temperant, trusty in deeds, true in words,
and willing to do any honest and household business. Beware of them by whom
evil suspicions and offenses may chance to arise. Do not over boldly dally
with thy masters wife or daughters, nor yet with his maidens, do not stand
familiarly talking with them in sight, or secretly. Imagine thou, (as it is in
deed,) that thy masters wife is thy mother, his daughters thy sisters: whom
to defile it is a filthy and villainous offense. Let every young man be neat, not
nastie, gentle, just, content with a mean diet, not licorishe lipped, nor
deintic toothed. But why stay I hereabout so long? Let every young man be
persuaded and keep in memory, that his duty is to keep him self chaste
from filthy defilings, to obey and not to rule, to serve all men, to learn
always, to speak very little, not to brag of any thing over arrogantly, not
to answer tip for tap, but to suffer much, and wink thereat.

For the honoring of Ministers of the Churches, which are the Pastors, The
ho^our due ^o Ministers of the Churches.
teachers, and fathers of christian people, many things are wont to be
alleged by them, who covet rather to reign as Lords, than to serve as
ministers in the Church of Christ. But we which are not of that aspiring
mind, do acknowledge that they are given us by the Lord, and that the Lord
by them does speak to us. I speak here of those ministers which tell us not
an headless tale of their own dreams, but preach to us the word of truth.
For of them the Lord in the Gospel says: He that hears you hears me: and
he that despises you despises me. Wherefore the ministry is of the Lord,
and through it he works our salvation. And therefore must we obey the
ministers which do rightly execute their office and ministry, we must think
well of them, we must love them, and continually pray for them. And since they
so we to us their heavenly things, we must not donie them, the reaping of our
bodily and temporal things. For 1. Cor. 5. Math. ^^
the labourer is worthy of his reward. And since the Roman president among the
Jews did not deny it, but aided the Apostle Paul against the pretended
murder and open wrong Act. 23. ^^ 25.
of the Jewish nation, a Christian Magistrate verily ought not to deny his
assistance and defense, to the godly ministers of Christ and the Churches.
Hereunto belong the testimonies of Saint Paul, that may be alleged. In the
last chapter of his first Epistle to the Thessalonians, he says: We beseech
you brethren to know them which labor among you, and have the oversight of
you in the Lord, and admonish you, that ye may have the^ in reputation through
love for their work, and be at peace with them.

Again, to the Hebrews he says: Obey them that have the rule over you, and
give place unto them: for they watch for your souls, as they that shall give
account for them, that they may do it in joy and not in trembling: for that is
profitable for you. For how many and great calamities have fallen upon kingdoms
and peoples, for the contempt of Gods word and his ministers? The (...) temp^^
the (...) Gods (...)
many examples can teach us, but that especially which in the last chapter of
the second book of Chronicles, is set down in these words. The Lord God of
their fathers, sent to them by his messingers, rising up betimes, and sending,
for he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place. But they
mocked the messingers of God, and despised his words, and iested at his
Prophets, until the wrath of God arose against his people, and till there was
no remedy.

Like unto this are the words of the Lord in the Gospel, where he says: I
send unto you Prophets and wise men, some of whom ye shall scourge and kill,
that all the righteous blood may light upon you, which has been shead upon
the earth from the blood of the righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the
son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar: and so
forth: for the place is known to you all (dearly beloved) and is to be seen
in the. 23. Chapter after S. Matthew. We must beware therefore in any case, that
we do not despise God, who speaks to us in his word, by his servants the
Prophets.

We owe by the force of this commandment, all love, reverence, help, The
honor due to our kinsfolks
comfort, and humanity, to our kinsfolks and alliance. In this commandment
are they condemned, that show them selves to be, (...), that is to say, men
without all natural affection and friendly love to their own blood and
kinsfolks. There is a certain natural affection, goodwill, love and pitiful
mercy (which the Scripture calls the bowels of mercy) in the father and
mother toward their children, in brother toward brother, and in cousins
toward their kinssolkes and friends of their aliance. We have notable examples
hereof set down in the Scriptures, of Abraham's love toward his son Isaac,
and of Iosephes affection toward his father Jacob, and his brethren, but
especially toward Benjamin his brother by one mother. Mothers and daughters in
law have a notable example to follow in Noemi and Ruth. Mothers and daughters
in law (for the most part) do bear a deadly hate the one to the other, which
is the cause of much mischief in the houses where they be. Let them learn
therefore by this preatie example, how to behave them selves on both parts. Let
the mother in law think the daughter in law to be her own daughter: and let
the daughter in law honor and reverence her mother in law, even as if she
were her own mother. Many things must be winked at on both sides, many things
must be taken in good part, and many things put up with a quiet mind. Many
things must be forgiven, and they must both have their ears stopped against
tatling talebearers, and wrongful suspicions. Concord in every house is the
greatest treasure that may be, and discord at home, is the most perilous and
endless mischief that can be invented. Paul his words touching good turns,
and honor to be given to our kinsefolkes, are very well known, and extant to
be seen in the fifth Chapter of his first Epistle to Limothie.

Last of all also, there is to be found in the word of God, a peculiar law
For the honor due to old men.
for the honoring of old men, which bids us to rise before the hoary and
gray haired head. Old men therefore are to be honored, whom we must worthily
magnify, and in whom we must acknowledge the singular grace of God in giving
them long life, and that by long and continual experience of all things, they
have attained to much wit or wisdom whereby they are able to help us with
their counsel. They therefore ought to be praised, that all may understand
that gray hairs are a crown of glory. Moreover, if aged impotent persons are
driven into need, then must our abundance supply their necessity. To be
short, we must not deny to old men any duty of humanity, wherewith we may
pleasure them. In the same sort also there are here commended unto us, widows,
orphans, wards, poor men, strangers, sick and miserable people. And for
that cause did the devout and good men of old, bestow their goods liberally
to the refreshing of old men, widows, fatherless children, and poor silly
creatures. Those goods at Church goods.
this day are called Church goods, or Ecclesiastical contributions: which
undoubtedly are very well bestowed, if they be laid out on them for whom they
were given. In the Emperors constitutions, we may see that there were common
houses and substance builded and appointed for all sorts of needy people. For
there is mention made of houses for fatherless children, of Hospitals for old
men, of spittles for beggars, of places for sick men, and nourceries for
children. Among us at these days, there are Hospitals and Monasteries, very
many whereof have several places appointed for orphans, old men, poor
people, impotent creatures, sick persons, and infants. They therefore do
commit an unappeasable offense, whosoever bestow to other uses, the substance
and places ordained for old and poor people, and lash out (they care not how
prodigally in riot and lustiness) the alms bestowed upon poor silly souls.
And now hitherto have I declared how our parents ought to be honored, and
they which are contained under the name of parents.

There is now remaining the third The p^^mis (...) to those that worship (...)
parents, (...) threatninges (...) their parents.
and last part of our present treatise, wherein we have to see what God
promises to them that honor their parents religiously, whereby we have to
gather, what peril hangs over the heads of them, that wickedly neglect, and
irreligiously despise their parents. The Lord in the law therefore says: That
thy days may be long in the land, which the Lord thy God shall give thee.
The meaning of which saying is, Honor thy father and thy mother, that thou
may for many days enjoy the possession of the land, which thou shall have
in testimony of my favor to thee ward. These words do properly belong to
the Jews: But very well and truly does a godly minister of Christ writing
upon this place, say: Because the whole earth is blessed to the faithful, we
do nothing amiss, when we reckon this present life among the blessings of God.
Wherefore this promise appertains as well to us as to the Jews, because the
prolonging of this present life, is a testimony of Gods especial favor. He
promises assuredly, to them that do religiously honor their parents, in what
land soever they dwell, al kind of blessings, felicity, and store of temporal
things, with a sweet prolonging of this present life. For Paul interpreting
this in the fifte Chapter of his Eipstle to the Ephesians, says: That it may
go well with thee, and that thou may live long upon the earth: Meaning any
land whatsoever, and promising a Temporal blessing of the Lord. We therefore
gather hereupon, that the contrary is threatened and set as a penalty upon
the heads of those that disobedie^tly despise their parents. By examples and
other places of the scripture, this shall be made more manifest. Cham is cursed
of his father Noe, for behauing him self irreverently toward him, even in his
drunkenness. Joseph is exalted to the chiefest dignity in Egypt, because from
his childhoode he honored God, and reverenced his father Iaacob. Solomon in
the. 17. Chapter of his Proverbs, says: Whosoever rewards evil for good,
evil shall not depart from his house. Again, He that despitefully taunteth his
father, and despises the old age of his mother, shall be confounded and left
in reproach. The son that leaves to keep the discipline of his father, shall
think of talk of wickedness. Who so curses his father or mother, his light
shall be put out, and the balls of his eyes shall see naught but darkness.
For they are monsters and no men, that are unnatural toward their parents, and
especially they which do not only neglect and despise the^, but also beat and
discourteously handle them. Such fellows does the Lord command to be slain, as
people unworthy to see the light, because they forget and will not acknowledge
that by the means of their parents, they came into the world. He that curses
father or mother, says the Lord, let him dye the death. And again, He that
strikes his father or mother, let him dye the death. There is none of you
which knows not the law, called Lex Pompeia, against such as kill their
parents. It is not amiss here to hear what the Gentile writers say, touching
this matter. Homer says.

He did not nourish as he should his aged parents dear,
Therefore the Gods did from his youth cut off the iolliest year.
And the ancient Poet Orpheus says.

God sits above, and sees the sons that do them selves apply
To do their fathers hests, and those that shamelesly deny
Them to obey, and as he does bless the one with sundry gifts,
So for to vex the other, he does devise a thousand drifts:
For though despised parents die, yet do their ghostes remain,
And are of force upon the earth to put their sons to pain.
Moreover, the tragical Poet Euripides has.

To him, that while he lives does love his parents to obey,
Whether he live, or else do dye, God is a friend always.
And Menander the Comicall Poet says.

The wretch is worse then mad that with his parents falls at odds,
For wise men greatly reverence them and honor them as Gods.
Virgil also among other horrible vices, which are punished in hell, with
eternal and unspeakable pains, does say.

Here they that did their brethren hate while life on earth did last,
Or beat their parents, etc.
And immediately after,

He did his country sell for gold, and made a tyrant King,
For bribes he made and marde his country laws and every thing.
And Horace in his Odes says,

It is a sweet and seemly thing in countries cause to dye.
And Silius Italicus has.

Doubt not of this: forget it not, but keep it in thy mind.
It is a detestable thing, to show thee self unkind
Unto thy native country soil, for no such sin remains
In hell to be tormented there, with utter endless pains,
As that: so does experience teach.
These testimonies have I cited to this end and purpose, that by these (dearly
beloved) ye may gather the heinousness of this offense, which the very
Gentiles them selves do so grieuosly cry out against and utterly condemn. Caine
slew his brother Abel, but thereby he gat his reward, to be marked with a
perpetual blot of ignominy and reproach. Semei did intollerably rail upon
David his ordinary Magistrate, and therefore was he punished according to his
deserts. Absalom rebelled unnaturally against his father David, but being
wrapped by the hair to a tree, and hanging betwixt heaven and earth, he is
horribly thrust through with a Iauelin. The Lord called them that slew the
Prophets by the name of Adders brood, and sons of the devil. As for them
that have reprochfully dealte with old men, or troubled widows, they have not
gone unpunished. For the Lord in the law says. Thou shall not afflict the
widows nor fatherless Exodus 22
children: But if ye do go on to afflict them, they shall undoubtedly cry to
me, and I will hear them: and my wrath shall wax hot, and I will slay you
with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.
Thus much hitherto.

Saint Paul alleging this law in his Epistle to the Ephesians, does ^phes. 5
very aptly apply it to our learning and comfort. For he says: Children obey
your parents, for this is right, honor thy father and mother (which is the
first commandment in promise) that thou may prosper and live long on
earth. Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in
instruction and information of the Lord. In these words he tells the
parents their duty, as well as the children.

Three things he does require at The d^tie of p^rents to the^ (...).
the hand of the parents, that is, to bring up their children, to instruct
them, and to correct them. For it is the parents office to nourish, to feed,
and bring them up, till they be grown to age, that being once dispatched from
hanging on their parents any longer, they may get their livings with their own
labor and travel. It is the parents office to teach and instruct their
children. That teaching or instructing consists in three things, in religion,
in manners, and skill of an occupation.

Now touching religion, it has Children to be i^structed relig^^^
certain principles, rudiments I say and Catechismes to teach by: Secondarily,
it has the Scriptures setting out the word of God, with a full exposition of
all things belonging to God: it has also mysteries, holy signs and
Sacraments to teach and to learn by. If the householder be conversant among a
people which honors the true religion, and has received the lawful
worship of God, with true faithful and godly Ministers and teachers of Christ
his Church, let him give charge and see that his children go to the holy
congregation, there to be instructed in religion by the public preacher. Yet
nevertheless, let the father at home examine his children, and know what they
have learned by hearing the sermon. Let both the father and mother also at home
privately do their endeavor to teach their children the. 10. commandments,
the Apostles Creed, and the Lords prayer, and let them teach the^ a brief and
ready rule out of the Scriptures, for the understanding of the sacraments. Let
them often and many times cause them to repeat the Catechism, and beat into
their heads such sentences as are most necessary to put them in memory of
their faith and duty of Counsel and advise given to householders in captivity.
life. But if so it be, that the householder have his dwelling with a people
that persecuteth the Christian faith and doctrine, which hates the true and
lawful worship of Gods name, and cannot abide the congregation and ministers
of Christ: as it happens in the Turkish captiuities, and troublesome
persecutions of our days: then shall he take heed and keep him self from
idolatry, neither shall he in his own person go, nor suffer his family to
come to those ungodly assemblies, but shall rather in his own house at home
instruct them in true religion, first in ye Catechism, and then in deeper
divinity. Moreover, so often as the case and necessity shall require, he must
freely and openly profess Christ and his Gospel. For it is apparently
evident by the Epistles of Paul and other hystories, that such Churches were
in private houses of great cities in the time of the Apostles, and thickest of
those hot and ancient persecutions. Neither is it likely that the Jews in
their captivity at Babylon, although they lacked the outward use of
sacrifices, were altogether without all worship of God. Although Daniel did not
sacrifice, yet did he at certain hours in the day time, worship God in his
own house.

The house of Cornelius at Cesarea was the Church, wherein Peter preached in a
very good and ecclesiastical assembly or congregation, and he, because Ioppe
had no Church for him to pray in, went up to the higher part of the house to
make his prayers there. Neither is it to be doubted but that the Eunuch of
Queen Candaces nobility, of whom mention is made in the Acts of the
Apostles, did ordeine a Church in Aethiopia. And let them be persuaded, which
are without the public and lawefull use of the Sacraments, that that shall
not be imputed to their default, which is committed, not by them but by
another offense. For even in such a case can the Lord work well by his
spirit, in the minds of his people. But whereas by the grace of God, liberty
is given for the congregation to assemble, and to hear the free, sincere, and
true preaching of the Gospel, and lastly, to celebrate the Sacraments, there
must those private and domestical Churches be broaken up and come to an end:
not for because the house of a godly householder is not, nor remains still a
Church, but for because the hearing of Gods word, prayer, and the celebrating
of the Sacraments, ought to be public and common to all the Saints. For
those assemblies by stealth, which the Anabaptists use, and all other
sectaries, are both worthily and utterly condemned.

And now let us hear the testimonies Precepts on the in^tructi^^ of (...) and
(...).
of Scripture, which command all householders to instruct holily their family
in the true religion, and to declare to their children the meaning of the
Sacraments. Moses in the sixte of Deuter. says:

Hear Israel the Lord our God is Lord only: Therefore shall thou love the
Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might.
And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart. And
thou shall show them unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou art
at home in thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thy
hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes. And again, When thy
son asks thee in time to come, saying: what mean these testimonies,
ordinances, and laws, which the Lord our God has commanded us? Then thou
shalt say unto thy son, we were Pharaoes bondmen in Egypt, and the Lord
brought us out with a mighty hand, and showed signs and mighty wonders
before our eyes, and brought us out from thence and gave us all these
precepts and statutes to do and to fear the Lord our God. Hereunto belongs
a great part of the. 78. Psalm. And in the. 13. of Exodus, the Lord does say
again: Sanctify to me all the first borne, And when thy son shall ask thee
in time to come, saying: what is this? Thou shall say to him, The Lord slew all
the first borne of Egypt, and therefore I sacrifice unto the Lord all the males
that open the matrice. Also in the. 12. Chapter, God, or Moses in Gods name,
expounding the mystery or sacrament of the Passover, said: When your
children ask you saying, what manner of service is this that ye do? ye shall
say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, which passed over the houses
of the children of Israel. etc. These testimonies are sufficiently evident and
need no further exposition. I will now therefore add to these the other
things which parents have to teach their children. The chi^^ must be taught
manners.


Let the father instruct his children in manners. We all from our birth are
clownish and rude, and all children have unseemly and uncivil manners: which
evil is made double as much by evil custom and clownish company. Let the
parents therefore teach their children manners betimes, which may adorn them
at home, and become the^ abroad. Let him instruct him, how to behave him self
decently in his going, and gesture of his body, how in the Church, how in the
market, how at the table, how in men's companies, and in all other places of
company. There are excellent preatie books set out for that purpose, so that
I need not stand to discuss to you the particularities thereof.

Lastly, let the father place his children Childr^^ must (...) an occupation.
with expert and cunning workmen, to teach them some handie craft whereby to
get their living another day. But first, he must make trial of their wits,
to see whereunto every one is best apt, and wherein he does most delight. For,
cunning will never be come by, where good will is wanting in him that must
learn it. If thou have any fit for learning, thou shall do a good and godly
deed, to train them up to the ministry of the church, or some other office
that stands by learning. But of all other, those parents are to be found
fault withal, that bring up their children in lazy idleness. For although
there be left unto them huge heaps of treasure, yet in three or four odd
hours, al may be wasted and come to naught. Whereunto then shall your deintie
idle Gentleman trust, what shall he do, when there is nothing left but his
bare carcass yt is a lump of clay not good for any thing? The inhabiters of
Massilia would not admit any into the number of citizens, but such as had
learned an occupation to live by. For to a city there is no greater a plague,
than an unprofitable citizen. But who I pray you may be thought to be a worse
citizen than he, that being accustomed to ease, and delicatenes, and of a
soudeine by some mishap, or else by prodigal riottousnes being deprived of
them both, and driven to extreme poverty, is compelled, perforce to seek out
unlawful shifts to get more wealth again? Furthermore they of old had a
Proverb worthy to be remembered of us at this time, Every land mainteyneth
Art. By this sentence they meant that learning and science, is the surest
preparation for every journey. For they cannot be taken away by thieves, but
whether soever thou go, they bear thee company, and are no burden for thee
to bear. If therefore mishappe do spoil thy children of the wealth that thou
leauest them, if thou have taught them an occupation, it is enough for them to
live by. Kings are deprived of their princelike dignity, and put beside their
exceeding riches, so that it is no marvel though kings inferiors be spoiled
of their wealth, and banished their countries. Dionysius of Syracuse is
reported for his tyra^nie to have been thrust beside his seat. But having lost
his kingdom he departed to Corinth, where he set up a schole, and taught
children their Grammar and Music, whereby in that necessity he got his
living. He had been hard bested verily, and in a miserable taking, if he had
never learned any thing, but had settled his hope upon dignity and riches,
vain hope had been his destruction. For he had died in extreme beggarie. Thus
much touching the bringing up of children in learning, or knowledge of some
occupation.

I have in that which is behind, to speak somewhat touching the correction Of
correction.
of those that are contained under the name of children. This correction
consists partly in words, and partly in stripes. In both, there must be had a
middlemeane and measure, that nothing be done outragiously. Let not the
admonition, yt is given in words, be bitterer than the fault deserves. Let it
nippe for the time present, but being past, let it bespoken off no more.
Continual chiding breeds contempt. Thou shall find some children also, with
whom gentle dealing will somewhat prevail. And unless thou do sometime praise
them, and speak well of that which they do, although peradventure, not so
well done as thou would require, thou shall perceive that ^^ter desperation
will take away hope and courage clean from them. I think it not good with too
heuie a burden to over awe such children as are willing to bear. Stripes must
not be bestowed but for some great offense, and that too, not in the fathers
anger but moderately, not to mar but to amend them. Let the parents always
remember yt golden saying of S. Paul: Fathers provoke not your children to
anger. For the best wits are hurt by too much rigorousnes. Solomon, where he
speaks of moderate correction, says: The rod and correction gives wisdom,
but the child that runs at randon brings his mother to shame. Again,
chastise thy son and thou shall be at quiet, and he shall bring pleasure unto
thy soul. These words of his do utterly condemn y^ fathers cockering, and
the mothers pa^pering, which is the marring Cockering of children.
of very many children. For the parents offend God as much in to much cockering
their children, as they do in over much punishing of them. Heli in the
scriptures is ill reported of for doting over his children, he himself dies
miserably, and brings the shameless wicked knaves his sons, to a
shameful ending. What is to be thought of that moreover yt in the 21. of Deuteronomy.
the parents themselves are commanded to bring their disobedient children before
the judge, and there, by complaint to sue them to death? By this example, which
may otherwise seem to be somewhat to sharp, it pleased God to put other men
in remembrance to keep their children in awe and obedience. For God is a god of
salvation and not of destruction, so yt when disobedient rebels and godles
people perish through their own default, he turns yt destruction of theirs to
the safeguard of his obedient servants. Let parents therefore always remember
this saying in the gospel: It is not the will of your heavenly father that one
of these little ones should perish. Whosoever offe^deth such an one, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the deapth of the sea.

Now touching ye duty of children I The duty of children.
have spoken of it before in yt place where I taught how and after what sort
parents ought to be honored. Paul as it were in one word knitteth up much
matter and says: Children obey your parents in the Lord. He tells ye reason
why. For that (says he) is righteous. And again he adds the cause saying,
For God has commanded it. Let children therefore consider and think upon
the nightly watchings, and continual labor yt their parents took in bringing
them up, and let them learn to be thankful for it, and content with their
present estate: when their parents instruct the^, let them learn attentively,
and show themselves like to godly Jacob, rather than to godless Esau. Let them
learn to accustom themselves to good and honest manners. Let them willingly
learn the art or occupation whereunto they are set. Let them yield and submit
themselves to their parents correction. Let them not stir up or provoke their
parents to anger. Let them choose to learn wit and obey their parents of their
own mind and accord, rather than to be driven to it by beating and brawling.
If parents at their departure leave little behind them for their children to
inherit let not ye good children therefore speak ill by ye dead. If thy father
has taught thee any art or occupation, he leaves for thee a sufficient
inheritance. Thriftines also and moderate spe^ding, is a very great revenue. If
thy father has well and honestly taught thee good manners, and trained thee up
in the true wisdom and perfect religion, then has he bequeathed thee a
patrimony sufficient for to mainteyne thee. For what else are exceeding great
riches left to a fool or irreligious fellow, but a sword in a mad man's hand?
Thou art left wealthy enough by thy fathers legacy, if that you art godly,
painful, heedful and honest. For goods gotten by ye sweat of our own brows, do
for ye most part continue longer, and prosper better with us, then those which
other leave unto us. We have again (derely beloved) spent an hour and an half
in handling this matter touching the honor due unto parents, I have stayed you
longer tha^ of right I should have done, but ye shall impute it to the love and
good will I bear to the matter. I am not ignorant how necessary this argument
is, almost to all men: and therefore stick I the longer upon it. For I
endeavor me self not only to teach you things profitable and necessary, but
also to beat them into your memories so much as I may, to the end that ye
never forget them. God grant you all a fruitful increase of his holy word,
which is the seed that is sown in your hearts. Let us pray. etc.

Of the second precept of the second table, which is in order the sixth of the
x. Commandments. Thou shall not kill. And of the Magistrate.
The sixte Sermon.
Justice and innocence are very well joined to the higher power and magistrates
authority, and in this 6. precept both public and private peace and
tranquillity are hedged in and enclosed against open tumults and secret
discords. And since ye life of man is the most excellent thing in ye world,
whereupon al other things, of how great price soever they be, do wait and
attend, and finally since ye body of man is more woorthe than all other gifts
whatsoever, the very natural order does seem to require, yt the 6.
commandment should be placed next. which god himself has plainly expressed in
these few words: thou shall not kill. For in this precept, justice and
innocence The sixth ^^^cept.
are commanded and commended unto us, wherein also it is provided, yt no man
hurt an others life or body: and so in this precept charg is given to every one
to maintein peace and quietness.

Now here are to be observed the steps y^ lead to murder, wherein we must
consider ye kinds and causes of hurting What is ^^^bidden (...) this
co^^aunde^^nt.
and annoying. For ye Lord does not simply forbid murder, but all things else
whereon murder does consist: all egging on therefore and provoking to anger is
utterly forbidden, sclaunderous taunts and brawling speeches are flatly
prohibited, strife, wrath, and envy are plainly commanded to be suppressed.
And in this sense we have Christ our Lord himself interpreting this law, where
in ye gospel after Matthew. he says: Ye have herd it said of old, thou shall not
kill, whosoever kills shall be in danger of judgment. But I say unto you that
whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be in danger of judgment.
And whosoever shall say unto his brother Racha, shall be in danger of a counsel:
But whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Thou see
here therefore, ye anger, slander, brawling, and al other tokens of a mind moved
to utter ill words, are flatly forbidden. What then must you do? Thou must
forsooth come into charity again with him whom thou have offended, thou must
lay aside al wrath and envy, unless thou had rather have all the honor that
thou do to God be imputed for sin unto thee, and that peradventure thou
would choose rather utterly to be condemned. For our Lord goes on in the
Gospel and says: If therefore thou bring thy gift unto the Altar, and there
reme^brest that thy brother have any thing against the, leave there thy gift
before the altar (he speaks to the^, who as then had their temple standing,
their altar remaining, and burnt offerings in use, we at this day have an other
manner of worshipping God) and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother,
and then come and offer thy gift. And again, Agree with thine adversary
quickly whiles thou art in the way with him, least at any time the adversary
deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the minister, and thou
be cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee thou shall not depart from thence,
until thou have paid the utmost farthing. But forbecause so few of us obey this
sound and whoalsome doctrine of ye Lords, thereby it comes to pass yt so
many great and troublesome tumults happen among me^. For small is the substance
of them that obey the word of god, but great is the rest and quietness of their
consciences. And what pleasure I pray you, do infinite riches bring to man,
since with them a man can not likely be without troublesome cares of mind,
great turmoiles, and lack of a quiet life. This law therefore which te^deth to
no other end, but to teach man the way to lead a sweet and plesaunt life, does
wholly take from the mind of man such immoderate affections as anger and envy
are, two the most pestilent evils that reigns among men.

As concerning anger I mean not at this present to speak over busily, eue^ as
also I have determined to be brief touching envy. Of anger many men Of Anger
have uttered many profitable sentences. And yet there is an holy kind of anger
which the scripture disalloweth not, so that unless a man be angry in that
sort, he shall never be a good and godly man. For a good man has a zeal of
God, and in y^ godly zeal he is angry at the iniquity and naughtiness of
mankind: whereof there are many examples to be seen in the Scriptures: and
this anger does stomache the sin committed, rather than the person who does
commit the sin. For ye good servant of God hates nothing in the wicked ma^s
person but his very sin: so that if the wicked cease once to sin, he will
leave to hate or be angry therwithal any longer. This anger is utterly
condemned then, when it springs of evil and corrupt affections, when no just
cause is given, but that he which is offended does in his anger either fulfill
his affection, or else hurt or determine to hurt him with who^ he is angry. A
great evil it is, and a fruit which when it is sown does yield and bring forth
one mischief upon an others neck. And therefore does ye Apostle of Christ
counsel al men not to give any place to anger: and if so be it happen that it
enter into our minds and stick there a while, yet that we suffer it not to
catch fast hold or take deep root therein, Be angry (says he) and sin not.
Let not the son set upon your anger, and give no place to the devil. For this
is the Apostles meaning, If so it happen that ye be angry, yet sin not, yt
is, yet bridle your anger. Neither does the Apostle bid us to be angry, but
wills us not to let our anger to continue long, nor to break out to ye
working of injury. And (...) (which word Paul uses) signifies anger in
deed, but yet more rightly y^ stirring or provoking to anger, so that thereby
we have to understand, yt to him which is by injury provoked to anger,
although he be somewhat grieved and touched at the quick, that grief ought
to be but of short continuance: neither must we in any case suffer our
adversary the devil, to fasten his foot in our hearts, who does through anger
by little and little, creep into our minds, and by continual wrath does work
out envy, by which he does captiuate and pervert the whole man, with all his
senses words and works.

For, Envy is anger grown into custom Of (...)
by long continuance, which does for the most part vex, burn, and envy,
more then the party which is envied: Although the envious does never cease to
devise mischief against the man whom he does envy. It is an endless evil
which does not admit any remedy to take it away. And therefore did the Gentiles
bait and canuase it too and fro with wonderful preatie quipps and pithie
sentences: Some of which I will not be ashamed here to rehearce, to the intent
that counterfeit Christians addicted to envy, may be ashamed of it, if
peradventure they will learn to blush, when they find them selves touched by
Heathens and Paynims.

Virgil says, In heart where enuies seed takes root, there grows a poisoned
grain,
Which dries and drincks from every lim the blood of every vain,
And sucks and sokes the marow bones until they feeble wax,
(Such is th'enuenomed poisons force) and yet no boane it crakes.
And therefore says Horace. The Sicil tyrants never found, a more tormenting
hell,
Than Envy was, etc.
Silius Italicus cries out. Illfauoured Envy, ugly hagge, and dogged end
Of mortal men, that never could abide to lend
One word to praise praisewoorthy deeds, but sweltst to see
Small things increase, and low things grow to high degree.
Ovid speaking of Envy describes it thus. Within did devilish Envy sit, and
eat the flesh of snakes,
To feed the humor of her vice, with such kind loathly cates:
With face of tallowcaked hew, and body lean like death,
With squinte eyes turned nine sundry ways, with rustie stinking teeth.
Her bitter breast was ouerspred, with gaide as green as grass,
Her tongue that ceast not to say ill, with venom poisoned was:
She never laughed, unless it wear when grief made others weep,
And fretting care within her heart, did keep her eyes from sleep.
She sees and pynes away to see the good success and state,
Of men that prosper on the earth: and so her deadly hate
Is to her self a deadly plague.
Whereas she goes she marrs the corn that grows upon the ground,
She maks on trees that blossoms bare, there can no fruit be found,
And with her breath she does infect, whole houses realms and towns.


Since therefore that envy is so great an evil, and that the Lord commands
to keep our selves from it, therein does appear ye Lords goodness to us ward,
and thereby we may gather how good and profitable his law is, which tends
and is given to none other end, but to set us at liberty from so great a
mischief. And here by ye way, we do perceive that our fault and not the
waywardness of God is the cause, whi^ many in this world are never at peace
and quietness, but are exceedingly vexed with continual torments. For as they
cease not to envy the estate of other, so with their anger they disquiet more
then themselves, and do at last duly aby and worthily suffer the deserved
punishment of their wicked deeds.

And this law does not only forbid Al hurting is forbidden.
and restrain the motions and evil affections of the mind by wrath, anger and
envy, but does also give commandment against al manner hurt yt rises by
them. Harm and hurt is done by sundry means, by beating, by violent
thrusting, by over throwing, by pulling, and troubling, although in doing so,
thou do not wou^d thy neighbor. But thy sin is the greater, if thou
give him a wound after what sort soever, either with weapon, or by any means
else. And again thou sinnest yet more grievously, if thou do quite cut off,
or otherwise break any limme of his body, if thou put out his eyes, or
dashest a tooth out of his head. So then the better that the limme is that thou
cuttest off, or put out of joint, the greater is thy sin, and more
grievous thine offense. From whence without doubt the law called The Law of
like for like.
Lex talionis took the beginning, which commands to cut off the hand of
him, which did cut off an others hand: and to pluck out the eye of him,
which did put out an other man's eye.

Now also the manner of killing The man^^rs of killing.
must not be ouerpassed. The Lord says: Thou shall not kill. We kill diverse
ways: either we our selves do the deed, or else we use the help of other
to strike the stroke, it is done either privily or openly. And in this sort
again there are very many facions. For we commit murder sometime by holding
our peace, sometime by dissembling, by giving ill counsel, by consenting, by
ayding, or egging forward to evil. An other peradventure would not do the
thing that he does, but because he sees that thou hartenest him on, but
because he knows he shall please thee thereby, and because he perceives
that thy help vpholdeth him. Although therefore that thou with thine own hand
strike not the stroke, yet the murder that an other commits by thy setting
on, shall be imputed to thee as well as if thou thy self had killed the man.
And no marvel, since John the Apostle and Euangeliste, calls hatred
manslaughter.

Moreover, here are to be touched The ^a^ses of m^^der.
the causes of murder, or doing of mischief. For heerevppon stands and from
hence comes the mischiefous deed and foul offense. Murder is committed, and
the neighbor endamaged either unwittingly, or else upon pretended malice. It
is done unwittingly, whereas, when a man purposes an other thing, by ill hap,
or as I should rather say, by the providence of God, murder does ensue. As for
example, when my mind is to discharge a gunne against a Buck meaning to kill
the beast, by happ I strike a man, who unawares to me was in the same wood
cutting timber: or else when as upon simplicity I give my friend a draught of
poison, where mine intent was to have given him a medicine to recover his
health. For such chances as these has the Lord in the Law, and among all
nations, prepared Sainctuaries for men to flee Sanc^^^ries.
too, as places of refuge. Murders proceed of pretended malice, when I being
blinded with private greedines do go about to take from an other man that
which is his, and for resistance do kill him if he yield it not to me. Of
that sort are many wars and foughten battles now a days, and of that sort
are robberies and murders committed by the high ways side. That also is
pretended murder, when I, for injury that an other man does me, do revenge
me self by killing him. Or else when I being mad with anger, or overcome with
wine, do murder the man, whom otherwise if I were not in that illfauoured
taking, I would make much off and love very heartily.

But now how foul and detestable an offense murder is, that proceeds How
great an offense murder is.
of malice, I thinck it expedient for me to declare to you, and you to marcke
in this that follows. For the consideration thereof being thoroughly scanned,
must needs undoubtedly work so in the hearts of men, that fewer murders
shall be committed, and that every one shall endeavor himself the more by
suppressing anger, to preserve mankind, who is the holy similitude of God
himself. The very deed of murder it self fights directly and disobediently
against ye eternal God, who is the life and salvation of the world. For murder
destroys the very image of God. Because man is created to the similitude and
likeness of God. If a man should of purpose deface the image of the King or
Prince set up at their commandment, he should be accused of treason
committed: in how great danger is he then that does destroy a man, which is
the reasonable, lively and very picture of God himself. We read that
Theodosius the Emperor did determine to destroy a great number of the Citizens
of Antioch, for none other cause, but for overthrowing yt Image that was set
up, for the honor of Placilla Augusta: But thereunto is added, yt one
Macedonius an Heremite came to the Emperors messingers and said: O my friends,
go say to the Emperor, Thou art not an Emperor only but also a man. Do not
thou cruelly destroy the image of God. Thou angrest thy maker when thou
killest his image. Consider with thee self that thou art soa^ie for an image
of brass. Now it is evident to al me^ what difference there is, betwixt a
thing that is dead, and that which has life, and a reasonable soul. Moreover
it is an easy matter in steed of one brazen image to set up more: but it is
impossible to restore one hair to them that once are slain. Finally murder is
clean contrary to the nature of man. For man cheerisheth himself, and flesh
destroys not it self, but preserves and nourishes it self so much as it
may. But al we men as many as live, are of one lump, and of the same
substantial flesh: to kill a man therefore is against man's nature. Furthermore
al men are the children of one father, of one stock, and of the same progeny:
murder therefore is directly against civil humanity, and is a plague that
reigns among men. And does not the Lord our redeemer also, require charity of
all men, which must so abound, that we may not stick to die for our
neighbor? To kill our neighbor therefore is flatly repugnaunt to Christian
religion. And take this by the way too, that the blood of man shed by murder,
cries out of the earth to heaven for reuengment. For to Cain, when he had
slain his brother, it was said: The voice of thy brothers blood cries out of
the earth, and is come up to me. For bloudshedde verily polluteth and makes
the ground accursed whereon it is shed, and is not cleansed again nor
easily appeased, until it do also (...) the guilty blood of them, which
spilte before the giltlesse blood of innocents.

Lastly murders procure and mark y^ conutters thereof with endless spots of
reproachful infamy, and that which is worst of all, it brings unto them
everlasting damnation. Wherefore Solomon in his Proverbs, says: My son if
sinners entice thee, consent not unto them. If they say, Com with us, we will
lay wait for blood: and will lurk privily for the innocent without a cause. We
will swallow them up like the grave quick and whole, as those that go down
into the pit. We shall find all manner of costly riches, and fill our houses
with the pray. Cast in thy lot among us: we will all have one purse: My son
walk not thou with them, but rather pull back thy foot from their ways. For
their feet run to evil, and are hasty to shead blood. Now David says that
The bloudthirstie man, and the hypocrite, are abominable to the Lord.

From this law is exempted the Magistrate ordained by God, whom The magistrate
may kill.
God commands to use authority and to kill, threatening to punish him most
sharply, if he neglect to kill the men whom God commands to be killed.
This sixth commandment of the Law therefore, does flatly forbid upon private
authority to kill any man. But the magistrate kills at Gods commandment,
when he puts to death those which are by law condemned for their offenses,
or when in defense of his people he does justly and necessarily arm himself
to the battle. And yet the magistrates may offend in these two points two
sundry ways. For either they do by law, that is, under the colored pretense
of law s^ay y^ giltlesse, to satisfy their own lust, hatred or covetousness: As
we read that Iesabell slew y^ just man Naboth with ye Lords Prophets. Or else
by peevish pity and foolish clemency do let them escape skotte free, whom the
Lord commanded them to kill: as Saul and Achab are reported to have sinned in
letting go the blouddie kings whom God commanded to be slain. And Solomon in
the 17. of his Proverbs does testify, that the Lord does as greatly hate the
magistrate that acquiteth a wicked person, as him that condemns an innocent
man. The magistrates also in making or else repelling war do offend two ways
in this sort. For either they do unjustly themselves make war upon other
men, and entangle their people therein: Or else they suffer foreign enemies
to rob and spoil the people committed to their charge, and do not with such
force, as they may, keep off and defend that open wrong and manifest injury.
Both these offenses are of sundry sorts, and therewithal so great that they
can hardly be purged. Thou read therefore that the holy kings of Israel
did never make war upon any body, unless ye Lord commanded them. And they
again fought for their people, and suffered them not to be led away captive as
miserable bondslaues. For so did ye blessed Patriarch Abraham follow upon and
pursue those four kings, nay rather cutthroate robbers of the East, and
recovered by force of arms Lot, Lots substance, and the people of Sodom that
were carried away.

And such wars as these, are taken in hand, either for ye recovery, or else
for the confirmation of peace: so that the magistrates that make war in such
a cause, are rightly and in deed the children of God, because they are
peacemakers. For all peace makers are the children of God.

And now this place and argument do require that I speak somewhat that the
(...) is.
touching the office or authority of ye magistrate: which (by Gods help) I
will assay to do, not that I mean or can allege all that may be said thereof,
but that which shall seem most properly to declare the meaning of it, and is
most necessary for this present treatise.

Magistratus (which word we use for the room wherein the magistrate
^^gistra^^^, what (...).
is) does take the name A magistris populi designandis, of assigning the
masters, guiders, and captains of the people. That room and place is called
by the name of power or authority, by reason of the power that is given to it
of God. It is called by the name of Domination for the dominion that the Lord
does grant it upon yt earth. They are called Princes that have yt Dominion:
for they have a preeminence above the people. They are called Consules of
Counseling: And kings of Commanding, ruling, and governing the people: So
then ye Magistracy (that I may henceforward use this word for the magistrates
power and place) is an office, and an action in the executing of the same.
Aristotle defines the magistrate to be a keeper of the laws. Plutarch, in
that book wherein he shows that learning is required to be in a king, among
other things says: Princes are the ministers of god for the oversight and
safeguard of mortal men, to the end that they may partly distribute, and partly
keep, the good things that he does liberally give, and franckly bestow upon
them. The Magistracy, by the Scriptures, may be defined to be a divine
ordinance or action, whereby the good being defended by ye Princes (...), and
the evil suppressed by the same authority, godliness, justice, honesty,
peace, and tranquilli^ie both public and private are safely preserved. Whereby
we gather, that to govern a common weal, and to execute the office of a
magistrate, is a worship and service to God himself: God verily is delighted
therein. For the office of a magistrate is a thing most excellent, and
abounding with all good works, as in my former sermon I have declared.

Now there are three kinds of Magistracies Three kinds of Magistracies.
or gouernements of commonweals, the Monarchy, ye Aristocracie, and the
Democracie. We may call the Monarchy a kingdom wherein Monarchy.
one alone does by just and upright laws rule all things, and causes in the
common weal. For if that justice and equity be once neglected, and that this
One do against all right and reason rule all the roast, then is he a Tyrant,
Tyranny.
and his power is Tyranny, that is to say wrong and injury, which is a
disease of that troubled kingdom, and a vice that is, as it were, set ^^posite
to be the destruction of yt common weal. The Aristocracie is the superior
power Aristocracie.
of a few Peers, where a certain number of holy and upright men are chosen to
be the guides and rulers of ye people. And this did first begin by the fall
of Tyranny. For when men perceived how dangerous it was to commit the rule of
their whoale state into one man's hand, they altered the order, and gave the
charge thereof to an appointed number of chosen men, who did excel the common
sort in power and authority. But if these chief or head men use evil means
to come to authority, and neglecting the common weal, do hunt after their
own advantage, then is their government not to be called an Aristocracie, but
Oligarchie.
an Oligarchie, yt is, the violent lust of a few, and not the good and upright
government of chosen Peers. So then these few violent rulers are the
contrary to the estate where upright headmen have the preeminence.

The Democracie may be called a common Democracie.
weal, wherein all the people together bear the whole sway, and absolute
authority. And this Democracie began first by the fall of the Oligarchie. For
when the people saw that their head men did abuse their power, and waxed
violent rulers, they displaced them, and kept the authority to themselves,
meaning that every man should freely give his voice in matters touching the
commonweal. This kind of government breaks out commonly into outrageous
tumultes, I mean, into seditions and conspiracies: for no man will suffer
himself to be corrected, while every man will challenge to himself full and
absolute authority to do what he lusts, because for sooth he is one and a
member ^^ the people, in whose hands the whoale authority does consist.

Now touching the excellency of these fourms or kinds of government, it
makes not greatly to my purpose to dispute which ought to be preferred before
other. Many have preferred the Monarchy before the rest: but therewithal they
added: If he which holds the Monarchy be a good and A proverb (...) it is
(...) ^or a sub^^cte to speak a^^^nst his (...): In (...), it (...) wit^
Saints.
upright Prince. Which nevertheless is rare to be found. They also which were
of that opinion, did themselves live under Princes in Monarchies. But it is
dangerous to speak against Jupiter. Among many kings of Judah and Israel thou
shall find a very few good, or at least wise tolerable and indifferent
Princes, whereby we may perceive yt the Lord did not in vain by the mouth of
Samuel, persuade his people to keep their Aristocracie, and to be ruled by
their priests and elders, as God by Moses and Iethro the wisest in the world,
had ordained long before. And yet none can deny but that great perils and
infinite discommodities are in the Aristocracie, but far more many in the
Democracie. But such is the condition of mortal men in this corruptible flesh,
that nothing among them is absolutely and on every side happy, and therefore
that seems to them to be most excellent, which, although it be not altogether
without inconveniences and some kind of vices, does nevertheless in
comparison of other, bring fewer perils and lesser annoyaunce. But how The
(...) must (...)
soever the case does ^^a^d, the Apostles of Christ do command us to obey the
magistrate, whether he be king, or senate of chosen me^. For Paul in his
Epistle to Titus says: Warn them to Titus.
be subject to rule and power, and to obey magistrates. For to ye Romans he
says: Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: For no power is but of
god: and those powers that are, are or deined by god. Again to Tim. he says I
exhort you that prayers be made for kings, and for all that are in authority.
If therefore any man live in a Monarchy, let him obey the king: if in a ce^mon
weal of what title soever, let him be ruled by ye Consuls, Tribunes, headmen
and elders of the people. For we ought rather to obey ye ordinance of God,
than over euriously to dispute of the kinds of gouernements, which is the
better or worse than other.

And in all cases truly, the magistrate is very necessary and cannot The
(...) and the beg^^ning.
be missing among men, yea, he is so necessary yt without the magistrates
help, the state of men can hardly prosper nor easily stand. Neither do thou
read that the state and commonweal of the Israelites was ever at any time in
greater danger and peril of undoing, than it was in the middle time betwixt
Sampson and Heli, when they were governed by no magistrates, but did every man
what he thought good himself. For all men even from their birth are blindly
ledd with self love, and therefore they seek their own advantage, nothing
pleases them but what they do them selves, they utterly mislyke the deeds and
words of other men, yea such is our fond affection and opinionatiue sense,
that how evil soever our causes are, yet we will not stick to face them out
with a card of ten, and to color them with law and equity. He that will
stand in denial hereof, did never consider man's disposition. The people of
Israel at their delivery out of Egypt saw wonderful signs, they were
meruaylously fedd from heaven in y^ desert, and did every day behold new
miracles. But yet hearke^ (my brethren) and consider what Moses, ye meekest and
gentillest man yt ever was does say, touching this holy people, this people of
God, whom God had chosen to be a peculiar people unto himself. How shall I
alone (says he to the people) bear your trouble, your burden, and the
st^ifes that are among you? What may be thought of that moreover, yt in the
most sure fellowship of the ancient and Apostolic Church, yea in those very
vessels, which were regenerate, the wrangling disposition of slesh did show it
self? For the Greeks murmured against the Hebrews, because their widows in
the daily ministry, were little regarded. The Corinthians also go to law
before Heathen Judges, and therefore does Paul very sharply rebuke them, and
charge them to appoint honest judges among themselves to take up matters
betwixt them that were at variance Let no man therefore make this objection and
say, that the old people of Israel were a carnal people and not regenerate.
For we see that eue^ in the regenerate, the roliques of flesh remain, which
ever and anon, when occasion is offered, do show forth themselves, and trouble
the quiet state of every thing. For I will not now say that the greater sort of
men do rather follow the flesh, than the spirit. And for that cause, God, who
loves man, who keeps and preserves civility, peace, and humane society,
has prepared and applied a medicine against those grievous diseases of men,
he has appointed the magistrate, I say, to step betwixt them that strive with
the authority of law and equity, to judge and discuss matters betwixt them
that are at variance, to bridle and suppress wrong and affections, and lastly
to save the giltlesse and innocents. Whosoever subuerteth this ordinance of
God, till such time as men do leave their wayward disposition, he brings
utter confusion to every state, and aydeth wrongful dealers and violent robbers
to oppress and root out the best sort of people. By this verily The
Magistrate ordained by God for the good of of men.
which hitherto we have alleged it is manifestly apparaunt that the
magistrate is ordained by God for the safeguard of the good, and punishment of
the evil, I mean for the good and quiet state of mortal men. Wherefore we
read yt from the beginning, there have been magistrates in the world. Hereunto
do appertain these testimonies of ye holy Scripture. Moses in y^ Law calls,
The judges, Gods, and this judgment, says he, is Gods. From whence also
Iosaphat borrowed that saying which he spoke to y^ Judges, where he says: See
what ye do: For ye judge not to man, but to the Lord, which is with you in the
causes which ye judge: let the fear of God therefore be in your hearts. S.
Peter says: That we must obey the magistrates for the Lords sake, by whom he is
ordained to the praise of the good, and terrifying of the evil. And Paul the
teacher of ye Gentiles says: There is no power but of God, and the powers that
are, are ordained by God: and whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God: and he that resists, shall receive to him self damnation.
For rulers are not fearful to them that do well, but to the evil. For he is
the minister of God, revenger of wrath on him that does evil. The magistrate
therefore is of God, his office is good, holy, pleasing God, just, profitable,
and necessary for men, and the rulers which do rightly execute their office,
are the friends and worshippers of God, they are his elect instruments, by whom
he works man's health and safeguard. We have examples hereof in Adam, all the
Patriarchs, our father Noe, Joseph, Moses, Iosue, Gedeon, Samuel, David,
Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, Daniel, and many other after the time of Christ,
who rightly executed the office of magistrates.

Now many there are which will have ye magistrate to be of two sorts, to wit,
either good or badde. The good A good Magistrate and a badde.
magistrate is he, who being lawfully ordained, does lawfully execute his
office and duty. The evil magistrate is he, which when he has by evil
means got the authority, does turn and dispose it as he himself lusts.
And hereupon, the question is wont to be demanded: Whether an evil, that is,
a tyrannical magistrate be of God Wheth^^ an (...) be of (...).
or no? To this I aunsweare, yt God is the author of good and not of evil: For
God by nature is good, and all his purposes are good, being directed to y^
health and preservation, not to the destruction, of us men. Therefore the good
and healthful ordeyning of the magistrate without al doubt is of god himself,
who is the author of all goodness.

But here it is requisite that we make a difference betwixt the office which
is the good ordinance of God, and the evil person that does not rightly
execute that good ^ffice. If therefore in the magistrate evil be found, and
not ye good for which he was ordained, that comes of other causes, and the
fault thereof is in the men and persons which neglecte God, and corrupt the
ordinance of God, and not in God, nor in his ordinance: for either the evil
Prince seduced by the devil corrupts the ways of God, and by his own fault
and naughtiness transgresses Gods ordinance, so far, yt he does worthily
deserve the name of devilish power, and not divine authority. We have an
example hereof in ye magistrate of Jerusalem. For although he were able to
refer the beginning of his power by degrees unto Moses, and so unto God
himself who did ordeyne it, yet for because he takes the Savior in the
Gardeyne and byndeth him, to his servant it is said, Ye are come out as it
were to a thief with swords and staves, When I was daily with you in the
temple, ye stretched not forth your hands against me. But this is even your
hour and the power of darcknesse. Lo here he calls the ordinary
magistrate the power of the devil when he abus^th his power. What could be
more evidently spoken? But here ye must mark, that the reproach was in the
person, and not in the office. Likewise also the Roman Empire was ordained by
God, as by the visions of Daniel it is clearly evident. And yet when Nero not
without Gods ordinance bare the sway in the Empire, whatsoever he did as king
and Emperor, contrary to the office of a good king, that did he not of God,
but of the devil. For whereas he honge up and beheaded the Apostles of Christ,
moving a bloody persecution against the Church, that sprang not from
elsewhere, than from the devil the father of murder. So then verily we ought
not at any time to defend the tyrannical power, and say that it is of God. For
tyranny is not a divine, but a devilish kind of government, and tyrauntes
themselves are properly the servants of the devil, and not of God. Or else
otherwise some people do deserve by their wicked deeds to have, not a king,
but a tyrant. So then the peoples sin is an other cause that evil
magistrates are found in commonweals. In the mean while the king is of the
Lord, and sometime he makes an hypocrite reign. Wherefore the evil
magistrate is of God, even as also seditions, wars, plagues, hayle, frost,
and other miseries of mankind come from the Lord, as punishment of sin and
wickedness, which the Lord has appointed to be executed, as he himself
says: I will give them children to be their kings, and infants shall rule
them: because their tongue and heart has been against the Lord. Likewise the
Lord stirred up the cruel kings of Assyria and Babylon against his City, and
own peculiar people, whose living was not agreeable to their profession.

But now how and after what sort subjects ought to be affected toward How the
opp^essed must behave themselves under tyrannical princes.
such hard, cruel, and tyrannical Princes, we learn partly by the example of
David, and partly by the doctrine of Jeremy and the Apostles. David was not
ignorant what kind of man Saul was, a wicked and merciless fellow, yet
notwithstanding he fledd to escape his hands: and when he had occasion given
him once or twice to kill him, he slew him not, but spared the tyrant and
reverenced him, as though he had been his father. Ieremias prayed for Ioachim
and Zedechias wicked kings both, and obeyed them until they came to matters
flatly contrary to Gods religion. For where I spoke touching the honor due to
parents, there did I by the scriptures prove that we ought not to obey the
wicked commandments of godless magistrates. Because it is not permitted to
magistrates to ordeine or appoint any thing contrary to Gods law, or the law
of Nature.

Now the Acts of the Apostles teach us in what sort the Apostles did behave
themselves in dealing with tyrannical magistrates. Let them therefore that are
vexed with tyrants, and oppressed with wicked magistrates, take this advice to
follow in that perplexity. First let them call to remembrance, and consider
what and how great their sins of idolatry and uncleanness are, which have
already deserved the revenging anger of their jealous God: and then let them
thinck that God will not wtdraw his scourge, unless he see that they redress
their corrupt manners, and evil religion. So then first they must go about and
bring to pass a full reformation of matters in religion, and perfect amendment
of manners amiss. Then must they pray continually that God will vouchsafe to
pull and draw his oppressed people out of the mire of mischief wherein they
stick fast. For that counsel did the Lord himself in the 18. after Luke,
give to those that are oppressed, promising therewithal assured aid and
present delyuerie.

But what and how the oppressed must pray, there are examples extant in the 9.
of Daniel, and in the 18. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Let them also
whose minds are vexed, call to remembrance the sayings of Peter and Paul the
chief of the Apostles. The Lord (says Peter) knows how to deliver his from
temptation as he delivered Lot. Paul says, God is faithful, and will not
suffer his to be tempted ^. Cor. 10. ^. Pet. 2.
above their strength, yea he will turn their temptations unto the best. Let
them call to mind the captivity of Israel, wherein Gods people were detained at
Babylon, by the space of 70. years: and therewithal let them think upon the
goodly comfort of the captives which Esaie has expressed from his 40. chapter
unto his 49. Let us persuade our selves that God is good, merciful, and
omnipotent, so that he can when he will, at ease deliver us. He has many
ways and means to set us at liberty. Let us have a regard only that our
impenitent, filthy, and wicked life, do not pronoke the Lord to augment and
prolong the tyrauntes cruelty. The Lord is able upon the sodeyne, to chaung
the hearts of Princes (for the hearts of kings are in the hands of the Lord, as
the rivers of water, to turn them which way he will) and to make them, which
have been hitherto most cruelly set against us, to be our friends and
favorable to us: and them, which have heretofore most blouddilie persecuted
the true religion, to embrace the same most ardently, and with a burning zeal
to promote it so far as they may. We have evident examples hereof in the
books of the kings of Esdras, and Nehemias, and in the volume of Daniels
Prophecy. Nabuchodonosor whose purpose was to toast with fire and utterly to
destroy the martyrs of God for true religion, was immediately after compelled
to praise God, because he saw the martyrs preserved, and he himself does by
Edictes given out, publicly proclaim and set forth the only true God, and
his true religion. Darius ye son of Assuerus, suffers Daniel to be cast
into ye Lions den: but straightway he draws him cut again, and shuts
up Daniels enemies in the same d^nne, to be torn in pieces by the famished
beasts. Cyrus the puissaunt king of Persia, aduaunceth true religion: Darius
son of Hystaspes whose surname was Artaxerxes, did by all means possible
aid and set forward the godly intent of Gods people, in building up again
their city and temple. Let us not doubt therefore of Gods aid and helping
hand. For God sometime does utterly destroy, and sometime he chasteneth
untoward tyraunts, with some horrible and sodeine disease: as it is evident yt
it happened to Antiochus, Herod the great, and to his nephue Herod Agrippa, to
Maxentius also, and other enemies of God, and tyraunts over men. Sometime he
stirs up noble capitaines and valiant men to displace tyraunts, and set
Gods people at liberty: as we see many examples thereof in the books of
Judges and kings. But least any man do fall to abuse those examples, let him
consider their calling by God. Which calling if he have not or else do
prevent, he is so far from doing good in killing the tyrant, that it is to
be feared, least he (...) of ^^antes.
do make the evil double so much as it was before. Thus much hitherto. Now I
return to that which by my digression, remains yet unspoken of.

Here I have to speak somewhat touching the election of magistrates: The
elec^ion of (...).
and first to whom the choice and ordering of the magistrate does belong:
Secondarilie, whom and what kind of men it is best to choose to be magistrates:
Who ^^ght to choose the^.
and lastly the manner and order of consecrating those which once are chosen.
Touching the election of magistrates, to whom that office should beelong, no one
and certain rule can be prescribed. For in some places yt whole communaltie
does choose their peers. In other places the Peers do choose the magistrates.
And in other places Princes come to it by succession and birth. In discussing
which of these orders should be the best, it were but folly to make much ado.
For to every kingdom and every city is worthily left their country facion,
unless it be altogether too too corrupt, and not to be borne withal. But
where Princes come to it by birth, there earnest prayer must be made to the
Lord, that he will grant them to be good.

Now for the good election of magistrates, What ^inde of (...) ^^ght to ^^
chosen ^^ be Ma^^strates, ^^ the de^^iption (...) a good (...).
the Lord himself declares whom and what kind of men he will have to be
chose^, in these very words. Look over all the people, consider them
diligently, and choose from among them men of courage, such as fear God,
speakers of truth, and haters of covetousness, and make them rulers over
thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tennes, to
judge the people at all seasons. Four things the Lord requires in a good
governor. First that he be a man of courage, of strength or force, that is,
which has ability to do the thing whereunto he is appointed. That ability
consists in mind rather than in body. For it is required that he be not a
fool, but wise and skillful in that which he has to do: because the office
of a Captain is to know how to set his army in order of battle, rather
than to fight himself, as also the duty of a Surueyor of works, is to know
how buildinges must be erected, rather than to work himself, or as a Chariot
man ought rather to know how to guide his Carte in driving, than to draw it
himself. And therewithal too, there is demanded a boldness of stomach to
dare to do the thing, that he already knows: For constancy and
sufferaunce, are very needful in every Captain.

In the second place that is set down, which in deed is the first, Let him
fear God, let him be religious, and not superstitious. No idolatrer preserves
the common weal, but rather destroys it, and a wicked man defends not
truth and true Religion, The Magistrate must be sound in religion.
but persecuteth and drives them out of his jurisdiction. Let this magistrate
of ours therefore be of the right Religion, sound in faith, believing the
word of GOD, and knowing that God is present among men, and does repaye to
whom he list according to their desartes. And for that cause Justinian the
Emperor in Nouellis Constitutionib. 109. does freely confess that al his
help is of God, and that therefore it is convenient that the making of all
laws should depend upon him alone. Immediately after he says: It is known
very well to all men that they in whose hands the Empire was before it came
to us, and especially that Leo of worthy memory, and the most sacred prince
Iustine our father, did in their constitutions flatly forbid al heretics to
be admitted soldiers in any warfare, or dealers in matters concerni^g the
common weal, that the less occasion might be given by receiving them into the
fellowship of war or handling of public affairs, for any to think, that
they corrupt the members of Gods holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. And
this decree do we establish. Thus says the Emperor. And the godly man verily
prays to God and receives wisdom at the Lords hand. And where the Princes
are Gods friends and have often conferrence with God, there is hope that those
commonweals shall prosper and flourish. But on the other side there must
needs be feared an unhappy end of that common weal where the enemies of God
have the preeminence. Thirdly there is required of him which must be chosen and
called to be magistrate, that he be true in word and deed, so that he be not
found to be an hypocrite, a liar, a deceiuer, a turnecoate, nor one which out
of one mouth, does blow both hot and cold: but faithful, simple, a plain
dealer, and blameless. He must not be more liberal in promising than in
performing. He must not be one that sets light by an oath, not a false
swearer, nor a perjured man. Fourthly because many that are in office desire
riches, and ^eeke to increase their wealth by bribes, the Lord remoueth such
from the magistracy, and forbids good magistrates to be covetous: Yea he
does expressly charge them to hate and abhor it. As he does also in an
other place, not only forbid them to take bribes, but also command them to
shake off and rid their hands of all rewards. Covetousness and greedy desire of
bribes, are ye very plagues that choke good magistrates. By covetous men and
takers of bribes, law, judgment, liberty, justice, and the country it self
is set to sale and sold to the devil for money. And now, though in this place
the Lord has named only the most pestilent mischief of all other, yet there
is no doubt but that he does inclusiuely debar all other vices and evils of
that sort, commanding them to be strange and far off from the good
magistrate and godly governor. Those vices are Pride, Envy, Anger, Diceing,
Surfeiting, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Adultery, and whatsoever else is like to
these.

This place is made more manifest by conferring it with other places Deuteronomy. ^.
in the law of God. Moses in Deuteronomie, says to the people: Bring men of
wisdom, of understanding, and of an honest life, according to your Tribes.
Three things here again does ye wise man Moses require in them that are to be
appointed magistrates in his common weal. First (says he) let them be wise.
But the beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord. Let them therefore be
ordained magistrates, that are friends to God and true religion, let them be
wise, and not foolish idiots. Secondarilie they must be men of understanding,
that is, men of experience, who by long and continual exercise in handling of
matters, are able at the first brunt to deal in all cases according to the
law. Lastly they must be men of honest report, whose life and sound
conversation are by their deeds perfectly tried and sufficiently witnessed off
unto the people: and finally they must be such as may bear authority and not
be despised as rascal and vile knaves.

In the book of Numbers also Moses Number. 27.
says: Let the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the
congregation, which may go in and out before them, and lead them in and out
that the Congregation of the Lord be not as sheep without a shepherd. By
these words of the holy Prophet we learn who are to be chose^, and how they
are to be chosen into ye office of magistrates. Moses prayed to the Lord for a
fit and a convenient man: and we therefore must pray to God, who searches all
men's hearts, that he will vouchsafe to send such men to be our magistrates, as
are meet for that room and calling. The outward show does many times deceive
us, and we judge him to be a good and godly man, who is in deed a notable
hypocrite. God alone does know the mind, we must beseech him therefore that he
suffer us not in our choice to err, or chose amiss. Let him be thought the
best and meetest for yt purpose, who is instructed with the holy spirit of
God. Furthermore he that is appointed to that office, must still be the first
and the last, and always at one end in all matters of weight and public
affairs. Some unprofitable and idle droanes there are, yt drive other forward,
and after the first onset do themselves take their ease. And some wicked
fellows there are which will appoint other what to do, but will themselves do
nothing of that which by right belonges to their office. The guide of the
people must be a man of choice elected to be magistrate, whose care is day and
night, to have an eye yt the flock of the Lord be not scattered, indaungered,
nor utterly destroyed. And thus have I hitherto told you what kind of men they
ought to be, to whom the charge is to be committed over the Lords people.

Last of all touching the manner of The manner of consecrating Magistrates.
consecrating magistrates, sondrie cities and countries have sondrie customs.
Let every country freely retain their own usual order. I for my part think
best of that manner of consecrating, wherein sumptuous pomp is little or none,
but what reason and decency seem to allow. The best and most profitable way
is in co^secrating them that are once chosen, to use a certain moderate
ceremony, and that too, in the face of all the people, that every one may
know, who they be that are the fathers of the people, to whom they owe honor,
whom they ought to obey, and for whose health and welfare they ought to pray.
The people of God had a certain prescribed ceremony, which we read that they
used in consecrating their kings and magistrates: and it is certain that it
was profitablie, and for good causes first invented, and then commanded by God
himself. The rest that is yet behind to be spoken touching the magistrate, I
mean to defer until tomorrow. And now to end with thanckisgeuing, let us
praise the Lord. etc.

Of the office of the Magistrate, whether the care of religion apperteine to
him or no: and whether he may make laws and ordinances in cases of Religion.
The seventh Sermon.
THE first and greatest thing that chiefly ought to be in a magistrate, is
easily perceived by the declaration of his office and duty. In my
yesterdayes sermon I showed you what the magistrate is, how many kinds of
magistrates there are, of whom the magistrate had his beginning, for what
causes he was ordained, ye manner and order how to choose peers, and what
kind of men should be called to be magistrates. To this let us now add what
the office and duty ^^ a magistrate properly is.

The whole office of a magistrate seems to consist in these 3. points. To The
Magistrates (...).
Order, to Judge, and to Punish. Of every one whereof, I mean to speak
severally in order as they lie.

The ordinance of the magistrate is a decree made by him for mainteyning of
religion, honesty, justice, and public peace: and it consists on ij.
points, in ordering rightly matters of religion, and making good laws for ye
preservation of honesty, justice, and common peace. But before I come to the
determining and ordering of religion, I will briefly and in few words, handle
their question, which demand, whether the care of religion do apperteine to
the magistrate, as part of his office or no? For I see many that are of
opinion, that the care and ordering of religion does belong to Bishops alone,
and that kings, princes, and senators ought not to meddle therewith.

But the catholic verity teaches Whether ^e care of religi^n belong ^o the
Magistrate.
that the care of religion does especially belong to the magistrate, and that
it is not in his power only, but his office and duty also to dispose and
advance religion. For among them of old, their kings were priests, I mean
masters and overseers of religion. Melchisedech that holy and wise Prince of
ye Chananitish people, who bare the type or figure of Christ our Lord, is
wenderfullie commended in the holy Scriptures: Now he was both king and
priest together. Moreover in ye book of Numbers, to Iosue newly ordained and
lately consecrated, are the laws belonging to religion given up and delivered.
The kings of Judah also, and the elect people of God, have for the well ordering
of religion (as I will by examples anon declare unto you) obtained very great
praise: and again as many as were slack in looking to religion, are noted
with the mark of perpetual reproach. Who is ignorant ye the magistrates
especial care ought to be to keep the common weal in safeguard and
prosperity? which undoubtedly he cannot do, unless he provide to have the
word of God preached to his people, and cause them to be taught the true
worship of God, by that means making himself as it were the minister of true
religion. In Leuiticus and Deuteronomie Leui^^^. Deuteronomy. 2^.
the Lord does largely set down the good prepared for men that are religious,
and zealous in deed, and reckons up on the other side, the evil appointed
for the contemners of true religion. But the good magistrate is commanded to
retain and keep prosperity among his people, and to repel al kind of
adversity. Let us hear also what the wise man Solomon says in his Proverbs:
Godliness and truth preserve the king, and in godliness his seat is holden up.
When the just are multiplied, the people rejoice, and when the wicked rules,
the people lamenteth. The king by judgment stablisheth his dominion, but a
tyrant overthrows it. When the wicked increase, iniquity is multiplied, and
the just shall see their decay. Where the word of God is not preached the
people decay, but happy is he that keeps the law. Whereby we gather that
they, which would not have the care of religion to apperteine to princes, do
seek and bring in the confusion of al things, the dissolution of princes, and
their people, and lastly the neglecting and oppression of the poor.
Furthermore the Lord commands the magistrate to make trial of doctrines,
and to kill those that do stubbornly teach against the scriptures and draw ye
people from the true God. The place is to be seen in ye 13, of Deuteronomy. God also
forbad ye magistrate to plant groaues or erect images: as is to be seen in the
17. of Deuteronomy. And by those particularities he did insinuate things general,
forbiding to ordeine, to nourish, and set forth superstition or idolatry,
wherefore he commanded to aduau^ce true religion: and so consequently it
follows that the care of religion belongs to ye magistrate. What may be
thought of that moreover, that the most excellent princes and friends of God,
among Gods people, did challeng to themselves the care of religion as belonging
to themselves, in so much that they exercised and took the charge thereof, eue^
as if they had been ministers of the holy things? Iosue in ye mount Hebal
caused an altar to be builded, and fulfilled all the worship of God, as it was
commanded of God by the mouth of Moses. David in bringing in and bestowing the
ark of God in his place, and in ord^^^ng the worship of God, was so diligent,
that it is wonder to tell. So likewise was Solomon David's son. Neither do I
think that any man knows not how much Abia, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias,
labored in the reformation of religion, which in their times was corrupted and
utterly defaced. The very heathen kings and princes are praised, because when
they knew the truth, they gave out edicts for the confirmation of true
religion against blasphemous mouths. Nabuchodonosor the Chaldean, the most
mighty Monarch of all ye world, than who I doubt whether any more great and
mighty did reign in the world, publishes a decree that he should be torn
in pieces, and his house made a iakes, whosoever spoke reprochfullie against ye
true God which made both heaven and earth. The place is extant in the third
Chapter of Daniels prophecy. Darius Medus the son of Assuerus king Cyrus
his uncle, says: I have decreed that all men in the whole dominion of my
kingdom do fear the God ofDaniel: as is to be seen in the sixte of Daniel.
Cyrus king of Persia loses the Jews from bondage, and gives them in charge
to repair the temple, and restore their holy rites again. Darius Persa the
son of Hystaspes says: I have decreed for every man which chau^geth any
thing of my determination touching the reparation of the temple, and the
restoring of the worship of god, that a beam be taken out of his house, and
set up, and he hanged thereon, and his house to be made a iakes. The very same
Darius again who was also called Artaxerxes says: Whosoever will not do the
law of thy God (Esdras) and the law of the king, let judgment straight way
pass upon him, either to death, or to utter rooting out, or to confiscation of
his goods, or imprisonment. All this we find in the book of Esdras.

The men, which are persuaded that An answer to an objection.
the care and ordering of religion does belong to bishopps alone, do make an
objection, and say, that these examples which I have alleged, do nothing
apperteine to us which are Christians: because they are examples of the Jewish
people. To whom mine aunsweare is. The men of this opinion ought to prove that
the Lord Jesus and his Apostles, did translate the care of religion from the
magistrate unto bishops alone: which they shall never be able to do: But we on
the other side will briefly show that these ancient princes of Gods people,
Iosue, David, and the rest were Christians verily and in deed, and that
therefore the examples, which are derived from them and applied to Christian
princes, both are and ought to be of force and effect among us at this day. I
will in the end add also the prophecy of the Prophet Esai, whereby it may
appear that even now also kings have in the Church at this day the same office,
that those ancient kings had in that Congregation which they call the Jewish
Church. There is no doubt but yt they ought to be accounted true Christians,
which being anointed with the spirit of Christ, do believe in Christ, and are
in the Sacraments made partakers of Christ. For Christ (if ye interpret the
very word) is as much to say, as anointed. Christians therefore according to
the Etymology of their name are anointed. That anointing 1. John. 2
according to the Apostles interpretation is the spirit of God, or the gift of
the holy ghost. But S. Peter testifies that the spirit of Christ was in the
kings and Prophets. And Paul affirms flatly that we have the very same
spirit of faith, that they of old had. And does moreover communicate our
Sacraments with them, where he says that they were baptized under the cloud,
and that they all drank of the spiritual rock that followed them, which rock
was Christ. Since then the case is so, ye examples truly which are derived
from the words and works of those ancient kings for the confirmation of
faith and charity, both are and ought to be of force with us. And yet I know
that every thing does not consequently follow upon the gathering of examples.
But here we have for the making good of our argument, an evident prophecy of
Esai, who foretells that kings and princes after the times of Christ, and
the revealing of the Gospel, should have a diligent care of the Church, and
should by that means become the feeders and nourices of the faithful. Now it
is evident what it is to feed and to nourish: for it is al one as if he should
have said, that they should be the fathers and mothers of the Church. But he
could not have said that rightly, if the care of religion did not belong to
Princes, but to Bishops alone. The words of Esaie are these: Behold I will
stretch out my hand unto the Gentiles, Esai. 4^.
and set up my token to the people, and they shall bring thee thy sons in
their lappes, and thy daughters on their shoulders. And kings shall be thy
nourcing fathers, and Queens thy nurcing mothers, they shall fall before thee
with their faces flat upon the earth, and lick up the duste of thy feet
etc. Shall not we say, that all this is fully performed in some Christian
princes? Among whom the first was the holy Emperor Constantine, Const^^tine
the great.
who by calling a general counsel, did determine to establish true and
sincere doctrine in the Church of Christ, with a settled purpose utterly to
root out all false and heretical fantasies and opinions. And when the
bishopps did not go rightly to work by ye true rule and touchstone of the
Gospel and of charity, he blamed them, vpbrayding them with tyrannical
cruelty, and declaring therwithal what peace the Lord had granted by his
means to the Churches. Adding moreover that it were a detestable thing, if the
bishopps forgetting to thancke God for his gift of peace, should go on among
themselves to bait one an other with mutual reproaches and taunting libells,
thereby giving occasion of delight and laughter to wicked idolatrers: when as
of duty they ought rather to handle and treat of matters of religion. For
(says he) the books of the Evangelists, Apostles, and Oracles of the
ancient Prophets, are they which must instruct us to the understanding of
Gods holy law. Let us expel therefore this quarelling strife, and think
upon the questions proposed to resolve them by the words of Scripture
inspired from above.

After him again, the holy Emperors Gratian Valentinian and Theodose
Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius, make a decree, and give out the edicte in
these very words: We will and command all people that are subject to our
gracious Empire, to be of that religion, which the very religion taught and
conueighed from Peter till now does declare, that the holy Apostle Peter did
teach to the Romans. And so forward. By this (derely beloved) ye perceive how
kings and Princes, among the people of the new Testament, have been the foster
fathers and nourices of the Church. being persuaded that the care of religion,
did first of all and especially belong to themselves.

The second objection yt they make Osias the Leper.
is the leprosy of Osias king of Judah, which he gatt by challenging to
himself the office of the Priest, while he presumed to burn incense on the
incense altar. They object the Lords commandment, who badd Iosue stand before
Eleazar the Priest, and gave the king in charge to receive the book of the
law at the Levites hands. But our disputation tends not to yt confounding of
the offices and duties of the magistrate, and ministers of the The several
offices of the Magistrates and of the ministers must not be confounded.
Church, as that we would have the king to preach, to baptize, and to minister
the Lords supper: or the priest on the other side to sit in the judgment seat,
and give judgment against a murderer, or by pronouncing sentence to take up
matters in strife. The Church of Christ has, and reteyneth several and
distinguished offices, and God is the God of order, and not of confusion.
Hereunto tends our discourse by demonstration to prove to all men that the
magistrate of duty ought to have care of religion, either in ruin to restore
it, or in soundness to preserve it, and still to see that it proceed
according to the rule of the word of the Lord. For to that end was the law of
God given into the kings hands by the priests, that he should not be
ignorant of Gods will touching matters Ecclesiastical and political, by
which law he had to govern the whole estate of all his realm. Iosue the
Captain of Gods people is set before Eleazar in deed, but yet he has
authority to command the priests, and being a politic governor is joined
as it were in one body with the ecclesiastical ministers. The politic
magistrate is commanded to give ear to the ecclesiastical ruler, and the
ecclesiastical minister must obey the politic governor in all things which
the law commands. So then the magistrate is not made subject by God to ye
priests as to Lords, but as to the ministers of the Lord, the subjection and
duty which they owe, is to the lord himself and to his law, to which the
priests themselves also ought to be obedient, as well as the Princes. If the
lips of the priest err from the truth and speak not the word of God, there
is no cause why any of the common sort, much less the Prince, should either
hearken unto, or in one title reverence ye priest. The lips of the priest
(says Malachie) keep knowledge, and they seek the Law at his mouth: because
he is the messinger of the lord of hoastes. To refuse to hear such priests, is
to repel God himself. Such priests as these the godly princes of Israel did
always aid and assist, false priests they did disgrade, those which
neglected their offices they rebuked sharply, and made decrees for the
executing and right administering of every office.

Of Solomon we read, that he put Princes have done and dealt in religion
Abiathar beside the priesthood of the Lord (that he might fulfill the word of
the Lord which he spoke of Heli in Silo) and made Zadok priest in Abiathars
steed. In the second book of 2. Parali. 8.
Chronicles, it is said: And Solomon set the sorts of priests to their offices
as David his father had ordered them, and the Levites in their watches, for to
praise and minister before the priests day by day, as their course did
require. In the same book again Ioiada the priest does in deed annointe Ioas
king, but nevertheless the king does call ye priest, and give him a
commandment to gather money to repair the temple. Moreover that religious
and excellent Prince Ezechias, called the priests and Levites, and said unto
them: Be ye sanctified and sanctify ye the house of the Lord our God, and
suffer no uncleanness to remain in the sanctuary. My sons be not slack
now, because the Lord has chosen you to minister unto him self. He did also
appoint singars in the house of the Lord, and those that should play on
musical instruments in the Lords temple. Furthermore king Ezechias ordained
sondrie companies of priests and Levites, according to their sondrie offices,
every one according to his own ministry. What may be said of that too, that
even he did divide to the priests their portions and stipends throughout the
priesthood? The same king gave charge to all the people, to ^eepe holy yt
feast of Passover, writing to them all such letters as priests are wont to
write, to put them in mind of religion and hearty repentance. And after all
this, there is added: And the king wrought that which was good, right, and just
before the Lord his God. When Princes therefore do order religion according to
the word of God, they do the thing that pleases the Lord. This and the like
is spoken again by the godly Prince Josias. Who therefore will hereafter say,
yt the care of religion belongs unto bishops alone?

The Christian Emperors following the example of ye ancient kings as of their
fathers, did with great Princes have (...) relig^^^
care provide for the state of true religion in the Church of Christ. Arcadius
and Honorius did determine, that so often as matters of religion were called in
question, the bishopps should be sommoned to assemble a counsel. And before
them again, the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, established a
law wherein they declared to the world, what faith and religion they would have
all men to receive and retain, to wit the faith and doctrine of S. Peter. In
which edicte also they proclaimed all them to be heretics, which thought or
taught y^ contrary: allowing them alone to be called catholics, which did
persevere in S. Peter's faith. By this we gather yt the proper office of y^
priests, is to determine of religion by proofs out of the word of God, and
that the princes duty is to a^de ye priests, in advancement and defense of
true religion. But if it happen at any time, that the priests be slack in doing
their duty, then is it the princes office by compulsion, to enforce the
priests to live orderly according to their profession, and to determine in
religion according to the word of God. The Emperor Justinian, in Nouellis
Co^stitut. 3. writing to Epiphanius Archbishop of Constantinople, says: We
have (most reverend Patriarch) assigned to your holiness the disposition of
all things that are honest, seemly, and agreeable to the rule of the holy
scriptures, touching the apointing and ordering of sacred bishops and reverend
clearkes. And in the 7. Constitution he says: We give charge and
commau^deme^t that no bishop have license to sell, or make away any
immoueables, whether it be in houses or lands belonging to the Churches.
Again in the 57. Constitution, he forbids to celebrate the holy mysteries
in private houses. He adds the penalty and says: For the houses wherein it
is done shall be confiscate and sold for money, which shall be brought into the
Emperors Exchequer. In the 67 Constitution, he charge all bishops not to be
absent from their Churches: but if they be absent, he wills yt they should
receive no commodity or stipend of the provincial stuards, but yt their
revenue should be employed on y^ Churches necessities. In the 123. constitution
the lieuetenauntes of every province are commanded to assemble a counsel for
the use and defense of ecclesiastical laws, if the bishops be slack to
look thereunto. And immediately after he says: We do utterly forbid all
bishops, prelates and clea^kes, of what degree soever, to play at tables, to
keep company with diceplayers, to be lookers on upon gamesters, or to run
to gaze upon May games or pageants.

I do not allege all this as Canonical Scriptures, but as proofs to declare
that Princes in the primative church had power, official authority, and a
usual custom, granted by God (as Esai did prophecy) and derived from the
examples of ancient kings, to command bishops, and to determine of Religion
in the Church of Christ.

As for them which object ye churches Ecclesiastical privileges.
privilege, let them know that it is not permitted to any prince, nor any
mortal man, to grant privileges contrary to the express co^maundeme^ts and
very truth of gods word. S. Paul affirmed that he had power given him to
edify but not to destroy. I am the briefer, because I will not stand to prove
that they are unworthy of indifferent privileges which are not such as
priests and Christ his ministers should be, but are soldiers rather and
wicked knaves, full of all kind of mischief. Among other things in the Canon
Law Distinct. 40, we find this written. See to your selves, brethren, how
ye sit upon the seat: for the seat makes not the priest, but the priest
the seat: the place sanctifies not the man, but the man the place. Every
priest is not a holy man, but every holy man is a priest. He yt sits well
upon the seat, receives ye honor of the seat: but he that sits ill upon
the seat, does injury unto the seat. Therefore an evil priest gets blame
by his priest hoode, and not any dignity. And thus much thus far touching
this matter.

Since now that I have declared unto you (dearly beloved) that the care of
religion does belong to the magistrate too, and not to the bishopps alone, and
that the magistrate may make laws also in cases of religion, it is requisite
that I inquire what kind of laws those are that the magistrates may make in
matters of religion.

There is no cause why the king or magistrate should suppose that power What
laws the magistrate ought to appoint concerning religion.
is given to him to make new laws touching God, the worship of God, or his
holy mysteries: or to appoint a new kind of true justice and goodness. For as
every magistrate is ordained of God, and is Gods minister, so must he be ruled
by God, and be obedient to Gods holy word and commandment, having evermore
an eye unto that, and depending still upon that alone. The scripture which is
y^ word of God, does abundauntly enough set down all that which is proper to
true religion: yea the Lord does flatly forbid to add too, or take any thing
from his holy word? The magistrate therefore makes no new laws touching God,
and the honor to be given to God, but does religiously receive and keep, does
put in ure and publish those ancient laws in that kingdom which God has
allotted him unto. For hereunto apperteineth the giving of the book of Gods
law unto the kings of Israel, that they might learn thereby the way to do the
things which they of duty ought to see done. To Iosue the Lord does say: See
that thou do observe and do according to all the law that Moses my servant
commanded thee. Thou shall not turn from it, either to the right hand or to
the left. Neither shall the book of this law depart out of thy mouth, but
occupy thy mind therein day and night, that thou may observe and do
according to all that is written therein. For then thou shall make thy way
prosperous, and then thou shall do wisely. Devout and holy Princes therefore
did do their faithful and diligent endeavor to cause the word of God to be
preached to the people, to retain and preserve among the people the laws,
ceremonies and statutes of god, yea they did their best to spread it to al men
as far as they could, and as place and time required, to apply it holilie to
the states and persons: on the other side they were not slack to banish and
drive away false doctrine, profane worshipings of God, and blasphemies of his
name, but settled themselves utterly to overthrow and root it out for ever.
In this sort (I say) godly magistrates, did make and ordeine devout laws for
the maintenance of religion. In this sort they bore a godly and devout care
for matters of religion.

The cities which the Levites had to possess, were of old their schools of
(...)
Israel. Now Iosue did appoint those cities for studies sake, and the cause of
godliness. King Ezechias was no less careful for the sure payment and revenue
of the ministers stipe^ds, than he was for the restoring and renewing of every
office. For honor and aduaunceme^t makes learning to flourish: when need and
necessity is driven to seek out sondrie shifts: beggarie sets religion to
sale, much more the invented lies of men's own mouths. Iosaphat sends
Senators and other officers with the priests and teachers through al his
kingdom. For his desire was by all means possible to have Gods word preached
with authority and a certain majesty, and being preached to have it defended
and put in ure to the bringing forth of good works. King Josias does together
with idolatry and profane worshippinges of God, destroy the false priests
that were to be found: setting up in their steeds the true teachers of Gods
word, and restoring again sincere religion: even as also king Ioas (having
rebuked the Levites) did repair the decayed buildings of the holy temple. I
am not able to run through all the Scriptures, and rehearce all the examples
in them expressed: let ye Godly Prince or magistrate learn by these few, what
and how he ought to determine touching laws for religion.

^^^isers of new fan (...) wor^^ippes are ^^arsed of God.
On the other side Ahia the Silonite says to Jeroboam. Thus says the Lord:
Thou shall reign according to all that thy soul desires, and shall be king
over Israel. And if thou hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk
in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, that thou keep my statutes and
my commandments, as David my servant did, then will I be with thee, and
build thee a sure house. But the wretch despised those large promises, and
rejecting Gods word, his temple at Jerusalem, and his lawful worship, refusing
also the Levites, he made him priests of the dregs and rascal sort of
people, he built himself new temples, which he decked, nay rather disgraced
with images and idols, ordeyning and offering sacrifices not taught in Gods
word, by that means inuenting a certain new kind of worshipping god, and a
new manner of religion. And although his desire was to seem to be willing to
worship God, yet is he by God condemned for a wicked man. Hearken I pray, the
sentence of the Lord, which he denounces against him: Thou have done evil
(says Ahia as the Lord had taught him) above all that were before thee. For
thou have gone and made the other Gods, and moulte^ images, to provoke me, and
have cast me behind thy back. Therefore I will bring evil upon the house
of Jeroboam, and will root out from Jeroboam even him that pisseth against the
wall, and him that is in priso^n and forsaken in Israel, and will take away the
remnaunte of the house of Jeroboam, as one carries away dunge till all be gone.
And al these things were fulfilled according to the saying of the Lord as the
Scripture witnesses in these words: When Baasa was king, he smote all the
house of Jeroboam, and left nothing that breathed, of that that was Ieroboams.
But ye very same king being nothing the better or wiser by an others mishap,
and miserable example of his predecessor, sticks not to continue, to teach
the people, to publish and defend the straung and foreign religion, contrary
to the word of God, which Jeroboam had begun. But what followed thereuppon?
Forsothe the Lord by the preaching of Hanani the Prophet does say unto him:
Forasmuch as I exalted the out of the dust, and made thee prince over my people
Israel, and thou have walked in the way of Jeroboam, and have made my people
Israel to sin, to anger me with their sins, behold I will root out the
posterity of Baasa, and the posterity of his house, and will make thy house
like the house of Jeroboam. Which was performed (as the scripture says) by
Sim^^ captain of ye hoaste of Israel. For he destroyed king Hela the son of
Baasa when he was drunken, and all his posterity. Amri succeeded in the
kingdom who was the father of Achab that mischesous cutthroate, whom the
Syrians sieve in fighting a battle. After him reigned his sons Ochosias and
Ioram. But when they left the religion taught in the word of God, to follow
the new tradition of king Jeroboam, and had thereunto added the worshipping of
the shameful idol Baal, they were utterly (at last) destroyed by the means
of Iehu a very just, although a rigorous prince. The offspring of Amri reigned
about the space of 40. years, not without the sheading of much innocent blood,
but it was at last destroyed, when yt measure of iniquity was fulfilled, and
was utterly plucked up at the roots by ye just judgment of Almighty God. Let
al Princes and magistrates therefore learn by these wonderful and terrible
examples, to take heed to themselves how they devise any new religion, or
alter the lawful and ancient manner of worshipping, which God himself has
ordained already. Our faithful Lord is our good God, who has fully,
simply, and absolutely set down in his word his true religion and lawful
kind of worship, which he has taught all m^n to keep alone and for
evermore: Let all men therefore cleave fast unto it, and let them die in
defense thereof that mean to live eternally. They are punished from above
whosoever do add too, or take away any thing from the religion and kind of
worship first ordained and appointed of God. Marcke this ye great men and
Princes of authority. For the keeping or not heeping of true religion, is the
root from whence abundant fruit of felicity, or else utter unhappiness
does spring and bud out. He therefore that has ears to hear let him hear.
Let no man suffer himself to be seduced and carried away, with any colored
intent, how goo^ly to the eye secuer it be, which is in deed a mere vanity
and detestable iniquity. To God obedience is much more acceptable than
sacrifices are. Neither do the decrees of the highest need any whit at al our
fond additions.

Here follows now ye second part of the magistrates ordinance, which (...).
consists in making good laws for the preservation of honesty, justice, and
public peace. Which is likewise accomplished in good and upright laws. But
some there are who think it mere tyranny, to lay laws on free men's backs, as
it were a yoke upon necks not used to labor: supposing that every one ought
rather to be left to his own will and discretion. The Apostle in deed did say:
The law is not given for the just, but for the unjust. But the cause, why the
law is not given to the just, is, because he is just: For the just works
justice, and does of his own accord the thing which ye law exacteth of every
mortal man. Wherefore, the law is not troublesome to the just man, because
it is agreeable to the mind and thoughts of upright livers, who do embrace it
with all their hearts. But the unjust desires nothing more than to live as he
iusteth, he is not conformable in any point to the law, and therefore must
he by the law be kept under, and brideled from marring himself and hurting
other. So then, since to good men the laws are no troublesome burden, but an
acceptable pleasure, which are also necessary for the unjust, as ordained for
the brideling of lawless and unruly people, it follows consequently that
they are good and profitable for all men, and not to be rejected of any man.
What may be said of that moreover, that God himself, who did foresee the
disposition of us men, what we would be, and has still favored the true
liberty, which he desired always to have preserved among his people, as one
that ever meant them good, and never did ordeine the thing that should turn
to their hinderaunce or discommoditie, that God himself (I say) was their
lawegiuer, and has not suffered any age at any time to live as people without
all law? Yea too, those commonweals have been happy always, that have
admitted laws, and submitted themselves to be governed by laws: When as
contrarily those kingdoms have of all other been most miserable, and torn
in pieces by civil dissentions and foreign enemies, which having banished
upright laws, did strive to maintain their own kind of freedom, their
vncomptrolled dealing, and licentious liberty, that is, their beastly lust
and uncivil rudeness. Good laws therefore are for the health and preservation
of the people, and necessary for the peace and safeguard of commonweals and
kingdoms. Wherefore it is a wonder to see the folly of ^ome Christians, since
the very Heathens have given so honest report of laws and lawegiuers. They
took their lawegiuers for Gods, confessing thereby that good laws are ye gift
of God. But the gift of God cannot be superfluous and unprofitable. Plutarch
called laws the life of cities. Demosthenes did expressly confess that laws
are the gifts of God. Cicero named laws the bonds of the city (because
without laws it is loosed and dispersed) the foundation of liberty, and the
wellspring of justice and perfect honesty. For laws undoubtedly are the
strongest sinews of the common weal, and life of the magistrates: so that
neither the magistrates can without the laws conveniently live and rule the
weal public, nor the laws without the magistrates show forth their strength
and lively force. The magistrate therefore is the living The Magistrate (...) a
law i^dued wit^ life.
law, and the law is the dumb magistrate. By executing and applying the
law, the law is made to live and speak. Which those Princes do not consider
that are wont to say, Wir sind das racht: we are the right, we are the law.
For they suppose yt they at their pleasure may command what they list, and
that all men by and by must take it for law. But that kind of ruling without
al doubt is extreme tyranny. The saying of the Poet is very well known,
which represents the very words of a tyrant.

I say it, and it shall be so,
my lust shall be the law.
The Prince in deed is y^ living law, if his mind obey the written laws, and
square not from the law of nature. Power and authority therefore is subject
unto laws. For unless the Prince in his heart agree with the law, in his
breast do write ye law, and in his words and deeds express the law, he is
not worthy to be called a good man, much less a Prince. Again, a good Prince
and magistrate has power over the Law, and is master of the laws, not that
they may turn, put out, undo, make and unmake them as they list at their
pleasure, but because he may put them in practice among ye people, apply them
to the necessity of the state, and attemper their interpretation to ye meaning
of the maker.

They therefore are deceived as far as heaven is wide, which thinck To put
too, and take from ^awes.
for a few privileges of Emperors and kings, granted to the magistrate to
add, diminish, or change some point of the law, that therefore they may
utterly abolish good laws, and live against all law and seemelinesse. For as
no Emperors or kings are permitted to grant any privileges contrary to
justice, goodness, and honesty: so if they do grant any such privilege, it
ought not to be received or taken of good subjects for a good tourn or
benefit, but to be counted rather, (as it is in deed) their utter destruction
and clean overthrow. Among all men at all times and of all ages, the meaning
and substance of ye laws touching honesty, justice, and public peace is
kept unviolable, if change be made it is in circumstances, and the law is
interpreted as the case requires, according to justice and a good end. The law
says: Let no man kill an other: let him that kills an other be killed
himself. That law remains for ever unchangeable, neither is it lawful for
any man at any time, to put it out or wipe it away. And yet the rigor of the
law may be diminished, and the law it self favorably interpreted: as for
example. If a man kill one, whom he loves entirely well, and kill him by
chance, and not of set purpose, or pretended malice, so that when he has
done he is soarie for it at the very heart, and would (if it were possible)
buy his life again with what soever he has to give for it: in such a case
the killer ought not to be killed, and therein the magistrate may dispense with
the rigor of the law, An other bears a deadly and continual grudge to one,
whom he kills, and goes about to color the matter under the pretense of
hap and misfortune. For he sought occasion, that he might for himself have
a show of chauncemedley. In such a case as this, the magistrate cannot chaung
any jot of the law, but must needs kill him whom the meaning of the law
commands to kill. I could allege more examples like unto these, but my care
is of purpose so much as I may, not to be too tedious unto you with too a long
a discourse. By this that I have spoken it is apparauntly evident, that laws
are good and not to be broken, and how far forth they do admit the Princes
(...), that is, the Princes moderation, interpretation, limitation or
dispensation, least peradventure that old and accustomed Proverb be rightly
applied unto them: Law with extremity, is extreme injury.

Hitherto I have declared that laws are good, profitable, necessary, Wh^^
mann^^ laws mag(...) ought use.
and not to be broken: it remains now to tell what and what kind of laws
the magistrate ought most chiefly to use for the ordering and mainteyning of
honesty, justice and public peace according to his office. Some there are
whose opinion is, that the magistrate ought not to use any written laws, but
that he should rather give sentence as he thought best according to natural
equity, as the circumstances Written ^^wes are ^eedfull.
of place, time, persons, and cases do seem to require. Other some there are
that do their endeavor to thrust into all kingdoms and commonweals, the
Judicial laws of Moses. And some there are which having once rejected the
law of Moses, will have no judgment given in law, but what is derived out of
the laws of heathen Princes. But since they that have the preeminence and
magistrates authority, are men either good or bad: and since that even in the
best men, courtousnes, anger, hatred, favor, grief, fear, and other
affections are rife to be found, to whom I pray you have they committed the
common weal, which rejecting all written statuts and certain laws, would have
every man that is a magistrate to give judgment as he himself thinks best?
Have they not committed their common weal to the rule of a beast? But what
shall I say then of evil men that are in authority, since in the best men
thnges are so amiss? As good were a kingdom subject to the furies of hell, as
bound to the judgments of naughty men. But we will (say they) have them give
judgment according to the equity of natures law, and not after the lust of
their corrupt affection. Mine answer is to that, that they will give
judgment as affection leads them without controllment, and say that they
judged by natural equity. They cannot, they will say, judge otherwise, nor
otherwise understand the pith of the matter. They think that best which they
have determined: and nothing is done contrary to conscience: and thou for thy
labor shall be called Coram nobis for daring find fault with their sentence in
judgment. And so shall the just man perish, barbarous affections shall have the
upper hand, and naughty men rule all the roste. Yea and admit we grant all
men are good that are called to be magistrates, yet diversity of opinions that
will rise in giving of judgment, will stir up among them endless braules
and continual troubles. If all things therefore be well considered, the best
way by a great deal is to put written laws in ure. Let us learn this by the
example of our eternal, wise, excellent, and mighty God, who gave to the
Jews his peculiar people such laws as at his commandment were set down in
writing. The magistrate has otherwise business enough to judge, that is, to
apply, and confer the causes with the laws, to see how far and wherein
they agree or disagree, and to judge who has offended against the law, and who
have not transgressed the law.

Now it is to be marked that in Moses Judicial law, there are many things
proper and peculiar to the Jewish Nation, and so ordained according to the
state of the place, time, and persons, that if we should go about to thrust
on and apply them to all other nations, we should seem to show our selves
more than half mad. And to what end should we bring The law of Moses is
not to be in forced upon kingdom: and countries.
back and set up again among the people of God, the ofscouringes of the
heathen, that were cast out a great while ago? The Aposiles of our lord Jesus
Christ did bind or burden no man with the laws of Moses, they never condemned
good laws of the heathens, nor commended to any man naughty laws of the
Gentiles, but left the laws, with the use and free choice of them, for the
Saints to use as they thought good. But therewithal they ceased not most
diligently to beat into all menns heads, the fear of God, faith, charity,
justice and temperaunce, because they knew that they in whose hearts those
virtues were settled, can either easily make good laws themselves, or pick
and choose out the best of those which other men make. For it makes no
mattter whether the magistrate pick out of Moses Jewish laws, or out of the
alloweable laws of the heathen, sufficient laws for him and his countriemen,
or else do keep still the old and accustomed laws, which have before been
used in his country, so that he have an eye to cut off such wicked, unjust,
and lawelesse laws, as are found to be thrust in among ye better sort. For I
suppose that upright magistrates ought to take off curiosity, A proverb used
when one will make them blind that were before him, and disanull that, which
wise men have allowed.
and new invented novelties. Seeldom, (says the Proverb) is the Crows eye
pickte out without troublesome stirs: and curious men's new laws are for ye
most part worse than the old, that are broken by them and utterly abolished.

Furthermore al laws are given for ordering of religion or outward worship of
God, or else for ye outward conversation of life, and civil behavior. Touching
the laws of religion I have spoken of them before. For Civil laws, what
manner of laws they be,
civil and politic laws I add thus much and say, that those seem to be
the best laws, which according to the circumstaunce of every place, person,
state and time, do come nearest unto the precepts of ye ten commandments,
and the rule of charity, not having in them any spot of iniquity, licentious
liberty, or shameless dishonestie. Let them moreover be brief and short,
not stretched out beyond measure, and wrapped in with many expositions: let
them have a full respect to the matter whereto they are directed, and not be
frivolous and of no effect. Now mark, that politic laws do for the most
part consist in three especial and principal points, honesty, justice, and
peace. Let laws Laws of honesty
therefore tend to this end, that discipline and honesty may be planted and
mainteyned in the common weal, and that no unseemly, licentious, and filthy
act be therein committed. Let law forbid all uncleanness, wantonness,
lightness, sensuality, and riottousnesse, in apparel, in building, in
bibbing, and banqueting. Let wedlock be commanded by law to be kept
holy. Let stews and brothell houses be banished the Realm. Let adulteries,
whoredoms, rapes, and incestes be put to exile. Let moderate feastinges be
allowed and admitted. Let thriftines be used, which is the greatest revenue
that a man can inioye. Briefly, whatsoever is contrary to honesty and
seemelines, let it by law be driven out and rejected. Let justice by (...)
laws be strongly fortified. Let it by laws be provided, that neither citizen
nor forrenner be hurt or hindered in fame, in goods, in body, or life. Let
upright laws be made for the obteyning of legacies and inheritaunces, for the
perfourming of contractes and bargains, for couenaunts and agreements, for
suretieshipps, for buying and selling, for weightes and measures, for leasses
and things let to hyre, for lending and borrowing, for pawnes in morgage, for
use, commodity, and usury of money. Let order be taken for maintenance of
peace between the father and his children, betwixt man and wife, betwixt the
master and the servant, and to be short, that every man may have his
own. For my meaning is, not here to reckon up particularly every several
point and title of the law.

Lastly, means must be made by ^awes of (...) and ^^nimitie
giving of laws, that peace may be established, whereby every man may enjoy
his own. All violent robberies and injuries must be expelled, privy grudges,
and close conspiracies must not be thought off. And war must be quieted by
wisdom, or else undertaken and finished with manly fortitude.

But that we may have such a magistrate and such a life, the Apostle
commanded us, earnestly to pray, where he says: I exhort you that first of
all prayers, supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men, for kings and for all that are in authority, that we may live a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. I am now again
compelled to end my Sermon before the matter be finished. That which remains,
I will add tomorrow. Make ye your earnest prayers, with your minds lift up
into heaven. etc. ()

Of Judgment and the office of the Judge: That Christians are not forbidden to
judge. Of reuengement and punishment. Whether it be lawful for a magistrate to
kill the guilty. Wherefore, when, how, and what the magistrate must punish.
Whether he may punish offenders in Religion or no.
The eight Sermon.
I SPOKE yesterday, (derely beloved) of the magistrates ordinance, there are
yet behind, other two parts of his office and duty, that is, Judgment, and
Punishment: of both which, by the help of God, I mean to speak, as briefly
as may be: give ye atttentiue ear, and pray ye to the Lord, to give me
grace to speak the truth.

Judgment is taken in diverse What ^^^gement
significations, but in this present treatise it imports the sentence of
Judges brought in betwixt men at variaunce, which sentence is derived out of
the laws according to right and equity, as the case put forth of the parties
required, and is pronounced to the intent to take up the strife betwixt them
at variaunce, and to give to every manne his own.

For at Sessions or Assizes, parties appear and sue one an other, for some
inheritance or possession, which either party affirms to be his by law,
layinge for themselves whatsoever they can, to prove and show what right and
title they have to the thing. All which the Judges do diligently hear and
perfectly noate, then they confer the one with the other and lay them with
the law, lastly they pronounce sentence, whereby they give the possession to
the one party, and take it from the other. The like reason is also in other
cases and matters.

And this is iudgmente, yea this, (I say) is the execution of justice. But this
kind of quieting and setting parties at one, is very myld in comparison of
reuengement and punishment, which is not executed with words and sentences, but
with swords and bitter stripes. And good cause why it should be so, since
there be diverse causes, whereof some cannot be ended but with the sword, and
some more gentilie with judgment in words. But herein consists the health
and safeguard of the kingdom or common weal.

Judgment and punishment therefore Judgment and punishment pertain to the
Magistrate, as depending upon his office.
are in the magistrate ye most excellent offices, although peradventure they
seem to be somewhat hard and cruel. But unless this which seems to be
cruelty be put in ure, all ages, states and sexes shall feel the smart of
crueller things, and that which is most cruel in deed. For it is not cruelty
but rather just severity, which (as the Lord commands) is put in ure for
the safeguard of ye guiltless, and preservation of peace, within the realm and
common weal. Put case there were a common weal well furnished with most
absolute laws, for politic manners and matters of religion: suppose also
that in the same common weal there were no magistrate to execute and as it
were to father those laws, by his authority to bring and reduce all the
deeds and sayings of men to the trial of those laws: and that therefore
every man breaks forth to what kind of life he list himself, and does
what he will, tell me I pray you what good do those written laws to the men
of ye country? Believe me forsooth not one halfpenie worth of good. The best
part therefore of the magistrates duty, consists in upright judgment and
punishing reuengement. And those two points require a man of courage and
Princely stomache: whom the Lord in his law deseribeth lively, and tells
what kind of man he would have him to be, and what the office is whereto he
is called: which description I will rehearse and expound, because therein the
Judges person is chiefly touched.

Moses at the Lords commandment says to the Judges: Hear the The (...)
Iudge^ ^^fice is ^^scribe^.
cause of your brethren, and judge righteouslie betwixt every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him. Ye shall have no respect of any
person in judgment, but ye shall hear the small as well as the great: ye shall
not fear the face of any man for the judgment is the Lords: The holy
Prophet in these words touches two things chiefly. He declares what the
Judges office is: and what vices or diseases do infecte the Judge that he
cannot fulfill his office as he ought to do.

Now touching the office of a good Judge, the first point thereof is that (...)
he repel no man, but hear every one, the small, the great, the Citizen, the
stranger, the known, and unknown. And he must hear the parties willingly,
diligently, and attentively. Herein there is admitted no sluggishnes of the
judge, nor a mind busied about other matters. Judgment before the matter be
decided, is utterly excluded, because it carries away the mind of the Judge
before the matter is known. The thing it self cries out, that ye matter must
first be heard and well understood, before the magistrate proceed to
judgment. And the common proverb says: Let the other party be heard too.
Herie wisely said that Judge, which told one that made a complaint: That with
the one ear he heard him, and kept the other ear for him upon whom the
complaint was made. Herein we cont^ine the perfect knowledge of the Judge,
and say that he must not make too much haste in cases unknown, since he must
judge them by the thing it self, and not by the parties secret tales, and
privy accusations.

Secondarilie, let him judge, (says he) yea let him judge uprightly. To (...)
Judge (...) iudg^ (...).
judge is to determine and pronounce truly and justly, according to the
laws, what is good, what is evil, what is right, and what is wrong. We
Switzers say: Vrteilen oder ertetlen oder richten, As if one should say, to
distinguishe a thing thoroughly considered, and to plain and make streighte a
crooked thing. Parties blinded with affections make straight things crocked,
which the Judge by applyinge the rule of equity and law does streighten
again: So that to judge, is to streighten and to make plain. Moreover to
judge is by defending and punishing, to keep in liberty. The magistrate does
judge therefore, when he defends the innocent, and brideleth the hurtful
person: But he must judge justly, that is according to justice, and
agreablie to the laws, which give to every man that that is his. The Judge
does judge unjustly, when of a corrupt mind he pronounces sentence
contrary to all law and equity. Now therefore we have to consider the vices
which usually are wont to reign in judges.

The vices that are in Judges be The faults of Judges.
many, and the diseases of their minds are sondrie: but two especial diseases
there are and chief of all the rest. The one of these two vices, which so
infecteth the minds of Judges, that they cannot execute their office as they
should, is the accepting of faces, or respect Respect of Persons
of persons, that is, when the Judge in giving judgment has not his eye set
upon the things themselves, or upon the causes or circumstances of the
causes, as they are in deed, but has a regard, either of dignity,
excellency, humility, poverty, kindred, men of honors letters, or some such
like scuffe. The Lord excludes this evil and says: Ye shall judge iustelie,
ye shall haue*no respect of any person in Judgment. Ye shall hear the
small as well as the great.

The other disease of these twain is Vehement affection.
fear, a very vehement affection of the mind, which disturbeth the very
best and most excellent counsels, and choaketh up Virtue before it come to
light. Under fear we do contain hope also, I mean, of commodity, and so
by that means by fear we understand the corruption of bribes. The Judge
that stands in fear to loose his life or goods, or is afraid to displease a
noble man, or is loath to loose the common peoples good will: he also that
takes bribes, or is in hope to be rewarded at one of the parties hands, does
peruerte equity, and advance iniquity. The Lord says therefore, Ye shall
not fear any mortal man: ye shall not look for any reward at any man's hand.
He adds the reason why: Because the matter is not yours, neither were ye
called to do your own business, but the judgment is the Lords. The will
and law of God therefore must be respected: For God is able to defend just
Judges from the unjust hatred of any, whatsoever they be, and against all
wrong and open violence.

Moreover where it is said that the judgment is the Lords, thereby are the
Judges warned, that they ought to imitate the example of the most high God.
But what, and of what sort that example of God is, the same Mo^es in the first
of Deuteronomie expresses and says: GOD does accept neither person nor
giste, he does Justice for the fatherless and The good judge oght to have God
before him for a pat^rne to ^olowe, 2. P^^al. 9.
widdowe: and loves the stranger to give him meat and cloathinge, and
therefore shall ye love the stranger. And so must godly Judges do in the
judgment which is Gods. Iosasaphat, without all doubt a very godly Prince,
speakinge to them whom he had made Judges, did say: Take heed what ye do:
For ye execute not the Judgments of man, but of God, which is with you in
Judgment. Let therefore the fear of the Lord be upon you, and take heed,
and be dilligent. For there is no unrighteousness with the Lord our God, that
he should have any respect of persons, or take any reward.

To these I will yet add a few places of the holy Scripture more, which
shall partly make manifest those that went before, and partly expound and
more plainly express the office of the Judge. In Deuteronomie we read: The
Judges shall judge the people, with equity and justice. Thou shalt not
peruerte Judgment, nor have respect of persons, nor take a reward. For a
reward does blind the eyes of the wise, and peruerteth the words of the
righteous. Thou shalt do Judgment with justice, that thou may live and
possess the Land.

Again in Exodus we find: Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil,
neither shalt thou speak in a matter of Justice according to the greater
number for to pervert Judgment. Exod^^
Neither shalt thou esteem a poor man in his cause: keep thee far from
false matters, and the innocent and righteous see thou slaye not, for I will
not justify the wicked. Thou shall take no rewards, for rewards blind the
seeinge, and peruerte the words of the righteous. In Leuiticus also, we have
Leui^^^
this: Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment, thou shalt not favor
the person of the poor, nor honor the mighty, but in righteousness shall
thou judge thy neighbor. Again: Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
Judgment, in metyarde, in weighte, or in measure. True balaunces, true
weightes, a true Epha, and a true Hin shall ye have. I am the Lord your God,
etc. I suppose verily, and am thus persuaded, that in these few words of
the Lord our God, are comprehended all that which profounde Philosophers, and
Laweyers of great learning, do scarcely absolve in infinite books, and
volumes of many leaves.

Beside all this the most holy Prophet (...)
Jeremy cries to the king, and says: Keep equity and righteousness,
deliver the oppressed from the power of the violent, do not grieve nor
oppress the stranger, the fatherless, or the widow, and shed no innocent
blood. Thus much touching the office of Judges.

But in the eyes of some men, this Iudge^ents are ^ot abro^ated a^o^g
chri^tians.
our discourse may seem vain and fruitelesse: unless we do also refute
their objections, whereby they endeavor to prove, that pleadinges and law
matters are at an end, because the Lord in the Gospel says: To him that will
sue thee at the law and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. And
again, While thou art yet with thine adversary upon the way, agree with him
quickly, least he deliver thee to the tormentour. They add moreover the
strifes in the law, which S. Paul the Apostle in the s^^te Chapter of his
Epistle to the Corinthians, does flatly condemn.

To al which objections mine aunsweare is this. As the doctrine of the
Evangelists and Apostles does not abrogate the private ordering of particular
houses, so does it not condemn or disanull the public gouernemente of
commonweals. The Lord in the Gospel after S. Luke, chideth with, and
repelleth the young man who desired him to speak to his brother, for an equal
division of the inheritance betwixt them: He blamed him, not for because he
thinks ill of him that claymeth an equal division, or that part of the
inheritance that is his by right, but because he thought that it was not his
duty, but the Judges office to deal in such cases. The words of our Savior
in that place, are these: Who has appointed me a Judge between you, and a
diuider of land and inheritance?

And again, as we read in the Gospel. If any man will sue thee at the law,
and take away thy coat, give him thy cloak also: So on the other side
against this doing of injury there is nothing more busily handled and
required in all the Evangelical doctrine, than charity and welldoinge: But a
good deed is done in nothing more than in iudgmente and justice.

Since therefore that Judgment was invented for the practisinge and
preseruinge of Justice and vprighte dealinge: it is manifest that to judge in
matters of controversy, is not forbidden Esai. 1.
in the Gospel. The notable Prophets of the Lord, Esai and Zachary, cry out
and say: Cease to do evil, learn to do good, seek after Judgment,
help the oppressed, Zach. 7.
and plead the cause of the fatherless and widdowe. Execute true Judgment,
show mercy and louinge kindness every manne to his brother. Do the
widdowe, the fatherless, the stranger, and poor no wrong.

They sin therefore that go on to hinder Judgment, and to thruste Judges
beside their Seats: For as they pull away from the true God no small part of
his woorshippe, so do they open a wide gate to wrong, robbery, and
oppression of the poor. The Lord (I grant) commanded that, which our
adversaries have alleged, meaning there by to settle quietness among his
people: but because the malice of men is invincible, and the long sufferinge
of silly Souls, makes wicked knaves more mischiefous, therefore the Lord has
not forbidden nor condemned the moderate use of Judgments in law. Moreover
we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that Paul did oftener than once, use
the benefit of Judgment, not for money or goods, but for his life, which
he endeavored to save and defend from them that lay in wait to kill him.
Neither consented he to the unjust judgment of Festus the President, but
appealed to Caesar: and yet we know that Paul did not offend therein against
the doctrine of the Gospel of Christ. The same Paul in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, did not absolutely condemn the Corinthians for going to law
about things belonginge to their living, but because they sued and troubled
one an other, before Heathen Judges. It is good and seemly without doubt, to
suffer wrong with a patient mind: but because it pleases the Lord to ordeine
judgment to be a mean of help and succor to them that are oppressed with
injury, he sins not at all that seeks to keep himself from wrong, not
by private reuengement, but by the vprighte sentence of Judges in law. And
therefore did the Apostle command the Corinthians, to choose out to themselu^s
among the faithful, such Judges as might take up temporal matters in
controversy betwixt them that fell at variaunce.

Thus have I declared unto you, Of reuengeme^t taken by the Magistrate.
the second part of the magistrates office which consists in Judgment, I
will now therefore descend to the exposition of the third and last part,
which comprehends reuengemente and punishment. For the magistrate by his
office bears the sword: and therefore is he commanded by God to take
reuengement for the wrong done to the good, and to punish the evil. For the
Sword is Gods vengeance The sword.
or instrumente, wherewith he strikes the stroke to revenge himself upon
his enemies for the injury done unto him: and is in the scripture generally
taken for vengeance and punishment.

The Lord in Jeremy cries out and says: I call a sword upon all the
dwellers upon earth. Again in Ezechiel: The sword is sharp and ready
trimmed to kill the sacrifice. And again: I will give my sword into the hands
of the king of Babell. The kings of Aegypte were of their people called
Pharaos, as who should say: Reuengers. But the sword in the magistrates hand,
is to be put unto two uses: For either he punishes offenders therewith for
doing other men injury, and for other ill deeds: Or else he does in war
therewith repel the violence of foreign enemies abroad, or repress the
rebellions of seditious and contentious Citizens at hoame.

But here again an other objection is cast in our way by them, which whet^^^
(...) be (...) to kil^ (...) puni^^ ^^fende^.
say, that according to the doctrine of the Gospel, no man ought either to
kill or to be killed* because the Lord has said: Resist not the evil. And
again to Peter: Put up thy sword into thy sheath. Every one that takes the
sword does perish by the sword. Mine aunsweare to this is, that throughout
all the Scripture, private reuengement is utterly forbidden, but that that is
done openly by authority of the public magistrate is never found fault
withal. But that was private and extraordinary vengeance that the Apostle
Peter was about to have taken, considering that he was called to be a
Preacher of the word of God, not to be a Judge, a Captain, or a man of
war. And against private and extraordinary reuengment is that sentence
rightly pronounced, Every one that takes the sword, shall perish by the
sword. But that public vengeance, and the ordinary use of the sword, is not
prohibited by God in the Church of Christ, I prove by this testimony of the
holy Apostle. Paul, in the 12. to the Romans has taught, what and how much
the perfectness of the Gospel requires of us, and among the rest thus he
says: Dearly beloved revenge not your selves, but rather give place unto
wrath. For it is written, vengeance is mine, and I will repay. But because this
might be argued against, and this objection cast in his way: Than, by this
means the long suffering of Christians shall minister matter enough to murder
and manslaughter: he does therefore immediately after in the next Chapter
add: The magistrate is the minister of God to thy wealth, to terrify the
evil doers. For he bears not the sword in vain. For he is Gods minister,
revenger of wrath to him that does evil. We gather therefore by this doctrine
of the Apostle, that every one of us must let God alone with taking of
vengeance, and that no man is allowed to revenge himself by his own private
authority. But public reuengeme^t wrought by the ordinary magistrate, is no
where forbidden. For that God which said to us, Vengeance is mine I will
repay, does grant to the magistrate authority to exercise and put that
vengeance in ure, which he does claim as due to himself. So that the
magistrates duty is, to punish with the sword, the wrongful dealings of
wicked men, in the name and at the commandment of God himself. Therefore
when the magistrate punishes, then does God himself, to whom all vengeance
belongs, punish by the magistrate, who for that cause is called by the name
of God. Moreover it is written: Thou shall not suffer a witch to live. Again:
A wise king will scatter the wicked, and turn the wheel upon them. And
again: He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, they
are both abominable in the sight of the Lord. Foolish pity.
Neither do we lack examples, to prove that some have incurred y^ heavy
wrath and displeasure of the Lord for their foolish pity in sparing them,
whom the Lord commanded to strike with the sword. I speak of Saul and Achab.
Again on the other side, there are innumerable examples of most excellent
Princes which testify and bear witness of the praise that they deserved for
punishing of lewd and wicked offenders. For the Prince sins not, nor is
blameworthie any whit at all, which kills or otherwise punishes the guilty
and ungracious man: and for that cause we find in the law so often repeated:
His blood be upon him self. But if the blood of the guilty be not shed,
then that is imputed as a fault, and laid to the magistrates charge, because
he neglecting his office, has pardoned them that were not worthy to be
forgieuen, and by letting them go, has left the innocent unrevenged. For he
is made partaker of the injury done, and shedding of the innocents blood,
which he leaves unrevenged, by letting the murderer go untouched, on whose
neck the Lord gave charge to let the sword fall. The just severity of the
vprighte magistrate in punishinge Severity is not cruelty.
naughty men, is not (as it is falselie judged) extreme cruelty. But
overthwart and peevish pity, that spares offenders, which are not worthy to
live among men, is utter and mere cruelty in deed. For when the magistrate
lets them go unpunished and at ease, which with their naughty deeds have
deserved death, he does thereby first of all give occasion and courage to like
offenders, to go on and increase in their mischiefous wickedness. For they see
their own faults borne with all in other men. Secondarilie the men that are
not as yet altogether drowned in the mire of wickedness, but are every hour^
tempted and provoked to naughtiness, will at the last leave to have scruple of
conscience, and give their consent to yield to mischief. For they see that
mischiefous marchaunts are gentellie dealt withal. Lastly offenders set free
without any punishment do for the most part become little better: yea they
become twice worse than they were before, and the increase of his sin shall at
length compel thee to kill him for many murders, whom thou would not kill
for ye murder of one, whereby thou might have saved many guiltless men, who^
that cutthroate since his first pardon, has villaynously slain. They
therefore send wolves and bears among the common people, that let such
rakehells escape unpunished.

Since now that I have declared ye For what ^auses God commanded to kill
offenders.
right use of the sword, and proved that the magistrate has power to reueng
men's injuries, and to kill heinous offenders, let us go on to consider what
the causes be, for which God commands to punish transgressors, let us see
also when they ought to be punished, and lastly what kinds of punishment or
penalties the magistrate must use.

The especial causes for which the Lord does openly command to punish
offenders, are for the most part these that follow. The Lord resists force
with force, and works the safeguard and salvation of men, he reuengeth them
that suffer wrong, and restores again whatsoever may be restored. He
declares his justice also, which rewards every one according to his deeds.
And therefore he wipeth out reproachful deeds, with a reproachful death. He
puts offenders in mind of their crime, and therwithall for the most part
does give them sense of repentance unto salvation. For if the wicked do
acknowledge his fault, and repent himself of his ill deed, and believe in
Christ with all his heart, his sin is forgiven him and be is saved: as we
have an evident example in the thief that was crucified, Luke^*
whose punishment was an occasion of his salvation. But from the other this
salvation was far off, because he did not believe in Christ, and would not be
warned by the pain, y^ he felt for his offense, to repent for his sins, and
to call to God for mercy. Furthermore by public judgment and open execution
all other men may take example to learn to beware of like offenses, unless
they will suffer like horror of torments.

But let not the magistrate execute Wh^^ ^ mag^^^ oug^^ (...) pu^^^ ^ ^ end^^*
any man, until he know first perfectly whether he, that is to be punished,
has deserved that punishment, that ye judges determine, and whether God has
commanded to punish that offense, that is, whether by Gods law that is
condemned, which is to be punished. The truth thereof shall be manifestly known
either by the proper and free confession of the man accused, or by the probable
testimonies brought in and gathered against ye de^endant, or by conferring y^
laws with the offenses of him that is to be punished. So then ye magistrate
may not punish virtue, true religion, nor good, honest, and godly men. For he
is ordained of God to terrify, not the good, but offenders.

Now touching the manner and facion of punishment I think it not best The ^indes
of ^unish^ente.
over curious^ie to dispute. Let every nation or city retain still their
penalties and order of punishing, unless peradventure their country custom
smack somewhat of rigor and extreme cruelty. For no wise man denies but that
the kind of punishment must be tempered according to the rule of justice and
equity. The kinds of punishment Dimin^tio ^^pitis, ^ kind of ^^dgeme^t
^hereby ^^e is put ^^t of the ^^ings pro^^ction or ^ondem^ed to ^ondage.
are exile or banishment, bondage, loss of goods, imprisonment and fetters,
scourges, marks with burning iro^s, loss of limms, and lastly death it self,
by killing we the sword, by burning, hanging, drowning, and other such means
as every nation uses of custom. Neither is the scripture without a pitiful
beadrowe of miserable torments. For in y^ book of Esdras we read: And who
soever will not do the law of thy god (Esdras) and the law of the king, let
judgment streightwayes pass upon him, whether it be to death, or banishment,
or loss of goods, or imprisonment. This do I ad not unadvisedly because of
them ye are of opinion, y^ such torments ought not so much as once to be named
among christian people.

But measure and discretion must be ^^cretion (...) cle^^ncie of ^^e judge.
used of the judges in punishing offenders, so ye heinous faults may be plagued
with grievous punishment, lesser crimes may be nipped with smaller penalties, and
the smallest and light offenses punished more lightly. That sentence in Gods
law ought to be remembered: According to the fault so shall the punishment be.
Where also the judge must have a consideration of his clemency and pity.
Oftentimes y^ kind and age excuses the party accused. The circumstances
being rightly weighed do sometime excuse the deeds, that otherwise are of
themselves not all of the best. The judge also must inquire after, and
diligently consider the former life of ye man accused, for which, if it fall
out to have been good and honest, than does he deserve some favor and mercy,
unless the offense, for which be is troubled, be so heinous y^ it can admit no
sparkle of pity. But godliness or y^ fear of god, with pouring out of prayers
unto the Lord, and a diligent and lawful examination of y^ deed or word, that
is, of the fault committed, is the best rule for the judge to follow in
choosing his time when to use pity, and when to deal with extreme rigor. For
otherwise decent cleme^cie is most praise worthy before God and men.

I have showed you (deerlie beloved) that the magistrate both may, and of What
is to be punished in offenders.
duty ought to punish offenders, then for what causes y^ Lord will have them
to be punished, and lastly how, when, and how much they are to be punished. It
remains now for me to declare wherefore and for what offenses, they are to be
punished. Which I mean to lay down in one word and briefly too. All words and
deeds which are contrary to the laws of God and the magistrate, that is, all
things that are done mischiefouslie against ye laws, are to be punished: but
laws are made either for religion or politic government: and politic
government consists in honesty, justice, and peace. Therefore the magistrate
must punish and keep under al them which do disturb, afflict, trouble,
destroy or overthrow honesty, justice, public peace or private tranquillite
betwixt man and man. Let him punish dishonestie, ribauldrie, filthy lust,
whordome, fornication, adultery, inceste, sodomie, riottousnes, drunkenness,
gluttony, covetousness, coosening, cutting usury, treason, murder, slaughter
of parents, sedition, and whatsoever is like to these. The law of the Lord
published by the ministry of Moses, does in the 18. and 20. of Leuiticus
reckon up a beadrowe, long enough of such offenses as are to be punished. And
least perhaps any man may think, that at this day, yt which Moses has
rehearsed, is utterly abolished, let him give ear to S. Paul who says: To the
just the law is not given, but to the unjust, and to sinners, to unholy and
unclean, to murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, to manslears, to
whoremongers, to them that defile themselves with mankind, to manstealers, to
liars, to perjured men, and if there be any other thing contrary to sound
doctrine. But Apostates, idolatrers, blasphemers, here tiques, false teachers,
and mockers at religion, do offend against the laws of religion, (and
therefore ought they to be punished by the magistrates authority.)

But the question has been and is Whether ^^e Magi^^rate may (...) for ^he
breach (...) religion.
yet at this day in controversy, whether it be lawefull sor a magistrate to
punish any man in his jurisdiction for the contempt of religion, or blaspheming
of the same? The Maniches and Donatistes were of opinion, that no man ought to
be compelled, much less to be killed for any religion, but that every man
ought to be left to his own mind and judgment. And yet the Scripture does
expresselie command the magistrate not to spare false Prophets: yea, rebels
against God, are commanded by holy laws and judges to be killed without
mercy. The places are extant to be seen in the holy Scriptures, the one in
the 13. of Deuteronomy. the other in the 17. of the same book. In Exodus this same is
set down for a rule: Whosoever sacrifices to any God, but to the Lord alone,
let him be rooted out. In Leuiticus the blasphemer is slain, and euerwhelmed
with stones. In the book of Numbers the man is slain yt did unhallow the
Sabbath day. And how many I pray you, did Gods revenging sword destroy of that
caluish people that did erecte and worship the calfe in the wilderness? Helias
at mount Carmel killed whole hundreds of false Prophets in a solemn set and
appointed Sacrifice. Eliseus at the Lords commandment, anointed Iehu king,
to the end that he might root out the house of Achab, and kill at once all
Baals priests. Ioiada the priest slew Athalia. And good king Josias destroyed
together the wicked and stubborn priests of all high places. S. Augustine
Tractatu in Joan. 11. disputing against the Donatistes, does prove by the
example of Nabuchodonosor, that Christian Princes do justly punish the
Donatistes, for despising Christ and his Evangelical doctrine. Among other
things he says: If king Nabuchodonosor did glorify God for delivering three
children out of the fy^e, yea and glorified him so much, that he made a decree
throughout his kingdom for his honor and worship: why should not the kings
of our days be moved so to do, which see not three children saved from the
flame alone, but themselves also delivered from the fire of hell, when they
behold Christ, by whom they are delivered, burnt up in Christian men, and when
to a Christian they hear it said: Say thou that thou art no Christian? This
they will do, and yet this they will not suffer. For marcke what they do, and
see what they suffer. They kill souls: they are afflicted in body. They kill
other eternally, and do complain that they themselves do suffer a temporal
death. Thus much has Augustine. In yt new testament we have most evident
examples of Peter and Paul Christ his greatest Apostles. The one whereof s^ue
Ananias and Saphyra, for their lying hypocrisy and feined religion. The other
struck Elymas the Sorcerer blind and bereft him of his eyes. Neither is there
one hayres difference to choose, whether a man be killed with a sword or with a
word. For to kill is to kill by what means, or with what instrument soever it
be done. God wrought that by his Apostles: and does the like by the magistrate
also. For vengeance is Gods, who gives it to the magistrate and chief men to
be put in ure and execution, upon wicked offenders. There are to be seen many
laws made by holy Christian princes for the state of religion, which give an
especial charge to kill idolatrers, apostataes, heretics, and godless
people. I will recite unto you (dearly beloved) one law among many, made by
ye holy Emperor Co^sta^tine the great. For in an epistle, entitled ad Taurum
P. P. he says: It pleases us that in all places and throghout every city,
the temples be out of hand shut up, and liberty denied to wicked men to have
access thither to commit idolatry. We will also and command all men to be
restrained from making of sacrifice. And if so be it happen that they offend
herein, our pleasure is that they be slain with the sword, and the slain man's
goods to be confiscate. And we have decreed, that the rulers of the provinces
shall suffer like punishment, if they neglect to punish the offenders. The
very same almost do Theodosius and Valentinianus by proclaimed edicts,
command In Codice Theodosiano tit. 2. And Valentinianus and Martianus in
Codice Iustiniano tit. 11. lib. 1. Lastly without al controversy, adulterers,
murderers, rebels, deceivers, and blasphemers, are rightly punished and not
against religion. Wherefore it follows consequently, that false Prophets and
heretics, are by good right slain. For they are deceivers, blasphemers and
manquellers.

But in ye execution of this punishment, What moderation must be had in
punishing.
there must a great consideratibe had and observed. First of the persons: then
of the errors: and lastly of the penalties. For in persons there is great
diversity: because there are some standard bearers, and headie graund
capitaines, which are stout, hypocrites, and full of tongue, and therefore y^
aptest for to seduce, who falling headlong without ame^dment to their own
destruction, do with themselves draw other into danger. They must by all means
be brideled and kept under as plagues to the Church, least like a cancker they
spread all over. Again there are some silly seduced souls made fools by
other men, which err not of malice, nor stubborn stomach, but do repent and
amend in time. These the magistrate must not streightway condemn, but pray to
the Lord and bear with their error, and teach them in the spirit of
gentleness, until they be brought to a better mind.

Moreover in erroneous doctrines, some are more intolerable than other some
are. Some there be so wicked and blasphemous, that they are unworthy to be
heard, much less to be done. Some there are, which do directly and openly
tend to the overthrow of the common weal, unless they be in time appensed and
resisted. But those crimes that are brought in and accused, ought first to be
by the Scripture and manifest truth co^uinced to be such, as they are said to
be. When the truth is known, and manifest proofs of scripture alleged, then
is it lawful most sharply to punish those blasphemers of God, and
ouerthrowers of the Church and common weal. But a light and easier penalty
must be set on the heads of them, whose offense consists in light and smaller
errors. For some do err so, that by their error God is not blasphemed, yt
Church not subverted, nor the common weal in any danger at all. Where, by the
way, every one must think of that saying of the Apostle: Bear ye one an
others burden. And again: The weak in faith receive ye, not to the
doubtfulnes of questions.

Furthermore in punishment and penalties, there is a great difference. They
that err stubbornely, and do their endeavor to draw in and keep other men
in their errors, blasphemers, troublers, and subuerters of Churches, may by
law be put to death. But it follows not therevppon that every one which
erreth must therefore by and by suffer loss of his life. The things that by
threats and faultfinding may be remedied and amended, must not be punished
with sharper correction. A mean in every thing is always the best. There is
a penalty by payment of money. There are prisons for them to be shut up
into, which are corrupted with the poison of false doctrine and lack of
belief, least peradventure they infecte others with their contagious disease.
There are also other means to punish the body whereby to keep them under
that err from the truth, to keep them from marring those that are sound,
and to preserve them selves that they perish not utterly, but that through
repentance they may fall to amendment. But the fear of God, justice, and the
Judges wisdom shall by the circumstaunces make him perceive how he ought to
punish the naughty doctrine, and stubborn rebellion of malicious seducers,
and how to bear with the foolish light belief of silly seduced men
grounded upon simplicity and not enuenomed rancour.

Earnest and diligent admonition is given to late, when the fault is allreadie
Admonition before punishm^^^
committed, and is so detestable that it ought straight way to be plagued with
the sword: Let the magistrate therefore always have an eye to admonish them in
time that are to be warned to take heed of a fault. For earnest admonitions are
earnestly commended to men in authority to use to their subjects, when they
begin to work any broile. Moreover godly and wise magistrates, have many times
pardoned unwitting offenders, whom they saw ready to repent upon giving of
warning. The Lord in the Gospel bids us admonish a sinner, then if he
repent, to pardon his fault, but if he reject a fair warning once given him,
then to punish him so much the sharper. And Iosue before he made open war to
be proclaimed upon the children of Ruben, did first by embassage command
them to dig down the altar which they seemed to have made contrary to the
law of the Lord. The Emperor Justinian also granted pardon to them which
repented, and turned to a sounder opinion, Constitut. 109.

Moreover Josias did not utterly kill al them that were wrapped in error and
idolatry, but those especially that were incurable, and would not recante:
the magistrate therefore must wisely moderate the matter, and be very
circumspecte in punishinge offenders.

I cannot here wincke at and s^ylie Objections answe^ed.
pass over the objections, that some men make against that which hitherto I
have said touching punishment, to wit: That the Apostle Paul has not
commanded to kill or punish an heretic after the first and second
admonition, but to avoid him. Again, That faith is the gift of God which
cannot be given or ingraffed in any man by rigor of the sword. Also, That no
man is to be compelled. He that constreineth, may make an hypocrite, but a
devout and; ealous man he cannot make. And lastly, That the Apostles required
no aid of kings either to maintain, or set out the religion of Christ, or
else to punish blasphemous railers, and enemies of Gods word. To all this I
answer thus. Paul, when he writ his Epistle to Titus, did write to an
Apostle, in that Epistle therefore he instructs an Apostle, how to behave
himself according to his duty toward an heretic paste all recovery. If
he had written to Sergius Paulus or any liefetenaunt, he would undoubtedly
have taught him his office. For the same Paul standing before Sergius Paulus,
then Prince of Cyprus, did by his deeds declare unto him the duty of a
magistrate. For first he did not only most sharply rebuke the false Prophet
Elymas, then forsake his company, eschew and shun him, as the Apostle John
did Cerinthus, but struck him also with bodily blindness.

I grant and confess that faith Faith is the gift of God.
is Gods gift in the heart of man, which GOD alone does search and know:
but men are judged by their words and deeds: Admit therefore that the
erroneous opinion of the mind may not be punished, yet notwithstanding wicked
and infectiue profession and doctrine, must in no wise be suffered. Verily no
man does in this world punish profane and wicked thoughts of the mind: but
if those thoughts break forth into blasphemous words, then are those
blaspheming tongues to be punished of good Princes: and yet by this I say not
that godliness lies in the magistrate to give and bestow. Justice is the
very gift of GOD, which none but God does give to men. But who is so foolish
as to gather thereuppon, that unjust men, robbers, murderers, and witches are
not to be punished, because the magistrate by punishment cannot bestow
righteousness, upon unrighteous people? We must therefore make a difference
betwixt faith, as it is the gift of God in the heart of man, and as it is the
outward profession uttered and declared before the face of men. For while
false faith does lurk and lie hid within the heart, and infecteth none but
the unbeliever, so long the unbelieving infidel cannot be punished: but if
this false and forged faith, that so lay hid, do once break forth to
blasphemy, to the open tearing of God, and the infecting of his neighbors,
then must that blasphemer and seducer be by and by plucked under, and kept from
creeping to further annoyaunce. Not to suppress such a fellow as this, is to
put a sword in a mad man's hand, to kill unwise and weakelie men.

Faith is the gift of God, but where he bestows faith, he uses means to
give it by: those means he will not have us to neglecte. An householder
knows that faith is the gift of God, and yet notwithstanding he instructs
his children in the word of truth, he charge them to go to Church, to pray
for faith, and to learn it at the preachers mouth. A good father would think
much, yea he would not think well of it, if his son should say: Father I
pray you teach me not, send me not so much to Church, and beat me not if I
be not there: For faith is the gift of God, which whipping cannot bring me
too. Then what man can quietly abide to hear that faith is the gift of God,
and that therefore no man ought for faith, that is, for the corruption of faith
and open blasphemy, to suffer any punishment?

And yet Petilian in the 83. chapter of S. Augustines 2. book Contra
Petiliani Whether it be lawful to compel one to faith.
literas cries out, and says: God forbid and far be it from our
conscience, to compel any man to our religion. Shall we therefore go on to
speak the words of heretics? or to say, that the Lord God in the Scriptures
has planted hypocrisy, where with threats and punishment he has driven men
to goodness? David says: It is good for me Lord that thou have chastised me.
And Jeremy says: Thou have chastised me, (O Lord) and I am chastised like an
untamed heffar. But if no man ought to be compelled to goodness, to what
intent does Solomon (ye wisest of al men) so many times command to chastise
children? He that spares the rod hates the child. Says he: Thou in deed
do strike him, but with the rod thou deliuerest his soul from death.
Daily experience, and the disposition of men do plainly teach, that in men
there are most vehement affections, which, unless they be remedied and
brideled betimes, do both destroy them in whom they be, and other men too, who
at yt first might easily with light punishment have been preserved. Men in
their madness despise compulsion and chastising punishment, but when they come
to themselves again, and see from how great evils they are delivered by those
that compelled them, then they rejoice, that to their health they were
chastised, and praise the compulsion which before they despised. Let us hear
what Augustine does think and teach hereof, whose experience in this matter
was very much. In his 48. Epist. ad Vincentium contra Donatistas de vi
coercendis haereticis, he writes thus. My opinion sometime was, that no man
ought by force to be compelled to the unity of Christ, that we ought to deal
by words, fight in disputations, and overcome with reason, least peradventure
we should have those to counterfaite themselves to be catholics, whom we
knew to be open heretics. But this opinion of mine, was not confuted with
the words of my gainsayers, but with the examples of those which showed the
contrary. For first, mine own city (Hippone) was objected against me:
which, when as sometime it held wholly with Donatus, was by the fear of the
imperial laws, converted to the Catholic unity: and at this day we see it
so greatly to detest the naughtiness of your her^ticall stomaches, that it is
thought verily that your heresy was never within it. And many more places by
name were reckoned up unto me, that by the effect of the thing it self, I
might confess, that in such a case as this, that may be rightly understood
where it is written: Give a wise man occasion and he will be the wiser. And
again, not every one that spares, is a friend: nor every one that strikes
is an enemy. Better are the stripes of a friend, than the voluntary kisses of
an enemy. It is better to love with severity, than to deceive with lenity.
He that byndeth a frenzy man, and waketh him that is sick of the lethargy,
does trouble them both, and yet he loves them both. Who can love us more than
God himself does? and yet as he teaches us mildely, so he cease not to
terrify us to our health. Thinckest thou that no man ought to be compelled to
righteousness, when thou read that the goodma^ of the house said to his
servants: Whomsoever ye find, compel them to come in? When thou read
that he, that was first called Saul and afterward Paul, was constrained by
the violent force of Christ, which compelled him to know and keep fast the
truth of the Gospel? And the same Augustine again, In Epist ad Bonifacium
comitem 59. says: Where is that now that they were wont to cry and say, that
it is at every ones free choice to believe or not to believe? Whom did Christ
constreine? whom did he compel? Lo here they have the Apostle Paul for an
example, let them confess in him that Christ first compelled him, than taught
him: first struck him and afterward comforted him. And it is wonderful, how
he, which by the punishment of his body was compelled to the Gospel, did after
his entering in, labor more in the Gospel, than all they that were called by
word alone: and whom the greater fear compelled to charity, his charity once
perfect, did cast out al fear. Why then should not the Church therefore
compel her lost children to return, since the lost children have compelled
other to their destruction?

Again in the same epistle, the same The Apostles required no ^ide of the
magistrate, for the maintenance of religion against the adversaries of the same.
Augustine says: Whereas some which would not have upright laws ordained
against their ungodliness, do say: that the Apostles did never require any such
things of the kings of the earth, they do not consider that that was an
other time (not like to this) and that all things are done in their due time
and season. For what Emperor did at that time believe in Christ to serve him
by making laws in defense of religion against ungodliness? When as yet that
Prophecy was in fulfilling: Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine
a vain thing? The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers took counsel
against God and against his Christ. For as yet that was not begun which
follows in the Psalm, where it is said: And now understand ye kings, and be
ye learned ye that judge the earth, serve him in fear and rejoice in
trembling. But how do kings serve God in fear, but by forbidding and
punishing with devout severity, those things, which are done against Gods
commandments? For in that he is a man, he serves him one way: but in that
he is a king, he serves him an other way. Because in that he is a man, he
serves him by living faithfully: but in that he is a king, he serves him
by establishing convenient laws to command that which is just, and to forbid
the contrary. As Ezechias served him by destroying the groaues and temples of
idols, and those high places that were erected against the Lords
commandment. As Josias served him by doing the like. As the king of Niniuie
served him by compelling the whoale city to please and appease the anger of
the Lord. As Darius served him by geuinge the idol into Daniells power to be
broken in pieces, and by casting his enemies in among the Lions. As Nabuch
odonosor served him by a terrible proclamation, which forbadde all men within
his Dominion, to blaspheme the true and very God. In this therefore should
kings serve God, in that that they are kings, by doing those things which
none can do but kings. Wherefore when as in the Apostles times, the kings did
not as yet serve the Lord, but imagined a vain thing against the Lord and
against his Christ, that the Prophets sayings might be fulfilled, there could
not as then (I say) any laws be made to forbid ungodliness, but counsel be
rather taken to put ungodliness in practice. For so the course of times did
turn, that both the Jews should kill the Preachers of Christ, thinckinge that
thereby they did God good service: and that the Gentiles also should freat and
rage against the Christians, and make the Martyrs constancy overcome the
flames of fire. But afterward when that began to be fulfilled which is
written: And all the kings of the earth shall worship him, all nations shall
serve him, what man that were well in his wits would say to kings: Tush take
ye no care how or by whom the Church of your Lord is defended or defaced
within your kingdom: let it not trouble you to mark who will be honest, and
who dishonest within your Dominion. For since God has given man free will,
why should adultery be punished, and sacrilege left untouched? Is it a
lighter matter for the Soul to break promise with God, than a woman with a
man? Or forbecause those things which are not committed by contempt but by
ignorance of religion are to be more mildely punished, are they therefore to
be utterly neglected? It is better, who doubts? for men to be brought to the
worshipping of God by teaching, rather than for to be compelled to it by fear
or grief of punishmente. But because these are the better, they which are not
such, are not therefore to be neglected. For it has profited many men (as we
see by experience) first to have been compelled with fear and grief, that
afterward they might either be taught, or follow that in deed which they
had learned in words.

Hitherto I have rehearsed ye words of S. Augustines answer to the objections
of them, which are of opinion that by no law disobedient rebels, seduced
people, and deceivers, ought to be punished in cases of religion.

I see my hope does fail me, wherein I thought, that I could have been able
in this Sermon to have made an end of all that I had to say touching the
magistrate: But I perceive that here I must stay, unless I should go on
(dearly beloved) and be too tedious unto you all. I mean to morrow
therefore to add the rest that is yet behind. Make ye your humble prayers
unto the Lord upon your knees and then depart in peace. ()

Of war, whether it be lawful for a magistrate to make war. What the
Scripture teaches touching war. Whether a Christian man may bear the office
of a magistrate. And of the duty of subjects.
The ninth Sermon.
TO the right of the sword, which God has given to the Magistrate, does war
belong: For in my last Sermon I taught you, that the use of the sword in the
magistrates hand, is two fold or of two sorts. For either he punishes
offenders there with: Or else repelleth the enemy that spoyleth or would
spoil his people, or cutteth off ye rebellious purposes of his own seditious
citizens.

But many make a doubt, whether ^hether (...) law^^l for a Magistrate ^o make
(...).
it be lawful for a magistrate to make war or no. And it is marvel to see
them as blind as bitells in a matter of it self as plain as may be. For if
the magistrate does by Gods law punish offenders, thieves, and harmefull
persons, and that it makes no matter whether they be few or many in number (as
I declared in my yesterdayes sermon:) even by the same law may he persecute,
repel, and kill rebellious people, seditious citizens and barbarous soldiers,
who under the pretense of war do attempt that openly, which thieves and
robbers are wont to do privily. The Prophet (I confess) did among other
things prophecy of us Christians, and say: They shall turn their swords
into spades, and their iauelyns into sythes. For Christians have peace with all
men, and do altogether abstain from armor. For every one does that to an
other which he would wish to have done to himself. But forbecause all are not
so minded, but that many unruly persons, wicked thieves, and oppressors of
the poor do live and dwell among honest and good meaning men, as wild beasts
among harmless creatures, therefore God from heanen has given the sword
into ye magistrates hand, to be a defense for harmless people against
unruly cut throats. But we read not in any place, that we are forbidden to
suppress and kill wolves, wild boares, bears, and such other beasts that do
annoy and pray upon men or cattle: What let then should there be why we
should not by lawful war begun in a good quarrel, repel the unjust
injury of violent robbers, since thieves, robbers, barbarous soldiers and
seditious citizens, do differ little or nothing from wild beasts? The
Scripture verily does not vouchsafe to call them by any other names, than by
the names of beasts. Hereunto co^senteth the common fense of nature: and
herewithall agrees the doctrine of faith and religion. If it be possible,
(says the Apostle) as much as lies in you, live quietly with all men, not
reue^ging your selves. See here, as much as lies in you (says ^ee,) and, if
it be possible. Otherwise he adds immediately after, The magistrate bears
not the sword in vain. He means, for them that trouble all things and do
annoy the men which do desire to live at peace. And this is confirmed by the
examples of the most holy and excellent men that have been in the world,
which have taken war in hand for the defense of their country and harmless
countriemen: as I have already declared out of S. Paul's Epistle to the
Hebrews, when as in the exposition of the fifth precept, I showed what honor
every man does owe to his country. I will add to these some reasons of S.
Augustine uttered contra Faustum Manichaeum lib. 22. cap. 75. Neither let him
(says he) marvel or be astonished at the wars made by Moses, for because
even in them too, he followed Gods commandment, not like a tyrant, but like
an obedient servant. Neither did God rage with cruelty when he commanded
those wars, but justly paid home them that deserved it, and terrified those
that were worthy of it. For what is blame worthy in war? Is it to be
blamed, that they do die which once must die, that they which live may rule in
peace? To find fault with that, is rather a cowardly touch, than the part of
a religious Christian. Desire to hurt, cruelty in revenging, an unappeased
stomach, brutenesse in rebelling, greedines to rule, and whatsoever else is
like to these, are the things that in war are worthy to be blamed, and by
right of law to be sharply punished. Against the violence of injurious
enemies, at the commandment either of God himself, or any other lawful
power, even good men are wont to take war in hand, since their state in the
world is such, that politic order does justly bind the magistrate in such a
case to command it, and the subjects to obey it. Otherwise John when the
soldiers came to him to be baptized saying: And what shall we do? would
have aunsweared them and said, Cast off your armor, forsake your soldiers
life, strike, wound, or kill no body. But because he knew, that while they
did so as soldiers in the war, they were not manquellers but ministers of
the law, not reuengers of their own injuries, but defenders of the common
weal, he said unto them: Strike no man, do no man injury: be content with
your wages. But because the Maniches have of use blasphemed or spoken against
John, let them hear the Lord Jesus Christ himself, commanding to give to
Caesar that stipend, which John did say the soldier should be content withal.
Give (says he) to Caesar, that which is Caesar's, and to God the things that
do belong to God. For to this end is tribute paid, that the soldier in the
war may have his pay out of hand, for his pain. Very well therefore, when
the Centurion said: And I am a man set under power, having soldiers under me:
and I say to one go and he goes, and to an other come and he comes, and
to my servant do this and he does it, did the Lord commend his faith, and not
command him to forsake his souldiershippe. Hitherto also apperteyneth yt which
follows in the same 75. chapter and 76. next after. But I do of purpose
willingly bear somewhat with you, not meaning by ouerlong rehearsing of too
many sentences to be tedious unto you. Thus hitherto I have showed (...)
you that it is lawful for the magistrate for to make war. Where by the way
also we gather, that the subjects do lawfully without any offense to God,
take armor to batteile, when they take it in hand at the magistrates bidding.
But if the magistrates purpose be, to kill the guiltless, I declared in my
former sermons, that then his people ought not to obey his wicked
commandments.

Let the magistrate therefore have an eye to himself, that he abuse not his
lawful authority. And although the magistrate be licensed to make war for
just and necessary causes, yet notwithstanding war is a thing most full of
peril, and draws with War a thing full of pe^il and danger.
it self an endless troop of mischiefous evils. By war the just judgment
of God does plague the men, whom his fatherly warning could never move: but
among them many times too, the guiltless feel the whip. In war for the
most part, soldiers misuse themselves, and thereby incur Gods heavy
displeasure: there is no evil in all the world that war vpholdeth not. By
war both scarcity of every thing, and dearth do arise: For high ways
are stopped, corn upon the ground is trodden down and marrde, whoale
villages burnte, provision goes to wrack, handicrafts are unoccupied,
merchandice do cease, and all do perish both rich and poor. The valiant
strong men are flame in the batteile, the cowardly sort run away for their
lives to hide their heads, reseruinge themselves to be tormented with more
exquisite and terrible kinds of cruel punishments: For wicked knaves are
promoted to dignity, and bear the sway, which abuse mankind like savage
beasts. Hands are wrou^ge on every side: widows and children cry out and
lament: the wealth that has been carefully gathered to help in want to
come, is spoiled and stolen away: cities are raced, virgins and vnmariageable
mayde^s are shamefully deflowred, all honesty is utterly violated, old men
are handled irreverently, laws are not exercised, religion and learning are
nothing set by, godless knaves and cut threats have the dominion: and
therefore in the scriptures War is the scourg of God.
war is called the scourge of God. For with war he plagueth incurable
idolatrers, and those which stubbornely contemn his word: for that was the
cause why ye city of Ie^usalem with the whole nation of the Jews was utterly
destroyed: Because they knew not the day of their visitation (as the Lord in
the Gospel says) but went on to kill the Lords Apostles, bringing on upon
their own necks the shedding of all the blood, from the righteous Abell unto
Zacharias. For murder, idolatry, incest, and detestable riot, we read that
the Chananites were raced out and cut off. The Moabites as Esai witnesses,
were quite overthrown, for cruelty, inhumanitie, and contempt of the poor.
The men of Niniuie did by war unjustly vex other nations, making havoc of
all, to fill their greedy desire: and therefore says the Prophet Nahum, other
men measured to them with the same measure, that they had measured to other
before. Micheas in his sixth chapter affirms flatly, that God sends war
upon unjust men for their covetousness and false deceit. In Jeremy,
arrogancy and pride: in Esaie, riot and dronke^nesse are said to be the causes
of war: but the evil and misery that war brings with it, sticks so
fast to commonweals and kingdoms where it once has hold, that it cannot be
removed, taken away or shaken off at our will and pleasure by any worldly
wisdom, by any league makinges, with any wealth, by any fortifications, by
any power or manhood, as it is to be seen in the Prophet Abdias. Our sincere
tourning to God alone, is the only way to remedy it: as Jeremy testifies
in his fifte Chapter. Now this turning to the Lord consists in free
acknowledginge, and francke confession of our sins, in true faith for
remission of sins through the grace of God and merit of Christ Jesus.
Seco^darilie it consists in hatred and renou^cing of al unrighteousness, in
love of justice, innoce^cie, charity, and al other virtues: and last of all
in earneste prayers and continual supplications.

Again thou may see perhaps War for profit.
that some by war have no small commodity, profit, and inestimable riches
with very little loss or no damage at all. Such was the war which the
Israelites had with the Chanaanites, under their Captain Iosue. But I would
not that gaping after gain should draw any man They that have the iuster
qua^ell, are overcome of the unjust.
from right and equity. And many times ye magistrates suppose that their
quarrel is good, and that of right they ought to make war on others, and
punish offenders, when as notwithstanding the righteous God by that occasion
draws them on into peril, that their sins may be punished by the men in
whom they did purpose to have punished some grievous crime. We have euidente
examples hereof in the Scriptures. The eleven tribes of Israel in a good quarrel
made war on the Beniamites, purposing to revenge the detestable crime that a
few wicked knaves had horribly committed, wherein the whoale tribe bare them
out and vphelde them, being parteners thereby of their heinous offense. But
twice the Israelites were put to the worse and the wicked Beniamites had the
upper hand in the battle. In the time of Heli the Israelites minded to drive
the tyrannous rule of the idolatrous Philistines out of their country, but
they are slain, the Arcke of God is taken, and carried into the cities of their
idolatrous enemies. Likewise that excellent Prince Josias is overthrown and
slain by the Chaldeis, because the Lord had purposed to punish and bring evil
upon the whoale people of Israel, which he would not have so holy a Prince
his servant, to see with his eyes to his sorrow and grief. Whereby we have to
gather that the truth of religion is not to be esteemed by the victory or
overthrow of any people, so that that religion should be true and right,
whose favorers have the upper hand, and that again be false and untrue, whose
professors and mainteyners are put to the worse: For we must distinguish
betwixt religion, and the men or persons that keep that religion, which do
for other causes suffer the Lords visitation.

But all this admonishes us, that the magistrate has need of the great fear
of God before his eyes both in making and repelling wars, least while he
goes about to avoid the smoulthering coasepitte he happ to fall into the
scalding lyme kill, or least while he supposes to ease his shoulders of one
evil, he does by the way whereby he sought ease, heap up either more, or
far greater evils. Princes therefore must precisely look into, and
thoroughly examine ye causes of wars before they begin or take them in hand.
The The (...) of (...)
causes are many and of many sorts, but the chief are these that follow. For
either the magistrate is compelled to send aid, and raise the siege of his
enemy, which does enuironne the garrisons that he has appointed for the
defense of some of his cities: because it were an offense, and part of
parricide to forsake and give over against oathe and honesty, his cities and
garrisons that are in extremity. Or else the magistrate of duty is compelled
to make war upon men which are incurable, whom the very judgment of the
Lord condemns and bids to kill without pity or mercy. Such were the
wars as Moses had with the Madianites, and Iosue with the Amalechites. Of
that sort are the wars wherein such men are oppressed as of invincible
malice will both perish themselves, and draw other to destruction as well as
themselves, with those also which rejecting all justice and equity, do
stubbornly go on to persist in their naughtiness. Such were the Beniamites
which were destroyed by sword and fire of the other eleven tribes. Such are at
this day those arrogant and seditious rebels, as trouble commonweals and
kingdoms, as of old, Absalom was in Israel, and Seba the son of Bochri: of
whom mention is made in the second book of Samuel.

Hereunto appertoyne the wars (...) in hand (...) the (...) of (...).
that are taken in hand for the defense of true religion against idolatrers and
enemies of the true and Catholic faith. They err that are of opinion that no
wars may be made in defense of religion. The Lord in deed blamed Peter for
strikinge with the sword, because he was an Apostle, but thereby notwithstanding
he badde not the magistrate to be negligent in looking to religion, neither
forbad he him to defend and mainteyne ye pureness of faith. For if it be
lawful for the magistrate to defend with the sword, the things of account, of
which sort are liberty, wealth, chastity, and his subjects bodies, why
should he not defend and revenge the things of greater account, and those
which are of greatest weight? But there is nothing of more and greater weight
than sincere and true religion is. There is moreover a manifest and flat
commandment of God touching this matter, to be seen in Deuteronomium. For
the Lord commands that every city (within the jurisdiction of every
magistrate) which departs from God and the worship of God, should be set on
with warriors, and utterly raced, if it revolted not from idolatry betimes.
The place is extant in the 13. of Deuteronomy. But if the magistrate be commanded to
punish Apostataes by war, then is it lawful for him by war to defend the
Church in danger to be drawn by any barbarous Prince from true religion unto
false idolatry. Iosue would by war have suppressed the Rubenits with their
confederates for building an altar against Gods commandment. Judas Machabeus
fought for the people of God against ye people and soldiers of king Autiochus,
who purposed to tread down the Jewish religion, which at that time was the
true worship of God, and perforce to make all men receive and profess, his
heathenish superstition. Likewise also Paul commended greatly those Jewish
capitaynes or Judges, which by faith withstoode and turned away foreign enemies
invasions. And Paul himself did war in Cyprus against Elymas the false
prophet and stroke him with blindness: he adds the reason why he stroke him
blind, which he fetches from the keeping of religion, and says: Ceassest
thou not to pervert the right ways of the Lord? etc. Act. 13. For the same
Paul again 40. me^ do lie in wait, supposinge if he were once made away,
that a good part of the preachinge of the Gospel would then come to an end,
and that thereby the Iewishe religion (which notwithstanding was utterly false)
should have been set up and mainteyned for truth. But Paul was not negligent
to remedy this case, neither turned he ye other cheek to have that stricken
too, Since he asked (...) of heathens, he would a great deal sooner have (...)
^t at the hand^s of C^ris^ian M^gistrates ^f a^ then there had been^ any.
but earnestly and humbly requires delivery and defense, which he
requested, not of a Christian magistrate (when as yet there was none) but of a
Roman Centurion: neither did he once gainsay him, when he saw that he
choase out 400. footmen, and 70. horsemen, whom he placed in order of battle
ray, to conduct him safely from Hierusal^m to Antipatridis: and by that means
was Paul the vessel of election, preserved by an armed band of Italian
soldiers. Of the Armenians whom Mariminus ye Emperor did tyrannously
oppress, Eusebius in the 9. book and S. cap of his ecclesiastical history
says: The people of Armenia having been long time both profitable and friends
to the people of Rome, being at length compelled by Maximinus Caesar, to chaung
the use of Christian religion (whereunto the whoale nation was most holilie
bent) into the worship of idols, and to honor devils in steed of God, of
friends became enemies, and of fellows adversaries, and preparing by force of
arms to defend them selves against his wicked edictes, do of their own
accord make war upon him, and put him often to much trouble and busynes.
Thus says he. It is lawful therefore for the magistrate to defend (...)
people and su^iect^s a^^inst idola^^ra, and by (...) and (...) to this there is
an other cause why the magistrate may take war in hand. For either some
barbarous enemy inuadeth ye people committed to thy charge, tearing and
spoiling them most cruelly, like a wolf in a flock of sheep, when as
notwithstanding thou did not first prouoake him thereunto by injury, but
also after his causeless beginning thou have offered equal conditions of peace
to be made. In such a case as this the magistrate is commanded to stand forth
like a Lion, and to defend his subjects against the open wrong of merciless
^utthroates. So did Moses, when he fought against Arad, Sehon and Og, kings
of the Amorites. So did Iosaphat when he fought against the Ammonites, and
inhabitauntes of mount S^ir. So did David, when he withstoode the war made on
him by the Syrians. Or else the magistrate does aid his confederates (for the
magistrate may make league with the nations about him, so that thereby nothing
be done against the word of God) when by tyrauntes they be wrongfully
oppressed. For so did Iosue deliver the Cabaonites from the siege of their
enemies, and Saul the men of Iabes Galaad, fighting for them against Nahas a
Prince full of tyranny. In such cases as these magistrates and Princes do
lawfully make war, and their soldiers and subjects do rightly obey them,
yea they do with great glory die a happy death, that die in so just a
quarrel, as for the defense of religion, of the laws of God, of his country,
wife, and children. They therefore that enter into warrfare to sustain the
troublesome The (...) of (...)
toil of batteile, must not set their minds upon gain or pleasure, wherein
they look, when peril is paste to lie ^^ill and wallowe: but justice,
public peace, defense of truth and innocence must be the mark for them all
to shoot at: to the intent, when the wicked are vanquished, the victory
obtained, and the enemies put to flight, slain out of hand, or brought to
better order, that then religion may flourish, judgment and justice may be
exercised, the Church vpheld, the ceremonies, rites, ordinances, and discipline
thereof mainteyned, study and learning cherished, ye poor provided for,
widows and children defended and cared for, ye all sorts may live in quiet
peace, that old men in reverence, maidens in chastity, and matrones in
honesty may serve God, praise God, and worship God without fear or danger.
This was the mark, whereto our fathers Abraham, Moses, Iosue, David and other
valiant men of famous memory, did direct the eyes of their bodies and
minds, upon this only their hearts were settled, so often as they warred
and went to batteile against ungodly tyrauntes in defense of the Church and
common weal. To whom and to all other valiaunte and godly soldiers eternal
praise is duly given of all the Church and faithful saints. But to fearful
and cowardly soldiers, to wicked, covetous, and blaspheming warrious, to
riottous knaves, and unconstant traitors, by whose cowardice, gluttony, lust,
and unnatural treason, excellent kingdoms do come to naught, and flourishing
commonweals are quite overthrown, is reproach and infamy worthily due: for
God himself has cursed such knaves for evermore.

Therefore it is not lawful to make (...).
any war, unless it be against open enemies, and wicked men that are
incurable. The wars are unjust that men do make upon their own fellows,
against innocente persons, or people in whom there is hope of amendmente. Those
wars also are unjust, that are not begun by lawful means for matters of
weighte. All things must first be assayed, before it com to be tried out by
batteile. Other men's territories must not be desired: the liberty of other
people or thine own subjects must not be repressed: thou must not follow any
affection which may withdraw or seduce thy mind, of which sort are desire of
rule, covetousness, greediness of gifts, envy, and other affections like
unto these. War is to commonweals a remedy in deed, but perilous and
dangerous, even as launcinge, or cuttinge is to the me^^ers. The hand is
poisoned, and the arm in danger to be enuenomed too, whereby the whoale man
perhapps may be cast away: but yet thou cuttest not off thy hand, until,
when thou have tried all other medicines, thou do plainly perceive that no
other means can remedy the soar but cutting off alone. Likewise when al
helps fail, then at the last let war beeginne, so yet nevertheless, that
the Prince do remember to beeginne with war, before all help and hope of
recovery be utterly paste.

For the word of God is so far off from finding fault with war begun The
word of God has made laws of war^e.
upon a just quarrel, that it does both make laws of war, and shows a
number of examples of upright wars, of wise and worthy warriors. The laws
of war are recited in the 20. Chapter of Deuteronomie, both profitable and
necessary, and there withalso evident that they need no words of mine to
expound them. Moreover in every place of the scripture, these laws of war
are still bidden to be kept. First of all the chief and uppermost place must
be given to religion in every camp and garrison. For the Lord himself has
appointed priests and ministers of true religion to attend and serve in
wars. Secondarilie let vprighte laws be of force in camps abroad, as well
as in cities at hoame: let soldiers live honestly, instly, and rightly as
order and discipline are wont to require, when as they are in the city at
home. For that saying comes not of God but of the devil which is commonly
spread abroad: Let laws in war, be huisht and still.

Thirdly, let him that is chosen to be guide and general of ye war, be godly,
(...) holy, valiant, wise and fortunate, as among them of old, were Iosue,
David, Judas Machabeus, Constantine, Theodosius, and many more. To all this there
must be added a chosen band of tried men: For choice of soldiers must be
made, unless perhaps the army do consist in a troop of dastards and
unskillful men, of periurd and blaspheming knaves, of cutthroates and rakehells,
of dronkards, and gluttons, and a beastly droaue of filthy swine. Victory
consists not in the multitude of men, but in the grace of God and a chosen
band. The proverb is common which says: Where a multitude is, there is
confusion.

Great and innumerable armies are a let to them selves very greatly: as we
do learn by daily experience and as examples of every age do testify to
us. Moreover loyterers in camps are always reproved. Let the Christian
soldier therefore be idle at no time, let him ever be busy and still doing
some thing, let him The description (...) a christian soldier.
be courageous, faithful to his country, ready to take pains, obediente to
his Capitaynes, fit to take time when occasion is offered, and evermore
occupied in warlike discipline: no effeminate misksoppe, but of manlye
stomache: not cruel and merciless, but severe and pitiful, as time
requires. What he may preserve, that let him not destroy. But above all
things let him not forget or think scorn, both in peril and out of peril
evermore to make his prayers and supplications to God his savior. In Gods name
let him begin all things, without God let him attempt nothing: In adversity
and when he has the overthrow, let not his courage quail, nor his heart and
hope for sake him: in prosperity let him not be puffed up with pride and
arrogancy, but let him give the thanks to God, and use the conqueste like a
merciful victour: let him whoalie depend upon Gods helpinge hand, and desire
nothing rather than the defense of the common weal, laws, religion, justice,
and guiltless people. Many I know will marvel to see me require at the
hands of a soldier the things that seem to be enoughe, as the common
saying is, to be looked for of a right good and godly man: as though in deed
that none could be soldiers but irreligious and naughty men. Soldiers I
confess are for the most part such kind of fellows: but what fruit I pray
you reap we at this day of so ceuill seed? The Turks ouerrunne and spoil
us, we are to all th heathen a jesting stock to laugh at, kingdoms decay
and are made subject to devilish Mahometisme, and every day we are wrapped
in more miseries than other. But what kind of soldiers they of old were,
which went (...)
to the war from out of the Church or congregation of the Christians, we may
easilte gather, even by that one history worthy the remembrance, Christians
^ere in ^imes past.
which Tertullian to Scapula sets down thus: Marcus Aurelius also in his
wars with the Germans, by the prayers which Christian soldiers made unto
God, obtained showers of rain in that great drought. At what time have not
droughts been turned away by our prayers and fastinges? The La^ine copy
^ath, Et (...) solus ^^tens, by ^hiche I ^^inke he ^^^ant the ^mperour
Then the people crying out for joy to the God of Gods, and the Emperor
himself under the name of Jupiter, confessed the wonderful working of our God.
Thus much Tertullian. But Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history, has more
largely and fully set down the same history, and says: Histories report
that Marcus Aurelius brother to Antoninus Caesar, making war upon the
Germans and Sarmatians, when his army was in danger to be lost with
drought, being at his wits end because he knew not what way to seek for
remedy in that distress, did at the last, light upon a certain legio^ wherein
Christian soldiers were, whose prayers God heard, when they (as the manner of
our men is) had upon their knees cried out unto him, so that on a soudeine
when no man looked for it, with the powringe down of sufficient showers the
thirste of the army that then was in danger, for which the Christians had
made supplications, was presently quenched: but their enemies that hoouered
there to have been their destruction, were stricken and scattered with thunder
and fire in lightening from heaven: Which deed is reported by heathen
Historiographers: but that it was obtained at the prayers of our men they do
not report: for with them the other miracles which are done by our men, have
no place of credit. But among our men Tertullian makes mention hereof, and
among the Greeks Apollinaris, whoalso affirms that for the miracle of that
notable deed, that Legio Fulmiuca.
legions name was changed by the Emperor and called the legion of thunder.
Tertullian adds that the letters of Marcus the Emperor are yet to be had,
wherein the full and manifest truth of this matter is plainly declared.
Hitherto Eusebius: Whereby we gather that Christian soldiers of old, were not
only given to prayer, but to justice also, and holiness of living. For who
knows not that James the Apostle said? The earnest prayer of a righteous man
avails much. Elias was a man under infirmities even as we are, and he
prayed in his prayer and the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought forth
her fruit. It is most euidente therefore that soldiers of old, were very
godly and religious men. Dure soldiers at these days, because they are far
from religion, yea because they are enemies to true religion, do in steed of
victory suffer overthrows abroad, and loss, and destruction of their cities
at hoame. And worthily do commonweals suffer such plagues, for trustinge
so much in such wicked soldiers: For to trust in them, is all one, as if they
should put confidence in the very devils, whom these soldiers do (for the
most part) exceed in all kind of filthiness, uncleanness, cruelty and
villainy.

But now the word of God does set Examples of war and Capitaines out of the
Scripture.
before our eyes an innumerable sort of examples almost, of holy and upright
wars, and of excellent kings and capitaynes. Abraham our father settinge
forward with a very small army, pursues the four most puissant kings or
robbers of ye world, he overthrows and puts them to flight, and having
recovered his people, and restoared to them their substance again, he gives
the thanks to God as to the author of that unlikely victory. Moses and Iosue
destroyed about 39. kings, they punished severely the unspeakable wickedness
of al those nations, and planted the people committed to their charge, in the
land which god had promised to give them. The Judges of the people of Israel
had notable wars against the Heathens and infidels, whereby they brake the
tyranny of those wicked men, unlawfully usurped among Gods people,
restoaring them again to their liberty and religion. The Prophet Samuel is
here to be numbered among the notable Capitaynes of Gods people. Ionathas Saules
son, was a worthy Captain, and a singular example of a godly man. Than
David none was more excellent or worthy to be praised. In war he vanquished
the Philistines, the Idumits, the Syrians, and a good part of the East beside,
by war he revenged injuries, by war he mainteyned his liberty, and kept
Gods people from a number of mischiefs: and yet notwithstanding, he that
warred thus, is said to be a man according to Gods hearts desire, and the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ touching his flesh or his humanity. In David's
posterity you may find many excellent warriors and valiant Capitaynes,
Abia, Asa, Iosaphat, Amasia, Ofia, Ezechias and other more. Among these Judas
Machabeus has not the last nor least place of all, who fought very stoutely
for the law, religion, and people of God, and died at the last in ye midst
of the batteile, in defense of religion and his country quarrel. I will not
add to these the examples of Constantine, Gratian, Theodosius, and other more
that were excellent in feats of war. Of these and other writes S. Augustine
in the end of his fi^t book De ciuitate Dei, and Orosius very largely in
the 7. book of his history unto the end of the 28. Cap. This is sufficient
for godly magistrates. Hitherto have I discoursed of war to be made by the
magistrate, and the use of the sword in the magistrates hand, touching which I
gave some notes by the way in that sermon, wherein I expounded the fifte
commandment.

This being thus ended I have now to prove that Christian men may bear A (...)
may (...)
the office of a magistrate, which treatise I mean therefore to take in hand,
because our mad headed Anabaptists, and some other builders of A devised
(...).
common weal, by gainsayinge that which hitherto we have alleged do go about
to prove that a Christian may not bear the office of a magistrate: their
reason is, because Christians (as they say) may not strive in law, nor kill any
man, nor recover by war things violently taken away, nor revenge any injury
that is done unto them. And although these causes of theirs be aunsweared
every one in his fit and several place, yet will I briefly gather here
together, a few substantial arguments, by which a politic and Christian man
may understand, contrary to the madness and dreams of the Anabaptists, if
he be called to bear rule and authority, that then he both may, and of
duty ought, to serve the Lord his God, in taking upon him and executing the
office of a magistrate. For whereas they feign that the doctrine of the Gospel
does utterly cut off all kind of defense, and whatsoever else belongs to
the defense of Christian men's goods and bodies, that is nothing so, and they
are deceived as far as heaven is wide: for the truth does teach us clean
contrary.

For whatsoever things are ordained by God for a means of men's safe guard, and
good estate, they are so far from misbeco^ming and being unseemly for a
Christian man, if he use them and apply himself unto them, that if he
refuse and neglect them, he cannot rightly be called a true Christian. For the
first and greatest care of every Christian is, by all means that he may to
set forward and maintain yt health and safeguard of all sorts of men. But the
magistrate is not ordained by any man, but by god himself for the health and
wealth of all mankind, as it is expressly witnessed by the Prophets and
Apostles, but by Paul especially in the 13. to the Rom who then cannot thereby
perceive that a Christian may praiseworthilie execute a magistrates office?

Furthermore no man will deny, I know, that a Christian man's faith is, not in
words only, but in deeds also to give a proof of justice and mercy, by all
means to care for public peace and tranquillity, to do judgment with
justice, to defend the fatherless, widows, and children, and to deliver poor
oppressed people. Neither does he contemn, flee from, nor reject, occasion,
places, and means by which he may put those good works in ure. And therefore
a Christian refuses not the place or office of a magistrate. For the
magistrates office is to do judgment with justice, and to provide for
public peace.

Moreover, it is undoubtedly true, (as before we have declared) that Moses,
Samuel, Iosue, and David, are not excluded from the name of Christianity: but
since they were in authority and bare the names of magistrates, what let is
there, I pray you, why a true Christian man may not bear yt office of a
magistrate in his common weal? What may be thought of this moreover, that in
the new Testament, certain notable men are well reported off, who, when they
were in authority, were not put beside their offices, because they were
Christians and of a sound religion? Touching Joseph of Arimathea thus we read
in Luke: And behold there was a man named Joseph, a counselor (Marcke says,
a noble Senator) who was a Honestus Senator.
good man and a just, the same had not consented to the counsel and deed of
them, which was of Arimathea a city of the Jews, which waited also for the
kingdom of God. Mark here I beseech you how notable a testimony this man
has here. Joseph is a counselor or Senator, yea and yt more is, a noble
senator too: he sat in the Senate, and among those Iudg^s which did condemn
our savior christ, but because he consented not to their deed and judgment,
he is acquitted as guiltless of that horrible murder. The same is said to have
been a good man and a just, and of the number of them that look for the
kingdom of God, that is of the number of those, which of Christ are called
Christians, and yet nevertheless he was a counselor or senator, and that
too in the City of Jerusalem. A Christian therefore may lawfully bear the
office of a magistrate. Hereunto belong the examples of the A^thiopia^
treasurer, Acts 8. of Cornelius the Centurion, Acts 10. and of Erastus the
Chamberleine of Corinth. Romans 16. 2. Tim. 4 But our desire is, to have the
Anabaptists prove and declare out of the Scriptures, that which they obiecte
here, in saying, that these men being once converted to yt faith, did
streightway put off their roabes of estate, and lay aside their magistrates
sword. For we have a little before by the words of S. Augustine upon John
Baptists answer (who did himself also preach the Gospel) already proved, that
the soldiers that were baptized, were not put beside their office, nor
commanded by John to give over armor, and cease to be soldiers.

They obiecte again, that the Lord The Lord conueieth himself away, while the
people would have made him a King.
conveyed himself privily away when the people were minded to have made him a
king: which (say they) he would not have done, but because by his example he
would commend humility to all Christian people, and as it were thereby to
command them, not to suffer the charge to rule any common weal to be laid on
their necks. They add moreover these sayings of the Lord: My kingdom is not
of this world. Again: Kings of nations have dominion over them, but ye shall
not be so. But they understand not that the cause why the Lord conveyed him
self away, was for the fond purpose of the foolish people, which went about by
making him a king, not to do the will of God, but being blinded with
affections to seek to bring those things to pass, that were for the ease and
fillinge of their bellies. For in so much as he had fed them miraculously a
little before, therefore they thought that he would be a king for their
purpose, who was able to give his subjects meat, without any cost or labor
at all. Furthermore, our Lord came not to reign on the earth after the manner
of this world, as yt Jews imagined, and as Pilate feared: who dreamt that
Messiah should reign as Solomon did: and for that cause the Lord does rightly
say: My kingdom My kingdom (...) not of (...) world.
is not of this world. For he is ascended into heaven, and sits at the
righthand of his father, having subdued all kings to himself, and all the
world beside, wherein he reigns by his word and his spirit, and which he
shall come to judge in the end of the world. And although Christ denies that
his kingdom is of this world, yet notwithstanding he never denied that kings
and Princes should come out of the world into the Church, to serve the Lord
therein, not as men alone, but as kings and men of authority. But kings
cannot otherwise serve the Lord as kings, but by doing the things, for which
they are called kings: And unless that Christians, when they are once made
kings, should continue in their office and govern kingdoms according to the
rule and laws of Christ, how (I beseech you) should Christ be called king
of kings, and Lord of Lords? Therefore when he said: Kings of nations have
dominion over them, but so shall not ye be, he spoke to his Apostles, who
stroaue among themselves for the chief and highest dignity: as if he should
have said: Princes which have dominion in the world, are not by my doctrine
displaced of their seats, nor put beside their throanes: for the magistrates
authority is of force still in the world, and in the Church also. The king or
magistrate shall reign: But so shall not ye: ye shall (...)
not reign, ye shall not be Princes, but teachers of the world, and ministers
of the Churches. Thus briefly I have aunsweared to the Anabaptists
objections, which in other places also I have many times confuted somewhat more
largely. By this, that here I have said, I think I have sufficiently
proved, that a Christian man cannot only, but ought of duty also to take
upon him the office of a magistrate, if it be lawfully offered unto him.

Now before I make an end of the Of the (...) of ^^biects
discourse of this place, I will briefly add what the duty of subjects is,
and what every man does owe to his magistrate. First of all, the subjects
duty is to esteem honestly, reverently, and honorably, not vilely nor
disdainfully of their magistrates or Princes. Let them reverence and honor
them as the deputies and ministers of the eternal God. Let them abroad also
give them the honor that is usually accustomed in every kingdom and
country. It is a foul thing for subjects to behave themselves vndece^tly
toward their Lords and men of authority. But a false, a light, or ill
opinion once conceived, breeds a contempt of the things and persons, touching
whom that opinion is once taken up. Some euidente testimonies of Scripture
therefore must be gathered and graffed in every man's heart, that thereby a
just estimation and worthy authority of magistrates and officers may be
bred and brought up in all peoples minds. Here by the way let Princes and
magistrates take heed to themselves, that by a spotted and unseemly life,
they make not themselves contemptible and laughinge stocks, and so by their
own defaulte loose all their authority among the common people. The Lord
our God verily voucheth safe to attribute his own name to the Princes and
magistrates of the people, and to call them gods. Exodus 21. Psalm. 82. The
Apostles called them the deputies and ministers of God. ^. Peter. 2. Romans 13.
But who will not think well of godds, and them which are the deputies and
ministers of god, by whom God works the wealth of the people? He that
despises him that is sonte, despises him that sends. He that honors the
deputy seems to give more honor to him that appointed the deputy, than to
him that is the deputy. Moreover Solomon in the 16. of his Proverbs says:
Prophecy is in the lips of the king, therefore his heart shall not go wrong
in judgment. And in the 8. of yt Preacher: I must keep the kings
commandment, because of the oath that I have made to God for the same.
Again, Proverbs 24. My son fear thou the Lord and the king, and keep no
company with them that slide back from the fear of them. For their
destruction shall rise soudeinly. And Paul said: Whosoever resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God, but they that resist, shall receive
judgment to themselves. Of this sort I have rehearsed certain testimonies
in the exposition of the fifte precept.

Secondarilie, let subjects pray for their Princes and magistrates, that yt
Lord may give them wisdom, knowledge, fortitude, temperaunce, justice,
upright severity, clemency, and all other requisite virtues, and that he will
vouchsafe to lead them in his ways, and to preserve them from all evil: that
we may live under them in this world in peace and honesty: This does Paul
require at the hands of subjects, in the second Chapter of his first
Epistle to Timothe, and Jeremy in the twenty and ninth of his prophecy, I
have in an other place recited their ve^ie words, therefore at this time I let
them pass. The minds of many men are herein very slow and careless, and
that is ye cause many times whi^ they feel the things that willingly they
would not, and bear the burdens with grief enough, that other wise they
should not: and woorthilie too. For if they would but do their duty
willingly, in praying for their magistrate earnestly, their case undoubtedly
would be far better than it is. But how fervent a desire they in the
Primitive Church had to pray for their magistrate, we may gather even by these
words of Tertullia^ in the 30. chapter of his Apology, We pray always
(says he) for all Emperors, desiring God to give the^ long life, a sure
reign, a safe house, valiant armies, faithful counselors, honest subjects,
a quiet world, and whatsoever else a man or Emperor may desire.

Let the people also obey the good and Obedie^c^ to Magistrates Laws.
upright laws of their princes or magistrates: yea let subjects obey them
holilie, reverently, and with a devout mind, not obeying their laws as the
laws of men, but as the laws of the ministers and deputies of God himself:
for Peter bids us obey them for the Lord: and Paul says: We must not obey
them for anger only, but for conscience sake also: that is, we must not obey
the magistrate only for fear, least our contempt and disobedience do breed
our punishment, but we must obey him, least we sin against God himself, and
so our own conscience do argue our wickedness. But in the fifte
commandment, I proved by testimonies and examples out of the scriptures, that
we ought not to obey godless magistrates, so often as they command any wicked
thing which is flatly contrary to the word of God. The Apostles and faithful
me^ of the primitive Church, did choose rather to be shut up in prison, to
be sent in exile, to be spoiled of their substance, to be cast to wild
beasts, to be killed with the sword, to be burnt with fire, and to be
strangled, than to obey any wicked commandments. That blessed martyr, bishop
Polycarpus answered the Roman Proconsul, and said: We are taught to give to
Princes and to the powers that are of God, such honor as is not contrary to
true religion. And S. John Chrysostom said to Gaina, It is not laweful for a
godly Emperor to assaye any thing contrary to Gods commandments.

Lastly, let subjects pay tribute to their magistrates, yea let them, if
necessity so require, not stick to bestow their bodies and lives, for the
preservation of their magistrate and country, as I have already taught you in
the fifte commandment. The Lord in the Gospel does simply say: Give to God
that which belongs to God, and to Caesar that which belongs to Caesar. They
therefore are worthily blamed, yt pinch, grudg at, or defraude the magistrate
of any part of his tribute. Tares and tributes are due to the magistrates, as
the hire of his labor, and as it were the synewes of public tranquillity
and common weal. For, who goes to warrefare of his own proper cost? Every
man lives by that labor wherein he is occupied: The Prince takes pains in
governing the common weal, and preserving it in peace: he neglects his own
private and household business, whereby he should live, and provide things
necessary for himself and his family, by looking and attending on his
countries affairs: it were against reason therefore but that he should be
fed and mainteyned upon the public treasure and cost of his country. It is
requisite also, that kingdoms (...) or ^^^sure.
and commonweals be sufficiently furnished with money and substance, to
help in distress, either of war, famine, fire, and other miseries: or else
to the setting up again of men fallen into poverty, or putting away of
greater calamities. I say nothing now touching the keeping in reparation of
common buildinges, as the city walls, bulwarckes, trenches, ditches, gates,
bridges, high ways, wells, conduits, judgment halls, and markette places,
with many more of the same sort. There are also certain common persons, as
sergeants, watch me^, and such like, which are to be nourished and mainteyned
of the common cost and treasury. And unless that money be still at hand and
in readiness, there can no kingdom nor any common weal stand long in
assurance. They therefore that grudge to pay tribute, deny the hire of ye
magistrates labor, and go the next way to work, to subvert the common weal,
and to bring it to naught. The men that in the commonweals affairs (as some
of custom be) are negligent and careless, sin not against any one Lord, but
against the whole common weal: and therefore thou may see that such
slothful workmen are seeldome times enriched with the good blessings of
God. But now here by the way all magistrates and Princes must be admonished, to
love the people subject to their charge and government, to bear with them
bountifully, and not to nip them with immoderate exactions: which is easille
done, if they themselves will^ thrift^e, and keep themselves moderately from
riottous gluttony, and over sumptuous pride. Let a good Prince consider, what
a sin it is to have his Palace abound in riottousnes and surfettinge, while
his cities and towns are tormented and pined with famine and hunger. Let
magistrates consider that tributes and subsidies are not the private goods of
them in authority, but the public substance of the whoale common weal. God
hates pilers and robbers. God abhors immoderate exactio^s. God curses
polling tyrauntes: but blesses profitable and moderate magistrates. Both in
peace and war agreement and concord are much more auayleable, than money
unjustly gotten: and stronger is that kingdom, and firmer that common weal,
which is vphelde by the love and agreement of the prince and cominaltie,
although the common treasure there, be very small, than that country or city
which has innumerable riches heaped up together and wrou^g out of the
citizens entrails, when as continual grudge and ill will makes the Prince and
people at continual variaunce. I say no more here than the very truth is:
experience of all ages is a witness that it is so.

Thus much hither to have I laid down before your eyes (dearly beloved) as
briefly as I could touching the magistrate, taking occasion upon the sixte
commandment: Thou shall not kill, and declaring to what end and purpose God
did ordeine him, what his duty is toward his subjects, and what his subjects
duty is toward him. New let us pray and beseech the Lord that he will grant
both to magistrates and subjects, to walk worthily in their vocaticus.

Of the third precept of the second table, which is in order the seventh of the
10. commandments. Thou shall not commit adultery. Of wedlock, against all
intemperancie, of continency.
The tenth Sermon.
THE nearest to our life and body is every ones several mate in wedlock: For
by wedlock two bodies are joined together, and are made one. For the Lord
said: And two shall be one flesh. In this third precept therefore which is next
after the forbidding of murder, commandment is given for the holy keepinge
of honorable wedlock, and for the true sanctifying of the body, against
adulteries, wandering lusts, and al incontinencie. Wedlock is prepared to
this end and purpose, that honesty and chastity may flourish among good me^,
and children may be brought up in the fear of the Lord. This commandment
again is briefly expressed in as few words as may be: Thou shall not commit
adultery. In the exposition The 7. precept.
of this commandment by the help of Gods good spirit, I will first speak
of holy matrimony, then of adultery: thirdly I will show you what is contained
under the name of adultery: and lastly I will make an end with a treatise of
continency.

Wedlock, which is also called matrimony, What wed^ocke is.
is an alliance or holy joining together of man and woman, coupled and brought
into one by mutual consent of them both, to the intent that they using all
things in common betwixt themselves may live in chastity, and train up
their children in the fear of the Lord. The Gospel verily calls wedlock a
joining together, which god has made. For Christ said: What God has joined
together, let no man separate. Neither is it lawful to make any other the
author of matrimony, than God himself. God did by the mean and ministry of
his Angels and chosen men, appointe other good and necessary ordinances for
mankinds commodity, but he himself did immediately without the ministry of
any person ordeine matrimony, he himself did establish and ratify it with
laws for the purpose, he himself did couple the first married folks, and he
being the true high priest in deed, did himself bless the couple then, whom
he did so join together.

By this we may easily gather the (...)
excellent dignity of marriage or matrimony. For God did ordeine it, yea he
ordained it in Paradise, when man as yet was free from all kind of calamities.
Adam when he was in the great felicity of Paradise, seemed not yet to live
commodiously nor sweetly enough, except a wife were given to be joined unto
him. It is not good (says God) for man to be alone, I will make him a helper
to tarry or dwell with him. For God brought to Adam al living creatures which
he had created for him to name them: but among them all, there was nothing that
Adam had lust unto, his mind and nature did utterly abhor to be coupled with
any of them. God therefore casting Adam into a dead sleep, does out of his
side as he slepte, frame up a woman, which so soon as Adam set his eye upon
when she was brought unto him by God who had made her, he streightway cries
that this was such a one as he desi^ed, that this was such a one as he could
love, and where with his nature could very well agree. This now (says he) is
bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. I have found (says he) I have found
an help fit for me, which has part of my flesh, of my blood, and my very
substance. From hence rises and yet remains that natural pronenesse of men
toward women: when on the otherside ouerthwarte minglinge and medlinge of
cursed men with beasts contrary to man's nature was long ago destroyed by
fire, which showed that God did abhorte it. The Lord moreover said: A man shall
forsake his father and his mother, and cleave to his wife, and two shall be one
flesh. But in the exposition of the fifte commandment we perceived how much
God does set by the love and goodwill of children to their parents: and what a
charge he gives to children to honor them. It must needs be therefore that
wedlock is a most heavenly ordinance, since it is preferred before the
honouringe of parents: and yet nevertheless it is so preferred, as that by
the law of matrimony, the precept for the honor due to parents may not be
abolished, but that thereby married folks may know to behave themselves so, if
their parents go about to breed discord betwixt them and their spouses,
that then they suffer not themselves for their parents words to be severed,
but in all things else to honor them as they should. The holy Patriarchs
kept the law of matrimony, and reverenced wedlock very deuontely. For no
small parcel of the first and most excellent book of the Bible called
Genesis, is spent in rehearceing the marriages of holy men. Neither is Moses
the peerless servant of God ashamed, to make mention of the business and
works of wedlock as pure and excellent, which seem to many at this day to
be foul and filthy. Christ himself (who being the very natural son of
God, was himself borne in wedlock, although of a pure and uncorrupted
Virgin) did honor and commend the knotte of matrimony, while he did
vouchsafe to show his first miracle at a wedding, which was such a miracle as
did declare that the Lord is able to make the bitterness of marriage sweet,
and the scarcity thereof to abound with plenty. As the Apostles were married
men according to the examples of the patriarchs, kings, princes, priests,
and prophets: So Paul the chief of all the Apostles, cries out and says:
Wedlock is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled. But whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge. He says that wedlock is honorable among all,
he means, all nations: For very few people shall you find that do not
greatly commend the state of marriage. Xenophon thinks that among all Goods
ordinances scant any one can be found that is more commendable or profitable
than wedlock is. Musonius, Hierocles, and other ancient sages think marriage
to be so necessary to live well and conveniently, that the life of man
without marriage seems to be maimed. Even they (y^ heathens I mean) do make
the evils and discommodities of marriage to consist in y^ married folks and
not in marriage. For marriage of it self is good, but many use not well the
thing that is good, and therefore they feel the smart of their foul abuse
worthily. For who knows not that the fault of drunkenness is not to be
referred to wine which is the good and wholesome creature of God, but to the
excessive bibbing and over great greediness of man which abuses Gods good
creature? That which comes out of the heart of man (says the Lord in the
Gospel) and not that which goes in by the mouth, defiles the man. Hereunto
belongs that saying of Paul the Apostle of Christ, where he attributes
sanctification to wedlock: for the bed says he) is undefiled: and in an other
place he testifies that the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing
wife: he affirms also that children borne in wedlock are holy or clean.
Moreover the same Paul makes Christ an era^ple of love betwixt man and wife:
and shadoweth ye mysteries of Christ and the Church by the color of wedlock:
he figureth (I say) a heavenly thing by an holy type that God does allow.
Whereupon in an other place the same Apostle does say: That their doctrine is a
very doctrine of devils which forbid men to marry. And so consequently it
follows that that is an heavenly doctrine proceeding from God, which
permits marriage freely to all men, and does commend and reverence it.

The excellency and dignity of matrimony The cau^^s of mar^^^ge.
being thus understood, let us now seek out and look on the causes, for
which God has ordained marriage for men to embrace. God according to his
natural goodness directs all his ordinances to the great good and
abundant commodity of mortal men: and therefore it follows that he
ordained matrimony for the preservation of mankind, to the end that man's life
might be pleasant, sweet and thoroughly furnished with joys sufficient. But
al these causes may be reduced into ye number of three. First God himself does
say: It is not good for man to be alone, let us make him an help therefore to
be before him, or to dwell with him. So then yt first cause why wedlecke was
instituted, is man's commodity, that thereby the life of man might be the
pleasaunter and more commodious. For Adam seemed not to live half happily nor
sweetly enough, unless he had a wife to join himself unto: which wife is not
in the scriptures called an impediment or necessary evil, as certain Poets
and beastly men, who hated women, have foolishly iangled, but she is the help
or arm of the man. Antipater The (...) is the (...) of (...).
an heathen writer In sermon de Nuptiis, does wonderfully agree with this
saying of the scripture, and expresses plainly what kind of help and what
manner of arm the wife is to her husband. Whosoever, says he, has not had
trial of wife and children, he is utterly ignorant of true mutual goodwill.
Love in wedlock is mutuallie showed, when man and wife do not communicate
wealth, children, and hearts alone, as friends are wont to do, but have their
bodies in common also, which friends cannot do. And therefore Euripides laying a
side the deadly hate that he bare to women, writ these verses in commendation
of marriage.

The wife that gadds not gigglot wise with every flirting gill,
But honestly does keep at hoame, not set to gossip still,
Is to her husband in his cares, a passing sweet delight,
She heales his sickness all, and calls again his dying spirit.
By fawning on his angry looks she tourns them into smiles,
And keeps her husbands secrets cloase, when friends work wily guiles.
For like as a man having one hand or one foot, if by any means he get
himself an other, may thereby the more easily lay hold on what he lists,
or go whether he will: even so he that has married a wife, shall more easily
enjoy the healthful pleasures and profitable commodities of this present life.
For married folks, for two eyes have four, and for two hands as many more,
which being joined together, they may the more easily dispatche their handie
businesses: again, when the ones two hands are wearied the hands of the
other supply their room, and keep their work in a forwardness still.
Marriage therefore, which in steed of one member is by increase co^pact of
twain, is better able to pass thorough the course of this world, than the
single and unwedded life. Thus much out of Antipater. Hierocles also in his
book de Nuptiis says: To live with a woman is very profitable, even beside
the begetting of children. For first she does welcome us hoame that are tired
abroad with labor and traueile, she interteyneth us seruiceablie, and does
all she may to recreate ou^e weary minds. She makes us forget all sorrow
and sadness. For the troublesome cases of our life, and generally of care and
business, while we are occupied in matters abroad, in bargayning in the
country, or among our friends, are not easily suffered to be troubled with
our domestical and household affairs: but when we have dispatched them and
are once returned to our wives at home, so that our minds are at quiet, and we
restoared to our ease and liberty, then are our co^bersome businesses well
lightened and eased, whereby they cease to trouble us any longer. Neither is a
wife troublesome undoubtedly, but lighteneth things that are troublesome to us.
For there is nothing so heavy, that man and wife living in concord are not
able to bear, especially if they be both willinge to do their endeavor. And
so forth.

The second cause why matrimony The begetting and bringing up of children.
was ordained, is the begetting of children for the preservation of mankind by
increase, and the bringing of them up in the fear of the Lord. For the Lord
blessed Adam and Eua, saying: Increase and multiply, and replenishe the earth.
Paul the Apostle in his Epistle to Titus says: Speak to the elder women
that they may teach honest things, that they may make the younger women to
be sober minded, to love their husbands, to love their children, to be
discrete, house keepers, good, obedient to their husbands. And again to
Timothy: Adam was not deceived, but the woman was seduced, notwithstanding
through bearing of children she shall be saved, if they continue in faith, and
charity, and holiness, with modesty. But the begetting of children were
altogether unprofitable, if they were not well brought up. For she, that
loves her children in deed, does bring them up in ye fear of the Lord Which
bringing up is no small commodity to the common weal and Church of God. The
glory also and worship of God, is greatly augmented, when as by wedlock there
does spring up a great number of men yt acknowledge call upon, and worship god
as they ought to do. The third cause why matrimony was ordained, yt Apostle
Paul The bed ^^ wed^ocke vn^efiled.
expresses in these words: To avoid whoredom let every man have his own
wife, and every woman her own husband. It were good and expedient for a man
not to touch a woman, and to live single, but because this is not given to al
men, as yt Lord in the gospel testifies, and that concupiscence of the flesh
does for the most part, burn the greatest sort of me^, the Lord has appointed
marriage to be as it were a remedy against that heat, as the Apostle in an
other place witnesses, saying: Let them marry which cannot abstain: for it
is better to marry than to burn. By this we learn that the natural company
of a man with his own wife, is not reputed for a fault or uncleanness in the
sight of God. Whoredom is uncleanness in the eyes of the Lord, because it is
directly contrary to the law of God. But God has allowed wedlock and blessed
it, therefore married folks are sanctified by y^ blessing of God through
faith and obedience. Neither lack we here any evident arguments, and
testimonies of Paul to prove it by. For to the Hebrews he said: Wedlock is
honorable among al men, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge. The Apostle here spoke very reverently, and by the bed he
understood the natural company of a man with his wife, which he says plainly
is undefiled. What God has made clean, who shall call unclean? Acts. 10 Tit.
1.
who ca^ deny yt to the clean al things are clean? Paphnutius therefore both
bishop and confessor judging rightly of this, did in the Nicene counsel say
openly: that the lying of a man with his own wife is chastity. Neither was
the most modest Apostle ashamed to make laws betwixt a man and his wife. For
to the Corinthians he says: Let the husband give to the wife due beneuole^ce:
1. Cor. 7.
likewise also the wife to the husband. The wife has not the power of her own
body, but the husband: likewise also the husband has not the power of his own
body but the wife. Defraud ye not the one the other, except it be with both
your co^sents for a time, that yemay give your selves to fasting and to prayer:
and afterward come together again, that satan te^pt you not for your
inco^tinencie: These words of ye Apostle are so evident that they need no
exposition at all. In the same Epistle again he says: If thou mariest a wife
thou sinnest not. And again. If a virgin marie, she has not sinned. Now what
is more excellent, pure and holy, than virginity is? But a virgin sins not
if she chaung virginity for holy matrimony. Very well therefore does
Chrysostom in a certain homily say: The first degree of chastity is
unspotted virginity, the 2. is faithful wedlock. S. Augustine also calls
marriage chastity or co^tine^cie: the place is to be seen in the 19. and 20.
cap. de bono coniugali. and in yt 198. Epist. This is the head from whence does
spring y^ greatest part of public honesty. For god allows wedlock, but
disalloweth fornication and al kind of (...)
uncleanness. It pleased him by his ordinance to exclude al uncleanness from
his believing servants. Let the saints therefore, but magistrates especially,
have an especial eye, not to be slack in promoating holy wedlock, but
diligent to punish severely al filthy fornication and other uncleanness. This
have I hitherto rehearsed somewhat largly out of the holy scripture, to the
intent I might prove to al men No man ^orbidden ^o marry.
that wedlock is holy, and that therefore no man ca^ be defiled with y^
moderate, holy, and lawful use thereof: and so consequently that marriage is
permitted to al sorts of men. For ye Apostle says: Let a bishop be the husband
of one wife, let him rule his own house well, and have faithful children. For
it is manifest by ye testimonies of scripture and ecclesiastical writers, that
the Apostles of Christ and other Apostolical teachers of ye primitive Church
were married men, and had wives and children. Neither is there any thing, next
after corrupt doctrine, which does more infect the Church of Christ, and
subvert al ecclesiastical discipline, tha^ if the ministers of yt Churches,
which should be lights of the whole congregation, be fornicatours or adulterous
persons. That offense especially above all other, is an hinderance and blot to
al kind of honesty: but touching this I purpose not at this time to discourse
so largly and fully as I might. To this I ad that the band of wedlock is
indissoluble and everlasting, yt is to say, such a The knot ^f wed^^ck is
in^^ssoluble.
knot as never can be undone. For of two is made one flesh and one body which
if you sever, you do utterly mar it. What god has joined together therefore,
let not man separate. They therefore do make a slaughter of this body, that do
commit adultery. For ye laws of God and men admit a diuorcement betwixt a man
and his adulterous wife. And yet let not any less or lighter cause dissolve
this knot betwixt man and wife, than fornication is. Otherwise God which in ye
Gospel has permitted the less, does not forbid the greater to be causes of
diuorcement. And in the primitive church the Epistles and constitutio^s of
christian princes do testify, yt once committing of fornication was no cause
of diuorcement. Of which I have spoken in another place.

But that this holy knot may be the surer, it is auayleable that marriages How
matrimony must be contracted
be made holilie, lawfully, and with discretion in the fear of the Lord. Let
them not be unwillingly agreed unto and made up by co^pulsion. First let y^
good liking of their consenting minds be joined in one, whom the open
profession of mutual consent and outward handfasting must afterward couple
together. Let them be matched together that are not severed by alliance of
blood and nighnesse of affinity. Let them be coupled in one, that may marry
together by the laws of God and their country, with the consent and counsel
of their friends and parents. Let them which mind marriage, have a sincere heart
purposely bent to seek their own safeguard and continual felicity, that is,
to respect only the will and pleasure of God, and not admit any evil affections
as counselors to make up ye marriage betwixt them. Hierocles in his book De
nuptiis says: It is mere folly and lack of wit which make those things that
of themselves are easy to be borne, troublesome, and make a wife a grievous
clog to her husband. For marriage to many me^ has bin intolerable: not
because the wedded state is by default of it self or own proper nature so
troublesome and comberous, but for our matching as we should not, it falls
out as we would not, and causes our marriages to be grievous and noisome. To
this end verily our daily marriages do commonly come. For they marry wives
usually not for the begettinge of children or society of life: but some for a
great dowry, some for a beautiful body, and some being seduced by such
kind of causes, as it were men abused by unfaithful counselors, have no
regard to the disposition and manners of their spouse, but marry at adventures
to their own decay, and utter destruction. Hereunto belongs Plutarches
admonition to parents in his treatise of bringing up of children, where he
counsels men to bestow such wives on their sons as are not much wealthier
nor mightier, than their children. For a very pithie saying is that usual
proverb: Marry a wife of thine own degree. To be short, let the fear of
God, the word of God, and earnest prayer powered out to God, be always annexed
to the beginning of marriages.

But it is not conueniente that in Against Polygamie, or the having of many
wives.
lawful matrimony, any more should be than two alone, to be joined together
under one yoke of wedlock. For the use of many wives which our fathers usurped
without any blame, may not stablish polygamie for a law among us at the so
days. The time of correction is now come to light, and Messiah now is come
into the world, who teaches all rightly, and refourmeth things amiss. He
therefore has reduced wedlock to the first prescribed rule and law of
matrimony. Two (says the Lord) shall be one flesh. And the Apostle says: Let
every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband. The multitude
of Solomon's concubines therefore, apperteine The second and third marriages
after the first wife.
not to us. We have not to follow ye example of Jacob, who married two
sisters. And yet notwithsta^dinge the word of truth condemns not the second,
third, or many marriages, which a man makes when his wife is deceassed. For
that saying of ye Apostle is general to al me^, and indureth in all ages: Let
them marry, that cannot abstain, for it is better to marry than to burn.
Which sentence is taken out of these words in ye Gospel: All men cannot receive
this saying, save they to who^ it is given. For there are some chaste which
were so borne out of their mothers womb: and there are some chaste which were
made chaste of men: and there are some chaste which have made themselves chaste
for the kingdom of heavens sake: He that is able to receive it, let him
receive it. Let him therefore that cannot receive it, marry a wife, so often as
necessity compels him thereunto.

But now especially it stands us in hand to know how married folks The
(...) be^^uiour (...) is ^^quired (...) the (...) of Ma^^age.
must behave themselves, what they must do in wedlock, to what end they must
direct their deeds and thoughts, and how they ought to be affected toward that
holy ordinance of God almighty. Touching which thing I will not speak much,
but briefly note out the most necessary points, to give all men occasion to
think with themselves, and call to mind both more and greater matters which I
leave untouched. First of al let married folks be thoroughly persuaded and
assuredly certain, while they live in matrimony, that they are in the work
of God, that they please God, and do an acceptable thing in the sight of ye
lord, because of Gods word wherein he blessed that kind of life, and sanctified
all wedd^d people, which by faith do live in that work and ordinance of the
living God. Therefore when married couples do patiently suffer the troubles,
that follow the married life, while they labor faithfully, while they do
those things decently which belong to the charge and office of married
people, as while the wife does love her husband, while she does duetifully obey
him, while she does bring forth her children with grief and pain, and when
they are brought forth, does diligently nourish them and labor to bring them
up: while ye husband does love his wife, while he does mutuallie help her, and
faithfully in all things show himself a careful father for his family and
household: in doing these things, they please God no less, than they do when
they go to Church to hear the word of God, and to worship the Lord. For
these works of wedlock are reputed for good works, as well as giving of
alms, justice, and making of peace. Married folks therefore have need
especially of true faith in God the author of wedlock. For by ^edlocke in
faith they shall please the Lord. This our monckes could not abide to hear of,
although ye word of God does urge it upon them, they ceased not to magnify
their cou^terfaite holiness and hypocritical vows.

Secondarilie it is required at the hands of wedded couples to be mindful
Married ^^lks must (...) faithful
of the faith, which they give and take, that they do not falsely deceive one
an other, but holilie keep the promise that they make and troth that they
plighte, and to keep it sincerely both in body and mind. Let neither of them
lust after ye body of a stranger, nor conceive an hatred or loathsomnes of
their wedded spouse. And thy body, thou that art a married man, is not thy
body, but thy wives: as also thy wives body is not thy wives, but thine. Thou
stealest and do commit a robbery if thou take away another bodies goods,
and when thou have conveyed it from the proper owner, do give it to another.
Let y^ mind of wedded mates be unspotted, and y^ body untouched. Every one
when he first comes to solemnise wedlock by the holy ceremony ordained for
that purpose, does promise with an oathe in the name of the Lord before God and
the Church, that he will use the company of no woman but her, that he will
cleave too, love and cherish her alone without any other. This faith once given
whosoever does violate, he is falsely forsworn, and is a breaker of a godly
promise and Gods holy truth.

Neither is it sufficient for thee to They must dwell together with knowledge.
be faithful, unless thou be courteous or tractable toward thy wife and dwell
with her according to knowledge, as S. Peter says. Let the husband be the head
of the wife, to wit, her aduiser and counselor, her ruler and guide, her
sweet yoakefellowe and admonisher in all her affairs, her assured aider and
faithful defender. Let ye wife be obedient unto her husband, even as we see
the members obey the head, let her yeald her self to her husband to be ruled
and governed, let her not despise his honest counsels, and indifferente
commandments: let them think that they twain are one body, or the members
of one body. And therefore let them learn by the government of this mortal
body how to behave themselves in ye guiding of wedlock. The worthier members
do not despise the more unworthy limbs, but do rather honor them, lighten
their labor, and aid and help them. Again the more unworthy limms are in
love with the worthier, not enuyinge their preeminence any whitte at al. One
member breaks not, or hurts an other, but all do mutuallie cheerish
themselves and defend one an other from harm and injury. Such a mutual
knitting together, and working, and love, and charity, and goodwill, and
fellowshippe let there be betwixt man and wife. For to that end the woman was
taken out of the man's body, that the husband should love and cheerish (his
wife) his own body. And for that cause the Apostle says: So must husbands
love Ephe. 5.
their wives, even as their own bodies. He that loves his wife does love
himself. For no man at any time has hated his own flesh, but loves and
cherishes it, as the Lord does the Church. What may be said to that moreover,
that the Apostle in the very same place has made the son of God and the
holy Church an example for married folks to follow in keeping of wedlock,
requiring at the husbands hand to love his wife, even as Christ has loved the
Church: and of the wife to reverence her husband and to love him again, as
the Church does Christ? Than which example there is none in the world more
holy and effectual. For there is no love greater than ye love of Christ toward
his Church. Neither is there any love more chaste, than that which the Church
does bear to Christ. It is required therefore at the hands of wedded mates,
mutually to bear most ardente and holy love the one to the other. Let them use
all things in common: let them be partakers both of the same prosperity, and
the same adversity. Let them both draw under one yoke, and bear betwixt
them one an others burden. Briefly, let them twain be the members of one and
the very same body. I have more at large set down these offices of man and
wife in my treatise which is called the Institution of Christian matrimony.

Lastly let them bring up their Let them beget an^ bring vp^ children.
children in holy discipline, and the fear of God, to the health of their own
house, and the whole common weal. Paul says: I would have the younger women
marry, to get children and to govern the house, for that is honest and
acceptable before God. But touching the bringing up of children. I have
already spoken in the fifte sermon of this Decade. Now the very begetting of
children alone is very profitable both to every private or particular house,
and also to the common weal: for here I will not stand to show that the
honor and glory of God, is very greatly augmented, if children be not only
begotten, but also brought up in the fear of God, and knowledge of his word.
Hierocles says: I confess that marriage is profitable: especially because it
brings children forth, which is in deed a goodly fruit, for they, being of
our very blood, do while we are in health aid us in all our affairs: and
in old age when years come upon us, they succor us well with all that they
may: they are familiar companions of our joy in prosperity, and in adversity
are our partners in sorowing with us for our heavy mishapps. And so forth.
Antipater also says: Man which is endued with a civil disposition to mainteyne
society, must augmente his country and common wealth with increase of
children: for cities could not have been preserved by any means at all,
unless the head men of every city, and the sons of noble gentlemen, seeing
their auncetours wither and fall away like goodly leaves of a fair tree, had
married in time convenient, and left behind them children as worthy plants
to succeed in their country, thereby to make it to flourish for ever, doing
their best so far as they could, to keep it from the assaults and
conquestes of enemies and strangers. They therefore shooting at nothing more,
than to defend and assist their country, both in their life time, and when
they were dead, did think it most necessary and especially convenient to
marry and be married, desiring thereby both to do all things that nature
requires, and also those that touch the health and increase of their
country, and most of all the worship of God. etc.

Since therefore that lawefull matrimony Marriages must be ^egonne ^ith
religion.
is of so great effect and so auayleable to live well and happily, the
faithful do not without cause begin their marriages with religion and
religious rites. The Lord verily did presently in the beginning bless the
first marriage of our parents Adam and Eve, and did himself couple them in
wedlock. Whervppon the Church of God has received a custom, that they which
join in marriage before they dwell together, do come into the temple of the
Lord, where after prayer made in the midst of the congregation, they are
joined together, and blessed by the minister of God in the name of God
himself. Wherefore in wedlock the first and chiefest things that be
required, are the earneste and continual prayers of the married folks to God,
that he will vouchsafe to make the husbands, wise, relligious, modest, gentle,
honest, painful, sufferers and lovers of their wives: and that it will
please him to make the wives, obedient, meek, chaste, faithful, lovers of
their husbands and children, housewiues, and fruitful. For no one man is able
to declare all the evils that come even of one corrupt and naughty marriage.
Through it whoale houses are wonderfully disquieted, all wealth and honesty
do utterly decay, the children are bastards, God is offended and prouoaked to
anger, and an endless mischief brought to the whoale common weal. God
therefore must be earnestly beseeched to bless all married people, that both
the glory of his holy name, and the commonweals prosperity may thereby
daily increase more and more.

I am now come to speak of adultery, which is a sin whereby the Against
adultery.
husband goes to an other woman, or the wife tourneth a side after an other
man, to whom they make common the use of their bodies, which are not their own
bodies now, but their mates in wedlock. Some there are that flatter
themselves, and are of opinion that they are not culpable of adultery, if they
have the company of any vnbetrouthed maiden, or one that is unmarried: or if a
woman play the harlotte with an unwedded man. They will have it (in Gods name)
to be fornication and not adultery. But the Scripture teaches the contrary.
Thou go to an other woman, thou art an adulterer: Thou breakeste thy faith,
thou art forsworn: Thy body is not thine but thy wives, when therefore thou
bestowest this body on an other, thou committest adultery. If thou being
wedded do lie with a married wife, thou doubleste the sin of thine
adultery. This offense was plagued with most sharp punishmente even in the
beginning almost, and as soon as ye world was created. Pharao the king of
Egypt commanded Sara Abraham's wife to be taken away and carried to his
Palace, that he might use her as his wife, thinckinge verily that she had
been Abraham's sister.

But the scripture says: The Lord Gene. 12.
vexed Pharao and all his house with great plagues, because of Sara Abraham's
wife. Lo here yt king of Egypt is punished with grievous plagues for his
adultery: and yet he knew not that Sara was Abraham's wife: how great plagues
therefore are prepared for the men that wittingly and willingly without all
shame commit adultery? To Abimelech king of the Philiftines the Lord does
say: Lo thou shall die because of the woman, Gene. 20.
which thou have taken away from her husband. And yet this king also had taken
away Sara, not knowing that she was Abraham's wife. Joseph being Gene. 39.
provoked to adultery by his masters wife, does simply say: How should I
do this great wickedness and sin against God? Every word here does bear
some weight. For adultery is an heinous sin. Whereupon in the book of Job
we find these words of Job himself. If mine heart Job. 31.
have been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at my neighbors
door, then let my wife be an other man's harlot, and let other men have to do
with her. For this is a wickedness and sin that is worthy to be judged to
death. Yea it is a fire that utterly should consume and root out all mine
increase. Job says that he has not only not committed adultery, but that
he has not so much at any time as once given the attempt to defile an other
man's wife. He confesses that adultery is a sin, and so grievous an
offense, yt it does deserve to have the adulterers wife to be defiled with
adultery. He adds that adultery is a fire that utterly consumes and
deuoureth all things, and lastly yt it is a sin to be judged and punished
by death. Moreover Solomon the wisest of all men says: May a man take fire in
his bosom and his Prou. 5.
clothes not be brent? Or can one go upon hot coals and his feet not be
brent? Even so he that goes in to his neighbors wife and touches her cannot
be vnguiltie. Men do not utterly despise a thief, that steals to satisfy
his soul when he is hungry: But if he may be gotten, he restores again
seven times as much, or else he makes recompense with all the substance of
his house. But whosoever commits adultery with a woman, he lacks
understanding: and he that does it destroys his own soul. He gets
himself a plague and dishonor, and his reproach shall never be put out. For
the iealosie and wrath of the man will not be entreated: neither accepts he
the person of any mediator, nor receives any gifts how great soever they
be. In these words of Solomon many things are to be noted. First as it
cannot otherwise be, but that fire must burn the garment wherein it is
carried: so no man can commit adultery without damage and danger of further
punishmente. Secondarilie comparison is made betwirte a thief and an
adulterer: not that theft is thereby defended, but because thieves, although
they be infamous, do seem yet to sin a great deal less than adulterers
do. For a thief may make satisfaction by restoring the worth of the thing,
that he stoale, to him, from whole he stoale it away: but for adultery no
amends can be made. And what is he that would not rather wish to have
thieves ransacke his chest, and take away his substance, than to have his wife
his dearling defiled with adultery. Moreover Solomon calls the adulterer
mad and without understanding. Adultery is judged to be a sin worthy of
death and endless infamy. For the Lord in the law does not say only, Thou
shall not commit adultery, But in an other place also goes on and adds: And
he that commits adultery with an other man's wife, eue^ he that commits
adultery with his neighbors wife, let both the adulterer and the adultresse
be slain. Leuit. 20. And this punishment of adultery by death was not
abrogated or changed by the very Gentiles. For the Roman law called Lex
Iulia is very well known, how it commanded adulterers to be put to death.
Which law was of force in the time of S. Hierome, as we may gather by the
History which he wrate of an adultresse, at the chopping off of whose head
seven strokes were given. Neither is it marvel undoubtedly that adultery
was among them of old, and is yet at this day according to the laws to be
punished by death. For upon that one many sins do depend. First of all the
adulterer is a perjured man. For he has broaken and violated the faith which
he gave openly before God and the face of the congregation by calling to
witness the most holy and reverend Trinity, when the minister of Christ did
solemnise the marriage and couple him to his wife, by giving hand in hand.
Secondarily the adulterer has committed theft and robbery. For when the
adultresse does make her body common to an other man, then does she set to
sale, defile and mar, not her own, but her husbands body. Thirdly bastardes
borne in adultery do often times enjoy an equal part of inheritance with
yt right begotten children. Which cannot be without great wrong done to the
lawful heirs and legitimate offspring. For they are against al right robbed of
their due inheritance, where of an equal portion is given to him, to whom by
law no parcel is due. Lastly beside all these, innumerable mischiefs do
spring of adultery. Since therefore that it is a serpente with so many heads,
both the laws of God and men do rightly punish adulterers with loss of life.

But some iollie fellows there are forsooth, that of adultery do make but
David's adultery.
a sport. They are persuaded that David's adultery does make on their side,
and that place of scripture, where we read that the Lord was favorable to ye
adultresse, that was taken even as the deed was in doing. Why do not these
merry conceipted men consider how severely the Lord did punish David for that
offense? The bloody house of David was immediately after defiled with filthy
inceste. For Amnon does perforce defloure his sister Thamar. And streightway
upon the neck of yt again his house is defamed by most cruel parricide,
while Absalom in a banquet murdered his brother Amnon. The very same Absalom
also David's son, defiles or deflowreth his fathers wives, and that openly
too, laying al fear of God and shame aside. He drives his father out of his
kingdom, and hasteneth on to shorten his days. Al which calamities David
confesses that he does worthily sustain for the adultery and murder by him
committed. Lastly many thousands of his people are slain in the batteile:
David himself is hardly and with much ado restoared to his kingdom, and
afterward being restored he repented his sin all days of his life. Now it
is marvel if adulterers (consideringe these punishments) will go on yet to
allege the example of David in defense of their naughtiness. Our savior did
not come into the world to be a judge but a Savior, neither did The Lord
^^solueth ^^ulterie.
he in any place usurp and take to himself the right of the sword. Who
therefore will make any marvel at it, to see the adultresse not to be
condemned by him, to be stoned to death? Yet he said: Has no man condemned
thee? as if he minded not to have resisted ye law, if judgment had once
passed upon her. For he came not to be a patron to adulterers, nor to break
the law, but to fulfill it. But if it like adulterers well, that the
adultresse was not condemned of the Lord, then let them also like that sentence
wherewith the History is ended, when the Lord says: Go thy ways, and sin no
more. Let them therefore leave off to defile and destroy themselves with filthy
adultery.

The Lord in his law has expressly What other things are forbid^en under ^he
title of adultery.
named adultery alone, but therewithal he does inclusiuely understand all
kinds of lust and luxury, and al things else which do egg forward and
stir up fire in men to wa^tonnesse, which he forbids as severely as
adultery it self. The Lord in the Gospel does not only forbid the outward
work of adultery, but the very affection also and wa^ton lust of the heart and
mind. Ye have heard (says he) that it was said to them of old, Thou shall
not commit adultery. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to
lust after her, has committed adultery already with her in his heart. In
the same place he teaches us to pluck out our eyes, and cut off our hands,
that is, to extinguishe unclean affections that rise in our minds, while yet
they be young and begin to bud, least peradventure they break out from
thoughts to deeds. So then in this precepte every unclean thought, all
ribaulde talk, and filthiness of bodily deeds are utterly forbidden.

In this precepte is forbidden fornication (...)
or that kind of whoorehunting, which is said to be the medlinge of a single
man with an unmarried woman. This kind of whoredom is thought of many either
to be a very small offense or none at all. But such kind of men does the
devil harten on, bewitch, and by those ill thoughts drive on to commit that
sin: when as the doctrine of the Evangelists and Apostles does teach us the
contrary. Acts. ^
For the Apostles in that Synodal Epistle, which they sent from Jerusalem to
al nations, do expressly name 1. P^^. ^. 1. Co^. ^*
and forbid fornication. S. Peter reckons fornication among those filthy
sins, from which he would have Christians to be most clear. S. Paul says:
Flee fornication. Again: Let us not be defiled with fornication as some of
them committed fornication, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
Fornication does directly fight with the couenaunte of God, whereby he is
joined to us, and we to him: and whooredome also spoyleth God of his glory,
and does most filthilie pollute the temple of the Lord. Let us hear what the
Apostle 1. Co^. ^*
Paul says touching this matter. Know ye not that your bodies are the
members of Christ? Shall I therefore take the members of Christ, and make them
the members of an harlotte? GOD forbid. What, know ye not that he that is
coupled to an harlotte is one body? For two (says he) shall be one flesh. But
he that is coupled to the Lord, is one spirit. Flee fornication. Every sin
that a man does is without the body, but he that commits fornication,
sins against his own body. What, know ye not that your body is the temple
of the holy ghost which is in you, whom ye have of God, and ye are not your
own. For ye are bought with a price: Therefore fornication shuts
fornicatours out of the kingdom Ephe. 5
of God. For the same Apostle says: Neither whoremongers nor adulterers shall
inherit the kingdom of God. And therefore in an other place he suffers not
fornication to be so much as once named among Christians, so far was he
from admitting stews and brothel houses among Gods people.

Moreover whooredome does fill the whoale body with sondrie diseases, it
depriueth whoorehaunters of all their goods and substance, it brings them to
poverty and extreme misery, and drives them at last to utter desperation.
It overthrows their fame and good name, with shame and ignominy: the view
whereof is lively expressed in the holy scriptures by the example of Sampson the
strongest man among all the Israelites. Solomon therefore the most wise of all
other, does very fitly in time and place conueniente, admonish all men to flee
the enticinge baits and flattering allurementes of whoorish strompets. For the
end of them is deadly poison, and they throw a man down headlonge into a
bottomless pit of endless miseries.

By this law also that kind of whoredom is prohibited which consists (...)
for^^dden.
in defloratio^ of virgins, and violent rapes, by which children are perforce
defiled and carried from their parents. There is difference betwixt a rape
perforce, and the deflowring of a maid done without violence. Sichem defiled
Dina the daughter of Jacob, and although he desired to have the defloured
maid to his wife and to change his religion, yet notwithstanding he himself
is slain by Leui and Simeon the brethren of Dina, his city is raced and
filled with the blood of murdered men, whose goods were ransackte and laid
open to spoil. The history is extant in the 34. of Genesis. For the rape
which Roderychus king of the Goths in Spain committed upon the daughter of
one Iulianus a liefetenaunt, all Spain in a manner was mingled with fire and
blood. For Volaterranus in his second book of his Geographie says: Roderychus
reigned three years, whose filthy lust brought an end as well to the name, as
to the quiet kingdom of the Goths in Spain, by means of the Saracenes that
invaded their land. For when it fell out that he had defloured the daughter
of one Iulianus a lieftenaunte of that part of Mauritania that is called
Tingitana, private grief did prick her father to seek reuengement, whereto
he used the commodity of the place. Wherefore Iulianus does privily call the
Saracenes out of Aphrica: who in the year of grace 714. under the conduicte
of their Captain Muzta being sent by Mirmomelinus their king at that time,
entering in through the streightes of Marrocko did in two years space subdue al
Spain almost Asturia, a Country in Spain betwixt Galacia and Portugal.
except Asturia. In the space of which time it is reported that seven hundred
thousand men on both sides were destroyed by that war: wherein also the king
which had defloured the virgin with all his nobility was utterly slain. In
Israel for yt Leuits concubine, who^ the citizens of Gibea of the tribe of
Benjamin had violently ravished were 25000. Beniamites slain, beside them
which perished from among the other eleven tribes, whose number amounted to
40000. men. Neither is it unknown to any that the kings were expelled out of
the city of Rome, and Troy being wearied with ten years war, (which
troubled both ye East and West) was at the last utterly sacked and clean
overthrown, because Tarquinius had perforce ravished Lucrecia, and Alexander
Paris had stolen out of Greece Menelaus his Helena an other man's wife. Every
age almost does minister an innumerable sort of such like examples. For ye
most just God has always by euidente examples declared how greatly he is
offended with deflowrers of virgins, and rauishers of women. And for that
cause are laws and very sharp punishments ordained and appointed for such
lascivious knaves. Rapes and such villainies committed perforce the laws do
punish with loss of life: but to him that does defloure a maid not violently
yt Lord does say: Marry and endowe her. Other laws appoint other penalties.
Touching which more is spoken in the civil law.

Moreover Incest is especially prohibited. ^ncest.
They call incest an unlawful meddling of a man with a woman against the honor
of blood and affinity. For Cestus signifies the marriage girdle which the
bride did wear, to show that the marriage was just and lawful. We Germans
call this sin by ye name of Blout schand, whereby we signify the sin
committed in corrupting or defiling our own blood or kindred. In Leuiticus after
the degrees of blood, in which we are forbidden to marry, the Lord does
presently add: In all these be not ye defiled: For in all these things are
the nations defiled, which I cast out before you. And hereby the land is
defiled, and I have visited the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land has
spewed out the inhabitaunts thereof. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and
mine ordinances, and shall not do any of all these abominations. For
whosoever shall do so, he shall be cut off from among his people. And in
the 20, chapter of Leuiticus he has appointed death to be the punishment of
incest, which is not changed by the civil laws or Imperial constitutions.

The abominable sin of Sodomie and meddling with beasts also, is Sodom^^
plainly forbidden. Against which we have most evident and express laws set
down in the 18. and 20. chapter of Leuiticus. We have also a very senere,
but yet a most just punishmente laid by God himself upon the pates of the
detestable Sodomites. For with fire and stinking brimstone sent down from
heaven he consumed those filthy men to duste and ashes, which ashes he
washed away with the waves of the dead sea, because he would not have so much
as ye very cynders to remain of so wicked men. Moreover their whole cities
and fruitful fields were burnte with fire. For it was not requisite that any
one jot of the substance of those most wicked men should remain undestroyed.
The place where those cities were sometime situated, is at this day overflowed
with water, and called the dead sea. Whereby we do consequently gather, that
the most just God will not spare the Gentiles entangled in the very same sin,
although for a time he wincke at and dissemble it. Fire shall destroy both
them and theirs: and they themselves shall for ever burn in hell, where
nothing shall remain of them, but a reproachful memory. For in the Revelation
of our Lord Jesus Christ to his Apostle John we read: And fire came down from
God out of Heaven, and devoured them, and the devil which deceived them was
cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false Prophet
shall be tormented day and night for ever more. Apoc. 20.

Furthermore all things else are (...) for^^dden.
for hidden that do incite or allure us to unlawful lusts, which baits are
the over nice pranckinge and decking the body, evil and wanton company,
gluttony, surfeiting, and drunkenness. For Ezechiel among the rest of his
Prophecies, says: This was the iniquity of Sodom, pride, glutonie,
abundance of all things, and idleness. Men are prouoaked to lust either by
hearing or reading of dishonest ditties, and bawdie ballads, or by looking on
and beholding wanton dau^ces, unseemly sightes, ribauld talk, and filthy
examples. They therefore are by this law reproved, which wincke at, or
chearish, which are the bawdes or bringers together of adulterous persons. Unto
the wicked the Lord in the Psalms does say: Why ^sal. 50.
do thou take my covenant in thy mouth, whereas thou hate to be
reformed, and do cast my words behind thee? when thou saw a thief, thou
consentedst unto him: and have bin partaker with the adulterers. etc. The just
Lord therefore does punish all these offenses in wicked men, every one
according to the greatness of ye sin. For some sins are far more heinous
than other some are. He is an adulterer that in his mind does lust after an
other man's wife: but he sins more grievously, if he endeavor to finishe
in deed his wicked thought, he offends yet more deeply if he do the
deed, and sins most of all, if after once, he fall unto it again.
Likewise ye adulterer sins, so does the bawd, and he also that vpholdeth
his adultery. The whooremonger sins deeply, but he that defiles himself
with incest, sins more grievously, and he most heynously of al, that in
meddling with beasts, commits filthy Sodomie. So then in this 7. precept
charge is given for the maintenance of shamefastness, modesty, sobri^tie,
temperancie, chastity, public honesty, and true holiness of soul and
body. The next is for me to say somewhat now touching continency.

By abstinence we refrain from other men's goods, and take from no man Of
Continency.
the thing that is his. Some there are that will have temperancie to extend
farther than continency: for they will make the one to be but a part of the
other. I, in this treatise, do simply make contiuencie the contrary to
intemperancie or incontinencie. For continency is a virtue or power of the
mind, received from the spirit of God, which suppresseth affections, and does
not in any wise permit unlawful pleasures. This is conversant and does show it
self in the common and usual talk of men, in pleasures that are allowed, in
apparel, in buildings and dweling houses, in meat and drink, and in other
things also. I at this present will only examine those points of of
continency, which are already rehearsed. The continency or the b^^deling of
the tongue.


First of all it is required of us to keep in our tongue, and not to let it
loose at randon to the blaspheming of Gods, glory, or hurt of our neighbor.
Let the talk of a Christian man be honest, profitable, and seasoned with
salt, let it be unacquainted with scoffinge, lightness, lyinge, ribauldrie,
and filthiness. S. James in the third Chapter of his Epistle has spoken
sufficiently of the tongues properties. In his first Chapter also he says:
Let every manne be swifte to hear, sloaw to speak, and sloaw to anger. And
Paul says: Let no filthy communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to edify withal, as often as need is, that it may minister grace
unto the hearers, and grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye are
sealed unto the day of Redemption. And again: Let not fornication, or any
uncleanness, or covetousness, be once named among you, as it becomes
Saints. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talkinge, nether jesting, which are
not seemly, but rather giuinge of thanckes. Let no man deceive you with vain
words. For, for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. For in another place he cites this sentence out of Me^ander and
says: Ill words corrupt good manners. Moreover a man's mind is bewrayed by
his talk: for of the hearts abundance the mouth does speak. If therefore in
any thing, than in tongue especially it behooves Christians to be sober and
continent.

The Lord I (confess) has granted man the use of certain pleasures.
Granted pleasures.
For he may lawfully without offense to God, cloth his body with garments
(...), thereby to keep his limbs from cold. God has and does allow the
embracings of man and wife, in holy wedlock. He grants choice of a dwelling
place conveniently situated against the vntemperatenesse of the air, and
bids us not to wander like beasts and cattle, through fields and desolate
woods. He has for our necessity and pleasant feeding, allowed us the use of
meat and drink. He grants us quietness, ease and sleep, which does
wonderfully refresh the strength that is decade and tired with pains.
Therefore so often as a godly man does enjoy them, does use them, and is
delighted with the honest pleasure of them, let him give thanks to God, and use
them moderately in the fear of the Lord. For in so doing he sins not
against the Lord: but by the abuse of those things, by vnthanckfulnes for
them, and by immoderate using of them, he does offend his God and maker.

For what is allowed or permitted to married folks, I have already declared in
this very sermon, so that I need not here again to repeat it un to you.
Solomon says: Be glad with the wife of thy youth: let her be as the beloved
Hind and pleasant Roe: let her love always refresh thee, and be thou still
delighted therein. etc. In the mean time let every one refrain from all abuse
and intemperancie: and if necessity at any time require it, let man and wife
lie a sonder, as Paul does counsel them: or else let them give ear to the
Prophet Joel, who says: Proclaim an holy fast, gather the people together:
let the bride grome come forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her cloaset.

Our garments must be cleanly (...)
and honest according to our country facion to cover and become us, unless
our country facion be too far out of order: there must be in them no
hypocritical sluttishnes, beeyonde sea gawdes, newfangled toys, nor unseemly
sightes. The chief Apostles of Christ Peter and Paul, were not 1. Peter. 3.
1. Timo. 2 Titus, 2.
ashamed in their Epistles to write somewhat largely touching the manner and
ordering of women's apparel: because that kind of people do most of all bend
to that foolish bravery. Let every faithful body think what is seemly for
them to wear, not so much by their degree in dignity, or condition of riches,
as by their religion. Excess in every thing is discommended in Christians. And
to what end do we iagge and gashe the garments that are sowed together to
cover our bodies, but that thereby we may as it were by a most fond and
ridiculous anatomy, open and lay forth to the eyes of all men, what kind
of people we are in our inward hearts, iagged (God wotte) and ragged, vain,
light, and nothing sound? And a linen or woollen garmente does as well cover
and become the body, as damasks and veluetts, the cost whereof does ouerlade
thy purse with expenses to buy them, and misshape thee like an ill favored
picture, when thou wearest them upon thee.

In buildinges God forbids not Continentie in buil^inges.
cleanlynesse and necessary cost, but sumptuous expense, and gorgeous excess.
For these over brave buildings are seeldome times finished without extorting
wrong, and over great injury done to the poor. Jeremy brings in the Lord
speaking against the king of Judah and saying: Woe to him that builds his
house with unrighteousness, and his parloure with the goods that are
wrongfully gotten, which never recompenseth his neigh bours labor, nor pays
him his hyre: Who says to himself, I will build me a wide house and
gorgeous parloures: who causes windows to be hewn therein, and the seelinges
and ioystes makes he of Cedar, and painteth them with Sinoper. Thinckest thou
to reign now, that thou haste incloased thee self with Cedar? Did not thy
father eat and drink and prosper well, as long as he executed justice and
equity? Let none of us therefore build sumptuous houses, by robbinge the poor
of their hyre for their labor. Let every one dwell in a house agreeable to his
profession, degree, and condition. S. Hierome condemns sumptuous cost even
in Churches and Temples. Neither do I see what gorgeous buildinges bring to a man, but mischief and misery. Lord, how unwillingly do we die and depart
from goodly dwelings, whereby we double the fear of death and terror of
sickness? The Patriarchs verily did dwell in tents, whereby they witnessed
that they were pilgrims, and sought another country, the heavenly Jerusalem.

Continency in meat and drink is not the loathinge of wine and victuals,
Contine^cy in meat and drink.
but the moderate vsinge of them, to supply our necessity, and not to cloye
us with gluttony.

God in the Scripture does condemn gluttony, surfettinges, riottous
afterbanquettes, and drunkenness, which he forbids most of all. For of
drunkenness do spring endelesse miseries, and innumerable mischiefs,
grievous diseases, poverty, and pinchinge beggarie. Solomon says: Who has
woe? who has sorrow? who has strife? Who has brawling? who has wounds
without a cause? who has red eyes? even they that follow the wine, and
seek excess thereof. Look not thou upon the wine how read it is, and what
a color it gives in the glass: It goes down sweetly, but at the last it
byteth like a serpent, and poysoneth like an adder. I will not rehearse all
which I could allege out of heathen writers, against surfeiting and
drunkenness. Solomon alone in that one sentence conteyneth a great Christ
against dru^^^nnesse.
deal of matter. Moreover, he that hears not Christ, whom is it likely that
he will give ear unto, in all the world? Now Christ in the Gospel by the
parable of the rich glutton, does meruaylous evidently, set forth the woeful
end of insatiable paunches. In the same Gospel also he takes occasion to
touch ye surfettings and drunkenness of our age, I mean the age which is
immediately before ye Judgment day, where he says: As it happened in the
days of Noe and Lot, they did eat and drink even until the day that Noe
entered into the arck and that Lot departed from among the Sodomits: and then
incontinently the deluge came, and fire and brimstome powered down from heaven,
and destroyed them al. Again he adds: Take heed to your selves least at any
time your hearts be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of
this life, and so that day come upon you at unawares. For as a snare shall it
come upon all them that dwell upon the face of the whoale earth. Watch ye
therefore, at all times praying, that ye may escape al these things and stand
before the son of man. And I would to God yt al men would not write this
golden, heavenly, and divine admonition of our Savior in their halls, and
dineing parlours only, but in their several hearts also. For since
drunkenness has in these our days so good intertainment with all degrees,
estates, kinds and ages, we do daily feel the woeful miseries, that God does
threaten to dronkards in the 5. and 28. cap. of Esaies Prophecy. And it is to
be feared greatly, that the day of the Lord shall sodeinly light upon an
innumerable sort of dronkardes to their endless pain and utter destruction.
Let him hear therefore, which has ears to hear.

Neither can I here refrain, but needs must recite unto you (dearly (...)
beloved) that which S. Martine y^ bishop, not of Tours in France, but of
Dumia in Germany, who flourished in yt days of Iustinia^ the Emperor, (...)
did write to Miro king of Gallicia touching ye ordering and leading a
co^tinent life. If (says he) thou do love continency, cut off superfluity,
and keep under thine appetite. Consider with thee self how much nature
requires, and not how much lust desires. Bridle thy concupiscence, and cast
off the alluring baytes that serve to draw on hidden pleasures. Eat without
undigested surfeiting, and drink without drunkenness. Neither glut thee self
with present delicates, nor long after deintrells hard to be come bye. Let thy
diet be of cates good cheap, and sit not down for pleasure but for meat. Let
hunger, not sauces prouoake thee to eat. Pay but little for pastimes to
delighte thee, because thy only care should be to leave such pleasures, that
thereby thou in facioning thy self to the example of God, may, as much as
thou can, make have to reduce thee self from the body to the spirit. If
thou love continency, then choose not a pleasant, but a whoalsome dwelling
place, and make not the Lord to be known by the gorgeous house, but the house
by the honest landlord. Boast not thee self of that which thou have not, nor
that which thou have, neither covet to seem more than thou art. But rather
take heed that thy poverty be not un clenly, nor thy niggishnes filthy, nor
thy simplicity co^temptible, nor thy lenity fearful: and though thy estate
be poor, yet let it not be in extreme misery. Neither be out of love with
thine own degree, nor wish after the estate of an other man's life. If thou
love continency, avoid dishonest things before they happen: and fear no
man above thine own conscience. Think that al things are tolerable,
dishonestie excepted. Abstain from filthy talk, the liberty whereof does
nourish unshamefastness. Love rather profitable communication, than merry
conceits, or pleasant talk: and set more by the blunt spoken truth, tha^ by
fair soothing speeches. Thou may sometime mingle mirth with matters of
weighte, but it must be done moderately without the hurt or detriment of
thine estate and gravity. For laughter is blameworthie if it be immoderately
used, childishly squeaked, or taken up by fittes as women are wont to do.
Esteem not saucie scoffing, but civil mirth with courteous humanity. Let thy
conceits of mirth be without biting, thy sportes not without profit, thy
laughter without unseemly writhing of thy mouth and visage, thy voice without
s^hriking, and thy pace in going without hasty shuffling. Let not thy rest be
idleness. And when other play, take thou some holy and honest thing in hand.
If thou art continent, take heed of flattery, and let it grieve thee as much
to be praised of naughty men, as if thou werte praised for thine own
naughty deeds. Be the gladder for it, if thou displeasest evil men, and
impute the evil opinions, which naughty men have of thee: for the best praise
that can be given thee. The hardest work of continency, is, to put away the
soothinge courtesies of dissembling flatterers, whose fawning words undo the
mind with pleasant sensuality. Presume not to much upon thy self, neither
be thou arrogant. Submit thee self so far as thou may keep thy gravity,
and yet make not thee self a footestoole or cousshen for every man to lean
on. Be told of thy faults willingly, and suffer thee self gladly to be
reprehe^ded. If any man for a cause be angry with, and chide thee, acknowledge
thy fault, and let his chiding profit thee. But if he chide thee without any
cause, think that thereby he would have profited thee. Fear not sharp but
sugared words. Do thou thee self eschew all sorts of vices, and be not an
ouerbusie searcher out of other men's faults, be thou no sharp fault finder,
but an admonisher without vpbrayding, so that still thy warning may bear the
show of cheerful mirth: and condescend easily to pardon the error. Neither
praise nor dispraise any man overmuch. Be still and give ear to them that
speak, and be ready to instruct them that do hearken: to him that asks
give a ready aunsweare, to him that despises thee give place easily, and fall
not out to chiding and cursing. If thou art continent, have an eye to the
motions of thy body and mind that they be not unseemly: and set not light by
them, because no body sees them: For it makes no matter if no body see them,
so thou thee self does^ spy and perceive them. Be moueabl^ not light,
constant, not stubborn. Be liberal to all men, fawninge on no man, familiar
with few, and upright to every one. Believe not lightly every rumor,
accusation, or conceived suspicion. Despise vain glory, and be no sharp
exactor of the goods that thou have. Use few words thee self, but suffer
them that speak. Be grave, not roughe, nor contemning the merry nature. Be
desirous and appliable to be taught wisdom, imparte what thou know to
him that demands without any arrogancy, and desire to learn the things
that thou know not, without hiding thine ignorance. A wise manne will not
change his common country facion, nor make the people gaze on him with new
found devises. Thus much have I hitherto recited touching continency, out of
the writings of the blessed bishop Martine of Dumia. We for our parts
must pray to the Lord, that he will vouchsa^e to bestow on us his holy
spirit, by which the force of continency in all things may take root in
our hearts, to the bringing forth of fruit in our deeds, agreeable to the
prescript rule of this commanded continency. For unless the holy ghost do
quicken and inspire us, we do in vain give ear to so many and so good
commandments, and unless we live and lead a temperate and a sober life,
we are utterly unworthy to bear the name of Christians.

To this place also does the treatise of fasting belong, which I mean to Of
fasting.
handle in as few words, as conveniently can be: Christian fasting is a
discipline, ordering, and chastening of the body for the present necessity,
which we begin and keep of our own accord without compulsion, and
wherewith we humble our selves in the sight of God, by drawing from the body
the matter that sets the flesh on fire, thereby to make it obey the spirit.
For so long as we mortal men do live in this body, the flesh does still
resist the spirit, and most of all rebelleth then, when we with delicates do
pamper the body. Wherefore fasting does draw from the body every evil, which
stirs up and strengthens it against the good commandments of Gods holy
spirit.

Now the necessity, for which we keep this fasting, is of two sorts, (...)
public and private. We fast for the public or common necessity, when
some calamity does either oppress or else hang over the head of the Church.
Of such a manner of fasting we see examples in the 2. Cap. of Joel, and in the
3. of Jonas his prophecy: which very same order in fasting was used in the
time of our Lords Apostles: as it is evidently extant in the Acts of the
Apostles. And this kind of fasting does seem to have differed very little
among them of old, from a general mourninge: yea it seems altogether to
have been nothing else but a kind of lamenting. In the scriptures every book
is full of examples which teach and instruct us how the holy saints did
humble themselves in the sight of God with true repentance for their sins
and offenses. Private necessity is that for which every particular man does
fast when he feels himself to be vexed with bodily concupiscence, that
thereby he may take from the flesh the flame and fuel, least the body at
last be fired and burned. For the Lord in the Gospel said, that the children
of the bridechamber do fast when the bridegroom is taken from them, that is, in
a hard and dangerous time. The marriage does signify the bond whereby we are
knit to Christ in faith, and the holy ghost. This yet notwithstanding, the
godly man does still rejoice. He does with giving of thanckes and temperancie
both eat and drink so much as is sufficient, and is delighted also in these
external gifts of God: but when he feels that the bridegroom is ready for
to depart, or that he is now already almost departed out of his heart, that
is, when he feels that the spirit is extinguished by the fleashes
wantonness, and that faith does once begin to be cold, then does he settle
himself to prayer and does appointe a solemn fasting, thereby either to
keep the bridegroom still, or else to pull him back being ready to depart.

But neither public nor private Of what quality and kind our fastinges must
be.
fastings can abide to be enforced. For they will not be compelled, but desire
to proceed of a free, cheerful, and voluntary mind. Unwilling men do
nothing well. God requires a cheerful giver. Moreover, let fastinges be
moderated according to the quality of places, persons, perils, and
temptations, if they be not continual yet let them be often, till such time as
we be delivered and rid utterly of them. Let them be without superstition
and feigned hypocrisy, as our Lord in the sixte of S. Matthewes Gospel has
taught us. Herewithall do the words of S. Hierome agree very well, which he
wrote to Nepolianus touching fasting, as follows: Prescribe to thee self so
long a time to fast in, as thine ability will suffer thee to bear. Let thy
fastinges be pure, incorrupt, simple, moderated, and not superstitious. What
avails it to eat no oil, and to seek out such seldom sond cates, as are
hard to be come by, as figs, pepper, nuttes, dates, pure flower for
ouerfine bread, and honey? The gardens with digging for novelties, are turned
over and over, because we will not eat common cribble bread, and so while
our deintie mouths seek after delicates, our souls are pulled from the
kingdom of Heaven. I hear moreover that some men there are, which
(contrary to nature) refuse to drink water and feed upon bread, but suck
up and swallowe very costly suppinges, deintie herb brothes, and the
juice of Beetes, not out of a cup, but out of a shell. O shame, blush we not
at such fond toys, and are we not ashamed of such superstition? Thus much
says Hierome. And it is euidente that even at this day this vice is ospecially
received among our wealthy and relligious men.

But the end of Christian fastinges The end of fastings
are, that the Church, or sinner should submitt and humble themselves before
the Lord, that the flesh should be obedient and subject to the spirit, that
the flesh should not hinder the sinner to work righteousness, and that the
intent and mind of him that prays should be the more earnestly bente
toward God. For fasting is of the number of those works, which of
themselves are not absolute and perfect, but have an other meaninge-for which
they are ordained to an other end and purpose: therefore fasting is a certain
help to the prayers and virtues of godly men. Whereupon in the Prophets we
find, that the fastinges of the Jews displeased the Lord: for they did naught
else but fast alone, that is, they did at a certain and appointed time abstein
from their usual manner of eating, but they restrained not themselves from
sin and wickedness, but let their flesh have the bridle at will, when as in
deed, they should have ceased to have pampered it, that thereby it being the
weaker, the spirit might be the stronger to do and fulfill all sort of good
works. And therefore says the Lord: I have not chosen such a manner of
fasting: and the rest as it follows in the 58. Chapter of Esaie, and in the
7. and 8. Chapiters of Zacharies Prophecy.

The Apostle Paul verily does expressly say, that Meat commends us not to
God: for neither if we eat The trueast.
have we any thing the more, neither if we eat not have we any thing the
less. He therefore does not fast truly, which does abstain only at a
certain appointed time from certain manner of meats, but he which does
therefore refrain from the pleasures of the flesh, that thereby he may make it
subject to the spirit, and do ye works of faith and charity, which are
acceptable in the sight of the Lord. If therefore thou do desire to fast a
true fast, eat, drink, and sleep, and take heed to thy body that it wax
not insolent, fast from al sin, eat not the meat of malice, taste not the
iuncates of lust and pleasure, and be not set on fire with the wine of
wantonness. Fast from evil deeds, abstain from evil words, and refrain
thee self from naughty thoughts. For Basile also faith: True fasting
consists in freeness from vices, in continency of tongue, in suppressing of
anger, in cutting off concupiscence, backbiting, lying, and perjury, etc. But
even as the good works themselves, which are done by faith, do not merit
the kingdom of heaven (for that glory is due to the merit of Christ alone)
even so fasting, which is an aid and help to good works, does not
meritoriouslye deserve the kingdom of God.

But now I see a doubtful disputation arise among the most divines of Of
(...) and (...) of (...) and of (...) choice (...)
this our age, touching the time and manner of fastings, and also of ye choice
of meats. Some there are which affirm and uphold the fastes of Lent, the
Embring days and such other to be the fastes which God has appointed. There
are, that say thou have not fasted, if by any means thou taste any flesh. And
there are, which prescribe and appointe some certain hours to fast in. But I
for my part see not any such doctrines to be taught us, in yt Scriptures. For
the Lord in the Gospel kept not any of their devised fastes, when he fasted
forty days, but did altogether abstain from all kinds of meat, even as
Moses and Helias had also done: wherefore he by that deed of his, did not
give us any law to fast so. Moreover the lord in the Gospel does evidently
teach, that the thing, which enters in by the mouth, does not defile ye man,
but that which issues out from his heart. To the pure are all things pure.
And Paul says: I know and am persuaded through the Lord Jesus Christ, that
nothing is common of it self, but to him that thincketh that any thing is
common, to him is it common. Again, Let not him which eats, despise him
which eats not, nor let him which eats not, judge him which eats* for him
that eats, the Lord has taken. Moreover the place is evident which the same
Paul writes in the fourth Chapter of his Epistle to Timothy, where he
affirms that the forbidding of meats, is a doctrine of devils. Neither
needs any manne here to tell us any whit of the Tacians and Encratites: for
they did slander the good creatures of God. Paul speaks of them, who,
although they do not utterly condemn meat and marriage, do yet
notwithstanding forbid the use of meat.

Furthermore we do not read that Difference^ an fastings
any laws were ordained in that age which followed next after the preaching
of the Apostles, which did command and prescribe any time and order of
fasting, or choice of meats. I will rehearse unto you (dearly beloved) the
words of Irenaeus the martyr, which in the Ecclesiastical history of
Eusebius, are to be found word for word as they are here set down. The
controversy is not only touching Easter day, but also touching the manner
of fasting. For some do think that the fast ought to be kept but one day
only, other two, other more, and some whoale 40. days, so that counting the
hours of the night and day, they make a day. Which difference of observing the
times, is not now first of al in our age begone, but was brought in a great
while ago (as I suppose) of them which did not simply keep that, which was
taught from the beginning, but either by negligence or unskillfulness fell
afterward into a worser use and custom. And yet notwithstanding, al these
though they iarred in the observation of times, were nevertheless and are
agreeable with us, neither has the discord about fasting, broake our concord in
faith. Thus much Irenaeus. Moreover, Socrates Co^stantinopolitanus in the 9.
book and 18. Chapter of his tripartite history witnesses, that about the
year of our Lord 453. in the reign of Theodosius the younger, y^ same
diversity was in the Church, and sets it down in these words following.
Furthermore they have not the same kind of abstinence from meat: For some do
altogether abstain from living creatures: some among living creatures do
eat fish only: some with fish do feed on fowls also, saying, that they (as
Moses says) have their substance of water: Some are known to absteme from
Herbs and eggs: some do feed of The Latin copy has Caulis, which I turn
Herbs: it may also be taken for Roots.
dry bread only: some not so much as that: some fasting nine hours, do
then without difference use any kind of meat: and innumerable customs are
found among sondrie men. Now the very same Socrates showing his opinion upon
that diversity does say: And forbecause no ancient writing is found touching
this thing, I think that the Apostles left it free to every man's judgment,
that every one may work, not by fear or necessity, the thing that is good.
Thus far Socrates. The fastes of Christians therefore ought to be free and not
bound to Fastinges must be free and not bound to laws.
laws. Apollinus, a certain ancient and Ecclesiastical writer, disputing
against Montanus the heretic says: This is he which taught that marriages
are undone, and which first of all has appointed laws for men to fast by.
And verily to go about to set down to all men, and nations, one manner of
fasting in one appointed time, one prescribed order, and choice of meat is a
mere folly, and a brainesicke kind of madness, For according to the choice
of air, so are men's bodies of sondrie temperatures, and one kind of meat
does not stir men of sondrie complexions, to one kind of affection. The most
godly way therefore, and profitable order for the Church is, that all pastors
in every congregation should teach sobriety, temperancie, and the true fast
in deed: not presuming to prescribe any laws for the choice of meats or
times, but leaving that free to every man and nation, who undoubtedly will have
an especial eye to temper themselves from ye things, by which they perceive yt
their health will be indaungered, but most of all in the time when the flesh
begins to wax ouerwa^ton, or when some great peril hangs over their head.
For the time of fasting is not proroged til an appointed number of years or
days be expired, but till the loosenes or wa^tonnesse of the fleash,
temptations, or motions be utterly brideled. Fastings being so ordered, as they
be the exercises of godliness, obtain great praise in deed in the Church of
the Lord.

Thus much hitherto touching fasting. The sum of this 7. precept, or
commandment.
Now to shut up this seventh precepte, I say it forbideeth al intemperauncie,
it commands holiness, and the clean and laweful use of all the members of
the whoale body: and therefore in this short precept there is contained a good
part of the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. For Paul to the Thessalonians
says: We beseech you brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that ye
increase more and more, as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and
to please God. For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God even your holiness, that ye should abstain from
fornication, that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
holiness and honor, not in the lust of concupiscence as the Gentiles which
knew not God. God is a revenger of all such, as we have forewarned you and
testified. For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.
And straight way after again: The God of peace sanctify you throughout, that
your whoale spirit, and soul, and body, may be preserved blameless in the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I have again my brethen, passed beyond the appointed time of an ordinary
sermon, staying you longer than I am wont to do. Pardon this fault, for (I
hope) I have not troubled you: almost two whoale hours, without profiting you
any whit at all. Make your prayers now, and depart in peace. By the help and
will of God I will within these few days add the rest of the ten
commandments. The grace of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ be with you
all. Amen.

THE end of the first Tome containing two DECADES.
THE THIRD AND fourth Decade of Sermons, WRITTEN TO THE most renowned King of
England, Edward the sixth, by Henry Bullinger.

The second Tome.

JESUS.

This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Hear him.

Matthew. 17. TO THE MOST RENOVMED Prince Edward the sixth King of England and
France, Lord of Jreland, Prince of Wales, and Cornwall, defender of the
Christian faith. Grace and peace from God the father, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.
YOur majesty would, I know right well, most royal king, admit a stranger
to talk with your Grace, if any new guest should come and promise that he
would briefly out of the sentences and judgments of the wisest men, declare
the very truest causes of the felicity and unhappy state of every king and
kingdom: and therefore I hope that I shall not be excluded from the speech of
your majesty, because I do assuredly promise, briefly to lay down the very
causes of the felicity and lamentable calamities of kings and their kingdoms
so clearly and evidently, that the hearer shall not need to trouble himself
with over busy diligence to seek out my meaning, but only to give attentive
ear to that which is spoken. For by the help of God, I will make this
treatise not to be perceived only by the wit and deep judgment of learned
heads, but also to be seen as it were with the eyes, and handled as it were
with the hands of very idiots and unlearned hearers, and that too, not out of
the doubtful decrees and devises of men, but out of the assured word of the
most true God. Even the wisest men do very often deceive us with their
counsels, and greatly endamage the followers thereof. But God which is the
light and eternal wisdom cannot at any time either err, or conceive any
false opinions or repugning counsels, much less teach others any thing but
truth, or seduce any man out of the right way. The wisdom of the father does
in the holy Gospel cry out and say: I am the light of the world: he that
follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.
This eternal wisdom of God as it does not disorderedly wrap things up
together and make them intricate, but layetb down in order, and teaceth them
plainly, so it does not only minister whoalsome counsels, but brings them
to the effect, which they wish that obey her. Oftentimes verily men do give
counsels that are not vnwhoalsome, but yet in their counsels that is
altogether omitted, which should have been first and especially mentioned. All
the wise men almost of the world, have been of opinion, that kings and
kingdoms should be most happy, if the king of the country be a wise man, if
he have many wise, aged, faithful, and skillful counselors: if his
Captains be valiant, warlike, and fortunate in battle: if he abound with
substance, if his kingdom be on every side, surely fortified: and lastly if
his people be of one mind and obedient. All this I confess is truly,
rightly, and very wisely spoken but yet there is another singular and most
excellent thing, which is not her^ (...) ^monge these necessaries, without
which no true felicity can be attained unto, (...) ing once gotten can safely
be kept: when as contrarily where that one thing is present, all those other
necessaries do of their own accord fall unto me^, as they themselves can best
wish or devise. The Lord our God therefore who is the only giver of wise and
perfect counselles does far more briefly and better knit up all shortly, and
say in the Gospel. But Matthew. 6. Luke. ^0.
seek ye first rather the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and
^ll (...) things shall easily be given unto you. Again, Blessed are the eyes
(...) that ye see. For I say unto you, that many kings and Prophets have (...)
to s^e the things that ye see, and to hear the things that ye hear, (...)
neither heard nor seen them. And again, Nay rather, blessed are they that
hear the word of God and keep it. And this one thing above allot^^r Luke. 11.
is ver^e necessary. Marie has chosen the good part which s^all not be taken
from her. Having my warrant therefore out of the word of God I dare bouldly
anowe, That From whence ^ssu^^th the felicity o^ calamity of ^inges and
Kingdoms.
those kings shall flourish and be in an happy case, which whoalie give and
submit themselves and their kingdoms to Jesus Christ the only begotten son
of God, being king of kings and Lord of Lords, acknowledging him to be the
mightiest Prince and Monarch of all, and themselves his vassalls, subjects,
and servants: which finally do not follow in all their affairs their own
mind and judgment, the laws of men that are contrary to Gods
commandments, or the good intentes of mortal men, but do both themselves
follow the very laws of the mightiest king and eternal Monarch, and also
cause them to be followed throughout all their kingdom, reforming both
themselves and all theirs, at and by the rule of Gods holy word. For in so
doing the kingdoms shall flourish in peace and tranquillity, and the kings
thereof shall be most wealthy, victorious, long lived, and happy. For thus
speaks the mouth of the Lord which cannot possibly lie: When the king sits
upon the seat of his kingdom, he shall take the book of the law of God,
that he may read in it all days of his life, that he may do it and not
decline from it, either to the right hand or to the left: but Deuteronomy. 17.
that he may prolong the days in his kingdom both of his own life, and of
his children. And again, Let not the book of this law depart out of thy
mouth, (Iosue, or thou whatsoever thou art that have a kingdom) but occupy
thy mind therein day and night, that thou may observe and do, according to
all that is written therein: for then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and
then shall Iosue 1.
thou be happy. It is assuredly true therefore, confirmed by the testimony of
the most true God, and in express words pronounced, that the prosperity of
kings and kingdoms consists in true faith, diligent hearing, and faithful
obeying the word or law of God: whereas their calamity and utter overthrow
does follow the contrary.

This will I make, as my promise is, in this annexed demonstration both evident
to the eyes, and as it were palpable to the very hands, by the examples of
most mighty kings, not taken out of Herodotus or any profane author, but out
of the infallible history of the most sacred Scriptures. Saul the first king
of Israel was both most fortunate and victorious, so long as he did in all
things follow the word of God: but when he once gave Saul. 1. Samuel. 13. 14.
15. etc.
place to his own good intentes and meanings, being utterly forsaken of the
Lord, he hears Samuel say to his face: Thou have refused and cast off the
word of the Lord, therefore has God also cast thee away, that thou shall not
be king of Israel. I will not here stand over largely to declare the miseries
and calamities, wherein he was wrapped from that time forward. For as he
himself was horribly haunted and vexed with the evil spirit, so did he not
cease to vex and torment his people and kingdom, until he had brought them
all into extreme danger, where he and some of his were slain, and put to
the worste by the heathen their enimyes, leaving nothing behind him but a
perpetual shame and endless ignominy. Next after Saul does David succeed
in the seat and kingdom, who without all controversy was the most happiest
of all other kings and Princes. But what stoare he did set by the word of the
Lord, it is evident to be seen by many notable acts of his, and especially
in that Alphabeticall Psalm which in order and number is the hundredth and
nintenth. For therein he sets forth the praise of Gods word, the whoalsom
virtue whereof he does at large wonderfully expound, in teaching what great
desire and zeal we ought to have thereto. For he was scholed and had learned
before by private mishaps and shameful deeds, and lastly by the unhappy
sedition of his graceles son Absalom, what an evil it is to decline from the
word of the Lord. Solomon the son of David the wisest and most commended king
of all the world, Solomon 1. Reg. 4. and. 11.
did so long enjoy prosperity and praise at the mouth of the Lord, as he did
not neglect with reverence to obey his word. But when once he had transgressed
the Lords commandment, straight way the Lord did say unto him: For as much as
this is done of thee, and that thou have not kept mine ordinances and my
statutes which I commanded thee, I will rent thy kingdom from thee and will
give it to thy servant. And now mark that according to that saying,
immediately after Solomon's death the kingdom was rent into two parts, and
that 10. Tribes followed Jeroboam the servant of Solomon. Two tribes claue
still to Roboam Solomon's son. He for neglecting Roboam. 2 Para. 12.
the word of the Lord and following after strange Gods, is overwhelmed with an
infinite number of woeful miseries. For the Scripture testifies that the
Egyptians came up against Jerusalem, and did destroy the City, Palace, and
temple of the Lord. Abia the son of Roboam overcame the host of Israel, and
bare away a triumphant victory, Abia. 2. Para. 13.
when he had wounded and slain five hundred thousand men of the 10. Tribes of
Israel. And of this so great a victory no other cause is mentioned, but
because he believed the word of the Lord. Next after Abia, did his son Asa a
renowned and most puissaunt king reign in his steed, of whom the holy
Scripture testifies, that he Asa. 2. Para. 14.
abolished all superstition, and did restoare sincere religion according to the
word of God: whereby he obtained a most flourishing kingdom in peace and
quietness by the space of forty years. Again of Iosaphat Asa his son we
read: The Lord was with Iosaphat 2. Para. 17.
Iosaphat because he walked in the former ways of his father David and sought
not Baalim, but sought the God of his father and walked in his commandment.
And therefore for his princelike wealth and famous victories he was renowned
through all the world. But to his son Ioram who forsook the word of God
Helias the Ioram. 2. Para. 12.
Prophet said: Because thou have not walked in the ways of Iosaphat thy
father, and in the ways of king Asa, but have walked the ways of the kings of
Israel, behold with a great plague will the Lord smite thy folk, thy children,
thy wives, and all thy goods: And thou shall suffer great pain, even a disease
of the bowels, until thy guts fall out. And whatsoever the Lord threatened
to bring upon him by the mouth of the Prophet, that did the unhappy king
feel with unspeakable torments to his great reproach: being made an example
of wretch^dnesse and misery which does light on all the pates of them that do
forsake the word of God. Neither was the happ of Ochosias son to king Ioram
and Athalia in any point better. For Ochosias. 4. Kings. 9
at the commandment of Iehu he was stabbed in and slain wretchedly: b^c^us^
he chose rather to follow the laws and rites of the kings of Israel, than
the very true laws of the Lord his God. Moreover Ioas a child yet but seven
years old being by the Ioas. 2. Par. 23. 24
labor, faith, and diligence of the faithful priest Ioiada restoared to, and
settled in the place of his father who was slain before him, reigned after the
wicked Athalia was put to death most happily and in a prosperous state so
long as Ioiada the priest did line. But when the high priest was once departed
out of this world unto the Lord, the king being immediately seduced by the
malice and wiliness of his wicked counselors, left off to follow the word of
the Lord. And as he ceased to follow the Lord. so did felicity and glory
forsake to follow him. For the Syrians coming on with a very small power of
armed men, do destroy and put to flight an insinite host of Jewish people,
they put to the sword all Ioas his counselors, and make a spoil of all his
kingdom. And Ioas for rejecting the Lord deserved with excessive grief first
to behold this misery, than to (...) away with a long consuming sickness, and
lastly upon his bed to have his throat cruellte cut of his own household
scruaunts, Amasias the son of Ioas is reno^med for a ^amous victory which he
obtained upon the Idumit^s, for no other cause, but for obeying Amasias. 2
Para. 25
the word of the Lord. But afterward when he began to rebel against God and
his Prophets, he is in battle vanquished by Ioas king of Israel, by whom
when be was spoiled, and compelled to see the overthrow of a great part of the
walls of Jerusalem, he was himself at the last by conspiratours entr^pped
and miserably murdered. Next after him succeeded his son Osias who also as
well as his father, enjoyed a singular felicity Osias. 2. Para. 26.
and most happy life, so long as he gainsayed not the mouth of God: but when
he would usurp and take upon him that office, which God had properly
appointed to the Leuits alone, directly opposing himself against the word of
the Lord, he was stricken with a leprosy, and for his uncleanness was
compelled severally to dwell ^loofe in banishment from the company of men
even until his last and dying day. Iothan also the son of Osias is reported
to have been wealthy and victorious in his wars: the cause of this Iothan.
2. Para. 27.
felicity the Scripture does briefly add and say: Iothan became mighty,
because he directed his ways before the Lord his God. But contrarily Achaz the
some of Iothan, as he was of all the Iewishe kings almost the wickeddest, so
was he in his life the most unfortunate. For in so much as he fors^^ke the
law of the Lord his God, the Achaz. 2. ^ara. 28.
Lord delivered both him and his people, first into the hands of the king of
Syrians, and afterward into the hands of the Israelites, who in one day ^lew
one hundred and twenty thousand Jews, and took captine away with them two
hundredth thousand women and children. So Achaz himself and all that were his
by feeling had proof of all kind of calamities, being made an example to
terrify all other that do gai^^say the word of God. The good and godly king
Ezechias succeeded his ungodly father in the seat and kingdom. Of him we
have this testimony in the holy Scripture: He did that Ezechias 4. Reg. 18.
which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father
David did. He put away the high places, and brake the images, and cut down
the groaues, and all to brake the brazen Serpent which Moses had made. For unto
those days the children of Israel burnt sacrifice to it. He trusted in the
Lord God of Israel. For he claue to the Lord, and departed not from him, but
kept his commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses.

And now let us hear what followed upon this obedience and faith of his. The
Scripture goes forward and says: And the Lord was with him, so that he
prospered in all things that he took in hand. While he did reign the most
ancient and puissant Monarchy of the Assyrians was broken and diminished. For
when Senach^rib king of Assyria besieged the city of Jerusalem the Angel of
the Lord in one night ^lue in the Assyrian camp one hundred fourscore and
five thousand soldiers. And the king of Babylon also did very honorably by
his ambassadors send prince like gifts unto Ezechias desiring earnestly his
amity and friendshipp. For the glory of that most godly king was blown
abroad and known in all the world.

Again when his son Manasses a very wicked man did not tread the pathe,
Manasses 4. Reg. 21.
and express the deeds of his most holy father, but being made king in the
twelfth year of his age did of purpose cross the word of God and brought in
again all the superstition, which his father had abolished, he was taken
captive and carried away to Babylon: and although by the goodness and mercy
of God he was restoared to his seat again, yet when he died he left a
maimed and a trouble some kingdom unto his son Ammon, who also for his
rebellion against the word of God as a most unfortunate man reigned Ammon. 4
Reg. 21.
but two years only, and was at the last wretchedly slain by his own
household servant. In place of his murdered father was his son Josias
settled in the kingdom, being when he was crowned a child but eight years
old. Of all the kings of Judah he was Josias. 4. Reg. 22.
the flower and especial crown. He reigned quietly and in all points most
happily by the space of one and thirty years. Now the Scripture which cannot
lie, does paint out to our eyes the faith and obedience, which he did devoutly
show to the word of God, for which that felicity did accompany his
kingdom. He was nothing moved with the admonitions of his father Ammons
counselors. But so soon as he had heard the words of the law read out of
the book, which Helkia the high priest found in the temple at Jerusalem, he
straight way committed himself whoaly to God and his word. Neither stayed
he to look for the minds and reformations of other kings and kingdoms, but
quickly forecasting the best for his people, he began to reform the
corrupted religion, which he did especially in the eightenth year of his age.
And in that reformation he had a regard always to follow the meaning of the
holy scripture alone, and not to give ear to the deeds of his predecessors,
to the prescribed order of long continuance, no^ to the common voices of the
greatest multitude. For he assembled his people together, before whom he
laid open the book of Gods law^, and appointed all things to be ordered
according to the rule of his written word, And therevppon it comes which we
find written that he spared not the ancient temples and long accustomed
rites which Solomon and Jeroboam had erected and ordained against the word of
God. To be short this king Josias pulled down and overthrew, whatsoever was
set up in the Church or kingdom of Judah against the word of God. And least
peradventure any one should cavil and say that he was over hardy and too
roughe in his dealinges, the Scripture gives this testimony of him and says:
Like unto him was there no king before him, which turned to the Lord with all
his heart, with all his soul, and all his might, according to all the law of
Moses: neither after him arose there any such as he. Whereas we read
therefore that this so commended and most fortunate king, was overcome and
slain in a foughten battle, that death of his is to be compted part of his
felicity, and not of his misery. For the Lord himself said to Josias: I will
gather thee unto thy fathers, and in peace shalt thou be buried, that thine
eyes may not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place. For there
is no greater argument that the people and very princes of the kingdom under
that most holy king were mere hypocrites and idolaters, than for because
next and immediately after his death both his sons and Peers rejecting the
word of God did bring in again all superstition and blasphemous wickedness.
Whereupon we read that for the whoale 22. years, wherein the kings of Iud^
did reign after the death of Josias, there was no peace or quietness in
Jerusalem, but perpetual seditions and most bloody murders. Next after
Josias reigned his Ioachas, Ioachim, I^chonias, and Zedechias. 4. Kings. 23.
24. 25.
son Ioachas: but within three months after he was taken, bound, and ledd
captive away into the land of Egypt. After the leading away of Ioachas, his
brother Ioachim ware the crown: whom in the eleventh year of his reign being
bound in chains was slain by Nabuchodonosor, and lastly (as Jeremy says)
was buried in the sepulcre of an Ass. In Ioachims steed was his son
Iechonias set up, but about three months after he with his Princes and
substance was taken captive and ledd away to Babylon. After him the kingdom
was given to Zedechias the son of Josias: but because he would not obey the
word of God preached by the Prophet Jeremy, he loses both his life and
kingdom in the eleventh year of his reign. In whose time also the temple is
set on fire, Jerusalem is sacked, and the people slain for the most part or
led away captive. Thus much hitherto touching the kings of Judah. For in
Zedechias both the kingdom and majesty or dignity thereof did fail and make
an end.

To these if we add the ends and destinies of the kings of Israel, we shall
again be compelled to confess that all felicity of kings and kingdoms do
consist in hearing and The kings of Israel.
following the word of God, and that contrarily calamities and miseries do
rise by the contempt and neglecting of the same. For Jeroboam the first king of
the separated Israelites, letting pass the word of God, did ordeyne new rites
to worship the Lord by, and erected new temples, but by so doing, he overthrew
himself, his house, and all his kingdom. After him does Baasa succeed both
in the kingdom and idolatrous religion, which was the cause why he and his
were utterly destroyed. Then follows Amri the father of Achab, who for
augmenting idolatrous impiety, is horribly slain with all his family so that
not one of his escaped the revenging sword of Gods anger and jealousy. And for
because Iehu was faithful and valliant in killing those tyraunts, in
dispatching Baals priests, and rooting out of idolatrous superstition, the
Lord does promise and say unto him: Because thou have zealously done that which
thou have done, according to all that is right in my sight, therefore shall thy
children unto the fourth generation sit on the seat of Israel. And we read
verily that his sons and nephues were notable Princes which succeeded in the
kingdom, even Ioachas, Ioas, Jeroboam the second of that name, and Zacharias.
The other kings, as Sellum, Manahe, Pekaiah, Peka and Osee, had their kingdom
altogether like to the kingdom of the son of Ios^as, to wit, in a seditious
troublesome and a most miserable taking. For they despised the mouth of the
Lord. Therefore were they utterly cut off, and for the most part either slain
or carried away captive by their enemies the Assyrians. From the division of
tbe people into two several kingdoms after the death of Solomon, there were
in number 19 kings of Israel, and 18. of Judah. The kings of Israel
altogether reigned about 272. years, and they of Judah about 393. Now by the
space of so many years in the most renowned and peculiar people of God, which
was as it were a glass set before the eyes of all nations to view and behold
themselves in, there might the truest causes of felicity and calamities of all
kings and kingdoms in the whoale world be so lively represented and perfectly
painted, that there should be no need to fetch from else where, a more plain
and evident demonstration of the same.

And yet for all that we are not without other foreign examples, whereby to
prove Foreign kings.
it. For the Pharaoes of Egypt were the destruction both to themselves and
also to their kingdom, by their stubborn rebellion against Gods word. Again
Darius Priscus and the great Nabuchodonosor enjoyed no small felicity, because
they despised not the counsels of Daniel. Balthazar king of Babylon, a
despightfull contemner of God and his word, is in one night destroyed with all
his power. Babylon the most ancient and famous city of the world is taken,
set on fire, sacked, and overthrown, and the kingdom translated to the Medes
and Persians. Neither were the kings of Persia unfortunate at all, I mean,
Cyrus and Darius otherwise called Artaxerxes, because they favored the Kings
which favored gods word and kings which persecuted the same.
word of God, and did promoate his people and true religion. But on the other
side we read that Antiochus syrnamed Epiphanes was most unfortunate, who as it
were making war with God himself, did most wickedly burn and make away the
books of holy Scripture. Furthermore we have as great stoare of examples also
even out of those Histories which followed immediately the time of Christ his
ascension. For so many Roman Emperors, kings and Princes as persecuted the
preaching of the Gospel, and Church of our Lord Jesus Christ, and advanced
idolatry and superstitious blasphemy, so many, I say, did die a foul and
shameful death. Of this are Eusebius and Orosius renowned Historiographers
assured witnesses. Again S. Augustine lib. 5. de Ciuit. Dei, affirms that
incredible victories, very great glory, and most absolute felicity has
been given by God unto those kings, which have in faith sincerely embraced
Christ their Lord, and utterly subverted idolatry and superstitious
blasphemy. It is evident therefore that felicity comes by good will and
obedience to the word of God, and that all kings and kingdoms shall be unhappy,
which forsake the word of God, and turn themselves to men's inventions. And
this I have, I trust, declared hitherto so plainly, that the hearers may seem
not only to understand, but also to see before their eyes, and as it were to
feel with their hands the pith and material substance of this whole treatise.

But whereunto does all this tend? That your Royal majesty forsooth may
vndoubttingly know, and be assuredly persuaded that true felicity is gotten
and retained by faithful study in the word of God, to wit, if you submit
your self altogether and your whoale kingdom to Christ the chief and
highest Prince, if throughout your whoale realm, you dispose and order
religion and all matters of justice according to the rule of Gods holy word, if
you decline not one hairs breadth from that rule, but study to advance the
kingdom of Christ, and go on (as hitherto you have happily begone) to subvert
and tread under foot the usurped power of that tyrannical Antichrist. Not
that your majesty needs any whit at all mine admonitions or instructions.
For you have undoubtedly that heavenly teach^r in your mind, I mean the holy
Ghost, which inspireth you with the very true doctrine of sincere and pure
religion. Your Majesty has the sacred Bible, the holiest book of all books,
wherein as in a perfect rule the whoale matter of p^etie and our true
salvation, is absolutely contained and plainly set down. Your Majesty has
noble men and many Counselors belonging to your kingdom, faithful,
valliaunt, and skillful heads both in the law of God, and men, who for their
wisdom and love that they bear to the sincere tru^th, are greatly commended
among foreign nations. And for that cause all the faithful do think and
call your majesty most happy. But that happy king Ezechias (although he did
especially use the help of those excellent men Es^^ and Micheas) did not yet
despise faithful admonishers, even among the (...) sort of Levites: neither
thought they that in admonishing the king, the^ l^st and (...) labor in vain.
I therefore having good affiaunce in your (...) good and godl^disposition, do
verily hope that this short discourse of mine, touching the true causes of the
felicity and calamities of kings and kingdoms, shall have a pro^iting place
with you. Even I, which 12. years since, did dedicate unto your father of
famous memory Henry viij. a book touching the authority of the holy
Scripture, and the institution and function of Bishopps, against the
Pontifical chuffes of the Romish superstition and tyranny, and now by
experience know that that labor of mine brought forth no small fruit within
the realm of England: am now so bold again as to dedicate these my Sermons
unto your Royal majesty. In these Sermons I handle not the least and lowest
points or places of Christian religion, the law, sin, grace, the Gospel,
and repentance. Neither do I, as I think, handle them irreligiously. For I
use to confer one Scripture with an other, than which there is no way better
and safer to follow in the handling of matters touching our religion. And
forbecause you are the true defender of the Christian faith, it cannot be but
well undoubtedly, to have Christian Sermons come abroad under the defense of
your Majesty's name. My mind was according to mine ability, and the measure
of faith which is in me, to further the cause of true religion, which now
begins to budd in England, to the great rejoicing of all good people. I have
therefore written these Sermons at large, and handled the matter so, that of
one many more may be gotten. Wherein the Pastors discretion shall easily
discern what is most auayleable and profitable for every several Church. And
the Pastors duty verily is rightly to moawe the word of truth, and aptly to
give the fodder of life unto the Lords flock. They will not think much, I
hope, because in these Sermons I do use the same matter, the same arguments,
and the very same words, that other before me both ancient and late writers
(whom I have judged to follow the Scriptures) have used yer now, or which I
my self have else where alleged in other books of mine heretofore published.
For as this doctrine at all times, and in all points agreeable to it self is
safest to be followed, so has it always been worthily praised of all good
and godly people. If the Lord grant me life, leisure and strength, I will
shortly add the other eight Sermons of the fourth Decade, which as yet are
behind. And all that I say here, I speak it still without all prejudice to
the judgment of the right and true Church. Our Lord Jesus the king of kings
and Lord of Lords, lead you with his spirit, and defend you to the glory of
his name, and safety of all your Realm. At Tigure in the month of March, the
year of our Lord. 1550.

Your Majesty's duetifullie bounden, and daily Orator, Henry Bullinger,
minister of the Church at Tigure in Swicerland.

THE THIRD DECADE of Sermons, written by Henry Bullinger.
Of the fourth precept of the second Table which is in order the 8. of the 10.
Commandments, Thou shall not steal. Of the owning and possessing of proper
goods, and of the right and lawful getting of the same, against sundry kinds
of theft.
The first Sermon.
FOR the susteyning and nourishing of our lives and families, we men have
need of earthly riches. Next therefore after the comaundements touching the
preservation of man's life, and the holy keeping of wedlocks knot, in this
fourth commandment a law is given for the true getting, possessing, using
and bestowing of wealth and worldly substance, to the end that we should not
get them by theft or evil means, that we should not possess them unjustly,
nor use or spend them unlawfully. Justice requires to use riches well, and to
give to every man that which is his: now since the laws of God be the laws
of Justice, they do very necessarily by way of commandment say. Thou The. 8.
^o^maund^ent.
shall not steal. These words again in number are few, but in sense, of
ample signification. For in this precept theft it self is utterly forbidden,
all shifting subtilties are flatly prohibited, deceit and guile is banished,
al cousening fetches are clean cut off: covetousness, idleness, prodigality,
or lauishe spending, and all unjust dealing is herein debarred: Moreover,
charge is here given for mainteining of justice, and that especially in
contractes and bargaynes. Wonderful turmoyles verily are raised up and
begone among men of this world, about the getting, possessing, and spe^ding
of temporal riches: it was expedient therefore that God in his law, which he
ordeyneth for the health, co^meditie, and peace of us men, should appoint a
state, and prescribe an order for earthly goods: as in this law he has most
excellently done. And that ye may the better understand it, I will at this
present, by ye help of Gods holy spirit, discourse upon the proper owning and
upright gettinge of worldly riches: in which treatise the whoale consideration
of theft in all his kinds shall be plainly declared.

For the proper owning and possessing Of the proper ownning of substance.
of goods is not by this precept prohibited, but we are forbidden to get them
unjustly, to possess them unlawfully, and to spend them wickedly: yea by this
commandment the proper owning of peculiar substance is lawfully ordained, and
firmly established.

The Lord forbids theft, therefore he ordeineth and confirms the proper
owning of worldly riches. For what can thou steal, if all things be common
to all men? For thou have stolen thine own, and not another man's, if thou
take from an other that which he has. But God forbids theft, and
therefore by the making of this law, he confirms the proper possession of
peculiar goods. But because there is no small number of that furious sect of
Anabaptists, which deny this propriety of several possessions, I will by
some evident testimonies of Scripture, declare that it is both allowed and
ratified of old. Of Abraham, who in the Scripture is called the father of
faith, Eliezer his servant says: God has blessed my master merueylously,
that he is become great, and has given him sheep and Oxen, silver and gold,
men servant and maid servant, camels and asses: and to his son has he
given all that he has. Lo then Abraham was wealthy, and did possess by the
right of propriety al those things which God had given him: and he left them
all by the title of inheritance, as peculiar and proper goods unto his son
Isaac. Isaac therefore and Jacob possessed their own and proper goods.
Moreover God by the hand of Moses brought ye Israelites his people into the
land of promise, ye grounds whereof he did by lot divide unto the tribes of
Iosue his servant, appointing to every one a particular portion to possess:
and did by laws provide that those inheritaunces should not be mingled and
confounded together. In Solomon and the Prophets there are very many precepts
and sentences tending to this purpose. But I know very well that these
troublesome wranglers do make this objection and say: That Christian men are
not bound to these proofs, that are fetched out of the old Testament. And
although I could confute that objection, and prove that those places of the old
Testament, do in this case bind us to mark and follow them, yet will I
rather for shortness sake allege some proofs out of the Scriptures of the
new testament to stop their mouths withal. Our Lord Jesus Christ does
greatly commend in his disciples the works of mercy, which do consiste in
feedinge the hungry, in giving drink to the thirsty, in clothing the
naked, in visiting prisoners, and those that be sick, and in harboring
strangers and banished men. He therefore grants to his disciples a
propriety and possession of peculiar goods, wherewith they may frankly do
good unto other, and help the needy, and the man in misery. But the proper
owning of several goods being once taken away, good deeds, and alms, must of
necessity be utterly lacking. For if all things be common, then do thou
give nothing of that which is thine, but all that thou spendest is of the
common richesse. Yet Paul the Apostle in his Epistle to the Corinthians,
bids every one to lay up alms by himself, which he might receive when
he came unto Corinthe. He does also command every one to bestow so much as
he can find in his heart willingly to give, and according to the quantity that
every one possesses, not according to that which he possesses not: and yet
not to bestow it so, that they, to whom it is given, should have more then
enoughe, and they, which give, should be pinched with penury and lack of
things necessary. The same Apostle says: We beseech you brethren, that you
study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with your
own hands as we commanded you: that you may walk honestly to them that be
without, and that ye may have lack of nothing. I could out of other his
Epistles allege many more proofs of this same sort: but these are enoughe to
declare sufficiently that propriety of goods is in both the testaments
permitted to Christian men.

In the Acts of the Apostles we read, that among them of the primative How in
^he Apo^^les age (...) things ^ere common.
and Apostolical Church, al things were common: but that which follows in
the same book does declare what kind of communion that was, which they had.
For Luk says: None of them said that anything was his of that which he
possessed. Lo here, the first Christians possessed houses, grounds, and
other riches by the right of propriety: and yet they possessed them not as
their own goods, but as the goods of other men, and as it were in common, so
notwithstanding that the right of propriety did still remain in possessours
own hand: and if so be at any time, necessity so required, they sold their
lands and houses, and helped the need of them that lacked. If they sold, then
that which they sold was undoubtedly their own. For no good man does sell an
other man's substance, but that which is his own, or that which he has taken
in hand to husband as his own. Moreover S. Peter compounding all this
controversy says to Ananias, whiles yt land remained was it not thine own?
and when it was sold, was it not in thy power? How is it then that thou lie
to the holy Ghost, and keep back part of the price of the land, and make
notwithstanding as though thou had brought the whole price unto us? It was
in Ananias his power not to have sold ye land, and when it was sold to have
kept to himself the whole sum of money: and yet for that deed he should not
have been excluded from the Church of the faithful. It was free therefore at
that time, even as at this day also it is, either to sell or not to sell their
lands and possessions, and to bestow it commonly for the relieuing of the
poor. Therefore that place in the Acts of the Apostles does not take away the
right of propriety, nor command such a communion of every man's goods as our
maddheaded Anabaptists go about to ordeine. And forbeecause I perceive that
some do very stiffely stick to the letter, and urge that communion of
substance: it shall not be tedious to recite unto you (dearly beloved) other
men's judgments touching this point, I mean the opinions of them, which by
conference of Scriptures have made this matter most plain and manifest.
Whereas we read in the second Chapter of the Acts, that all which believed
were joined in one, it must not so be understood, as though they like Monks
forsaking every one his proper house, did dwell together in common all in one
house, but that they, as it is immediately after added, continued daily in the
temple with one accord: not that they left off every man to eat in his own
house, and to provide things necessarily required of nature or that every one
sold the house that he had, since there is afterward added, Breaking bread
from house to house. If they brake bread from house to house, let these
Anabaptists aunsweare in what houses the Christians at Jerusalem did break
their bread. In the houses of unbelievers? I think nay. Therefore they brake
bread and eat meat in the houses of the faithful. How therefore did they all
sell or forsake their lands and houses? how did they live together like
cloysterers? whereas Luke says therefore, that so many as believed were joined
in one, that is to be understood, that they did often times assemble in the
temple, so then that communicating of goods among the Christians, was nothing
else but a sale, which the welthier sort made of their lands and houses, to
the end that by bestowing that money, the poor might be relieved, least they
being compelled by penury and famine, should turn from Christianity to
Iudaisme again.

Moreover, we read in many places of the Acts that Christians kept to them
selves the use of their houses and ordering of their substance, as in the
ninth of the Acts we find of Tabitha, who was full of good works, making
coats and cloathinge for widows and poor people.

In the twelfth of the Acts, we read that Peter the Apostle being brought
out of prison, came to the house of Marie the mother of John, whose syrname was
Mark, where many were gathered together to pray: he says not to dwell, but
to pray: whereby thou may understand, that the congregation was assembled in
that house to pray.

Again, in the ninth Chapter: Peter stays many days in y^ house of Simon
the Tanner, which was a Christian man and dwelt in his own house. And in the
eleventh Chapter: the disciples, according to every ones ability sent help to
the brethren, which dwelt in Jury. Lo here, as every one, says he, was of
ability. But what ability could any of them have had, unless they had
somewhat of their own in possession? In the 16. Chapter? Lydia the woman that
sold purple, when she was baptized, did say: If ye have judged me to be
faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there. Why said she not,
sell my house: but, come into my house: but forbecause she did so possess her
house after she believed, as that she made it common to the Apostles. In the
20. Chapter: Paul does glory that he has not desired any man's gold,
silver, or precious clothes. But what sense or reason could be in these
words, unless it were lawful for Christian men to keep the possession of
that, which is theirs. And in the 21. Chapter: Phillip had at Caesaria a house
and four daughters, why sold he not his house? Philemon also Paul's host, had
both a house and a servant too. It is therefore most plain and evident, that
the holy Ghostes meaning is not to have such an order of life observed, as
these people do devise, but that every man should govern well his own house
and family, and relieve the brethrens necessity, according as his ability
will suffer and bear. To this end also do other places belong, 1. Timothe. 5.
Titus. 2. 1. Thessal. 4. 2. Thessal. 3. And when in all his Epistles almost, he
prescribes to parents and children, to housbands and wives, to masters and
servants, their office and duties what does he else, but teach how to order
our houses and families? thus much thus far.

What may be said of that more over, that many wealthy men in the Gospel,
are reported to have been worshippers of God? Joseph of Arimathea, which
buried the Lord after he was crucified, is said to have been a wealthy man,
and a disciple of Christ also. The women were welthie which followed the Lord
from Galile, and ministered to him and his disciples, of their goods and
substance. The gelded treasorer of Queen Candace was a welthie man. Tabitha of
Ioppa, who^ Peter raised from death to life, was rich, and spent her substance
freely upon poor and needy people. Lydia the seller of purple was wealthy
too, and innumerable more, who were both godly and faithful people. Whereas ye
Lord therefore did say to the young man: If thou will be perfect, go and sell
that which thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven, and come and follow me: that is no general law or simple doctrine
belonging to all men, but is a demonstration only to show that the young man
to whom he spoke, had not yet so perfectly fulfilled the law, as he thought
verily that he had d^n: for he thought he had done all, and that nothing was
wanting. For the young man set more by his goods, then he did by God, and
the voice of Gods commandment. For he departed sadly, and did not as the Lord
had bidden him: and thereby declared that he had not yet fulfilled the law.
Moreover, we may out of other places gather, that the Lord did not cas^e down
his disciples to misery and beggarie. Neither was Paul the Apostle ashamed, to
make laws for rich men, and to prescribe an order how they ought to behave
themselves. To them that be rich, says he* in this world, give charge that
they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living
God, (which gives us abundantly al things to enjoy:) that they do good, that
they be rich in good works, that they be ready to give, glad to distribute,
laying up in stoare for them selves, a good foundation against the time to
come, that they may lay hold upon eternal life. Hereunto belong the
admonitions of our Savior who says: Ye cannot serve God and mammon at once.
Again, Riches are thorns that choke the seed of the word of God. And
again, Verily I say unto you, a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom
of heaven. It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, than
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. And as the minds of wealthy
men are not utterly to be discouraged and driven to desperation, as though it
were impossible for them to be saved: so are they to be admonished of the
imminente perils, least peradventure they sleep securely over their riches,
being seduced by Satan to abuse their wealth, when as in deed they ought
rather to use it after the rule of the Apostle, which I did even now recite.

The Gangresian Synod, a very ancient Counsel, verily condemned Gangresis
Synodus.
them which taught: That faithful rich men could have no hope to be False
doctrine concerning riches and rich men, condemned.
saved by the Lord, unless they did renounce and forsake all the good that
they did possess. S. Augustine enrolleth and reckons the Apostoliques in his
Catologue or beadrowe of heretics. They taking arrogantly this name to
themselves, did not admit into their company any of them which used the
fellowshipp of their own wives, or had in (...) any proper substance* (...),
they therf^^e (...) because seperating themselves from the Church, they think
that they have no hope to be saved, which use and enjoy the things that they
themselves lack. They are like unto the Encratites, and are called also by the
name of Apotactites. Touching riches they of themselves verily are not evil,
but the good gifts of God: It is the abuse that makes them evil. But for the
use of them, I will speak hereafter.

Here follows now the treatise Of the lawful getting of riches.
of the getting of wealth and riches, which be necessary for the maintenance
of our lives and families Touching the getting whereof, there is a large
discourse among our Lawyers: For they say that goods are gotten by the law of
Nations, and by the peculiar law of every particular country. By the law of
Nations, as by Prevention in possession, by captivity, by finding, by birth,
by casting up of water, by changing the kind, by increase in bondage, by
mixture, by building, planting, sowing, tilling in a ground free from
possession, and by delivery, By the peculiar law of every particular
country, as by continuance of possession, by prescription, by giving, by
will, by legacy, by feoffment, by succession, by challenge, by purchase, of
all which particularly to speak, it would be a labor too tedious, and for
you to hear (dearly beloved) little profitable. That therefore which we are
to say, we will frame to the manners and customs of our age, and we will
utter that which shall tend to our avail. Principally and before all things,
we must close and shutt up an evil eye, least we be carried away with too
much concupiscence and desire. The light of the body (says our Savior
Christ in the Gospel) is the eye: If therefore thine eye be single, thine
whoale body shall be lightened: but if thine eye be evil, thy body shall be all
darcke.

The mind of man being endued with faith, and not infected with
concupiscences and naughty lusts, does give light to all things that he
shall take in hand, go about, and do: but if his mind be corrupt and
unclean, then shall his deeds savor also of corruption and uncleanness.
Wherefore faith and an upright conscience, must subdue and beat down too much
concupiscence and covetousness, which take their original and root from
distruste, making unholy and unclean all the counsels of man, all his
thoughts, all his words and deeds. And that we may be able and of force
sufficient, to captiuate and bring them into subjection, necessary it is, that
the Grace of Christ assiste us, which every godly minded man and woman, does
ask of God, with godly and faithful prayers. Beehoofull it is, that we
always set before our eyes, and have deeply graven in our hearts, the
doctrine of our Savior Christ touching these, and the instruction also of his
holy Apostles: which is not so much, but it may be well borne away. We will
therefore rehearse unto you (derely beloved) three several places, two of them
out of the Gospel, and the third out of S. Paul: in which places, as it were
in a perfect abridgment, you may have comprised what things soever can be
required, of such as worship God in truth. In the Gospel according to S.
Matthew, thus says our Lord and Savior: Hoord not up for your selves,
treasures in earth, where the rust and moth does corrupt, and where thieves
break through and steal: but lay up treasure for you in Heaven, where
neither mothe nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through
and steal. For where your treasure is, there will your hearts also be.

No man can serve two masters. For either he shall hate the one, and love the
other, or else he shall lean to the one, and despise the other: ye cannot
serve God and Mammon.

Therefore I say unto you, be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat,
or drink, nor yet for your body what ye shall put on: is not the life more
worth than meat, and the body more worth then raiment?

Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
carry into barnes, yet your heavenly father feeds them: Are not ye much
better then they?

Which of you, by taking careful thought, can add one cubite to his stature?
And why care ye for raiment? consider the Lillies of the feelde how they
grow, they labor not, neither do they spinne: and yet I say unto you that
even Solomon in all his royalty was not araide like one of these. Wherefore,
if God so cloth the grass of the field, which though it stand to day, is to
morrow cast into the furnace: shall he not much more do the same for you, O ye
of little faith? Therefore take no thought saying, what shall we eat, or what
shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? for after all these
things do the Gentiles seek: for your heavenly father knows that ye have
need of all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and all
these things shall be added unto you.

Care not then for to morrow: for the morrow shall care for it self.
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

This says the Lord in the sixth of Matthewes Gospel. Matt. 6.


Again, in the twelfth Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel, he says: Take heed
and beware of covetousness: for no man's life stands in the abundance of
the things which he possesses: that is, the life, has no need of
superfluity: or, no man's life has need of more then enough. And he put
forth a similitude saying.

The ground of a certain rich man brought forth fruits plentifully, and
he thought within him self, saying: what shall I do because I have no room
where to bestow my fruits? And he said, this will I do, I will pull down
my barnes, and buyld greater, and therein will I gather all my fruits and my
goods, and I will say to my soul: Soul, thou have much goods laid up in
stoare for many years: take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

But God said unto him: thou fool, this night do they require thy soul
again from thee: then, whose shall these things be which thou have provided?
So is he that gathers richesse to him self, and is not rich to Godwardes.

Paul the vessel of election followinge in all things his teacher and
master, cries out and says: Godliness is a great lucre, if a man be
content with that he has: For we brought nothing into the world and it is
certain that we may carry naught away, but having food and raiment we must
therewith be content. For they that will be rich fall into temptation and
snares, and into many folish and noisome lusts which drown men in perdition
and destruction. For covetousness and the love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some have lusted after, they erred from the faith, and
wrapped themselves in many sorrows: But thou, O man of God flee these things,
and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness
etc. Whosoever therefore means by bodily labor or any kind of traffic to
get a living, and things necessary for himself and his family, let him take
these godly precepts in steed of Triacle, and other wholesome medicines to
strengthen his mind against the enuenomed force of poisoned greedines, and
infectinge plague of covetousness.

And when he has with this medicine Labor is commended and idleness
condemned
against poison compounded of the doctrine of the Evangelists and Apostles
fortified his mind against the plague, then let him immediately bend himself
to some labor and kind of occupation. But let every one pick out and choose an
honest and profitable occupation, not a needelesse Art, or a Science hurtful
to any other man. And finally let all men flee idleness as a plague or
contagious disease. And now again let us in this case hear the heavenly
words of that holy Apostle Paul, who says: We charge you brethren in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every
brother that (...) mordinately, and not after the institution, which h^e
received of us. For when we were with you, this we warned you off, that if
any would not work the same should not eat. For we hear say, that there
are some which walk among you inordinately working not at all, but be busy
bodies. Them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ,
that they working in quietness eat their own bread. In all ages and among
all honest men, both idleness and needelesse occupations have been always
condemned.

Hesiodus said. Both Gods and men abhor
the lazy hand in bosomd lout,
That works not in a common weal,
but lurckes and liu's without
Pains taking, like the idle droane
that lives upon the spoil
Of that, for which the busy Bees,
do tire themselves with toil.
And Sophocles said. Where idleness does sit a brood,
there is never good egg hatched.


For God does not assiste slothful persons and idle slowbackes. Now I (...)
call those needelesse occupations, which idle and ill disposed people do use,
thereby to be troublesome to their neighbors and to deceive other men,
exercising, I confess, an occupation, but such an one as is utterly unlawful
and unprofitable to all men, themselves only excepted, to whom it bringes in
excessive gaynes: of which sort are vsur^rs, engrossers, hucstars, and other
more that have many arts to francke themselves with an idle show of business,
like a swine shutt up to be ^atted in a stie. As for them (...) wealth is come
to them, not (...)
by their own labor, or their own industry, but by inheritance of their
au^cetours leaving, let them consider with themselves, by what means ye riches
were gotten, which now by inheritance are fallen to their lot: and if they
perceive that they be heirs of unjust gotten goods, let them be liberal and
make amends for them, not doubling the evil in possessing unjustly, and more
wickedly digestinge the thing that before was naughtily come by. Let them put
no trust or confidence in their ill gotten riches, neither let them give them
selves to idleness, but still be busy in some honest thing. But yet most
commonly, it comes to pass, that ill gotten goods are spent very lewdly. The
best way therefore, is either to be heir to a good, just, and liberal man,
or else to seek means by their own toil and travail to have of thine own,
wherewithal to sustain both thine own life, and the lives of thy family.

But many men make a doubt here, and call it into question: first, whether
Whether ^argayni^g (...) buying ^^d selling ^e lawful (...) no.
bargaining and buying and selling be lawful or no, and then what one
occupation it is among all other, that does best beseem a godly man. Them
which stick upon these doubts I wish to consider these reasons that follow.
First, it is manifest that co^tractes are for the most part voluntary, and
that bargains are made with the mutual consent of the buyer and seller, so
that each one may take deliberation and make choice of that, which he would
have, to see whether it be best for his purpose or no. Of this sort are the
exchange of things, suretiship, letting, hiring, morgaging, borrowing,
lending, couenanting, buying, selling, and other mo like unto these. These
things, as experience does prove, even the holiest men cannot be without, so
long as they live in this frail world. Neither does the Lord of the law in
any place forbid these kind of contractes, but planteth them rather in his
common weal of Israel, that the people might know and acknowledge them to be
the ordinances of God: the abuse, deceit, guyle, and confidence in them is
flatly forbidden by the word of the Lord.

If therefore any man do use the^ moderately, not staying him self wholly upon
them, nor reposing his trust in them, in so using them he sins not. And here
again, let us hear the words of the Apostle, who says: Let them which have
wives be as though they had none: and them which weep as though they wept not:
and them which rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and them which buy, as
though they possessed not: and them which use this world, as though they used
it not. For the facion of this world does pass away. In like manner we do in no
place read, that just and lawful gains have been at any time forbidden:
yea, the Lord does bless the labor and travail of his servant, which love
him, that even as in virtue, so also they may increase in richesse and
substance. This do ye examples of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob evidently testify.
And the very Apostles bid us not to look after no gain, but charge us
only to keep our selves from gaping after filthy gain.

There are among men, many and diverse occupations. And the state and Sundry
kinds o^ occupati^n^.
conditions, wherein men are, do stand in need of many and sundry things.
There is an occupation or (...) kind of labor, which is put in practice by
force of hand, and strength of body, rather then by art, although it wants
not altogether wit and discretion. There is also a more fine and subtle
labor of the wit, which, although it be not done without the body and
strength of man, is yet notwithstanding accomplished by the wit rather then by
the bodily force of him which labors. Of the first sort are all those
occupations or sciences which are commonly called handicraftes, and in that
number we reckon also merchaundising, husbandry, and grasing of cattle. Of
the latter sort are the study of tongues, of Physic, of law, of Divinity
especially, and of Philosophy, and lastly the governing of a common weal.
The Patriarchs verily, who were most innocent and excellent men, did for the
most part either exercise husbandry, or else breed and feed up cattle to
increase. There are many examples, of Abell, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job,
and other more. The Levites, and Prophets lived by their study and
ecclesiastical ministry. The feate of merchandising is no where condemned
throughout the holy Scriptures: but those merchauntes are condemned which
neither fear nor seek after God, but use odd shifts and subtle sleightes
to deceive and coosen their brethren and neighbors. For James the Apostle of
Christ our Lord says: Go to now ye that say: to day, and to morrow let us
go into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and win
(and yet cannot tell what shall happen on the morrow: for what is your life? it
is even a vapor, that continues for a little time, and then vanishes away.)
For that ye ought to say: If the Lord will, and if we live, let us do this
or that: Neither is Lydia the seller of purple found fault withal in the
Acts of the Apostles, for that she did sell purple: For Solomon, where he
sets forth the praise of a good huswife, does commend (...)
her greatly for exercising merchaundise. All notable kings have lived by
governing of their common wealths, even as Joseph the preserver of Egypt, and
Daniel the chief next to the king in Babylon and Media did in like sort. For
as in man's body there are many members, and sundry uses, whereunto they are
applied, 1. (...)
when as notwithstanding they do all agree in one and tend together to the
preservation and safegarde of the body: even so God has ordained diverse arts
and occupations for me^ to labor in, so yet nevertheless, that he would have
them al to serve to the commonweals commodity.

But now it is not for me definitiuely to pronounce which of al these (...)
use.
occupations a godly man ought chiefly first to choose, and then to put in
practice. Let every man weigh with him self the things that hitherto I have
alleged, then let him search and make trial of him self, to what kind of
life and occupation his mind is most willing, and whereunto he him self is
most fit and profitable: let him also have a diligent regard to consider what
arts they are that be most simple and agreeable to nature, and what occupations
have lest need of craft and deceipte, and lastly, what sciences do least of
all draw us from God and just dealing. And when this is scande, then let every
man choose to him self that which he takes to be best conuenyent, and most
whoalesome both for his soul and also his body.

We cannot all of us manure the ground, neither are all heads apt to take
learning, a few among many do govern the common weal, and all are not fit
to be handicraftes men. Every one has his sundry disposition, every one is
inspired by God, every one has the aid and counsel of his friends and
welwillers, every one has sundry occasions, and every one has the rule of
Gods word: let him be content with and stay him self upon them, so yet that
Gods comaundements may still have the preeminence.

But for him that labors and takes pains in his occupation, these rules of
admonition, which follow, Beware of prodigality.
are as necessary as those which are already rehearsed. For first of all,
every one must take heed of prodigality or riot, in meat, drink, apparaile,
nice pranking of the body, and gorgeous buyldings, needless expenses must
always be spared. For the Lords will is, that every man should keep and not
lashe out the wealth that he has, where no need requires it: for the Lord
does hate and detest riott and needelesse cost to maintain pride withal.
Moreover, the man that is prodigal of that which is his own, is for the most
part desirous of other men's goods, from whence arise innumerable mischiefs,
theafts, conspiracies, downright deceipte, shameless shifts, murders, and
seditions. Secondarily, let him which labors in his vocation be prompt and
active, let him be watchefull and able to abide labor, he must be no
litherbacke, unapt, or slothful fellow. Whatsoever he does, that let him do
with faith and diligence. Sloth and sluggishnesse do displease God utterly.
The Lord mislikes the yawning mouth and folded arms, the signs of sleep,
which commonly follow the careless man, who does neglect the state and
condition of his house and family. But on the other side, the Scripture
commends highly faithful laborers and good and painful people in work.
Let us hear, I beseech you, the golden words of Solomon the wisest among all
men: who, where he blames sluggardes, says: Go to the Emmet thou sluggarde,
consider her ways and learn to be wise. She has no guide nor ouerseer, nor
ruler, and yet in the Summer she provides her meat, and gathers her food
in the harvest. How long will thou sleep thou sluggarde? when will thou
arise out of thy sleep? yea, sleep on still a little, slumber a little, fold
thine hands together yet a little, and take thine ease: and in the mean while
shall poverty come upon thee like a traueyler, and necessity like a weaponed
man.

Again, David in the Psalms cries, saying: The labors of thine hands shall
thou eat: O well is thee and happy shall thou be. What may be thought of that
moreover, that the Lord God would not have Adam to live ydlely in Paradise,
that happy place for his state and condition? for he enjoined him the tending
and dressing of that goodly garden. Idle people therefore are the most
unhappy of all mortal men: and slothful drousieheades are nothing else, but
an unprofitable lump of unoccupied earth.

Lastely, let the artificer have a regard that he hurt no man by his art or
occupation.

And let this be the rule for him to keep his eye upon in all business and
affairs of his science: Whatso ever thou would have done to thy self, the
same do thou to another: and what soever thou would not have done to thy
self, that do not thou to another. Moreover, thou do hurt to another man
two sundry ways: that is, by keeping back, and taking away: as for example,
if thou withholdest that, which thou oweste, and is not thine own: or if thou
take away that which is another man's, and that which he does not owe unto
thee. But of the hurt done in withholding and taking away, I will at this
present speak somewhat largely, that thereby, ye may the better understand
the Lords commandment. Thou shall not steal, and more perfectly perceive,
what kinds and sorts of theaft there be.

Theaft, they say, is a deceiptfull Theaft.
fingering of another man's goods, moveable and bodily, which is done against
the owners will, to the intent to make gain, either of ye thing it self, or
of the use of the thing, or of the possession of the same. Therefore they say,
that a mad man does not commit theafte: because in him there can no
endeavor of craft or deceipte be possibly found. Neither can, say they, ye man
be argued of theaft, which by mistakinge, and not of set malice did take away
another man's good in steed of his own. But he alone is not called a
deceiptfull fingerer, which lays hand upon the thing, but he who by any
manner of means conueyeth it from the possession of the true owner. Now they
say, that it is done against the owners will, not only if it be perforce and
violently taken from him, but also if he know not of the taking it away: or
if he do know, yet if he cannot forbid them: or if he can forbid them, yet
if for some certain causes he will not. Neither is it added without a cause:
that theaft is committed for gain and profits sake. For if one in jest, or
for some other honest cause, take any thing away, he does not thereby deserve
to be called a thief. But of theaft they make two sorts, the manifest theaft,
as that wherewith the thief is taken: and the theaft not manifest, as when
after the deed one is convinced of theaft. Of these there is a large discourse
Digestorum lib. 47. tit. 2. Let us return to ye further opening of our present
proposition.

Thy withholding does hurt another man, when thou in buying and Sund^^^
sorts: (...) done and with^^ding.
selling do use false measure or false weightes. To this rule is referred
unjust and false exchange, I mean exchange of money in bank. Touching these
points we will recite the commandments and sentences only of the Lord our
God, who in Leuiticus sets this for a law: Ye shall do no unrighteousness
in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure: true ballaunces, true
weightes, a true Epha, (that is a busshell or a pecke in measure of dry
things) and a true Hin (that is in measure of liquide things a pint and an
half, or ye twelfth part of a pint and an half) shall ye have. I am the
Lord your God which brought you out of the land of Egypt. In Deuteronomie we
read: Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of weightes, a great and a
small. Neither shall thou have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a
small (to the end that in receiving or buying, thou may use the greater, and
in laying out or selling thou may use ye lesser) but thou shall have a just
and right weight, and a just and right measure shall thou have, that thy days
may be prolonged upon the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee. For all
that do such things, and all that do unrightly, are abominable unto the Lord
thy God. Hereunto appertains that sentence of Salomons in the Proverbs,
where he says: Two manner of weightes, and two manner of measures, both these
are abominable unto the Lord. But what can be heard or thought of more
grievous and horrible, then a man to be abominable in the sight of his God? In
the sixth Chapter of Micheas also the Lord does threaten diverse and grievous
punishementes which he myndeth to lay upon the necks of them that use not
justice in weightes and measures. Why therefore do we not rather fly from
doing wrong and unrighteousness, choosing sooner to be happy than unhappy,
and hearken unto the Lord who says: good measure and pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over, shall they give into your bosom. For with
the same measure that ye mete to other, shall other mete to you again. Let us
be thoroughly persuaded therefore, that riches gotten by craft and theaft can
neither florishe long, nor yet be for our health to enjoy.

Again, other men are endammaged by ye withholding of them, which possess
inheritances due unto other: which break promise and deceive men in
contractes, in bargains and couenauntes: which make a face as though they gave
the thing, which they do either change or retain to them selves by some
colored shifte, or else do give it, when they them selves have marred or
utterly destroyed it. Both the one and the other verily is fraud and guile,
and flatt deceit. But now by the way, mark this manifest and usual point
of Gods just judgment, that wrongful possessours of other men's heritages,
are both short lived, and the vnfortunatest men of all other people. Touching
these wrongful withholders, Solomon pronounces that they shall find no
gain. For gain unjustly gotten, how great soever it be, deserves rather to
be called a loss more truly then a gain.

To this precept do things, that Things found.
are found belong, which thou denyest to the demaunder, as though thou either
have not found them, or else do challenge them to be thine own by law.
Hereunto appertains the pledge or pawn which thou withholdest. Pledges and
pawnes.
A man that takes a journey into a far country, has put thee in trust with
certain silver plate and a pound weight of gold, to keep for him against his
return, because he had a hope that thou would keep them safely: but at his
coming back, when he demands them, thou deniest the thing, in so doing,
thou have stolen it from him, and cracked the credit that thy friend had in
thee, and last of all, thou have doubled the sin. A poor man has guaged to
thee some precious thing that he sets much by, which when he claims
again, with ready monye in hand, to pay thee the sum which he borrowed
upon it, thou denyest him his pledge, thou quarellest with him, and use
subtlety to defraude him of his pawn, in so doing thou stealest it from him.
Moreover, the Lord gave to his people other laws, to this end and effect,
touching the taking of pledges or guages. For in Deuteronomie, he says: No
man shall take the nether, or the upper millstone to pledge: For he has laid
his life to pledge to to thee. For it is all one as if he had said: thou shall
not take that at thy neighbors hand in steed of a pledge, wherewith he
gets his living, and does maintain his family. For thereby thou should
take from him both life and living. And immediately after, he says: When thou
lendest thy brother any thing, thou shall not go into his house to fetch a
pledge from thence: but thou shall stand without, that he, which borrowed it
of thee, may bring it out of doors to thee. The Lord forbids cruelty, and
would not have rich men to be too sharp in ransacking poor men's houses,
nor over curious in taking pledges at poor men's hands. For he adds
afterward: And if it be a poor body, thou shall not sleep with his pledge:
but deliver him the pledge again when the Sun goes down, that he may
sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and that shall be imputed for
righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God.

Lastly, they do most of all endammage their neighbors which The withholding
of laborers hire.
do withholde the laborers wages. The laborers hyre is withheld two sundry
ways. For thou do either never pay it: Or else thou payest it with
grudging and grunting, thou do delay the payment too long, or otherwise
diminishest some part of his hire. But mark now that the name of hirelings
is of ample signification, and is extended to all kinds of artificers. The
common sort of wealthy men have a cast now adays to use the help of
handicraftes men, and bid them keep a reckoning of their hire and wages in
books of accomptes, in the mean while, though they perceive that these poor
men lack money, yet will they not pay them so much as one penye: yea, when
they require the debt that is due, they take them up with bitter words and
send them empty away, till they them selves be disposed to pay. And so these
foolish and wicked wealthy men do not cease to lash out in riot prodigally
the things that are not clearly their own, but which they withholde from
other poor men. Let us hear therefore ye laws and judgments of the Lord our
God touching this horrible abuse and detestable fault. In Deuteronomie we
read: Thou shall not deny, nor withholde the wages of an hired servant, that
is needy and poor, whether he be of thy brethren or of the strangers that
are in thy land and within thy gates: But shall give him his hire the same
day, and let not the Sun go down thereon, for he is needy, and by the
hire he holds his life (that is, he lays the hope of his life therein, as
he that looks to line thereby) lest he cry unto the lord, and it be turned unto
sin to thee. With this law of the Lord do the words of James the Apostle
most fitly agree, where he says: Behold the hyre of laborers, which have
reaped down your fields, which hire is of you kept back by fraud, cries:
and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord
of Sabbath. What can be more terrible to ye hearers ears? the laborers hire
which is withheld does cry, and cries even up into heaven: and that which is
most of all does enter into the ears of the most just, severe and mighty
God? What now may these defrauders look for at Godshand, but heavy
punishment to light upon their cursed heads. Tobie, therefore most rightly,
and briefly concludes this matter, and gives excellent counsel to all
sorts of people, saying: Whosoever works any thing for thee, give him his
hire immediately, and let not thy hired servants wages remain with thee at
all: For in so doing, and fearing God, thou shall have thanks.

Now follows the second member or part of detriment, which does consist in
taking away an other Damage that is don by taking away.
man's goods. And this taking away also is of sundry sorts.

Now the first place of these sorts is attributed to theft it self (of which
we have spoken somewhat before) which theft is committed not in taking away
of money only, but in wares also, and wrongful dealing in other men's
grounds, in removing landmarkes or mere stones, and whatsoever is translated,
denied, or clean taken away against all right, or is maliciously against all
conscience, and consent of the other party, that is, of the true owner,
delayed or foaded off till a longer time than it ought to be. For in the
nineteenth of Leuiticus ye Lord sets this down for a law, and says: Ye
shall not steal, ye shall not lie, no man shall deal with his neighbor
deceiptfully. And Paul to the Ephesians says: Laying lies aside, speak ye
every man the truth to his brother: for we are members one of another. Let
him which stole steal no more, but rather labor with his hands in woorking
the thing that is good, that he may give to him that has need. This may we
extend almost to all the offices and duties of men. For who soever denies
the debte and duty which of right he owes, the same does sin against this
commandment: as for example, if the householder deny the duty that he owes
to his family: again, if the family consume the householders substance, and
do deceive the good man, whose care is bent to maintain his charge, and are
set to undo him, by prodigal spending his money and goods, which they filche
from him privily.

Again, if the Lord or master (although this point may well be referred to
the title of damage that is done by withholding) be too rough to his hyndes or
husbandmen: or if the ploughfolks do idely wast their masters substance, or
slackly look to their tillage and business, or spend in ryott his wealth and
richesse. So then the servant offends against this commandment, if he
does not seek all the means that he may to have a diligent care for his
masters affairs, and faithfully augment his wealth and possessions.

And in like manner do maydeseruauntes, in the duties which they owe, offend
against their mystresses. And therefore Paul having an eye to this precept
gives Titus in charge and says: Exhort servants to be obedient unto their
own masters, and to please them in all things, not aunswering again, nor
pickers, but showing all good faithfulness, that they may adourne the doctrine
of God our Savior in all things.

And like unto this is that which the same Apostle repeateth in the sixth
Chapter to the Ephesians: the 3. to the Colossians, and the 1. to Timothy the
sixth Chapter: for in this commandment, his doctrine of the duties of
masters and servants has a fit place (so far as concerns the
householders riches) and what soever else is like unto this.

To this precept also robbery and Robbery and deceit.
deceit, do fully belong, both which extend far, and contain many
kinds. Fraud is infinite: for the iniquity of men is bottomless, their
crafts are diverse, and of so many sorts, that no one man can number them
all. And robbery is not always armed with force and weapons, but is sometimes
furnished with sleights and colored words: neither do robbers lurk and lay
wait in wooddes and wide open fields alone, but are conversant also in ye
thickest throngs of every good city. Thou take away thy neighbors goods
under the false title and pretense of law. Thou robbest him, I say, while by
thy suite, thy gifts, or other fetches thou do extort from the Judges
corrupted sentence to maintain thy wrongful claim. Some there are, which
under the title of a deed of gift, stick not to wrest whole heritages from
legitimate heirs. These and other shifts, or coosenings like unto these, are
contained partly under robbery, partly under deceit, but altogether and
flatly under plain theeuerie.

Although at dice, players do give Dicing and carding.
their mutual consent to fall to gaming: yet for because, each ones desire is
greedily set to get the others money, and that they make blind Fortune, I
mean the dice or cards to be the diuider of their goods betwirt them.
Therefore are the dice and cards worthily condemned of al good divines. And
Justinian the Emperor, as it is extant Cod. lib. 3. tit. vltimo: having a
regard to his subjects commodity, decreede that it should be lawful for no
man either in public or private houses to play at dice. For although dice
play has been used of great antiquity, yet has it ended and burst out into
tears. For many having lost all the substance that they have, do at the last
in play, break forth to the cursinge and blaspheming of God. Otherwise there
is none so ignorant but knows well enough, that such exercises of the wit or
body as are free from the poisoned desire of filthy gain, whereon, neither
the hurt of our neighbor nor our self does depend, are lawful enough to be
used of Christians.

Usury, is when thou grauntest (...)
to another man the use of thy goods, as of land, houses, money, or any
thing else, whereof thou receiuest some yearly commodity. For thou have a
manor, a farm, lands, meadows, pastures, vineyardes, houses, and monye,
which thou do let out to hire unto another man upon a certain covenant of
gain to return to thee for the use thereof. This bargain, this covenant is
not of it self unlawful, nor yet condemned in the holy Scriptures. And the
very name of usury is not dishonest of it self, the abuse thereof has made it
dishonest, so that not without a cause it is at this day detested of all men.
For usury is in the Scripture condemned, so far as it is joined with
iniquity, and the destruction of our brother or neighbor. For who will forbid
to let out the use of our lands, houses, or monye to hire, that thereby we may
receive some just and lawful commodity? For buying, setting to hyre; and such
like contracts are lawfully allowed us. And as the part of him that gives, is
to do good: so is it the duty of him that takes, not to use a good turn
without all manner of recompense to the hurt and hinderance of him that gives
it: in bestowing of mere benefits, there is another consideration, whereof we
read in the 6. of Luke: If ye lend to them, of whom ye hope to receive again
etc. And the Lawyers do discuss this matter thus: that it is no usury, when
the debtour gives a pension and some yearly fee, in recompense of the money
which he has borrowed, saving the principal sum which he has borrowed whole,
by a covenant that was made before of selling it back again, because the
thing does cease to be lent, which is so granted to another man's use, that
unless the debitour will, the creditour cannot claim the thing, so long as
the debitour pays the pension, for the assured payment whereof, he has put
him self in bonds. For such a crediting is a flatt contract of buying. They
say therefore, that usury is committed in lending alone (which ought to be
without hire) and not in other contractes or bargains. Let them therefore
which deal in these kind of trades, have this always before their eyes, as a
rule to be ledd by. Whatsoever thou would have done to thy self, that do
thou to an other: and whatsoever thou would not have done to thy self, that
do not thou to another. And let them think of those words of the Apostle: Let
no man beguyle his brother in bargaining. I know very well, that touching
money, they are wont to allege, that it endures not as lands and vineyards,
but is consumed and made less with use and tossing from man to man, and that
therefore no commodity ought to be taken for the use thereof. But if a man put
monye into another man's hand, wherewith he buyeth him self a farm, a
manor, lands, or vineyardes, or otherwise occupyeth it to his gain and
profit, I see no cause, why a good Christian and an honest man may not reap
some lawful commodity of the hire of his monye, as well as of the letting or
leasing of his land. It is in the power of him, which so lets out his
monye, with that monye to buy a farm, and so to take the whole gain to him
self: but now we see that in letting the other have it, he grants him the
use of his money, whereby he is a very great gainer. This fellow, to whom
this sum is leant, or otherwise given upon couenauntes of contract, does
with the money get some stay of living, with the revenue whereof, he
nourishes all his family, paying to his creditour the portion agreed on, of
which, when he has once made a full restitution, he makes the living his
own for ever, and acquiteth him self from the yearly pension. In this kind of
couenanting, no man, I think will say, that the poor is oppressed, when the
thing it self does rather cry, that by such usury, the poor is greatly
helped. Usury therefore is forbidden in ye word of God, so far forth, as it
byteth (for here I use the very term of the Scriptures) his neighbor, while
it hinders him, or otherwise undoes him. For thus says the Lord in
Leuiticus: If thy brother be waxen poor and fallen in decay, whether he be a
stranger or indweller, releue him, that he may live with thee. Thou shall take
no usury of him, or more then right: but fear the Lord, that thy brother may
live with thee. Thou shall not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him
thy victuals for increase. I am the Lord your God. Therefore, the Lord
misliketh all arts of covetous and deceiptfull men, wherewith they do not
only exceed measure in exacting usury, but do of purpose let out their money
and substance to hire, that by that occasion they may wipe their debitours of
all that they have.

No man, I think, can in few words express all the wicked fetches of
subtle usurers, they invent such new ones every day. I will therefore
recite here the judgment of the Lord against a few wicked arts and
detestable deeds of usurers in lending, letting, and selling, to the end that
these being once considered, all men may judge and take heed of the like.

The Prophet Amos in the eight Chapter, says: Hear this, O ye that swallowe
up the poor, and make the need^e of the land to fail, saying: after a month
we will sell corn, and at the weeks end we will set forth wheat, we will
make the Epha small and the sickle great, That is the me^sure small, and the
price great.
and falsify the weightes by deceipte, that we may buy the poor for silver,
and the need^e for shoes, and sell the refuse of the wheat. The Lord has
sworn by the excellency of Jacob: surely I will never forgett any of their
works. Shall not the land tremble for this? shall not every one mourn that
dwells therein? And it shall rise up wholly as a sludde etc.

Wherefore, that the wrath of God may be turned away from falling upon commonweals and kingdoms Aga^^ su^^^
for unjust extortion in usury and detestable usurers, it is the part of a
holy magistrate to bridle usurers with upright laws, and according to the
quality of times, places, states, and persons, to appoint a lawful, just and
honest lucre, that usurers may not in lending, lettinge, buying, and selling,
oppress the poor people, but that equity and justice may be kept in all
things. Of this duty of his, the magistrate has a notable example in
Nehemias, suppressing the covetousness, cruelty, and extreme injury of
usurers, and other oppressors of his Jewish commonaltie. It is at large let
down in the fifth Chapter of the History of Nehemias. In this therefore
which I have hitherto alleged, I mean not to father or defend unjust
occupiers, usurers or their insatiable covetousness: but I affirm flatly that
they live of the blood and bowels of their brethren and countriemen: and that
they shall be undoubtedly damned, unless they repent them of their sin and
extortion. The very law of nature does make greatly against them, which I
obiecte here and say unto them: Whatsoever thou would not have done to thy
self, that do not thou to another. The Publicans also came to John, that they
might be baptized of him and said: master, what shall we do? To whom he
said: exact no more then is appointed for you.

These Publicans were such as lived upon the public toll and customs which
they had farmed at the Romans hands for a certain sum of ready menye. Now
he had not these Publicans to leave off their toll gatheringe, but willed them
to be content with their appointed duty. In like manner I urge the same
sentence and say to all usurers and occupyers: Exact no more then is appointed
for you. But if ye want a certain constitution and ordinance set down by the
Magistrate for the gain of your money in every several trade, then let
equity, humanity, and charity, prevail in your minds, and let the common
law sinck into your hearts, which says: what soever ye would that men
should do to you, the same do ye to them. If thine eye, says the Lord, be
single, all thy body is lightsome: but if the light that is in thee be dark
nesse, how great then is that darkness?

Sacrilege is the spoiling of holy things which are consecrated to Sacrilege
God and the use of the Church. For the Church of God has hallowed goods
and richesse, wherewith it does partly maintain sincere dectrine, and the holy
ministry of the church, and partly relieve the needy Sainetes and impotent
brethren. The church also has goods and possessions to keep the places of
prayer, spiritual houses, and hospitalles in due reparations: and lastly, for
the public healpe of all people in common calamities and greenous
afflictions. They therefore are churcherobbers which do convert the church
goods from the lawful and holy purpose, for which they were ordained, into a
profane and godless use, spending them prodigally in hunting, gaye clothing,
superstition, whoorehaunting, diceing, drinking, and excessive banqueting. In
which things Bishops and Magistrates of these days do greatly offend. And
it cannot otherwise be, but that some great misfortune, and more calamities
than one must needs follow that foul abuse of ecclesiastical richesse and
spiritual goods. For as Christ our Lord, the very son of God, is spoiled
and defrauded in the poor and needy: so doctrine and godliness come to an
end, honest studies do utterly decay, the sheep of Christ are altogether
destitute of good and faithful sheepeheardes, and are leaft for a pray to
ravening wolves and merciless robbers. But yet we must have a regard not to
account in the number of churcherobbers such heads and overseers of holy
religion, as some Kings of Judah were, but Ezechias especially, and many other
Bishops and pastors of the primitive church, who in many troublesome broils,
when either wars did waste their countries and commonweals, or else, when
hunger or some other public calamity did oppress and pinch their silly
countriemen, did not stick to bestow the church goods liberally, and to
empty the treasure of the hallowed money, that thereby they might do the
oppressed some good. But they had undoubtedly been wrongful churcherobbers,
if they to spare money and others vessels which are without life, would not
have redeemed living creatures, their countriemen from death and penury.

There is an excellent place of this matter in Saint Ambrose, Officiorum lib.
2. Cap. 28. There are also notable examples hereof in the Ecclesiastical
history.

Moreover, in the number of Churcherobbers, divines account Simoniaks
Simoniakes, that is, Merchauntes, I mean, buyers and sellers of spiritual
and Ecclesiastical dignities. For such an one is Simon Magus their graunde
Patriarche reported to have been in the Acts of the Apostles. In the civil
law whosoever went about with privy gifts to Ambition.
buy the voice of any man to speak on his side, when public offices or
dignities were for to be bestowed, he was guyltie of ambition, and beside the
shame and open infamy was compelled to pay an hundred Crowns for his offense.
But because this belonges not to sacrilege, we let it pass, and return to
our matter.

They are churcherobbers, whosoever either do not pay at all, or else do pay
unwillingly the goods that are due to the church, I mean, their tithes, and
yearly revenues. It is to be seen in the Scriptures, how terribly the
Prophets do threaten churcherobbers. Haggeus testified, that the ground
brought forth so ill and little fruit for nothing else, but forbecause the
people did not truly pay that, which of duty they ought to the temple. In
Malachie, God promises the people to make their ground fruitful, if they
will pay liberally the stipendes and tributes due to the temple. Now the
ministers of the churches may use those revenues or stipendes by as good law
and right, as they that use the profit of the ground, which they them selves
have husbanded. For so does the Lord expressly teach them in the 18. of the
book of Numbers, wherewithal Paul's saying agreeeth in the ninth Chapter of
his first Epistle to the Corinthians. And the Lord Jesus him self also gave
alms to the poor of the stipend, which he had, as it is to be seen in the
thirteenth Chapter of Saint John's Gospel. Moreover, beggars commit
sacrilege, who abuse the name of Christ, and make their poverty a cloak to
keep them idle still. The Apostle commands Timothy not to cherishe such
idle hypocrites and wandering vacabondes with the alms and expenses of the
churche-goods. But now the greatest sacrilege of all, is, if a man translate
the glory of God the creator unto a creature.

There is a kind of theaft called Peculatus, which is committed in filching
(...)
the common treasure, or purloyning away the princes substance. This kind of
robbery breeds every hour new exactions, and gives wicked magistrates
good cause and fit opportunity to poll the poor co^monaltie. Of this sort of
robbers did Cato happily speak, when he said: Private thieves do lead their
lives in chains and fetters, but public thieves in gold and purple. Under
this title of robbery are all those contained, which either do not pay at all,
or else pay with ill will the tributes and taxes that are due to their
magistrates. Lastly all they are compted faulty in this kind of theeuerie,
who soever do abuse the public wealth or treasure of the common weal.

Other some there are, that take up children, whom they know very (...)
well, and sell them to other, thereby to get advantage, or else do steal
away other men's servants. This kind of theaft the Lawyers call Plagium.
And of this offense are those people guyltie, which by evil whispering,
persuasion, and seditious doctrine do draw servant and handmaydes from
obedience to their masters, and children from doing reverence and duty to
their parents. And when Capitaines that are hired of strange Princes, to serve
for money in foreign wars, do against ye ^his is (...) in no ^ace so ^uch as
in ^^llingers ^^n coun^^e, where ^e (...) who ^rue all ^^en for ^oney do
^actise it ^^ily.
parents will and knowledge, carrye away whole bands of silly young men,
whom they entice with many fair promises, and entrap with sundry sleights,
leading them to wars wherein they perish and never return to their friends
again. Such captains, I say, are to be reckoned in the number of
menstealers. This offense of old was punished by death, as it is evident in the
21. of Exodus, and in the law of Constantine, which is to be seen. Cod. lib.
9. tit. 20.

An other sort of thieves there is, which we call felones, and those be ^bigei.
they which steal and drive away other men's cattle. In this order of thieves
are those people placed which do misuse the cattle that is lent them: and they
also, which when they may, will not help another man's cattle that is in
ieopardie. For the Lord in the law commanded to bring back that which goes
astraye, and to restore it to the right owner.

Thus much hitherto have I spoken, my brethren, touching the sundry kinds of
theaft, of the just and lawful getting of goods, and also of the proper owning
of peculiar richesse.

Of the lawful use of earthly goods: that is, how we may rightly possess and
lawfully spend the wealth that is rightly and justly gotten: Of restitution
and alms deeds.
The Second Sermon.
I Did in my last Sermon (dearly beloved) declare unto you, by what means
goods are rightly gotten, and how many kinds of theaftes there be, and sundry
sorts of getting wealth unlawfully: there is yet behind an other treatise for
me to add, and therein to teach you, what is the true use of goods rightly
gotten, and how we may lawfully possess them, and justly spend and dispose
them in this transitory life. For justice does not only not descaude any man,
but does so much as it may endeavor it self to do good to al men. Neither is
it enough for a godly man not (...), unless also he do good to all that he
can. And in this point do many men sin, while they are persuaded that they
have done all the duty that they owe, if they hurt no man, and if they
possess that which they have without trouble to any man, although in the
mean while they have no regard whether they help or do good to any man, or
no. And he sins as greatly in the sight of the Lord, which does not use
rightly goods justly gotten, as he that has heaped up wealth in wickedness,
and naughty means. I will tell you therefore, so far as God shall give me
grace, how and in what sort godly men may holily possess and dispose these
earthly goods.

First of all, that the use of worldly wealth may be healthful to the owner,
holy men have a diligent care that nothing of another man's Nothing ^f
another man's must ^e posses^ed.
remain in their possession: that is, they do carefully separate wealth
rightly come by, from unjust gotten goods, and do fathfully restore what
soever they find, in that which they have, to belong of right unto other men.
For they are thoroughly persuaded and do verily believe that by this means the
wealth that is left them, although by restitution it be somewhat diminished,
will yet notwithstanding prosper the better, endure the longer, and be far
more fruitful unto them.

Now, this restitution is flatly commanded and also very necessary
Restitutio^ is necessary.
to be put in practice. For the Lord in the law does by sundry means and that
very carefully give charge of it too, as is to be seen in the 22. of Exodus.
Moreover, so often as the just Exodus 62.
and holy commandment of God was through the covetousness and wickedness
of mankind cast off and neglected, the Lord raised up grievous and almost
unspeakable evils, against the contemners thereof, and scattered abroad the
unjust gotten goods, by wars, mishaps, and diverse calamities. For the Prophet
Esaias cries, saying: The Lord shall enter Esai. 3.
into judgment with the elders and princes of his people, and shall say unto
them: It is ye that have burnt up my vineyarde, the spoil of the poor is in
your houses. And Amos in the third Chapter of his prophecy cries: They
stoare up treasures in their palaces by violence and robbery. Therefore thus
says the Lord God: miseries shall invade thee on every side of the land, and
the enemies shall bring down thy strength or richesse from thee, and thy
palaces shall be spoiled. We read therefore in the Gospel, that Zacheus, of (...)
his own accord, promised restitution fourefolde double, that is, a full and
absolute recompense of whatsoever he had taken wrongfully away, and it is
assuredly certain, that he performed that promise. For he understood by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, that a restitution of his ill gotten goods was
especially necessary, and that he should never be happy until he had made a
full amends for all his wrongful dealings. Very rightly therefore said Saint
Augustine in his 54. Epistle to Macedonius, where he writes: If, when thou
may, thou do not restore that which thou have of another man's goods,
then is not repentance truly performed, but falsely fained: but if repentance
be truly taken, then is not sin forgiven, unless restitution be made of
that, which was taken away, but as I said, when it may be restored.

But touching the time when restitution (...) to be (...)
ought to be made, the example of Zacheus teaches us, who, so soon as he was
received into the favor of Christ, and did understand the works of truth
and equity, did immediately promise restitution, and out of hand perform the
same. Wherefore, we must not foad off from day to day to make restitution. No
man has need to double his offense. For thou need not by thy morrow and
ouermorrowe delays to augment his discommoditie and hinderance any longer,
from whom thou have by thy subtle means and wicked violence, wrested the
goods that he has, considering yt he to his loss has lacked them long
enough, and been without them too too long God wott. If thou demaundest, To
whom thou ought to make restitution? I answer To whom ^estitution ^^ to
be ^ade.
to him from whom thou tookest it, if thou know from whom thou have had it,
and who it is whom thou haste defrauded. But by that means, say thou, I
shall bring me self into obloquie and infamy. I bidd thee not do so. But if
thou did invent a means to take it, then find out some handsome way to
restore it again, whereby thou may escape and not incur the noate of
infamy. And pray to the Lord that he will vouchsafe to show thee a ready
way and apt for to accomplish the thing that thou mindest. If thou meanest
in good sadness to make true restitution, thou shalt undoubtedly find a way
to do it, without reproache and obloquie. But if thou do but dally and
jest with the Lord, thou will not be without a thousand excuses, the best
and soundest whereof will never set thy conscience at quiet liberty. Neither
is God mocked. I cannot tell, say thou, from whom I have taken it, and
therefore I know not to whom I should restoare it. If in very deed thou
know not from whom thou have taken it, then have thou the poor and needy
on whom to bestow it. To these thou ought to deal thy unjust gotten
goods, and not to superstition or the ministers thereof.

Now let every one make restitution ^owe ^^ch (...) one ^^ght to (...).
of so much, as he has taken away, or at least of so much as he is able to
restoare. For many have spente and so prodigally wasted other men's goods,
that they are not able to make restitution of any thing again. Let such
fellows acknowledge their fault and repent their folly from the bottom of
their hearts. And if it happen at any time afterward that they come by goods,
then let them be so much more liberal of their own, as before they were
prodigal in spending other men's.

But if all the richesse which thou possessest be other men's goods, and
gotten of thee by theft and robbery, so that if thou madeste a full
restitution, there should no penny be left for thee, but that thou must
needs go beg, then art thou verily hard bestedde, and in too woeful a
taking, yea thou art madd and far beside thee self if thou will not stick,
but still go on to paint thy pride and maynteyne a port with other men's pence,
and satisfy thy lust in the bowels, blood, and sweat of poor men's brows.
Why do thou not rather abase thee self to poverty, and use thy unjust
gotten goods, as needy people use their alms? For thou lyuest of that that
should be the poores. Good counsel or advise.
Therefore lay down thy pride, and forsake thy ruffling riott. Consider with
thee self who thou art and whereupon thou lyueste. And still do thy endeavor
to make restitucion, so far as thou canste, and let it grieve thee to see
thee self not able to restoare the whoale again. If it be not a grief to
thee for a time to suffer poverty, to labor and faithfully to exercise some
honest occupacion, and to train up thy children leading them as it were by the
hand to work, then thou shall not want whereon to live, although thou
restoarest all whatsoever thou have of other men's goods. But there is very
small and almost no faith at all in many men, whereby it comes to pass that
very few or none can be persuaded, to make true restitu^ion. To this I add
(before I go any further) that they ought especially to think of a
restitution, which have with evil words corrupted y^ minds of simple souls,
with privy backbyting raised slanders, on other men, or with perverse
counsel stirred up the mightier men against the weaker sort. For these
things do pass and are far above all earthly richesse.

Thus much have I said hitherto touching Ample or large discourses have been
made touching restitution.
restitution, of which other men have left very ample discourses. I for my part
do see that to a godly mind this work of restitution is short and plain
enough, and therefore have I spoken of it so shortly as I have. For a godly and
well disposed man does with all his heart desire and seek to obey the law of
God, and therefore by calling to God for aid he shall easily find a way to
work justice and equity. As for those whose desire is rather to seem just
men, than to be just in deed, and do love this world more than it becomes
them to do, they with their over many questions, and innumerable Perchaunces
and Put cases do make the treatise of restitution so tedious and intricate,
that no man shall ever be able to make it so plain, that they will understand
it. I will not therefore aunsweare them any more, but only warn them to
examine their own conscience, and see what that does bid them do. Now I
would have that conscience of theirs to be settled in, and be mindful of the
general law, which says: Whatsoever thou would have done to thee self,
that do thou to another: and whatsoever thou would not have done to the
self, that do not thou to an other.

After this now I will somewhat We must not set ou^ minds on riches.
freely discourse upon the just possessing, using or disposing of well gotten
earthly substance. First of all no man must put any confidence in richesse,
which are in deed things transitory and do quickly decay: we must not
settle our minds upon, nor be in love with them, but by all means take heed
that they drive us not to idolatry, nor hinder ye course that we have to
pass. Heaven is the goal whereat we run. Here again we must all give ear
to the divine and heavenly words uttered by the Prophet David who said: Put
your trust in God always, power out your hearts before (...)
him, for God is our refuge: As for the children of men, they be but vain: the
children of me^ are deceitful upon the weightes, they are altogether lighter
than vanity it self. Trust not in wrong and robbery, give not your selves
to vanity: if riches increase, set not your hearts upon them. The Apostle
Paul being endued with the same spirit, bids us to use the world and
worldly things as though we used them not Again, he calls covetousness
the worshipping of idols: and charge rich men not to put their trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living god, who ministers to all creatures
living sufficiently enough. And therefore the Lord in the Gospel, forbids
to heap up treasures upon earth. (...)


Now on the other side, we are not bidden by the Apostles to spend our goods
prodigally in riot and wantonness. For we may not abuse the wealth that the
Lord has lent us, in pride and luxury, as many do, who lash out al in
dieing, sumptuous building, straung clothiong, excessive drinking, and over
deyntie banqueting. The end and destruction of such kind of people the Lord
does very finely, though not without terror to them that hear it, set down
in the parable of the rich glutton, who after his delicate fare and coastly
apparel, was after this life tormented in hell with unspeakable thirste, and
toasted there with unquenchable fire. Therefore these temporal goods must be
rightly, holilie, and moderately used, without excess.

Every man must acknowledge these terrestrial goods to be ye mere ^iches are
^^e gift of ^od for which he ^ust be ^^anked
and free gifts of our bountiful and heavenly father, and not to be given for
our deserts, or gotten by our might. For we have of Gods liberality all
things necessary to mainteyne our lives. It is the Lord which blesses and
does prosper our labor. Finally they are not evil but the good gifts of God
which he gives for the maintenance of our lives, and not to our destruction:
the fault is in our selves that riches are a snare to bring many men to evil
ends. Moreover ye Lord himself requires and in his word commands us, to
be thanckful unto him for his good benefits bestowed on us, to use them with
thanks giving, to praise his name for all things, and to rejoice in his
fatherly goodness showed unto us. For thus does Moses the servant of God in
Deuteronomie charge the Israelites: When thou have eaten therefore and filled
thee self, then thancke the Lord thy God in that good land which he has
given thee. Beware that thou forgett not the Lord thy God, that thou would
not keep his commandments, his laws, and ordinances, which I command thee
this day: yea, and when thou have eaten and filled thee self, and have built
goodly houses and dwell therein: and when thy beasts, and thy sheep are
waxen many, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is
increased: then beware least thine heart rise, and thou forgett the Lord thy
God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and from the house of
bondage. Say not then in thine heart, my power and the might of mine own hand,
has prepared me this abundance. Remember the Lord thy GOD: for it is he
that gives thee power to get substance etc.

Moreover Paul the Apostle says, that all the creatures of God are good,
created to the good and preservation of us men, and bids us use them with
the fear of God and giving of thanckes. And again, Whether ye eat or
drink or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And in another place:
Let your manners be far from covetousness, and be content with the things
that ye have. For he has said, I do not forsake nor leave thee, so that we
may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man can do unto
me.

Let earthly goods also serve our necessity. Now necessity requires Goods
serve to supply our necessity.
a commodious dwelling place, so much victuals as are sufficient: comely
apparel, and honest company keeping with our neighbors and equals. Let
every man measure and esteem these circumstaunces, first by his own person,
then by his family or household. For an householder must warely provide and
foresee that no necessary thing be wanting in his family. Of this care of
the househoulder, there are sundry testimonies of Scripture extant, but
especially that of Saint Paul, in the fifth Chapter of his first Epistle to
Timothy. And here note that by necessity all things are mente which the body
or life of man does necessarily require and stand in need of, and finally
whatsoever the honesty and beseeming of every man does crave or demand. And
thus far verily and to this end or purpose it is lawful for any man to lay
somewhat up in stoare against years to come. The man, whose charge is much in
keeping a great house, has need of the more to maintain it withal, and he
whose family is not so big needs so much the less, as his house is ye
smaller. And one state of life and a greater port becomes a magistrate, when
an other countenance and a lower sail beseems a private person. But in
these cases let every man consider what necessity requires, not what lust and
riotting will egg him unto. Let him think with himself what is seemly and
unseemly for one of his degree.

And yet we do not in this treatise make so stricte a definition of
necessity Necessity excludes not allowed pleasure.
as that thereby we do utterly condemn all pleasure and moderate liberty for
sensuality and lururie. For I know that God has granted and given to man,
not only the use of necessity, I mean the use of those things, which we as
men cannot be without, but also does allow him all moderate pleasure
wherewithal to delight him. Let no man therefore make scruple of conscience in
the sweet and pleasant use of earthly goods, as though with that sweet
pleasure which he enjoys, he sinned against God, but let him which makes
conscience, make it rather in the just and lawful use of those terrestrial
riches. For the Lord has in no place forbidden mirth, joy, and the sweet use
of wealth, so far forth that nothing be done indecently, unthankfully, or
unrighteously. For the Prophet Jeremy alluding to yt promises of Gods law
contained in the 26. of Leuiticus, and the 28. of Deuteronomie says: They
shall come and rejoice in Sion, and shall have plenteousnes of goods which the
Lord shall give them, namely, in wheat, wine, oil, young sheep and calves,
and their soul shall be as a well watered gardeine, for they shall no more be
sorrowful. Then shall the maid rejoice in the dance, yea both young and old
folks: For I will turn their sorrow into gladness, and will comfort them and
make them merry. I will make drunken the hearts of the priests with fat,
and my people shall be filled with my goodness, says the Lord. Jeremy 31.
Moreover in the 4. Chapter of the third book of kings we read: And under
Solomon they increased and were many in number as the sand of the sea, eating
and drinking, and making merry. Again in the 8. Chap. of the same book we
find: And Solomon made a solemn feast and al Israel with him, a very great
congregation, which came together out from among all the people, even from the
entering in of Hemath unto the river of Egypt, before the Lord seven days and
seven days, that is 14. days in all. Afterward he sent away the people, and
they thanked the king, and went unto their tents very joyfully, and with glad
hearts, because of all the goodness that the Lord had done for David his
servant, and for Israel his people. Like unto this is that which we read in
the 8. Chap. of Nehemias in these words: And Esdras with the Levites said to
all the people which was sad and sorrowful, This day is holy unto the Lord
your God, be not ye sorry, and weep ye not, but go your way to eat the fat,
and drink the sweet and send part unto them that have not etc.

And the Lord verily does not require us men to be without all sense and
feeling of those pleasures which he of his grace has given us to enjoy,
neither would he have us to be al together benumbed like blocks and stocks
and senseless stones. For he himself has graffed in us al ye sense and
feeling of good and evil, of sweet and sour. And the same our God and maker
has of his eternal goodness and wisdom, ordained a certain natural
excellency in his creatures, and has adourned them and made them so
delectable, that we may delight in and desire them, yea and that more is, our
God has planted in them a nourishing force and virtue to cherish us men, and
to keep our bodies in fair and good liking. For David says, And (he makes
grow out of the earth) wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make
him have a cheerful countenance, and bread to strengthen man's heart. The trees
of the Lord also are full of sapp, wherein the birds make their nestes and
sing. etc. Moreover it is reported that Jacob the Patriarch did drink to
drunkenness, and of Joseph and his brethrene the Scripture says: The common
english translation has, they were made mer^ie.
and in drinking with him they were made drunken with wine. Now no man will
take this drunckennesse of theirs for that excessive bibbing, which the holy
scripture does every where condemn, but for a certain sweet and pleasant
measure in drinking, wherewith being once satisfied, they were made the
merrier. For that madd kind of drunkenness bereaues the senses and is so far
from causing men to be iocund and merry, that clean contrariwise it makes
them wayward, uncivil, out of order, beastly, swinelike and filthy. A like
phrase of speech uses Haggeus the Prophet where he says: Consider your own
ways in your hearts, ye sow much, but ye bring little in, ye eat, but ye have
not enoughe, ye drink, but not unto drunkenness: that is, not unto sweet and
pleasant sufficiency, that being filled and iocund therewith, ye need desire
no more, but for that plenty give thanks to ye Lord your good benefac^our for
bestowing it on you. This do I somewhat more largely declare, because of the
Anabaptists and certain senseless Stoickes, and other new sprung up
hypocrites the Carthusian Monks, who as they go about to make men mere
blocks, so do they with most tragical outcries, condemn utterly all
allowable pleasure and laweful delights. They to color and commend their odd
opinion to the ears of men, abuse many places of y^ sacred Scriptures: Woe
(say they) to you which now are full, and do laughe now, for the time will
come, when ye shall hunger and weep: When as in deed this and such like
sayings were uttered of God, against the wicked and such as do unthankfully
abuse the benefits and creatures of their good God. And therefore for a
conclusion of that, which I have hitherto said, I ad this, that godly men must
still take careful heed, that they let not loose ye reins to lust, and so
exceed the golden mean. For mean and measure in these allowed plesures also
is liked and looked for as well as in other things. Furthermore, let goods and
earthly substance, serve to do honor, and riches must serve to do honor,
and show courteous behavior between man and man.
show curteise humanity in one man to an other. For we do of duty owe honor
and humanity to our kinsfolks and alliance, our friends and acquaintance,
our countriemen and strangers. For we must not only do good to them which are
familiar with us, but to them also whom we did never see before, in keeping
hospitality for wayfaring strangers, so far as our substance will stretch, to
mainteyne it. For if otherwise thy wealth be so slender, as that it will do no
more but mainteyne thine own house and family, no parcel of Gods law does
bind or bid thee to distribute to other men the wealth, which thou thee self
do need as much or more then they. It is sufficient for thee to provide
that they of thine own household be not a burden to other men's backs. So
then the man whose wealth is small, is not compelled to spend that little, which
he has in doing honor or showing courtesy to other men. It is enoughe for
him to bear with a valiant heart his own hard hap, and to take heed that
his poverty procure him not to offend against right and honesty.

Let those who are indifferently stoared, and richer men who have wealth at
will, be courteous and liberal to enterteyne strangers with francke
hospitality. Let their minds be set to use liberality to their own praise
and honesty, and not given to filthy greediness, and dishonest sparing of
every odd halfpenie. For some thou shall find, who though they be
indifferently well stoared with wealth and possessions, are yet not
withstanding so whoalie given over to the gathering of more, that neither for
their own honesties sake, nor for any show of courtesy they will once
bestow a dodkin upon any man whatsoever, be he their own countrieman, or a
stranger unknown. These kind of fellows are always chambered, and keep
themselves cloase in secreate counting houses, their baggs are their pillowes
whereon they sleep, and dream of their ruddockes, they are not seen to
stir abroad, least peradventure occasion should be offered them to give
entertainment or to show some civility to aliaunts and strangers. The
Scripture does give a far better report of the most holy (...)
and famous Patriarchs our graund predecessors.

Lot sat in the gates of Sodom to wait for strangers and wayfaring men, to
the end he might take them hoame to his house, and give them enterteynment so
well as he could. And if it fell out that he met with a stranger, he did
not desire him hoame to his house for fashions sake only, that is, with fainte
or feigned words, but he used in earneste all the means he could to compel
him perforce to take up his Inn and lodge with him that night. Of our father
Abraham ye read in Genesis, that in the very heat of the day, as he sat in
the door of his tent, he espied three men that were travelers, whom at the
first sight, although he knew them not, he enterteyned very lovingly and
badd them welcome heartily. For he stays not to look when they should come
and request to refreshe themselves with him, but starteth up and meets them
before they come to the door of his tent, where he himself preuenteth them
in speaking first unto them, and when he had courteously after his country
manner with obeysaunce saluted them, he bids them very lovingly hoame to
his house and says: I beseech thee my Lord if I may find favor in thy sight,
pass not away (I pray thee) from thy servant.

Lo here he calls a traveler and a stranger too, by the name of ^e say
in ^nglish (...).
Lord (even as we Germans in the enterteyning of strangers are wont to say:
Sind mir Got wol kommen, lieben herren vnd gouten friind.) And although he
were in the land, where he dwelt, a man of high authority and very great
name, yet notwithstanding he did, as it were, forget himself and say: Pass
not, I pray thee, away from thy servant. He calls himself a servant of
strangers. He goes on moreover and says: Let a little water be fet and wash
your feet and refresh your selves under the tree. And I will fet a morsel of
bread to comfort your hearts, and then shall ye go on your way. In these
few words he conteyneth in a manner all the points of civil courtesy.
Neither did Abraham use these words to make a show only of bounteous
liberality: but when he had by entreatie requested them to stay and by their
grant obtained his desire, he bestirreth his stumpes to accomplish in
deeds, the thing that he had promised, he makes have to Sara which was in
the tent and says: Make ready at once three measures of fine meal, kneade
it, and (...) peckes
make cakes. The Scripture yet adds further this cause: And Abraham running
unto his beasts caught a calfe tender and good, and gave it to a young man,
which hasted and made it ready at once. And he took butter and milk and the
calfe which he had prepared, and set it before them. and stood himself with
them: That is, did himself serve them, as they ate under the tree. This is
wonderful verily, and to be thought on deeply. Those goods were well and
woorthily bestowed upon so bountiful, liberal, and courteous a man as
Abraham was, which knew how to use his wealth so honestly and with so
commendable courtesy.

Neither was he alone in all his house so francke and liberal, as his wife
and family were readily given and very willing to put that holy exercise in
ure and practice. All things therefore were ready with a trice. In making
preparation also no diligence was wantinge, choice was made of all things, for
riffe raffe and refuse geere was not served to these strangers, but the best
and likelyeste of all that was found. The good man himself takes pains like
a servant. He himself brings in his country fare, which far does
excel all costly cates, and princelike dishes, and sets his guestes to
meat with butter and milk, and serves ye last course with veale well fedd
and housewife like dressed. Neither was he content with this courtesy and
enterteynemente, but humbled himself further yet, and waited at the Table,
while his guestes were at meat.

The table, lo, was served by him, which had those great and ample promises
made him by GOD, which is the father of all the faithful, which is the root
and graundsyre of Christ our Lord, which was the friend of God, and
confederate to puissaunte kings, being himself the most honorable Prince in
all the land, as he that had in war overcome and vanquished four of the
mightieste kings of all the East, and brought them back again to slavery
and bondage, delivering his people whom they had taken captive.

This excellent and worthy man, I say, may well be a pattern for all wealthy
men to follow in bestowing honor, courtesy, and hospitality upon
strangers and men unknown. For lastly beside his rare and seldom seen
hospitality, he showed moreover this point of courtesy, that, when they rose
from meat, he bare them company some part of the way. Let our wealthy
pinchpence therefore at the last be ashamed of, and leave their niggish lives
and insatiable covetousness. What pleasure I pray you have they of their
riches? to whom do they good? whom do they honor with their close kept
coin? Or what honor or honesty does their money procure or get them while
they live among men? Why do not the wiser sort of wealthy men rather leave
this crew of miserable wretches, and hearken to the Apostles words who says:
Remember to keep hospitality: for by that means many have lodged Angels
unwittingly and unawares. And verily he speaks there of Lot and Abraham.
Neither is it to be doubted, but that we interteyne the very Angels of God,
and Christ himself, as often as we show courtesy and hospitality to good
and godly mortal men.

Lastly, let the goods of wealthy men serve, not to the interteynment Goods
must serve to relief the poor
of men of credit only, but to the relief also of poor and needy
crea^^res. For that whoalsome saying of Paul must be beaten into their heads:
Charge them that are rich, that they do good, that they be rich in good
works, that they be ready to give, glad to distribute, laying up in stoare
for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay
hold upon eternal life. With this doctrine of the Apostle does the Prophet
Esaie very well agree, where he says touching Tire: Their occupying also and
their wares shall be holy unto the Lord: their gaynes shall not be laid up
nor kept in stoare, but it shall be theirs that dwell before the Lord, that they
may eat enough and have clothing sufficient. Lo, here Esaias teaches us
the means to lay up treasure that ever shall endure.

Moreover, in the sixth Chapter of Matthewe, the very same is repeated that
was spoken of before. Let every one also call to his memory the other
wholesome sentences of the lord his God, to stir him up to the giving of alms.
In Deuteronomie Moses says: Beware that thou harden not thine heart, nor shutt
too thine hand from thy needy brother: but open thine hand liberally unto
him. Thou shall give him, and let it not grieve thine heart to give unto him:
because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall enrich and bless thee in
all thy works, and in all thou put thine hand unto. The Lord shall never
be without poor, and therefore I commau^de thee, saying, Open thine hand
liberally unto thy brother, that is poor and needy in the land. In the
Psalms we find: A good man is merciful and le^deth, and guides his words
with discretion. He dispearseth abroad, and gives to the poor: his
righteousness remains for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor. Solomon
also says: Let mercy or weldoing and faithfulness never part from thee, bind
them about thy neck, and write them in the tables of thine heart, so shall thou
find favor and good estimation in the sight of God and men. Again, Honor
the Lord with thy substance, and of the firstlinges of all thine increase give
to the poor: So shall thy barnes be filled with ple^nteousnes, and thy presses
shall flow over with sweet wine. And again, Whosoever stops his ear at
the cry of the poor, he shall cry himself and not be heard. With these in
all points do the sayings of the Apostles and Enangelistes plainly agree.
Give to every one that asks of thee. Again, Verily I say unto you, in as
much as ye have showed mercy to the least of these my brethren, ye have
showed it to me. Which sentence surely is worthy to be noted and deeply
printed in the hearts of all Christians. For if the Lord Jesus reputeth that
to be bestowed on himself, which thou bestowest on the poor: then
undoubtedly he thincketh himself neglected and despised of thee, so often as
thou neglectest or despisest the needy.

This is (undoubtedly) true and most surely certain. For the Lord and judge of
all people assures us by promise, that at the end of the world in that last
judgment, he will give sentence in this manner and order: Come ye blessed of my
father, possess the kingdom etc. For I was hungry and ye gave me meat, I
was thirsty and ye gave me drink: And so forward as is to be seen in the
25. Chapter of Saint Matthewes Gospel. Hereunto also belongs the words
of Saint John the Apostle where he says: Whosoever has this worlds good and
sees his brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him.

And from hence undoubtedly did first arise the common voice of them of old
which were wo^t to say: If thou see a needy body die with hunger, and do
not help him while thou may, thou have killed him, and given consent unto
his death. Let him therefore which has stoare of earthly goods, know for a
surety and in his heart be thoroughly persuaded, that he is bound
especially to do good to the needy.

Moreover, let him that is wealthy To whom we must do good.
do good to all men so near as he can. For the Lord says: Give to every
one that asks of thee.

And Tobias gives his son this lesson saying: Turn not thy face from any
poor man. But if thou canste not thoroughe lack of ability do good to all
men, then succor them chieslye whom thou perceyueste to be godly disposed,
and yet pinched with penury. For S. Paul says, Let us do good to all men,
but to them especially that are of the household of faith. Let us therefore
aid, succor, and relieve fatherless children and poor widows, old men and
impotent people, those that are afflicted and persecuted for the profession of
the truth, and such as are oppressed with any misery and calamity. Let us
further and help forward good and holy learning, and all the woorshippers
and true ministers of God, that live in want and scarsitie. Finally, let us
relieve strangers, and whom so ever else we may.

Now our duty is to aid and stand them in steed, with counsel, How we
ought to do good.
comfort, help, money, meat, drink, lodging, raiment, commendations, and
with all things else, wherein we perceive that they lack our helping hand.
Touching which, I spoke somewhat in the tenth sermon of the first Decade. We
must also succor them readily, with a willing heart and a cheerful mind. For
God requires a cheerful giver. And in helping them let us do liberally. For
Tobias says: Be merciful after thy power, if thou How far we must do good.
have much give plenteousely, if thou have little, do thy diligence, gladly to
give of that little: For in so doing, the Lord shall bless both thee and
thine.

Thus much, my brethren, have I hitherto said, touching the lawful use of
earthly goods. God grant that every one of you may print these sayings in his
heart, and put in practice this holy work: let us pray to the Lord that he
will vouchesafe so to direct us in his ways, that, for y^ getting of those
transitory goods, we loose not the everlasting treasure of his heavenly
kingdom.

Of the patient bearing and abiding of sundry calamities and miseries: and
also of the hoape and manifold consolation of the faithful.
The third Sermon.
I Shall not do amiss, I think, my reverend brethren, if to the treatise
which I have already made of earthly richesse, and of the use and abuse of the
same, I do here also add a discourse of the diverse calamities, wherewith man,
so long as he lives in this frail flesh, is continually vexed and daily
afflicted. For since that many men do either loose their temporal goods, or
else can by no means get them, which are the causes why they be oppressed
with penury and needinesse, it cannot be but profitable and very necessary
too for every godly man to know out of the word of God the very reason and
ground of those calamities, and of his consolation in his miseries, lest being
swallowed up of too great sorrow, and entangled in utter desperation, he give
him self over to be Satan's bondslaue. Now, this treatise serves for the
whole life of man. For I mean not to speak of any one calamity alone, as of
poverty or penury, but generally of all the miseries that happen to man.
Verily, since man is borne to grief and misery, as birds to flying, and
fishes to swimming, his life can never possibly be either sweet or quiet,
unless he know the manner and reason of his calamity. And if so be he know
the reason thereof religiously taken and derived out of the word of God, then
his life cannot choose but be sweet and quiet. Howsoever otherwise it seem to
be most bitter and intolerable. The mind of man verily is sorely afflicted
and grievously tormented with lamentable miseries, but ye same on the other
side is sweetly eased and mightily vpholden by the true knowledge of those
miseries and holy consolations, derived and taken out of ye word of God.

First of all it is requisite to lay before our eyes and reckon up the several
The kinds of calamities.
kinds and especial sorts of mortal men's calamities. The evils verily are
innumerable which daily fall upon our necks, but those which do most usually
happen, are the plague or pestilence, sundry and infinite diseases, death it
self, and the fear of death, whose terror to some is far more grievous
then death can be. To these be added the death and destruction of most notable
men, or such of whom we make most account, robberies, oppressions, endless
ill chances, poverty, beggarie, lack of friends, infamy, banishment,
persecution, imprisonment, enforced torments, and exquisite punishments of
sundry sorts and terrible to thinck on, unseasonable and tempestuous weather,
barrenness, dearth, froast, hayle, deluges, earthquakes, the sinking of
cities, the spoiling of feelds, the burning of houses, the ruin of buyldings,
hatred, factions, privy grudges, treasons, rebellions, wars, slaughters,
captivity, cruelty of enemies, and tyranny: also the lack of children, or
troubles, cares, and hellish lives by the matching of unmeet mates in
wedlock, by children naughtily disposed, maliciously bent, disobedient and
unthankful to father and mother, and lastly care and continual grief in
sundry sorts for sundry things which never cease to vex our minds. For no
man can in never so long a beadrowe reckon up all ye evils, whereunto miserable
mankind is woefully endaungered and every moment tormented. New miseries rise
up every day, of which our elders did never hear. And they are appointed to
be fealt and suffered of us, who with our new and never heard of sins, do
daily deserve new and never seen punishments, when as otherwise the miseries,
which our forefathers fealt, had been enough and sufficient to have plagued us
all.

But now with these evils, as well The good and evil are afflicted with
calamities.
the good and godly worshippers of God, as the wicked contemners of his name
are troubled and kept in ure: yea, the Saints are through al their life time
afflicted and vexed, when as contrarily the wicked abound with all kinds of
joy and delightful pleasures: whereupon it comes, that great temptations and
complaints arise in the minds of the godly. The wicked do gather by their
happy state and pleasant life, that God does like their religion, and accept
their manner of dealing, whereby they are confirmed and grounded in their
errors. And on the other side the godly, by reason of the miseries, which
they have long suffered, do revolt from godliness, and turn to the ungodly,
because they think that the state of ye wicked is far better than theirs.
Now it is good to know and severally to learn all this out of ye Scriptures.

That the godly are and have been afflicted as well as the wicked, since the
beginning of ye world, it is manifest to be seen in the example of Abel and
Came: for, as the one was pitifully slain of ye other for his sincere
worshipping of God: so was the other for the murder made a vagabonde, not
daring for fear to abide in any place to take his rest in. Jacob surnamed
Israel is read to have been vexed with many calamities. The same is reported
also of the Egyptians while they persecuted y^ Israelits. Saul was vexed, and
David afflicted. The Lord our Savior with his disciples, bare the cross of
grief and trouble. Again on the other side the Jews who cruelly persecuted
Christ and his disciples, were horribly destroyed and that worthily too, for
their villainous injury. Unspeakable are the evils which ye church of Christ
did fuffer in those 10 most bloody persecutions before the reign of
Constantine the great: but Orosius the notable, diligent, and faithful
historiographer makes mention that due and deserved punishments were out of
hand laid upon the necks of those persecuting tyrants, of who^ I will speak
somewhat in place convenient. And by the testimonies both of god and man, and
also by manifold experience, we see it proved yt as well ye godly as ungodly
are touched with miseries. The godly are afflicted when the wicked live in
pleasures.
Yea, truly the best and holiest men for the most part are troubled and
afflicted: when the wicked and worser sort are free from calamities, leading
their lives in ease and pleasures. And while the good do suffer persecution and
injuries, the wicked rejoice thereat. For the Lord in ye Gospel says to his
disciples: Verily verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, the world
shall be glad: but ye shall be sorrowful. But now what kind of temtations those
be, which arise in the hearts of the godly through their tribulations, and
what those men which are not altogether godless nor the enemies of God, do
gather of the felicity wherein the wicked are, the scripture in many places
teaches us, and especially in that wonderful discourse of Job and his
friends. The Prophet Abacuch co^playneth and says: O Lord Abac. 1.
how long shall I cry, and thou not hear? how long shall I cry out to thee
for the violence that I suffer and thou not help? why am I compelled to se
iniquity spoiling and unrighteousness against me? why do thou regard them
that despise thee, and hold thy tongue while the wicked treads down the
man that is more righteous then himself? The wicked does circumue^t the
righteous, and therefore wrong judgment proceeds. In Malachie M(...)
the hypocrites do cry: It is but vain to serve God, and what profit is it,
that we have kept his commandments? and that we have walked hu^blie before
the face of the lord? Now therefore we call the proud and arrogant, blessed and
happy: for the workers of wickedness live happily and are set up, and they
that tempt God, go on in their wickedness, and are delivered. The holy prophet
Asaph conteyneth Psalm. (...)
all this most fully and significa^tly in the Psalm where he says: My feet
were almost gone, my treadings had well nigh slipped: for I was grieved at the
wicked, when I did see the ungodly in such prosperity: for they are in no
peril of death, they are, I say, troubled with no diseases, whereby they are
drawn as it were to death, but are lusty and strong. They come into no
misfortune like other me^: but are free from the evils wherewith other folk are
plagued: and this is the cause that they are so holden with pride, and wrapped
in violence as in a garment. Their eyes swel with fatnes, and they do even what
they lust. They stretch forth their mouth unto heaven, and their tongue goes
thoroughe the world. Yea and they dare to say: Tush how should God perceive it?
Lo these are the ungodly, these prosper in the world and these have riches in
possession. The^ said I have I cle^sed my heart in vain. and ^ashed mine hands
in innocence* and I bear punishe^t every day. And while I thought thus to my
self, I had almost departed from the generation of Gods children.

Now since this is so, it follows The cau^^s of cala^ities.
consequently to beat out the causes of these calamities. For in so doing we
shall be the better able to judge rightly of the miseries both of yt godly and
wicked sort of people. The causes of calamities are many and of many sorts:
but the general and especial cause is known to be sin. For by disobedience
sin entered into yt world, and death by sin, and so consequently diseases,
and al evils in the world. They are very lightheaded and vain fellows that
refer these causes to I cannot tell what, blind constellations, and mouinges
of Planets. For we by our evil lusts and corrupt affections, do heap up
day by day one evil on an others neck. And at our elbowes stands ye devil,
who roundeth us in the ears and eggeth us forwards: and as helps to spur us
on, there are a crewe of naughty packes that never cease to train us in: and
daily there do rise up diverse instruments of tribulation, wherewith the most
wise and just God does suffer us men to be excercised and tormented.

But the same causes of affliction are not always found to be in the The
causes why the Saints ^re afflic^ed.
holy worshippers of God, as are in the wicked despisers of his name. The
Saints are often afflicted, that by their trouble the glory of GOD may be
known to the world. For when the disciples of Christ did see y^ blind man in
the Gospel, which was blind from his mothers womb, they said to yt Lord:
Master, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was borne blind? Jesus
answered: Neither did this man sin nor his parents, but that the works of
God might be made manifest in him.

Likewise when the Lord heard say that Lazarus was sick: This disease (said
he) is not to death, but to the glory of God, that by it the son of God may
be glorified. And yet if we touch this matter to the quick, there can none in
the woorld be found without sin, so that if the Lord will mark our
iniquities, he shall always find somewhat to be punished in us. As it is at
large declared in the book of Job.

Furthermore, the Lord does suffer We are delivered by the goodness of the
Lord, not by our own mea or ability
his spouse the Church, which he loves full dearly, to be troubled and
afflicted, to this end and purpose, that he may openly declare, that the
elect are defended, preserved, and delivered by the power and aid of God, and
not by the policy or help of man. For Paul says: We have this treasure in
earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be Gods, and not of us,
while we are troubled on every side, but not made sorrowful. We are in
poverty but not in extreme poverty: we suffer persecution, but are not
forsaken therein: we are cast down, but we perish not: we always bear
about in the body, the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus might
also be made manifest in our body. For we which live are always delivered
unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest
in our mortal flesh. Also the same Apostle says: Virtue is made perfect in
infirmity.

Again, as the afflictions of the holy Afflictions are testimonies of the
doctrine of faith.
martyrs and faithful Saints of Christ are testimonies of the doctrine of
faith, as our Savior in the Gospel says: They shall deliver you up to
counsels, and in their Synagogues they shall scourge you, yea ye shall be
brought before kings and rulers for my sake, that this might be for a
witness to them and the people. Even so in like manner are the Saints
ouerladen with miseries made examples for us to learn by, how to overcome and
despise ye world and to aspire to heavenly things.

Finally, the Lord does try these We are tried by afflictions.
that be his, by laying the cross upon their necks, and purges them like
gold in the fire, he cutteth from us many occasions of evil that he may
bring us to the bearing of greater and more plentiful fruit. The wisdom of
the Lord does therein follow the manner of Goldsmythes, who put their gold
into the fire to purge, and not to mar it. And he imitateth also good
husbandmen, who when their corn is somewhat too rank do mow it down, and
prune their trees not to destroy, but make them bear more abundant fruit. And
this flesh of ours verily in peace and quietness is luskish, lazy, drowsy,
and slow to good and honest exercises: it is content and seeks no further
than earthly things, it is whoalie given to pleasures, it does utterly forget
God and godly things: now therefore it is not expedient only but also very
necessary to have this dull and sluggishe lump stirred up and excercised
with troubles, afflicions and sharp persecutions. The Saints herein are like
toyron, which by use is somewhat woarne and diminished, but by lying still
unoccupied is eaten more with ruste and canker. Most truly therefore said S.
Peter: Dearly beloved, think it not strange, 1. Pet. 4.
that ye are tried with fire, which thing is to try you, as though some
strange thing happened unto you: But rejoice rather in that ye are partakers
of the afflictions of Christ, that when his glory is reucaled ye may be merry
and glad. For Paul to Timothy says, Remember (...)
that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to
my gospel, for which I am afflicted as an evil doer even unto bonds: and yet
I suffer al things for the electes sakes, that they might also obtain the
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. It is a faithful
saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: if we be
patient we shall reign with him: if we deny him, he shall also deny us. For
in his epistle to the Romans he says, Those which he (...)
knew before, he did also predestinate that they should be like facioned unto
the shape of his son, that he might be the first begotten among many
brethren. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them also he called: and whom he
called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, them also shall he
glorify. Again in the (...)
same epistle he says: We rejoice also in tribulations, knowing that
tribulation works patience: patience proof: proof hope: and hope makes not
ashamed. etc. This do yt private examples of the saints, and public examples
of the whole Church, very plainly declare. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, had never
known yt Gods helping hand had been so faithful and always present with them,
they had never been grounded in so sure hope, nor showed such especial fruit of
their excellent patience, if they had not bin exercised with many perils, and,
as it were oppressed with infinite calamities. Whereupon it comes that David
cried. It is good for me Lord that thou have troubled me. The Church Psalm. ^
of Israel was oppressed in Egypt, but to the end that it might with the more
glory be delivered and pass into the land of promise. The Iewishe Church was
afflicted by them of Babylon and the Assyrians, so that their temple was
overthrown, and the Saints carried captive with ye worst of the people. But
the godly sort in their very captivity do feel y^ wonderful help of God,
and by that means are made the better by their afflictions, so that the name
of the Lord was known among the Assyrians, the Chaldees, the Medes, and
Persians, to his great glory and renown, as it is at large declared in the
histories of Daniel, Hester, and Esoras.

Here also is to be noted that certain punishments are appointed of Certain
punishments appointed as plagues to certain sins.
y^ Lord as plagues for certain sins so that most commonly a man is plagued
by the very same things, wherein he sinned against the Lord. David offended God
with murder and adultery: and therefore is he punished with the shame of his
own house, with whoredom, incest, and detestable murder of his own children,
and lastly driven out and banished his kingdom. It was pride and arrogancy
wherein Nabuchodonosor sinned, and therefore being distract of his wits and
turned into a beastly madness, he led his life for a certain time with beasts
of the field. But as Nabuchodonosor was, when God thought good, restoared to
his kingdom: So David did in time convenient feel the merry of ye Lord in
settling him in his seat again. For this saying of the Lord is firmly
ratified for ever, not only to David, but to every one that believes, which
is in these words set down in yt Scriptures: If his children forsake my law
and keep not my commandments, I will visit their sins with rodds, and their
iniquities with scourges: yet will I not utterly take my goodness from him. I
will not break my covenant, neither will I change the thing that is once gone
out of my mouth. Therefore it is to our profit that the Lord afflicts us, as
he himself testifies in ye Revelation of Christ uttered by John the Apostle
and Evangelist, saying: Them which I love, I rebuke and chasten. And Solomon
Apoc. 3.
long before that, did say: My son refuse Proverb. 3
not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art corrected of him.
For whom the Lord loves him he chasteneth, and yet delights in him as a
father in his son.

Now touching the persecutions and terrible plagues laid upon yt neck of Sin
is the cause of the chur ches persecutions.
the whole Church of God, or several martyrs of yt same, as they were for ye
most part breathed out of worldly tyrants against the S. for their open
confession and testimonies of their faith and truth of the Gospel, so most
commonly the causes of those broils were the sins and offenses of the S.
which the justice of God did visit in his holy ones, no doubt to the good, and
salvation of the faithful. For of yt bloody persecution under the Emperors
Diocletian and Maximinia^, which caused many thou sands yea many millians of
Martyrs to com to their endings, we read this following in yt history of
Eusebius of Cesaria, who learned it not by hearesay but was himself an
eyewitnes of the same: When as by to much liberty and wantones, the manners of
the Church were utterly marred, and the discipline thereof corrupted, while
among our selves we envy one an other, and diminish one another estimation,
while among our selves we snatch at and accuse our selves, moving dedly war
among our selves, while dissimulation sits in the face, deceit lurketh in
the heart, and falshod is uttered in words, so that one evil is heaped still
on another neck, the Lord begins by little and little, and with the
bridle to check the mouth of his tripping church, and reserving the
congregations untouched, he begineth first to suffer them to feel persecution,
which served as soldiers in the camps of the Gentiles. But when as by that
means the people could not be made to remember them selves, in so much that
they ceased not to persist in their wickedness, and that the very guides of
the people and chief of the church unmindful of Gods commandment were set on
fire among them selves with strife, envy, hatred, and pride, so that they
might think they rather exercised tyranny than the office of ministers,
because they had forgotten Christian sincerity and pureness of living: then
at length the houses of prayer and churches of the living God were thrown to
the ground, and the holy scriptures set on fire in the broad and open
streets. Thus much, word for word, out of the 8. book of his
Ecclesiastical history.

And yet here I make difference betwixt sin and sin. For the what kind of
sins the Saints sins re.
Saints sin, but yet they abstain commonly from heinous crimes, although
now and then too, they fall into them, as it is evident by the example of
David. But yet for the most part they fly from theft, murder, whooredome, and
other grievous sins like unto these. And while the Saints are afflicted by
tyraunts, it is not for their neglecting of justice and true religion, but for
yt contemninge of superstition, and steadfast sticking to Christ and his
Gospel. The Lord therefore does forgive, and in the blood of Christ wash
away yt sins of the holy Martyrs, reputing them to suffer death, not for
the sins which they have committed, but for the zeal and love of true
religion. He also punishes the tyrants for the death of his Martyrs, because
in putting them to death they follow their own tyrannous affection, and not
the just judgment of the living God. The Lords mind verily was by tyrauntes
to chasten his people Israel. But the tyraunts (as Esaie in his 10. Chapter
witnesses) did not take it to be so, but rather following their own
affections, they passed all measure in afflicting them, and never sought after
justice and equity: they therefore are punished of the Lord for killing his
innocent and guiltless servants. For the thing which the Lord did persecute
in his people, (their sins, I mean and offenses) that do the tyraunts
neither punish nor persecute: but yt thing that pleases God (the love, I
mean, of true religion, and the utter detesting of idolatry) that they are
mad upon, and persecute it with swoorde and fire, and unspeakable torments.
To this therefore does that saying of Saint Peter belong: See that none of
you be punished as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a
busy body in other men's matters: but if any man suffer as a Christian man,
let him not be ashamed, but rather glorify God on this behalf.

Yet for all this, I would not that heinous offenders should any whit
despair. They have the example of the thief that was crucified with Christ,
that let them follow: let them I say, confess their faults, believe in
Christ, commit themselves wholly to his grace and mercy, and lastly suffer
patiently the pain of their punishment, and in so doing there is no doubt but
they shall be received of Christ into Paradise, and live there for ever, as ye
thief does with Christ.

And although the godly be slame among transgressors, yet is ^ee no Why God
^oth pu^ishe the ^ood with he evil.
more defiled by suffe^ing with them, than Christ ou^ Lord was, being hanged
among thieves. For though the godly and ungodly be wrapped and coupled
together in one kind of punishment: yet are they severed by their unlike
ending, while the wicked after this bodily death, is carried to hell there to
burn without intermission, and the godly taken immediately into heaven, to
live with Christ his Lord, to whom he committed and commended himself.
Touching this matter, and the causes of the afflictions of the holy men of God,
I will not be agreeued to recite unto you, dearly beloved, a notable place of
S. Augustine out of his first book de ciuitate Dei. Wheresoever (says he)
good men do suffer the same and like punishment that the evil sort do, it is
to be marked yt there is not therefore no difference betwixt them, because
there is no diversity in ye thing that they suffer. For as in one and yt same
fire gold does shine, and chafe does smoke, and under one flayle the husk is
broken and the corn purged, and as the scummy froath is not mixed with the
oil, although one weight of the same press does crush both out at once: even
so one and the self same misery falling upon the good and the badd, does
try, fine, and melt the good: and on yt otherside condemn, wast, and consume
the evil sort. Whereupon it comes to pass, that in one and the same
affliction, the evil do detest and blaspheme the Lord, when contrarily the
good, do pray unto, and praise his name for all that he lays upon them. So
much matter makes it in afflictions to mark not what, but with what mind
every man does suffer. For stir up dirt and sweet ointments alike, you
shall have the one stincke filthily, and the other cast forth a sweet smelling
savor. Therefore in that hurly burly and irruption made by the barbarous
people, what did the Christians suffer which was not rather to their profit,
while they did faithfully consider those troubles? especially, because they
humbly considering the sins for which God being wroth, did fill the world with
so many and great calamities, although they be far from committing heinous,
grievous and outrageous offenses, do yet nevertheless not repute themselves
so clear of all faults, as that they judge not themselves worthy to suffer
temporal calamities for the crimes they commit every hour and moment. For over
and besides that every man, which lives peradventure laudably enoughe, does
in some points yield a little to carnal concupiscence, although not to y^
outragiousnes of horrible sins, to the goulfe of heinous offenses, and
abominable iniquities, yet notwithstanding he yields to some sins, which
either he haunteth very seeldomely, or else commits so much the oftener as
they are the lesser. Over and besides this, therefore, I say, what man is
there, which, when he sees and knows very well the men, for whose pride,
lascivious lives, covetousness and damnable iniquity, God (as he has
threatened) does plague the earth, does so esteem them, as they are to be
thought of, and live so with them, as he ought to live with such kind of
people? For often times many things are wickedly dissembled, while wicked
doers are not taught, corrected, chidden and admonished of their evil
behauiours, either because we think the pain to much to tell them their
faults, or while we are afraid to have the heavy looks of them with whom we
live, or else avoid their displeasure, least peradventure they should hinder
or hurt us in temporal matters, when as either our greediness desires to
have somewhat more, or our infirmity fears to lose y^ things which it has
already in hold and possession: so yt although the life of the wicked
displease the good, for which cause they fall not into the same damnation,
which is after this life prepared for the evil: yet since they do therefore
bear with, and forbear their damnable sins, because they fear them in
lighter and smaller tris^es, they are justly scourged with them in this
temporal life, albeit they be not punished with them eternally. While they
be punished by God with the wicked, they do justly feel the bitterness of
this life, for the love of whose sweetness, they would not be bitter in
telling the wicked of their offenses.

This therefore seems to me to be no small cause why the good are whipped with
the evil, when it pleases God to punish the naughty manners of men with the
affliction of temporal pains. For they are scourged together, not forbecause
they lead an evil life together, but because they love this temporal life
together, I do not say alike, but together, when the better sort ought to
despise it, that the evil being rebuked and corrected, might obtain the
eternal life, to the getting whereof if they would not be our fellows and
parteners, they should be carried and lovingly drawn, even while they be our
enemies, because, so long as they live, it is always uncertain whether their
minds shall be changed to be better or no. Wherefore they have not the like but a
far greater cause to admonish men of their faults, to whom the Lord says
by the mouth of the Prophet: He verily shall die in his sin, but his blood
will I require at the hand of the watchman. For to this end are the watchmen,
that is, the guides of the people ordained in the Churches, that they should
not forbear to rebuke sin and wickedness. And yet for all this, that man is
not altogether excusable of this fault, which although he be no guide or
ouersee^ of the people, deeth notwithstanding know many things worthy
controllment, and yet winck at them in those with whom he lives and is
co^uersant, because he will give them none offense, for fear least he loose
those things, which in this world he uses as he ought not, or is delighted
in, so as he should not. And so forth. For all this have I hither to rehearsed
out of Saint Augustine.

The last and hindermost cause of the calamities which oppress yt holy (...)
Saints of God is, because the Lord in afflicting his friends, deeth thereby
give a most evident testimony of his just judgment, which shall fall upon
his enemies for their contemning of his name and Majesty. For Saint Peter
says, The time is that judgment must begin at the house of God: if it first
begin at us, what shall the end be of those, which believe not the Gospel
of God? And if the righteous scarsely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
sinner appear? And like to this, is that notable sentence of the Lords, which
he spoke, when he went to the place of execution, saying: If they do this
Luke. 23
in a moist tree, what shall be done in the dry? If the Saints, by whom are
meante the fruitful trees bringing forth most precious fruits of good
works, are by the su^^eraunce of God in this world, so miserably tormented
and woefully vexed, what shall we say, I pray you, of the wicked, which are so
far from virtue and good woorks? They shall undoubtedly be plagued with
unspeakable pains and punishments.

For touching the causes of those calamities wherewith the wicked The causes of
afflictitions in the wicked sort.
are tormented, they can be none other than the heinous crimes which they
commit from day to day, and are therefore punished by Gods just judgment, to
the end that all men may perceive that God hates wicked men and wickedness
alike. So we read that Pharao was afflicted. Saul fell upon his own sword,
and was slain in the mount Gelboe, with many thousand Israelites, because he
had sinned against the Lord, which purposed to destroy him for an example of
his judgment, and a terror to them that should follow after. Antiochus
Epiphanes, Herod the great, Herod Agrippa, and Galerius Maximianus the
Emperor, were taken horribly with grievous diseases and died of the same. The
reason was because they sinned against GOD and his servant, on whom he
determined to take a vengeance, and to make them proofs of his just
judgment: so to be examples for tyrauntes, to perceive what plagues remain
for those, which seek the blood of the godly and faithful.

And although our good God does ordeyne all things, for the best to his
creatures, and sends in a manner all calamities and miseries, to draw us
from wickedness: yet because hypocrites and wicked people despise the
counselles and admonitions of GOD, and neither will acknowledge God when he
strikes, nor turn to him when he calls them, all things do turn to
their destruction (even as to them which love the Lord, all things work to
the best) and therefore do they perish in their calamities: for in this
world they feel the wrath of the Almighty God in most horible punishments,
and in the world to come, when once they are parted out of this life, do for
ever bear far greater and bitterer pains, than any tongue can tell.

But if it happen that the wicked and ungodly sort, do not in this The
infelicitie of the ungodly.
life, feel any plague or grievous affliction, then shall they be punished
so much the soarer in the woorld to come.

There is no man that knows not the Evangelical parable of the rich
unmerciful glutton, who, when as in this life he lived as he iusted, in
passinge delights, was notwythstanding in hell tormented with unquenchable
thyrste, and parched with fire, which never ceased burning. The felicity
therefore of the wicked in this life is nothing else but ertreeme misery. For
Saint James the Apostle says: Ye have lived in James. 5.
pleasure upon earth and been wanton, ye have nourished your hearts as in a day
of slaughter, which, I say, will turn to you, as to well fedd beasts, that are
fatted up to be slain to make meat of. For Jeremy goes ^ere. 12.
a little more plainly to work and says: O Lord thou art more righteous, than
that I should dispute with thee: yet notwithstanding, I will talk with thee.
How happens it that the way of the ungodly does prosper so well, and that
it goes so well with them, which without shame offend in wickedness? Thou
haste planted them, they take root, they grow, and bring forth fruit. And
immediately after, But draw thou them out O Lord, like a sheep to be slain,
and ordeine or appoint them against the day of slaughter. With this also does
that agree, which the Prophet Asaph, after he had roundly and largely
reckoned up the felicity Psalm. 72.
of ye wicked, adds saying: Thou verily have set them in slipperie places,
thou shall cast them down head long, and utterly destroy them. O with how
soudaine calamities are they oppressed, they are perished, and swallowed up of
terrors. Even as a dream that vanishes so sone as one awaketh: thou Lord
shall make their image contemptible in the city. For David also before him did
cry saying: Yet a little, and the ungodly shall be no where: and when thou
look in Psalm. 37.
his place, he shall not appear. I have seen the ungodly in great power, and
slourishing like a green Bay tree, and I went by, and lo he was gone, I
sought him, but he could not be found. In like manner also does Malachie the
Prophet witness that there is great difference in the day of judgment,
betwi^te the worshipper and despiser of God, and betwixt the just and unjust
dealer. For the day of the Lord shall come, in which the proud and those that
work wickedness, shall be burnt as stubble with fire from heaven, so that
there shall remain unto them neither root nor branch. They that are wise
therefore will never hereafter be offended at the felicity of the wicked: they
will never desire and long to be made partakers of their unhappy prosperity:
they will not grudge at all to bear the misery of the Cross, which they do
daily hear to be laid by God upon his Saints, to the end they may be tried
and fined from the dross of the flesh and this unclean world. Thus far
have I sufficiently reasoned of the causes of calamities.

Let us now see (my reverend brethren) how and in what order the (...) godly
(...) have (...) their (...)
godly and sincere worshipper of God, does behave himself in all calamities
and worldly afflictions. His courage quayleth not, but kicketh rather all
desperation aside, because he understands that he must manfully in faith,
bear al sorts of evils. Therefore does he arm himself with hope, patience,
and prayer. There are verily among men some, which so soon as they feel any
affliction, do presently cry as the common voice is, That it had been best if
they never had been borne, or else destroyed as soon as they were borne. A very
wicked saying is this, and not worthy to be heard in a Christian man's mouth.
But far more wicked are they which stick not to destroy them selves, rather
than by living they would be compelled to suffer any longer some small
calamity, or abide the tauntes of the open world. And yet on the other side
again, men must reiecte the unsavory opinion of the Stoickes, touching their
Indolentia or lack of grief. The Stoikes were of opinion that a valiant man
ought not to be gree^ed for a^y misery ^^ calamiti^
Touching which I will recite unto you (dearly beloved) a most excellent
discourse of a notable Doctor in the Church of Christ set down in these
words following.

WE are too vnthanckful toward our God, unless we do willingly and
chearefully suffer calamities at his hand. And yet such chearefulnes is Against
the Stoiks ^^dolentia
not required of us, as should take away all sense and feeling of grief and
bitterness. Otherwise there should be no patience in the Saints suffering of
the Cresse of Christ, unless they were both pinched by the heart with grief,
and vexed in body with outward troubles. If in poverty there were no
sharpness, if in diseases no pain, if in infamy no sting, and in death no
horror, what fortitude or temperancie were it to make small account of and set
little by them? But since every one of them does naturally nipp the minds of
us all with a certain bitterness ingraffed in them, the valiant stomache of a
faithful man does therein show it self, if he being pricked with the feeling
of this bitterness howsoever he is grievously payned therewith, does
notwithstanding by valiant resisting and continual struggling worthily
vanquish and quite overcome it. Therein does patience make proof of it self,
if when a man is sharply pricked, it does notwithstanding so bridle it self
with the fear of God, that it never breaks forth to immoderate vnrulynesse.
Therein does cheerfulness clearly appear, if a man once wounded with
sorrow and sadness, does quietly stay himself upon the spiritual
consolation of his God and creator. This conflicte which the faithful
sustain against the natural feeling of sorrow and grief (while they study
to exercise patience and temperance) the Apostle Paul has finely described in
words as follows: We are troubled on every side but not made sorrowful:
we are in poverty but not in extreme poverty: we suffer persecution but are
not forsaken therein: we are cast down but we perish not. Thou see here
that to bear the Cross patiently, is not to be altogether senseless, and
utterly bereft of all kind of feeling: as the Stoics of old did foolishly
describe the valiant man to be such an one, as laying aside ye nature of man,
should be affected alike in adversity and prosperity, in sorrowful matters
and joyful things, yea, and such an one as should be moved with nothing
whatsoever. And what did they I pray you with this exceeding great patience?
Forsooth they painted the image of patience, which neither ever was nor
possibly ca^ be found among men. Yea while they went about to have patience
over exquisite and too precise, they took away the force thereof out of the life
of man. At this day also there are among us Christians certain newly
vpstarte Stoickes, which think it a fault not only to sigh and weep, but
also to be sad and sorrowful for any matter. And these Paradoxes verily do
for the most part proceed from idle fellows, which exercising themselves
rather in contemplation, than in working, can do nothing else but daily breed
such novelties and Paradoxes. But we Christians have nothing to do with this
yronlike Philosophy, since our Ferrea Philosophia.
Lord and master has not in words only, but with his own example also
utterly condemned it. For he greaned at, and wept over both his own, and other
men's calamities, and taught his disciples to do the like. The world (says he)
shall rejoice, but ye shall be sorrowful, ye shall weep. And least any man should
make that weeping to be their fault, he pronounces openly that they are
happy which do mourn. And no marvel. For if all tears be misliked off,
what should we judge of the Lord himself, out of whose body bloody tears
did trill? If all fear be noted to proceed of unbelief, what shall we
think of that horror, wherewith we read that the Lord himself was stricken?
If we mislike all sorrow and sadness, how shall we like of that where the
Lord confesses that his soul is heavy unto the death?

Thus much did I mind to say, to the intent that I might reuoake godly minds
from desperation, least peradventure they do therefore out of hand forsake to
seek after patience, because they cannot utterly shake off the natural
motions of grief and heaviness: which cannot choose but happen to them which
of patience do make a kind of senselessenes, and of a valiant and constant
man, a senseless block, or a stone without passions. For the Scripture does
praise the Saints for their patience, while they are so afflicted with the
sharpness of calamities, as that thereby their stomaches are not broaken, nor
their courages utterly quayled: while they are so stounge with the prick of
bitterness, as that yet they are filled with spiritual joy: while they are
so oppressed with heaviness of mind, as that yet they be cheerful in Gods
conselation. And yet is that repugnancie still in their hearts, because the
natural sense does fly from and abhor the thing that it feels contrary
to it self: when as on the other side the motions of godliness does even
thoroughe these difficulties, by striving, seek a way to the obedience of God.
This repugnancie John. ^
did the Lord express when he said to Peter: When thou wast younger, thou
girdedst thee self and wentest whether thou would: but when thou shall be
old, an other shall gird thee, and lead thee whether thou would not. It is
not unlike verily that Peter, when it was need to glorify God by his death,
was with much ado against his will drawn unto it. For if it had been so, his
martyrdom had deserved little praise or none. But howsoever he did with great
cheerefulnes of heart obey the ordinance of God, yet because he had not laid
aside the affections of his flesh, his mind was drawn two sundry wa^es. For
while he saw before his eyes the bloody death which he had to suffer, he was
undoubtedly struck through with the fear thereof, and would with all his heart
have escaped it. And on the other side when he remembered, that he was by Gods
commandment called thereunto, (ouercomming and treading dewne all fear) he
did willingly and chearefullie yield himself unto it. If therefore we mean to
be Christ his disciples, our chief and especial study must be, to have our
minds endued with so great obedience and love of God, as is able to tame and
bring under all the ill motions of our minds to the ordinance of his holy
will. And so it will come to pass, that with what kind of Cross soever we
be vexed, we may even in the greatest troubles of our minds, constantly
reteyne quiet sufferaunce and patience. For adversity will have a sharpness
to nippe us with all: likewise being afflicted with sickness and diseases, we
shall groan, and be disquieted, and wish for health: being oppressed with
poverty we shall be pricked with the sting of care and heaviness: in like
manner we shall be stricken with the grief of infamy, contempt and injury
done unto us: Also at the death of our friends, nature will move us to shedd
tears for their sakes. But this must still be the end of our thoughts, why
ye Lord would have it so. Let us therefore follow his will. Thus much has he.

Wherefore the faithful being once overtaken and entangled with Of the Saints
patience.
calamities, do chiefly remedy their miseries with patience: Which (as
Lactantius says) is the quiet bearing with an indifferent mind of those
evils, which are either laid or do fall on our pates.

For the faithful man by patience, having his eyes thoroughly fastened upon
the word of God, does in faith and hope, stick fast to God and cleave to
his word, he suffers all adversities whatsoever bechance him, moderating
always the grief of his mind, and pains of his body with wonderful
wisdom, so that at no time being overcome with the greatness of grief or
sorrow, he does reuolte from GOD and his word, to do the things that the
Lord has forbidden. By patience therefore he vanquisheth himself and his
affections, he^ overcomes all calamities, and stands still steadfaste with a
quiet mind, and well disposed heart to Godwarde. And although the faithful
do with patience, suffer all things, yet does he find fault with the
things that are wicked, and hardly bear with ought, that is against the
truth. For our Savior Christ Jesus the only perfect example of patience,
did most patiently yield his hands and his whoale body, to be bound of the
wicked: and yet nevertheless, he reproves their iniquity saying: Ye are
come forth as to a thief with swoordes and stanes, although I was daily with
you in the temple: but this is your hour and power of darcknesse.

To this now belongs that excellent description or lively image of The Image
of patience.
patience, laid down by Tertullian in words as follows: Go to now let us
see the image and habit of Patience: Her countenance is calm and quiet, her
forehead ^mooth, without furrowed wrinckles, which are the signs of sorrow or
anger: her brows are never knit, but slack in cheareful wise, with her eyes
cast comely down to the ground, not for the sorrow of any calamities, but
only for humilities sake. Upon her mouth she bears the mark of honor,
which silence brings to them that use it. Her color is like to theirs that
are nigh no danger, and are guiltless of evil. Her head is often shaked at
the devil, and therewithal she has a threatening laughter. Moreover the
clothes about her breasts are white and cloase to her body, as that which
waggeth not with every wind, nor tosseth up with every blast. For she sits
in the throane of that most meek and quiet spirit, which is not troubled with
any tempest nor over cast with any clouds, but is plain, open, and of a goodly
clearenes, as Helias saw it the third time. For where God is, there also is
patience his darling which he nourishes.

Moreover the blessed martyr Cyprian in his Sermon de bono patientiae, The
force (...) pati^nce.
reckons up the force or works of patience, and says: Patience is that
which commends us to God, and preserves us. Patience is that which
mitigateth anger, which brideleth the tongue, governs the mind, keeps
peace, rules discipline, breaks the assaults of lust, keeps under the
force of pride, quenches the fire of hatred, restrayneth the power of the
rich, relieueth the need of the poor, maynteyneth in maidens unspotted
virginity, in widows chastity, in married people inseparable charity, which
makes humble in prosperity, constante in adversity, meek in taking injury,
which teaches thee to forgive quickly those ye offend thee, and never cease
to crave pardon, when thou offendest others: which va^quisheth temptations,
which suffers persecutions, and finisheth with martyrdom. This is that
which groundeth surely the foundations of our faith: this is that which does
augment ye increase of our hope: this is that which guides us, so that we may
keep the way of Christ, while we do go by the sufferinge thereof: this is
that which makes us continue the sons of God, while we do imitate the
patience of our father. Thus much Cyprian.

To this if it please you, you may add for a conclusion, that short, but very
evident sentence of the Lord in the Gospel, Through your patience Luke. 12.
possess your souls: and these words of the Apostle: Cast not away your Heb.
10.
confidence, which has great recompense of reward: For ye have need of
patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the
promises. For yet a very little while, and he, that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry. And the just shall live by faith: and if he withdraw
himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. We are not of them which
withdraw our selves unto perdition: but we perteyne to faith unto the winning
of the soul. But since patience is not borne in and together with us, but is
bestowed of God from above, we must beseech our heavenly father that he will
vouchsafe to bestow it upon us, according to the doctrine of James the
Apostle, who says: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask ^am^*
of God, which gives to all men indifferently and casts no man in the teeth:
and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith nothing wavering. The (...)
of (...)


Now the sound hope of the faithful vpholdeth Christian patience. Hope, as it
is now a days used, is an opinion of things to come, referred commonly as
well to good as evil things: but in very deed Hope is an assured expectation
or looking for of those things which are truly and expressly promised of God,
and believed of us by faith. So then there is a certain relation of hope to
faith, and a mutual knott betwixt them both: Faith believes that God says
nothing but truth, and lifts up our eyes to God. And hope looks for those
things which faith has believed. But how should thou look for ought,
unless thou know that the thing that thou look for, is promised of God,
and that thou shall have it in time convenient. Faith believes that our sins
are forgiven us, and that eternal life is thorough Christ our redeemer
prepared for us: now hope looks and patiently wayteth to receive in due time
the things that God has promised us, howsoever in the mean time it be tossed
with adversities. For hope does not languish nor vanishe away, although it
sees not that, which it hops: yea it quayleth not, although that things fall
out clean cross and contrary, as if the things, which it does hope, were
nothing Hope is of things ab^ent.
so. And therefore Paul said: We are saved by hope: But hope, that is seen, is
no hope. For how can a man hope for that which he sees? But and if we hope
for that we see not, then do we with patience abide for it. Abraham hoped
that he should receive the promised land, when as yet he possessed not one
foot of ground in it, but saw it inhabited of most puissaunt nations. Moses
hoped that he should deliver the people of Israel out of Egypt, and place them
in ye land of promise, when as yet he saw not the manner and means how he
should do it. David hoped that he should reign over Israel, and yet he felt
the peril of Saul and his servant hanging over his head, so yt oftener than
once he was in danger of his life. The Apostles and holy martyrs of Christ,
did hope that they should have eternal life, and that God would never forsake
them: and yet nevertheless they felt the hatred of all sorts of people, they
were banished their countries, and lastly were slain by sundry torments. So
(I say) hope Hope is of things (...) and not (...).
is the hope and looking for of things not present, and things not seen, yea
it is a sure and most assured looking for of things to come: and that not of
Hope is of things that (...) most (...).
things whatsoever, but of those which we believe in faith, and of those
which are promised to us by the very true, living, and eternal God. For S.
Peter says: Hope perfectly in the grace which is brought unto you. Now they
hope perfectly, which do without doubting co^mitt themselves wholly to the
grace of God, and do assuredly look for to inherit life everlasting.

Furthermore, the Apostle Paul calls hope, as it were, the safe and sure
anchor of the soul. And by how much the promise of God is the surer, by so
much is hope the more firm and secure. For hope is not the looking for of any
thing whatsoever, but of faith, that is of the thing, that faith has believed,
and which we know to be promised to us in the word of God. And therefore does
Paul expound faith by hope, where he says: Faith is the ground of things
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. Faith therefore is as it were the
foundation, whereupon hope does rest, and so God himself and his infallible
word is the object to our hope. And for that cause Paul calls God our hope:
and so do the Prophets also. To this belongs the 91. Psalm, where ye
faithful cries: Thou art my hope (O Lord) thou have set thine house very
high. Like to this thou shall find an inumerable sort of places in the book
of the Psalms. But hope cannot be sure, where there is no sound faith, and
express promise of God. Now since Gods promises are as well of things
temporal as eternal, hope also is as well of things transitory as everlasting.

And as faith is the gift of Gods Hope, the gift of God.
grace, and not the power or effect of our own nature, so hope is given us
from above, and confirmed in us by the spirit of God. For in our looking after
things, there are both groanings and longings for them. Temptations assail
and urge us sorely, as though the thing were utterly demed, which is for a
season deferred, or as though God knew not our state and condition, because he
seems somewhiles, and as it were for ever to neglect and not set by our
earnest expecta^ion: wherefore our hope has need of much consolation and
confirmation of the spirit of God. Which, if it be sound, susteyneth and
vpholdeth the mind of man ouerladen howsoever with very weak infirmities. And
when the Lord deferreth his promises, and seems somewhat too long, Though the
Lord put off the perfourmance of his promises unto us for a season: yet he
does not deceive us, because he is faithful and just.
either to neglect our calamities, or else to lay more troubles on ye backs
of us, that are otherwise sufficiently afflicted, then comes hope, which
doing her duty, bids us pluck up our hearts and stay the Lords leisure,
who, as he cannot possibly hate them that worship him, so he never fails nor
in the least point deceives them, for he himself is the eternal truth and
everlasting goodness. Here now the places of Scripture touching the certainty
of hope, are very pro^itable to teach, that the people that hoped in God were
never confounded, although he did delay very long to aid them with his
healping hand. The Lord promises the land of Canaan to the seed of Abraham,
but 430 years do first come about, before he setleth them in possession of it,
yea before he brought them to it, he ledd them whoale 40. years about in the
wilderness. He delivers the Israelits from the captivity of Babylon, but not
till 70. years were spent. What may be thought of this also, that God having
immediately after the beginning promised his only son, did notwythstanding
not send him til and toward the latter and of the woorlde? The Sainets must
therefore still endure, and always wait the Lords good leisure, because truth
cannot possibly fail them, and all that hope in it are surely saved. David
cries: Our fathers hoped in thee, they hoped (...)
in thee and thou did deliver them. They called upon thee and were saved:
they hoped in thee and were not confounded. And again, The Lord is good,
happy is the man that hops in him. And again, they that hope in the Lord,
shall be like mount Sion, they shall not be moved but shall stand fast for ever.
And Paul in his temptations cries out in his epist. to the Phil. saying: I
know that my affliction shall turn to my salvation, according to my earnest
expectation, and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed.

Thus much have I said hitherto, (...).
to teach you how ye faithful do behave themselves in sundry calamities: for
they despair not, but confirm their hearts with assured hope, and suffer al
evils with a patient mind, quietly waiting for ye Lord in their troubles, who
is the only hope of all the faithful. Now to the end of this, I mean to ad a
few general consolations, which may the more confirm the hope of yt faithful,
induce them to patience in suffering calamities, and cheer up their heavy
spirits to al manner afflictions.

First of all let the afflicted weigh with himself from whence affliction (...)
comes. Evil men, the devil, sickness and the world are they that afflict us,
but not without god, who suffers them to do it: satan could not trouble Job,
neither in goods or body, but by gods suffera^ce. And ye Prophet David cries,
Thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb, thou wast my hope when I
hanged yet upon my mothers breasts: I was left to thee as soon as I was borne.
Thou art my God: my time is in thy hand. And the Lord in the gospel says: Are
not two sparrowes sold for one farthing, and one of them lights not upon the
ground without your father? yea, even all the hairs of your head are numbered.
Now God by whose government al things are ruled, is not a God and a Lord only,
but also a father to mortal men. And his will is good and wholesome to us ward,
besides that whatsoever he does, he does it al in order and justly. But if the
will of God be good toward us, the thing cannot choose but be good to us, which
happneth by the sufferance and will of him that loves us so dearly. And herein
do the children of the world differ much from the sons of God. For these (I
mean ye sons of God) in comforting one an other in their calamities do say:
Suffer and grudge not at the thing yt thou can not alter. It is gods will that
it shall be so, and no man can resist it: suffer therefore ye power of the Lord,
unless thou would rather double the evil, that thou can not escape. But
the worldlings on the other side being demanded, how they suffer the hand of
the Lord, and whether they submit themselves to God or no, do make this
answer. I must whether I will or no, since I cannot withstand it. If therefore
they could withstand it, by thie we may gather, yt they assuredly would. But
the children of God do patiently bear ye hand of God, not because they cannot
withstand it, nor because they must by co^pulsion suffer it, but for because
they believe yt God is a just and merciful father: for therefore they acknowledge
and confess that God of his just judgment does persecute y^ sins of them,
that have deserved far more grievous and sharp punishment than he lays upon
them: they do acknowledge also that god does as a merciful father, chasten them
to ye amendment of their lives and safeguard of their souls: and therefore do
they for his chastning of them yield him hearty thanks, and forsaking utterly
themselves and their opinions, do wholly commit themselves whether they live or
die into the lords hands. The Apostle going about to settle this in the hearts
of the faithful says: God speaks to you as to his sons, my son despise
not thou the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of
him. For whom the lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son that he
receives. If ye endure chastening, God tendereth you as his sonns. For what
son is he who^ the father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastiseme^t
whereof al are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons. Since therefore
when we had fathers of our flesh, they corrected us and we reverenced them,
shall we not much more rather be in subjection to the father of spirits and
live? Secondarilie, let the faithful The causes of our afflictions
believer which is oppressed wc calamities consider and weigh the causes for
which he is afflicted. For either he is troubled and persecuted of worldlinges
for the desire that he has to righteousness and true religion: or else he
suffers due punishment for his sins and offenses. Let them which suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, rejoice and give God thanks, as the Apost^es
did, for that he thinks them worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. For ye
lord in the gospel said: Blessed are they that suffer persecution for
rightousnes Math. 5.
sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall revile
and persecute you, and shall say all manner evil saying against you ^or my sake:
rejoice ye and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted
they the Prophets that were before you. But if any man for his sins does
feel the scourge of God, let him acknowledge yt Gods just judgment is fallen
upon him, let him humble himself under the mighty hand of the Lord, let him
confess his sins to God, let him meekely require pardon for them, and
patiently suffer the plague, which he with his sins has worthily deserved.
Let him follow the examples of Daniel and David. Daniel confesses his sins
unto the Lord and says: We have sinned, we have committed iniquity and have
done wickedly, we have not obeyed Dani. 9.
thy servants the Prophets, which spoke to us in thy name. O Lord unto thee
does righteousness belong, and unto us open shame. Thou haste visited and
afflicted us, as thou did foretell by Moses thy servant. And David when
through Absaloms treason 2. Reg. 15.
he was compelled to forsake Jerusalem and go in exile, said to the priests
which bare the Arcke after him: Carry back the Arcke of God into the city
again. If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back
again, and will show me both himself and his Tabernacle. But if he thus say,
I am not delighted in thee: then, here am I, let him do with me what seems
good in his eyes. And verily it is much more better and expedient to be
punished in this world, and after this life to live for ever: than to live here
without afflictions, and in an other world to suffer everlasting pains. Paul
verily does plainly say: When we are judged we are chastened of 1. Cor. 11.
the lord, that we should not be damned with the world. And the very end of
all chastenings and calamities wherewith the Sain^ts are exercised, tends to
nothing else, but that by despising and treading down the world, they may
amend their lives, return to the Lord, and so be saved. But touching the end
of afflictions, we have spoken of it before.

Furthermore, the men that bear (...) the (...).
the yoke of afflictions, do lay before themselves the plain and ample
promises of God, from which, and from the examples of the saints they never
turn their eyes. There are innumerable examples of them which have felt Gods
helping hand ready in all needs to aid and deliver them. Now our good God
does promise to help and deliver, not them only which are afflicted for
righteousness sake, but them also whom he does visit for their faults and
offenses. For David says: The Lord does heal the contrite of heart: The Lord
does loose them that are bound in chains: The lordgiueth sight unto the blind:
The lord sets up again them that do fall. He is not angry for ever,
neither does he always child. He deals not with us after our sins, nor
rewards us after our iniquities. And how wide the East is from the West, so
far has he set our sins from us. To this belongs the whole thirtieth
chapter of Ieremies Prophecy. And Paul does bear witness to this and
says: As the afflictions of Christ are many in us, so is our comfort great
through Christ. Neither are we without examples enoughe to prove this same by,
and to lay before our eyes the present delivery of the Saints, and the
repentance of sinners in extreme calamities. Our ancestors y^ Patriarchs Noe
and Lot with their families, were by the mighty hand of God delivered from the
deluge, that drowned all creatures under the heavens, and the horrible fire
that fell upon Sodom. Jacob and Joseph being wrapped in sundry tribulations,
were by their merciful God wooud out and rid from all. Even as also the
children of Israel were brought forth and delivered from the servile bondage
of Pharao in Egypt. The people of Israel did in the wilderness under their
guides and Judges, sin often and grievously against the lord, for which they
were punished roundly, and sharply scourged, but they were quickly delivered
again by the Lord, so often as they did acknowledge their sins, and turn
themselves to him again. There are also notable peculiar examples of Gods
deliverance of his people in David, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Manasses, and Examples
of Gods deliverance.
many other. There are to be seen in the Gospel innumerable places, where
Christ delivered his professors from sin, from diseases, from evils, from
perils, and from the devil. In the Acts of the Apostles there are found most
excellent patterns of present delivery by the mighty hand of God. The
Apostles are imprisoned and fast bound in fetters, but they are loosed and
brought forth by the Angel of God, and placed in the temple to preach the
Gospel openly. Peter likewise is delivered out of prison, when Agrippa had
determined ye next day following to make an end of and dispatch him. The
Apostle Paul being oppressed with an infinite sort of calamities, did always
feel the present hand of God at all times ready to rid him out of misery.
And setting this tribulation and delivery of his for an example to all the
faithful he says to Timothy: Thou know my persecution and afflictions
which came to me at Antioche, at Iconium, at Lystra, which persecutions I
suffered patiently: But from them all the Lord delivered me: yea and all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. Many more examples
does the same Apostle reckon up together in the 11. Chapter to the Hebrews.
All this I say, do the saints consider, and in time of temptation and
affliction, do comfort and strengthen themselves therewith. For so does Paul
teach us, where he says: Whatsoever is written, for our learning is it
written, that through patience and comfort of the Scriptures we might have
hope.

Beside this also the faithful sort call to their minds the commandments
The Lords commandments of bearing the cross.
of Christ our Lord, wherewith he comme^ding patience unto us, has laid the
cross upon us all. For in the Gospel he says: If any man will go after me let
him forsake himselfe^, and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever
will save his life shall loose it: and whosoever shall loose his life for my
sake shall save it. For what does it advantage a man to win the whoale
world, and loose his own soul? Or what shall a man give for a ransom of his
soul? For the son of man shall come in the glory of his father with his
Angels: and then shall he reward every man according to his works. And again
in an other place he says, If any man come to me, and hate not his father,
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own
life also, he cannot be my disciple, And whosoever does not bear his cross,
and come after me, he cannot be my disciple. After which words, the Lord
brings in certain parables by which he teaches us to make trial of our
ability, before we receive the profession of the Gospel. To the precepts of
their master Christ, the faithful Apostles Peter and Paul had an especial
eye, exhorting us to the patient bearing of the cross of Christ. For Christ
(says Peter) was afflicted for us, leaving to us an example, that we should
follow his steps. And Paul said: Through many tribulations we must enter
into the kingdom of God.

An other comfort that the faithful have in their afflictions is this, The
time of afflicti^n is short but the reward very ample and eternal.
that the time of affliction is short, that the joy and reward in the world to
come is vnspeakeablie far more large and excellent, than the tribulation of
this life is troublesome, so that there can be no comparison betwixt ye joy of
the one, and grief of the other: and lastly, that our good God does not lay
such burthe^s on us as we are not able possibly to bear. Touching all which
points, I think it convenient here to rehearse proofs out of yt scrip tures
to prove them true. S. Peter calls the time of affliction short or
momentanie. And the Prophet Esate or the Lord rather in Esates prophecy, long
before Peter's time did say: Go my people, enter into thy chambers, and shutt
the doors after thee, hide thee self a little while, until mine indignation
be ouerpast. Paul also says, The fathers of your flesh did for a few days
chasten you after their own pleasure, but the father of spirits does (for a
short time) correct you to your profit, that ye might be partakers of his
holiness. But no chastising for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous. Nevertheless afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness
to them, that are exercised thereby. Again he says, We suffer with Christ,
that with him we may be glorified. For I am certainly persuaded, that the
afflictions of this time, are not comparable to the glory that shall be showed
upon us. For the momentanie lightness of our affliction does wonderfully
above all measure, bring forth to us an everlasting weight of glory, while we
look not for the things that are seen, but the things that are not seen.
For the things, that are seen, are temporal, but the things that are not
seen, are eternal. Again, in his first epistle to the Corinth. the same
Apostle says, God is faithful which shall not suffer you to be tempted above
that you are able: but shall with the temptation make a way to escape, that ye
may be able to bear it. But if it so happen, that the Lord does seem to us to
extend our tribulation longer than justice would seem to require, then must
we by and by remember that we may not prescribe to God any end of his will, but
must permit him freely to afflicte us without all controllment, so much, so
long, and by such means as shall seem to be best to his godly wisdom. He
(who is himself the eternal wisdom, and loves us men entyrely well) does
know well enough his time and season, when to make an end of our miseries, and
rid us from afflictions. There are in the Scriptures sundry examples to comfort
ye men, whose afflictions endure for any long time. The woman in the Gospel,
was troubled with an issue of blood by the space of twelve years, which had
almost driven her to utter desperation of her healthes recovery. An other lay
beddred whole eightene years. By the poole Bethesda, lay the silly creature,
who had been diseased eight and thirty years. This space surely was very
troublesome. But yet at last they were restoared to health again, by God, who
knows best at what time and season his help is most expedient and profitable
for mankind. Let us therefore wholly submit our selves to his good, just, and
most wise will, to be delivered when, and how he shall think best.

But the chiefest comfort and greatest hope in tribulation is, that not any No
afflictions do separate the godly from their Lord and God.
force or misery can possibly separate the faithful and elect servant of
God, from God himself. For the Lord in the Gospel cries out and says: My
sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give to
them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck
them out of my hand. My father which gave them me is greater than all: and no
man is able to take them out of my fathers hand. I and my father am one.
Hereunto belongs that out^rie of S. Paul which he uses to the encouragement
of us Christians, where he says: Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? Shall tribulation? or anguish? Romans ^.
or persecution? or hunger? or nakedness? or pe^ill? or sword? (As it is
written: For thy sake are we killed all day long, and are compted as sheep
for the slaughter.) Nevertheless we overcome in all these things through him
that loved us. For I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
rule, nor power, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of GOD,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The Saints I confess in their (...) that the saints suffer are recompensed
with other commodities.
calamities, do feel grief and many discommodities, but so yet that even in
their disco^modities, they have far many more commodities: they are therefore
diminished one way, but augmented an other way, so that ye cross of theirs is
not their destruction, but an exercise for them, and a whoalesome medicine.
And therefore I think that that same worthy and golden sentence of S. Paul,
can never be too often beaten into your minds, where he says: We are troubled
on every side, yet are we not without shift: we are in poverty, but not in
extreme poverty: we suffer persecution, but are not forsaken therein: we are
cast down, but we perish not. The faith full therefore do in this world,
loose these their earthly riches, but do they thereby loose their faith? Loose
they their upright and holy life? or loose they the riches of the inner man,
which are the true riches in the sight of God? The Apostle cries: Godliness is
a great lu^re with a mind content with that that it has. For we brought
nothing into the world, and it is certain that we may carry naught away:
but having food and raiment we must therewith be content. And the Lord verily,
who of his goodness has created Heaven and earth, and all that is therein for
the use of men, which even seedeth the Ravens young ones, will not cause the
just man to die with hunger and penury. Moreover that man does not loose his
treasure in this world, which gathers treasure as the Lord has commanded
him, with whom y^ faithful know yt a most wealthy treasure is laid up in
heaven for them which are in this world spoiled of their ^errestrial goods for
their lord master^ sake. That worthy and notable seruam of god Job, does cry,
Naked camed ou^ of my mothers womb, and naked shall I turn to the earth
again. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, as the Lord pleased, so is
it happened. Blessed be the name of the Lord.

Last of all, it is manifest that to To deny the truth is not the way to keep
our Goods.
deny the truth, thereby to escape persecution, is not the way to keep our
wealth and quiet state, but rather ye means to loose them, yea, by so doing
we are made infamous to all good men of every age and nation. For we see that
they, which would not for Christ and the cause of his truth hazard their
riches, but chose rather by dissimulation and renouncing of the truth to keep
their worldly wealth, did reteyne for ever, infamous reproach, and daily augment
most terrible torments, which vexed horiblie their guilty conscience, loosing
nevertheless in the devils name y^ wealth, which they would not once hazard in
the cause of their Savior. But they on y^ otherside, which ieoparded
themselves and all their substance in the quarrel of Christ, despising
manfully al dangers that could happen, did always find a sweet and pleasant
comfort, which strengthened the minds of their afflicted bodies. For they cry
with the Apostle: We have learned in whatsoever estate we are, therewith to
be content. We know how to be low, we know also how to exceed: every
where and in all things we are instructed both to be full, and to be hungry,
both to have plenty, and to suffer need. We can do all things through
Christ who strengthens us. They know that ye same Apostle has said: Ye have
suffered with joy, the spoiling of your goods, knowing that ye have in heaven a
far more excellent substance, which will endure. For the Lord in the Gospel
also said, Verily I say unto you, there is no man that has forsaken house, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for
my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now at this
present with persecutions, and in the world to come eternal life. Mar. 10. So
than the Saints and faithful servants of God are oppressed with servitude in
this present world: but therewith all they know and consider that the Lord
himself became a servant for us men, whereby they, that are servants in
this world, are made free thorough Christ, and by terrestrial servitude a way
is made to celestial (...)
liberty. The faithful are exiled or banished their country: but the heathen
Poet says, A valiant hearted man, takes every country for his own. Verily
in what place of this world soever we are, we are in exile as banished men.
Our father is in heaven, and therefore heaven is our country. Wherefore when
we die, we are delivered from exile, and placed in the heavenly country and
true felicity. In like manner, whom the tyrant (...)
kills with hunger and famine, those does he ridd of innumerable evils. And
again whomsoever famine does not utterly ^il, but only torment* them does it
teach to live more sparingly, and afterward to fast the longer and devoutly.
Now in this case the faithful which suffer famine, do call to remembrance
the examples of the ancient Saints, of whom when Paul speaks, he says:
They wandered about in sheep skinns and goat skins, being destitute,
afflicted and tormented, of whom the world was not worthy: they wandered in
wilderness, and in mountains and in dens and caves of the earth, christians
also consider that the state of famished Lazarus, who died among the tongues of
the dogs that licked his bla^^es, was far ^erter than ye surfeiting of the
strutbellied glutton, who being once dead was buried in hell. Moreover it is to
be abhorred, de Af^liction in wars by deflou^ing of women.
tested, and (yet) lamented of all men, to see a crew of barb^rous villaynes,
and unruly soldiers abuse perforce not honest matrenes only, but tender
virgins also that are not fit yet, nor ripe for a man. But the greatest comfort
that we have in so great a mischief and intolerable ignominy is, that
chastity is a virtue of ye mind. For if it be a treasure of the mind, then
is it not lost though the body be abused: even as in like sort ye faith of a
man is not thought to be overcome, although the whole body be consumed with
fire. And chastity is not lost verily where the body is defloured, because
the will of the abused body, perseuereth still to use that chastity, and does
what it may to keep it undefiled. For the body is not holy therefore, because
the members thereof are undefiled, or because the secret parts thereof are not
indecently touched: considering that the body being wounded by many casualties
may suffer filthy violence, and since Physicians for healths sake may do to
the members the thing that otherwise is unseemly to the eyes. Wherefore so long
as the purpose of the mind (by which the body must be sanctified) remains,
the violent deed of an others filthy lust takes not from the body that
chastity, which the perseuering continency of the defloured body does seek
to preserve And in ye mean while there is no doubt, but the most just Lord
will sharply punish those shameless beasts and monsters of nature, which
dare undertake to commit such wickedness.

The Saints are confirmed in their The saint^ in suffering the cross do^ feel
no new or unwonted miseries.
tribulations by the mnumerable examples of their forefathers, whereby they
gather that it is no new thing y^ happens unto them, since God from the
beginning has with many afflictions and tribulations, exercised his servant,
and the Church his spouse whom he loves so dearly. And here I think it to
be very expedient and auaylable to the comforting of afflicted minds, to reckon
up the best and choysest examples that are in the scriptures. Of which there
are many both private and public. The chances and pilgrimages of the later
Patriarchs (because I mean not to speak of them before ye deluge) are those
which I call private examples. For our father Abraham is by the mouth of God
called from out of Vr of ye Chaldeans Examples of afflictions in the patriarchs.
to go into Palestine, from whence he is driven by a dearth into Egypt, where
again he is put to his shifts, and feels many pinches. After that when he
came again into Palestine, even till ye last hour of his life he was never
without some one mishap or other to trouble and vex his mind. His son Isaac
felt famine also, and had one misfortune upon an others neck to plague him
withal. He sins not y^ calls Jacob the wretcheddest man that lived in that
age, considering ye infinite miseries wherewith he was vexed. While he was
yet in his mothers womb and saw no light he began to strive with his brother
Esau: afterward in his striplings age, he had much a do to escape his
murdering hands, by exiling himself from his fathers house into ye land of
Syria: w^er again he was kept in ure and exercised sharply in ye schole of
afflictions. At his backreturne into his country he was wrapped in and beset
with perils enough and endless evils. The detestable wickedness of his
untoward children, had been enough to have killed him in his age. In his
latter days for lack of food he goes down as a stranger into the land of
Egypt, where in true faith and patience, he gave up the ghost. Of Moses y^
great and faithful servant of God the scripture testifies y^ in his youth he
was brought up in the Egyptian Court, but when he came to age, he refused to
be called ye son of Pharaos daughter, chosing rather to be afflicted with the
people of God, tha^ to enjoy the temporal commodities of this sinful world,
because he counted ye rebuke of Christ greater riches, than all the treasures
of the Egyptians. The same Moses was grievously afflicted, first by Pharao and
his princes, and after that again by them of his own household, and his own
country people, whom he had brought out of the land of Egypt. David also the
anointed of ye lord, was trobled a great while with his master Saul, that was
mad upon him, to have brought him to his end, but having at the last (for all
that Saul could do) obtained y^ kingdom, afflictions ceased not to follow
him still, for after many troublesome broils, he was by Absalom thrust beside
his kingdom, and very streitly delte withal, and yet in the end God of his
goodness did set him up again.

In the new testament Christ himself Christ and Paul examples unto us.
our Lord and savior, and that elect vessel his Apostle Paul, are excellent
examples for us to take comfort by. The Lord in his infancy was ^ompelled to
fly the treason and murdering hands of cruel tyrants, in all his life time he
was not free from calamities, and at his death he was hanged among thieves.
And Paul speaking of himself does say: If any other be the ministers of
Christ, I am more, in labors more abundantly, in stripes above measure, in
imprisonme^ts more plenteously, in death often. Of the Jews five times
received I forty stripes save one, thrice was I beaten with rodds, once
stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a day and a night have I been in the
depth, in iourneying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in
perils of mine own nation, in perils among the heathen, in perils in the
city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among
false brethren, in labor and travail, in watchinges often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastinges often, in cold and nakedness, beside those things that
outwardly come unto me, the trouble which daily lies upon me, is the care of
all the churches. These I say, are private examples.

We have a public example in (...)
the Church of Israel afflicted in Egypt, many times troubled under their
kings and Judges, and lastly led captive by the Assyrians and men of Babylon.
Afterward being brought home again by the goodness of God, they pass many
bruntes, and are sharply afflicted under the Monarchies of the Persia^s,
Greeks and Romans. What shall I say of the Apostolic church of Christ, which
even when it first began like an infant to The (...)
creep by the ground, did presentlye feel the cross, and yet flourished
still in those afflictions, which eue^ to this day it does patiently suffer?
Histories make mention of ten persecutions* wherewith the Church of Christ
(from the eight year of Nero, till the reign of Constantine the great, by the
space of 318. years) was terriblie shaken and sharply afflicted without
intermission or respite of time for it to breath in, and rest it self from
troublesome broils and merciless slaughters. The first persecution of those
ten, did Nero that beast and leacherous monster raise against the Christians,
wherein it is said that Peter and Paul the Apostles of Christ were brought to
their endings. The second was moved by Flauius Domitianus, which banished the
Apostle John into the Isle of Pathmos. The third persecutour after Nero, was
Traiane the Emperor, who published most terrible edicts against the
Christians: under him was the notable martyr and preacher Ignatius, with many
other excellent servant of Christ, cast out to wild beasts, and cruelly
torn in pieces. The fourth persecution did the Emperor Verus most bloudilie
stir up through all France and Asia, wherein the blessed Polycarpus was
burnt in fire alive, and Irenaeus the bishop of Lions was headed with the
sword. In the fifte persecution of the Church of Christ, Septimius Seuerus
thorough many provinces, did bloudily crown many a Saint with the garland of
martyrdom: among whom is reckoned Leonidas the father of Origenes. Julius
Maximinus was the sixth after Nero yt played the tyrant against the Church: in
that persecution the preachers and ministers of the churches were especially
murdered: among whom beside an innumerable sort of other excellent men,
Pamphilus and Maximus two notable lights, were especially slaughtered. The
seventh bloudsucker after beastly Nero, was Decius the Emperor, who proclaimed
most horrible edictes against the faithful: in his time was S. Laurence a
deacon of the Church, broyled upon a grateyron, and the renowned virgin
Apollonia for her profession, did leap into the fire alive. Licinius
Valerianus, was as cruel as the rest in executing the eighth persecution
against the faithful professors of Christ and his Gospel. In that broile were
slain many myllions of Christians, and especially S. Cornelius and Cyprian,
the most excellent doctors in all the world. Val. Aurelianus did rather
purpose than put in execution the ninth persecution. For a thunder rushed
before him to ye great terror of them that were about him, and shortly after
he was slain as he iourneyed, and so his tyranny by his death was ended. But
C. Aurel. Val. Diocletianus, Maximianus, Maxentius, and Marcus, Julius
Licinius, being nothing terrified with this horrible example, did raise the
tenth persecution against the church of Christ, which enduring by the space of
ten whole years, brought to destruction an infinite number of Christians in
every province and quarter of ^he world. This broile does Eusebius Csariensis,
passingly painte to the eyes of the reader: for he himself was an eye
witness and looker on, of many a bloody pageant and triumphant victory of
the martyrs, which he rehearses in the eight book of his Ecclesiastical
history. In that slaughter Anno Domini. 306.
were killed the first Apostles of our Tigurine Church, both martyrs of Christ,
and professors of his Gospel, S. Foelix and his sister Regula.

After those ten persecutions, there followed many more, and more terrible
butcheries stirred v^pe by many Kings and (...) men* in sundry quarters of
the earth, upon the neck whereof did follow the merciless bloudsheddings
committed by ye Sarracens, Turks and Tartars: moreover the butcherly
bishops of Rome, did annoy extremely ye church of God, by shedding in civil
and forrayne wars more christian blood than any tongue can possibly tell. No
new thing therefore does at this day happen to us, that in the Church of Christ
do suffer diverse persecutions and afflictions for we have examples of great
efficacy both new and old to confirm our hearts that they faint not in
calamities.

And therefore did the Prophets and Apostles, and their Lord and master Their
afflictions were foretold.
Jesus Christ foretell these perils, calamities, and all persecutions, because
they would have us to fortify our minds against these miseries at al times
and seasons, least by being shaken with them at vn^wares, we should reuoulte
from our faith and forsake our profession. Because I have chosen you out from
the world, says the Lord to his disciples, therefore the world does hate you.
Remember the words which I s^^ke unto you, saying, The servant is not greater
t^an his master. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If
they have kept my words they will also keep yours: but all these things shall
they do to you for my names sake: because they know not him that sent me. This
hauel I said to you that ye should not be offended. They shall drive you from
their Synagogues: and the time shall come, that whosoever kills you, shall
think he does God good service. The rest that is like to this, I mean not at
this time to recite out of the Prophets and Apostles, because it cannot be
briefly rehearsed: let every one pick out and apply to his own comfort ye
playnest and most evident testimonies, that by reading he shall light upon.

And although the saints do not rejoice at the destruction of their
persecuting (...)
enemies, who^ they could wish rather to be converted and so saved, than in
this present world to be punished, and in the world to come to be damned for
ever: yet they are gladd when they see ye Lord punish their afflicters, because
thereby they perceive that God has a care over those that be his servants. They
do gather also by the present vengeance of God upon the wicked, that as
afflictiens are for the health and amendment of the faithful, so they are to
the hurt and destruction of the unbelievers. For while they persecute other,
they themselves are destroyed, and while they trouble the church of the living
God, they kindle a fire of the wrath of god against themselves that will never
be quenched. For in the Prophecy of (...)
Zacharias thus we read that the lord speaks touching his church, Behold I
make Jerusalem a cupp of poison unto all the people that are round about her:
yea, ^^da himself shall be in the siege against Jerusalem. And in that day I
will make Jerusalem a heavy stone for all people, so that al such as lift it
up, shall be torn and rent, and all the people of the earth shall be gathered
together against it. A like saying to this has ye lord in Jeremy, where he
speaks against the persecuters of his Church and says: Take this wine (...)
cup of indignation from my hand, and make all the people* to whom I send thee,
to (...) of it: that when they have drunken thereof, they may be madd and out
of their wits, for fear of the sword which I will send among them. For I
begin to plague the city that is called after my name, and think ye then
that ye shall escape unpunished? Ye shall not go unpunished. And this is that
whereto S. Peter alluding said: The time is that the judgment of God begins
at the house of God: if it first begin with us, what shall the end of them
be, that believe not the Gospel?

I have a little above, rehearsed in order the ten persecutions which
Vengeance taken of ^loudie Rome.
the Roman Emperors stirred up against the Church of Christ: now histories
make mention that there was not one of them but was requited with some notable
calamity. And beside the peculiar reuengements that followed every several
persecution, it is to be noted that the most just Lord after the space of 342.
years (for so many years are reckoned from the last of Nero, unto the second
year of the Emperors Honorius and Theodosius) did begin more abundantly to
requite the death of his Saints, upon the neck of bloudthirstie Rome. For
within the space of one hundred and nine and thirtic years, Rome was six
times taken, and brought in subjection to the barbarous nations. For in the
four hundredth and twelfth year of grace which was ye second of Honorius and
Theodosius his reign, yt Wisigothes under their captain Alarichus both took
and sacked ye city, using notwithstanding great mercy in their victory.
After that again y^ Vandals under their guide Genserichus brake into the city
cruelly, and spoiled it very greedily. After them came the Herules, and the
remnaunt of Atthilas his army with their captain Odacer, who took the city
and got the kingdom to themselves, extinguishing utterly ye rule of the Romans
in the west part of the world. Then again, when about 14. years were come and
gone, in-co^meth Theodoricus Veronensis with his Ostrogothes, who slew the
Herules and obtained the city. But it being recovered by the faith and
industry, of the valiant captain ^ellisarius, and restored to Justinian the
Emperor of the East, was immediately again taken by Totylas a prince of the
Goths, who with fire and sword did sack it, pull down houses, and overthrew a
great part of the walls thereof, whereby Rome was so defaced, that for the space
of certain days there was no man that dwelt within it. That spoil of the
city happened about the 548. year after Christ his incarnation. And thus did
Christ in revenging his Church, lay deserved plagues upon the neck of bloody
Rome: beside other miseries (that I pass over) which it did suffer by the
Hunns and Lombards. For this is enoughe to show how miserably Rome was
plagued for afflicting the Church of Christ, which nevertheless maugre the
tyrauntes heads, remained safe and overcame those brunts, and shall reign
with Christ for evermore. In like manner were the Sarracenes extinguished and
utterly destroyed, when first they had suffered many a great overthrow, and
had been plagued thoroughout the world with sundry mishappes and overthwart
calamities. The Turks also do daily feel their woes and miseries, and are
likely hereafter to feel sharper punishments, Moreover, the Popes with poison
are one slain by an other, and are straughly vexed with wonderful terrors.
They are in no place sure of their lives, but even in the middes^ of all their
friends are beset with miseries, they live in fear continual^^ all the whoale
pack of them. Furthermore even they among them, that ^opes dye of the ^ocks
which does be ^ray their ^haltitie.
live most happily, do rot away with that disease, that follows filthy
pleasures, than which there is no kind of death either sharper to the patient,
or more detested among all men. And their adherents, which by their setting on
do persecute ye church of Christ, do either dropp away with the like disease
that wayteth upon They were ^aten of vormes alive, and ^^a^cke so horribly
that no man could abide the^.
filthy lust, or do by little and little consume away, as Herod and Antiochus
did, which death is long before it dispatche them, but does torment them
beyond all measure: yea and besides these bitter plagues they destroy one an
other with endless civil wars. The Lord therefore is righteous and his
judgments are just and equal, who never forgets to revenge his friends, by
finding out his own, and his servants enemies to punish them for their deserts.

Since then (my brethren) that the case so stands, let us I beseech you, The
conclusion.
patiently suffer the hand of the Lord our God, as often as we are touched
with any calamity, or tempted of the Lord our God, knowing this, that the lord
does strike us that he may heal us, and trouble us that he may comfort us,
and receive us to himself into joys everlasting. And that we may so do,
since we are otherwise to weak of our selves, let us pray to our father which
is in heaven, thoroughe Jesus Christ our Lord, that he will vouchsafe to be
present with us in our temptations, and guide us in the way of constancy,
peace, and righteousness. And for an example let every one set before his eyes,
the order that Christ our Savior and master did use, who a little before the
cr^sse of his passion, betook himself to prayer. For going up into the mount
of Olyues, he beseeches his father humbly, and prays to him ardently. He
is instant in prayer and lies upon him earnestly: and yet so, that he
submits all to his will and pleasure. Let us also do the like, that we may
have trial of our fathers present aid with the effectual comfort of our
minds, and that we for his goodness may give him praise for ouermore. Amen.

Of the fifte and sixth precepts of the second table, which are in order the
ninth and tenth of the ^^. commandments, that is, Thou shall not speak false
witness against thy neighbor. And, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house,
etc.
The fourth Sermon.
WE are now come to the exposition of ye two last precepts of ye ten
commandments. The ninth commandment The nint^ commau^demente
is: Do not speak faise witness against thy neighbor. By this precept is
confirmed faith in couenauntes and contractes, it rules the tongue, and
commends unto us verity, the fairest virtue of al other, and teaches us to
use modesty and sincerity both in word and deed. Hitherto yet have we heard
nothing in all Gods commandments touching the tongue, but a little only in
the third commandment. But of the tongue do arise the greatest commodities
and discommodities of our life. For the tongue (says James) is a little member
and boasts The ^ounge.
great things. Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles. And the
tongue is fire, even a world of wickedness. So is the tongue set among our
members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of
nature, and it is set on fire of hell. All the nature of beasts, and of birds,
and of serpents, and things of the sea, is meeked and tamed of the nature of
men: but the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
poison. Therewith we bless our God and father, and therewith curse we men that
are made after the similitude of God. Out of one mouth proceed both blessing
and cursing. Therefore very well and necessarily is the way set down in this
ninthe precept, how men should frame and order their tongues. Now summarilie
this precept does command us, to use our tongues well, that neither privately
or publicly we do our neighbor harm, either in his life, good name, or
riches, by word or writing, or otherwise by paynting, neither by simulation nor
dissimulation, nor yet so much as by a beck or a nod. All things are forbiddden
that are against truth and sincerity. There is required at al our hands,
simplicity, plain speaking, and telling of the truth. Briefly, we are
commanded every man to do his endeavor mutually to mainteyne plain dealing
and verity. For in ye 23. of Exodus we read that the Lord did charge us saying:
Thou shall not have to do with a false report. And in the 19. of Leuit, Ye
shall not steal, says the Lord, nor lie, nor deal falsely one with an other.
And the Apostle James, after he had touched the euile of the tongue,
(especially because out of one mouth proceeded good and badd) does add: These
things my brethren ought not to be so. Does a fountain at one hoale send
forth sweet water and bitter also? Can the fig tree (my brethren) bear
Olyue bearries? either a vine figgs? So can no fountain give, both salt water
and fresh also. Verily since God has given to man a tongue, that by ye means
of it, one man may know an others meaning, that it may bless or praise God,
and do good to all men, it is altogether requisite that it should be applied to
ye use that it was made for, that thereby a man out of a good heart, might utter
good talk, clear from deceit and hurt, from blasphemy and raylings, and from
filthy speaking.

But it is best for us by parts more nearly to sift the special points Of
bearing witness.
of this precept or argument. First of all in this commandment it is
forbidden every man in the Court before a Judge to bear false witness.
Therefore al witness bearing simply is not forbidden us, but false witnessing
only. Do not speak (says he) false witness. It is lawful therefore to be
are true witness, especially if a magistrate demand it of thee. And therefore
the Hebrew phrase is very significant and says: Answer not false witness
against thy neighbor. Now he aunsweareth, that is asked a question. And in
bearing of witness he that speaks, must have a regard of God alone, and
simple truth, he must lay aside all evil affections, hatred, fear or all
part taking^ he must hide nothing, nor dissemble in his speech: he must not
devise any thing of his own making: nor corrupt the meaning of his words
that spoake: as those false witnesses did in the Gospel, when before the
Judges they said: I will destroy this temple and in three days build it
again. For they corrupted the meaning of Christ. And the Lord in the Law
does say, Thou shall not take up a false report, neither shall thou put thine
hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak in a matter of justice,
according to the greater number for to pervert judgment. He therefore that
bears false witness, commits sin against God and his neighbor. For
first of al he stayneth himself with sacrilege and perjury, and so by
telling a lie in the name of God, he does despite to God himself: Moreover
he does to his neighbor so much hurt, as he takes damage by the Judges
sentence either in body, goods, or loss of life. For it is manifest that the
Judge being moved with thy false witness, did punish the accused party in
body, goods, or life it self: which he would not have done, had he not
been drawn thereunto, by thy false witnessing. And therefore a very good and
just law is that, which Moses has uttered in these words, If a false witne^
befou^d among you, then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought wickedly to have
done to his brother: and thou shall put evil away from the midst of thee:
that the rest may hear, and fear: and dare after that do no more such
wickedness among you. Thou shall have no compassion on him: but life for life,
eye for eye, tooth for ^ooth, hand for hand, and foot for foot. To this
belongs the saying of Solomon in the Proverbs where he cries, God hates a
false witness. And again, A false witness shall not escape unpunished. We
have an example in the two false witnesses that roase against the chaste and
honest Susanna.

In this law are condemned also (...)
all false and wrongful accusations, and unjust judgments bought for money,
at the mouth of unrighteous Judges. And as those deeds are worthily
forbidden, so likewise are they misliked that set their tongue to sale, I
mean, such merchauntes as for a morsel of bread will easily be hired, either
to bless or curse the innocent. Of which sort of cursing, spightfull, and
soothing tongues, thou may find a great number in every degree and state,
both of rich and poor, of spiritual and of Lay people.

Furthermore we have here commended unto us ye inviolable keeping of
bargaynes, couenauntes, and contractes: and on the other side are we
especially charged, not to use either guile, or deceit, or craft, or any kind
of cousening. Of which I have spoken, where I treated of theft,

But now the especial thing that A lie (...) the (...) of lies.
is forbidden the faithful herein is to tell a lie, that is, to speak an
untruth, either upon purpose therewith to hurt his neighbor, or upon any
vain and light occasion, or otherwise upon some evil affection. For among men
many kinds and sundry sorts of lies are reckoned up. S. Augustine in his 14.
Chapter ad Consencium de Mendacio, makes mention of eight kinds of lies. I
among many will name a sewe only. There is a jesting lie, as when I say that
I lie, or other men know that I dee lie, by which lie of mine they take some
pro fite, or (as I should rather say) some pastime or pleasure. To lie in that
sort, although it be no great and heinous sin, is yet a sign of very great
lightness: which the Apostle mistiketh in y^ faithful, as it may appear in
the fifte Chapter of his epistle to the Ephesians. And yet I think not that
devised fables, parables and feigned narrations are hereby forbidden: which, as
they are in the Scripture every where used in matters of most importance, so
have they also a very goodly grace, being of themselves very necessary and
profitable, for the readers understanding. S. Augustine will not have jesting
mirth, in the number of lies. There is moreover an officious lie, that is when
I fitten or tell an untruth for duties sake, to the end that by my lie, I may
keep my neighbor harmless from the evil or mischief, that hangs over
his head. Of this sort there are many examples in the holy Scriptures. The
midwiues of Egypt, did save the Hebrews children alive, whom Pharao
commanded to be slain at their birth: and being accused before the king for
breaking the law, they did by an officious and a very wit^ie lie excuse
themselves, and pretend a certain speediness of traua^le in the Hebrews
wives, more than the Egyptian women had. Rahab does with a very straung tale,
deceive the citizens of Jericho, and by her ly preserve the spies of the people
of God. And Michol David's wife, with a lie did save her husbands life, and sent
away her father Saul's servants without their purpose, for which the king had
sent them. And Io^^than faineth many a thing at his fathers table, for the
goodwill that ^ee bare t^ David, whom by honest shifts and godly deceiptes he
did ridd from the bloody hand of his cruel father Saul. The holy widow
Judith also, by lying and dissembling does enter the tent of captain
Holophernes, and by cutting off his head, does set her afflicted cou^triefolkes
at liberty again.

Now it has been a question among the divines of the Primative Church,
whether they, whose examples I have here alleged, did sin in lying or no.
Origenes and they that followed him, did permit a wise and godly man to lie,
if so be it were for the welfare of them, for whom the lie was made. Neither
was S. Hierome without suspicion of Orig^ns opinion. For upon the Epistle of
Paul to the Galathians he writ, that Peter and Paul to serve the time, did
use a kind of simulation. But S. Augustine admonishing Hierome of that matter,
denies flatly that we ought once to suspect, that a ly is allowed in the
sacred Scriptures. On the other side again, S. Hierome tells Augustine that
the best interpreters of the ancient Church, are full and whoalie of his
mind. There are, to and fro, very learned and large epistles written on both
sides, which are extant now and to be seen among us, and therefore I ne^de
not (...) hereupon any longer. The same Augustine in the 15. chapter of his
book that he wrote ad Co^sentium contra mendacium, says, He, which says
that some lies are righteous, is to be thought to say nothing else, but that
some sins are righteous, and so consequently that some unrighteousness is
righteous. Than which: what can be spoken more absurd? For whereupon is sin,
but because it is contrary to righteousness? But (...) things, that are done
against the law of God, cannot be righteous. Now it is said to God, Thy law is
truth: and therefore that which is against the truth, cannot be righteous. But
who doubts, but that every lie is against the truth? Therefore no lie can
possibly be righteous. And so forth as follows.

Now on the other side, very notable learned men have thought, that Augustine
was somewhat too stubbornely set against lying. And therefore some there are,
which going as it were betwixt both do say, that they (whose examples I
alleged eue^ now) were not altogether without all sin, and yet they suppose
that their fault in those lies, was a very small sin. I would wish those,
which will allow themselves to lie officiously, to take heed to themselves,
least by following their own affections more than enough, they do at last take
that for an officious lie, which is in deed a pernicious lie. For the last and
worst kind of lie is a pernicious lie. And that proceeds of a corrupt mind,
and tends to the damage of thy neighbor, which has deserved no hurt at thy
hand. This kind of lie is every where cried out upon thoroughout the
Scriptures: and the fault thereof increases according to the quantity of the
mischief that it does. For divines and ecclesiastical preachers do lie of all
other most perniciously, while with lies and corrupt doctrine they kill the
souls of men, and make the bodies and goods of silly seduced people, both
subject to the curse of God, and in danger of a thousand perils more. And
hereunto belongs hypocrisy also, which the Lord Jesus does in the Gospel
wonderfully taunt and bayt exceedingly. Now hypocrisy does show it self,
not only and so much in crafty and deceitful words, as also and far more,
in the whole conversation of our lives, as when we make semblaunce, or else
dissemble such things as are not, by that means lying to God, and beguiling
our neighbor.

Furthermore, in this law are forbidden Carrying of (...) a (...) to (...).
talebearings, privy slanders, backbitings, cloase whisperings, and al
suspicions which rise by such occasions. Despiteful quips ^^erfore, and heads
that are ready to speak evil of all men, are plainly condemned. For some
there are which are without honesty, not sticking to slander all estates and
conditions, both high and low, public and private, and people of all ages:
and for that purpose (...) as (...) an (...) in (...) the (...) to (...) to the
(...) of the^ who^ (...) writi^^ by the (...)
do they cast abroad infamous libels, they stick up written Pasquils, and set
out pictures to diffame men withal. And to themselves they seem very
eloquent, while with bitter words they check and find fault with all sorts of
men: yea, they account ye malapert prattling of their unbridled tongues, to be
a commendation of uncontrolled liberty and free license of speaking. But they
sin very grievously which take delight in cursed speaking, that is, which
carry about a tongue full of bitterness, curses, and deceit: even as they also
are not without sin, that love a life to hear enuenomed spech and hurtful
talking. But we make a difference, and do except from wrongful quarrels such
accusations, as are justly made and openly showed, either (...)
by writing or word of mouth, and such kind of chi^ings and chastenings also as
preachers use in sacred sermons. For they, which do in that sort chastise and
pursue wicked vices and errors, do purpose nothing else but the glory of God
and safeguard of men's souls, which they desire to advance by all the means
they can, not seeking to utter their spite, or wreake the malice of their
naughty affections. But we may gather by many arguments, that it is a heinous
crime falsely to slander, and wickedly to backbite our brethren and
neighbors. Backbyting is (...).
For there is scarsely any thing that does so much disgrace us as backbyting
does. We are made to the similitude and likeness of God, that we may be the
sons of God: but false accusations do make us of the sons of God, to be the
sons of the devil. Now we all abhor and utterly detest the name of the
devil: but if thou art a wrongful slaunderer, than art thou the very same that
thou do so detest. For the devil takes his name of wrongful accusing, and
is called a staunderer.

Moreover, in the book of Preuerbes GOD is said to hate backbiters and
wrongful slaunderers. And in yt 19. Chap. we read: The thought of a fool is
sin, and a slaunderer is ^ated of men. For a good name (as the same Solomon
witnesses) is a precious treasure. When as therefore the fame and good name of
a man is put in hazard, by the false reports and slanders of a wicked tongue,
the chiefest jewel that a man has is put in ieopardie: so that in very deed
a slaunderer does seem to sin more deeply than a thief: unless a man
make more account of his transitory richesse, than of his name and good
report. And therefore it is strange at this day, that a thief for stealing is
never pardoned, and backbyters for slanders are never once touched. I would to
God that magistrates would once rightly weighe the sundry circumstances of
sundry matters, and punish every fault with penalties agreeable to the
offense, and revenge the greater crimes, with great and sharper punishments.
For God truly does require of, and charge every one of us, to do our best
in mainteyninge truth, for the defense of our neighbors good name, and
preservation of his earthly substance.

In this law also it seems that flattery is forbidden, which, as the
Flatteri^
proverb does truly say, makes a fool madd, and causes him that is mad, to
be incureably mad. And therefore Solomon says, that a flatterer is worthy to
be cursed of all men. They (says he) which say to the wicked thou art just,
shall be cursed of the people, and hated of the tribes. And in an other place:
The words of a talebearer be as though they were simple, and yet they
pearce to the inward parts of the heart. When he speaks softly believe him
not: for there are seven mischiefs in his heart. And therefore in Ecclesiastes
it is very well said: It is better to hear the rebuke of a wise man, than the
song of a fool. That is, of a flatterer.

And yet, although flattery be so great an evil, it is notwithstanding
favored of all men, so that as an infecting plague, it is crepte into the
Church, into Princes Palaces, into Judges Courts, and every private house.
For like an alluring Mermayde it has a song that does delight our flesh. For
we like fools are blinded with self love, and do not mark that flatteries
and allurementes, do breed our destruction. Eze^hiel blames greatly all
flattering Preachers, and says: Woe unto them that lay to the people peace,
people, peace, peace, when there is no peace: which dawbe with untempered
mortar, which sow entising pillowes under every elbowe, and put alluting
kercheifes upon every head, to hunt after, and catch souls. Of such kind of
teachers, that delight more in lies and flattery, than in sincere verity, the
Apostle Paul says, The time shall come that they shall not abide to hear
sound doctrine: but they whose ears do ytche, shall get them teachers
according to their lusts, and shall turn their ears from the truth, and
shall be turned unto fables And David praying against this plague, as the thing
that is most pernicious to all kings and Princes in authority, does say: The
righteous shall smite me friendly, but the precious baulmes of the wicked shall
not annoint my head. And again, Lord deliver me from lying lips, and a
deceiptful tongue. Thus much have I hitherto said for the exposition of the
ninth commandment.

Now follows the tenth and last The tenth commandment of God.
commandment, which word for word is expressed thus: Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his
manseruaunt, nor his maydseruaunt, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing
that is thy neighbors. Which words the Lord in the fifte of Deuteronomy* does lay
down in this manner and order. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, thou
shall not covet thy neighbors house, nor his field, nor his manseruaunt, nor
his maydseruaunt, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy
neighbors. Neither is there any difference or contrariety in the thing it
self, although in Exodus Thy neighbors house, and in Deuteronomie Thy
neighbors wife, be set first in order. Now this makes somewhat against them
that divide this last precept into two commandments, which is in deed but
one, as it may be partly gathered by this order thus inuerted in the setting of
it down in two sundry places.

In this precept coveting is especially forbidden, I mean evil longing, (...)
and corrupt desiring. For coveting is a word indifferently used, as well in
the better as the worse signification. For David affirms that he did long
after God and his law, I have wished for (says he) O Lord thy salvation.
And, I have longed after thy commandments. Psalm. 119. We must here therefore
be able with discretion to judge betwixt that good affection, which God did
first create in man, and that other motion, the root of evil that grows in
our nature, by the descent of corruption from our first father Adam. There was
in Adam before his fall, a certain good appetite with pleasure and delight. He
was not so hungry, that hunger did pain his empty bowels (which is in deed
a plague for sin) but he did eat with a certain sweet and delectable
appetite. He was delighted with the pleasures of Paradise. He did with a
certain holy desire, both love and long after the woman, which God had brought
and placed before him. And this good appetite or desire proceeded from God
himself, who made both Adam and all his affections good at the first. Yea, and
at this day also there are in men, certain natural affections and desires,
as, to eat, to drink, to sleep, and such like belonging to the preservation
of man's life, which of themselves are not to be accounted among the number of
sins, unless by corruption of original vice they pass ye bounds, for which
they are ordained. But in this treatise upon the tenth commandment desire is
used in ye worser part, and is taken for the concupiscence or coveting of evil
things. This concupiscence being translated from Adam into us al, is the fruit
of our corrupt nature, or offspring of original sin: whose seat is in the
heart of man, and is the fountain and he adspring of all sin and wickedness,
that is to be found in mortal men. For the Lord in the Gospel does
expressly say: whatsoever enters in by the mouth, goes into the belly and
is cast out into the draught: but the things that come out of the mouth,
proceed from the heart, and those defile the man. For out of the heart do
come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, whordomes, theft, false witness
bearinges, despiteful speakig: these be they that do defile the man. And the
Apostle James speaking altogether as plainly in an other place does say: Let
no man, when he is tempted, say that he is tempted of God. For every one is
tempted, while he is drawn away, and entised with the bait of his own
concupiscence: then when lust has conceived, it brings ^oorth sin, and
sin when it is finished brings forth death.

Concupiscence therefore is a moti-on or affection of the mind which of
Concupiscence.
our cor^upt nature, does lust against God and his law, and s^^rreth us up to
wickedness, although the consent or deed it self does not presently follow
upon our conceit. For if the deed do follow the lust, then does the sin
increase by stepps and degrees. For first we must consider the very blotting
out or corrupting of the Image of God in us, Original sin, and that disease
that lies hidd in our members, which is by use called evil affections.
Secondarilie, we must consider that it increases by our delight and pleasure
therein. Thirdly it is augmented if we consent and seek after counsel to
commit the crime: and lastly if the consent break forth to the deed doing,
than is it greater and greater, according to the qualities of accidents or
circumstances. Now al these are reckoned in ye number of sins, though by
degrees the one of them is greater tha^ the other: touching which I will by
Gods suffera^ce speak somewhat more largely, when I come to the treatise of
sin. Wherefore that evil and unlawful affection, which is of our natural
corruption, and lies hidd in our nature, but bewrays it self in our hearts
against the pureness of Gods law and majesty, is that very sin, which is
in this law condemned. For although there be some which think that such
motions, diseases, blemishes and affections of the mind are no sins, yet God
by forbidding them in this law, does flatly condemn them. But if any man
doubt of this exposition, let him hear the words of the Apostle who says: I
knew not sin but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law had
said, Thou shall not lust. Without the law sin was dead: I once lived
without law: but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I was dead.
And again, The affection of the flesh is death, but the affection of the
spirit, is life and peace. Because the affection of the ^leshe is enimitie
against God: for it is not obedient to the law of God, neither can be. So then
they that are in the flesh cannot please God. The affection of concupiscence
therefore does condemn us, or, as I should rather say, we are worthily
condemned by the just judgment of God for our concupiscence, which does every
hour and moment bewray it self in the thoughts of our hearts. There are (I
confess) sundry fantasies and many thoughts in the minds of men, which while
they tend not to the offense of God or our neighbor, nor do co^t^ine any
uncleanness or selfeloue, are not to be counted in the number of sins: as I
did imm^diately after the beginning declare unto you.

So hitherto verily God has forbidden Man is co^uinced of sin.
the grosser sins which man does daily commit against him, and now at last
he comes to the concupiscence and corrupt nature of man, the welspring of
al evil, which in this precept he goes about to stop up and cause to sleep:
or as I should rather say, to detect to the eyes of all men ye infirmity and
weakness of mankind. For what is he that has not some whiles felt
concupiscence? yea, what is he that is not every hour and moment pricked with
the stinge of fleshly concupiscence? What man is there (I pray you) that is not
diseased with the natural sickness common to us al, and spotied with the
blemish of original guiltiness? Being therefore co^uinced of sin before the
lord, we are not able to excuse our fault, nor escape the sentence of the
Judge, that does condemn all flesh. For the just Lord does expressly
condemn our natural corruption and wicked inclination, which is a continual
turning from God, and rebellion against the sincerity, which he requires at
our hands. For they are called happy that are clean in heart, because they
shall see God. They therefore whose hearts are wrapped in lusts, diseased with
concupiscence, and spotted with the poison of original guilt, shall not see
God. But such are al we that are the sons of Adam. And therefore this law
does convince us all of sin, infirmity, natural corruption, and of
damnation which follows upon the neck of our corruption. Moreover god in his
law does not only require What (...) God (...)
the outward cleanness of the body, but ye inward pureness also of the mind,
the soul, and al our affections: and gives charge that all, whatsoever we
think, determine, go about, or do, should tend to the health and profit
of our neighbor. This commandment therefore may be referred to all the
other that went before. For the Lord himself expounding this commandment, Thou
shall not commit murder, adds, Whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in
danger of judgment, etc. Matt. 5. and again in expou^ding this precept Thou
shall not co^mitadulterie, he adds. Whosoever looks on an other manns wife
to lust after her, he has committed adultery already with her in his heart.

And here he does exactly rehearse ye What (...) that (...) must (...) cour^
things which we do covet, and in longing after which we are wont to sin: Now
our covetousness consists in ye desire either of things or persons. The
things that we covet are either immovable or moveable: as we Germans do
usually say, Der gueteren sind etliche ligende, etliche furende. The immovable
things are houses, farms, lands, vineyards, woods, medows, pastures,
fishpooles and such like. Things moveable are money, cattle, honor, office,
and dignities. The persons, are wife, children, manseruants and maidseruants.
These and such like which our neighbor has in possession, none of us ought to
covet to his hurt or hinderance: or if any man happen to covet them, yet let
him not consent to y^ concupiscence, nor take delight therein, let him not seek
to obtain the thing that he so desires, nor suffer his ill conceived purpose
to break out to y^ deed doing, in taking from his neighbor his things or
persons: for god requires at the hands of those y^ worship him, such kind of
righteousness, as is altogether sound and absolutely perfect, not in the
outward deed alone, but also in ye inward mind and settled purpose of the
heart. Whereupon the lord in the gospel says, Unless your righteousness exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of God. But touching ye manner how Gods comaundements are fulfilled,
and that faith is the absolute righteousness, I will hereafter in an other
sermon tell you, as I have already said somewhat in the sermon that I made
upon true faith.

Hitherto in twelve Sermons I have run through and declared the ten
precepts of the moral law, in which I told you that the form of virtue is
laid before our eyes, thereby to frame our manners according to the will of god.
God himself has divided all the branches of his moral law into two tables. The
first does show ye duty of us me^ to our creator, and teaches how to worship
aright our God and governor. The second table in six whole precepts, does
declare what and how much every man is bound to owe to his neighbor, and how
we may al live both quietly, well, and ciuilie one with another. It comaundeth us
to honor our parents, and al those, which god has ordained in steed of our
parents. It forbids murder, or doing injury to any man in his life and body.
It forbids whordom, adultrie, and wicked lusts, comending wedlock,
cleannes, and a continent life. It forbids lies, false witness bearinges,
and evil desires: and bids us to love our neighbors with all our hearts,
being ready at all times with all our power to do them good. To God our Lord
and most prudent lawgiuer be praise and thanks for ever and ever. Amen.

Of the Ceremonial laws of God, but especially of the priesthood, time, and
place, appointed for the Ceremonies.
The fifth Sermon.
IN the partition of gods laws, next after ye moral law we placed the
Ceremonial law: and therefore since ye moral law is already expounded, I
have now next by the help of God, to treat of ye law of Ceremonies. And yt I
may not hide any thing from you, note this by the way, that some write
Ceremoniae and some Cerimoniae, which two words are used for Ceremonies,
considering y^ sundry men have sundry opinions touching y^ word from whence
it should come. For some (after the opinion of Seruius Sulpitius) do think
that they are called Ceremoniae a Carendo. But Festus affirms that Ceremonies
did first take their name of the town Cres or Crete. For Liuie in his fifte
book says, that the relics of the Romans were kept by the townsmen of Cres
in y^ French war at what time ye Frenchmen invaded Rome By which occasion it
is likely that for remembrance of the benefit all the worshipp due to God,
and all the holy rites or customs, were according to the name of the town
usually called Ceremonies. But from whence soever the word is derived, we in
this treatise use it for the holy deed of worshipping God, and the
ecclesiastical rites of sacred religion.

Now Ceremonies are holy rites belonging to the ministers of religion,
Ceremonies gene rally what they are.
and also to the place, time, and holy worship exhibited to God, all which,
how they ought to be kept and observed according as they should be, the laws
called Ceremonial do exactly teach and precisely describe. Ceremonies therefore
are the actions or rites which the laws or rules called Ceremonial do frame
or appoint. Now Ceremonies are ordained either by God or men. As touching
those which God has instituted they are of two sorts. The one sort whereof he
did ordeine in the old testament to the ancient Israelites, and the other at
the coming of Christ to us, that are the people of the new testament or
covenant. Of the Ceremonies of the new testament I mean to speak, when I
come to treat of the Church and the Sacraments thereof. At this time I will
discourse of the Ceremonies of the old testament, which were holy rites and
actions ordained and delivered by God himself to the people of Israel, until
the time of amendment, partly to represent and in a shadow to show the
mysteries of God, and partly to worship God by them, and also with them to
keep the people of God in a lawful religion, and in the society of one
ecclesiastical body. Humane ceremonies.


But men also have brought in very many and sundry sorts of Ceremonies: as
among the heathen the Archflamines did, who were the priests and ministers of
Idols, which offices and romes both their kings and princes did sometimes
supply. Among the Hebrews Jeroboam king of Israel, to the destruction of him
and his, did chaung the Ceremonies, which God had ordained, into his own, that
is, into men's inventions and detestable blasphemies. In this latter age of the
world, wherein we live there is no ho of Ceremonies that are instituted daily
by brainsick people. The misery whereof, many learned men both have, and do
yet at this day lament and bewail. Angustine complayneth that in his time
Ceremonies did increase too fast in ye Church of God: what would he say,
(think you) if he were alive to see them now a days? But of this I will
speak at an other time. Now forbecause the word, Ceremonies, is attributed as
a name to any heathenishe rites whatsoever, I in this treatise would have you
to know, y^ I speak not of every Ceremony, but of those only which were
delivered of God by Moses to the people of Israel, not at the will of Moses,
but at the will of God, by the means or ministry of Moses, according as it
was said unto him: See that thou do all things according to the pattern
that was showed thee in the mountain. The original therefore or beginning of
these ceremonies, which we treat of, are referred to God himself, y^ most true
and assured author thereof, and they did therefore please God, because they were
godly, and might be exhibited in faith. Contrarily, the Ceremonies in religion
that are devised and ordained of men are utterly condemned, as is to be seen
in the 12. of Deuteronomie. In the 17. Cap. of the 4. of kings also we find:
I srael walked in the ordinances or Ceremonies which they themselves had made
to themselves. It is known to all men what happened to Jeroboam and his
household, and all the kings of Israel that walked in the ways of Jeroboam. So
then these Ceremonies of ours, I mean, ye Ceremonies whereof I speak, are
actions and rites not in profane, but holy matters, which god himself did
first ordeine, and which Gods people does use and exercise. These Ceremonies
were not delivered Divine ^eremonies.
to al people or nations, but to the people of Israel only, and that too, as
the Apostle says, until the time of amendment, as that which should lie upon
the shoulders of the Jews till the coming of Messiah, at what time they should
be taken away, and after that appear no more. And in this sense verily the
Apostle Paul calls the law the schole mistress until Christ. We have
moreover to note The end whereto ceremonies were ordained.
the end whereunto Ceremonies were ordained. Ceremonies do especially belong to
the doctrine of piety and faith. For they were added to the first table, as a
shore or propp to uphold or stay it. For they teach the outward worship of
the true God, which godly men do give unto him, and by them were the Israelits
drawn not only from strange gods, but from strange worships also, wherewith
they were too much and too long inured and trained up in the land of Egypt: to
the end they should not have any occasion to receive oradmit any strange kinds
of worships, when they were furnished and as it were wrapped in so exquisite
sorts of curious Ceremonies. This does Moses in the 12. of Deuteronomy. make to be ye
cause why God appointed such busy Ceremonies. Therefore Ceremonies and the use
of Ceremonies are in ye scripture expressly called ye worship of God. For with
them The woshippe o^ God*
it pleased God to be worshipped: and with them he did retain his people in
the true worshipping of him, and in the true religion, and communion of one
ecclesiastical body. For the church is severed and divided by the admitting or
bringing in of new or strange ceremonies: as it is evident in the states and
dealinges of Solomon and Jeroboam. Moreover the Apostle Paul said, Are not they
which eat of the sacrifice, partakers of the altar, and so consequently 1.
Cor. 10.
of the whole religion? Furthermore the chief or especial mysteries of Christ
and his Church, were shadowed in Ceremonies, and were the Sacraments of ye
Jewish people, wherewith the Lord would bind them unto him, put them in mind of
his benefits, and lastly keep the piety, obedience, and faith of his people
in ure and exercise. And because the Lord did especially require faith and
faithful obedience at the hands of his servants in the observing of
Ceremonies, therefore those Ceremonies did not please but utterly displease his
Majesty, so often as the people were ignorant of the meaning of the secret
mysteries contained in those figurative shows, so often, I say, as they were
without faith, and observed only the outward actions or Ceremonies without
inward zeal and touch of conscience. For the Lord in Jeremy cries out and
says: Heap up your burnt offerings with your sacrifices, and eat the flesh:
For When God likes and when he mislyketh Ceremonies.
when I brought your fathers out of Egypt, I spoke no word unto them of burnt
offeringes or sacrifices, but this I commanded them saying, Hearken unto and
obey my voice, and I will be your God and ye shall be my people. And yet in an
other place we read that the offering of sacrifices, and that external action
of the people in worshipping god was acceptable and of a sweet smelling savor
in the nose of the Lord. Now wheruppon rises this diversity I pray you, but
upon the difference of the minds of them that worship the Lord? For
sacrifices pleased him, and the honor that was done unto him in simple
obedience and faith alone did please him too: but that religion he did utterly
mislike of, wherein he was worshipped with outward shows, and not with the
faith and sincere obedience of the inward heart: in which sort we read that
Cain did sin, for God commanded not to sacrifice in that manner that Cain
did. Again he commanded to sacrifice and to worship him with external
ceremonies, in faith that Christ should come to be the Savior of the world: not
that they should hope to be justified by the external action, but by him that
was prefigured in all their Ceremonies, Christ Jesus ye sacrifice once to be
offered to save them all, who was the life and meaning whereunto all those
Ceremonies did lead, that are expressed in the law.

But it is not a miss here particularly The knowledge of the ceremonies is not
unprofitable.
to examine and look into, not al and every one, but the chiefest Ceremonies,
and those which are more significant than the rest. Let this labor of mine not
seem to any man to be more curious than needs, or less profitable than it
shows for. For it is undoubtedly very available to the sound understanding
of the abrogation of the law. All things, whatsoever God has laid down in
the holy scriptures, are altogether profitable to our edification, and do
carry with them a divine authority, whereby we may confirm our minds: they
therefore are very fools and godless people, or to use a more gentle term,
they are shuttle witted and ignorant of all good things, whose stomachs do
rise at the Ceremonies that God has taught, and whose ears are offended to
hear a sober and godly treatise upon the exposition of those divine
ceremonies. Some there are, and that no small number, who think it very
profitable and an excellent thing to construe Homer and Virgil allegoricallie:
in divine Ceremonies only foolish heads are persuaded that no profit or
wisdom lies secretly hidden: when in deed in all the world again there is
nothing more profitable, more pleasant, more fine, more excellent, or more full
of wisdom in allegorical types, than the ceremonies are, that God has
ordained. For in them are the mysteries of Christ and his Catholic Church,
very finely, plainly, and notably described.

Now in reckoning up and touching these several ceremonies, I wilchiefly (...)
follow the very natural order. Ceremonies do apperteyne to the Ecclesiastical
worship of God. Therefore it is necessary that there should be persons
appointed in the Church, to be the masters or rather public ministers of
those Ceremonies, to exercise and put them in practice, as the Lord ordained
them. It is necessary also that there be a certain place and time appointed,
wherein and when God should be especially worshipped, rather than at an other
place or season: moreover the holy rites, that is, the very ceremonies must be
appointed and certainly numbered, that the worshippers of god may know, what
and how great y^ honor is that they are bound to give unto him. And first The
priesthood.
of al I mean to say somewhat of the persons, that is the priests or Leuits,
referring still the hearers to the reading of the holy Bible, wherein the whole
is fully contained and largely described.

The beginning of priesthood among the old people, is derived or brought The
beginning of Priesthood
from the creation almost. For they say that in every family the first
begotten were always the priests. It is certain that when the first borne of
Egypt were flaine, the Lord did by a law consecrate to himself the first
begotten of the Israelits. And the preeminence or dignity of the first
begotten has always been very great by the Civil law. The first begotten
did always rule and bear the sway in his fathers house, and was as it were a
king among his brethren: to the first begotten the inheritance was I think
^is meaning was to have ^ide Esau and Jacob ^n steed of Caine and Abell.
due, to the other brethren were portions given: the first begotten did excel
the rest in the dignity of ye priesthood. Therefore when Cain and Abel did
strive about their birthright, they co^tended not about a trifle, but about a
matter of very great weight. Whereupon when the mother virgin is said Christ the
first begot^en.
in Luke to have borne her first begotten son, let no man think that she was
the mother of the second begotten or many sons more. For in that Luke calls
Christ her first begotten son, therein is noted his dignity and excellency.
For to Christ our Lord does belong ye kingdom, priesthood, and inheritance. By
whose bou^tiful liberality we are adopted to be his parteners both in the
kingdom, priesthood, and inheritance of life everlasting and all heavenly
things. But to return to our purpose again, ye dignity of priesthood
among the people of Israel, did of right belong to Ruben, because he was the
first begotten. But he by committing detestable inceste did loose his right.
Next to him therefore was Leui: who also lost that dignity for the sin which
he committed in killing the men of Sichem traitorously, and profaning the
sacrament of Circumcision. But because the tribe of Leui did behave The Levites
chosen to be the priests.
it self manfully, not only in the bringing of the children of Israel out of
Egypt, but also in punishing idolaters, I mean, ye men that worshipped the
golden calfe, therefore did they receive the office or dignity of priesthood
in reward of their virtue, and at that time were the Leuits chosen into the
place of the first begotten of all the seed of Israel: For thus we read, And
Moses said unto the Levites: Consecrate your hands unto Exodus 32.
the Lord this day every man upon his son and upon his brother, that there
may a blessing be given you this day. And again, And the Lord spoke unto
Moses saying, Behold I have taken the Levites from among Number. 3.
the children of Israel for all that first opens the matrice among the
children of Israel, and the Levites shall be mine. Because all the first borne
are mine: For the same day that I smoate all the first borne in the land of
Egypt, I hallowed to me self all the first borne in Israel. And so forth.

By this it appears that the tribe of Leui was appointed to the priesthood in
the Church of Israel. Moreover this dignity or ministry was singularly
confirmed to this Tribe immediately upon the insurrection of Corah, Dathan and
Abiron, by the wonderful miracle that the Lord wrought upon Aarons rodd,
which budded alone among the other eleven twigs, for a witness, that god had
appointed the tribe of Leui alone to the office and function of holy priest
^ood. And for that cause was the same rodd put into the arcke and kept in the
tabernacle, to the end that none other tribes should affecte the priesthood at
any time thereafter. Al which is largely declared in the 16. and 17. Cap, of
the book of Numbers.

Now there was among the Leuits a certain order, there were degrees, Certain
degrees among the Priests.
and as it were appointmentes unto sundry offices. For the Levites were
divided into three families, that is, into Cahatites, Gersonites, and
Merarites: and they again were parted into four orders. For first of all out
of the family of Cahat were chosen princes to bear the sway, and rule the
rest: to them the remnaunt of the Cahatites, and the other two orders, the
Gersonites and Merarites were subject, and did obey the first sort of
Cahatites that were their governors. For Aaron the chief priest with Ithamar
and Eleazar his sons, had the preeminence among the rest. For thus we read in
the 3. of Numb. And thou shall give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons.
For they are given unto him of the children of Israel. And thou shall appoint
Aaron and his sonns to wait on their priests office: and the stranger that
comes nigh shall be slain. Therein did Aaron the chief priest bear ye type
or figure of Christ the true, the best, and greatest king and bishop, to whom
all Christians are subject as to their chief bishop and head, whose dwelling
is in heaven,

And here observe that all the Levites did not serve in the tabernacle, Among
the Leuits
nor that they al did every where thorough the land of Israel instruct and (...)
teach. There were certain ordinances touching the choice and refusal of
those among the Leuits that were to be called to the ministry or priest
hood. Time will not serve me to reckon all the laws appointed for that
purpose: The chief whereof are to be seen in the 21. and 22. Cap. of Exodus:
In the 8. Chapter of the book of Numbers the age is appointed of them that
should be thought fit for the ministry, that is, from the 25. to the 50.
year of their age. The priests that were called and chosen to the ministry
were also consecrated. The manner of consecrating them, is far more large and
busy, than that I can in few words declare it. By their consecration was
meant, that they ought to be adourned with sundry gifts, and endued with
holy conversation, that serve the Church in the office of priesthood. For to
this does ^specially belong the annoynting of the priests, which is a type of
the holy ghost, where withal unless an (...)
Ecclesiastical minister be endued, he exercises the office to his own
destruction. This Ceremonial annoynting of priests, is set down by Moses in
the 19. of Exodus the 8. of Leuit. and the 8. Chapter of the book of Numbers.
To this we must add also the habit or apparel that the priests did use. The
priests ware, when they did not minister in their charge or office, such kind
of garments as Lay men did, as we may gather out of Ezechiel: but when they
did serve in the ministry, then did they wear ceremonial rayme^t according to
gods commandment. A very large description whereof Moses does very well set
down in the 28. and 39. cap. of Exodus

There are in number 9. sorts of Ceremonial garments, yet some do The
priests raiment.
reckon up but eight: Josephus makes 10. First of all the priests before
they went about their offices did wash themselves in water, and then put on
their holy garments. Among those garments some there were indifferently used
both of the inferior and chief priests. And first their priuities are hidden
with linen breeches, Breeches.
coming down to their knees and hamms, the upper part whereof was tied above
their hippes with a gathering band like to the upper part of our common slopps,
to the end that if they should chance to fall, while they were busy in
killing their sacrifices, or in bearing burdens to and fro, the parts should
not appear, which shame does bidd to cover. Upon The close frocke or ^^ssocke.
their linen breeches they had a close coat made of double linen, which, (as
Josephus says) was made of silk. That was plain or cloase to the body,
without plaight or gathering, and came down just to the calfe of the leg.
Such were soldiers wont to wear, and called them cassocks, so fit for their
limms and close to their bodies, that they were light, and without let either
to run or fight. And therefore the priests making themselves ready to the
ministry of God, put on such a cassocke, that being comely cladd, they might
notwithstanding with much expedition discharge their office, and exercise their
ministry. The third kind of raiment, that was a belt or girdle, The girdle
did gird that cassock about the priest. This girdle was woauen of purple,
scarlet, and blew silk, like to an Adders skin, hanging down beneath the
knee, but in the holy ministry tucked up again upon the left shoulder. The
fourth kind of (...) was a Mitre or a round little Capp The (...) or (...).
which covered his head almost to the ears, in facion like as if a man should
cut a boowle even in the midst and set the upper part upon his head. Then
was the Ephod (whereof mention The Ephod.
is made, not in Exodus, where the Ceremonial garments are reckoned up as
it were of purpose, but in other places of holy scripture) which garment was
indifferently common to all the priests. This Ephod is thought to have been a
linen cloak, such an one as David ware when he daunced before the arcke. Of
the priests which Saul slew by the hands of Doeg the Edomite, thus we read:
And he killed that same day 85. men, that ware linen Ephods. His meaning is
not that they were slain while the Ephodes were on their backs, but that they
were killed when they were of that age and order that they might wear an
Ephod, that is, that they might minister in the priesthood of the Lord.
Therefore in Osee we read, Thou shall be without Ephod and Teraphim, That is,
without priesthood and religion. For the Ephod began to be used for the very
priesthood, the garment or the sign for the thing signified. But if any man
will take these words of Osee to be spoken of ye more notable Ephod, (of which
I shall have cause to speak anon) I will not greatly gainsay him. Now this
linen Ephod seems not to differ much from that which the Papists do call a
Surplice. These five garments the chief priest and under priests did use
alike. The other four do properly belong to the high priests alone. The
first of the sour was called Megil, and was a coat down to the ancles, The
Megil.
a garment all of blew silk, from the neck down to the soale of the foot,
being cloase on every side, unless it were the places to put his head and
arms out at: at the hemms beneath did hang 72. bells, and as many
Pomegranates, so placed, that still betwixt two bells there hounge one
Pomegranate, and betwixt two Pomegranates one bell: the cause thereof is made
to be this, that when the high priest went into the holy of holies, the sound
might be heard: because he should by and by die ye death unless he did so.

Now solloweth the Ephod of the high priest, which differs much from The
brestlappe or high priests Ephod.
that whereof I spoke before. For it was not of lynnen, but woauen with weauers
work of diverse colors of gold, purple, and silk, being unlike to the other
in shape and making. For it belonged to the high priests alone, and was a
brestlap coming over ye bulk from the neck to the hippes: for like a curet
it covered the breast, it came over the hinder part of the shoulders, and
about both the sides under the armehooles: bearing the same facion that at this
day women's stomachers do, which we Switeers call Libli. This Ephod he ware
upon the topp of his Megil that came down to his ancles. Upon each shoulder
he bare on Onyx stone called Schoham, wherein were graven the names of the
children of Israel: against the breast there was nothing woauen in it, but a
place was left void for the breastlap of Judgment. For the breastlap of
Judgment which The brestlappe of ^udgeme^t.
is called Hosen was the eighth ornament of their attire, and it was a woauen
cloth made of gold, purple and silk, about an handbreadth quare, and double,
and hemmed about on every side, because it should not rauell out. In that there
was woauen precious stoanes of a wonderful greatness (for the kind) and of a
meruaylous price, which were placed so in four sundry rows, that every rank
contained three stones: in which, as in the Onyx stones, were graven the names
of the children of Israel. They glistered with a wonderful brightness: for no
stones were set in the brestlap, but such as shoane exceedingly. Whereby it
seems that Vrim and Thummim, Vrim (...) Thummim.
was nothing else but these rows of precious stones. For Vrim and Thummim
signify light and perfectness, For as these stones did give great light, so
were they pure without all manner of spotts. And they thought that the high
priest did never say right in a matter of weight, nor when he was asked, did
utter truly the aunswears and Oracles of God, but when the breastlapp of
Judgment did hang on his breast. Now this breastlap of Judgment was tied
to the Ephod or the other breastlap by golden rings beneath, and above it
hounge down the shoulders by golden chains, that were fastened under the Onyx
stones. This was the most precious and excellent part of the high priests
apparel. For it was the coffer of wisdom, and treasure of all law and
knowledge, of equity and justice from whence ye Israelites did fetch, as it
were, the determinate aunsweares to such doubts, as at any time they stuck
upon: which is the cause (as it seems) that some have translated Vrim and
Thummim into the Greek (...), that is (say they) doctrine and truth is in the
priests breast. (...)


The last of all is the golden Plate. For upon the high priests head, there was
a blew silk lace, where upon this plate was put, which was broad beneath and
sharp above, in facion somewhat like to the labell of a bishops Miter, wherein
was written, Holy to the Lord, or, The holiness of the Lord. For Christ our
Lord alone is holiest of all, and he that sanctifies us all. He is an
Antichrist that does usurp ye name or title. Some think that in that plate
was written that That name was Jehovah, which wheresoever the Israelites did
^inde it written, they did not call Jehovah, but expressed it by the word
Adonai, which signifies Lord: so greatly did they reverence the maiestical
name of God.
name of GOD, that was not lawful for any man to utter. This plate was tied to
the capp full upon the forehead with a blew silk lace, and was, as it were, a
crown upon his head. Thus I say were ye high priest and vnderpriests arrayed
at the first.

These sundry Ceremonies have sundry and goodly significations. The use and
end of these ordinances, the Lord declared by Moses to be for glory and
comeliness sake: for they were invented partly for the winning of credit and
authority to the ministers of religion, and partly for the commendation or
advancement of religion it self: because the things are most regarded, that
are set forth with so great solemnity. Moreover it was profitable and
especially necessary with these busy Ceremonies to set a work the people,
which, if they had been without such Ceremonies of their own, was very proane
and ready to have embraced the idolatrous rites of heathen nations. Furthermore
those Ceremonial clothes The meaning of the Priests apparel.
used by the Priests Aarons successors, do offer to us the beholding of Christ
the true and highest priest. He was apparelled with the garment of
righteousness, temperance and virtue, which garment is common unto us also. For all Christians must put on and be cladd with Christ. And yet Christ has the
preeminence as the high and chiefest priest among us all, not only because he
does sanctify us, and indue us with virtue: but also because he has certain
properties peculiar to himself, as he that is both very God, and the Savior
of the world. He bears us upon his breast and shoulders, as Aaron did the
precious stones: for we are not vile, but very dear in the sight of God. Out
of the breast of our high priest Christ does glister and shine the light of
eternal wisdom. For in him, as it were in the treasury of gods eternal
wisdom, are all the riches of knowledge and wisdom laid up and locked.
He is the light of the world, he is both truth and perfectness, so that all
the world should of right, require and seek at Christ alone for laws,
ordinances, aunsweares, and whatsoever else is needeful to perfectness and
true happiness. He is the holy of holies, the very majesty and holiness of
God: upon his head is the crown of glory very rightly placed, as he that
sanctifies only, reigns in glory, and lives for evermore. Besides all this, the priests were by these Ceremonies taught to understand by their very
apparel, what was required at their hands, and what kind of men they ought to
be. Let the priests be always ready to the executing of their office, let
them walk honestly before God and men: let them be temperate and far from
lust and sensuality: let their loins be girded with the belt of justice and
verity: let their breast, their sides and back be furnished with the word
of God: let their head be covered with the helmett of Salvation: upon that
let Christ Jesus the Savior be placed: and let him be the chief of the
ministers and of the ministry: but chiefly let the priest be heard in the
Church. For if he be dumb he shall die the death: but if he ring out the name
of the Lord and preach his law, then does he stir up in the Church a savor
far passing ye smell of sweet Pomgranates in the nose of God. Therefore under
these clothes is hidden the signification of the priests manners, of their
virtues and vices. Next after a man's talk, there is nothing that does commend
him sooner than his apparel. For as the man is, such is his talk, such is his
clothing: therefore the raiment does note of what conversation the priests
ought to be. Whereupon it comes that in the Scriptures we are bidden to put
on other clothing, when the meaning of the holy Ghost is, that we should
change our wicked conversation: so that the very garments do partly instruct
the priests what they have to do, and what is seemly for them.

But now the time and course of this treatise, inuiteth me to speak The
Priests office.
somewhat of the priests office. Their office did consist in many things, but
especially in teaching and instructing. Let Priests teach.
For the chief cause why ye priests were ordained of God, was to instruct
the Church in true piety, and to teach the people the law of God. For thus
we read that the Lord did say unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons that are with
thee, shall drink neither wine nor strong drink, when ye enter into the
tabernacle of witness, least happily ye die. Let it be an everlasting
ordinance among your posterities, that ye may put disfere^ce both betwixt
holy and unholy, and betwixt clean and unclean, and that ye may teach the
sons of Israel, all the statutes which the Lord has spoken unto them by the
ministry of Moses. Leuit. 10. The same law does Ezechiel in as many words
almost, rehearse in the 44. Chapter of his Prophecy. And Malachie declares
it also, as it is to be seeae in the second of his Prophecy. They therefore
are utterly deceived, which think that the Leuiticall priests were appointed
only for to kill the sacrifices. Moreover the lord does every where in his
laws minister matter for the Leuitical priesies to instruct his people in: and
that matter was not the heathenish Philosophy, the edicts of kings or decrees
of Senators, but the very word of God, delivered to them by God himself. And
that this doctrine might be the more conunodiously uttered to the people, the
priests appointed certain holy days, wherein the people should assemble
together, to hear them preach the word of God.

The next point of their duty after teaching, was to bless the people. Let
(...) bless.
That blessing was not free for every priest to use as he listed, but was
bound to a certain form of words very solemnly uttered, which is thus
expressed in the 6. of Numbers: Number. ^
And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, Speak unto Aaron and his sons,
saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, and say unto them,
The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: The Lord show his face unto thee, and be
merciful unto thee: the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace. This manner of blessing did they use undoubtedly in their holy
assemblies, esspecially at the breaking up of the congregation when the people
did depart. In an other place it is said, that God did bless, but here that
Aaron and his sons did blesie the people: whereupon we have to note, that
God does work inwardly and perform in the faithful, what soever the priests
in that form of blessing did wish unto the people, so that still to bless,
is the only and proper work of God alone. And therefore very significantly
after that solemn blessing uttered by the mouth of the priest, God does add,
And they shall call or put my name over or upon the children of Israel, and I
will bless them. The priests therefore do lay before the people the name of
the Lord: they commend unto them the mighty power of his Godhead: and show
them that all goodness does flow from God, teaching them how they may
obtain it through faith in Christ, who is the blessed seed that blesses all that call upon his name. Now in this solemn blessing six principal points
are chiefly contained. First the priest says, The Lord bless thee. That is,
The Lord bestow upon thee, whatsoever belongs to the safety of thy body
and soul. Secondarily he says, The Lord keep thee. For it is not sufficient
to receive good things at the hand of the Lord, unless they be preserved by
his power, and not taken from us by his wrathful indignation, nor lost again
by our own negligence. Thirdly he says, The Lord show thee his face, or The
Lord make his face shine upon thee, The Lord does the^ show us his loving face
when after his anger he shows us his favor, and does become good and
gracious to us. And therefore in the fourth clause does follow a more plain
exposition, where the priest says, The Lord be merciful unto thee: as if he
should have said, The Lord be always gentle and favorable unto thee in all
that thou go about. either in words or deeds. The fifth blessing is, The Lord
liftvpp his countenance upon thee. Now the Lord lifts up his countenance,
when he looks upon us, when he watches over us, and does direct and guide
our ways. The last desire is Peace, which is taken for the salvation and
chief goodness that happens to mankind, although in an other sense it is
put for the contrary to war or battle: and the peace of the conscience is no
small felicity to mortal men. These were the good things that the priests did
wish to light upon the people, teaching them withal to beseech the Lord for
those blessings with ardent prayers, and carnest supplications. Even till this
day there do remain the Psalms that the priests did make for the peoples
sake to singe. For after that David had brought music into the temple, then
did the playing upon musical instruments with sweet melody and singing of
Psalms begin to be taken for an office among the priests. Touching this
music used in the temple the first book of Chronicles speaks very much,
where it treats of David and his dealinges, how he distributed the singers
into 24. orders and that by course.

Moreover the priests were commanded Sacrifices and ministering of the
sacraments was commanded the priests
to minister ye Sacraments and to sacrifice. For they did circumcise the
infants, their office was to see the Passover eaten, and to offer sacrifices
of sundry sorts unto ye Lord: of which, I will speak hereafter in place
convenient. And that they might more commodiously offer their sacrifices, David
by the inspiration of the holy ghost divided the two families of Eleazar and
Ithamar into 24. orders. For they did minister by course, as is to be seen in
the 24. Chapter of the first of Chronicles. All the while that their turn to
minister did last, the priests remained still within, and never did set a
foot out of ye temple. For there were houses builded within the temple for the
priests to dwell in, when their lot did come to serve the Lord: they never went
unto their own houses until their course were expired, and their time to
minister were fully finished. The priests also did keep the holy vessels and
make them clean: they kept the candels burning, and the holy fire that it
should not go out: to be short, they had the charge of all things which
seemed to belong to the service of God, as oil, franckincense and such like
things.

Now before the temple was erected, and that the Israelits had obtained The
priests carried the tabernacle and vessels of the Lord.
a place where to settle themselves in the land of promise, the priests office
was to see the tabernacle pitched down, taken up again, and carried to and
froo. For in the third of Numbers thus we read: The Levites shall keep all the
instruments of the tabernacle of the congregation, and have the charge of the
children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle. For the tabernacle
was so appointed, that when they iourneyed it might be taken into many pieces.
Therefore when the Israelites were ready to remove their camp, Aaron and his
sons came with the coueringes appointed for the purpose, to wrapp up and
carry the holy vessels in. The Cahatites bare the Arc, the table, the altar
and instruments belonging thereunto. The Gersonites had charge over the
cords, the couerings, the hangings, the curtaynes, the vayles and roapes
belonging to y^ tabernacle. The Merarites did bear the harder stuff that was
made of wood and brass, as the pillars, bars, stakes and planks. Al which
whosoever desires to understand more nearly, let him read the third and fourth
Cap. of the book of Numbers. When the temple was builded, there were porters
and warders of the temple appointed among the Levites. The (...)
trumpetts also, wherewith the congregation was called together, were in the
Levites hands: as we read in Tru^pete^s.
the 10. of Numbers. The priests also were appointed to be ready and serve
(...) serves war
in the wars, as is to be seen in the 20. of Deuteronomy. For the Lord would not
have the laws to be huisht where armor did clatter, for victories do avail
greatly to godliness and the study of religion.

Beside this also the priests had yet (...)
an other office, that was, to judge betwixt cause and cause, between clean
and unclean. Both which are more largly declared in the 17. of Deuteronomy. and in
the 13. and 14. cha. of Leuiticus. For as often as any difficult matter
happened to rise among them, the hearing of it was brought to the mother city
Jerusalem: and if any man were suspected to be a Leper, the Leuiticall
priests did judge of his disease according to the laws that were prescribed
them. So hitherto I have summarily laid down ye offices of priest hood among
the old people, reckoning up only the especial parts belonging to their
service. Now as those priests did serve the Israelitish church, so ^id (...)
they live of the revenues of ye church. For the Lord appointed them certain
stipends, and dwelling places in the land of promise. For he assigned 48.
cities for them to inhabit in the land of Israel, sire whereof were cities of
refuge for men to slye unto, as unto Sanctuaries. Moreover he commanded to lay
out and appoint, for the sustenance of the priests cattle and families, the
suburbs and fermes without the walls of the cities, within a A thousand cubits
geometrical make one mile, three quarters of a mile, and ^00. pace^, reckoning
five feet to every pace.
thousand cubits compass on every side. In those cities were schools so
conveniently placed throughout all y^ land, that all men might easily go
with very small pain from y^ places there about, unto the synagogues, to hear
ye word of God. In those cities there was no sacrifices made: for they were
commanded to sacrifice in one place alone: and thrice a year they went up to
the temple to sacrifice unto the Lord: but every sabbath day ye A Synagogue was
a place for people to assemble themselves together in to hear the word or
law of the Lord.
law was taught in every town where the synagogues were. Moreover the rents
belonging to the priests were great and ample, as is to be seen in ye 18. of
the book of Numb. and in the last of Leuit. The wealth of the priests was
enough and sufficient to maintein their families, and to live themselves
honestly. And they with that stipend did not give themselves to riot and
idleness, but living moderately did apply themselves to learning and teaching of
the people. Thus much hitherto touching ye persons belonging to the ministry
of holy religion.

And for because by law they could not sacrifice but in one place alone, The
holy place.
there was a certain place appointed to ye people, wherein as in an holy shop
the priests should exercise their holy ministry in sacrificing to the Lord,
and therefore now the very order and course of this argument does require, that
I say somewhat touching that holy place. That place in the beginning was the
tabernacle builte by Moses, and afterward the temple which Solomon did make.
The law, which forbadd them to sacrifice any where, but in that one place
alone, unless it were by dispensation, is extant in the 12. of Deuteronomy. and in
the 17. Cap. of Leuit. and deeth conteyne the mystery of Christ who was
offered up but once, and in one place, to cicanse the sins of all the world.
Of whom I will speak somewhat more hereafter.

Now that tabernacle or tent (being called the tabernacle of appointment,
because the Lord appointed it both to give aunsweares in, and to have his
lawful worship duly accomplished in) was to the people in steed of a temple,
so long as they wandered and dwelt in the wilderness. For in so much as they
strayed 40. years in the desert, it was not convenient for them to have a
settled temple, but such an one as in their iourneys they might carry to and
fro, so often as they removed. That tabernacle was erected in this order, and was
in a manner of this form and facion. First of all The fashion of the tabernacle.
there were ^^uck into the earth close by the ground, silver sockets to fasten
in, and set boords upon to make a wall withal: under every planke or board
were two sockets. For every board had two t^nons like pikes, whereby they were
stuck into the socketts. The boordes on either side of the tabernacle North
and Southe were twenty in number, at the upper end, which was toward the
Weste, were ten boordes or planckes, all laid over with gold, and ten
cubits high a piece. These, when they were set up, were stuck or fastened
into the sockets: upon the back sites, those bordes had golden ringes,
through which were bars of (...) wood (which i^ thought to be white
Thoarne) thruste, partly to join the boordes cloase together, that they might
be like a wall without chincke or creauise, and partly to make them stand
steadfast without wagging to and fro. The Sanctum on the East side, was shut up
with a veil. Moreover there were made ten curtaynes or hauginges of brodered
work, which were coupled together with loupes or taches. These curtaynes were
laid upon the tops of the boords, that were set upright, as it had been
the rafter or rouffe of an house: over which curtaynes were three coueringes
more, the uppermost whereof was of Taxus leather, well able in rain to keep
water out. Now the tabernacle was in length 30. cubits, and in breadth 10.
cubits: as may be gathered by the measure of ye boords. It was divided also
into three parts, The first was called Sanctum sanctorum, Holy of holies, and
Adytum aedis (ye house into which no man came but the high priest alone) or y^
Chauncel of the temple. The second was the Sanctu^, whose length was twenty
cubits, as the length of the first was tenn. The third part was called Atrium,
the Court, which had in length an hundred cubits, and in breadth fifty. This
Atrium was compassed about with 53. pillars that were fastened down into brazen
sockets, and were in height five cubits, upon which there hou^ge hangings of
network through which a man might easily see: at the very entry was hanged a
veil twenty cubits long upon four pillars. The Sanctum sanctorum was
divided from the Sanctum by ye most precious veil hanged upon four pillars
of silver: and the Sa^ctum was severed from the Atrium with the second veil,
that was very precious, and hou^ge upon five pillars laid over with gold. In
the midst of the Atrium did stand the inner house, I mean the tabernacle
that is divided (as I said even now) into the Sanctu^, and the Sanctum
sanctorum. Into the Sanctum sanctorum no man did enter, but the high priest
only once in a year. Therein was laid the arc of the covenant of our Lord
betwixt the Cherubin: whereunto some Wh^^ thinge^ were (...) in the (...)
(upon the Apostles words) do add the golden Censar. But other there be
which think that by (...) is meant the incense altar, and not the Censar. It
should seem thereby (if these fellows be not deceived) that at the time when
the Apostle writ, the golden altar did stand within the veil in the Sanctum
Sanctorum. But it is manifest by the 40. Cap. of Exodus (as I mean to show
you anon) that the golden altar from the beginning was placed in the Sanctum
before the veil. And thereunto agrees that which may be gathered out of the
first Chapter after S. Luke But howsoever it was, this is sure, that the arcke
of the covenant was not seen of any mortal man, but of the high priest
alone, when he offered incense in the Sanctum sanctorum, once in a year. For
it was hidd with the first veil, the staves, wherewith it was borne, appearing
a little within the Sanctum, by the bearing up of the veil, which was somewhat
thrust out with the ends of the staves, so that he which stood any thing nigh
in the Sanctum might easily discern it, but of him, that stood farther off,
it could hardly be perceived. For in the 8. Chapter of the third book of
Kings thou read, And they drue out the staves that the ends of them might
appear out of the Sanctum Sanctoru^ into the Sanctum, but they were not seen
without. The Sanctu^ was open daily for the priests, that did by course
supply the place of ministry before the Lord. In the Sanctum The Latin copy
here does square from the words of the 26. of Erodus where we find (as I have
turned it) that the table stood on the North side, whereas the Latin copy
says, on the Southside, and calls it pars Australis.
before the veil was placed the golden table furnished with Shewbread upon
the North side: right over against it upon the Southside was set the golden
candlestick. Now in the midst betwixt those twain before the veil and the
arcke, did stand the golden altar, called the altar of incense, which was
consecrated to the burning of sweet perfumes. And in the Atrium, not very
far from the second veil of the Sanctum did appear the altar of burnt
offeringes, and betwixt the altar and the veil, was put the lauer out of
which the priests did wash themselves, when they began to go about their
ministry. All the people which came to the sacrifice might easily on every
side see to the altar. And of this sort was the holy tabernacle, which was to
the Israelits in steed of a temple. Touching which he shall read more largely
and fully, whosoever will look in the 26. 27. 36. 38. and 40. Chap. of Exodus.

Now, so much as I have hitherto spoken touching the building of the The
meaning of the Tabernacle.
tabernacle, has a very good end to be applied unto, and conteyneth and
co^prehendeth no obscure signification. For first of all it was profitable to
nourish and mainteyne the unity of the Catholic faith. For with that one
tabernacle, as with a sure bond, they were tied first to God and his religion,
and then among themselves one to another, as it were, sundry members compact
and knit into one body. For to that tabernacle the whole people was gathered,
as to one parish Church, to worshipp and pray unto one God and Lord. And for
because the children of Israel did dwell in tabernacles, it pleased the Lord
also to have a tabernacle builded for himself, and placed in the midst of
them, that thereby he might testify that he himself does dwell in ye midst
of his people. The tabernacle therefore being as it were the palace of God, the
most high and mighty king, did stand in the midst of the people, as a
testimony of his divine presence to strike the fear and reverence of God into
the hearts of al his subjects. We men lay up in our tabernacles or houses the
things that we have, and will be sought for and asked after at our houses. And
therefore the Lord did place in the tabernacle the holy things, as it were his
treasure, and would be inquired after in the tabernacle, promising that there
he would hear the prayers and requests of all the faithful, y^ called upon
his name. Moreover in those Ceremonies are contained the secret mysteries of
Christ and his Church. For Paul calls us the temple of God and our bodies
ye tabernacle of the Lord. For in us the Lord will dwell. The boords of the
tabernacle are, as it were, the rafters, beams, and pillars of the Church. And
the Church has her pillars, which are doctors and other excellent men
inspired with the holy ghost: and every several faithful man is a board laid
over with gold, if he keep sincerity and remain in the unity of the faith.
The boords of the tabernacle were joined together with bars: and so must
sound doctrine keep all the faithful (which are the boords of the mystical
tabernacle) in their duty and quiet concord without crack or ^reauise. The
curtaynes, though they were many, yet were they knit together with golden
loupes, as if they had been but al one piece: and therefore the sundry
members of the Church must be gathered together and by charity be knit
together in one, that they may be one among themselves, and as it were a
rouffe of righteousness in the Church of God. The coueringes of the Church to
keep out storms are faith, repentance, and desire to do good. Christ himself
is the socket thereof. For none other foundation can be laid than that that
is already laid, even Christ Jesus. Moreover the veil that was spread before
the Sanctum sanctorum, did signify as the holy Apostle Heb. 9.
says, that the way of y^ saints, which they had to go in, was not as then
made manifest, so long as y^ first tabernacle did stand. Therefore when Christ
was come, and with his death had finished al, then ye veil that hou^g in the
temple was rent from the top to the very ground, whereby all men might
understand, that the way was opened into the Sanctum fanctorum, that is, into
the very heavens, and that satisfaction was made for all men in respect of the
law. In the tabernacle also did hang other vayles, which were as shadows of
y^ flesh of Christ. Those vayles did hang at the very entry into the Sanctum
and the Atrium. Now Christ our Lord is the way and the door, by whose
incarnation and death, we have an entry made into the kingdom of God. Yea
Christ himself is our tabernacle in whom we dwell and live, and in whom we
worship and please our God: he is the curtain and seeling, the rafter and
ornament of his Church: he is the trusty and most assured covering that does
(...) us from the injuries of man and the devil: he is the bar of the
Church, which joins the members thereof together, and keeps them in the
unity of faith, he is the pillar and sockett of his Church, he is the head,
and only all-in-all both of our life and true salvation. In those figures
therefore they of old had the chief mysteries hidden of Christ and the Church,
in which Christ is now no etherwise to be behold, than he was in the beginning
of the world beheld of the ancient Patriarchs, to wit, very God and very man,
the only and highest king and priest, the true Savior of the world, in whom
and by whom alone the faithful have their whole salvation.

To proceed now, this Tabernacle by the Lords appointment was erected in Silo,
as soon as they came into the land of promise, and did continue there until
the time of Heli, as is evident in the 18. of Iosue, and 1. Samuel. (...) God
1. and 3. Chap. Under Heli the Arcke was taken by the Philistines, and carried
into Palestine, from whence it was restoared again, and placed in Bethsemes,
from thence again it was carried to Kiriathiearim into the house of Abinadab
in Gibea, that is, on the hill. For his house was set upon an high place. For
in the 6. of the second book of Samuel we read, David went with all the
people to Baala Judah (which is in the 15. of Iosue called Kiriathiearim) to
fetch from thence the ark of God. And presently after: And they fetched it out
of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibea, that is on the hill. For there was
an high place in Kiriathiearim, wherein Abinadab dwelte. Some other, which
take Gabaa for the proper name of the town, do say that the Arcke was
translated from Palestine into Gabaa. But, this is sure, the Arcke was conveyed
from the house of Abinadab, into the house of Obededom, and from thence into
the city of David, that is, into Sion. For so is the city David expounded in
the eighth Chap. of the 3. book of kings. In Sion did David pitche a new
tabernacle for the Arcke of God, wherein he did place it, and appointed
priests to minister there before the Lord: as it is at large described in the
16. Chapter of the first book of Chronicles. The history of the Lords
Tabernacle.
And yet (by building that new tabernacle) David neglected not the old
tabernacle of appointment. For after the time of Heli, and the taking of the
Arcke by the Philistines, it seems that it was translated diversely from place
to place. Silo verily, wherein it was first placed, was desolate, as is to be
seen in the 78. Psalm, and the seventh Chapter of Jeremy. Therefore when
Saul did reign, it appears to have been pitched in Gilgal, where he
offered peace offeringes in sign of thanckesgiuing unto the Lord, for victory
against the Ammonites, as is to be seen in the 11. Cap. of the first book of
Samuel. In the 21. cap. of y^ same book it is apparent that ye tabernacle was
for a time in Nob (a town not very far from Jerusalem, Esaie 10) where
Abimelech the priest gave to David, the fresh Show bread, that was taken from
the golden table. In the time when David reigned, it was erected in Gabaon a
city of the Beniamites. For in the 21. of the first of Chro. thus we read: The
tabernacle of the Lord which Moses made in the wilderness, and the altar of
burnt offerings was at that time (when ye Angel appeared to David with a sword
ready drawn) in the hill of Gabaon. In that place was it also in the reign of
Solomon, and to that hill did Solomon go to pray to the Lord before the
temple was builded. For in the first Chapter of the second book of Chrenicles
we find. And Solomon with all the Congregation, went to the high place that
was at Gabaon, For there was the tabernacle of Gods appointment, which Moses
the servant of the Lord made in the wilderness: But the Arcke of GOD had
David brought from Kiriathiearim into the place which David had prepared for
it: For he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem. Moreover the brazen altar,
that Bezaleel the son of Vri had made, was there before the tabernacle of the
Lord: and Solomon and the Congregation went to visit it. Therefore, where as
we read in the 3. Chapter of the third book of Kings, Solomon loved the
Lord, and walked in the ways of his father David, only he sacrificed and
burnte incense in the high places: that is not spoken in the dispraise but in
the praise of Solomon, as he that did not at adventures sacrifice in every
place but in the high places, to wit upon that consecrated altar, which was
appointed of the Lord, whereof I spoake even now before. Other there are which
think yt Solomon was not simply blamed in these words for offering upon the
altar of burnt offerings (for that was altogether lawful) but because he had
til the^ deferred the building of the temple. But that which goes before and
follows after, do make greatly yt those words were speken in that sense and
signification, which I did first allege. The same Solomon when the temple was
builded, did command and see that the old Arck with all the instrument^ longing
thereunto should be brought by the priests as a precious treasure from Gabaon,
and placed in the temple, which he had caused to be builte for that purpose:
the holy Scripture bearing witness thereunto and saying: And they brought the
Arcke of the Lord and the tabernacle of appointment, and all the holy vessels
that were in the tabernacle: the priests and Levites, I say, brought them into
the temple. The 3. of kings 8. Cap. and the 2. of Chronicles 5. Cap. And so
was the tabernacle of the Lord, which stood 478. years, abrogated at the
last, and in steed thereof the temple was erected.

Touching the temple of the Lord which was prepared by David, but Of Solomon's
temple.
builded and made an end of by Solomon, I need not make many words in the
description thereof, because it is in the 3. of Kings, and 2. of the Chronicles
very busily set down, and painted out at the full. The place where the temple
was afterward builded, is 1. Chro. 21
reported to have been showed to David by the Angle of the Lord, and that David
did first of all make sacrifice there unto the Lord, and adds these words:
This is the house of the Lord God, and this altar is for the sacrifice of
Israel. As if he should have said, This plat of ground is appointed for the
temple, in this piece shall be builte the house of the Lord, yea, here shall be
offered that only and effectual sacrifice for all men, the very son of God
Christ Jesus incarnate. For all the interpreters of the holy scriptures agree,
that the place was at Jerusalem upon the mountain Moria, where Abraham once
would have offered his son Isaac: and that in that appointed or fatal pl^ce
the temple ^as erected: and that the hill Golgotha or Caluarie was not far
of, but in the very topp of ye mountain Moria, which was the place and holy
hill, wherein the holy Gospel does testify that Christ was offered for the
sins of al ye world, which was prefigured in a type of the ancient
sacrifices, and other Ceremonies belonging to the temple. The use and end of
the temple was none other, than the use and end of the tabernacle was before.

Jeroboam therefore and the kings The (...) of th^^ that s^^^^fice (...) high
p^^ces.
of Israel, did sin most grievously, when they forsook ye temple to make
sacrifices in the high places, in their Cathedral Churches at Bethel and at
Dan, and in other high and pleasant places. The people of Judah with their
kings did sin most grievously either for sacrificing to God in the high
places, or else because they did not utterly cut down those high places. For
the Lord would, and his will was to be worshipped in one place which he had
chosen unto himself. The plain law touching that matter is extante in the
12. of Deuteronomie, and is very expressly set down in the 17 of Leuit. in
these words following: Whosoever of the house of Israel shall kill an Ox, or
a sheep, or a goat, within the host or without the host, (to wit for a
sacrifice unto the Lord. For otherwise they might lawefully kill a beast for
their sustenance in any place wheresoever) and shall not bring it to the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer his Sacrifice before the
dwelling place of the Lord, blood shall be imputed to that man, as if he had
shedd blood. Wherefore when the children of Israel bring their offeringes, let
them bring them to the Lord before the door of the tabernacle of appointment
unto the priest, that he may offer them. And let them no more offer their
offerings to devils, after who^ they have gone a whoring. This shall be an
ordinance to them for ever in their generations. And he that does not this
shall be rooted out from among his people. There are in these words three things
to be noted. First that it was not lawful to sacrifice, but in yt one place
only, that was before the altar of burnt offeringes. Secondarilie we have to
mark that that commandment was given, to the end, yt al men should
understand, that the sacrifice was made to God, to whom the tabernacle did
belong. Thirdly, that to offer sacrifice out of y^ place against Gods
commandment, was to make sacrifice unto the devil: that the offerer was to be
judged as a murderer: and that he was excommunicated by the lord God, as he
that was excluded from the company of God and his holy saints. But whereas
Samuel, Helias, and certain other Patriarchs did by Gods sufferance make
sacrifices upon some especial causes in other places and not before the altar
in ye tabernacle, they did it by dispensation. They therefore that sacrificed
in high places not to strange Gods only, but even to the very true God did
sin first of all by disobedience. For God does mislike, yea he curses all the
worship done unto him, which we our selves do first invent without the
warrantise of his word: it is faithful obedience y^ pleases him best.
Seco^darilie they sinned by making a schism in the unity of ye Ecclesiastical
body. Thirdly for despising ye mystery of Christ that was to be offered in the
mount of Golgotha, and for not referring the meaning of their sacrifices to
Christ the only truth of all their typical Ceremoines. Lastly they sinned by
trusting in their sacrifices, as in well wrought works to justification, and
by neglecting ye worship of God, and changing it into trifles of their own
inventions. The temple stood from the time that Solomon did first build it,
until ye first destruction of it, under king Zedechias 440. years. And from
the reparatio^ of it, unto the utter overthrow under Vespasian it stood 582.
years. Other there be that do account it otherwise. Thus have I hitherto
spoken a little of a great deal concerning the temple.

Now it remains for me to touch and lightly to pass over the holy
instruments belonging to the tabernacle and temple of the Lord: among which
the arcke of the covenant was The signification and mystery of the Arc.
the chief, which arcke was so called, because of the tables of the covenant,
that were put within it. It was also called the ark of the Lord God of hosts,
which dwells upon it, betwixt the Cherubim, and by that means the Lord
himself was called by the name of Him that sits betwixt the Cherubim,
because he did from thence give aunsweares unto his servants, and had placed
it in the midst of his people, to be a sign that his presence was always
among them. Touching the stuff whereof, and the for me how the arcke was
made, I will say nothing here. For the matter and fashion are in their colors
very lively painted out in the 25. Chap. of Exodus Of the meaning, mystery, and
use of ye arcke I will speak somewhat now. We men lay up in our coffers and
cheasts the treasures y^ we most set by. And therefore we understand that in
the arcke was Area is an arc or a coffer, and what was laid therein.
laid the treasure of the Church, and all the substance of which the faithful
made most account. We must not therefore seek for them in me^, in Noah, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, S. Marie, John, Peter, or Paul, much less in the
Romish indulge^tiarie, but in him in whom all fullness dwells, and in whom
all the treasures of gods wisdom and knowledge are heaped up in store, who is
not seen here on the earth, but in the Sanctum Sanctorum, in heaven, I say,
above: and is called Jesus Christ: whose divinity is figured by the most pure
gold, and his humanity by the Sittim wood, that is, of Cedar, or rather white
thorn. For he took upon him flesh, like to our sinful flesh, even the very
flesh, that we have in all points, saving that it was not sinful: Out of
this arc do the faithful fetch all good and necessary things for the use of
their life and eternal salvation. For in the arcke we read that there was
laid the tables of the covenant, the pot of Manna, and Aarons rodd y^ budded.
For we heard that in Christ were hidden the jewels of the Church. Christ is our
wisdom, the word of the father, the fulfilling of the Law, he is just
himself and our righteousness also. In Christ is the heavenly food. For he is
the bread of life that came down from heaven, to the end that every one that
eats of it may live eternally. In Christ did the priesthood bud again: it
seemed verily at the death of Christ upon the cross Christ his priesthood
compared to Aarons rod.
to have been cut down for growing any more, but at his resurrection it
b^dded again, and he took the everlasting priesthood that never shall be
ended. For even now as he stands at the right hand of his father in heaven,
he makes intercession to him for us. Moreover the arc was compassed with a
crown, because Christ our lord is a king which delivers us his faithful
servant from all evil, and makes us the sons of God. Upon the arc we
read that there was placed the mercy seat, which was either The ^^cy (...)
the cover of the arc, or else a seat set upon the arc. By it was figured,
as the Apostles John and Paul interpret it, Christ our Lord, who is the
throne of grace and the propitiation for our sins, not only for ours, but
also for the sins of all the world. Out of the propitiatory or Mercy seat
also were uttered the Oracles and aunsweares of God. For the use of the mercy
seat is read in the holy Scripture to have been this, that Moses entering
into ye tabernacle did at the mercy seat receive the answers and
commandments of God, which he declared unto the people. And Christ is he, by
whom our heavenly father declares his will to us, and whom alone he has given
us to hear, saying, This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear
him. Two Cherubim have their faces turned toward the mercy seat, and do as it
were look one to an other. Whereupon S. Peter says that The Angels do desire
to behold the savior of the world, which is declared in the Gospel. The same
Angels do always serve our Lord and master, and are ready at his beck, as
to him that is Lord over all. Now none did carry the ark of the Lord, but the
priests alone. For they only, which are annoincted by ye holy ghost, and
endued with true faith do receive Christ, and are made partakers of his
heavenly gifts. Neither must we winck at and let pass the note that is Th^^
abuse^ the (...)*
given in the 4. and 5. Chap. of the first book of Samuel, where it is said yt
the Israelites for abusing the arc, and turning it to another use than that
for which it was given, and for attributing unto it more than the Scripture
willed, were slain by the Philistines, and that the arc was carried into
captivity: to the end that all men might learn thereby not to attribute more
to the Sacraments and mysteries of God than is convenient, and not to apply
them to any other use than that for which the Lord has ordained them. For the
arc was not ordained to the end that it should be taken for God, although it
bare the name of God, neither was it made to the end that they should look for
grace and help to proceed from it, as we read that they did, but it was
given them as a token that God their confederate was in the midst of his
people, so long as they did keep the tables of the covenant, that were cloased
within the arc, and did cleave to God alone, at whose hands they should look
for all good things through Christ his son, which was prefigured by the arc.

Next to the Adytum or Sanctum Sanctoru^ in ye Sanctum, did stand the The
golden table.
golden table, the matter and fashion whereof is declared in ye 25. ca. of Exodus
Upon the table we men do set our meat and sustenance, by the table we are
refreshed, and at the table we forget our cares and are merry and iocunde.
Therefore the table can be none other but Christ our Lord and Christian
doctrine. For Christ is the sustenance of our life, he is the joy and mirthe of
the faithful. The table was of gold without, and all wood within, because
Christ our table is both God and man. The table (which is the type of Christian
doctrine) is set forth in ye Church: it is not therefore to be sought at Athens
among the Sophisters, nor among the Gymnosophistes of India, nor in the
Jewish Synagogues. Upon the table are set 12. new loanes divided into two
parts. For the bread of life which is new and sweet, does feed and fill both
the Jews and the Gentiles. Moreover that bread was holy and not profane, and
none might eat it but ye priests alone. In like manner the faithful only are
worthy of Christ the bread of life, and they that believe receive it only. The
loa^es were called by the name of Show bread, or y^ The show bread.
bread of sight, whereby is meant that ye bread of life (which is Christian
doctrine) should always be in sight before our eyes. And as those leaves
were to be set always before ye Lord in the sight of all men: so must not the
doctrine of Christ be privily hidden, but openly showed unto all people. A
vessel with franckincense was set upon the Show bread. Because they that eat
the heavenly bread do offer to God prayers and thankesgiuinges without
intermission, which is to God as sweet a^ franckincense. In the 24. of
Leuiticus it is at large declared in what sort the Show bread is prepared.

The golden Candlestick is in the The golden ca^dlestick.
Sanctum, and stands before the veil on the one side, or over against the
table. We have the description of it in the 25. Chap. of Exodus. Candles are
set up in our common houses to give light to all them that are in the house.
And Christ our Lord is come a light into the world, that whosoever follows
him should get the light of life. Out of Christ do proceed, and upon
Christ do stick other noses of Candlestickes, which have their light from
Christ the chief Candlestick. For the Lord did say unto the Apostles, Ye are
the light of the world. So then Christ is the shancke or shall of the
Ca^dlesticke, upon which shanke many snuffes or noses do stick, which hold
the light up to ye Church. For what light soever is in the ministers of y^
Church, they have it all of Christ who is the head of light, and very light it
self. The candlestick is wholly all of gold. And Christ is very God in deed
the light and wisdom of the father: and the ministers of Christ must be
sincere and thoroughly snuffed from al affections of the flesh: and to that end
belongs the use of the snuffers that did pertain unto the candlestick.

In the midst betwixt the table and the candlestick before the veil in the
The incense altar.
Sanctum did stand the golden altar of incense, which is exactly painted out
in the 30. chap. of Exodus. That altar was ordained for two uses. For first
there was offered upon it every day incense or perfume, which it was not
lawful to offer or prepare to any other God or creature. That was done twice
every day at morning and at evening. Zacharias the father of John Baptist was
in that ministry, when he saw the Angel, and for his vnbeliefes sake was
made dumb for a season. Secondarilie incense was offered upon that altar,
after a certain solemn manner once in a year, that was, at the feast of
Clensing, as is declared in the 16. Chap. of Leuiti^us. Now by incense or
perfume is to be understood the prayers of the faithful, as David witnesses
where he says: Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incense, and
let the lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. Now there was but one
incense altar alone. Whosoever builded any more he was condemned of
blasphemous wickedness. By that only altar is figured Christ our Lord both
God and man, the mediator and intercessour betwixt God and man, by whom all
the Saints do offer all their prayers to God their Lord and heavenly father.
They therefore build many altars, which choose to themselves creatures to be
their intercessours, by whose mediation they desire to obtain that, which they
lack, at y^ hands of God. In the end of the 30. cap. it is expressly said,
Who soever shall make like ince^se to that to smell thereto, shall perish from
among his people. Therefore through Christ alone ye faith full Church of
Christ does offer her prayers to God the father. This altar whereof we
speak, was bound about with a crown of gold. For Christ our Lord and altar,
is a very king and priest and wears the crown of glory. Now we must pray
at morning and at evening, that is, continually and very earnestly. And we must
always pray in and through the name of Christ. And Christ is he alone through
who^ God has been pleased with the prayers of them that have prayed in ye
morning, that is, at the beginning of the world, and is at this day pleased
with them yt pray to him at evening, that is, in the end and these last days
of the world. They therefore sinned most grievously against ye Lord, that
offered incense in the high places every where. For as they were rebellious and
disobedient to God, preferring their own inventions before the laws of GOD,
which they neglected: so did they despise the mystery of Christ the only
mediator, in departing from that only altar.

In ye Court or Atrium did stand an The (...) of (...)
other altar which was called the brazen altar of ye altar of burnt offerings,
which is finely described in the 27. of Exodus. Of this sort also there was but
this one. For it was not lawful for any religious man to sacrifice in any
other place, saving in ye holy place, where this altar was, unless it were by
some singular dispensation. Therefore whom the Rubenites with their
confederates had builte an altar by the banks of Jordan, and that the fame
thereof was brought to the ears of the other tribes of Israel, they did all
agree with one consent, that the crime was to be punished with open war.
Whereby we may again gather the greatness of their fault, which neglecting
that altar did offer sacrifice in the high places. Of which I also spoke
before. Now that only and Catholic altar of ours is Jesus Christ: who
offered himself a living sacrifice for us to God. Neither is there any
sacrifice in all the world that can cleanse sin but that alone. Neither do any
sacrifices of the faithful please the father, but those that are by faith
offered upon the altar Jesus Christ. For Christ does sanctify us, and being
sanctified, we do by him offer the sacrifice, that he does well accept off.
This have I taken out of the Apostles doctrine in the 13. to the Hebrews, and
the twelfth to the Romans.

The last of the holy vessels was the brazen lauer, which was placed in The
brase^ lauer.
the Atrium betwixt the veil of the Sanctum, and the altar of burnt
offerings. It is described in the 30. chap. of Exodus. In it was contained the
water wherewith the priests, that ministered before the Lord, did wash
themselves. By that lauer was Christ signified, which is the washinge of the
faithful. And by it was mente, that holy things were not to be handled with
unwashed hands and feet. They wash themselves that by the holy ghost are
purified, and by the grace of God are made fit to the ministry of religion.
But he is in danger of death, that is not a partaker of ye grace of life.
Beside these there are also reckoned other instruments belonging to the
tabernacle: but these in a manner are the chief. I thought not good by beating
out busily every particularitie, to rehearse unto you every small thing, least
peradventure by too long a treatise, I should be too tedious unto your
patience. Now the same holy vessels that were in the tabernacle were in the
temple also, saving that in Solomon's temple there was a far more goodly show
and pomp, than in the tabernacle: for none other cause undoubtedly, but that
the mysteries of Christ and of the Church, should increase every day more and
more to the sight of the world. Christ the true Solomon and king of peace and
tranquillity, the very eternal felicity it self has raised up in this
world to himself a Church, which stretches to the ends of the world. Of
which the Prophets have spoken very largely, Zachary especially, and the
famous Prophet Nathan, 2. Samuel. chap. 7. Thus much hitherto of the holy
place.

After the holy place in the sacred Ceremonies the next to be handled is The
holy time.
the holy time. For as to the outward religion a certain place was given, so
to the same also an appointed time was assigned. And holy days are to be
employed upon holy actions. For actions are either those, which we call handie
works invented for to get victuals, clothing, and other things necessary for
the use of our bodies: or else they are holy or religious, which are done for
ye exercise of outward religion. We must not consume all our time in handie
works and profane business: neither can we bestow al times upon outward
religion. But those actions are not without time. For every action is contained
in time. Therefore God has divided the time into sundry parts for sundry
actions, so that he will have some woorking days to serve for handie actions,
and other holy days for ye exercise of outward religion. Not that the working
days are not holy and dedicated to the Lord: (for he does challenge all days
and times to himself, and will at all seasons be worshipped in heart) but for
because the holy days are singularly, and as it were, more precisely
consecrated to the outward worship of God, than the working days are.

Therefore the festival or holy day, which by Gods appointment is holy What an
holiday is
to the Lord, was kept for the devout exercising of Gods outward worship.
Therefore those days are not holy, nor those feasts lawful, which are not
held to the one and only God JEHOVAH: neither are those holy days lawful, in
which the lawful service of God is not lawfully exercised. And for those
causes the Sabbothes and festival days of the Israelites, are in the
Prophets many times rejected, because they were unlawfully solemnized without
pure faith and sincere affections.

Now all holy days had one common To what end the holy days were ordained.
name and were called Sabbothes, feasts, holy days, meetinges and assemblies.
All holy days, what name soever they were called by, were ordained to God
alone, not to creatures, not for surfeiting and wanton chambering. All holy
days were invented for the health, profit, and recreation of mankind. For
holy days are no burden, but the easing of our burdens. Profane works I
confess are profitable, but ease is also necessary: sor without rest labor
cannot continue. The Lords will therefore is to give man a time of recreation,
and bids his servant to be merry on the holy days in holiness and
modesty, so that their ease may be an honest recreation, and not reproachful
sensuality. Again ease of it self is not good, but in respect of an other
thing it is good. God bids to cease from work, but yet he sets us on
work another way, he wills us to cease from bodily labor, and begin to
work in heart and mind, and wholly apply our selves to his holy service. And
therefore it is needful to have holy assemblies, the reading of the holy
Scriptures, public prayers, sacrifices (for it is prescribed in the 28. and
29. Chap. of the book of Numbers, what they ought to offer at every feast and
holy day) the celebration of the Sacraments, and whatsoever else the Lord has
commanded to be done at festival days and solemn seasons. For that one
thing is here required especially, which Marie found, as she sat at the feet
of Jesus and heard his word.

Moreover all feasts generally do contain the memory and put us in the
remembrance of notable things, every feast according to ye name. The Sabbath
did put them in mind of (...)
Gods good benefit in creating the world for the behoof and profit of us
men. It was also, as Moses witnesses Exodus 31. a sign of the true
sanctification which God alone bestows upon the people that call upon his
name. The other holy days did beat into them the memory of the other
benefits that God had showed them, and had (as I will anon declare) their
several significations.

Now there was a measure and certain number of holy days, which A (...) holy
(...)
were distinguished and very wisely ordered: first into seven nights, whereof
every one had in it one Sabbath, that was the seventh day: then into months.
For the first day of every month was holy to the Lord, and was called the
feast of the New moon: and lastly they were divided into yearly feasts,
which returned once every year at an appointed season: of yt sort of feasts
there were three in number, The Passover, Pentecoste, and the feast of
Tabernacles. Besides these there were also other made holy days, which God
had not commanded, but were received by the Church to the glory of God, and
the remembrance of his great benefits. For the feast of Lotts which they
called Purim, and was brought in by Mardocheus, was received of all ye Church,
as is to be seen in the 9. of Esther. The feast of dedication was ordained by
Judas Machabeus with y^ consent of all the Church, in memory that the temple
was restoared, and the people delivered from the tyranny of king Antiochus, as
is to be read in the 4. Chapter of the first book of Machabees. And Christ our
Lord did honor that feast of dedication with an holy Sermon. Moreover Solemn
fastings.
there were solemn fastinges appointed to be kept among the people of God, as
in the fifth month, wherein the city was set on fire: in the seventh month,
wherein Godolias was slain: and in the tenth month wherein Jerusalem was
besieged: Of which fastinges the Prophet Zachary speaks in his 7. and 8.
Chapiters: and in the time of Esther a fast was ordained in the month Adar,
for a remembrance of the calamity which was wrought, or rather purposed
against the Jews by the wicked Aman.

Of the Sabbath and the signification thereof I spoke a little above, and The
Sabbath.
in an other place also where I expounded the ten commandments. The Sabbath
was observed by a natural and divine law ever from the first creation of the
world: and is the chief of all other holy days. For it was not then first
ordained by Moses, when the ten commandments were given by God from
heaven. For the keeping of the Sabbath was received of the saints immediately
from the beginning of the world. And therefore we read that the Lord in the
commandments did say, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. And
before the law was given there is evident mention made of the Sabbath in the
16. of Exodus and the 2. of Genesis

The second kind of holy days was The new Moon.
the New moons, which were solemnized in ye beginning of every month. Mention
is made of them in the 10. and 28. Chap. of the book of Numbers. Samuel. 20.
Psalm. 81. Ezech. 46. and 2. of Chro. 2. That solemnization is reported to have
been ordained in remembrance of the light created, to admonish the people not
to ascribe the months to Ianus, or Mars, or any other planet, but to the one
and only God the maker, governor, and ruler of al things and seasons.
Moreover it was a sign of the reparation or renewing of faithful minds by the
heavenly illumination: that we Christians may truly and in deed solemnize the
new moon, when being brought forth of darcknesse into light by the son of
God, we walk as becomes the children of light, and reject the works of the
devil and darkness.

The third kind of holy days does contain the feasts y^ return once every
The three years metings or asse^blies of the Jews.
year, of which I find to be three: The Passover, the Pentecoste, and the
feast of tabernacles. Now the Lords will was, yt in these three feasts there
should be general assemblies and solemn meetinges in the holy place, to wit,
at the tabernacle, and after the tabernacle, at Solomon's temple. For thus says
Moses in Deuteronomy. Thrice in the year shall every male appear before the Lord thy
God in the place, which he has chosen, that is, in the feast of sweet
bread, in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles. Neither shall
he appear empty in the sight of the Lord. Every one according to the gift of
his hand, and according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he has
given thee: that is to say. Every man shall of^^r to the Lord according as he
can, and according to ye measure of riches which the Lord has given him. Now
those three solemn feasts were divided into three several months most apt
to journey and to travel in. In the spring time was the Passover holde^, when
first the corn began to spindle or turn into ears. About baruest when the
first work belonging to husbandry was done and finished, they kept the feast
of Pentecost. And lastly, when all their fruits were in, they went up to the
feast of tabernacles. And so many went to it as possibly could go. Some are
of opinion that they, which had once in the year appeared before the Lord,
were dispensed withal, and might lawfully tarry at home, at the other two
feast times. But I think verily that religious men, did seeldome times use
such dispensations. The Lord in one place promises that he will defend and
keep the bounds and substance of them, that travel to seek his name.
Howsoever those dispensations were admitted, yet this is most sure, as
appears by all histories, that at those feasts were very great assemblies.

Now the feast of Passover was Passover.
called by many names, but especially it was termed the feast of sweet, or
unleavened bread. For by the space of seven whole days they fedd upon
unleavened bread. The Ceremonies of that feast, with ye sacrifices that were to
be offered thereat, are at large described in the 12. of Exodus, and 23. of
Leuiticus. In that feast was eaten the Pascall Lamb, in no other place but at
the tabernacle, or afterward at the temple, Deuteronomy. 16. for a remembrance of that
notable deliverance of Israel, and all the faithful out of the Egyptian
servitude and slavery. In that feast God would have the first fruits of their
land offered unto him in token of the Manna, wherewith he fedd their fathers.
Moreover that feast did signify the passing over and delivering of the
faithful, which in the s^eading of blood was accomplished by Christ.
Whereupon the Apostle said, Christ our Passover is offered up. 1. Cor. 4. But
of the Passover I will speak more in my next Sermon.

The Pentecost was also called the (...)
feast of weeks, and new corn. For at that feast was set forth Show bread
made of the new years corn. They reckoned from the next day after the
Passover seven weeks, that is, fifty days, and upon the fifteeth day they
did celebrate the memory of the law of God, revealed and given by God
himself from heaven unto his people Israel. For the fifteeth day of their
departure out of Egypt, we read that the Lord himself spoke to them at the
mount Sinai, and gave to them the law of the ten commandments: so that the
Pentecost was a memorial, that as then the Church was illuminated with the
very word of God. And that old Pentecost was a figure of the day wherein
Christ the Lord beeinge the end of the law, did send the holy Ghost upon
his disciples, and did illuminate his spouse the church. The ceremonies
belonging to this feast are expressed by Moses in the 23. Chapter of Leuiticus.

They kept the feast of Tabernacles The feast of the seventh month, or of the
tabernacles.
in the seventh month, as Moses commanded in Deuteronomium: saying, When thou
have gathered in the croppe of thy land and vineyardes, then shall thou keep
the feast of Tabernacles, by the space of seven days: and thou shall be merry
in thy holy day, thou and thy son and thy daughter, thy man servant and
thy maid servant, the Leuite, the stranger, the father less, and the
widdowe that are within thy gates. Seven days shall thou keep holy unto the
Lord thy God, in the place which the Lord has chosen to him self: because
the Lord thy God has given thee happy success in all thy fruits, and in all
the work of thy hands. See therefore that thou rejoice. Moreover the manner
of this feast solemnly celebrated is to be read in the 8. Chapter of
Nehemias, where, whosoever looks, he shall find it described at the full.
Now this feast of Tabernacles of ye seventh month, was divided into four
solemnities. For the first day of the month was y^ feast of Trumpets, or
sounding of Tru^pets, which was a memorial of those troublesome The feast of
trumpets.
wars which the people did happily atchiue by the help and aid of God,
against the Amalechites, and all other their heathen enemies. And by that feast
was signified that the whole life of man upon the earth is a continual The
feast of clean^ing.
warrefare. Upon the tenth day of the same month was held the feast of
cleansing. In that feast the Priest in a solemn form of words began to
confess aloud the peoples sins, and every man quietly following in the same
words did recite them privately to him self, and in his mind did quietly
speak unto the Lord. To those confessions was added the ceremony used with
the escape goat, and the sacrifice which is at large set down in the 16.
Chapter of Leuiticus. And so were the sins of the people cleansed: which was
a type of the cleansing, yt should be through Christ, who being once offered,
did with the only sacrifice of his body, take away the sins of all the
world. It did also contain the doctrine of true repentance. Upon the
fifteenth day began the feast of Tabernacles. For by the space of The feast
of tabernacles.
seven whole days, that is, from the fifteenth to the 22. the people dwelte in
Tabernacles. The end of this ceremony the Scripture does declare to be, that
the posterity should know that the Lord did place their forefathers in
Tabernacles: whereby they were put in mind of the good, that he did to them,
while they were in the wilderness. For they were kept forty years in the
wilderness, so yt they lacked neither victuals nor clothing. And by that
feast we are warned that the life of this world is but as a stage, and that
we have no abiding place to stay for ever, but are still looking for the
world to come: as the Apostle taught us 2. Cor. 5. Heb. 13. The fourth feast
of this month was held upon the 22. The congregation.
day, and was called the Congregation or assembly. Upon that day was
gathered the offering and stipe^d given to the ministry, for reparations of
the temple, for the cost of Sacrifices, and maintenance of the ministry. It
is thought that in ye feast was song the Psalm: How pleasant are thy
Tabernacles etc. and certain other Psalms called Torculares Psalmi, which
they did use. Thus much hitherto concerning the feasts that fall out once in
every year.

Here also I think it necessary to make mention of the year of Jubilee. The
year of Jubilee.
Now this year of Jubilee was every fifteeth as it fell by course, which is
at large described with all the ceremonies belonging thereunto in the 25. of
Leuiticus. It was declared to all the people in the land of promise by the
sound of a trumpet made of a Rams horn, with a proclamation of freedom to
all them that were wrapped in servitude or bondage.

In that Jubilee was contained very evidently the mystery of Christ our
Lord, who declared to us the meaning of that ceremony out of the 61. Chapter
of the prophecy of Esaie, in Saint Lukes Gospel where he says that he is
he that does in deed proclaim the Jubilee, the true freedom and acceptable
year of the Lord. Now he has pronounced remission and freedom to all the
faithful, not with a trumpet made of a Rams horn, but with the Gospel. For
by the mercy of God in the merit of Jesus Christ the son of God all debtes
or sins are forgiven to all the faithful that live upon the face of all the
earth upon condition, that we whose sins are forgiven should likewise
forgive the trespasses of them that offend us. And in Christ verily we have
the true and everlasting rest that shall never fail us. By Christ we have
return granted us to our possession or country, from whence we were fallen,
that is to heaven the place of ye faithful.

Thus much have I said of the holy time or holy days as briefly as
possibly I could. The rest is at the full to be seen in the 23. of Exodus:
Leuiticus 23. Number. 28. and 29: Deuteronomy. 6. That which is behind touching this
argument, I mean, touching the Iewishe ceremonies, I will by Gods leave make
an end of in my next Sermon. Now let us make our humble prayers and
supplications unto God etc.

Of the Sacraments of the Jews, of their sundry sorts of sacrifices, and
certain other things perteining to their ceremonial law.
The sixte Sermon.
IN my last Sermon I spoke of ye holy persons, I mean, the ministers of Gods
religion the Leuitical priests, and the place and time assigned to Gods
service: there remains now for us to consider the holy thing which those
holy persons did exercise in the holy time and place, I mean the very
worship and holy rites so ordained, taught, and prescribed by God him self,
that all men might easily understand how to do service, and what honor to
give unto the Lord. In this treatise we have first to consider the Jewish
Sacraments, and then their sacrifices.

The ancient church of the saints Two Sacraments of the Synagogue.
had two especial sacraments, circumcision and the Pascall lamb. Of both which
I will speak severally, and agreably to the word of God according to the
grace which the Lord shall vouchsafe to give unto me.

Now circumcision was the holy Circumcision what it is.
action, whereby the flesh of the foreskinne was cut away for a sign of the
covenant that God made with men. Or to describe it more largely, circumcision
was a mark in the privy members of men betokening the eternal covenant of
God, and was or deined by God him self, to testify his goodwill toward them
that were circumcised, to warn them of regeneration and cleanness, and to
make a difference betwixt the confederates of God and other people or nations.

The author therefore of circumcision is God him self: the beginning of it is
of great antiquity. For ye Lord him self in the Gospel says: Circumcision
The original or beginning of Circumcision.
began not at Moses, but at the Patriarchs. Moses verilye did renew or repair
the law or custom of circumcision, but Abraham the renowned friend of God
was the first that was circumcised in the ninetieth year of his age, and in the
very same day that God making a covenant with him did first ordeine the use
of circumcision. For he added circumcision as a seal to the league which he
made with Abraham and with his seed for ever. The place is extant in the 17.
Chap. of Genesis. It was first ordained in the 2046. year after the creation
of the world, 390. years after the deluge, when Sem the son of Noah was 487
years old. So that Moses is found to have been borne 320. years after the
first institution of circumcision: whereby it appears that circumcision was
in use among the Patriarchs 400. years before the law was given to the
Israelites by the hand of Moses.

Now for because circumcision is Of the league of God and man.
added as a sign or seal to the league that was made betwixt God and Abraham,
I must briefly and by a short digression touch the manner or order of that
covenant. God in making of leagues, as he does in all things else, applies
him self to our capacities, and imitateth the order which men use in making
confederacies.

Men do by leagues as by most sure and steadfast bonds bind themselves to the
society and fellowship of one body or people, in which society, to the end
they may be the safer and live more quietly from the wrongs and injuries of
all other nations, they do mutually hazard both lives and livings the one in
defense of y^ others liberty. In these leagues they do precisely express what
they be that make ye confederacy, upon what conditions, and how far the
covenant shall extend. And therefore when Gods mind was to declare the favor
and good will that he bare to mankind, and to make us men partakers wholly of
him self and his goodness by pouring him self out upon us, to our great good
and profit, it pleased him to make a league or covenant with mankind. Now he
did not first begin the league with Abraham, but did renew to him the
covenant yt he had made a great while before. For be did first of all make it
with Adam the first father of us all, immediately upon his transgression, when
he received him silly wretch into his favor again, and promised his only
begotten son, in whom he would be reconciled to the world, and through whom
he would whoaly bestow him self upon us, by making us partakers of all his
good and heavenly blessings: and by binding us unto him self in faith and due
obedience. This ancient league made first with Adam he did afterward renew
to Noah, and after that again with the blessed Patriarche Abraham. And again
after ye space of 400. years it was renewed under Moses at the mount Sinai,
where the conditions of the leagu were at large written in the two tables, and
many ceremonies added thereunto. But most excellently of all, most clearly and
evidently did our Lord and savior Jesus Christ him self show forth that
league, who wiping away all the ceremonies, types, figures and shadows brought
in in steed of them the very truth, and did most absolutely fulfill and
finish the old league, bringing all the principles of our salvation and true
godliness into a brief summarie, which, for the reuewing and fulfilling of
all things, and for the abrogation of the old ceremonies, he called the new
league or new testament. In that testament Christ alone is preached the
perfectness and fulness of all things: in it there is nothing more desired
then faith and charity, and in it is granted holy and wonderful liberty
unto the Godly. Of which I will speak at another time. But now I return to y^
league which was renewed with Abraham.

We are expressly taught in (...) (...).
who they were that made the league, that is, the living, eternal and
omnipotent God, who is the chief maker preserver and governor of al things:
and Abraham with al his seed, that is, with all the faithful of what nation or
country soever they be. For so does the Apostle expound the seed of
Abraham, especially in his Epistle to the Galathians, where he says: If ye be
Christ's, then are ye the seed of Abraham, and heirs by promise.

The time how long this league The (...) how (...) this (...) should (...)
should endure is eternal, and without end or term of time. For although in
the renuinges or declarations of the league many things were added, which
afterward did vanish away, especially when Christ was come in the flesh, yet
notwithstanding in the substantial and chiefest points ye can find nothing
altered or changed. For God is always ye God of his people: he does always
demand and require of them faithful obedience: as may most evidently be
perceived in the new testament.

For there are two points or especial The (...) of (...) league (...)
conditions, contained in this league. The first whereof declares what God
does promise, and what he will do for his confederates, I mean, what we
may look for at his hands. The second comprehends ye duty of man, which
he does owe to God his confederate and sovereign Prince. Therefore God for his
part says, I will be thy God and Saddai, that is, thy fullness and
sufficiency: I will, I say, be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee.
God of him self is wholly sufficient to most absolute perfectness and
blessedness, neither needs he the help of any other, since whatsoever is
in any place wheresoever, it is both of him, and has abiding by him. God alone
suffices man, and be alone God is all an al to his co^federats.
is the giver of all that men desire, or does belong to perfect felicity. And
therefore Saturnus (peradventure by occasion of the word Saddai) took his
name among the heathen, and signifies to suffice or satisfy. For he alone is
able to satisfy or suffice all, who is him self very fullness and
sufficiency it self. But now God shows by two arguments that he will be
the sufficiency or all in all to the seed of Abraham. For first he says, To
thy seed will I give the land of Chanaan. In which promise he comprehends
all earthly and bodily benefits, to wite, great wealth, felicity,
tranquillity, abundaunce of all things, health, glory, notable victories,
and whatsoever else pertains to the preservation and temporal happiness of
mankind.

Now how he did perform this promise to the seed of Abraham the holy
scripture does declare, by that means teaching that the very true God was the
God of Abraham's seed, as he had promised to their father Abraham. Secondarily
he promises ye seed, wherein all the nations of the earth were to be
blessed: to wit, Christ the Savior, whom he had promised to Adam many years
before. To bless is to enriche with all spiritual benediction, wherein he
comprehends all ye spiritual gifts of God, the forgiveness of sins, the
reviving of life, and glory everlasting. To bless also is to take away a
curse, so that this promise of Gods to Abraham is all one with that, which he
made to Adam: saying, The seed of the woman shall tread down the Serpents
head. For the head of ye old Dragon is nothing else, but the power and
kingdom of Satan. His power is the curse, sin, and death. Therefore, when
his head is crushed or troaden down, the curse is taken away, and in sted of
the curse succeeds a blessing. By this I say he does declare that he will
be the God of Abraham and of his seed.

The second condition of the league betwixt God and man, prescribes to What is
r^quired of men in the league.
man what he must do, and how he must behave him self toward God his
confederate and sovereign Prince. Walk before me, says God to man, and be
upright. Now, they walk before God, which do direct all their life, words,
and works according to the will of God. His will is that we should be
upright. That uprightness is gotten by faith, hope, and charity: in which
three are contained all the offices of the Saints which are the friends and
confederates of the Lord. Therefore this latter condition of the league does
teach the confederates what to do, and how to behave themselves before the
Lord: to wite, to take him for their God, to stick to him alone, who is their
only all in all, to call upon him alone, to worship him alone, and through
his Messiah to look for sanctification and life everlasting. These were the
conditions of the covenant: to which the number of ceremonies were not added
in Abraham's time, which afterward were given to the Israelites under the
leading of their Captain Moses.

To this confederacy the Lord did add circumcision as a sign or seal
Circumcision was the sign or zeal annexed ^o the league.
to confirm it withal. Seals are put to writings for an effectual force and
confirmations sake. The tables or writings do contain and give evidence of
all the points of the whole league. Circumcision therefore is added to the
league in steed of the writing and also of the seal, and for that cause
circumcision is called the league it self: even as the writings or letters of
covenants among us are commonly called the very covenant, when as in deed
they are nothing else but the evidences of the league, which contain in
writing all the order of the confederacy, and confirm it with a seal. It is
very usual that the signs do take the names of the things which they do
signify, so that it is no marvel though circumcision be called the league,
when as in deed the league is not the cutting of the skin, but the communion
of fellowshippe which we have with God.

In the seventeenth of Genesis thus says the Lord, touching this sign of
outward circumcision: This is my covenant, which ye shall keep betwixt me
and you, and thy seed after thee. Every male shall be circumcised among you. Ye
shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskinne: and it shall be for a sign of the
covenant betwixt me and you etc. Lo here circumcision in these words of the
Lords is first named the covenant, and afterward for expositions sake, it is
called the sign of the covenant. In the same sense does Saint Stephan call
it a testament in the seventh Chapter of the Acts, when he meant that it was
the sign or seal of the Testament.

Moreover the manner of circumcision is declared: Ye shall, says God (...) and
(...) ^f Cir^^^cision.
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin. For there is a skin which does
incompasse, cover, and hang somewhat over the nut or forepart of a man's
yard, and that skin is called the flesh of the foreskinne, because it does
appear or hang before the rest. This skin did they cut away with a knife
made of stone, and did make bare the topp or nutt of the manchildes privy
member. The cutting or taking away of the flesh was called circumcision. But
now whose office it was to cut that skin away, we find not expressed. It
appears that the most honorable in every house or family, I mean the
first begotten or ancient of every household did circumcise before the law,
which office was turned to the priests, when once the law was given. It is a
singular example and no more to be found like unto it, that Zippora the wife of
Moses did circumcise her son. Exodus 4. Chap.

Now also the time of circumcision is set down, to wite, the eighth day, when
the new borne child began to be of a little more strength. And we gather
out of the fifte Chapter of the book of Iosue that they did circumcise them,
not with knives of iron, but of stone: for in that Chapter the Lord does in
express words command to circumcise the sons of Israel with knives of
stone. But it is manifest by the rites, of the sacraments that God does alter
nothing in the ceremonies of the sacraments: and therefore we conjecture and
gather that Abraham used none other, but knives of stone, especially since we
read that Zippora Moses his wife did circumcise her son with a stone. The
rest of the Iewishe trifles which they sow abroad touching the ceremonies of
cicumcision, I do of purpose here let pass. For they are utterly unworthy to
be heard, and have no mysteries contained in them. But the knife of stone is of
force in the exposition of the mystery of circumcision.

For circumcision had a mystery The mystery and ^ening of Circumcision.
and a most certain meaning hidden within it.

For first circumcision did signify that the whole nature of man is unclean
and corrupt, and therefore that all men have need of cutting and regeneration.
And for that cause that cuttinge was made in the member wherewith man is
begotten. For we are all begotten and borne the sons of wrath in original
sin. Neither does any man deliver us from that damnation, but he alone that
is without sin, to wite, the blessed seed Jesus Christ our Lord, who was
conceived by the holy Ghost and borne of the virgin Marie: who with the
shedding of his blood (which was prefigured in the blood shed in circumcision)
does cleanse us from sin, and make us heirs of life everlasting. And now
this circumcision makes sorely against them that deny original sin: and
puts them to their shifts that attribute justification and salvation to our
own strength and virtue. For if we were clean, if we by our own power could
get salvation, what needed our fathers to be cut in that sort. The things
that are cut off, are either vnpure, or else superfluous. But God made nothing
vnpure or superfluous. Now he made the flesh of the foreskinne. If the flesh
of the foreskinne had been evil, God had not made man with the flesh of the
foreskinne. The skin therefore is not evil of it self, nor yet superfluous:
but the cuttinge of the foreskinne does rather serve to teach us to
understand, that by our birth and nature we are corrupt, and that we cannot
be cleansed of that corruption but by the knife of stone.

And for that cause verily was circumcision given in that member and in none
other. I will anon add another cause out of Lactantius why it was given in the
priuities, and in none other part of all the body. Moreover circumcision did
signify and testify that God almighty, of his mere grace and goodness, is
joined with an indissoluble bond of covenant unto us men, whom his will is
first to sanctify, then to justify, and lastly to inriche with all heavenly
treasures through Christ our Lord and reconciler. For that was the meaning
of the stoanie knife. Because Christ the blessed seed is the rock of stone,
out of which do flow most pure and cleansing waters, and he by his spirit
does cut from us, whatsoever things do hinder the mutual league and amity
betwixt God and us: he also does give and increase in us both hope and charity
in faith, so that we may be knitt and joined to God in life everlasting, which
is the blessed and happy life in deed. Now here it is expedient to hear the
testimonies of the law and the Apostles. In the 30. of Deuteron. Moses says:
The Lord thy God shall circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, that
thou may love the Lord thy God. Now the outward and visible cutting was a
sign of this inward circumcision. And Paul also speakinge of Abraham says:
And he received the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the righteousness
of faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised, that he should be the father of
all them that believe, though they were not circumcised, that righteousness
might be imputed to them also etc. Lo here Abraham's circumcision was a sign
y^ God by his grace had justified Abraham: which justification he received by
faith before his circumcision, which is an argument that they which believe,
though they be not circumcised, are nevertheless justified with faithful
Abraham: and again that the Jews, which are circumcised, are justified of God
by faith. And for that cause was circumcision given in The grace ^f God is not
tied to ^^rcumci^i^n.
the very body of man, that he might bear in his body the league of God,
and be thereby admonished that he is justified by grace through faith. Whereby
we gather also that the grace of God, and the justification of the godly is
not tied to the sign. For if it had, then had not Abraham been justified
before his circumcision, but even in his circumcision. Furthermore if it had
been so, then ye Lord, whose will is to have mankind saved, would not have
given commandment to have them circumcised upon the eighth day. For many
children died before the eighth day, and never came to circumcision, and yet
they were not damned. To which we may add that Sara, Rebecca, Rahel,
Iochabeth, and Marie Moses sister with innumerable mo matrones and holy
virgins could not be circumcised, and yet they were saved by the grace of God
through faith in the Messiah that was to come. The grace of God therefore was
not tied to the sacrament of circumcision: but yet it was not despised and
neglected of the holy saints of the old church, but used to the end, for
which it was ordained, that is, to be a testimony and a seal of free
justification in Christ, who circumciseth us spiritually Colos. ^.
without hands by the working of the holy Ghost.

Furthermore, God by the outward By circum^is^on the circumci^ed are gathered
(...) to one (...).
and visible sign did gather into one church them which were circumcised, in
which number those, which he had chosen before, he did join to him self with
the bond of his spirit. For saint Paul for the very same cause did call
the people of one religion the circumcision, as is evident by the 15. Chapter
to the Romans, and the third to the Philippians.

Therefore by circumcision God did separate his people from the unbelieving
nations. Whereupon it came that to be called uncircumcised was as great
reproache among them, as to be called dog is now adays among us. For an
uncircumcised person was reputed for an unclean and profane man, and for such
an one 1 Samuel ^^ Acts. ^.
as had no part in God nor his couenaunts.

Finally, circumcision did put the Circum^^sio^ (...) a man (...) mynde^ his
(...)
circumcised in mind of their duty al their life long, to wite, that every
man should think that he had taken upon him to profess God, and to bear in
his body the Sacrament of ye Lord. For that is the cause why the Israelites
were named, or had their names given them in their circumcision. For it is
evident in Luke that John Baptist and Jesus our savior had their names given
them at their circumcision, even as also the first circumcised at his
circumcision was called Abraham, whose name before was said to be Abram.

It did admonish the circumcised of his duty, for so much as he had given his
name unto the Lord his confederate, to be enrolled in the register of God
among the names of them that give them selves unto the Lord: wherefore he ought
by covenant and duty to frame his life not after his own lust and pleasure,
but according to the will of God, to whom he did betake him self. For the
condition of the covenant was, that the circumcised should not defile them
selves with idolatry and strange religions, that they should not pollute with
unclean living the bodies and minds that were hallowed to the Lord, but that
they perseuearing in true faith, should ensue godliness, show the works of
repentance, and be obedient to God in all things. For thus says Moses in the
tenth of Deuterono. Circumcise the foreskinne of your hearts, and harden not
your necks any longer. To which words the Prophet Jeremy alludeth in his
fourth Chapter: saying, Be ye circumcised to the Lord, and cut away the
foreskinne of your heart. And the Martyr S. Stephan rebuking the unbelieving
Jews says: Ye stiffenecked, and of uncircumcised heart and ears, ye
always resist the holy ghost: Very rightly therefore does the holy Apostle
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans declare, that there are two sorts of
circumcision: the Two Circu^cisions, one of the spirit, the other of the
letter.
one of the letter, in the flesh, the outward circumcision, that is made with
hands: the other in the heart, of the Spirit, the inward circumcision, which
is made by the means of the holy Ghost. The circumcision of the heart God does
like well of in those y^ be his, but that in the fleash he does utterly
mislike of, if as the fleashe is, the heart be not circumcised. The liking and
misliking of these two circumcisions is in that, which went before, so plainly
already declared, that I need not to stick any longer upon it.

And here I think it not amiss, before Lactantius touching Circumcision.
I make an end of circumcision, to rehearse unto you (dearly beloved) the
words of the ancient writer Lactantius, lib. Instit. 4. Chap. 17. where he
speaks of circumcision in this manner. The meaning of circumcision was, that
we should make bare our breasts, to wite, that we should live with a simple
and plain dealing heart: because that part of the body which is circumcised,
is partly like to a heart, and is the fore part of the priuitie: and the
cause why God commanded to make it bare, was, that by that sign he might
admonish us not to have a covered heart, that is, that we should not cover
within the secrets of our conscience any crime, whereof we ought to be
ashamed. And this is the circumcision of the heart, whereof the Prophets
speak, which God has translated from the mortal flesh to the immortal
soul. For the Lord being whole set and fully minded according to his eternal
goodness, to have a care for our life and safeguard, did set repentance before
our eyes for us to follow, as a way to bring us thereunto: so that if we
make bare our hearts, that is, if by confession of our sins we satisfy the
Lord, we should obtain pardone, which is denied to the proud and those that
conceal their faults, by God, who beholds not the face as man does, but
searches the secrets of the breast. Thus much hitherto has that ancient
writer of the church Lactantius Firmianus declared unto us touching the
mystery of circumcision.

Now all this which hitherto I have said touching the meaning and The sum
of Circumcision.
mystery of circumcision was set forth as in a picture to be seen of all men's
eyes, so often as circumcision was solemnized in the church. There was the
league, as it were, renewed, which God did make with men. There was the grace of
God, his sanctification, and our corruption declared: therein did Christ the
rock of stone appear, who with his spirit does cut and wash away all
spots of the Church.

Moreover the worshippers of God did learn by that sign, and so by all the
holy ceremony, that they being in one ecclesiastical body, ought to do
their endeavor by pureness of living to win the favor of God their
confederate. Because by the visible circumcision there was after a sort an
open confession made of the true religion, of free consent to the true
religion, and of a bynding by promise unto the same. He therefore that did
despise or unadvisedly neglect that holy ceremony, was sharply punished, as
may be gathered by the 17. of Genesis and the fourth Chapter of Exodus. And so
much hitherto touching circumcision.

There follows now the second Sacrament of the ancient church, I Of the
Paschal lamb.
mean, the Paschal Lamb. It is an Hebrewe word, not signifying a passion, as
it should seem, if it were derived according to the Greek etymology, but it
signifies a skipping, a leaping, or a passing over. For the Hebrewe * * *
signifies to leap or pass over. The cause of this word Moses him self
shows in the law, where he says: The Lord shall go over to strike the
Egyptians, and when he shall see the blood upon the upper post and the two
side posts of the door, * * * the Lord will pass over that door, and will
not suffer the destroyer to come within your houses. This sacrament is known
also and called by other names. For it is called a sign, a remembrance, a
solemnity, an holy assembly, the feast of the Lord, a worship, an
observation, an oblation, and a Sacrifice. But whereas that ceremony is called
a passing over, that is not done without a trope. For the passing over was the
very benefit, wherein the Angel of the Lord did pass over the Jews, leave
their houses untouched, and save their lives: but for because the Paschall
Lamb was a memorial and a renewing of that benefit, therefore it took the
name of the benefit. Even as I admonished you before, that it is usual in
Sacraments, for the signs to be called by the names of the things that they
signify, because of the likeness and mutual proportion that is betwixt them.

Let us see now what the passover was, and what kind of ceremony What (...)
Passe^^^^ was.
did belong unto it. The Passover was an holy action ordained by God, in the
killing and eating of a Lamb, partly to the end that the Church might keep
in memory the benefit, which God did for them in the land of Egypt, to be a
testimony of Gods good will toward the faithful, to be a type of Christ, and
partly also to gather all the partakers thereof into the fellowship of one
body, and to put them in mind to be thankful and innocent.

This Sacrament was first ordained The (...) autho^ ^^ the (...) time (...).
by God him self, and not by man. For Moses delivered to the children of Israel
whatsoever he received at the Lords hand: as is to be seen at large in the
12 Chapter of Exodus. And he instituted that ceremony eue^ at that very time,
when he brought y^ Israelites from out of Egypt. Now since this ceremony came
first from God, it follows consequently that all the passeouers, which
followed, even until that passover, which the Lord did hold with his
disciples a little before his death, were holy and divine actions. To flesh
and worldly wisdom many points, I may say, all the parts of this sacrament
do seem to be merely absurd and altogether needelesse, but faith, which
looks up to God the author of this sacrament, has a great respect unto, and
reuerenceth greatly all the mysteries contained therein. For even as God is
the chief and most absolute wisdom, so are all his ordinances most
absolute and passing profitable.

Here now is noted the time, when this Sacrament was first delivered to the
church of Israel, to wite, in the four hundredth and thirteeth year, (counting
from the promise made to Abraham, or from the time that he departed from his
country first) which was the 2447 year from the beginning of the world, 791
years after the general flood. The time is also appointed when the passover
should be holden, to wite, every year, in the month Nisan, which takes part
of our March and part of April. Moreover the very day is named, that is, the
fourteenth of the month, beginning their account at ye spring times
Equinoctial. For on the tenth day The Equi^octiall is, when the day and ^ight
is both of on ^ength, and comes twice in a ^eare, to ^it, the 8. ^f April,
and (...) 8. of October. The jews ^egan to ^ckon from (...) to 12. (...) we
be^in to reckon from 7. in the morning till 6. at night, and so it was, that
our three a clock was nine a clock to the^, and ou^ five, eleven to them.
they chose the Lamb that should be eaten, and on the fourteenth day they
killed it. There is also set down the hour of the day, when it should be
slaughtered: that was, about even tide, to wite, betwixt three and five of the
clock in the after noone, according to the course of our dialles, and as the
Jews were wont to reckon ye hours of the day, it was to be killed betwixt
nine and eleven a clock. And in that killing of the Lamb at even tide did
this meaning lie hid, that Christ should be slain in the latter days of the
world, yea the very hour and moment wherein Christ should dye was therein
foretold.

For he gave up the ghost about the ninth hour. Whereupon Saint Peter says
that the Prophets did search at what moment or minute of time the spirit of
Christ, which was in them, did signify that Christ should come and suffer.

Furthermore there was a certain appointed place assigned to this Sacrament. In
Egypt verily they did The ninth hour of the Jews is three a clock in the
afternoon to us.
eat it by companies here and there in several houses. But, when they were
once come into the land of promise, it was not lawful to hold passover in any
place, but at the Tabernacle of appointment, and after that at the temple in
Jerusalem. Being The place appointed for the eating of the Passover.
divided therefore into several houses at Jerusalem they did eat it by
companies, as is to be seen in the 22. Chapter of S. Lukes gospel. And that
was a type that Christ, which was to be offered but once upon the mount of
Caluerie, should be effectual for ever to cleanse the sins of all his
people.

There was also appointed who they should be, that should hold the Who were
the guests at the eating of the lamb.
passover, to wite, the whole circumcised congregation of Israel, beeinge
assembled by houses and families in so great companies, as were sufficient to
eat a Lamb. For as Christ is the Savior of us all, so all sinners (for we
all are sinners) are the cause why Christ our Lord was offered upon the altar
of the Cross.

Moreover there is great diligence The manner or ^it^ of eating the Passover.
used in describing the manner of killing and eating the Lamb. First they
chose to them selves this Lamb from among other Lambs and Kiddes: the fifte
day after they cut the throat thereof, and saved the blood in a platter, which
with a bushe of Hysope made like a holy water stick they sprinkled upon the
two sides and upper posts of the door. The Lamb it self they did eat
publicly, not boiled with water, but roasted with fire, and that whole also, I
mean, both head and feet, and purtenaunce too: and with it they did eat
letuce or sower herbs, and unleavened bread. And while they were at it, they
stood about it, with their loins girded, with shoes on their feet, and
staves in their hands. They did eat it in haste, they neither brake nor cast
a bone of it unto the dogs, but burnt the bones with fire. From evening until
morning no man did set one foot out of doors.

All these ceremonies had their ends whereunto they tended, contained The end
whereto this ceremony tended.
great mysteries, and bare a very evident signification of things past,
things present, and things to come. They did also join the whole congregation
or Jewish church into one body, and profession of one religion: and did also
warn all those that did eat of the Lamb to be thankful to God, and zealous in
religion: as I will by parts touch, and teach you as briefly as I can.

For first of all the Lords will was The Lords benefit was kept in memory by
the eating of the Passover.
to keep in memory, and as it were for ever to prolong the remembrance of
that great benefit, which he did once for his people of Israel, in preserving
merueilously his chosen flock, when he slew in one night all the first borne
of the Egyptians, and the next day after led his elect from out of Egypt,
where they had a long time sustained great misery in bondage.

This benefit he would not have only to be preached by word of mouth (for
it is certainly sure that in that feast were made most effectual Sermons
touching Gods benefits and grace showed to their fathers) but would have them
also laid before their eyes by an holy action and ceremony, as it were by a
looking glass and lively picture, even as though their deed were newely in
doing again before their faces. For the visible action did after a sort make
a Sermon to their eyes and other senses. Wherefore Moses, when he did interpret
y^ ceremony and holy action, did say: When your children shall say unto
you, what means this worship of yours? ye shall say unto them, this
sacrifice is the passinge over of the Lord, who passed over the houses of the
children of Israel in Egypt, when he slew the Egyptians and delivered our
houses.

But this ceremony was the signification The (...) GOD^ good^ (...) his (...)
of a thing already past and therefore it should have little auailed that age
of man which followed, to celebrate a benefit which did nothing at all belong
unto them, unless the Lord had applied it to every age and season. God
therefore would have this to be as a testimony to the posterity, of his
favor, goodness, and perpetual assistance, to put them in mind that he was
not only the God of their fathers and ancestors, but that he would be the
God of all the posterities of the Israelites, that he would bear with and
spare them for the blood of Christ, and finally that he both would and could
defend them from all evil, and bestow upon them all good and fatherly
blessings. For in the 136 Psalm we read: O Praise the Lord for he is good,
because his mercy endures for ever: which struck the first borne of the
Egyptians, for his mercy endures for ever. With a strong hand and a
stretched out arm, For his mercy endures for ever. Besides the remembrance
therefore of the benefit, which God did for their fathers, the posterity did by
the use of that ceremony stir up their faith to believe that god would have
mercy on, and do good for them according to his natural goodness, even as
he did to their fathers before them. And by that means this ceremony was no
small exercise of faith in the children of Israel.

Furthermore, those ceremonies The Lamb was the type of Christ, of his passion
and redemption.
did contain the mysteries that were to come of Christ the Savior of us al.
For in them was prefigured what Christ should be, what he should do for the
world, by what means the faithful should be partakers with him, and how
they should beehaue them selves before him. For among many other beasts,
there was none thought to be more fit for this sacrament then a lamb, not so
much for the signification of simplicite and patience that was in Christ,
like to the quietness of a Lamb, as for because a Lamb was the daily
sacrifice that was offered to the Lord. For Paul says: Christ our paschall
Lamb is offered up. And a Lamb by the law was every morning and evening
offered up in sacrifice. For Christ is the lamb that was killed since the
beginning of the world. Of whom John Baptist testified saying: Beeholde the
lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. And for because we
all did go astray like sheep every one after his own way, the son of God
came down unto us, and became a sheep of our very substance and nature.
But yet he was sound and without spott, without sin and wickedness:
conceived by the holy ghost and borne of the virgin Marie. He was a male, and
of a year old: that is to say, strong and all one, the same to day that he was
yesterday, and the same for ever, to wit, the savior of all the world. The
ceremonial lamb was chosen and taken from among other lambs and goats. For
Christ descended lineally of righteous men and sinners: as is to be seen in
the first Chapter of Mathewes gospel. Likewise for the shedding of y^ lambs
blood, God did bear with the whole church of the Israelits: for the blood of
Christ (whereof the lambs blood was a type) was to be shed, that by it all the faithful might be cleansed, and that by the sheadinge of that, the anger of
God the father might be appeased, and he reconciled again unto the church.
The blood was sprinkled upon the upper and two side posts of the house with
a bunch of Hysope. Hysope verily is a base herb and of small account: and
the preachinge of the gospel seems to be foolish, vile, and of no valor:
and yet by the preachinge of the gospel ^he blood of Christ, unto the
remission of sins, must be sprinkled on us which are the house of God. Now
we receive the lamb to life, when we do eat, that is, when we believe that
Christ did suffer for us. For Christ is eaten by faith, as is at large declared
in the 6. Chap. of Saint John. The lamb is dressed with fire, and not with
water: it is not eaten raw but roasted. For Christ was not man alone, but
very God also, the true burnt offering. He is able fully to absolve us, so
that there needs no addition of ours. All our additions are mere water and
altogether cold. Moreover the whole Lamb was to be eaten, the head, the
feet, and purtenance. For unless we believe that Christ is very God and very
man, and that he is our wisdom, and righteousness, we do not eat him
wholly. They eat not the head, which deny that Christ is God. They eat not the
feet, which do deny that Christ is man. They eat not the purtenance, which do
not acknowledge the gifts that are in Christ, which he does communicate unto
the faithful, to wite, righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, redemption,
and life. The bones of the Lamb were neither broken nor thrown to the dogs,
but burnt with fire. For in Christ there was not one bone broken: as the
Apostle John bears witness in the nineteenth Chapter of his Gospel. Herein
also lies hidd another mystery. For although the son of God did sus^er in
his humanity, yet in his divinity he remained still without any passion. Now
the things in Christ which we cannot attain unto by reason of the
excellency of his Godhead, we do earnestly wish for and greatly desire.
Moreover, Christ is the meat of the reasonable and faithful soul, and is not
to be cast to dogs and unbelieving miscreants. The Lamb was to be eaten in
haste, without delay. For Christ must be eaten by faith out of hand without
foading off, and that too with a sharp desire and eager appetite. With the
Lamb they were commanded to eat sower herbs and unleavened bread. For the
faithful must repent them of their life ill spent, and wholly betake the^
selves to a purer trade of living. For here follows the manner how they ought
to behave them selves toward their redeemer. They stood to eat the Lamb,
having their loins girded, with shoes on their feet, and staves in their
hands. Such was the habit of waifaring men or pilgrims. We therefore must so
behave our selves in this present world, as does become pilgrims and strangers
which do contemn this world and look for another country. In their journey,
therefore let them give them selves to temperate modesty: let their feet be
shodde with the preaching of the Gospel of peace, let them wholly lean upon y^
staff of Gods aid and succor, and let the^ depart, with as much haste as may
be, from the bondage and corruption of this naughty world. This very same
ceremony was, as it were, a confession of y^ true religion, and as a
cognizance, The (...) and (...) of (...)
whereby y^ people of God were known from other people and nations. Therefore al
ye Israelites were gathered together into one church and society: wherein by
celebratinge of the passover they did profess that they were the redeemed,
the Libertines, and the people of the living God. For thereunto belongs the
commandment, which charged them that no stranger should eat of the Lamb:
but that the circumcised alone should be partakers of it: that it should not be
divided into many parts, that it should be eaten no where but in one place
alone, and that too by At the (...) first, and (...) the (...)
companies of all the Israelites: and lastly that no man should once set a foot
out of doors until the next morning. By which thing it is given us to
understand, that neither Christ nor our salvation is to be found without the
church, in the sects or schisms of wicked heretics. Christ the Lamb of God
does gather al ye faithful into one church, wherein he keeps them, and lastly
does save them. Last of all this ceremony did put gods people in mind of their
duty of tha^kfulnes, especially, The (...) did (...) the co^m^icants of their
duty.
of y^ study of godliness, and harmless innocence. They therefore did give
thanks to God for these and all other his benefits: they praised his name, and
did utterly abstain from all leauened bread. For ye shall find nothing so
severely forbidden in this ceremony, as the eating of leauened bread. Who
soever eats leauened bread, says the Lord, his soul shall perish from
among the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger, or an Israelite
borne. The same saying is afterward often times repeated and thoroughly beaten
into their brains. Now the Apostle Paul, whose cunning and learning was much
in the law of Moses: expounding what was meant by the leauened bread, does say.
Therefore let us keep the feast, not in the old leaven, nor in the leaven of
malice and unrighteousness: but in unleavened bread, that is, in sincerity
and truth. Thus much hitherto touching y^ eating of y^ Paschal lamb. To these
sacraments were also Of Sacrifices, and their first begi^nings.
added sacrifices of sundry sorts and many kinds: which were not first
inverted and taught by Moses, but were taken up and used immediately after the
world was created. For Caine and Abel offered burnte sacrifices to God the
maker of the world, the one of the fruits of the earth, and the other of the
cattaile that was in his flock. Like wise Seth, Noah, Sem, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, with all the other patriarchs are known to have sacrificed unto the
Lord. Now since the heathenish sacrifices of the Gentiles, as the very
heathen writers them selves did testify, were partly like unto, and in many
points all one with the Jewish sacrifices, it is not unlikely but that the
graunde partriarchs of the Gentiles did teach, every one his own nation the
manner of sacrificing, which they had learned of their forefathers, Sem, Cham,
Iaphet, and of the holy Patriarche Noah him self. But it is undoubtedly
certain that the holy fathers did bring in nothing of their own invention, nor
add any thing to the sacrifices more, then they had received and learned of
God, who is the author of all goodness: although Moses did more precisely
distinguish and certainly order the sorts, the kinds and differences betwixt
sacrifice and sacrifice. And yet whatsoever he did, that did he at the Lords
appointment. God instructed Moses in all that he did. For the book of
Leuiticus, wherein are especially described all the kinds of sacrifices, does
immediately after the very beginning testify that Moses was called by God, and
that he learned of the Lord all the ceremonies of the sacrifices which he
commanded the Israelites to keep. And in the 7 Chap. of y^ book of Numb. we
read. And when Moses came into the Tabernacle of appointment, he heard the
voice of God speakinge unto him out of the mercy seat. Now as I was about to
say, there were diverse sacrifices sundrily Sacrifices have some things common,
and somthings peculiar.
differing in many points among themselves, and yet having many things common
and general one with another. It was general to al sacrifices, not to be offered
in any other but one appointed place alone. It was general to all sacrifices, yt
they ought of duty to be offered by faith, according as they were taught by
y^ word of God. It was general to al sacrifices to be made according to ye
Lords commandment, with holy fire, and not with strange fire, or fire profanely
kindled. Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron were slain for nothing else, but
for because they used profane or strange fire in sacrificing to ye Lord. For
when the Israelites or Levites did first of all sacrifice, as the Lord had
commanded them in the tabernacle of appointment, then did God by sending fire
from heaven give a token that he did like of that manner of sacrifice.
Whereupon in the sixte of Leuiticus the priests are charged The ^estal virgins
were Nuns consecrated to the Goddess Vesta.
to maintain or keep the holy fire always burning, first in the tabernacle,
and then in the temple: which thing it is manifest that the heathen did
imitate in commanding the vestall virgins at Rome always to keep the holy
fire burning. By this perpetual fire is meant the perpetual working of the
holy Ghost in the church of Christ: which must be kept quick and stirred up
in the hearts of the faithful, with fervent prayers, with the sincere doctrine
of the Lord, and with the right use of his holy Sacraments. It was also
general to all sacrifices, that in them neither wild nor unclean beasts were
offered to y^ Lord. Moreover, this general rule of sacrifices is given by
Moses in ye 22. Chapter of Leuiticus, saying, Let no deformity be in the
thing that thou shall offer: If it be blind, or lame, or maimed, if it have
pusshes or scabbes, or tettar, ye shall not offer it unto the Lord, neither
shall ye put ought of it upon his altar. Verily if any man had brought a
deformed oblation unto the Lord, he showed him self plainly to be a
contemner, and utterly unthankful toward his maker. And therefore the Lord in
Malachie cries out and says:

When ye bring the blind for sacrifice, do ye not sin? and when ye bring the
lame and sick, do ye not sin? Offer it now I pray thee to thy prince or
captain, will he be content with it? or will he accept thy person, says the
Lord of hosts? And so, I say, my name is in contempt and of no estimation
among you. The just and true God therefore does at all times require truth,
liberality, sincerity, and integrity in them that worship him, and on the
other side he abhors and utterly detesteth uncleanness, lying, and
hypocrisy. There are certain other things also which be generally common to
all sorts of sacrifices: but I will not at this time make particular rehearsal
of every several iott or minute. But what peculiarities every sundry
sacrifice has, it will evidently appear in the exposition of their sundry
sorts: which I will now speak of in order as they lie. First of all I will
expound to you that kind of sacrifice, which in the Holo^^^^tum the bur^^
(...).
scripture is called Holocaustum. That sacrifice was wholly consumed with fire,
so that nothing but the skin or hyde of the beast was leafte for the priest.
The word is derived of the Greek. For it is called Holocaustu^, as one
should say (...), that is, wholly burnt or consumed with fire. This sacrifice
was of three kinds, I mean it was made after three sorts, to wite, with
greater, with little, and with less living creatures: namely with an Ox, a
bullock, or a calfe, or if any man's ability were not sufficient to stretche
to that expense, then did he offer a Lamb or a Kidde: and yet again if he
could not offer that by reason of his poverty, it was lawful for him to
sacrifice birds, not Geese, or Cocks, or other unclean fowls, but Turtels,
and Doves, and such kind of clean birds.

Now the manner of making this burnt sacrifice was in this order. The beast
that was to be offered was placed at the one side of the altar, upon which the
priest did presently lay his hands, and cut the throat of it.

The blood was saved to be sprincled round about the altar: the skin was
flayed from the slaughtered beast and that alone was all the fees, that fell to
the portion or share of the priest. The legs were chopped off and washed
together with the purtenance. Immediately after a fire was made upon the
altar, whereupon was laid the whole sacrifice, to wite, the head, the body,
y^ legs and the purtenance, and were altogether burnte upon the altar before
the Lord. But if so be it happened that a Turtle or a Dove were offered for a
sacrifice, then did the priest with his finger wreathe about and break the
neck thereof, and the blood was let drop about the sides of the altar. The
feathers also were cast at the one side of the altar into a place where ashes
lay, the wings were ioynted, and last of all the whole body was burnt upon
the altar. This was the manner of the sacrifice or oblation, which they did
commonly call a burnte offeringe: the signification whereof was most
cheerful and pleasant to them, which were persuaded that by the burnt
offering was prefigured the very son of God to be incarnate of the unspotted
virgin, and to be sacrificed once for the cleansinge of all the sins of the
whole world. For they in the glass of that sacrifice did behold the cross
and passion of the Lord, which took our sins upon him self, and being
slain did shead his blood for the remisson of sins, offeringe him self
wholye to God the father in the fire of charity and heavenly zeal. The very
same Christ is the Turtle or Pigeon.

Moreover beside these ceremonies in the burnt sacrifice, it was required that
no burnte sacrifice of beasts should at any time be made without that kind
of offering, which they called Minha: that oblation was an handful of corn,
or of meal, or else of crustie bread sodde in a caldron, or a bowed piece of
bread (which we call a Cracknell) baked in an oven, or in a frying pan, which
was burnte with oil and frankincense upon the altar of burnt sacrifices. And
Christ verily is the bread of life, who by the eternal spirit, as says the
Apostle, did offer him self to God the father for us, to be the meat and
preservation of our life.

In the number of burnt sacrifices are reckoned, the daily sacrifices The daily
sacrifice.
that were offered every morning and every evening, and the sacrifices of the
annoynting or consecrating of priests. Of the daily sacrifice a large
exposition is made in the 29 of Exodus: and the sixte Chapter of Leuiticus. It
was called the daily offering: because every morning and evening two Lambs
were offered, to wite, one in the morning, and another at the evening.

In these Lambs was Christ most manifestly prefigured, who is that lamb of
God, that takes away the sins of the world, whose virtue is always
effectual and of power to take away the sins of the faithful. For that
Lamb was killed from the beginning of the world: he was once slain upon the
cross, but yet his merit and effectual power endures still, and does
absolve all them, that are delivered from their sins.

Now the sacrifices of consecrating, I mean of the priests of the
tabernacle, and of all the vessels or instruments belonginge to the holy
ministry, are in many points all one with the burnt offeringes, and in some
things differing from them: as is fully to be seen in the 29 of Exodus and the
eighth of Leuitic. And Christ our Lord did first begin the priesthood by his
passion, and after that hallowed all the faithful to be priests unto him self.

The second kind of sacrifices was the oblation which they called Minha, The
meat offering.
a gift, reward, or sacrifice of a wheaten cake, and by another name was called
a meat offering. This sacrifice was of the fruit of the earth, and was not
offered always after one sort: for there are reckoned three kinds of this
sacrifice. For there was offered either parched wheat, sticking in the ears,
or wheat out of the ears, or else clean meal vnbaked, or at least wise
meal made up into bread, which bread again was made three sundry ways
and in three sundry facions. For either it was baked in an oven or furnace: or
else sodde in a pott or a caldron, or else fried in a frying pan like unto
cakes. To these there was added, as sauce to the sacrifice, salt, oil and
frankincense. Honey and leaven were by a general rule utterly barred from all
sorts of sacrifices. For cakes made with honey were never allowed of, nor
admitted in their offerings. Yet in the feast of thanks giving they did eat
leauened bread.

Therefore when any man did offer wheat, it was first anointed by the priest
with oil, then seasoned with salt, and last of all had frankincense put upon
it: after that the priest took one handful from out of all (but in the
sacrifice for the priest all was burnt) and burnt it upon the altar, the rest
he did reserve as a share to him self.

And in all meat offerings frankincense was always used, except in the
sacrifice for sin, and in the sacrifice of jealousy: as is to be seen in
the fifth of Leuiticus: and the fifth of the book of Numbers. The rest that
belongs to the full rites and ceremonies of the meat offerings, whosoever is
desirous to know, he shall find them in the second Chapter of Leuiticus.
For I mean not here particularly to repeat every iott and title of their
accustomed ceremonies.

Now even as Christ was before prefigured in beasts and birds, so also is he
represented in this bread or cakes. For he is the bread of life: and has
sundry facions of infirmity and glory.

In Christ thou shall not find any leaven, that is, sin, uncharitableness,
hypocrisy, or pride. There is in Christ no sweetness nor honnylike taste of
worldly or wicked pleasures. But salt thou may find in him, a well seasoned
temperature altogether heavenly, and most absolute wisdom: because of
Christ and for his sake, all things of ours are acceptable unto God: for
Christ his sake our prayers are heard of God the father: upon Christ
therefore there is a sweet smelling frankincense in the nose of God the
father. And in these ceremonies are also shadowed the manner and matter of our
sacrifices, to wite, that they should be without hypocrisy, bitterness,
hatred, envy, and fleshly pleasure, and should be seasoned with godly and
continual prayers.

With the meat offerings we may The (...)
place the drink offeringes also. For in those sacrifices wine was powered out
unto the Lord, as is evident in y^ 29 of Erodus: the 6 of Leuiticus: and the 28
Chapter of the book of Numbers.

Now Christ is our wine, our drink and joy unto eternal life. He powers
himself into the minds of the godly, that he may fill them with joy, and
live in them and they in him. And therefore did he consecrate in wine the
memory of his blood, that was shead for us to the remission of our sins.
With these meat offeringes may be joined the sacrifices of ye first fruits, of
the first begotten, and of the tenths. Touching all which, there is much to be
read in diverse places of ye law: as in the. 13. and. 23. of Exodus: in the.
18. of Leuiticus: and the. 18. of the book of Numbers. Now Christ is the
first begotten and the first fruits of all the faithful, for whose worthiness
and merit we are all spared, and by whom we being sanctified are made ye
sons and heirs of God. To him as to our maker and redeemer we owe, as
tenthes, our very souls, and whatsoever else is dear unto (and good in) us.

Moreover it is a point of thanckfulnes, franckly to bestow upon God part of
our earthly riches, which we have at his hands, to ye mainteinance of his true
worship, and the relief of all that be in poverty.

The third kind of sacrifice is that which is offered for sin, and is
therefore The sin offering.
called Hattah, a cleansing or Ascham, a sacrifice for sin. We in one word
may call it a cleansing sacrifice. For it was offered for sin committed
unwittingly or by ignorance: which by the degrees of the sinners were divided
into four sorts, as, if the chief priest did sin, if ye whole church did
sin, if the Prince did sin, or if some man of the meaner sor^e did sin.
Or else they did offer it for sin committed willingly or of a set purpose,
being yet a mean or excusable sin: or else for a great and heinous crime,
which ignorance could by no means excuse.

The ceremony used in this sacrifice is very ample and large, so that I mean
not presently once to touch it.

It is most exquisitely set down in the fourth, fifte, sixte, and seventh
Chapter of Leuiticus. Neither is it to be doubted, but that Christ was laid
before their eyes as well in that sacrifice, as in all their other oblations.
For Christ is the end of the law, (and the mark whereto the^ ceremonial
laws did tend.) And Esaie in the 53 Chapter of his prophecy says: Whereas
he never did unrighteousness, nor any deceiptfulnesse was found in his mouth,
yet has it pleased the Lord to smite him with infirmity, that when he had
made his soul an offering for sin (for here is put **** Ascham) he might see
seed, and might prolong his days, and that the advice of the Lord might
prosper in his hand. To this belongs y^ whole disputation of the apostle Paul
in his Epistle to the Hebrews, wherein he shows that Christ is the true
sacrifice for sin, that cleanses all the church and the sins thereof. In
this ceremony were shadowed the disposition of sins, the passions of Christ,
and the power and strength of death.

Now these many and sundry sacrifices appointed for sins were The verly
sacrifice.
kept vncerteinly, because they were wont to be offered of them that sinned
at that very time when they did commit the sin: but the certain, ^he
yearly and universal sacrifice was that, which is at large described in the
(...) of Louiti^us: and may be referred in this place to the number of
cleansing sacrifices. For in the feast of atonement upon the tenth day of the
seventh month every year was solemnized the sacrifice of cleansing or
atonement for all the sins universally of all the people. The manner of this
general sacrifice I will not over busily at this time describe, since it is as
clearly as the light set down in that place of Leuiticus which even now I
cited, and since I in expounding the mystery thereof do mean to show and
make plain so many shadows in it, as are needful to be marked. For I will
say somewhat touching the meaning and mystery thereof.

In that most pleasant glass was figured the whole passion and effect of the
passion of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior: which by that sacrifice was
every year laid before the eyes and renewed to the minds of all the faithful
church of God. For this manner of representing our redemption and salvation did
please God by sacraments rather then by pictures, colors, or by stage plays:
which are at this day greatly set by, although scarce godly, by no small
number of trifeling and fantastical heads. Now mark that the high priest
only did all that was to be don in this solemn sacrifice, save only that two
ministers were joined unto him, the one to lead away the escape goat, and the
other to carry out of the host the bullock and he goat that was to be
offered. Yea, charge is very precisely given, that no man should join him
self to the high priest, when he enters into the tabernacle, and makes an
atonement for the sins of the people.

Let no man, says the Lord, be in the tabernacle of appointment when he goes
in to make sacrifice in the Sanctuary, until he do come out again. For no man
must be joined to Christ in finishing the work of our salvation and
redemption. For he alone is the Savior, he alone has trod the press, and
he alone was crucified for us. The Patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs,
and all other creatures are utterly excluded, from having any thanks for our
redemption and salvation. Christ alone remains the savior and redeemer of
the world. To attribute our salvation to creatures, to our own works, and
our own merits, is to admit creatures with the high priest into the
tabernacle, and to incur the indignation, that is, the terrible curse of the
almighty, true, and everliving God. For by the Iewishe high priest is
prefigured to us Christ our Savior, who, as the Apostle Paul says, has a
priesthood, which by succession cannot go from him to any other. Now Aaron
did take a bullock for a sin offeringe, and a ram for a burnt offering of
his own, and of the people he took two he goats. Therefore Christ our Lord
the true and only priest of his church, did offer for us the thing that he
took of us, to wite, the substance of our flesh. There is added also that
Aaron (by which name we understand every one that was the high priest among
the people of God) when he went about to sacrifice, did cloth him self with
the usual and common garments of the other priests (I mean such as the
other priests were wont to wear) saving only that they were holy and
without spot.

For although Christ the son of GOD did take our nature upon him, and did
become like unto us, being cladde as it were in the usual garment of us men:
yet notwithstanding his fleshely garment (I mean his body that was like to
ours) was altogether free from corruption and clean without all spots of
sin. Aaron did first of all kill a steer for him self and his family:
whereby he declared that he was not the very and true high Priest, but the
type of him that was the true Priest. For Paul says: Our high priest had no
need, as those high priests had, first to offer sacrifices for their own
sins, and then for the sins of the people. For he did that once when he
offered up him self. Afterward Aaron drew lottes at the door of the
tabernacle to try betwixt the two goats, which should be slain for the
sacrifice, and which should be sent away as the escape goat into the desert,
The two Goats do signify Christ our Lord, very God, and very man in two
natures vnseparated. He is slain and dies in his humanity: but is not slain
nor dies in his divinity. Yet he being one and the same Christ vnseperated is
the savior of the world, and does work the redemption of us (...)
mortal men. So in the two Goats was a mystery hidden. And for because as
Solomon says, the lotts are guided by the Lords will, it was not without the
especial will of the father that the son was sacrificed and killed on the
cross. Moreover the high Priest did take the blood first of the bullock,
then of the slain goat, and a Censer in his hand, and went wtin the veil,
where, with the incense he did make a cloud of smoke before the mercy seat,
and with his finger did sprincle the blood seven times toward the mercy seat.
All which the Apostle Paul expoundinge in the 9 to the Hebrews says, that
Christ entered not into the Tabernacle made with hands, but into the very
heavens, not with the blood of a bullock, or a goat, but with his own blood,
and found for us a perpetual cleansing and remission of our sins. For he is
our propitiation, not for our sins only, but also for the sins of all the
world. And hereunto did the Apostles allude as often as they called Christ our
propitiation: as S. Paul did in y^ third to the Romans, and Saint John in the
second and fourth Chapter of his first Epistle. Now the seven times
sprinckling of the blood betokened the full perfection or perfect fullness of
the cleansinge. We have need also to be sprinkled with the finger, not of
man, but of Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, whose finger is the holy
Ghost, by whom our cleansing does come upon us.

To the sprinckling of the blood is also added sweet smellinge incense. For as
the Apostle testifies, Christ Heb. 9.
our high priest did offer prayers for us with tears, and was heard in that
which he feared. Whereupon by the cloud of smoke, that is, by the great
quantity of smoke, was noted the great efficacy of earnest prayers.

When that was don the high priest went again into the Sanctum and set the
blood upon the golden altar of incense. For in the work of our redemption both
innocent blood and earnest prayer for us must be joined together. Out of the
Sanctu^ again he came to the altar of burnt offerings which stood in the
court (which was called Atriu^) and there he gave the other goat to a
convenient man to be carried away into the wilderness: but in the delivering
of ye goat he used a precise manner and singular ceremony. For the high
priest laid both his hands upon the Goat, and over his head did confess
the sins of the people, who also did them selves confess their sins,
following the priest clause by clause in all the confession, which he
rehearsed: and then so soon as all the sins were laid upon the head of ye
Goat, he was sent away, that by that means he might carry the sins of all
the people into the desert. From this ceremony did the Gentiles undoubtedly
borrow their kind of cleansinges or purgings of the people called in Greek
(...), and in Latin P^amina. For their manner was in extreme periles, yt one
should give him self for all the rest, whom they took and did either kill
and burn upon the altar, or cast into the water, praying therewithal that al
their evil luck might go with him, and yt the Gods being pacified wc the death
of him, might again be favorable to all the rest. But the wretches erred as
far as heaven is wide. For Christ the son of God was made sin for us,
that is, he was made a sacrifice for sin, yea, he became a curse for us
that we by him might receive a blessing. For to this had the Prophet Esaie an
eye when he said: we all went astray like sheep, every one turned after his
own way: But the Lord has thrown upon him al our sins. Again, He was
wounded for our offenses and smitten for our wickedness. And again, The
pains of our punishment were laid upon him, and he bare our griefs. Now the
Goat did carry the sins into the desert, not that the sins should not be,
but that they should not be any more imputed unto them. For in the church
verily there is sin in the Saints, but it is not imputed unto them. Sin is
imputed to all them that are without the church in y^ desolate wilderness. The
convenient man that should carry away the escape Goat can be none other, than
Christ him self, who in the days of his flesh did observe the convenient
time and fit occasion, repeating often times that his hour was not yet come,
but at the last when time convenient was come for him to dye, he said that
then his hour was come. And by dying he carried away conveniently the escape
Goat, I mean, the sin of all the world.

When this also was thus accomplished, ye high priest did again wash him
self, and putting off the common garments of the inferior priests, did
again put on his high priests attire. Now this often and manifold washing
in the holy ceremony is a shadow or type of the most absolute remission of
sins: even as also the changing of the garment is a sign or figure of
glorification: as is at the full to be seen in the third Chapter of Zacharies
prophecy. And Christ being glorified did enter into heaven, there to appear
in the sight of God, the only and effectual sacrifice for us mortal men.
Therefore did Aaron sacrifice a Ram for a burnt offering: for Christ is ye
sacrifice which endures always and purges all the faithful. Moreover Aaron
sent the Bullock and the other Goat unto the holy place without the host,
that there they might be burned. Which thing Paul expounds thus and says:
The bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the holy place by the
high priest for sin, was burnt without the tents: therefore Jesus also, that
he might sanctify the people with his blood, did suffer without the gate.
Hebr. 13.

And although in this which I have hitherto alleged, I have by fittes declared
the end and fruit of this ceremony, yet will I not think it much here
again particularly to repeat the same again: since I see that the holy
Ghost in the Scripture does, as it were, take pains very busily to beat the
same into our heads. The end of all this stir and solemnity is, that all
the sins, I say all the sins of Gods universal church, are by the one and
only sacrifice, once only offered, most perfectly blotted out and absolutely
purged. Let us therefore hear the very words of the holy Ghost which
speaks in the Scripture most plainly and evidently, saying: 1. And the high
Priest shall confess over the Goat all the iniquities of the children of
Israel, and all their trespasses and all their sins. 2. And the Goat shall
bear upon him all their misdeedes into the desert. 3. The same day shall the
priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you that you may be clean from
all your sins before the Lord. 4. And let this be an everlasting ordinance
unto you, to cleanse the children of Israel from all their sins once every
year. But who is so very a sott or dull head as to think that all the sins
of the people are washed away with the blood of beasts? If, says the
Apostle, they had once fully cleansed sins, then would they have ceased to
offer any more. By this ceremony therefore the mystery of Christ to come was
beaten into all men's brains, and once every year laid forth to the eyes of
all men to behold. For of this ceremony did Zachary borrowe his prophecy of
Christ in his third Chapter, where he says: Behold I bring forth the
branch my servant. For lo the stone that I lay before Joshua, upon one stone
shall be seven eyes: behold I will cut the grauing thereof, says the Lord of
hosts, and I will take away the sin of this land in one day. The Lord does
promise the Messiah, which was prefigured by the priests, and especially by
the high priest Joshua. Christ is the stone upon which the eyes of all men are
steadfastly fixed, as upon their only savior. He is dug in and cut in his
passion, and by suffering and dying once, he purges the sins of all the
earth. Of this ceremony and of this place of Scripture did Paul the holy
Apostle of Christ borrowe his whole discourse almost in his Epistle to ye
Hebrews, touching the sacrifice of Christ once offered for all the sins of
the whole world: in which discourse he does very often repeat out of the
law the word Once, and that with a certain emphaticall vehemency.

Now to appoint other Priests, to institute another time, and to ordeine The
only sacrifice of Christ is sufficient for all the world.
another manner of sacrifice, is utterly to kick at and tread under foot
this heavenly and most evident truth. But this doctrine of the only
sacrifice of Christ, is the true, ancient, sound, unreprovable and
everlasting doctrine: by which all they are saved, that are saved, and by which
all they have been saved that have been saved since the beginning of the
world. The enemies or adversaries of this doctrine, Paul the Apostle of
Christ and the Gentiles (whose skill in ye law was inferior to no man's) does
call fools, mad, unconstant, light headed, carried with every pusse of
wind, wicked, apostataes, which have revolted from Christ, liars, false
Prophets, false Apostles, deceivers, schismatiques, dogs, inchau^ters,
witches, detestable, and cursed. Therefore if an Angel from heaven teach us
any other wise, let him be to us accursed.

Yet by the way this must not be concealed, that in that yearly sacrifice it
was required and looked for at men's hands, first that they should confess
their sins: then that they should be sorry in their minds in good earnest
and in deed for their sins committed, and lastly that they should keep
Sabbath, I do not mean an idle resting from honest business, but a quietness
in the faith of Christ, and a ceassing from ill deeds. Who soever does so
prepare him self in the feast of atonement, that is, in the time of the
preachinge of the grace of God through Christ, he is without doubt thoroughly
cleansed, by that only sacrifice of Christ Jesus: of which I have hitherto
not without good cause spoken so largely as you perceive that I have. For this
one place does give a wonderful light both to the understanding of many
places in the Scriptures, and also of the mystery of our redemption and of
Christ our redeemer, so plainly, that no other place does so clearly expound,
set forth, and lay them open before our eyes to be seen and looked on: it
does also teach us to understand the words of Christ our Lord in the gospel
of saint John, where he says: There is one which accuses you, even Moses in
whom ye hope: for had ye believed Moses, ye would then have believed me: for
he wrote of me.

Now with the sacrifice of atonement This wa^er was al ^o called ^he water of
(...) they (...) was (...) from (...) rest of (...) by (...) were (...).
and the other cleansinge sacrifices we do advisedly number the sacrifice of
the red cow, I mean, of the cleansinge, or of the cleansing or holy water,
that was ordained against all sorts of defilings and uncleannesses: for there
were sundry kinds of uncleannesses. Of which there is a large discourse to be
seen in Moses his law, and by them is laid before us y^ type of our corrupt
nature and continual sins. There is fully described in the 19 Chapter of the
book of Numbers, first the very ceremony and sacred rite, then is declared
the manner how to make the holy cleansing water against all defylings: lastly
is added the use and effect of that holy water. The (...)


There was brought to Eleazer the priest a red cow, without spot which
never felt the yoke, and that was out of hand carried out and slain without
the host. Part of the blood was saved by the priest, and with his singer he
sprinkled it seven times toward the tabernacle of appointment. But the whole
Cow he burnt with fire, so that no part of it was left, and into the fire
he cast Cedar wood, hysope, and a scarlet lace. This being once done, the
priest did wash him self in water, and in his steed came another that was
clean, who gathering the ashes did lay them up in a clean place. Therefore
so often as need required, they did put off those ashes into an earthen
vessel, into which they powered running water, and in that sort was the holy
cleansinge water always prepared, which they did sprinckle with a sprinckler
made of hysope upon all such as were defiled. This was the manner and
ceremony of the cleansinge, the use and end whereof does immediately follow.

The Apostle Paul does testify that the circumstances of this Ceremony did
lay before us a most evident type of Jesus Christ: for in the ninthe to the
Hebrews he says, If the ashes of a young Cow sprinkled does sanctify
them, that are partakers of it, to the purifying of the flesh, how much more
the blood of Christ? Therefore both the priest and the cow did bear the type
of Christ. The female kind in the cow does note the infirmity of man's
nature: the redd color does admonish us of the Lord his blood, by which we
are washed from our uncleanness. There was no spot to be found in Christ: for
he was the holy of holies, and altogether free from, and without all sin.
He was not brought to death by the yoke of necessity. For he offered
himself unto it of his own free will. Yea he offered himself willingly to
go to his death, and that too without the host or walls of the city in the
mount of Caluarie: which thing the Apostle Paul does touch in the 13. to the
Hebrews. Christ both God and man was whoalie offered in body and soul: whose
blood is hoalesome for us, if by the holyghost it be sprinkled in our hearts.
The faithful also must die with Christ, they must be humbled, and burn in love
to Godward as redd as Scarlet: and that was the meaning of the Cedar wood, the
Hysope, and the Scarlet lace, which were cast into the fire. Moreover the ashes
which came of the sacrifice were gathered up and preserved to purify and
cleanse withal. Those ashes were nothing else but the type or figure of the
effect of Christ his death or sacrifice, I mean, the very cleansing and
remission of our sins. For therefore did blood and water gushe abundantly
out of the pierced side of Christ, that we might learn that out of the death
of Christ does flow our cleansing and our life. For in blood life does
consist, and water purges, and is a sign of cle^sing. The ashes were gathered
by a man that was clean, who nevertheless was made, and did remain, unclean
until the evening. Finally the water was sprinkled with a sprinklar made of
Hysope upon the defiled, to the end that thereby he might be sanctified or
purged. The water was kept in an holy place. For Margarites and that which is
holy ought not to be cast to dogs, and filthy swine. The Lord also does
require preachers to teach the effect of Christ his passion, and in the
co^temptible and lowly preaching of the Gospel to lay before the world our
redemption and sanctification in the death and blood of Christ: he does
require, I say, such holy teachers as are themselves faithful, and cleansed in
the blood of Christ. And yet those teachers, with the whole Church beside, do
even til the evening, I mean, the ending of their lives pray still, Forgive us
our trespasses. For the Lord himself said, He that is washed is clean and
has no need but to wash his feet only. To this do appertain the often
washings used in this Ceremony, which signify that by the grace of God all
sins are purged, that the Saints have always an holy care to watch against
the assaults of sin, and that those sins are cleansed none other ways but
by ye water of Christ his grace. Lastly it is most often and earnestly repeated
in the law that they al remain unclean, how many soever, being once defiled,
and are not again cle^sed with the holy water of separation. For the Lord said
to Peter, Unless I wash thee thou shall have no pa^te with me. My meaning is
not to run through every particular point of this Ceremony, but to touch the
especial matters only. Therefore now I proceed to that which remains.

To these cleansing sacrifices may also be added the sacrifices, whereby ye
Sacrifices ^or the defilings of the body.
bodily defilings, which were figures of the defilinges of sin, were purified
and cleansed: of which sort were the defilinges of the seed, the eating and
touching of unclean creatures, the Leprosy, and of the woman in childbedd.
All which Moses does largely handle, from the 12. of Leuiticus unto the 16. of
the same. And in all this there is nothing else prefigured to the Church of God,
but our natural corruption and original wickedness, with the free cleansing
of the same by the grace of God in the blood of Christ our Savior. With these
we may also number the sacrifice of jealousy: which is thoroughly treated of
in the 5. Chapter of The Sacrifice of ^^alousie.
Numeri: although the manner and order thereof seems rather to belong unto
the Judicial laws of God.

The fourth kind of sacrifices was The Sacrifice of thanks giving
the sacrifice of thanckesgiuing, which they called Schelamim, or Schlomim,
the sacrifice of health, or the peace offering. For it was offered to give
thanks withal, to wit, either for the recovery of health, or for felicity
and prosperity, I mean, when they had received some good turn at the hands
of God, or else by his aid had escaped the brunt of some mishapp or evil
fort^ne. In this sacrifice they used a b^aste either of the heard, or of ye
fould: It was not lawful to o^fer birds: for it was done either ^^th a
vnllocke or an h^ffar, with a male or a female lam^e, or with an he or a she
goat. It was (...) before the Atrium. The ^ide or skin thereof was the
priests fee. The blood was sprinkled about the altar. The kidneys, the call
of the liver, the rumpe of the lamb, and all the fatt was burnt upon the
altar of burnt offerings. The right shoulder was heaued, the breast was waued,
toward the ends of the world. (For Thruma and Thnupha, that is, the Thruma and
Thnupha.
heauing and wauing were not kinds of sacrifices, but ceremonies only, which
the priests did use in making their sacrifices and oblations. By the heauing
was signified that Christ should be heaued or lifted up, and that he being
once lifted up should draw all men unto him. The wauing of the breast toward
every part of the world was a token, that the preaching of Christ should be
spread in every corner of the world.) The breast and the shoulder were both the
priests portion, together with the iawe done, and the paunch or belly. The
rest of the flesh returned to him that made the oblation, and was eaten by him
in an holy banquet. The remnaunt of Ceremonies belonging to this sacrifice,
are to be found in the third Chapter of Leuiticus. For if it were Thoda, a
confession, a praise, or a protestation, then was added to the sacrifice a cake
of pure wheat flower and salt steeped in oil, or sodden cracknells, or bread
baked in pannes: part whereof was heaued, and fell to the priests share: the
rest returned to the offerer, even as also leauened bread was allowed to be
eaten in the banquet.

Now in this kind of sacrifice also Christ was preached with the effect ^
power of his death and passion: and in it was showed the whole manner and order
of giving thanks to God for his good benefits. There are sundry sorts of
benefits. If a man received a good turn: if an ill (...) had not be f^lne him:
if he had receuered his health: or had escaped some misfortune, he offered a
sacrifice to the Lord. There are also other ancient benefits common to all
men, as, that God has made the world and all that is therein: and that
thorough Christ he has redeemed all the faithful: there are daily benefits:
yea u^nally all things are full of Gods good benefits. For all which benefits
we must offer our sacrifice to God alone and not to any creatures, which he
has made: yea we must offer to him with all our hearts: al our affections
must be hallowed to the Lord. For out of the beasts, which were sacrificed to
ye Lord for thanksgiving, those parts were chosen and given to the Lord, in
which the especial power of life consists. For in the kidneys is ye power of
generation, in the blood the vital spirit, in the liver the spring of all the
blood. etc.

Now we must give thanks by a sacrifice, that is by Christ. For we are saved
for Christ his sake: and all good things are bestowed on us by God, not for
our own sakes, nor for any creatures sakes, but for Christ his sake our only
Savior and redeemer. To them, which offered, was allowed a sober and merry
banquet: because the felicity of those that are not unthankful is for the
most part augme^ted twofold double. And the knowledge of Christ is a delicate
banquet and a continual feast.

With the sacrifices of thanckesgiuing The free will offe^^ng.
those offeringes do much agree, which are called vows and freewill
offerings. The freewill offering was that, which proceeded of mere good will
and devotion of the mind without necessity or compulsion of any law or
ordinance. As when a servant gives to his master the thing that he owes him
not, for a declaration only of the goodwill that he bears unto him. But
herein the free will offeringes do differ from the sacrifice of thanksgiving:
because in the sacrifice of thanksgiving charge was given, that whatsoever was
left, which was not spent the first day, should not be eaten on the morrow,
but be burnte with fire: on the other side in the free will offeringes it was
lawful for them to eat the remnaunt upon the second day, and to burn their
leauings upon the third day.

Now the vowed sacrifices were those which were offered by covenant to the
Lord: as for example, a man being in peril, does vow to make a sacrifice to
God, if he be delivered out of that imminent danger: it falls out that he
is delivered, and he for his delivery does offer up the sacrifice: the
thing that is so offered is called a vowed sacrifice. The Ceremonies of these
twain did wholly agree with the Sacrifice of thanckesgiuing. More of them is
to be seen in the seventh Chapter of Leuiticus.

The meaning of these Sacrifices were that all good benefits are bestowed
upon us for Christ his sake, and with those benefits we receive the very
good will which we have to serve the Lord.

Thus much have I hitherto said touching the Sacrifices of the people of God:
not that I have touched every point, but so many only as are of most
importance. In these Sacrifices as in a lively action were set forth CHRIST
our Lord, his Passion, and the effectual merit of his death: so that we may
call, the holy actions of the Sacrifices, Sermons upon the Passion of Christ,
and instructions of our redemption by our Lord and Savior.

Now forbecause we have already Of vows.
spoken hitherto of vowed sacrifices, we must here consequently borrowe leave
for a digression to say somewhat of their usual vows. For vows belong to
the Iewishe Ceremonies. Of the making, performing, and redeeming of vows there
is a large discourse in the law of God, but especially in the 27. of
Leuiticus. To vow, is to promise any thing with an oath solemnly, either for
our own or an others welfare. And therefore a vow was an action referred to
God alone, and that too in an holy and a lawful thing. But in vows there was
a difference: because vowed things were divided into four kinds. For some
times they vowed men, sometimes they vowed other living things, sometunes
houses, and sometimes lands or other immovable substance. Again there was a
difference in men according to their ages, and after their ages they might be
redeemed. for clean living creatures there was no redemption permitted at all.
It was free either to leave their houses to the use of the ministry, or else
to redeem them with such a sum as the priest should value them at. In lands
redemption was sometimes admitted and sometimes not admitted. And in the 30.
Chapter of the book of Numbers there is a precise commandment given touching
the votories, when their vows are of force, and when of small effect. Where it
is diligently beaten into their heads, that vows lawfully made to God are not
to be called back again, but straightly kept and throughle performed. Rash or
unlawful vows the Lord did never like off, nor receive.

Of the lawful vows and such as are made to the true and only God the
Prophet speaks where he says, Make vows and pay them. We read not that
any of y^ Godly sort did make any vows to any Saints or any other creatures,
neither that they vowed any thing that was not in their power to vow, nor that
which was contrary to the will of God, to whom they vowed it, nor that which
was to their neighbors hinderance, nor the thing that had not in it some
evident commodity. And verily these kind of vows were for none other cause
permitted to the Israelits till the time of amendment, but that they should
remain in the worship of one true God, and not make their vows to any other
strau^g God.

To the treatise of vows belongs (...).
the discipline and order of the Nazarites. Of which there is alarge discourse
in the 6. Chapter of the book of Numbers The Nazarits were those, who,
because they would the more freely without let attend upon Gods service, or
else because they had heretofore lived ^oo licentiously, did of their own
accord and will take upon them a more stricte and severe trade of life, than the
common people used, and kept it for a discipline to make other men to follow
their example of virtue and honest living. Whereupon it comes that some do
take the Nazarits to have their name of separation, because Nazir among the
Hobrues signifies a separation, and that the Nazarites separating themselves
from the common trade of life, that other men did lead, did give themselves to
a certain peculiar form of living for God and Godlynesses sake. That severe
and strict discipline did continue in some by the length of all their life
time, as in Samson, and Samuel.

Moreover, such as did wholly give themselves to the study of the Scriptures,
were by the Prophets Amos and Jeremy, because of their most temperate life
(which is required of stude^ts) and because they were wholly dedicated to the
ministry of God, called Nazarites. Sometimes also it did endure but for ye
space of certain days or months. These Nazarits did abstain according to
the commandment of the law from certain things, from which they were not
barred by any other law, and which were not unlawful for other men to use,
which were without the necessity of that vow. First of all they absteyned
from wine, from all things that the vine brought forth, and whatsoever else
did make men drunken. But it is manifest, that as wine is the good creature of
God, so no drink is forbidden by the law. Yet forbecause the Nazarits were
consecrated to ye Lord and sanctified by a certain peculiar kind of living:
and for because wine is the means that leads to drunken nes, which is the
gulf of al sin and filthiness, therefore did the Nazarits not without a
cause abstain from wine. They did also take heed of idleness the mother of
mischief, and utterly despised all worldly pleasures. Furthermore so long as
the time of their vow endured they did not clipp their hair, but let their
locks grow out a length. And thereuppon, as some do think, they took their
names and were called Nazarits. For in so much as Nazer signifies hair, they
suppose that they were called Nazarites, as who should say, long locked or
shagge haired people. But the Apostle Paul bids the woman to pray, or to
come into the Congregation to hear a Sermon with her head covered, for none
other cause, but for that she is not in her own power, but subject to an
other, that is, to her husband. And therefore the Nazarits did let their hair
grow, because by the vow which they had made to God, they were no longer in
their own power, but were wholly yielded into the power of God. And the head,
which is the tower of the body and the most excellent part thereof, being
covered with a bush of hair, was a token that the whole man was by vow given
to the Lord, to whom alone he ought to have an eye, and upon whom alone he
ought wholly to depend. Moreover it was required at ye hands of the Nazarite,
that he should not defile himself with the contagious company of wicked and
naughty persons. Whereunto also belongs the commandment, which charged the
Nazarite not to be present at the death or burial of his parents, or
children, or wife, or brethrene or sisters. For he ought to settle the eyes of
his mind upon God alone, and in comparison of him to set light by, and
loathe the things which were most dear and precious unto him.

But if it so fell out that at unawares he were defiled by seeing of a dead
body, he was not therefore acquitted of his vow, as one whose former life had
been sufficient for the performaunce of the same. For he was commanded to
sanctify himself the seventh day, and then to undertake the keeping of his
vow again. By Samson a Nazarite to the lord how greatly he sinned.
all this we may plainly perceive what and how great the sin of Samson
was, who was a Nazarite to the Lord. For because he did not only lurk in the
brothell house with the harlot, but did also bewray the secret of GOD unto
her, and cast behind him the covenant made with God whereof his hair was a
sure testimony, therefore did the Lord forsake him, and that wonderful
strength, which he had from heaven was clean taken from him. For the strength
of Samson lay not in his hair, so that by the cutting of his hair his
strength was cut away also, but it lay in the spirit of the Lord which was
given him from God above. And therefore do we find this sentence so often in
the scripture, And the spirit of the Lord came upon Samson. Therefore when the
spirit of God departed, his strength departed also: but it departed from him,
when he being wholly joined unto the harlot was made one soul with her, and
did prefer her before God and his commandment, so that he suffered his
hair to be polled, and utterly revolted from the ordinance of the Lord. For
by that means did the spirit of God forsake him. Whereupon immediately after
he was brought into the hands of his enemies the Philistines: where when he was
miserably vexed, and when he heard the name of God evil spoken of and
blasphemed because of his captivity, he repented heartily, and called upon
the name of the Lord, whereby it came to pass that when his hair grew forth
again, his strength returned, yt is, the spirit of ye Lord came upon him
again, being brought unto him, not by the growing of his hairs, but by his
repentance and earnest calling upon the Lord. Neither did Samson desire to
revenge his own private injury so much, as to suppress the blasphemous
mouths, and to deliver the people of God from fear and slavery.

The strength of God therefore returned again, wherewith he bending the
pillars of the Theater, was himself slain with the fall of the palace, and at
his death slew many mo than he had killed in all his life time before. But
now we return again to the purpose, to add the other Ceremonies, that do
belong to the full exposition of the vow of the Nazarites.

When the time was expired therefore, which the Nazarite had taken upon him
for to observe, he came to the tabernacle of the Lord, and offered the
sacrifices that are prescribed in the Law: whereby he testified that he was
a sinner, and plainly confessed that al goodness and virtue, that was to be
found in him, was given and bestowed from God above. And therefore he polled
his head, and cast his hair into the fire, wherein the peace offering was a
burning. At last when all this was in this manner accomplished, it was lawful
for the Nazarite, as one loosed of his bonds, to return unto his old life
again. Thus much hitherto touching the discipline of the Nazarites.

Now touching the clean and unclean (...).
there is a long discourse in the law of Moses: I in my former treatise did
lightly touch and pass over some certain things: but now at the last (for
here I mean to make an end to speak of Ceremonial laws) I will add
somewhat touching the choice of meats, I mean, of clean and unclean meats.

God verily in the beginning created all things, and he so created them, that
as the Creator is good, even so all his creatures even at this day are good
also: neither does he gainesay himself now, when he forbids certain
mears, as though somewhat of it self were unclean. There are other (...).
mysteries that lie hidden under this doctrine of the choice of meats. The
laws, which are given touching meats and victuals, seem to be small and of
little valor, but it pleased the Lord in a small thing to admonish us what
we have to do in a greater, and that even in the smallest things the
authority of his Godhead ought to be regarded. For the authority of the law
depends upon God: God is the lawegiuer, and the law is his invention.

This suppresseth the malapertnesse of mortal men, which makes, undoes, and
every day deuiseth new laws and ordinances. Therefore GOD in these kind of
laws does commend to his people faithful obedience to be showed unto him:
even as in the beginning he commanded Adam not to taste of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, requiring thereby faithful obedience to be showed
unto him. Verily the obedience and faith, which was in the Machabees, in old
Eleazar, and in certain other Godly men that stood against The constant
obedience of certain holiemen who abstai^ed from things unclean.
king Antiochus, even to the shedding of their blood, and suffering of most
bitter death, did please ye Lord exceedingly.

Other more absteyned from swines flesh, whereby they obtained neither praise
nor glory among wicked men. When the word of GOD says that a thing is holy,
it is holy in deed, and that because he is holy that commands it. When God
says that any thing is unclean, it is unclean in deed, so that to eat any
thing against the word of God is to defile the eater: Ye now, says the Lord
in the Gospel, are clean because of the word which I said unto you. It is
needful therefore that we believe the word of God, and that obedience go
before faith, and then it cannot be but that the deed or work that is of
faith, as Eleazars was, who would not taste the swines flesh, must needs be
acceptable unto God, with whom whatsoever is not of faith is sin and
wickedness.

Moreover, the Lord in these laws of his touching the absteyning from the
flesh of certain living creatures, had a great respect unto the health and
soundness of mortal men's bodies. For some of those which he forbids to be
eaten, are by Physicians scarcely thought to be hoalesome for our bodies. And
thereuppon the Saints do gather this syllogism, If God has care for the
health of our bodies, he is far more careful verily for the preservation
of our souls. What may be thought of this, that many nations have tempered
themselves from the eating and touching of some living creatures? Therefore
that the people of Israel, who of themselves were sufficiently superstitious
and curious enoughe, should not be their own caruers and invent such toys as
they thought best, God gave them such laws for choice of their meat, as did
contain hidden mysteries in them, thereby to draw them from their own
devises, and to sever them from al other nations: as Moses testifies in the
foureteenth Chapter of Deuteronomium, saying: Thou art an holy people unto the
Lord thy God, and the Lord thy GOD has chosen thee from among all the nations
upon the face of the whole earth, to be a peculiar people unto himself.

To Saint Peter in the Acts of the Aposties a vision is showed, wherein by
the unclean beasts are meant the Gentiles. Lastly God would have the nature
and disposition of the beasts, that he for^ad to be eaten, to be thoroughly
scanned. For in their diet at the table he did by figures lay before their
eyes the heavenly Philosophy, giueing them occasion even in their meat to
think and speak of the true holiness of the mind, to the end that men
should not be filthy, impudent, foul, and unclean. And therefore is this
clause so many times repeated, I the Lord your God am holy. As if he should
say: All these Ceremonies tend to this end, that ye may give your selves to
holiness. Wherefore in those figures he taught the godly what to follow, and
what to fly from.

Now in the law of the clean and unclean, he does first of all put
certain generalities, then he descends by specialities, and does in a
beadrowe reckon up certain particular things in a very natural course and
order. The place is at the full set out in the eleventh Chapter of Leuiticus
and the fourteenth of Deuteronomium. Those beasts were allowed to be eaten,
which cleave the hoof, and chawe the cudd. Here are two things set down, in
which the duty of a good man is notably contained. For if we will be
clean we must divide the hoof, and also chawe the cudd. Our affection is the
foot of our minds, which affection must not be followed. We must have
discretion in all things to judge betwixt affections. And as in a cleaft there
be two parts or sides, the right and the left, so a good man chooses the
good, and flies from the evil. Chawing of the cudd is our judgment. For we
must not admit every thing which we hear and see, but those things only
which we have examined exactly and found to be contrary neither to God nor to
his law.

There are then repeated many living things particularly, which were not
lawefull to be eaten among the people of the Lord. Those were either
fourefooted beasts upon the earth, or fishes, or birds, or such as creep
upon the ground. Of fourefooted beasts four by name we are especially
forbidden. The Camel, whose long and lofty neck does teach us, that pride
and arrogancy must be eschewed. The Connie or the mountain mouse: for God
does utterly mislike the men that are altogether overwhelmed like Connies in
the earth, and never lift up their minds unto heaven. The Hare a fearful
beast: which does warn us to shake off all cowardly fearfulness: even as
also the Hog does put us in mind to avoid al uncleanness. For a Hog is
the very type and picture of nastie filthiness, and of it does the byword
rise to call an uncleanly person a beastly swine. And of Circe the fable goes
that she with her enchantments did turn Ulysses his men into a sort of
loathly Hogs.

Furthermore of fishes, so much was allowed for meat, as was found to have
finnes and scales upon them: if they lacked either of them, they were
forbidden, as the Eele, which though it has finnes yet lacks it scales, and
therefore was not to be eaten. For as the bodies of fishes are ruled with the
finnes: so must the whole man be governed by hope. The scales are hard and
cover the body: and we, unless we be constant and patient in the Lords
work, are worthy to be abhorred of the Lord our maker. Of birds those are
forbidden which are the gretest raueners, deuourers, which love and live by
unclean meats, which fly abroad at owlelight, at midnight, and in the
dark, and such as are crafty, unstable, and nothing cheerful. Herein
therefore is commended unto us, well doing, abstinence, temperance,
simplicity, light, constancy, cheerfulness, soundness and pureness of
liueing.

Lastly, of such as creep by the ground no small number are noted. For men
altogether wrapped in worldly mucke do utterly displease the Lord. I have of
purpose not reckoned up, all the names of the forbidden creatures, partly
because it would have been too tedious unto you, and partly because the
interpreters of the Bible do wonderfully stick in the interpretation of their
names: so that I can never marvel enough at the extreme blind
stubbernenesse of the Jewish people in keepinge so strictly the choice of their
meats, when their own Rabbines do stick and cannot tell certainly what
creatures they be that the Lord did forbid them.

To this belongs, that even before the law, in the time of Noah, The eating
of blood and strang^ed is forbidden.
God did forbidd to eat the blood, and the fleashe with the blood of any thing
torn by wild beasts, or strangled. Before the deluge the fathers did eat
the herbs and fruits of the earth. After the flood they had leave given to
eat the fleash of lyuinge creatures, but so yet that they should cut ye throat
off, and drayn the blood out of the body. The place is extant in the ninth
Chapter of Genesis. Moreover in the law the Lord with great severity says:
Whatsoever man it be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that soiourne
among you, that eats any manner of blood, I will set my face against that
soul, and will cut him off from among his people. Leuiticus 17. And the same
law is repeated in the nineteenth Chapter of the same book, and in the 12 and
15 Chapter of Deuteronomie. It is again rehearsed in the third and seventh
Chapter of Leuiticus. Neither is it without very just and great causes that he
did so severely forbid the eating of blood. For first of all, after the
words above rehearsed he adds immediately: For the life of the flesh is in
the blood: and I have given it unto you upon the altar to make an atonement
for your souls. For blood shall make an atonement for the soul. Therefore I
said unto the children of Israel: Let no soul among you eat blood etc. Lo in
these words a most evident reason is given, why it was not lawful to eat
blood, because blood was the most excellent and precious thing, as that which
was ordained for the sanctification of mankind. For God gave blood to be as
the price, wherewith sins should be cleansed, to be I say, the price of
redemption, whereby men should be absolved of their sins. Blood also is the
life, that is, the nourishment of life.

The blood therefore was a sign of the blood of Christ, that was to be shedd
upon the cross: by which as by a most full and absolute atonement ye
faithful are cleansed and thoroughly sanctified: and in which is the
nourishment of the soul to life everlasting: and as it was not lawful to eat
of the flesh of the sacrifices, whose blood was carried into the Sanctum for
sin, but to burn it without the hoaste: so it was unlawful to eat the
blood, which was ye cleansing for their sins. He therefore did eat blood,
which attributed to his own strength or works the atonement which was made
by the blood of Christ, esteeming his blood to be profane, and not attributing
unto it the full satisfaction for all sins. Again, he did not eat, but
power the blood down at the altar, who did ascribe the benefit of our
redemption to the only merit of Christ, and did esteem it of so great
valor as it ought by right to be esteemed. Lastly, God would have it deeply
printed in the minds of men, that no man should shead another blood, nor live
of the blood and bowels of other men: as mercenarie soldiers, covetous
persons, usurers and couseners do in sucking out and sheadinge the blood of
silly people with subtle fleightes and open injury. And God talking with
Noah did with terrible threats beat into all murderers an horrible fear,
saying: If men be slack I will take vengeance upon the sheading of blood.
For man was made to the image and likeness of God: how can God choose then
but take the reproach as done to him self, which is done unto his image? For
whosoever casts down the image of the king, he offends against the king,
and is accused of treason. But now touching strangled this law was given:
Eat not with blood. And again: Eat not of that which dies of it self, nor
of that which is torn with wild beasts etc. But by strangled and carrion,
that dies of it self, are signified the dead works, from which he is bidden
to purge him self whosoever desires to get Gods favor. He therefore did
eat strangled, whosoever did live in wickedness without repentance, not
regarding the blood of Christ his Savior.

Now also the touching of unclean things is set down in the law by The
touc^ing of ^n clean things.
these three notes, as if thou fouchest an unclean thing, or if thou bear it,
or if it fall by chance into some vessel or garment of thine. He verily is
defiled by the falling of a thing, whosoever sins unwittingly. But he
sins more heynously, whosoever sins willingly and of a set and pretended
purpose. But he sins most grievously of all, that vpholdeth wickedness and
compels other to committ the same.

But whereas in touching, and in other places it is said, that the
uncleanness shall abide till eueninge, that is an evident prophecy of
Christ, to wite, that the Messiah should come at evening, that is, in the end
of the world to purge the sins of all the earth.

I have enough and long enough thus far by two whole sermons (I pray God it
may be to your profit dearly beloved) stayed in and stuck upon the
ceremonial laws, therefore that I may now come to an end, I will bring the
chief points, whereof I have spoken, into a brief sum. I did divide the
whole treatise of the ceremonial laws into three especial branches. For I
spoke of the holy persons, of the holy time and place, and of the holy
thing which the holy persons did exercise in ye sacred place, I mean, the
sacraments, the sacrifices, and other holy ceremonies. The holy persons are
the priests. I showed you their first beginning, their ordering, their
mystical apparaile, and their sundry offices. When I spoke of the holy time
and place, I did describe unto you the Tabernacle, and noted unto you what was
within the Tabernacle, to wite, the Arc of the covenant, the golden table, the
golden candlestick, the altar of incense, the altar of burnte sacrifices, and
the brazen lauer: the mysteries of all which I declared unto you. In the
treatise of the holy time I touched all the kinds of holy days and solemn
feasts days, with all their certain and uncertain holy days. Last of all
in our discourse upon the holy things, I told you of the two Sacraments of
the old church, Circumcision and the Passover: and also of the sacrifices,
whereof some were burnte offeringes, some meat offeringes, some peculiar, and
some of thanksgiving: wherein we spoke somewhat also touching free will
offeringes and vowed sacrifices: finally of vows, of the discipline of ye
Nazarites, of clean and unclean creatures, of the choice of meats, of blood
and strangled, and of the touching of unclean things.

The Lord Jesus enlighten your hearts, that all this may tend to the glory
of his name, and the health of yours souls. Amen.

Of the Judicial laws of God.
The seventh Sermon.
IN prosecuting the treatise of Gods laws, I have now lastly to speak of that
sort which are called the Judicial laws: of which I will entreat, dearly
beloved, as briefly as I can, so far forth as I shall be persuaded to be
expedient for your edification. This treatise will not be unpleasant nor
unprofitable The Judicial laws are profitable.
to every zealous hearer, although it does specially belong to courts of
law, where judgment is exercised. For the Judicial laws were with
wonderful faith and diligence set out of God by the ministry of his servant
Moses: and God is not wont to reveal any thing to mankind with so precise
and exquisite diligence, unless it do directly tend to mankindes great
commodity.

Now although these Judicial laws are very few in number, and not to be
compared in multitude with the huge volumes of the laws and decrees of
Emperors, Kings, and wisest Sages, yet do they in their short breuiarie
contain the chief points of judgment and justice, and in effect as much
almost as is contained in ye books of the laws and constitutions of the
Emperors and civil lawyers. The good Lord would not by too long and
burdensome a pack of laws be too burdenous and troublesome unto his people:
neither was it needful over curiously to stick upon every several thought
of ill disposed persons: it is sufficient for all wise men, people, and
nations, if every one have so much law as is sufficient for the conservation
of peace, civil honesty, and public tranquillity: as all the holy
Scripture witnesses that the people of Israel had.

Now these Judicial laws are the most ancient, and very founteines Most
ancient laws.
of all other good laws, which are to be found all most in all the world.

Moses was before all other lawegiuers that were of name and authority: among
whom Mercurius Trismegistus and Rhadamanthus y^ L^cian are thought to be the
eldest.

The Egyptians called their Mercurius by the name of Thoth, who, as Lactantius
affirms, slew Argus that had so many eyes, and upon the murder He was called
Diphyes, that is, Geminus or duplicis naturae, because he first ordained
matrimony among the Graecians: His image was made with two faces, or two heads.
flead into Egypt. Now Argus and Atlas lived about the time of Cecrops
Diphyes. And Cecrops is reported to have been in the same time that Moses was.
Radamanthus also is supposed to have lived after ye days of Iosue Moses his
servant and successor. But the most famous lawegiuers of the gretest and
most ancient nations did follow long after ye death of Moses, Draco and Solon
among the Atheniens, Minos with the Cretians, Charondas of the Tyrians,
Phoronaeus to the Argiues, Lycurgus to the Lacedaeinonians, Pythagoras to the
Italians, Romulus and Numa unto the Romans, Plato writ of laws a little
before the reign of Philipp king of Macedon and father to Alexander the
great. And Cicero 2. lib. de legibus says: I see therefore that the opinion
of the wisest sort was, that law was neither invented by men's wits, nor
yet was the decree or ordinance of people, but a certain eternal thing ruling
the whole world with discretion to command, or for bidd, to do, or leave
undone. So they The latin copy has mentem Dei, for the which I call the
wisdom of God.
said that that chief and highest law is the wisdom of God, which
commands or forbids all things by reason. Whereupon that law, which the
Gods have given to mankind, is rightly commended: for it is the reason and
discretion of the wise which is able either to command or else forbidd, and
so forth. Therefore the Judicial laws of God are commended unto us, not so
much for their antiquity, as for the authority which they have of God.

Now, that we may plainly and To judge.
distinctly discourse upon this matter, ye have to mark, that to judge is an a
^udg^, (...) and the (...) what (...) be.
action: and in this treatise is taken for an action done in the courts of
judgment: for it signifies to take up and determine of matters betwixt such
as be at variance, or else upon ye bearing of a cause to give sentence or
judgment. Finally, to judge does signify to deliver them that be in danger,
to relieve the oppressed, to defend the afflicted, and with punishment to
keep under mischiefous offenders. Judgment therefore is not the sitting or
meeting of Judges in Assizes or Sessions: but is rather the very diligent
discussing of causes, the giving of sentence according to right and equity by
the laws of God, and also the assertion and defense whereby the good are
delivered, and the punishment that is executed upon the ill disposed and
wicked offenders. The Judges are the overseers of judgment and justice, I
mean, such as do justly according to the laws give sentence be twixt them
that are at discord, which do defend and deliver the good, and punish and
bridle the wicked. And so ye Judicial laws are those which inform the Judges
how to determine of controversies and questions, how to Judge justly, how to
punish the wicked, and how to defend the good, that peace, honesty, justice,
and public tranquillity may be among all men: which is the end and mark
alone whereto both the Judge, and all the Judicial laws do tend and are
directed. For God our good Lord and lawegiuer would have it to go well with man,
that we may live happily, ciuilie, and in tranquillity. And therefore we do not
in this treatise exclude the care and defense of pure religion, but do make it
one of the especial points, which the Judicial laws do look unto.

And now even as the ceremonial laws, so also are the Judicial laws The
Iudi^iall laws belong to the ten commandments.
added by God unto the ten commandments, to expound and confirm them
therewithal. For the precepts of the ten commandments are the chief and
principal precepts, whereunto we must refer all laws, as to the eternal
mind or will of God. I think I need not to stand and show you (dearly
beloved) to what precepts of the ten commandments every several Judicial
law is to be referred. For that is very plain and evident to every one that
will take but small pains to confer and lay them together. For the
Judicial laws that are set out against murder and injury, are apperteining
to this precept: Thou shall do no murder. And whatsoever is spoken against
adultery, fornication and filthy lusts, are added to the commandment: Thou
shall not committ adultery. Likewise, whatsoever is said in the Judicial
laws against deceipts, shifts, cousinings, and usury, do belong to the
commandment: Thou shall not steal. Lastly, all the laws touching the
brideling of heretics and suppressing of Apostataes by force, are set down to
make plain the first, second, third and fourth commandments of the first
table. For some laws may be applied to more precepts than one of the ten
commandments. But this is easy and plain to be perceived of every man:
therefore I will not stand any longer about it.

Now, for because the Judicial laws do first of all require Judges, The
laws (...) i^dges.
such, I mean, as should maintain and put the laws in execution (for the
laws without executours seem to be dead, and on the other side are alive
under a just magistrate, who is for y^ cause called the living law) therefore
before all other laws are placed those Judicial laws, which were given by God
touching the magistrate or Judges, with their office and election. Of their
election thus we read: Bring ye, says Moses to the people, men of wisdom,
and of understanding, and expert, according to your tribes, and I will make
them rulers over you. Again, I will make thee rulers and Judges to judge the
people according to thy tribes in all thy cities, which the Lord thy God
gives thee. And yet again more plainly: Seek (says Ieth^o, being inspired
from above, unto Moses) out of all the people, men of courage, and such as
fear God, true men, hating covetousness, to wite, such as hate to take money
and bribes* and make of them over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of
hundredes, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tennes: and let them judge the
people at all seasons. Which if thou do thou shall both keep the ordinances
of God, and the people in peace and safety. To this does belong that which we
read in ye book of Numbers, where Moses prayed, saying: Let the God of the
spirits of al fleashe set a man over this congregation, which may go out and in
before the^: that the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep without a
shepehearde. Herein Moses has leaft an example for us to imitate in making our
prayers to God for the election of our Judges. For often times our opinions or
judgments of men do utterly deceive us. But the God of spirits does behold
the minds and hearts, and kneweth what every one is, in thoughts and inward
meaning. He therefore must be besought to give and show to us not hypocrites
to be our Judges, but men of truth and virtue. In the same place does Moses
leave to us the description of consecrating new chosen Judges. For they were
set before the Lord and hands were laid upon them with making of prayers and
supplications. Moreover the office of Judges is very briefly, but yet in
most effectual and absolute sentences described of the Lord, by ye mouth of
Moses, in these words: Hear the causes of your brethren, and judge
righteousely betwixt every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with
him. Ye shall have no respect of any person in judgment: but hear the small and
the great alike: and fear not the face of any man: for the judgment is Gods.
Again: Judge the people with just judgment. Decline not in judgment, have no
respect of persons, neither take thou any bribes: for rewards do blind the
eyes of the wise, and does pervert just causes. Do judgment with justice,
that thou may live and possess the land which the Lord thy God shall give
thee. And again: Do no unjust thing in judgment, accept not the face of the
poor, neither fear thou the face of the mighty, but judge thou justly unto
thy neighbor. Again: Thou shall not have to do with a false report, thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak in a
matter of justice according to the greater number for to pervert judgment:
that is, if thou see an innocent to be condemned of the multitude, do not
thou therefore condemn him, because the multitude has condemned him, but judge
thou justly, and committ not evil because of the many voices of the multitude.
Thou shalt not esteem a poor man in his cause: neither shall thou hinder the
poor of his right in his suite. Keep thee far from a false matter, and the
innocent and righteous see that thou slaye not. Thou shall not oppress the
stranger: seeing ye your selves were strangers in the ^and of Egypt.

And God verily, when he had delivered The (...) King (...) of (...).
the people from the tyranny of the kings of Egypt, did not putt them in
subjection to kings again, nor burden them with the tributes, which kings are
wont to exact of their subjects: for he made them a common weal or an
Aristocracie, which was the most excellent kind of regiment, wherein the
choicest men in all the multitude were piked out to bear yt swaye, and to rule
the rest: but yet because he was not ignorant of his peoples foolishenesse,
and that they being weary of their liberty would crave a king (which thing
he did afterward also disuade them from by his servant Samuel) he made laws
1. Sam. ^.
for a king also, that he might understand that he was to live under the
laws, and to give judgment according to the laws. The discipline or
institution of a king is thus expressed in the 17 Chapter of Deuteronomium.

When thou art come into the land, which the lord thy God gives thee, and
shalt say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations, that are about
me: then thou shall make him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall
choose. One from among the midst of thy brethren shalt thou make king over
thee, and thou may not set a stranger over thee, which is not of thy
brethren. But he shall not gather many horses unto him self: nor bring the
people back again into Egypt, to increase the number of horses, that is, to
get him self a strong troop of horse men: for as much as the Lord has
said: ye shall henceforth go no more again that way. Also let him not take
many wives to him self, least his heart turn away: neither let him gather
too much silver and gold. And when he is set upon the seat of his kingdom,
he shall write him out a copy of this law in a book, according to the copy
of the book, which the priests the Levites do use: and it shall be with him,
and he ought to read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this law, and these
ordinances, for to do them. And let not his heart arise above his brethren,
neither let him turn from the commandment either to the right hand, or to the
leaft, that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, both he and his sons
in the midst of Israel.

Thus much hitherto of the magistrates, of Judges, and of kings. Now I
suppose that in this institution of a king all things are contained, which
are most largely set out by other authors, touching the discipline and
education of a Prince. And by the way this is especially to be noted, that
Kings are not set as Lords and rulers over the word and laws of God, but
are as subjects to be judged of God by the word, as they that ought to rule
and govern all things according to the rule of his word and commandments.

And here I have to rehears^ unto you some of the Judicial laws, I mean not
all and every several one, but those alone which are the chief and choicest to
be noted: by which ye may consider of the rest, and plainly perceive that the
people of Israel were not destitute of any law, which was necessary and
profitable for their good state and welfare. I will recite them unto you as
briefly as may be, and in as natural and plain an order as possibly can be.

Of the holy buyldings, of the not making away of such things as Holy
things.
were consecrated to the Lord, and finally, of the mainteining and publishinge
of true religion, there is large speech every where throughout the whole
Scripture.

Neither do I think it to be greatly to the purpose word by word to recite
all the laws, nor particularly to make mention of all the commandments
touching those matters. Verily of the Heathen, and of the overthrowing of their
Temples and superstitious holy toys, this commandment is briefly given by
the Lord him self.

When the Lord thy God has cast out many nations before thee, thou shall
root them out, neither shalt thou make league with them, nor pity them, nor
join affinity with them: because they will seduce thy sons to serve
strange Gods, and so my fury wax hoate against thee, and I destroy thee.

But this shall thou do to them, ye shall dig down their altars, ye shall
break their idols, ye shall cut down their groves, and burn their images
with fire. For an holy people art thou unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord
thy God has chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto him self.

The same law is set down in ye ^dolat^ie
23 of Exodus, and is again repeated in the twelfth of Deuteron. Hereunto
belong the laws that were published against idols and images. In the nineteenth
of Leuiticus the Lord says: Look not back to idols, neither make you
moulten Gods. I am the Lord your God. Also in the 26 Chapter: Ye shall make you
no idols nor graven Image, neither rear you up any pillar, neither shall ye set
you up any Image of stone in your land to bow down unto it: for I am the Lord
your God. Again in the 16 of Deuteronomie: Thou shall plant no grove of any
trees nighe unto the altar of the lord thy God: neither shall thou set thee up
any image, which the Lord thy God hates. There are beside these also many
other laws to this end and purpose in every place through all the volume of
the Scriptures.

Of the well handling and entreating The poor
of the poor, of widows, of orphans, and strangers the Lord gives this
commandment: Ye shall not afflict the widow nor the fatherless. But if ye
go on to afflicte them, without doubt they shall cry to me, and I will
assuredly hear the^, and will be angry with you, and will slaye you with the
sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. To this
beelongeth a good part of the fifteenth Chapter of Deuteronomie.

In the 24 Chapter the Lord says: Do not pervert the judgment of the
stranger, of the fatherless, and of the widow. Remember rhat thou wast a
stranger in the land of Egypt.

Of the receiuinge and refusinge of ^^tnesse (...) wi^nes ^^^rings.
witnesses, and their witness bearings in judgment, these few notes are
given in the law. One witness shall not be of force against a man,
whatsoever his sin or offense shall be: but in the mouth of two or three
witnesses, shall every word be established. If a false witness rise up
against a man to accuse him of trespass, the Judges shall make diligent
inquisition, and if they find that the witness has borne false witness
against his brother, then shall they do to him as he had thought to have don to
his brother, and thou shall put evil away from out of the midst of thee.

Now for the oath which the Judges have to exact, or they that are at
variance, or else the witnesses have to take, that does the Lord command to
be done, by the calling to record of his holy name, and that too of none other
but his name alone. Deuteron. 10 etc.

Moreover, that in effect is a kind of appeal, where Moses does so often
(...)
bidd the Judges in an hard and doubtful matter to have recourse unto the high
priest, and so, as it were, to God him self, or the Oracle of God for the
declaration of the same: as is to be seen in the eyghteenth Chapter of Exodus,
and in the first, and sixteenth Chapter of Deuteronomie.

Of lawful wedlock, against incestuous and unprofitable marriages, (...)
and also of the degrees of consanguinitie and affinity there are exquisite
precepts as well in the eyghteenth Chapter of Leuiticus, as also in other
places of the books of Moses. Verily where lawful marriages are not, there is
no matrimony: therefore the children, that are so borne, are counted
bastardes: neither is there for them any dowries or inheritance.

The Lord in many places of his law does charge parents to bring up their
children honestly, and to instruct Parents and children.
them in the fear of God. Among the rest he says: The words which I
command thee this day, thou shall show unto thy children, and shall talk
of them when thou art at home in thine house, and as thou walk by the way,
and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall bind them
for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as fro^tlets betwixt thine eyes,
and thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon thy gates
etc.

Again, for the honoring, reuerencing, and nourishing of parents, there are
not in the moral only, but also in ye Judicial laws some things set down,
wherein the honor and duty to be given to parents is diligently commended
to all sorts of people. Of which I will speak when I come to treat of
parricidie, under which title I do comprehend the evil handling, and naughty
demeanor of men to their parents.

Now how great the authority of fathers over their children was, Of the
power and authority of fathers.
we may conjecture by that especially, where, in the 21 of Exodus it is
permitted to the father, that is in poverty, to sell his daughter. Again, in
an other place leave is given to the father either to deny, or else to give
his deflowred daughter in marriage to him, that did defile her. And again, it
was in the fathers power to break the vow which the child had made without
his knowledge or consent: Numerie 30. But that to disinherite the Disinheri^ing.
children (if the children had not deserved it, but that some corrupt
affection had blinded the parents) lay not in the power or will of the
parents, that law does show, which is published in the twenty one Chapter of
Deuteronomie, and does forbid the father to place the second in the right of
his eldest or first begotten son.

Concerning the coming to inheritance Inheritance.
and the succession of goods, or the lawful succession by kindred, there is a
precise law in the 27 Chapter of the book of Numbers. There is set down the
case of the daughters of Zelphad, who did request that their fathers name
should not be wiped out, but that their fathers inheritance and name might be
given unto, and still remain with them, upon that occasion was the law made,
that if the sons did dye, the heritage should be conveyed over and given to
the daughters, or at least wise to those that were nearest of affinity. And
thereunto belongs the law of raising seed unto the deceased brother, and
the whole 26 Chapter almost of the book of Numbers. Upon this law also does
hang the right which comes by adoption.

Furthermore of whoredoms, adulteries, and the rauishing of virgins,
Whoredoms and adulteries.
there are many profitable, honest, and hoalsome laws. In the thirteenth of
Deuteronomie, it is said: There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel,
nor whoremonger of the sons of Israel.

And in the same plac^ he forbids to bring oblations which are the price of
an harlots hire. In Leuiticus charge is given saying: Set not out thy daughter
for hyre to make her play the harlot, least the land be defiled and filled
with sin.

Therefore in the 22 of Deuteronomie, the maid that was deflowred, and yet
feigned her self to be a virgin still, when she was given to an husband,
was commanded to be stoned to death before the doors of her fathers house: to
the end that parents being terrified with so grievous a thing might be stired
up to look more warely unto their children. In the 22 of Exodus this law is
given: If a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he
shall endowe her and take her to his wife. There are most sharp laws against
whoredoms and adulteries: Deuter^nomie 22. For there adulterers are punished
with death.

The same punishment was appointed for him that did by violence ravish a
virgin. For suspicions and jealousy there are rules given in the fifth Chapter
of Numeri. Against detestable, unlawful and altogether devilish lusts, there
are most severe and yet most just laws expressed, as against most silthie
incest, abominable Sodomie, horrible and unnatural buggarie, and such sins
as God has cursed, and are not once worthy to be named among men. Leuit. 8.
and 20. Chapter.

Diuorcementes and separations were permitted by the law in the Diuorcements.
24 of Deuteronomie, for nothing else but for the hardness of the Iewishe
peoples hearts, and for the avoiding of some greater inconvenience, to wite,
least peradventure any man should poison, strangle, or otherwise kill the
woman his wife, which he hated, when he could by none other means rid his
hands of her.

And they that were in that manner divorced, might at their pleasures be married
to others.

Moreover, that justice might be The diuis^on of goods.
maintained, and that every man might inioye his own, in the law there was
charge very diligently given, for the division of things, for the partition
of the land of promise by equal portions, and for the peculiar possession of
proper goods, that to every tribe possessions might be given by lot, and that
no man should by any means make away the possessions, which were given him.
For hereunto belongs that, which is spoken by Moses in the 32. 33. 34.
Chapters of the book of Numbers, and often times in other places also.

And yet notwithstanding this law was nothing prejudicial to traffic Buying
and selling, and*
by exchange. For there were many and very upright laws published for buying
and selling, for letting and hiring, for borrowing and lending, for usury and
things leafte in custody. Whosoever desires to see the places in the law,
he shall have them in the 25 of Leuiticus, in the 22. of Exodus, and in the
fifteenth and twenty three Chapter of Deuteronomium.

And I suppose that to this is to be referred the law, which is given
concerning pawnes or pledges: If thou (...) pledges.
have taken thy neighbors garment to pledge, thou shall restore it him again
before the Sun be set. For that is his only covering: that is, it is the
garment wherewith he covers his fleashe, and wherein he sleeps. For it shall
come to pass, that if he cry to me, I will hear him: because I am
merciful. Again, Thou shall not take the nether or upper millstone to pledge:
for he has laid that, whereon he lives, to pledge to thee.

The laws for things leaft in custody or committed to the credit of Things
left in c^stodie.
another man, and for takeinge of ohters, commands every man to make true
restitution of the thing, which was given unto him to keep. But if it were
stolen away from him, to whom the custody of it was committed, then, he that
kept it ought to purge him self by an oath before a Magistrate, to show that
he consented not to the conueying of the thing away. The same order is
commanded to be observed in things borrowed, that are lost, or otherwise
broken: as is to be seen in the 22 Chapter of Exodus.

And for because it is manifest that no small part of the goods of the
ancient Israelites did consist in ye multitude Bondage.
of bondmen, therefore the law of God does stick long upon the discourse of
bondage and bonomen, and of the bynding and manumission of them. And yet it
does diligently command to handle bondmen mercifully like men, and every sixte
year to set them free from slavery. But if it so fell out, that at the sixte
years end, any bondsman were desirous to stay still in his masters house, he
was permitted so to do, upon condition that his voluntary bondage should
Mancipation.
be confirmed by the ceremony of Mancipation, to wite, that the bondsman
beeinge brought before the Judges, should there testify that he would serve
in bondage voluntarily, and thereuppon the nether lap of his care should be
boared with an aule and fastened to the door. And that was the sign or token
of faith and obedience. For David alluding thereunto did say that ye Lord had
boared through his ear, that is, that by faith he had bound him to obedience.

Moreover the Lord did in these Manumiss^^n*
laws limitt out the time of bondme^s manumission, because the Lords of
bondmen should not use them over cruelly for their gain and commodities sake:
al which are at full set down in the 21 Chapter of Exodus: we must also refer
that to the clemency that ought to be showed to servants, whereas in the 23
Chapter of Deuterono. it it said: Thou shall not deliver unto his master the
servant, which is escaped from his master unto thee: but let him dwell in any
place whereunto he is fledd. And yet manstealing is most sharply forbidden.
Now they Plagium.
committ the offense called Plagium, ye is to say, manstealing, whosoever do
entice other men's bondmen to run from their masters, or which do by theft
or robbery steal other men's servant, whom they do either keep to them
selves, or else sell to others. Against such this law is given: Whosoever
steals a man and sells him, if he be convinced of the crime, let him dye
the death. And the same law is again repeated in the 24 of Deuteronomium.
Bastardes


Of free men little is said in the law, but they were exempted from bearing
office in the common wealth, which were known to be harlots children, whose
fathers no man know. Strangers also, as the Amonites and Moabites were
utterly barred from rule and authority in the Israelitishe weal public.
Deuteronomium 23.

All deceipte, cousening, robbery, shiftings, and subtle crafts are flatly
forbidden in the law under the title of theft. For in the 19 of Leuit. we
read: Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor lie one to another. And in
the nineteenth of Deuteronomie: Thou shall not remove thy neighbors meerestone.

In the 22 of Exodus the Lord does Theft and deceit*
punish thefee with four or fiuefolde double restitution: which whosoever
Restitutio^.
did not perform, he was sold and brought into extreme bondage. But if the
stolen thing were found with the thief and recovered again, then did the
stealer restore to ye owner double the value of that, which was stolen. To this
law belonged whatsoever was spoken concerning sacrilege, stealing of
cattaile, robbing of Sacrilege.
the common treasury, and carrying away of other men's bondslaues, of which
I spoke somewhat a little before. And to this does appertain that excellent
law which says: The hirelings wages.
Thou shall not deny nor keep back the wages of an hired servant, that is
poor and needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of the strangers, that are
within thy land: Thou shall give him his hire the same day, and that before
the sun go down, because he is needy, and does therewith sustain his
life: least he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.

Concerning doing and receiuinge damage, and the making of full restitution
The doing and receiving of damage.
for the harm that is done, there are many constitutions in the law of the
Lord: If any man, says the law, does dig a well, and do not cause it to be
covered, so that an Ox or a sheep of an other man's do fall into it, then
let him that owes the well take to him self the beast that perished, and pay
the worth of the beast to him that is the owner thereof.

The like law is made in the 21 of Exodus touching an Ox that pussheth with
his horns. In the 22 Cha. is given the law of restitution in giving like for
like. If either one man's pasture be eaten up by an other man's cattaile: or if
one man hurt another corn or vineyarde. For y^ law commands to restore
other pasturings, other corn ground and other vineyardes, not of the worste,
but of the best, to him that had the damage done him. Likewise if any man had
set thorns on fire, and by his negligence had suffered it to catch hold upon
corn, either standing in the field upright, or stacked up in mowes at home,
then he by whose negligence the fire began, did make amends for the loss,
that the other received. The same law is again repeated in the 24 of
Leuiticus. In the 22 of Deuteronomie, there are many things expressed that must
be referred unto this title: of which sort is the law that bids us to
bring back the Ox that goes astraye, and to restore the things that are
found, to him that lost them: to keep our buyldings in good reparations, that
by misfortune in the fall of them our brethren be not mischieued.

And like to these is the law also, which says: Thou shall have a place
without the host to go forth unto, and shall bear a paddle stick at thy
girdle, wherewith as thou sit, thou shall dig a hole to hide thy ordure
or cover thine excreme^ts in. And in the civil law the like matter in effect is
handled: for very necessity does require y^ in commonweals there should be
laws concerning draughts, and order of buyldinges, so y^ no man by his
excrementes or buylding of new houses should trouble or annoye his neighbors
about him. To this place also we may add ye laws that were made concerning ye
separating of leapers from the^ yt were clean, lest peradventure y^ contagious
disease should by little and little infect the healthful. The laws of Lepers
and the leprosy are at large set down in the 13 and 14 Chapter of Leuiticus.

Just weightes and just measures the Lord commanded to be kept in Weight and
measure.
the law, where he says: Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of
weightes, a great and a small: neither shall thou have in thine house diverse
measures, a great and a small. But thou shalt have a right and a just weight,
and a perfect and a just measure shall thou have: that thy days may be
lengthened in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee. For all that do
such things and all that deal unrightly, are abomination unto the Lord thy
God. This law is given in the 25 of Deuteronomie, and is again repeated in
the 19 Chapter of Leuiticus.

Of public judgments of witchcraftes and the punishment of offenders The
punishment of the guilty
there are many laws set down in the book of the Lord. Thou shall not, says
the Lord, suffer witches to live. Again, The fathers shall not be killed for
the sons, nor the sons for the fathers: but every one shall be slain for
his own offense. Neither does the law conceal the manner of killing: for it
gives the use of the swoorde, of stones, and of fire into the magistrates
hands. And sometime it is leaft to the Judges discretion to punish the
offendour according to the circumstance of the crime committed, either in body
or goods, in loss of limbs or life, in scourging with rods, or selling
into bondage. In the twentieth Chapter of Leuiticus, all the offenses are
almost reckoned up, that are to be punished we present death. And in like
manner, the like are repeated in ye eyghteenth and twenty one Chap. of the
same book.

Against witches and soothsayers Wi^ches and soothsayers.
there is precise charge given in the eyghteenth of Deuteronomie: in the
nineteenth of Leuiticus this short precept is given: Ye shall not seek after
witches, nor observe your dreams: ye shall not decline to sorcerers, nor
inquire of soothsayers to be defiled by them. Against such the law does
expressly give judgment of death and extreme punishment, Leuiticus 20. In the
22 of Exodus this straight sentence is sharply pronounced: Let not a woman
live that is a witch.

Against heretics, schismatiques, Heretics and false prophets.
apostataes, and false prophets, the law gives judgment in the thirteenth
and eighteenth Chap. of Deuteronomium, where it does most plainly teach, how
such kind of people are to be handled. And like to this is the law for the
stoninge of blasphemers, which is contained in the 24 of Leuiticus. And also
the law for the contemners and breakers of the Lords Sabbath, Numeri 15.

Against seditious rebels and secret Rebels and slau^derers.
slaunderers there is much to be found in many places of the law. Chore,
Dathan, and Abyrom were rebels, of whose ends ye may read in the sixteenth
of the book of Numbers. If any man did maliciously bring up a slander upon
his wives chastity, and was not able to prove it true, he was mearced at a
su^me of money, or punished with stripes, as is to be seen in the 22 of
Deuteronomie. In the 19 of Leuit. this precept is given: Thou shall not go up
and down with tales among thy people: neither shall thou hate thy brother in
thine heart, but shall rebuke him and tell him thy mind plainly. Also in the
22 of Exodus it is said, thou shall not rail upon the Gods (or Judges) nor
blaspheme the ruler of thy people. Murder.


Moreover there are sundry kinds of murder, whereof some are greater or
smaller then other. The most detestable murder of all is parricidie, (when
one kills his father or his kinnesman) under which we do co^prchend the evil
entreating, or currishe handling of parents by their children. Whosoever
strikes father or mother, or curses them, says the law, let him die the
death. Again, they are bidden to kill the rebel that dares stand up to
resist the upright decrees and holy ordinances of the elders: Deuteronomium
17. And also in the 21 of Deuteronomie we find: If any man have a stubborn, a
froward and rebellious son, that will not harken to the voice of his father,
and the voice of his mother, and they have chastened him, and he would not
hearken unto them. Then shall his father and his mother take him, and bring him
out unto the elders of that city, and to the gate of that place, and say unto
the elders of the city, this our son is stubborn and disobedient, and will
not hearken to our voice, he is a riottour and a drunkard: and straightway all
the men of that city shall stone him with stones until he die: and thou shall
put evil from thee, and all Israel shall hear and fear.

Furthermore, murder is either committed willingly or else unwillingly. Of
murder unwillingly committed there is an example in the 19 Chapter of
Deuteronomie, where the case is put, as follows: two friends go to the wood
to hew wood together, and as the one fetches his stroke the head of the are
falls from the helue, and strikes the other so that he dies upon it. This
deed the Lord does neither impute, nor would have it to be imputed to the
man, but to him self. And therefore he gives license to the man to fly unto
the Sanctuary. For his mind was that the sanctuaries The sanctuary,
should be a safegarde to such kind of people as killed men unwillingly, and
not to bladers and cutters, not to them that poison, or otherwise kill their
neighbors of a set pretense or purpose. Of which there is much to be seen in
the 35 of Numeri, the fourth and the nineteenth Chapters of Deuteronomie. To
the law for murder unwillingly committed does the case belong, that is thus
put forth. Two men fight together, and in their fight they strike a woman with
child, so that either she falls in travail before her time, or else does
presently die out of hand. In such a case, what is to be done, the Lord did
teach in the 21 of Exodus, where the law of like for like is also set down.
An eye for an eye, a toothe for a toothe, a hand for a hand etc. In the same
place also is putt an other kind of murder which is committed either by thy
beast, as by thine Ox that pussheth with his horns, or by thy Wolf, or by
thy dog that thou keep in thine house, or else by some instrument, or
buylding that is in thy possession. Now thou did either know or not know
the fierceness of thy beast, the peril in thine instrument, or the
rottenness of thy buylding. If thou knew it not, thou wast then excused.
But if thou knew it, and did not seek a way to prevent the mischief, the
Lord gave charge that thou should dye for it. But if of clemency it were
granted thee to redeem thy life, thou should not refuse to pay any sum
of money, how great so ever it were. Now, wilful murder, committed upon
pretended malice, is utterly unpardonable in the law of God. Such an one,
says the law, thou shall pull from mine altar that he may be killed. In this
case redemption of life is not permitted, but the blood of the murderer is
straightly required. Many causes of this severity, and many other things
tending to this end, are to be read in the 35 Chapter of Numbers, and the
second of Exodus.

In the 21 of Deuteronomie is described the action partly ceremonial, and
partly Judicial, which was solemnized, when any man was found to be slain,
and no man knew who was the murderer. Where also the manner is prescribed
how to make an attoneme^t for ye murder: whereby we may gather, how horrible
a sin murder is in the sight of God and the Catholic church.

Lastly the law does not leave the order of war untouched. For it gives
Wary.
precepts concerning the beginning, the making, and the endinge of war: which
are to be read in the twentieth Chapter of Deuteronomie. Moreover in the law
there are set out the examples of terrible wars, as that with the Amalechites
in the seventh of Exodus, and that with the Madianites in the 31 of the book
of Numbers: where somewhat also is said touching the division of spoils
gotten in the wars.

I know (my brethren) that I have Conclusion.
been somewhat tedious unto you in making this rehearsal of the laws unto
you: but for because the most wise and mighty God does nothing without
especial causes and the evident profit of mankind, I could not therefore
suffer this part of the law to pass me untouched, considering that I see it
so diligently taught by God him self, and that it makes much to the opening
and mainteining of the moral law. Our good God who knows all things, does
also know the dullness and ouerthwarte slacknesse of man's wit, and how it
requires to be driven perforce many times to do good and eschew evil. And
therefore the holy Lord has in these Judicial laws added an holy kind of
compulsion to drive men on withal.

In the Morals he frames our manners and teaches us what to do and what to
leave undone. With the ceremonials he helps forward the morals, and does
under types and figures lay before the eyes of our body and mind the
mysteries of God, and his heavenly kingdom. And lastly by the Judicials, he
compels us to the keepinge of the laws, and does preserve the integrity of
the same. Now all these together do tend to this end only, that man may be
saved, that he may worship God aright, and live according to the will of the
Lord.

Thus much have I spoken hitherto by the help of God, concerning his holy
laws. Now let us praise the goodness of the Lord, who does not suffer his
people to lack any thing, that is necessary for their commodity, and does
even at this day instruct us with these laws to the glory of his name, and
health of our souls.

Of the use or effect of the law of God, and of the fullfilling and abrogating
of the same: of the likeness and difference of both the testaments and people,
the old and the new.
The eighth Sermon.
ALthough I have hitherto in large Sermons, laid forth the law of God by
several parts: yet me thinks I have not said all that should be said,
nor made an end as I should do, unless I add now a treatise of the use,
effect, fulfilling and abrogating of the law of God, albeit I have here and
there in my Sermons touched the same argument. Now by this discourse or
treatise (dearly beloved) ye shall understand, that the testament of the old
and new church of God is all one, and that there is but one means of true
salvation for all them, that either have, or else at this present are saved in
the world: ye shall also perceive wherein the old testament does differ from
the new. Moreover this treatise will be necessary and very profitable both
to the understanding of many places in the holy Scripture, and also to the
easy perceiving and most hoalesome use of those things which I have said
hitherto touching the law. God, who is the author, the wisdom and the
perfect fullness of the law, give me grace to speak those things, that are
to the setting forth of his glory, and profitable for ye health of your
souls. Of the use and effect of Gods law.


The use of Gods law is manifold and of sundry sorts, and yet it may be
called back to three especial points, and we may say that the use thereof
is threefold or of three sorts. For first of all the chief and proper office
of the law, is, to convince all men to be guilty of sin, and by their own
fault to be the children of death. For the law of God sets forth to us the
holy will of God, and in the setting forth thereof requires of us a most
perfect and absolute kind of righteousness. And for that cause the law is
wont to be called the testimony of Gods will: and the most perfect exampler
of his divine pureness. And hereunto belong those words of the Lord in the
Gospel, where he recitinge shortly the sum of Gods commandments, does say:

The first of all the commandments is: Hear, O Israel, the Lord Absol(...)
perfec^^^ is req^^^^^ of us (...) the la^^.
our God is one Lord: and thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength. This is the first commandment, and the second like to this: thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. There is none other commandment
greater then these.

Therefore to this does also apperteine that saying of the Apostle Paul: The
end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned.

But since ye law does require at all our hands most absolute righteousness,
charity and a pure heart, it does condemn all men of sin, unrighteousness,
and death. For in the law of God it is expressly said, Cursed is every one
which abides not in all that is written in the book of the law to do it.
But what one of us fulfilleth No man living is perfect and un spotted.
all the points of the law? what man, I pray, either heretofore has had, or
at this day has a pure heart within him? What man has ever loved, or does
now love God with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his mind?
What man is he that did never lust after evil? Or who is it now y^ lusts
not every day? Therefore imperfection and sin is by the law or by the
bewraying of the law revealed in mankind. What shall we say to this? where I
pray you does there appear in any man that divine and most absolute
righteousness which the law requires? Job cries, I know verily that a
man compared to God cannot be justified. Or, How shall a man be found righteous
if he be compared to God? If he will argue with him, he shall not be able to
answer one for a thousand. If I have any righteousness in me, I will not
answer him, but I will beseech my Judge. Like to these are the words of the
Apostle John who says, If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us. Again, If we say we have not sinned, we make him a
liar, and his word is not in us. Therefore by this means the law is a
certain looking glass, wherein The law does make (...) sins manifest (...)
bring ou^ misery to light.
we behold our own corruption, frailnesse, imbecillitie, imperfection and our
judgment, that is, our just and deserved damnation. For the Apostle does
expressly say, yt the law was given, to the end, that it might make manifest
men's tra^sgressions, and by that means drive them to the acknowledging of
their imperfection and guilt in sinning. For none of us does look into his
own boosome, nor into the secrets of his own breast, but we do all flatter
our selves, and will not be persuaded that our thoughts and deeds are so
corrupt, as they be in very deed: and therefore does the law creep in and
lay open the secrets of our hearts, and brings to light our sin and
corruption. Before the law, says the Apostle, although sin were in the
world, yet was it not imputed. The same Apostle also says, The law works
wrath, for where there is no law, there is no transgression. And again, By
the law comes the knowledge of sin. For in ye 7. to the Romans the same
Apostle does say more fully, I knew not sin but by the law: For I had not
known lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not lust. But sin taking
occasion by the commandment, wrought in me al manner of concupiscence. For
without the law sin was dead: I once lived without law, but when the
commandment came, sin revived: and I was dead. And it was found that the
same commandment, which was ordained unto life, was unto me an occasion of
death, etc. For a good part of that Chapter is spent in that matter. Therefore
the proper office of Moses and the principal use and effect of the law is, to
show to man his sin and imperfection.

As for those which stay here, and go no further to make any other use Moses
does not only slay nor the law only kill.
and effect of the law, but as though Moses did nothing but kill, and the
law nothing but slay, they are diversely and that not lightly deceived. I do
here again repeat it, and tell them that the very proper office of the law is
to make sin manifest, and also that Moses his chief office is to teach us
what we have to do, and with threateninges and cursings to urge it,
especially when the law is compared with the Gospel. For in the third Chapter
of the 2. Epistle 2. (...).
to the Corinthians Paul calls ye law the letter, and immediately after the
ministration of death, then again he calls it a doctrine written in letters
and incke, and figured in tables of stone, which should not endure, but perish
and decay. The same Apostle on the otherside again does call the Gospel the
ministration or doctrine of the spirit, which endures, and decays not,
which is written in men's hearts, and gives life to the believers. Whereupon
we do freely confess that the law does properly make manifest our
infirmity, but that the Gospel gives a medicine and a remedy to that, which
was almost past hope. And now here we must think that our holy ancestors had
not the law alone to convince them of sin, nor Moses to do nothing else but
kill and slay, nor that Moses was given to wound them, but to heal them: and
that not by his own power or virtue, but by the guiding of them to him that
cheerisheth the contrite in heart, and heals all their sorrows: that is
Christ Jesus, who also wrought by the ministry of Moses. For we must not
think from the beginning of the world, nor from Moses his time till the
coming of Christ, that the bare letter was preached only, and that ye grace
and spirit of God was idle and wrought not in the minds of the faithful. For
in that ye law does show us, and inuincibly prove to us, that in us, I mean
in our flesh, y^ perfection is not, which the most holy and perfect God does
in his law require of us, it does therein revoke and pull back mankind (not
by the virtue of it self, but by the power of the quickening spirit of
Christ) from confidence of the flesh, as that wherein there is no health, nor
jot of perfection: and so consequently does give us occasion to turn our
selves to Christ our mediator, who is alone our sanctification and perfection.
And so for this occasion the law is a path, and ready way, and as it were a
scholemaster given by God to us men, to draw us from all confidence in our
own strengths, from all hope of our own merits, and from y^ trust in any
kind of creatures, and to lead us directly by faith to Christ, who was made by
God, as I said eue^ now, our righteousness, sanctification, and redemption,
without whom there is no salvation under the sun. Therefore Moses did not
only urge the law but did also preach Christ, and life in Christ. Moses does
(...) dead to Christ.
For the Lord in the Gospel says to the Jews, Think not that I will accuse
you to my father. There is one that accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye
trust. For if ye had believed Moses, ye would undoubtedly have believed me. For
he wrote of me. And Paul to the Galathians says, If there had been a law
given, which could have given life, then no doubt righteousness should have
been by the law: but the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given unto them that believe.
But before faith came, we were kept under the law, and were shut up into the
faith which should afterward be revealed. Wherefore the law was our
scholemaster unto Christ, that we should be justified by faith. Lo, what could
be said more plainly, then that the law has concluded all under sin? But
to what end? That the promise by ye faith of Christ Jesus should be given unto
them that do believe. And again, Before faith came, that is, before he came to
whom our faith is directed, and upon who^ it is grounded, we were kept under
the law. How? forsooth being shut up unto the faith that was to be revealed.
Therefore our fathers were shut vpin the law that they should not break out at
any time and seek for life and salvation any where else, but in Christ alone.
Wherefore the law did lead us by faith directly unto Christ. And yet more
plainly he says, The law was our scholemaister unto Christ. Lo, here
again the law does bring us to Christ. And again he adds, That we should
be justified by faith. Therefore the law sets forward the true doctrine of
justification, teaching plainly that we are justified by faith in Christ, and
not by the merits of our own works. In which point it is openly like unto
the Gospel, and takes to it self the office of the Gospel: and no marvel,
since to many men through their own fault the Gospel does become, and is made
the letter. Furthermore the same Apostle does in an other place say that in
sacrifices they called their sins to remembrance, and we know that in them
was prefigured the purging of sins. Therefore eue^ the ceremonial laws also
led them to Christ, testifying and teaching them that he alone does cleanse us
from all our sins. Whereupon I conclude that the office of Moses and of ye
law both was and is, to open to us our sin and judgment, and yet not to
condemn us, only, but also by occasion to lead us to Christ. By which we
learn also that the law does not only teach us the first (...) law ^^cheth
(...) ri^^t^ous^^se.
principles and rudimentes of righteousness, but the very true and absolute
righteousness. For Moses does expressly say, that he taught a most perfect and
absolute kind of doctrine, as that where in both life and death does wholly
consist. And the Apostle says, that the law leads us by the hand to Christ,
that we should be justified by faith. Now, the righteousness of faith is the
most perfect righteousness. Therefore where The precepts of the law are the
rudiments of the world.
as the precepts of the law are in some places called the rudime^ts of ye
world, that is for two especial causes. The first whereof is, because the law
is as it were the first instructions or elements, which, when the doctrine of
the Gospel comes, is finished, and gives place to it as to more absolute
principles. The latter cause is because ceremonies are taught under outward
things or signs, when as in those outward things they do prefigure and set
forth to be seen y^ inward things, even Christ himself and his holy mysteries.
And out of that which I have hitherto said, we may also learn, that the
ancient saints, which lived under the old testament, did not seek for
righteousness and salvation in the works of the law, but in him which is the
perfectness and end of the law, even Christ Jesus, and therefore that they used
the law and the ceremonies as a guide and scholemistresse to lead them by the
hand to Christ their savior. For so often as they heard yt the law required
perfect The kind of righteousness which was in the people of the old ancient
world.
righteousness at their hands, they did by faith through grace understand, y^
in the law Christ was set forth to be the most absolute righteousness, to
whom all men ought to fly for ^he obt^ining of righteousness. So often as
they met together in the holy congregation to behold the holy Ceremonies,
which God had ordained, they did not look upon the bare figures only, nor
think that they did please God, and were purged from their sins by that
external kind of worshipp, but they did cast the eyes of their minds and of
faith upon the Messiah to come, who was prefigured in all ye Ceremonies and
ordinances of the law. They therefore did abuse the law, who thought that
they were acceptable to God, and that they served him as they should, because
they were busy in those Ceremonial works. For those thoughts and
persuasions the Prophets in their Sermons did sharply accuse, and evermore cry
out upon. And in that sense and for that cause ye people of Israel is many
times called a carnal people: not that all the Patriarchs A carnal of fleshly
people.
and fathers before the coming of Christ were carnal or fleshly: but for
because they did as yet live the^ under those external shadows, and outward
figures, and for because there were peradventure among the people some, that
did not perceive the spiritual things shadowed under those external figures,
and did think perhaps that they were acceptable to God for the woorking and
doing of that external work.

The second use and an other office of the law is to teach them, that are The
law frames the life of man.
justified in faith by Christ, what to follow and what to eschew, and how the
godly and faithful sort should worship God. For the law of God does comprehend
a most absolute doctrine both of faith in GOD, and also of all good woorks. For
in the first use of the law I declared how the Moral and Ceremonial law
does teach us faith in God, and Christ his son, and how it brings man to
the knowledge of himself, that he may understand how that in himself, that
is, in the nature of man there is no good thing nor any life, but that all the
gifts of life, of virtues and salvation are of God the father, the only
wellspring of all goodness, through Christ his son our savior. In this
second argument of the end, the use, or office of the law of GOD, we must
acknowledge all the forms of virtues, and the treasure of all goodness to be
set forth unto us in the law of the Lord: and that the Apostle applies the
precepts of the law to exhortation and consolation. The first of the two tables
of the Moral law does teach us what we owe to God, and how he will be
worshipped of us. The second table frames the offices of life, and teaches us
how to behave our selves toward our neighbor. The Ceremonies also do
beelonge to religion. And the Iudicialls teach the government of an house or a
common weal, so that by them we may live honestly among our selves and
holilie to Godwards. Therefore the law does teach all justice, temperance,
fortitude, and wisdom, and in structeth a Godly man in every good work,
wherein it is necessary that an holy woorshipper of God should be instructed.
Wherefore so often as the holy Prophets of God would set up again and restore
the worship of God and true religion, that was decayed, so often as they would
cry out upon and rebuke the faults and errors of men, and lastly when they
would teach them to do those good works, which are good woorks in deed, they
led them always unto the law, and cited all their testimonies out of the law.

Whereof we have evident examples in the 15. Psalm of David, and in the first
and 33. Chapter of Esaies Prophecy: and in the 18. of Ezechiel also. Paul in
the 13. to the Romans refers all the offices of our life to y^ law of
charity. For the Lord himself, before Paul had done the same in the Gospel.
Moreover the Prophet David in the 94. Psalm cries: Blessed is the man, O
Lord, whom thou instructest in thy law. And in the 78. Psalm, He made a
covenant to Jacob, and gave a law in Israel, that the posterity might know
it and put their trust in the Lord, and not forgett the works of God, but
keep his commandments. Again in the 19. Psalm he says, The law of the
Lord is an undefiled law, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is
sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple: the statues of the Lord are right,
and rejoice the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure and gives light
unto the eyes. The fear of the Lord is holy and endures for ever: the
judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether: more to be desired
are they than gold and precious stone, and sweeter than honey and the honey
comb. And to this end tends the sense of all the Alphabetical Psalm, which
is in order of number the 119.

The third use or office of the law, is to repress the unruly, and those,
The law ^^idleth the (...)
whom no reason can move to orderlinesse, the law commands to constrain
with punishment, that honesty, peace and public tranquillity may be
mainteyned in Christian commonweals. For some there are, and that no small
number of people which do refrain from doing evil, and live somewhat
tollerablie, not so much for the love of virtue, as for the fear of punishment
that will ensue their inordinate living. Therefore it pleased the goodness of
God by giving ye law to put in a caveat, and to make a prouiso for the
tranquillity of mankind. And to this it seems that the Apostle had an eye,
when he said, We know that the law was not given to the just, but to the
unjust, to the lawelesse and disobedient, to the ungodly and to sinners, to
unholy and unclean, to murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, to
manslears, to whoremongers, to them that defile themselves with mankind, to
mans^ealers, to liars, to perjured, and if there be any other thing that is
contrary to hoalsome doctrine, etc.

After the declaration of the use, the end and the office of the law, I have
It is impossible for us of our own strength to fulfill the law.
next to teach you how and by what means the law of God is fulfilled. It is
impossible for any man of his own strength to fulfill the law, and fully to
satisfy the will of God in all points. For it is manifest that in the law
there is not required ye outward work only, but also the pureness of the
inward affections, and as it were, as I said even now, a certain heavenly and
absolute perfectness. For the Lord himself in one place cries, Be ye perfect
eue^ as your father which is in heaven is perfect. But so absolute a
perfectness is not found in us so long as we live in this flesh. For the
flesh even to the very last end of our life does keep still her corrupt
disposition, and although it does many times receive an overthrow by the
spirit, that strives against it, yet does it still renew ye fight, so that
in us there is not found, nor in our strength there does remain that heavenly
and most absolute perfectness. But let us hear the testimony of ye holy
Apostle Paul touching this matter, who says, We know that the law is
spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin. For that which I do I allow
not. For what I would, that do I not, but what I hate, that do I. And again
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing. For to will is
present with me: but I find no means to perform that which is good. Again,
I delight in the law of God after the inward man: but I see an other law in my
members rebelling against the law of my mind, and subduing me unto the law of
sin, which is in my members. And at the last he concludes and says, So
then, with the mind I me self serve the law of God: but with the flesh the
law of sin. Now some there are which think, y^ Paul spoke these words not
of himself, Paul spoke in the 7. cha. to the Romans of his own person.
but of the person of others which were carnal men, and not as yet regenerate.
But the very words of the Apostle do enforce the reader, whether he will or no
to confess, that the words recited may be applied eue^ to the man that is most
spiritual. Augustine 1. lib. Retractat. cap. 23. says that he himself was
sometime of opinion, that those words of the Apostle ought to be expounded of
the man, which was under the law, and not under grace: but he confesses that
he was compelled by ye authority of others writings and treatises to think
yt the Apostle spoke them of such men, as were most spiritual, and of his own
person: as he does at large declare in his books against the Pelagians. Even S.
Hierome also, who is said to have thundered out a most horrible curse against
them, that taught yt the law did command things impossible, does expressly
write to Rusticus, that Paul in this place speaks of his own person. But if
the flesh and the corrupt disposition thereof remain, whereby it does
vncessa^tly strive with the spirit, then verily yt heavenly perfectn^s is
never perfect in us so long as we live: and so consequently so long as we
live, none of us fulfilleth ye law.

Here also is to be inserted that disputation of Paul, where he proves that
(...) the (...) of the.
no mortal man is justified by the works of the law: his meaning is not yt
no man is justified by the very works of the law, but that no man is justified
by the works of our corrupt nature, which does not perform that, which the
law of God requires. For, as the same Apostle says, it is not able to
perform it. And very well truly says he, We know that a man is not justified
by the deeds of the law but by the faith of Jesus Christ: and we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by
the deeds of the law: because by the deeds of the law no flesh shall be
justified. Neither must we by the deeds of the law understand the Ceremonies
only. For even as the Ceremonies do not, so likewise do not the morals
justify us men. The Apostle speaks of the morals when he speaks of the
deeds of the law. For in the 3. Chap. to the Romans the same Apostle The (...)
says, By the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified, in his
sight. And immediately after he adds the reason why, saying, For by the law
comes the knowledge of sin. But in the 7. cap. he shows by what law, to
wit the moral law. For the moral law says, Thou shall not lust. But ye
Apostle says, I knew not sin, but by the law. For I had not known
concupiscence if the law had not said, thou shall not lust. In his Epistle to
the Ephesians he speaks to the Gentiles and says simply that works do not
justify. But speaking to the Gentiles he could not mean it of the ceremonial
laws, but of the very moral virtues, that is, all kinds of works y^ seemed
to be good. To the Galathians he says, As many as are of the deeds of the law
are under the curse. And to prove that, he adds, For it is written: Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the law to do the^. Now unless we do by the deeds of the law understand the
morals, as well as the ceremonials, I do not see how his proof can hang to
that which went before. For he says expressly, In all things which are
written in the book of the law to do them. Now who knows not that ye
ceremonials were not written alone, but that the morals were written also? And
S. Augustine in his book De spiritu and litera, Cap. 8. does by many
arguments prove that Paul by the deeds of the law did understand the morals
also.

Now that we may conclude this place I will here recite the words of the
Apostle in the 8. to the Romans, saying, What the law could not do, in as
much as it was weak thorough the flesh, that God performed by sending his own
son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and by sin condemned sin in the
flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, which
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. The Apostle in these words
teaches us two things. First that the law neither can now, nor never could
justify us men. The fault of this weakness or lack of ability he casts
not upon the law, which is of it self good and effectual, and is the doctrine
of most absolute righteousness: but he lays the fault thereof upon our
corrupt flesh. Our flesh neither could nor can perform that, which is
required of us by ye law of God. Whereupon S. Peter in the counsel held at
Jerusalem is read to have said, Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put on the
disciples necks the yoke which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
The latter is inferred upon the first, to wit, when the law could not give us
life, nor we were able to do y^ which the law required at our hands, the^ God,
who is rich in mercy and goodness sent his son into the world, that he
being incarnate should die for us, and so take away the sin of our
imperfection, and bestow on us his perfectness in faith, being himself the
perfectnes and fullness of the law. By this therefore it is manifest y^ Christ
has fulfilled the law, and that he is the perfectnes of al ye faithful in the
world. But here this place requires a more full exposition, how Christ has
fulfilled the law, and how he is made our Christ has fulfilled the law and is
the perfectnes of the faithful.
perfectness. First of all, whatsoever things are promised and prefigured in
the law and the Prophets, all those has Christ our lord fulfilled. For those
promises, The seed of the woman shall crush the Serpents head: In thee shall
all the kindreds of the earth be blessed: and other more innumerable like to
these, did our Lord fulfill, when he being borne into this world, made an
atonement for us, and brought back life to us again. In like manner he
fulfilled all ye ceremonials, while he himself being both priest and sacrifice
did offer up himself, and is now and ever an effectual and everlasting
sacrifice, and an eternal high priest, making intercession always at the
right hand of ye father for all faithful believers. He also does spiritually
circu^cise the faithful, and has given them in steed of circumcision the
sacrament of baptism. He is our Passover, who in steed of the Paschal lamb
has ordained the Eucharist or supper of the Lord. Finally he is the
fulfilling and perfectnes of the law and the Prophets. Moreover our Lord
fulfilled the law, in that he did most absolutely in all poinctes satisfy the
will of God, being himself the holiest of all, in whom there is no spot, no
evil concupiscence, nor any sin: in him is the love of God most perfect,
and righteousness altogether absolute: which righteousness he does freely
communicate to us, that are most imperfect, if we believe and have our hope
fast settled in him. For he forgiueth us our sins, being made a cleansing
Sacrifice for us, and makes us partakers of his own righteousness: which is
for that cause called Imputed righteousness. Whereunto the testimonies of ye
Apostle do apperteine, God, says Paul, was in Christ, reco^ciling the world
unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them. For him, which knew not
sin, he made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God
by him. Again, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness, without works. So also if we believe in God, through Christ
our faith shall be imputed to us for righteousness. For by faith we lay hold on
Christ, whom we believe to have made most absolute satisfaction to God for us,
and so consequently that God for Christ his sake is pleased with us, and that
the righteousness is imputed to us as our own (and is in deed by gift our
own) because we are now the sons of God.

These things being diligently weyyed, it shall be easy for us to answer Life
is promised to them that keep the law^.
them, which make this question and do demand, since no mortal man does of
himself exactly satisfy the law: How then is righteousness, life and
salvation promised to them that do observe the law? Our answer is forsoothe,
that that promise has a respect to the perfect righteousness of Christ, which
is imputed unto us. Otherwise it is assuredly certain that the holy Scripture
does not so much as in one jot disagree, or square in any point from it
self. The Apostle does plainly say, If there had a law been given which
could have given life, then had righteousness been of the law: but now the
Scripture has shutt up all under sin, that the promise might be given by
faith to them that do believe. Wherefore he keeps or does fulfill the law,
even of the ten commandments, who does the thing for which the law was
chiefly ordained. But the law was chiefly ordained (as I did declare a little
before) to the end that it might convince us all of sin and damnation, and
so by that means send us from our selves, and lead us by the hand to Christ,
who is the fulfilling of the law unto justification to every one that does
believe. And therefore he does fulfill and keep How (...) may (...) the (...)
the law, who has no confidence in himself and his own works, but
committing himself to the very grace of God does seek all righteousness in
the faith of Christ. Whereupon now it is evident that these two sentences of
Christ our Lord are of one sense and meaning, Whosoever believes in me, he
has life everlasting: And, If thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments. For Paul also in the 13. Chapter of the Acts says, Be it
known unto you brethren, that thorough Christ is preached to you the
forgiveness of sins: and by him, all that believe are justified from all the
things, from which he could not be justified by the law of Moses. And to this
place now belongs all the work of justification, of which I have at large
disputed in an other place.

Now that faith, wherewith we believe that Christ has satisfied the law, How
we may keep the law.
and that he is our righteousness and our perfection, is neither of our own
nature, nor of our own merits, but is by the grace of God powered into us
through the holy spirit, which is given into our hearts. This spirit abiding
in our hearts, does inflame our breasts with the love and desire of Gods
law, to do our endeavor to the expressing and showing of the law in all our
works and conversation. Which desire and endeavor, although they be never
fully accomplished by reason of the s^eashes frailetie or weakness of man's
nature, which remains in us even till the last gasp and end of our life, is
notwithstanding acceptable to God by grace for Christ his sake alone: neither
does any Godly man put any confidence in this other, but in the first
fulfilling of the law, as that which is only absolute and perfect. For Paul
in his Epistle to the Romans cries out, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? And yet immediately after he answers,
I thank God. to wit, because he has redeemed me from death, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. So then I me self with the mind serve the law of God, but
with the flesh the law of sin. There is then no damnation to them which
are graffed in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit. etc.

Wherefore since we are in Christ, we are in grace, and therefore is God pleased
with our works, which being given to us by faith and by the liberal spirit,
do proceed from an heart that loves God the giver of them all. For John said,
This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. And his
commandments are not grievous. He adds also the reason thereof and says,
For all that is borne of God overcomes the world: now every one is borne of
God, that does believe, as is declared in the first of John.

By which it is easy to reconcile these 2. places which seem at a blushe
Gods commandments are not heavy to be born
to jar one with an other: The laws of God are heavy, which neither we nor
our fathers were able to bear. And, The laws of God are not grievous, or
heavy to be borne. For they are not heavy to the faithful which are in
Christ, and to those which have the gift of Gods spirit, that is, to those
that are reconciled to God by Christ their Lord and Savior. Without Christ
and faith in Christ they are most grievous and heavy to be borne of every
unbeliever. So the faithful being stirred up by the spirit of God, does
voluntarily and of his own accord do good to all men, so far, as his
ability does suffer him, and will not in any case do hurt to any man: not
forbecause he fears the punishment, yt in the law is appointed for the
disobedient, unjust and wrongful dealers, but forbecause he loves God. And
so also he fulfilleth the Judicial law.

Here I know full well ye thou will Of the abrogation of the law.
make this objection and say, if the law be fulfilled, and that the fulfilling
thereof has a place in the Saints and faithful ones, what needed then I pray
you the abrogating of the law? What needed Paul and all the best divines to
dispute so largely of the abrogation of the same? I will therefore say somewhat
of the abrogation of the law, first generally, and then by parts peculiarly.
But first of all these words of the Lord in the Gospel must be beaten in^o the
head of every godly hearer, Think not, says he, that I am come to destroy the
law or the Prophets: yea I came not to destroy, but to fulfill the^. Verily, I
say unto you, heaven and earth shall pass, but one jot or title of the law
shall not pass till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall loose one of
the smallest of these commandments and shall teach men so, he shall be called
the least in the kingdom of heaven. But whosoever shall do and teach them, he
shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. Let every one therefore be
assuredly persuaded, that the law of God, which is the most excellent and
perfect will of God, is for ever eternal, and cannot be at any time disolued
either by men or Angels, or any other creatures. Let every man think that the
law, so far as it is the rule how to live well and happily, so far as it
is the bridle wherewith we are kept in the fear of the Lord, so far as it
is a prick to awake the dullness of our flesh, and so far as it is given
to instruct, correct, and rebuke us men, that so far, I say, it does remain
vnabrogated, and has even at this day her commodity in the Church of God: and
therefore the abrogating of the law consists in this that follows.

I told you that Gods commandments require the whole man, and a very
heavenly kind of perfectness, which whosoever performs not, he is accursed
and condemned by ye law. Now no man does fulfill that righteousness:
therefore are we all accursed by the law. But this curse is taken away, and
most absolute righteousness is freely bestowed on us through Christ Jesus. For
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made the curse,
righteousness, and sanctification for us men. And so in this sense the law is
abrogated, that is, the curse of the law is thorough Christ taken from the
faithful, and true righteousness is bestowed upon us thorough grace by faith
in the same Christ Jesus. For he is that blessed seed in who^ all the kinreds
of the earth are blessed. He is our righteousness. For Paul says, By him
every one that believes is justified from all things, from which ye could not
be justified by the law of Moses. Therefore the law is put for the curse of
the law: or else the law of God is taken for that, which 1
is bewrayed or made manifest by the law, that is to say, it is taken for
sin. For by the law comes the knowledge of sin. Therefore the law is
abrogated, that is, sin is taken away, not that it should not be, or not
show it self in us, but yt it should not be imputed unto us and condemn us.
For there is no damnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Moreover the law is
taken for the vigeance or punishment 3
which is by the law appointed for transgressors. Therefore the law is
abrogated, because the punishment appointed by the law is taken from the
necks of the faithful believers. For the law is not given to the righteous
man. For Christ delivered the faithful from eternal punishments, whiles he
being guiltless did suffer afflictions for wicked sinners. Furthermore, the
Apostle says: The fleshly mind is enimitie against God: for it is not obedient
to the law of god, 4
nether can be. But now this hatred or enimitie of Gods law is by faith pulled
out of the hearts of the faithful: and in steed of it is graffed in the love of
gods most holy will: so that in this sense also the law is said to be
abrogated, because the hatred of the law is taken away. And therefore the
Apostle compares them that are under the law to bondslaues, and them that are
free from the law to sons and children: to whom also he attributes the
spirit, not of bondage, but of adoption. For forbecause ye are sons, says
he, God has sent the spirit of his son into your hearts, which cries Abba
father. etc. To these may be added that the law of God has types and
shadows, and that the Ceremonies are very burdensome, even as also the whole
law is called a yoke. But now the son of God came into this world, who
fulfilling the figures, showed to us the very truth, and did abolish those
types and shadows: so that now no man can condemn us for neglecting or
passing over those Ceremonies or figures: and so again in that sense the law
of God is abrogated, y^ is to say, that kind of government which Moses
ordained, did come to naught, when Christ did come and his Apostles began to
teach. For they, without regard of the Ecclesiastical regiment appointed by
Moses, did congregate Churches, to which they taught not that kind of
regiment, which Moses had ordained. For they did constantly reiecte the
priesthood of Aaron, the sacraments, the sacrifices, and choice of days, of
meats, and of apparel, which Moses had taught their elders. And in steed of
al those rites they preached Christ alone, and his two Sacraments. etc.

This have I said hitherto, generally The (...) is (...).
touching the abrogation of the law, and now again I will more largely expound
the same by several parts. The whole law is divided into the Moral, the
Ceremonial, and the Judicial laws. The Moral law now is contained in the
ten commandments, the first precept whereof does 1
teach us to honor and worshipp one God alone, and not to match any strange
gods with him. This commandment did our Lord Jesus in the Gospel so
earnestly urge, and diligently teach, yt we may perceive very well that in it
nothing is altered. The second precept forbids idolatry, that is, the 2
worshipping and honoring of al manner images, whether they be the images of
GOD himself, or of any of his creatures. But it is known that the Apostles in
the doctrine of the Gospel did use all means that they could, to banishe and
drive away all kind of idolatry. Paul and John cry, Flee from idolatry.
And whereas Christ and his Apostles do most diligently teach us 3
to sanctify and glorify Gods holy name, they do thereby give their consent
to the establishing of the third commandment, which does forbid to defile Gods
name by taking it in vain. The 4. alone of all the commandments, concerning 4
the sanctifying of the sabbath day, is of S. Augustine called Ceremonial. But
it must not be simply understood to be Ceremonial. For so far forth as the
outward worship of God requires a certain appointed time to be exercised in,
and carries with it the sacrifices of the law, so far, I say, it is
ceremonial: but in respect that it teaches to meet in holy assemblies to
worship God, to pray, to preach, to be partakers of the sacraments, and to
offer spiritual sacrifices, therein it is eternal and not ceremonial: As I
have before declared in the exposition of the Sabbath. The fifte precept,
touching the honor due to parents, ye 5
Lord himself does ratify in the 15. cap. of Matthews Gospel: Even as he does
also very diligently teach the sixte against 6
murder, and the seventh against 7
adultery in the 5. Cap. of y^ same Gospel. The eighth, which is against
theft, is 8
renewed by the Apostle, who gives charge, that no man deceive his brother,
and that no man steal any more, but that every one should labor with his
hands, that he may have things necessary for himself, and be able to give
to him that wants. The ninthe precepte, which is for the brideling of 9
the tongue, so that no lie be made, nor false witness borne against our
neighbor, is by Christ himself and his Apostles confirmed so often, as they
give rules for the ordering of the tongue, and charge every man to speak the
truth to his neighbor. And they also do condemn evil lusts and
affections, whereby they do not abrogate, but 10
repair the tenthe commandment, which does forbid all manner of
concupiscence. Therefore the whole abrogation of the ten commandments, so
far forth as they are abrogated, does consist in those points whereof I
spoke even now: to wit, that Christ in faith is our perfect and absolute
righteousness etc. The Apostle bearing witness thereunto and saying, What the
law could not do, in as much as it was weak through the flesh, God having
sent his own son, in the similitude of sinful flesh, even by sin
condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. As is
to be seen in the 8. to ye Romans. I have therefore discoursed the brieflier of
this matter in this place, because I have at the full spoken of it in the
treatise of ye ten commandments.

I am now come to speak of the Ceremonials. These Ceremonials were given and
granted until the How far ^oorth the ceremonials are abrogated.
time of amendment, to wit, until Messiah should come. Messiah is already
come, therefore all the Ceremonies, even to the coming, death, resurrection
and ascension of Christ our Lord into the heavens, are come to an end, and have
no place any longer in the Church of the Christians. And yet here we must,
and do make a difference betwixt the writings concerning the Ceremonies, and
the very things of the Ceremonies, that are set down in writing, I mean, the
very Ceremonies themselves, or actions y^ were used. For ye writings concerning
the Ceremonies, which were set forth by the spirit of God, are not taken away
from Christians nor abrogated, so that they may not be read, retained or used
in the Church: as I declared in the 2. Sermon of the first Decade. For they are
effectual to instruct us in Christ Jesus, while in them we do behold the
manner how Christ was preached and prefigured to the ancient Church of the holy
fathers. Paul verily did most significa^tly preach Christ out of the
ceremonies, which no man will deny, that reads diligently his Epistle to the
Hebrews. For he does wonderfully in that Epistle, lay Christ and all his
gifts before the eyes of all the Church. Therefore ye Ceremonials both may and
ought to be read in the church, so yet that in them Christ may be sought, and
when he is found be aptly preached. And for that cause in ye 5. and 6. Sermons
of this Decade, where I handled the Ceremonials, I annered unto them certain
notes of their significations, that I might open away for the students of the
scriptures and lovers of Christ to go forward and proceed in that hind of
argument. Now the Ceremonial things or stuff of the ceremonies, of which sort
are ye priesthood, the place, the time, the sacrifice, and whatsoever else is
like to these, are utterly abrogated, so y^ henceforth they are neither used,
nor have any place in the Church of Christ. This did Jeremy foretell in the 3.
Chap. of his prophecy saying, In those days they shall make no more boaste of
the arcke of the Lords covenant: no man shall think upon it, neither shall
any man make mention of it: for from thenceforth it shall neither be visited,
neither shall such things be done any more. By the arc the Prophet means
those poinctes of the law, which are abolished by the coming of Christ. S.
Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews, by the promise that GOD made to Jeremy,
saying: That he would make a new covenant, does Heb. 1.
gather this observation, In that he says a new covenant, he has worn out
the first: For that which is worn out, and waxed old, is ready to vanish
away. The same Apostle to the Ephesians says, Christ is our peace, which has
made both one, and has broken down the middle wall, that was a stop between
us, taking away in his flesh the hatred, even the law of commandments
contained in ordinances, for to make of twain one new man in himself. So
making peace. Ephesians. 2. God verily severed the Jews from the Gentiles, while
he chose and consecrated them to be a peculiar people unto himself, not by the
calling of the word only, but also by the sacraments. For there were
ceremonies prescribed and given, which, as a middle wall betwixt the Jews and
the Gentiles, should compass in and contain the heritage of ye Lord: so that
in the ceremonies the note of difference did consiste, whereby the Jews were
known to be the lawefull heirs of Gods good promises, whereof the Gentiles
had no part or portion. But Christ came into the world, to the intent that of
two people, the Jews and the Gentiles, he might make one Church, and therefore
did he break down the middle wall that parted them, that is, Ceremonies the
niddle wall or patition.
he did clean take away the Ceremonial ordinances, which were a stopp
betwixt them. For Christ in that case did the same, that Princes are wont to
do, who when they go about to bring two nations, that are at variaunce, into
one kingdom, and under one authority, do first take away the diversity of
arms, which are the cognizaunces of their ancient hatred, that when the cause
of the remembrance of the grudge is taken from their eyes, they may the
better agree betwixt themselves in mind and behavior. For even so did Christ
take away Circumcision, the Sacrifices, and all the Ceremonies, to the end
that of the Jews and Gentiles he might make one Church and fellowship. Paul
to the Colossians compares the Ceremonies to an obligation Ceremonies of hand
writing.
or handwriting, whereby God has us bound, as it were, so that we cannot deny
the guilt. But he says, that we were so delivered by Christ from the guilt,
that the obligation or handwriting was cancelled or torn in pieces. But by the
cancelling of the handwriting the debtor is acquieted and set at liberty. And
therefore we read that at the death of our Lord, the veil of the temple was
torn in pieces from the bottom up to the very top: that thereby all
people might understand, both that sins were then forgiven them, and that the
people of God was set at liberty from all the burden and yoke of the law.
Verily, when the wicked, stiffenecked, and disloyal The city and temple of
Ierus^le^ destroyed.
people of the Jews did after ye death of Christ go on to exercise, prorogue,
and to obtrude to all men the Ceremonies, which were finished and abrogated at
the coming of Messiah, then Christ, sitting at the right hand of the father,
did by the means of the Roman Princes utterly deface their city, and
overthrow the temple, wherein they boasted. Which thing the prophet Daniel, and
Balaam many hundred ^ani 9. Number. 24.
years before Daniels time foretold, and said should come to pass. Neither
hitherto yet, by the space of 1500. years and more have they had any place to
restore and set up again their city and temple. In Theodoretus and Ruffinus
we read, that in the reign of Iuhan the Emperor, the Jews with very great
hope and presumption went about to build a new temple, and that they sought
the foundation thereof in the place, where that temple stood, which was burnt
by Titus, son and general to the Emperor Vespasian: but Christ our Lord
(who in the Gospel foretold out of Daniels prophecy the desolation thereof,
and did among other speeches say, And Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot of
the Gentiles: till the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled) did mightily repress
their wicked endeavors, and hinder their labor for going forward. For when
they had gathered and brought together many thousand bushells of lyme and
chaulk, then soudeinly came a whirlewind we a wonderful storm and blustering,
which scattered abroad and carried away the store of stuff by them provided.
There happened also a terrible earthquake, by which all the buildinges almost
of the whole place were swepte away and made even with the ground. Finally,
when a great company, which were busy in the work, did the same night
remain or take their rest in a certain porch or galerie near to the new
begone city and temple, the whole building and roof thereof falling down on
a soudeine, slew all the number that were within y^ reach thereof. In the
morning, they which remained alive ran together, to seek every man for his
friend, among them that were slain by the ruinous building: and when those
terrors could do no good, nor turn them from their purpose, then soudenly out
of the trenches, foundations, and stoarchouses hard by, where their tools and
other necessaries lay, there sprange forth a fearful fire, which burnt many
that urged the work, and compelled ye rest to take their heels. For in that
one day it brake forth sundry times, and so at last repressed the stubborn
rashenesse of that stiffnecked people. And for because these things should not
be thought to have happened casually or at adventures, the night before and y^
night following, there appeared in the sky a bright or glistering sign of the
Cross, and the garments of the Jews were filled over we crosses, not bright,
but black, which could not be ridd away or wiped out by any pains taking or
manner of means. They therefore in spite of their teeth and full sore against
their wills being compelled with those horrible terrors, fearful
judgments, and bitter plagues of Christ our Lord, forsook the place, and
fledd every man to his house, leaving the work undone, and openly confessing
that Jesus Christ who^ their forefathers had crucified, is a most mighty God,
howsoever Julian, with Pharao, and the chief of the Jews did perseauer still
in their disloyalty and despiteful blasphemy against him and his holy Church.

But, howsoever the Jews do even at this day abide in their wilful
stubbornness, the Lord did from heaven declare openly enough, that he is no
longer delighted with the Ceremonial rites, because he destroyed all the
instruments belonging to that ancient kind of worship, and made the very
shopp of that old religion, I mean the temple, and city of Jerusalem, leuel
with the ground. Touching the temple the Lord in the Gospel spoke to his
disciples, when they with wondering did behold it, and said: Do ye not see al
these things? verily I say unto you, there shall not be leaft here one stone
standing upon an other. And again, weeping over the vnthanckful city he said,
They shall not leave in thee one stone standing upon an other, because thou
knew not the time of thy visitation. And now that all this was word for
word accomplished and fully finished, Josephus an eye witness of the same
does largely testify in the 18. Chap. of his 7. book De Bello Iudaico. Even
very now I told you that from one thousand and five hundredth years ago unto
this present time, the Jews never had any place given them to build their
temple up in again: whereby, if they were not beside themselves, they might
easilye gather, yt the Messiah is already come into the world, and that he
has abrogated all the Ceremonial rites.

It is a very slender, or rather no defense at all for the Jews, to allege
(...) they (...) or (...).
the words in the law, which are many times rehearsed, where the Ceremonies
are described, Ye shall keep it for an everlasting ordinance. For in this
sense, Everlasting is taken for Longlasting and Unchangeable, so far forth
as it has respect unto the will or authority of mankind. For the Lord did
with threatening of grievous punishments forbidd, that mankinds unadvisedness
should change or abrogate the holy Ceremonies.

And yet since he did ordeine those Ceremonies until the time of amendment,
he does neither sin nor yet incur the crime of inconstancy, when he
does change, or take away the Ceremonies according to the determinate
purpose, which he intended from the beginning.

Moreover, so long as the thing signified does not decay, and that the
shadow only or momentanie figure does vanish away, it is assuredly certain
that the Ceremony does yet remain in full effect and substance. The whole
man does live for ever: and yet the things that are temporal or corruptible
in him, do perish in death, and are abolished in his clarification.

But that all these things may appear The priesthood abrogated.
as clear as the day light, I will particularly run through and touch the
more notable sort of Ceremonies. That the priesthood of Aaron is utterly
abrogated, it is evident by the words, which the Apostle cites out of David
saying, The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou art a priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech. Christ therefore is the one and only high
priest, and that too, an everlasting priest, having an immutable priesthood,
which cannot by succession pass from him to any other man or Angel. For he
now standing at the right hand of the father in heaven, the very true temple,
which was prefigured by the Tabernacle and temple at Jerusalem, does make
intercession for us, and does all the offices of an high priest: Of whom the
Apostle of Christ S. Paul does speak very largely in his Epistle unto the
Hebrews This Christ Jesus our high priest has consecrated all the faithful
to be Kings and Priests unto himself. And yet notwithstanding he does
ordeine ministers of the Church, by doctrine and examples to instruct the
Church and to minister the sacraments, I mean not those old and ancient ones,
but those which ye Lord has substituted in steed of the old ones. What
doctrine they must teach he does expressly declare. The mystical attire and
garments of the priesthood, he neither did commend to his Apostles, nor leave
to his Church, but took them away with all the Ceremonies, that are called the
middle wall betwixt she Jews and Gentiles. The Lord himself and his Apostle
Paul will have the pastors of the people cladd with righteousness and
honesty: and do precisely remove the ministers of the Church from superiority
and secular affairs. They do also appoint stipendes for the ministers to live
upon, yet not those which the law allowed them, but such as were most
tolierable and convenient for the state and condition of every Church.

The Lord left the place, to serve and worshipp God in, free without exception
1. Cor. 9. Math. 10. The place ^or to worship God in is free ^or every man to
choose where he lists, and the congregation likes.
or binding to any one prescribed or peculiar place, when in the Gospel after
John he said, The hour shall come, and is already, when the true worshippers
shall worshipp the father neither in this mountain nor at Jerusalem, but in
the spirit and in truth. For such the father requires to worship him. God is
a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth.
The Apostle followed the Lord in this doctrine and said, I will that men pray
in every place lifting up pure hands without anger. Neither did the Lord in
^aine, as I showed you eue^ now, suf^^r the temple to be utterly overthrown,
considering that at his death he had rent the veil thereof. And yet for all
that, the Ecclesiastical assemblies are not thereby condemned: Of which I
spoke in the exposition of the 4. precepte, Remember that thou keep holy the
sabbath day. Verily y^ tabernacle and the temple bare the type of the
catholic Church of God, out of which there are no prayers noroblations
acceptable to the Lord. But the Church is exte^ded to the very ends of ye
world. And yet it follows not theruppon, yt all are in the Church, which are
in the world: they alone are in the Church which thorough the Catholic
faith are in the fellowship of Christ Jesus, and by the agreement of doctrine,
by charity, and by the participation of the Sacraments (unless some great
necessity hinder them) are in the communion of the holy Saints. But they
burn incense and sacrifice in high places, To (...) places.
whosoever seek after any other sacrifice, than the one and only oblation of
Christ Jesus or look for any other to offer their prayers to God the father
than Christ alone, as they are taught by the mouth of the Pastor sincerely
preaching the word of God. Moreover the Church of God has no need now of any
arc, any table, any shewbread, any golden candlestick, any altar either of
incense or burnt offeringes, nor yet of any brase^ lauer: for Christ alone is
all in all to ye catholic Church, which Church has all these things
spiritually and effectually in Christ Jesus, and can seek for nothing in any
other creatures, insomuch that if it perceive any man to bring in again either
these, or such like Ceremonial instruments, it does sharply rebuke and
bitterly curse him for his unwarranted rashenesse and blasphemous presu^ption
in the church of Christ.

For what need has the church of shadows and figures, when it does now
enjoy the thing it self, even Christ Jesus, whose shadow and figure the
ceremonies bare? Moreover the church has signs enough, in that it has
received of Christ two Sacramental signs, wherein are contained all ye
things, which the old church did comprehend in sundry and very many figures.

Furthermore, he has leaft the holy time The holy (...).
to worship God in, free to our choice, who in the Gospel says: The Sabbath
was made for man, not man for the Sabbath: therefore the son of man is Lord
also of the Sabbath And the Apostle Paul says: Let no man therefore judge you
in meat, or drink, or in part of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of
the Sabbothes, which are the shadows of things to come, but the body is of
Christ. Of the Christian Sabbath I spoke in the exposition of the fourth
Commandment. As for the new moons they are not solemnized by ye church of
Christ, in so much as it is taught by Christ to attribute to God, not the
beginning of Months only, but the whole year also and the commodity
thereof, with the light of the Sun, the Moon, and all the stars in heaven.

Moreover the Christians do celebrate their passover more spiritually then
bodily: even as also they do solemnize their Pentecoste or whitsuntide. For as
he sent his spirit upon his disciples, so does he daily sent it upon all
the faithful. And that is ye cause that in the faithful the alarm is stricken
up to encourage them as soldiers to skirmish with their enemies. For the
fleash lusts against the spirit, and the faithful are daily assaulted and
provoked to battle by the world, and by the devil the prince of the world.
Furthermore the feast of propitiation being once finished upon the cross
endures for ever: neither do the Saints any more send out a escape goats to
bear their sins into the desarte. For Christ our Lord came once and was
offered up, and by his sacrifice took away the sins of all the world.
Finally since the faithful do daily consider and bear in their minds, that
they have no abydinge place in this transitory world, but y^ they look after
a place to come, they need not, as the Jews did, once a year to celebrate the
feast of Tabernacles. In like manner the faithful do no more acknowledge any
year of Jubilee. For Christ came once and preached unto us y^ acceptable
year, even the Gospel, whereby it is proclaimed, that all our sins and
iniquities are clearly forgiven us. For so does Christ himself interpret it
in the fourth of Saint Lukes gospel, taking occasion to speak of it out of
the sixth Chapter of Esaies prophecy. And thus the holy time and festival
days are abrogated by Christ in his holy Church: which notwithstanding is not
leafte destitute of any holy thing or necessary matter.

But now because this present year, wherein this book is first of The
Romish Jubilee.
all printed, is the year of Grace one thousand five hundred and fifty, and
according to the Romish tradition is called the year of Jubilee, I am
therefore compelled, as it were of necessity, to make a little digression, and
speak somewhat of the Romish Jubilee. I do therefore call it the Romish and not
the Christian Jubilee, because as I showed you even now, the church of Christ
after our redemption wrought by Christ, and preached by the gospel does
neither acknoledge nor receive any other year of Jubilee. In the ancient
Jewish year of Jubilee there is to be considered the meaning of the letter,
and of the spirit. * According 1
to the letter, bondmen were set at liberty, and lawful heirs did receive
again their patrimony and possessions, which either was changed away, or
otherwise gone from them. The meaning of that order as it could not be brought
again into all kingdoms in these latter days without the trouble of all
estates, so is it little set by, and the care of the oppressed vterly neglected
by the holy popes, who now of late brought in the year of Jubilee, and
preached it unto the foolish world, not for any zeal they had to help the
oppressed, but for the desire they had, by robbing the world, to augment their
own treasures. * The spiritual and hidden mystery 2
of the Jubilee did commend unto them of old the free remission of all sins
through Christ by faith in Christ: which free grace cannot without reproach
to Christ be otherwise preached than it has been already taught by the
holy Gospel. Therefore the church was without the observation of any year of
Jubilee by the space of one thousand and three hundredth years after Christ his
incarnation. At last up start Bonifacius the eyghth of that name bishop of
Rome, who first of all invented that wicked ordinance. For Platina in ye life
of that Bonifacius says: This is he that first brought in the Jubilee in the
year of Christ 1300. wherein he granted full remission of all their sins to
as many as visited the Sea apostolical. And the same did he ordeine to be
observed every hundredth year. So then the church of Christ was without this
Jubilee, without peril of salvation, by ye space of one thousand and three
hundredth years. And therefore may we also be without it without all peril and
damage, yea, to our great profit and commodity. For if our Romanists go on to
obtrude it to the world as a thing necessary to salvation, then shall they
condemn the universal church, which was before Pope Boniface his time, who
first brought in this unacquainted Jubilee. Thus we are so far from not being
able to be without it, that we ought by all means possible to detest and
abhor it, as a very wicked and blasphemous ordinance, considering that we
have to believe that the Jubilee is utterly abrogated by Christ and also y^ al
sins are freely through Christ forgiven to all that believe, in what place of
the world so ever they live, and are conversant in. This Pope Boniface does to
his most false promise and vnpure place annexe the remission of sins. Now I
doubt whether this blasphemous antichriste could do any thing more horrible
and more against the honor of the Savior. For therein is defiled the glory of
the only begotten son of God, who is the only health of all the world.
Therein is defiled the salvation of many thousands, for which Christ died upon
the cross. And therein also is defiled the glory of Christian faith, by which
alone we are made partakers of eternal salvation. This ungracious and wicked
Pope was he, of whom that common proverb runs: He entered like a woolfe,
he reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a dog. For verily so blasphemous an
ordinance was worthy of such an author. So foolish a people was worthy of
such a pastor. And so diuelishe a Pope was worthy of such an end. Platina
writes that in that year of Jubilee, there came so great heaps of people to
Rome, that although the city were indifferently large enough, yet one man
could not, for throng, pass by an other. For the world will needs be
deceived: if it were not so, they would give ear unto the Lord which cries:

O all ye that thirste come to the waters, and ye that have no money draw
nigh. Why spend ye your money upon a thing of naught? etc. Esaie 55. and John
4. 7. Now all the while that the world was set thus on madding, the righteous
Lord was not a sleep, nor yet did dissemble how much they displeased him with
that diuelishe invention. For the very same year he stirred up Otthoman the
Patriarche and first founder of the Turkish empire, by whose means he did
notably scourge the church of Rome, and the corrupt manners that were crept
into Christendom. A few years after, succeeded Clement the sixte, Paul the
second, and Sixtus ye fourth, as wicked men as he, as is to be found in the
histories of their lives, who changed the year of Jubilee from every hundredth
to every fiftieth year, and so at last to every five and twentieth year, that
so they might suck the more advantage out of men's foolishness. But now to
the matter again.

The Sacraments also of the aunclent (...).
Jews are flatly abrogated, and in their places are substituted new
sacraments, which are given to the people of the new covenant. In steed of
circumcision is baptism appointed.

The Apostles in the Synod held at Jerusalem did oppose them selves against
those, which were of opinion, that circumcision was necessary unto salvation,
and in that counsel they allowed of Paul's doctrine who both thought and
taught the contrary. For Paul in one place says: Lo I Paul say unto you,
that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

For I testify to every man which is circumcised, that he is a debitour to the
whole law to do it. Christ is made of none effect to you: as many of you as
are justified by the law, are fallen from grace. Neither is it right or
convenient that in the church of Christ there should remain so bloody a
Sacrament as Circumcision was, when once that blood was shead upon the cross,
which stauncheth and takes away the blood of the old testament.

In steed of the Paschall lamb is the Lords supper ordained, which by 2
another name is called the Euchariste or a thanksgiving. For so the Lord him
self in Luke expounds it, saying, that he did then eat the last passover
with his disciples, at the end whereof he did immediately ordeine the
Sacrament of his body and blood, which he bids them to celebrate in
remembrance of him, until he return to judgment again. Therefore the Lord
leaft the supper to be an unchangeable Sacrament until the end of the
world. Moreover, that all sorts of sacrifices contained in the law are
utterly abrogated, no man I suppose will once deny, which does but consider,
that both the Temple and the two altars with all the holy Instruments, are
utterly overthrown and come to nothing.

I told you that those sacrifices were remembraunces of sins, and types or
figures of the cleansing and atonement that was to be made by Christ Jesus.
Therefore when Christ was come and offered up for the sins of all the
world, then verily did all the sacrifices of the ancient Jews come to their
ending. For where there is a full and absolute remission of sins, there is no
longer any sacrifice for sin. But in the new testament there is a full
remission of sins: therefore in the new testament there is no longer any
sacrifice offered for sins. For Christ is only and alone in steed of all
the sacrifices. For he was once offered up, and after that, is offered no
more: who by the once offering up of him self has found eternal redemption:
so that all which be sanctified, are sanctified by none other oblation, but
that of Christ upon the cross made once for all. Wherefore Christ, being once
offered upon the cross for the sins of all ye world, is the burnt offering
of the catholic church: he is also the meat offeringe, which feeds us with
his fleashe offered upon the cross, unto eternal life, if we receive and
feed on him by faith.

Moreover, he is the drink offering of the church, which with his blood does
quench the thirste of the faithful unto life everlasting. He is the purging
and daily sacrifice of the church: because he is the lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world. His death and passion cleanses all men from
their sins, their errors, and iniquities. Finally, he is y^ churches
sacrifice of thankesgiuinge: because by Christ we offer praise to god, and by
Christ we render thanks unto the Lord. To conclude, the only supper of the
Lord, which we call ye Eucharist, contains in it all the kinds of ancient
sacrifices, which The (...) the (...) is to (...)
are in effect but of two sorts, to wite, of purging, and of atonement, as
those which were offered for sin: or else of thanksgiving, as those which
rendered thanks and offered praise unto the Lord. Now the supper is a
testimony, a sacrament, and a remembrance of the body of Christ, which was
given for us, and of his blood that was shedd for the remission of our sins.
For the body and blood of our Lord, which were but once offered upon the
cross, and neither can nor ought to be offered any more of men, are not
sacrificed a freash in the celebration of the supper: but in the celebrating of
it, there is reiterated a remembrance of the thing, I mean, of the oblation,
which was but once made, and in once offering was sufficient. Again in the
supper we render thanks to God for our redemption, for which also the
universal church does offer praise unto his name. Wherefore, the supper of the
Lord does comprehend the whole substance and matter, which was prefigured in
those ancient sacrifices: so that in y^ point the church is not destitute of
any good or necessary thing, although it does no longer retain those
sacrifices of ye elder church. Yea, they ought not any longer to be solemnized
in ye church, because (when they were nothing else, but the figures, types, and
sacraments of Christ to come) the church does now believe, and that rightly
too, y^ Christ is already come, and that he has fulfilled and accomplished
all things, as we read that he him self did testify when on the cross he
cried, saying: It is finished.

Moreover all vows are come to (...)
an end, because all sacrifices, wherein the vows consisted, are vanished and
gone. Likewise the discipline of the Nazarites is now decayed, because the
temple with all the ceremonies belonging thereunto is vaded away. There
remains still in the church a Christian and moderate discipline, but not that
which is described in y^ law. And the Saints do perform to God the vows
which they have made in the church not contrary to faith and godliness. But
they are sparing, wary, and very religious in making vows. For what have we
to give to God, which we have not first received at his hands, and to the
perfourming of which we were not bound before in baptism?

Christ does not so distinguish betwixt clean and unclean in the Gospel,
(...) choice of meats abrogated.
as Moses does in the law: That says he, which enters into the mouth
defiles not the man, but that which comes out of the mouth. And the apostle
Paul does flatly say, that to the clean all things are clean. And like to
this he speaks much in the fourteenth to the Romans, and in other places
mo. In his Epistle to the Colossians he says: If ye be dead with Christ
from the rudimentes of the world, why as living in the world are ye led with
traditions, touch not, taste not, handle not: all which do perish in abusing:
And so forth. To Peter also it is said: What God has sanctified, that call not
thou unclean. Therefore whereas in the Synodall (...) and (...) ^^^bidden of
the (...).
Epistle set forth by the Apostles in ye fifteenth of the Acts, both blood and
strangled is forbidden and exempted from the meat of men, that commandment
was not perpetual, but momentanie for a time only. For it pleased the
Apostles for charities sake to bear therein with the Jewish nation, who
otherwise would have been too stubborn and selfewilled. The Jews at that time
did every day so rifely hear the reading of the law, which did expressly
forbid to eat blood and strangled, as if the preaching of the Gospel had
not begone to be sowed among them, and therefore they could not but be
greatly offended, to see the Gentiles so lauishly to use the things
prohibited. Wherefore the Apostles would have the Gentiles for a time to
abstain from the things that otherwise were lawful enough, to see if
peradventure by that means they might win the Jews to the faith of Christ.
For the Epistles which Paul wrote a few years after the counsel at
Jerusalem, do sufficiently argue, that the decree of the Apostles against
blood and strangled was not perpetual. But ye commandments given against
things offered to idols, and against fornication (in using whereof ye Gentiles
thought that they did not greatly offend) are perpetual, because they be
morals, and of the number of the ten commandments. But of that matter I
have spoken in another place.

And now, because I am come to make mention of the Synodall decree ordained by
the Apostles and elders of the counsel at Jerusalem, I think it not amiss
to recite unto you (dearly beloved) as a conclusion to this place, the whole
Epistle sent by the Synod, because it does bear an evident, full, and brief
testimony yt the law is abrogated after that manner which I have declared.
Now this is their Epistle or constitution: The Apostles and elders, and
brethren, The decree of the Synod held at Jerusalem
send greetings unto the brethren, which are of the Gentiles, that are in
Antiochia, Syria, and Cilicia. For as much as we have heard that certain,
which departed from us, have troubled you with words, and cumbred your minds,
saying: ye must be circumcised, and keep the law, to who^ we gave no such
commandment: it seemed good therefore to us, when we were come together with
one accord, to send chosen men unto you, with our beloved Paul and Barnabas,
men that have ieoparded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. We
have sent therefore Judas and Silas which shall also tell you the same things by
mouth. For it seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, to charge you with no
more than these necessary things, (that is to say) that ye abstain from
things offered to idols, and from blood, and from strangled, and from
fornication: from which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well. So fare ye
well. This is word for word the Catholic, the Synodall, Apostolic, and
Ecclesiastical Epistle of the counsel held at Jerusalem, both brief and
easy: for as the speech of truth is simple, so also may true religion and
Christian faith be easily laid down in very few and evident words.

Immediately in the beginning after The false Apostles doctrine.
their accustomed manner of subscribing and inscribing their Epistle, they do
out of hand fall too and touch They subscribe their own names, and inscribe
the names of them to whom the the Epistle is sent.
the false apostles, with whom Paul and Barnabas were in controversy, and do
declare what kind of doctrine, that of the false prophets was, which they had
til then preached unto y^ churches, as the catholic, true, and apostolic
doctrine, to wite, that they which will be saved, must be circumcised and keep
the law of Moses.

For they thought not that faith in Christ without the help of the law was
sufficient enough to full and absolute justification. They made their bostes
that they were sent from Jerusalem by the Apostles and disciples of the Lord,
who did all with one consent teach the same doctrine, that they did preach,
and they said that Paul with his companion Barnabas alone did schismatiquelike
sow in the churches a certain doctrine peculiar to him self, touching faith
which justifies without the works of the law. Wherefore the Apostles
straight ways after the beginning of their Epistle do declare what they think
of such false teachers and their unwarranted doctrine: We confess, say they,
that those false teachers went from hence out of Jerusalem, but we deny that
they were either sent or instructed by us. For we gave no commandment to any
such. And so they do testify, y^ it is utterly false, which those fellows
taught, to wite, that the Apostles and Disciples of the Lord did preach: That
the law is requisite to full justification. Yea, they do yet go on, more
plainly to declare what the doctrine of those false Apostles was, They trouble
you, say they, with words, and cumber your minds, commanding you to be
circumcised, and to keep the law. The sum therefore of their doctrine was,
y^ unless a man were circumcised and did keep the law, he could not be
saved. Whereby they did ascribe salvation to y^ keepinge of the law, or to the
merit of their works. Unto this doctrine the Apostles do attribute two
perilous effects. The first is: They trouble you with words. They be words
say they, which do rather amaze, then appease, comfort or pacify your minds,
yea, they do trouble you so, yt ye can not tell what to believe, or whereto to
trust: and do moreover stir up strifes, discordes, and iarrings among you.
To these words of the Apostles does Paul seem to have alluded in his
Epistle to the Galathians, saying: I marvel ^. Gal.
that ye are so soon turned from Christ, which called you by grace, unto
another gospel, which is not an other gospel in deed, but that there besome
which trouble you and inte^d to pervert the gospel of Christ. The latter effect
is. They cu^ber or weaken your minds. For they which lean to the law and to
works, have nothing stable or steadfast in their minds. For since the law
requires a most exact and absolute righteousness, and does thereby kill,
because such righteousness is not found in us, therefore those minds are
weakened and subverted, that are taught to lean to the works of the law,
which law no man does keep as of right he ought to do. Therefore Paul to the
Romans says: If they that do belong unto the law, are heirs, then is faith
vain, and the promise made of none effect. And immediately after again:
Therefore the heritage is given by faith, as according to grace, that the
promise may be sure to all the seed etc. The false apostles therefore did
subuerte and weaken minds, by teachinge that salvation is gotten by the law,
which verily is a grievous judgment against those which with them do teach
the like.

Then also they do with like liberty go on to the other side, to show (...)
his (...) it (...) and Span^ to the (...).
their opinion of Paul and Barnabas, yea, they do adourne them as their
messingers with a most holy testimonial, to the end that they may among
all men have the more authority, and that all men may understand, that betwixt
them twain and the other Apostles there was a full agreement and consent of
doctrine and religion: We being gathered together with one accord, say they,
have sent messingers unto you. Lo here, of the false apostles they testified,
that they sent them not, nor gave them any commandment: but these men they
send, and do with one accord give them a commandment. But who be they
whom they send? Our beloved Paul and Barnabas which have ieoparded their
lives for the name of Christ Jesus. These twain are most choice Apostles and
holy, glorious martyrs, our dearly beloved brethren, being of the same
religion and doctrine with us, who have declared what their lives and doctrine
is, by their manifold virtues, and manfull suffering of peril and dangers.

But for because Paul and Barnabas were them selves no small doers in that
controversy and disputation, there were joined to them two other chosen men,
Judas and Silas, to the end that they might indifferently without suspicion
declare the things, which in the counsel were alleged for both sides, as I
mean to show you in the exposition of the general decree.

For now they do in few words co^prehe^d y^ very decree of y^ whole and
universal The exposition of the general decree of the Synod held at Jerusalem
1
synod, in ye laying down whereof they do first of al name the author of the
decree, saying: It seemed good to the holy ghost and to us. They first set the
holy Ghost, and then them selves, making him to be the author of truth, and
them selves to be the instruments by which he works. For he works in the
Church by the ministry of men.

But men's authority without ye inspiration of the holy Ghost is none at all.
Therefore do the Apostles very significantly say: It seemed good to the holy
Ghost and to us. That is, after that we were assembled in ye Synod to treat
of the matter of justification and of the law (about which things Paul and
his adversaries did stand in controversy) we followed not our own
judgments, neither did we use proofs of our own inventions, but searching
out and hearing the doctrine of the holy Ghost, we do upon his warrant write
this unto you. In the second place they do set down the sum of the decree,
saying: That we might not charge you with greater burdens than these
necessary things, (that is to say) that ye abstain from things offered to
idols, and from blood and from stra^gled, and from fornication. Therefore, say
they, the doctrine of ye Gospel which Paul has hitherto preached with us, is
sufficient to the obteining of life and salvation. We intend not to lay any
greater burden upon you than the doctrine of the Gospel and abstinence from
those few things. In which sentence they seem to have had an eye to the
opinion of Saint Peter, who in the counsel said: Ye know that I being
called by God, did go to the Gentiles and Act. 10.
did preach to them salvation through the Gospel. Ye know that to the Gentiles,
being neither circumcised, nor keeping the law, while I preached to them faith
in Christ Jesus, the holy Ghost was given from above, so that their hearts
were purified of God him self by faith, not by the law, and that they were
made heirs of eternal life.

And upon this he infers: Now therefore why tempt ye God, to lay upon the
disciples necks a yoke, which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear?
But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be
saved, even as they.

See here, Saint Peter called the law a burden and a yoke: and therefore
where the Apostles say that they will not lay upon the church any greater
burden, they do thereby signify that the law is flatly abrogated. They do
therefore set the church free from the burden of the law: and do acquit it
from all burdens like to y^ law. We now do gather by those words of the
Apostles, that those Men (...) the (...) of (...).
burdensome, and innumerable ceremonies, which the church has received by
counsels and Synodes since the time of the Apostles, were unjustly and against
the Apostolic spirit then laid upon the church, and at this day wickedly
retained and defended in the church. For they in express words said: It
seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us to burden you with no more then
these things necessary. But if any man object and say that those ceremonies
were for the rudeness of the people laid upon the churches necks, as a rule
or instruction to guide or teach them by? Mine answer is, that that kind of
instruction is clean taken away, which whosoever goes about to reduce, he
desires nothing else but to bring in Iudaisme again. God knew very well what
kind of church that would be, which he purposed to gather together of Jews
and Gentiles, and yet he abolished those external ceremonies. Now, who does
better know than God, what is expedient, or not expedient for his church?
therefore the things that he abolished, were not expedient for the faithful,
whereupon the Apostles did rightly and very well pronounce: It seemed good to
the holy ghost and us not to lay upon you any greater burden. Let them
therefore be ashamed of their doings, which lay so great a burden upon the
shoulders of the church, that otherwise ought to be most free.

Now also here is added the conclusion of the sentence, Than these necessary
things, (that is to say) that ye abstain from things offered to Idols etc. In
these words they had an eye unto the sentence of saint James S. James
allows of S. (...) opinion
the Apostle and brother of the Lord: for he confirminge and allowing of
Saint Peter's opinion touching justification by faith, and the not laying of
the law upon the Gentiles necks, does allege a testimony of scripture out
of Amose, who did foretell that the Jews should be cut off because of their
sins, and that in their steeds the Gentiles should be taken, among whom the
true church of God should be, which was prefigured by the ruin and reparatio^
of David's tabernacle. The same Prophet did also foretell a reason how, and a
cause why the Gentiles should be received into ye church, not for Circumcisions
sake, nor yet by the help of the law, but by grace through faith. For he
says: The remnaunte of the men shall seek after the Lord, and all the heathen
upon whom my name is called, says the Lord, which does all this: all these
works of God are known to him from before the world began. Lo here, they
shall seek the Lord, and shall be received into his fellowship, upon whom his
name shall be called. This phrase of speech does signify that they which are
elect shall be the sons of God. For upon them the name of the Lord is called,
which are named the sons of God, and are his elect. Now the whole scripture
attributes that to faith. By faith therefore we are made the members of the
church and sons and heirs to God our maker. But if any man do murmur
against the counsel of God and say, why does God so? Let him think that this
deed is the deed and work of God, whom it is not lawful for man to
gaynsaye, and all whose works are known from the beginning of the world to
have been done in judgment and righteousness: whereupon it does consequently
follow, that this counsel of his is good and righteous, whereby he does
through faith in Christ join to himself and sanctify the heathen nations.
Now upon these words of the prophet Saint James (subscribing as it were to
Saint Peter's opinion) does gather and infer: Wherefore my sentence is, that
we trouble not them which from among the Gentiles are turned to God: That is
to say, I think that they are not to be molested or charged with the
observation of the law. But least the Gentiles once hearing y^ the law was
abolished, should thereby think that they might freely do whatsoever they
would, and so by that means abuse their liberty, and also against all
charity despise and give offense unto the Iewishe brethren, therefore James
adds: But I think From some certain things must the Saints abstain.
it best for us to write unto them, that they abstain from filthiness of idols.
For there were at that time certain conuerts of the Gentiles, who thought it
lawful for them to enter into idol Temples, and be partakers of things offered
to idols: because an idol is nothing, since there is but one only God alone:
whereupon they gathered that those sacrifices were nothing, that they did
neither good nor harm: and therefore that Christians might with a safe
conscience be partakers of them. But saint James, and Paul also 1. Cor. 8. 9.
and 10. will have the heathen conuerts to abstain utterly from the worship of
Idols, that is, from the idols them selves, and from those things which are in
the idol temples offered to false and fained Gods. Moreover he adds: Let them
beware of fornication. The Gentiles verily did by good laws forbid the
adulteries and defilings of virgins and matrones, with very sharp punishments
suppressing the violent deflowrers of honest women: but they thought it a very
light and in a manner no fault at all, for such to committ whoredom, as did of
their own accordes set their chastity to sale: or if an unwedded man should
have to do with a single woman: and therefore the Apostle James even as Paul
also 1. Cor. 6. and 1. Thessa. 4. does very severely require the holy and
pure use of the body, without all filthy and unclean beastlynesse. Last of
all he wills the Gentiles to be restrained of eating blood and strangled. He
adds the cause why, and says: For Moses of old time has in every city
them that preach him in the Synagogues, where he is read every Sabbath day.

Of which constitution (touching blood and strangled) I spoke somewhat, before
that I made this same digression. Now therefore since the matter is at that
point, it is evident S. James defended.
that they are without a cause offended with Saint James, which think that he
did without all right and reason make and publishe this decree, and that the
fruit of that Synod was very perilous, nothing healesome, and flatly
contrary to Christian liberty. For it is assuredly certain that the meaning
of James did in no point differ from the mind of Saint Paul, who
nevertheless did very well, and praisworthily say: Let us follow the things
that make for peace, and things wherewith we may one edify an other. Destroy
not the work of God for meats sake. All things are pure, but it is evil for
that man, that eats with offense. It is good neither to eat flesh nor to
drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or falls, or is
made weak etc. Romans 14. It is also most certain, that Saint Paul who
was so sharply set to defend the Christian liberty, that he withstood Peter
openly at Antioche, would not have been behind hand to resist Saint James,
if he had thought that this constitution, either had been, or should be
prejudicial to Christian liberty.

Verily, he would neither have preached nor yet commended this tredition of
y^ Apostles to the churches of the Gentiles, if he had not thought that it
had been both hoalesome and profitable for them all to embrace. But he did
preach and commend it unto the churches, as is to be seen in the sixteenth
of the Acts: and therefore is saint James without a cause murmured against of
some, because he for badd to eat blood and strangled.

Finally, the conclusion of their Epistle is: From which if ye keep your
selves, ye do well. So fare ye well.

They praise that abstinence, and teach it as a good work, because it is also
commended to us in all the Scriptures.

Thus have I digressed, not far I trust from our purpose, to speak of the
decree of the apostolic Synod held at Jerusalem: and thus much at this
time touching the abrogation of the ceremonial laws.

It remains here for me to say somewhat concerning the abrogation The
abrogace of ^he Judicial laws.
of the Judicial laws. Now therefore the Judicial laws do seem to be
abrogated in this sense, because no Christian common weal, no city, or
kingdom is compelled to be bound and to receive those very same laws, which
were by Moses in that nation, according to the time, place, and state.
published and set out of old. Therefore every country has free liberty to
use such laws as are best and most requisite for the estate and necessity of
every place, and of every time, and persons: so yet that the substance of Gods
laws be not rejected, trodden down, and utterly neglected. For the things
which are agreeable to the law of nature, and the ten commandments, and
whatsoever else God has commanded to be punished, must not in any case be
either clean forgotten or lightly regarded. Now the end whereunto all these
laws do tend is, that honesty may flourish, peace and public
tranquillity be firmly maintained, and judgment and justice be rightly
executed. Of which because I have at large disputed in the exposition of the
precept: Thou shall do no murder, I will here be content to be so much ye
briefer.

The holy Apostle Paul commands to obey the magistrate: he aloweth of the
authority of the sword, which he confesses that ye magistrate has, not in
vain, received at the hand of God. And therefore he did not dissallowe or
find fault with the election of the magistrate, the use of the sword, the
execution of the judgment and justice, nor with upright and civil laws.

Now whosoever does confer the laws and constitutions of Princes, kings,
Emperors, or Christian magistrates which are to be found either in the Code,
in the book of Digestes, or Pandectes, in the volume of new Constitutions, or
else in any other books of good laws of sundry nations, with these
Judicial laws of God, he must needs confess that they draw very near in
likeness, and do very well agree one with an other. Justinian the Emperor
forbad by law either to sell or otherwise to make away the possessions of the
church, and things consecrated unto God. For the sincere confessing and pure
mainteining of the catholic faith the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and
Theodosius did make a most excellent and holy law. Constantine the great gave
charge to Taurus one of his lieuetenauntes to shut the idol temples, and with
the sword to destroy such rebeiles, as went about to set them open, and to
do sacrifice in them. That laws were made for the relief of the poor, and
that kings and emperors had a care over them, it is to be seen in more
places than one of the Emperors laws and constitutions. It is very certain
y^ whosoever reads the Code, lib. 1. tit. 2. he shall find much matter
belonging to this argument. For the honest trayning up of children, and the
liberal susteining of aged parents there are very comme^dable laws in ye
books of ye heathens. Concerning the authority y^ parents have over their
children, there is m^ch^ and many things to be found in writing^ likewise of
wedlock, of inc^st and (...) marriages, Honorius, A^cadius, and many other
princes have made very tolerable and laudable decrees: where they speak also
very well and wisely of the law of diuorcement. But if I go on to add or
oppose to every several title of the Judicial laws contained in this sermon,
sundry and peculiar laws out of the decrees of Christian Princes, I shall, I
know, be too tedious unto your patience. For then would this treatise pass
the time of an ordinary sermon. Let it therefore suffice us at this time, by
the declaration of these notes, to have opened and made a way to the dilligent
lovers of the truth, to come to the understanding of other things, which we
have here omitted, and that they may believe yt the substance of Gods Judicial
laws is not taken away or abolished, but that the ordering and limitation of
them is placed in the will and arbitrament of good Christian princes, so yet,
that they ordeine and appoinct that, which is just and equal, as the estate
of the time, place, and persons shall best require, that honesty and public
peace may be thereby preserved, and god the father duly honored through his
only begotten son Christ Jesus, to whom all praise is due for ever. For we
do see that the Apostles of Christ did neither require nor command any
nation, in the administration of politic affairs, to bind them selves to
the strict keeping of Moses law.

This rule must always be kept and observed. Saint Peter does simply
command and say: Submitt your selves to all manner ordinance of man for the
Lords sake: whether it be unto the king, as having the preeminence, or unto
rulers, as unto them that are sent of him for the punishment of evil doers,
but for the laud of them do well. And yet the same Apostle affirms that we
ought rather to obey God than men, so often as men do publish laws against
true religion, justice and equity, concerning which I spoke in the exposition
of the common place of the magistrate. And so, thus much I thought good to say
touching the abrogatio^ of the Judicial laws.

Now if every one of you do thoroughly ponder with him self the things y^ I
have hithereto said touching the The (...) and (...) of the (...) and people
law of God, the parts of the law, the use or effect, the fulfilling and
abrogating of the same, it will be a thing of no difficulty to determine what
every one ought to think concerning that point or title of this treatise,
whereof I promised in the beginning of this sermon that I would speak somewhat
toward the end, to wit, that the testament of the old and new church is
all one, and that there is but one way of true salvation to all, that either
are, or have been saved in this world: and also wherein the new testament
does differ from the old. For since I have alredie showed that all the
points of the law have a respect and a kind of Relation unto Christ, and
that he was in the law preached to the fathers to be the only Savior in
whom alone they were to be saved, who is it, which cannot perceive, that they
had none other, but the very same manner and way to be saved which we at this
day do enjoy by Christ Jesus? And yet yt this may appear more evident, I will
not stick to bestow some pains to make this matter more manifest unto you
with as plain a demonstration as possible may be, although a playner cannot
likely be, than that which I have alredie showed you.

Verily there is no difference of the people, of the testament, of the church,
The (...) and (...) are all (...) chur^^e, and people of (...) and ^he same
(...).
or of the manner of salvation betwixt them, among whom there is found to be
one and the same doctrine, the same faith, the same spirit, the same hope, the
same inheritance, the same expectation, the same invocation, and the same
sacraments. If therefore I shall be able to prove that all these things were
indifferently common to them of the old church as well unto us, then have I
obtained that which I shot at, to wite, that in respect of ye substance, there
neither was, nor is, any more than one testament, that the old fathers are one
and ye same people that we are, living in the same church and communion, and
saved not in any other but in Christ alone the son of God, in whom also we
look for salvation.

That they and we have all one and the same doctrine, I prove thus. That the
Fathers (...) have al (...).
Our doctrine is the doctrine of the gospel. But that the fathers were not
without the san^e doctrine, it is evident by Saint Paul who testifies,
saying: God verily promised the Gospel of God before by his prophets in the
holy Scriptures, of his son, which was made of the seed of David after the
fleash, and has been declared to be the son of God with power by the
spirit etc. What could be said more plainly? The Gospel, which is at this
day preathed, was of old promised by the prophets in the holy scriptures, to
wite, that ye son of God should come into the world, to save all faithful
beleuers. This Gospel also teaches that the faithful are not justified by the
works of the law, but freely by grace through faith in Christ. Saint Paul
says: By the deeds of the law there shall no fleash be justified in his sight.
For by the law comes the knowledge of sin, But now is the righteousness
of god declared without the law, being witnessed by the testimony of the law,
and the prophets: the righteousness of God comes by the faith of Christ
Jesus unto all, and upon all them that believe. With Paul S. Peter also does
fully agree, where in the Synod held at Jerusalem he says: Neither we nor
our fathers were able to bear the yoke of the law, but do believe even as
they, to be saved through the grace of our Lord Christ Jesus. And so
consequently in all other substanciall and material poynctes there is no
difference in doctrine betwixt us and them.

To proceed now, they, whose doctrine is al one, must of necessity have The
Fathers and we have al one faith.
all one faith. For faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
What does that argue that Abraham and the rest of the holy fathers are set
before our eyes as examples of faith for us to follow? we see that it is so
in the holy Gospel of the Lord, and the sacred writings of the Apostles. But
who would give us such foreign examples to imitate, as do not concern the
thing for which they are given. Paul in many places, but especially in the
fourth Chapter to the Romans, shows that faith must be imputed to us for
righteousness: as we read that it was imputed unto Abraham: now that faith
of his was not another, but the v^rie same faith with ours, which rest^th upon
the promise of God, and the blessed seed. For he calls Abraham the father,
not of these only, which are borne of the circumcision, but of those also,
which walk in the st^ppes of ye faith, which was in Abraham before he was
circumcised. Besides that also ye confirmation of the Christian rule, I mean,
the Apostles Creed, or articles of our belief is fetched out of the
Scriptures of the fathers of the old testament, which is undoubtedly a most
manifest argument that their faith and ours is the very same faith. They did
believe in the Messiah that was then to come, and we believe y^ he is already
come, and do more fully perceive, and nearly see all that, which was spoken of
before in the prophets: as I will anon declare, when I come to show the
difference betwixt the two testaments.

That all one and the same spirit did govern our forefathers and the The
Fathers and we have al one spirit.
people of the new covenant, who can doubt, considering that the spirit of
God is one alone, and that Saint Peter does in express words testify that
the spirit of Christ was in the Prophets? And Saint Paul also says: Since
we have the same spirit of faith, according to that which is written, I
believed and therefore I spoke, and we believe, and therefore do we speak.
Therefore although the same apostle does in another place say: that the
faithful have not received again the spirit of bondage unto fear, but the
spirit of adoption whereby they cry Abba father. Yet does he not deny, but
that the faithful fathers had the same spirit that we have. For even they
also cried to God as to their father, although they obtained it not by the law
(which terrifieth) but by the grace of the Messiah. Again the same Apostle
says: Whosoever are led by the spirit of God they are the sons of God.
Which sentence we may thus convert and say, that the sons of God are led by
the spirit of God.

But there is none, unless it be such an one as never read the scriptures,
which will deny that the ancient fathers were the sons of God, Exodus ^.
Deuteronomy. (...).
and were so called both by the Lord him self, and also by his servant
Moses.

What may be thought of ye moreover that our forefathers were called kings and
priests, and so consequently a royal priesthood, and a priestly kingdom?
which names Saint Peter applied to the faithful believers in Christ Jesus.
Now such a kingdom and priesthood cannot be or consist without the unction of
the spirit. The holy apostle John, I confess, in his Gospel said: The holy
Ghost was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified.

But as he spoke not of the substance of the holy Ghost, which is
coeternall with the substance of the father and of the son, so he does not
altogether deny that the fathers had the holy Ghost. For in that place he
speaks of the excellent gift, which after the ascension of the Lord was
powered out upon the people, that did believe. For John him self interpreting
him self, does immediately before say: These words (who so ever believes
on me, out of his belie shall flow rivers of water of life) spoke he of the
holy Ghost, which they that believe on him should receive.

The gift therefore of the holy Ghost was not at that time when the Lord
spoke those words so commonly, and plentifully powered upon all men, as it was
upon the faithful after the glorification of the Lord Jesus. And verily our
forefathers and the holy Prophets could not have so precisely and e^pressely
foretold all the mysteries of Christ and the church, which the Evangelists
and Apostles do testify to be now accomplished and fulfilled, unless in
their prophecies they had been governed by the very same spirit, wherewith
the Apostles were afterward instructed. For it is a wicked thing for us to
think that the Prophets and patriarchs did like mad men babble they knew
not what, and speak such words as they them selves understood not. Abraham
saw the day of Christ, and was glad of it: for by that spiritual sight of
his, he had, and felt with in him self a certain kind of spiritual joy. How
many times does David in the Psalms testify yt the service of God, and the
holy congregation did delight him at the very heart? which words he uttered
not so much for the joy that he had in the external ceremonies, but for that
he did by the spirit and by faith behold in those ceremonies the true Messiah
and Savior of the world. And since it is evident that our forefathers were
justified by the grace of God, it is manifest that that justification was not
wrought without the spirit of God: through which spirit even our
justification at this day is wrought and finished.

Therefore the fathers were governed by the very same spirit, that we of this
age are directed by. Of this opinion was saint Augustine, whose words
(dearly beloved) I mean to recite unto you, word for word, out of his
second book de Peccato orig. contra Pelag. et celest. Cap 25. Things to come:
says he, were foreseen of the prophets by the same spirit of faith, by which
they are of us believed to be already finished. For they, which of very
faithful love could prophecy these things unto us, could not choose but be
themselves partakers of the same. And whereupon is it that the Apostle Peter
says: why temptye God, to lay upon the Disciples necks the yoke, that
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? but we believe that through
the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they: (Whereupon
is I say that Peter says this) but for because they are saved by the grace of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and not by Moses law, by which does come, not the
saluing, but the knowledge of sin?

But now the righteousness of God is without the law made manifest,
witnessed by the law and the prophets. Therefore if it be now at this time
made manifest, then must it needs be that it was before, although as then it
were hidden. The hyding whereof was prefigured by the va^le of the temple,
which when Christ died was rent in pieces for a signification that it was then
revealed. And therefore this grace of the only mediator of God and man, the
man Christ Jesus, was then in the people of God, but it was hidden in the^ as
it were rain in a sliece, which God does separate unto his inheritance, not
of duty, but of his own voluntary will: but now that sliece being as it
were wroung out, that is, the Jewish people being reprobated, it is openly
seen in all nations, as it were upon the bare ground in an open place. Thus
much out of Augustine. The Fathers had the same hope and ^nherita^ce that we
^aue.


Now also there was set before the eyes of Israel, a earnall and temporal
felicity, which yet was not all that they hoped upon.

For in that external and transitory felicity was shadowed the heavenly and
eternal happiness. For the apostle in the fourth and eleventh Chapter to the
Hebrews says, that ye fathers out of that visible and temporal inheritance did
hope for an other invisible and everlasting heritage. Neither was Christ to
any other end so expressly promised them, nor the blessing and life in
Christ for any other purpose so plainly laid defore them, nor Christ him
self almost in all their ceremonies so often prefigured for any other intent,
but that they thereby might be put in hope of ye very same life, into which
we are received through Christ our redeemer. For the Lord in the Gospel
says that we shall be gathered in the kingdom of heaven into the same glory
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But here is an objection made, that life and
salvation That Salvation was not promised only but also performed unto the
fathers.
was promised only and not performed unto the fathers, but that they being
shut up in prison did look for the coming of Messiah. I for my part do not
find any thing in ye scriptures to be written of such a prison, whereinto the
holy Patriarchs were fast locked up. Peter verily makes mention of a
prison, but in that prison he will have the disobedient and not the obedient
spirits to be.

But if any man object that Christ Ad inferos.
descended to them below: we verily do not deny it, but yet we say withal
that he descended to ye departed saints, that is, that he was gathered to ye
company of the blessed Spirits, which were not in the place of punishment,
that is in torments, but in the joys of heaven, as the Lord him self
confirms the same, when being ready to descend to them below, he did say
Ad inferos.
unto the chief: This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. It may also by
many places of Scripture be proved, that the ancient holy fathers from Adams
time until the death of Christ, at their departure out of this life did
presently for Christ his sake enter, not into prison, but into eternal life.
For our Lord in the Gospel after Saint Mark does say: God is not the God of
the dead, but of the living. But he is the god of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob: therefore consequently Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob do live, or are now
alive: and yet not in body corporally. For their bodies being buried were
rotten long since: therefore their souls do live in joy: and their very
bodies shall rise to judgment again. In the Gospel after S. Luke the Lord
makes mention of Abraham's bosom, into which are gathered all the blessed
spirits, and of it he testifies that it is placed aloft, and that it is not a
place of pain and punishment, but of joy and refreshing. And therefore we do
often read in the Scriptures of the holy fathers, that they were gathered unto
their people, that is to say, that they were received into the fellowship of
those fathers, with whom they had in this world remained in the same faith and
same kind of religion. For the sequences and circumstances of those places do
manifestly declore y^ those words cannot be expounded corporally of the
burial of ye body. Again in the Gospel after S. Matthewe the Lord says: I
say unto you, that many shall come out of the East and out of the West, and
shall rest them selves with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven: but the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Now if the Gentiles must be
gathered into the kingdom of heaven, and that they must be placed in the
fellowship of the fathers, than must it needs be, that the fathers were
already in heaven, and felt the joys thereof at that very time when the Lord
spoke these words. Who also in the Gospel after S. John does plainly say,
Abraham was glad to see my day: and he saw it, and rejoiced. Which saying
although we understand to be spoken of the justification and joy of the
conscience, yet do we not separate from it the joy of eternal life, because
the one does of necessity depend upon, and follow the other.

Moreover we must here consider the occasion, upon which these words of the
Lord do seem to have been spoken. The Lord had said, Verily, verily I say
unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never taste of death, which words
the Jews took hold on and said, Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are dead,
and yet say thou, if a man will keep my sayings he shall never see death?
What art thou greater than our father Abraham which is dead? and the Prophets
are dead also? Whom make thou thy self? To this the Lord made answer and
showed, that Abraham is quickened, or else preserved in life and heavenly joy
through faith in the sayings of Christ Jesus: and that howsoever he is dead
in body, yet notwithstanding his soul does live in joy for ever with God, in
whom he did put his trust. To this may be added that David in the 16. Psalm
calling God, his hope, his expectation, and his inheritance, does among other
things say, The Lord is always at my right hand. Therefore my heart is glad,
my glory rejoices, and my flesh shall rest in hope. For thou will not leave
my soul in hell: neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption.
Thou will make me to know the path of life: in thy presence is the fullness
of joy, and at thyright hand there be pleasures for evermore.

And although S. Peter and Saint Paul do in the Acts of the Apostles, apply
this testimony of David, as a thing spoken Prophetically, unto Christ Jesus,
yet notwithstanding no man can deny but that the same may after a certain
manner be referred unto David, who in that Psalm makes a profession of his
faith, declares his hope, and expresses his Michtam, that is, his delight, or
ye arms or cognizaunce, whereby he would be known. Those words therefore do
first apperteine to Christ, and then to David and all the faithful. For the
life and resurrection of Christ, is the life and resurrection of the faithful.
Again in an other place the same prophet says, I believe verily to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Now in the land of the living
there is neither death nor dolor, but fullness of joy and everlasting
pleasures: these joys and delights David by faith did look to obtain at the
hand of GOD through Christ his savior, and did in deed according to his hope
possess^ the same immediately after he did depart out of this life, although it
were many years after his death or ever Christ did come in the flesh, even
as we also at this day are saved by him, although it be now one thousand five
hundre^h and od years ago since he in his fles^ did depart from the earth.
But whereas Paul in the 12. to the H^brues says, And all these holy fathers
having through faith obtained good repo^t, received not the promise, because
(...) had provided a better thing for us, that they without us should not be
made p^rfecte, I think simply that it must be understood of the perfect or
full felicity, in which y^ holy fathers without us are not consummated or made
perfect. Because there is yet behind the general resurrection of all flesh,
which must first come, and when that is once finished, then is the felicity of
all the Saints consummated or made perfect, which felicity shall then not
be given to the soul alone, but to the body also. Saint Peter also does
constantly affirm, that salvation is first of all by Christ purchased for the
souls of the holy Saints, then that they by the same Christ are immediately
upon their bodily death received to be partakers of the same salvation, and
lasty that in the end of the world the bodies of the Saints being raised from
death, as the bodies of all men be, shall appear before Christ to be judged of
him. The Lord, says he, 1. Pet. 4.
shall judge both the quick and the dead. For to this end was the Gospel
preached to the dead, that in the flesh they should be judged like men, but in
the spirit they should live with God. That is to say, ye death of Christ is
effectual to the fathers that died in the faith: so that now in soul they
l^ue with God, and that they again are to be judged in their flesh like to
all other men, at what time the Lord shall come to judge the quick and the
dead. Therefore our salvation is not as yet perfect nor consummated, but
shall be made perfect in the end of the world.

Moreover our forefathers did not The Fathers and we have al one ma^^er of
inu^cation.
pray to any other, but God alone, the only creator of all things, and did
b^leeue verily that he would be merciful unto mankind for the blessed
seeds sake. And although they did not so usually call upon God, as we at
this day do, thorough the mediator and intercessour Christ Jesus, even as
the Lord in the Gospel did himself testify and say, Hitherto have ye not
asked any thing in my name: ask and ye shall receive, yet were they not
utterly ignorant of the mediator, for whose sake they were heard of the Lord.
Daniel in the ninthe Chapter of his Prophecy makes his prayer, and desires
to be heard of God for the Lords sake, that is, for the promised Christ his
sake.

Finally so often as the holy Saints did in their prayers say, Remember,
Lord, thy servant Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they did not look back to the
persons or souls of the deceased Patriarchs, but to the promise that was made
to the Patriarchs: Now since that promise is, In thy seed shall all the
kinreds of the earth be blessed: and since Paul does testify that Christ is
that blessed seed: it follows consequently that the holy fathers in their
prayers had an eye to the blessed seed, and that they did desire God to hear
them for Christ his sake. For in one place also the Lord promises deliverance
to king Ezechias, saying: I will defend this city for mine own sake, and for
my servant David's sake. But in the 7. and 28. Chapter of Esaies Prophecy it
is manifest that the city was spared for Christ his sake the son of the
Virgin, which is the foundation placed in Sion, whom Ezechiel in the 34.
Chapter calls by the name of David, and the Gospel calls David's son,

Last of all the Apostle Paul does (...)
show, that the ancient fathers had amongst them the very same Sacraments,
which we now have, as he does in other places also make us partakers, and
apply to us both circumcision and the Passover, the Sacraments which were
given to them of old as does appear in the second to the Col^ssians, and 1.
Cor. the fifth cap. In the tenthe Chapter he threateneth grievous punishment
to the Corinthians at the hands of God, unless they abstain from things
offered to idols, and from all heathenishe sensuality. And thereuppon he
brings in the example of the Israelites, which he does after this manner
apply to his purpose: I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant, that
our fathers were the Church of God, and that they had the same sacraments which
we at this day have. For they were all baptized unto Moses, (that is, by Moses,
or by the ministry of Moses) in the cloud and in the sea. For the cloud and
the sea were figures of baptism. And they did also eat of the same spiritual
meat, and did drink of the same spiritual drink. And immediately after
he interprets his own meaning and says: For they drancke of the spiritual
rock that followed them, which rock was Christ. Mannaverily and the Rock did
typicallie represent the spiritual food, wherewith Christ refreshes both us
and them, who is himself the bread and drink of eternal life. But although
they did bodily, outwardly, and visiblie receive these Sacraments, yet for
because they were destitute of faith and the holy Ghost, because they were
defiled with the worshipping of idols, with surfeiting and fornication, they
displeased God, and were by him destroyed in the desarte. And therefore unless
ye also abstain from those filthy vices, neither shall baptism nor the
sacrament of the Lords supper avail you, but ye shall undoubtedly be
destroyed of the Lord. Since therefore it is by most evident proofs of
Scripture declared, that the old fathers had the same Sacraments, the same
invocation of God, the same hope, expectation, and inheritance, the same
spirit, the same faith, and ye same doctrine, which we at this day have, the
marcke, I hope, whereat I shot is fully hit, and I have, I trust, sufficiently
proved, that the faithful fathers of the old testament, and we the believers
of the new covenant, are one Church, and one people, which are all saved
under one congregation, under one only testament, and by one and the same
manner of means, to wit, by faith in Christ Jesus. Of the difference of the
old and new testament and people.


Thus much have I hitherto said touching the likeness, the agreement, and the
unity betwixt the old and new testament or people of God. I will now add
somewhat touching the diversity betwixt them, and the things wherein they
differ.

In the very substance truly thou can find no diversity, the difference
which is betwixt them, does consist in the manner of administration, in a f^w
accidents and certain circumstances. For to the promise or doctrine of faith,
and to the chief and principal laws there were annexed certain external
things, which were added until the time of amendment so that the whole
Ecclesiastical regiment, the manner of teaching the doctrine of Godliness,
and the outward worship of God was among the old fathers of one sort, and is
among us of an other. But the especial things wherein they differ, may be
rehearsed and set down in thief few principal poinctes.

First and foremost, all things of the Al thing^^ more ^^ident in the new
people or covenant tha^ ^ere in the (...).
new covenant are more clear and manifest tha^ those of the old testam^t.
The preaching of the old covenant had always in it for the most part some
mystie or cloudie thing, and was still covered and wrapped up in shadows and
dim sh^wes. But the publishing of the new testament is clear and manifest,
so that it is called the light which is without all mystes and darckenesse.
Moses did with a veil cover his face, neither could the children of Israel
behold his countenance: but we beholding not only the countenance of Moses,
which is now uncovered, but the pleasant and amiable face of Christ himself,
do greatly rejoice to see our salvation openly revealed before our eyes. In
that sense (...) say that his disciples were happ^^, where he brake out into
these w^^ds. Happy are the eyes which see the things that ye see. For I say
unto you that many Prophets and kings desired to see the things that ye see,
and saw them not, and to hear the things, that ye hear, and heard them not.
The just man Simeon did in this sense call himself as happy a man as lived,
and did thereupon promise that he was willing to die, saying: Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. For mine eyes have
seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of al people, to
be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people Israel.

But although our forefathers had not so much light, as does shine to us in
Christ, since his coming in the flesh, yet was that little light, which
they had, sufficient to the getting of salvation by faith in Christ. Even we
our selves, although we see him far more clearelie than our forefathers
did, do notwithstanding behold him but in a myste, in comparison of the
brightness, wherein he shall appear. For we shall hereafter see him face to
face in the glory of his majesty: and yet notwithstanding even this sight of
him, which now we have, is sufficient to salvation. Therefore it is a very fine
similitude, and preatily said of them, which say: Although at day break the
brightness of the Sun is not so great as it is at noone day, yet wayfarers
or travelers do not stay till the Sun be at the highest, but take the
morning before them to go their journey in, and have light enough to see the
way. For in like manner they think that to our forefathers even that little
portion of light, which was in the morning, was sufficient by the leading of
says to bring them through all imp^dimentes to eternal felicity. In ye mean
time we have great cause to rejoice, that Christ the very Sun and light of
righteousness does after the maystie light of the day star of the law, shine
forth to us in the new testament.

Moreover the forefathers in the old testament had types, shadows, and (...)
figures of things to come, but we have now received the very thing it self
which was to them prefigured. Therefore the thing which God did promise to them
he has performed and given to us. They verily did believe that Christ should
come and deliver all the faithful from their sins: and we beleene that he is
already come, that he has redeemed us, and has fulfilled all that ye
prophets foretold of him. Therefore the Lord in the Gospel said: The Prophets
and the law prophesied unto John, since that time the kingdom of God is
preached, and suffers violence of every man. Whereupon it is gathered, when
the thing prefigured is come, and present, that then the figures and shadows,
which did foreshewe the things to come, do come to an end and vanishe away.
Therefore the yoke and burden which our fathers christ has taken all
burdens from our shoulders.
did bear is thereby taken from our necks. The worshipping of God which they
did use externally was very busy and burdensome, as the Aaronicall
priesthood, the tabernacle or temple that was to be thoroughly furnished with
most exquisite things and instruments, their sundry sorts of sacrifices, and
many more Ceremonies like unto these. Now from all this cost and business
we, which be the people of the new couenaunte, are freely disburthened and
set at liberty. And he, by whom we are disburthened, is Jesus Christ, in
whom alone we have all things necessary to life and salvation. For it pleased
God the father to recapitulate in him, and as S. Paul says, to bring into a
sum all things requisite to life and salvation, that the things which
seemed before to be dispersed here and there, should in Christ alone be fully
exhibited and brought unto us. For Christ is the fulfilling of all the types
and Ceremonies: by whose spirit since we do now possess the thing
prefigured, we have no longer need of the representing types and shadows.
The external things that Christ has ordained are very few, and of very
small cost. Therefore the people of the new testament does enjoy a passing
great and ample liberty. To this, I suppose does belong that excellent place
of S. Paul, which is to be seen in the 4. to the Galathians, where in handling
this matter diligently, he fayneth that there are two mothers, the one whereof
does gender to bondage, and the other unto liberty: and that he does under
the type of Agar and Sara. By which he notes the two doctrines, that of the
law, and that of the Gospel. That of the law gendreth to bondage: but that of
the Gospel does gender unto liberty. Therefore the law did gender the holy
The bondage of the law in the old testament.
fathers and the prophets unto bondage, not that they should abide bondslaues
for ever, but that it might keep them under discipline, yea yt it might lead
them unto Christ the full perfection of the law. The liberty of the fathers
was by the weight and heap of Ceremonies so oppressed and covered, that
although they were free in spirit before the Lord, yet notwithstanding they
did in outward show differ little or nothing from very bo^dslaues, by reason
of the burden of the law that lay upon their shoulders. For in so much as
the law was not as yet abrogated, they were compelled precisely to observe it.
But when Christ was come and had fulfilled all things, then did the shadows
vanish away, and that heavy yoke was taken from the neck of us Christians. So
by this means our mother Sara gendreth us unto liberty. She is the mother of
us all. Of y^ mother (which is also called the holy mother Church) we have
the seed of life, she has fashioned us, and brought us forth into the light,
she colleth us in her bosom, wherein she carries both milk and meat, I
mean, the word of God, to nourish, save and bring us up.

Now the bonds being caucelled, The people of the new testament are new and
without al number.
and y^ middle wall, which was a stopp, being broken down, God does more
liberally rule his Church, and not retain it any longer under so streite a
custody. For neither is the people of God contained within the bounds of the
land of promise. For they are dispersed to y^ ends of the world: neither are
the circumcised, and those that keep the law, his people now, (although it is
not to be doubted, but that eue^ then, when Circumcision was of force, he had
some that were his people among the Gentiles, as Job, and other mo which he
himself did know) but those are his people, which do acknowledge Christ,
although they be neither circumcised, nor busied with the law. This is a new
people gathered together out of all the world by faith and the holy Ghost. To
this new testament has Christ given his own name: wherein So that the people
of this testament are after the name of Christ called Christians.
the Jews have none inheritance, unless they forsake their stubborn opinion
of the law, and clean to Christ alone without affiaunce in the law. All the
books of the Prophets are fully fraughted with testimonies touching the
calling of the Gentiles unto the communion and fellowship of God, and also
touching the reprobation of the Jews, who for their vnreclaymeable affiaunce
in the law are utterly rejected.

Furthermore, the Apostle Paul puts an other difference betwixt The gifts
of the new testament are most ample and manifold.
the two testamentes, alluding to the Prophecy of Jeremy, as is to be seen in
the eighth Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews. For he attributes to the
people of the new testament certain excellent gifts, to wit, absolute and
full remission of their sins: For he says, Because I will be merciful to
their vnrighteousnesses, and I will no more remember their sins and
iniquities.

He does also attribute to the people of the new testament a most exquisite
reformation and absolute illumination of their minds. For he says, I will plant
my laws in their minds, and write them in their hearts: and then shall no
man teach his neighbor or his brother, saying: Know the Lord: for they shall
all know me from the little unto the great. But of ye law it is written that
it was graven in tables of stone. Yet for all this let no man think that the
fathers obtained no remission of their sins. For as they by faith had free
forgiveness of their sins, so did God both write his law, and power his
spirit into their hearts. For which of us at this day can say that we
excel in knowledge and in faith either Abraham, Moses, Samuel, David, Esaie,
Daniel, or Zacharias? So then the difference is not, in that the fathers of the
old testamente were without the remission of sins, and the illumination of
the holy Ghost, and that we alone, which are the people of the new
testament, have obtained them: but the difference does consiste in the
greatness, amplenesse, largeness, and plentifulnesse of the gifts, to wit,
because they are more liberally bestowed, and more plentifully powered out
upon more now, than they were of old. For all nations being called, do not
by dropmeale, but by whole handfulls draw the water of life. The Lord does
power out his spirit upon all flesh. Of old, God was known in Jury only,
but now since Christ is come into the world, his disciples are gone thoroughe
all the corners of the earth, and teach all kingdoms to know the Lord.

Of old, the worthy men and Prophets were not so many but that they might be
numbered: because the land of promise in a manner alone did breed such good and
holy men. But who is at this day able to reckon all yt kings, Princes, noble
men, Prophets, Bishops, doctors, Martyrs, and excellent persons of every sex,
estate, and age, which have been, and are, at this day bred, not only in
Jury, but also in Arabia, Idumea, Phenicia, Mesopotamia, Persia, Asia, Egypt,
Africa, Greece, Italy, the East, the South, the Weste, and the North? Free
remission of sins is preached to all countries and kingdoms. All the
faithful in every nation under heaven are, through Christ, received into the
grace and favor of God the father. All have received in great abundaunce the
gift of the holy Ghost. All have prophesied. All have known the Lord.
Finally, the law makes no man perfect. The Gospel simply makes perfect,
and does directly without any stopp, lead us to Christ, and causes us to rest
and to content our selves in him alone.

Last of all I will not slip over this difference, although it be of little
The new (...) no promise of (...).
weight, and such an one as other like unto it may be easily observed, that
the law appointing out a certain land peculiarly separated from other
nations, did promise to the old fathers the possession of ye same, so long as
they did keep the law: but if they did transgress the law, then did it
threaten that they should be rooted up, and utterly cast out of that good
land. But to us no one limited land is expressly promised. For the earth is
the Lords and the fullness thereof, the round world, and all that therein is.

But although he does not here assign to us, as he did to our
forefathers of old, any certain or peculiar thing, yet does he not at any
time neglecte us: For he feeds, blesses, and preserves us in every land
and nation. Therefore the promises which were of old made to our forefathers
concerning the land of promise, being come to an end, are utterly vanished
away: so that they, which for an age or two ago did incite many nations to
arm themselves for the recovery of the holy land, do seem to have been
besides their wits. Christ by his coming into the world has sanctified all
the earth. For there are in every nation of the world some sons and heirs
of God and his kingdom.

Touching the likeness and agreement, the unlikeness and difference of both,
I mean, the old and new testaments or people, I have therefore spoken the more
briefly, because I have in the first Sermon of the first Decade, and in the
sixte Sermon of this third Decade, already handled the self same matter.
Finally, I have but shortly touched the abrogation of ye law, because I did a
good while ago set forth two treatises, y^ one of the Ancient Faith, the
other of the Only and eternal Covenant of God, which treatises I know to
be familiar among you.

I will not here in the conclusion recapitulate unto you y^ special points of
this Sermon, partly because I have already been somewhat to long, and partly
because I have, as I hope, used so plain an order, that every point is
indifferently well settled in every manns memory. Thus have I, by Gods grace
and sufferance, made an end to treat of Gods holy law, wherein I have been
occupied a good sort of days by several Sermons. Blessed be God and our
heavenly father world without end, whom I beseech to bless us all thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

Of Christian liberty, and of offenses. Of good works, and the reward thereof.
The ninthe Sermon.
I HAVE already through many sermons discoursed, long upon Gods law, now
therefore because upon the consideration and handling of the law there do
arise certain points not to be omitted, which do depend upon, and are
annexed hand in hand unto the law, of which sort are Christian liberty, good
works, the reward of good works, sin, and the reward or punishment of
sin: I will speak of them in order as God shall put into my mouth: who^ I
shall desire you to pray unto with me, beseeching him not to suffer me to
speak, in these or other points of holy doctrine, the thing that shall sound
against his holy will.

Upon the abrogation of the law does Christian liberty depend and Of
Christian liberty.
follow, as the effect of the abrogating of the law, which liberty does
minister us occasion to speak of offenses. Now concerning Christian liberty
the most holy Apostle of Christ Saint Paul has reasoned very diligently and
largely, whereby we may gather that the consideration of Christian liberty is
neither of no weighte nor yet of little profit. But the treatise thereof is
especially necessary to us of this age, among whom there are no small number
of men, which do either not understand what Christian liberty is, or else, if
they know it, do foulie abuse it, thereby to fulfill the lusts of the flesh.
I will therefore tell you, who is the deliverer that sets us at liberty,
who they are that he sets at liberty, and wherein and how far forth he
sets them at liberty: which things being once known, it will be an easy
matter, to perceive, what Christian liberty is, what the property or
disposition of those is which are so set at liberty, and how far forth they
must beware from giving office to any man, and from abusing their granted
liberty.

There is none other deliverer promised, Who (...) our (...).
given, and preached unto us, than Christ Jesus the Son of God. For he which
does deliver other men, must be himself free from the bands, wherewith they
are tied, that wish and look to be set at liberty. But throughout all ages
there is none such to be found in all the world, nor yet in heaven, but Jesus
Christ alone the son of God, who for that cause did in the Gospel say, If
the Son set you at liberty, then are ye free in deed.

Now they, whom the Lord delivers, are bondslanes, wherefore he Who (...)
^e tha^ Christ does (...).
does deliver them from bondage, and does incorporate them in the liberty of
the sons of God. He does set all bondseruauntes at liberty, excluding none,
but such as do by their own default, their own unbelief, and disobedience
exclude themselves. For the coming of the son of God was to set all such at
liberty, as were entangled in bondage. Therefore he does so far forth
deliver us, as we are bondseruaunts. For bondage and liberty are one opposed
and contrary to the other, so that without the consideration of the one we
cannot conceive the meaning of the other. Wherefore I think it best here to
speak so much of bondage as this present argument shall seem to require.

First, bondage is nothing else but What bondage is.
the state or condition wherein bondseruauntes be. Now those that are in
bondage are either bondmen borne, or else made bondseruauntes. The children,
that issue of bondseruaunts, are bondslaues borne. The other, that are made
bondseruantes, are so made either by captivity, whereupon they take their
names, and are called captives. For Pomponius says, Slaves were therevppon so
called, because the Capitaines commanded to sell them for money, when they
were in wars taken captives by their soldiers, and so by that means to
spare their lives and save them: these bondmen are in latin also called
Mancipia, eo quod ab hostibus manu caperentur, because they were taken
prisoners by the hand of their enemies. Or else they are made bondslaues by
the civil law, as when a free man above twenty years of age, does for lucre
sake suffer himself to be sold for money. Bondmen therefore have lost all
liberty, and do whoalie hang upon their masters government, in whose power
it lies to kill them if they list.

Now of bondage there are two sorts, the Politic, and the Spiritual. The
politic bondage is not (...) sorts (...) bon^^ge.
by grace and the preaching of the Gospel, taken out of the Church of the
faithful, so that there should be no (...).
bondmen at all, or that they should not do their duty, or not do the
service that of right they do owe. For the Apostle Paul says, Let every man
walk, according as he is called. And so ordeine I in all Churches. Art thou
called being a servant? Care not for it. But yet if thou may be free, use
it rather. And again, Servants obey them that are your bodily masters with
fear, and trembling, and singleness of heart as unto Christ, not with eye
service as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart, with good will serving the Lord and not men, knowing that
what soever good thing any man does, that shall he receive again of the
Lord whether he be bond or free. And in his Epistle to Timothy he says, Let
as many servants as are under the yoke, count their masters worthy of all
honor, that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. And they,
which have believing masters, despise them not, because they are brethren: but
rather do service, for as much as they are believing, and beloved, and such as
are partakers of the benefit.

And yet in this bondage the faithful have this comfort by ye preaching of the
Gospel, that, howsoever they be bond in body, yet they are free in mind and
soul. For ye Apostle again does say, He, that is called a bondsman in the
Lord, is the Lords freeman. Likewise A Paradox of liberty.
he that is called free, is bond to Christ.

This is a comfort to the faithful in all their afflictions, which know that
their spirit is safe and free, howsoever their body is straightly imprisoned
or sharply tormented. Therefore the Saints are at their liberty, although
they be never so narrowely looked to, and shutt up in custody: they are
victorers and vanquishers, howsoever they are bound and oppressed: Finally they
enjoy most exquisite pleasures, even then, when they are vexed with most
infinite evils. I know that the children of this world do mock and scoff at
these pleasures and liberty of the faithful believers, as though they were
mere dreams and fantasi^s of very fools and asses. But God does soundly pay
them home for their scoffs and mockery, not in the world to come only, but
also in this present life: while they themselves like miserable caytifes being
in extreme captivity, do notwithstanding even in that slavery, think
themselves at liberty and in most absolute felicity. For they serve a filthy
service in detestable slavery, making themselves bondme^ to abominable
whoredom, to beastly madd drunkenness, to the wicked Mammon, and to other
most vile pleasures, wherein they die and rott with endless shame and infamy.
But of the service and afflictions of the Saints, who do even in their
afflictions enjoy their liberty and rejoice in the Lord, the Apostle Paul
speaks where he says, We are troubled on every side, yet are we not made
pensive: we are in poverty, but not in extreme poverty: we suffer
persecution, but are not utterly forsaken therein: we are cast down, but we
perish not: bearing about always in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that
the life of Jesus might also appear in our body.

And again, In all things we do our 2. Cor. 11.
endeavor, to show our selves as does become the ministers of Christ, in much
suffering, in afflictions, in necessities, in sorrows, in stripes, in
imprisonmentes, in seditions, in labors, in watchinges, in fastinges, in
glory and ignominy, in reproaches and praises: as deceivers, and yet speakers
of truth: as unknown, and yet known: as dying, and lo we live: as
chastened, and not killed: as sorrowful, and yet always rejoicing: as poor,
and yet making many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

Lo here ye see how the Saincces in extreme servitude, have a cheerful
consolation, and are always at their liberty: as is to be seen by infinite
examples in the Acts of the Apostles, and other Ecclesiastical histories.
Now we come to the second part of bondage.

The spiritual bondage has a certain likeness to the bodily servitude.
Spiri^^^l ^ondag^
For Adam, by his own fault, became a bondsman: and we of him are all borne
bondmen. He was once at liberty, and had the Lord to be his friend and
favorer, but he did dis^oyallie reuolte from GOD, and ghost himself an other
master, the devil, a tyrant as cruel as may be, who for his sin having
gotten power over him, did like a merciless Lord miserably handle him like a
bond servant. Now we of our corrupt graundsire are borne corrupt and
sinners, and for our sin are also under the devils dominion: we are in
danger of the law, and of the curse thereof. For we are the bondslaues of
sin, we are made subi^^te to sundry calamities by reason of our sin. This
therefore is called the spiritual bondage, not because it is only in the
mind of man, but because of the opposition, whereby it is opposed to the
bodily bondage. For otherwise sin has made our body also subject to the
curse. Neither do we sin in mind alone, but in the body also. For every
part and all the members of our bodies are subject unto sin and infected with
iniquity.

Therefore we serve in most miserable bondage, while being under the Abortion
is made ^hen a woman is before her time delivered of her child.
devils dominion, we do the things that please the flesh, by the egging on
of evil affections, to the bringing forth of fruit, or rather to the making of
abortion with peril of our lives to the devil our cruel and over rigorous
master. For this verily is our hardest and most lamentable servitude The
spiritu^l liberty, and how far forth we are made free by Christ.
and bondage.

Now on the other side let us see what Christian liberty is, that is to say,
from what, and how far forth the Lord has made us free. In one word we
do briefly say, that Christ our Lord has delivered us from a grievous
bondage, to wit, that he has so far forth made us free, as we by sin
were slaves and bondseruants. This we may more largely expound and say, The
son of God came into this world, and having first oppressed the tyranny of
Satan, and crusshed his head by his death and passion, he has translated us
into his own kingdom, and has made himself our Lord and king.
Secondarilie, he has adopted us to be the sons of GOD, and with his
blessing took away the bitter curse of the law. For he took away all
sins, and purged all the faithful from their iniquities.

Thirdly, he did most liberally bestow the free gift of the holy Ghost, to
the end that the sons of God should willingly and of their own accord,
submit themselves to the will of God, and to do the things that the Lord
would have them. For the hatred of the law does not remain, although the
weakness of the flesh abides still Lastly, the same our Lord and king has
taken from the shoulders of his elect the burden of the law, the types, and
figures, with all the cost belonging to the same, and has forbidden us, being
once set at liberty, to entangle our selves again with any laws and
traditions of men. Of all this being laid together we make this definition.
Christian liberty.
To deliver, is to make free, and to set at liberty from bondage. He is free
or manumised, that being delivered from bondage does enjoy his liberty.
Therefore manumission or liberty is nothing else but the state of him that is
made free, the commodity, I say, which a free made man has received, and
does enjoy by reason of his deliverance, to wit, in that he being delivered
from the tyranny of Satan, from sin, from the curse of the law, and from
death, is made the son of God, and heir of everlasting life: and also that
he has received the spirit of liberty, by which he does wholly give
himself to be the servant of God, to do him service all his life long: and
lastly, that being delivered from the law of Moses and from all laws of
mortal men, he does altogether depend upon the Gospel only, having at
liberty the free use of external things, as of meat, of drink, of
clothing, and of such like indifferent things. And in these three last
rehearsed points does Christian liberty chiefly consiste.

Now to this I will add such testimonies of Scripture as shall both
Testimonies to prove christian liberty by.
better confirm, and more plainly declare my exposition. And first of all, I
will allege those testimonies which are to be found in the books of the holy
Evangelists, and then those that are extant in the writings of the Apostles.

Zacharias the priest and father of John Baptiste in his hymn of
thanckesgiuing, Luke. 1, does declare the truth and goodness of God, in
performing that to us, which he promised to our forefathers, to wit, That
we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. In
this testimony of his, we have the true liberty, that freedom, I mean,
wherein we being by the Lord delivered from all our enemies, both visible and
invisible, should no longer serve them with fear, but serve our GOD in joy
and gladness. There is added also the manner and order how to serve him, In
holiness and righteousness. Holiness does cut off and cast away all
uncleanness and incontinencie. Righteousness gives to every man that which
is his due, to wit, the things which we of duty do owe to every man, and
does conteyne in it both freedom and benevolence. And in this kind of
service do they, which are made free, serve the Lord their God, not for a day
or two, or a certain few years, but all the days of their life. Therefore,
true Christian liberty is the perpetual service, which we owe and do to God.

In the eighth Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, to the Jews which made
great bragges of the vain and silly liberty which they received of their
ancestors, Christ our Lord makes this objection: Verily verily I say unto
you, that whosoever commits sin, he is the servant of sin. And the
servant abides not in the house for ever, but the son abides for ever: if
the son therefore shall make you free, then are ye free in deed. In these
words he makes mention both of bondage and of liberty. He is a bondsman to
sin, as to a cruel master, or a never contented tyrant, whosoever does
committ any sin. For he does obey, as one that is bound to sin. Such
bondmen are all the sons of men: whose punishment is to have none
inheritance in their fathers house, which is the heavenly Jerusalem.

As for those, which the Son of God restoareth to freedom, they are
partakers of the heavenly kingdom and fellow heirs with the Son of God.
But Christ makes none free but them that are faithful: therefore the sons
of God and fellow heirs of Christ are, for Christ his sake their only
deliverer, made free and set at liberty. Neither is there any other in heaven
or in earth beside Christ Jesus, which is able to set us at freedom and at
liberty.

Paul in the sixte Chapter to the Romans says, Let not sin reign in your
mortal body, that ye should thereunto obey by the lusts of it: neither give
ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: but give your
selves unto god, as they that are alive from the dead, and your members, as
instruments of righteousness unto God. For sin shall not have power over
you, because ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. In these words he
exhorts them, that are purged and made free by Christ, to live holilie in
their spiritual bondage. Now he says not, Let not sin be in you, or in your
mortal body: but he says, Let not sin reign in you, or in your mortal
body. But when reigns sin? Forsoothe sin reigns then, when we obey it
thorough the lusts thereof, yt is, when we resist not, but do fulfill the
lusts of the flesh.

Sin therefore does not reign in our mortal body, so long as it is but
fealt in the body, and not obeyed or permitted to rule, but rather resisted
and trod under foot. This same sentence does he expound by an other somewhat
more easy to be understood, I would not have you to permit your members to
sin, as to a tyrant, to use them as instruments to work all
unrighteousness. I rather require you to give your selves to be ruled and
governed by God. For since he has set you free from death, and brought you to
life again, it is requisite that ye should give your members to God as lively
instruments to work all righteousness. And that shall ye be easily able
to do, because ye are not under the law, but under grace. Upon this does all
the rest of that Chapter depend unto the end. What then, says he, shall we
sin, because we are not under the law, but under grace? God forbid. Know
ye not how that to whomsoever ye commit your selves as servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness? But God be thanked that ye were the servants of
sin, but ye have obeyed with heart, the form of doctrine into the which ye
are brought unto. Being then made free from sin, ye are become the servants
of righteousness. And yet he shows that the freemen of Christ do not abuse
their liberty, and give themselves again to be governed by their old and
tyrannous master Sin. For he makes Sin and Righteousness to be, as it
were two masters: and adds to each of them the hire or reward that they give
to their servants, the one Life, the other Death. Lastly he says generally
that we are his servant to whom we give our selves to obey. Upon which he
infers, Being redeemed by the grace of God from the bondage of sin, and
from death which is the reward of sin, we are translated into the bondage
of righteousness (whose reward is life) that thereby we may live. For he does
more significantly express his meaning in that which follows saying, I
speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh. As ye
have given your members servant to uncleanness and iniquity, unto
iniquity: even so now give your members servants to righteousness, unto
holiness. For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from
righteousness. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death. But now ye being made free
from sin, and made the servants of God, have your fruit unto holiness, and
the end everlasting life. For the reward of sin is death: but the gift of
God is eternal life, thoroughe Jesus Christ our lord. All this is so plain
and evident, that it needs no larger exposition of mine.

And yet in the seventh Chapter next following he does by comparison in a
parable more fully expound all that he said before. The woman, says he,
which is in subjection to the man, is by the law bound to the man as long as
he lives: If while the man lives she go a side to an other, she is counted
an adultresse. But if the man be dead, she may couple her self with an other
man. Even so, I say, we are dead to the law. For Christ died for us, and was
in his body offered up to be a sacrifice or oblation to cleanse and purge
our sins, that we might thenceforth be united and coupled to him, and that
we being conceived and made with child with his holy spirit, may travail,
bring forth and be delivered of an excellent issue and holy fruit of good
works: even as, while we served sin, and were subject unto it, as to our
master, we brought forth an ill favored babe of death, I mean, iniquity
and wickedness, for the punishing whereof death is appointed and ordained. But
let us now hear the very words of the holy and blessed Apostle, saying:
Even so my brethren we also are dead concerning the Law by the body of
Christ: that we should be coupled to an other, who is raised from the dead,
that we should bring forth fruit unto God. For when we were in the flesh, the
lusts of sin, which were by the law wrought in our members to bring forth
fruit unto death. But no we are we delivered from the law, and dead unto it,
whereunto we were in bondage, that we may serve in newenesse of spirit and
not in the oldnesse of the letter.

That place in the eighth Chapter to the Romans is unknown to no man, where
he says: The law of the spirit of life thorough Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the law of sin and death. The manner of this deliverance he
does immediately after add, saying: For what the law could not do, that GOD
did by sending his own son, And so forth as follows. For the words are
sufficiently plain and understood of all men.

In the seventh Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians he says, Ye
are bought with a price, do not ye become the servants of men. In these
words the holy Apostle exhorts servants, under the color or pretense of
worldly bondage not to committ any thing for their earthly masters pleasure,
which sounds against sincerity and is repugnant to pure religion: to wit,
although they be called by the name of servants, yet that they should not
obey the wicked laws and ungodly ordinances of mortal men. The cause that
ought to pull and draw us from it, is, Because we are redeemed and set at
liberty by the price of Christ's his blood. It would therefore be to to bad
and unworthy a thing, if we, contrary to the effect of our liberty,
should obey the naughty laws and ordinances of man.

This also is extended and stretches out to the laws of men, which are Free
from the laws and ordinances of men.
made in matters of religion. For in the fifteenth Chapter of the holy Gospel
written by the Evangelist S. Matthewe the Lord and Savior says, In vain do
they worship me, teaching doctrines the precepts of men. And: Let them alone,
they are blind leaders of the blind. And the Apostle S. Paul says, If ye be
dead with Christ from the rudimentes of the world, why as yet living in the
world are ye ledd with traditions, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not? Which all
do perish in abusing after the commandments and doctrines of men: which
things have a show of wisdom in superstition and humbleness of mind, and
in neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh.

First of all he shows that the faithful ones of Christ Jesus, have nothing
to do with the decrees of man's inventions, and that they are not bound to
observe men's traditions: because they are dead to traditions with Christ, that
is to say, they are by Christ Jesus redeemed and set free from traditions,
which traditions did in Christ his death finishe and come to an end, while
he did make us his own, and set us at liberty. Then also he does by
imitation counterfaite the words of them which make those decrees, and say:
Oh, touch not, Taste not, Handle not.

These three precepts stretch very far, and comprehend many petit decrees.
All which he does unmediately confute with these probable arguments. First,
because they appoinct the worship of GOD to be in things that perish in the
use thereof. But the kingdom of God is neither meat nor drink, but does
consiste in spiritual things. And that which enters in by the mouth does
not defile the man. Secondarilie, because they are not made of God the author
of all goodness, but have their beginning of man's inventions. But in vain do
they worship me, says the Lord in the Gospel, teaching doctrines the
precepts of men. Neither does the holy Apostle saint Paul wincke at and
slily pass over, because he will not aunsweare to the things, which do
most commend these traditions.

First of all they are commended (...)
for the show and appearaunce of wisdom that is in them. For they seem to
have been, not without great wisdom, ordained of wise men in that they do
so fittlie serve to every person, time and place. The earnest defenders of
men's traditions cry out and say: Our ancestors weee no fools, their laws
are full of wisdom. But Jeremy cries out on the other side saying, They
have rejected the word of GOD, therefore what wisdom can be in them?

An other cause why traditions are commended is the Greeks (...), that is to
say, a chosen kind of worship, which we of our own brains have chosen and
taken to our selves to serve and do God worship with all. For men do gladly
and willingly receive the traditions of men, because they are agreeable to
their inclination. Yea, Christ in the holy Gospel says, If ye had been of
the world, the world would have loved her own: Now for because I have chosen
you out of the world, the world does hate you. And again he says, That
which men set great store by, is abominable unto God. Moreover, men's
traditions are commended for humility: which is understood in two manners or
respects. For first, that is said to be humility, if any man do readily obey
and easily yield to that, which is urged, obtruded and thrust upon him, by men
of countenance and authority. Secondarilie, the laws of men do seem to
exercise humbleness, and keep men in humility. But such obedience and
humility may rather be called sacrilege, because it is not ruled and directed
by the word of God, as the thing whereby alone it should be tempered and
squared, but does transfer and conueighe over the honor of GOD from God to
men. Last of all, men's traditions are commended for the neglectinge of the
flesh. For (Oh) that discipline and chasticemente of the fleashe seems to
them a goodlye thing, by which the wantonness of the flesh is somewhat
brideled and tamed. Finally the Apostle adds, Not in any honor to the
satistyinge The care of the body.
of the flesh: that is to say, Which things although they have a show of
religion and holiness, have notwithstanding in very deed no honor at all,
considering that those external things are ordained of GOD for the ease and
relief of menns necessities. Yea Paul does flatly find fault with those
decrees, because they give the body no honor for the satisfying of the same,
that is, according to the measure of the bodies necessity. For a moderate care
and looking to the body is not only permitted, but also commanded, least we
perhapps by too much lack and neerenesse do mar the body, and make it
unapt to do good works. Neither is the care of the flesh in any place
forbidden, unless it tend to lusts and sensuality. Wherefore the Apostle
says, Cherish not the flesh unto concupiscence. Therefore God has granted to
man for his necessity the use of meat, drink, sleep, clothing, rest,
alloweable pleasures, and other things necessary.

In the fourth Chapter to the Galathians Saint Paul says, When the
fulness of the time was come, God sent his son, borne of a woman, and made
under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might
receive by adoption the right (or inheritance) of children. Now because ye
are sons, GOD has sent the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying
Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant but a son: If thou be a
son, thou art also an heir of God, thoroughe Christ. And immediately after
again, Stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has delivered us, and
be not again wrapped in the yoke of bondage.

In the second to the Hebrews he says, Christ was made partaker of flesh
and blood with us, to the end that through death he might expel him that had
Lordship over death, that is the devil: and that he might deliver them which
through fear of death were all their life time in danger of bondage. Thus I
hope these testimonies of Scripture suffice for our purpose.

These things being well weighed The (...) or (...) them (...) are (...) Christ.
and thoroughly considered, will plainly teach what kind of liberty they
have, which are made free by Christ, and what their property and inclination
is, to wit, most religious and altogether given to holy things, that is to
say, in all points addicted to the spirit, without which there is no
liberty, and by which all the sons of God are always governed. The Lords
free men do most diligently beware, that they do unadvisedly offend no man by
their liberty, nor vainly abuse their purchased freedom. For they have
continually before their minds and eyes the weighty sayings of the holy
Apostles of their Lord, Christ Jesus. Saint Peter in the second Chapter of his
first Epistle says, As free, and not as having the liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but even as the servants of God. And Paul has, Brethren, ye
have been called unto liberty: only let not liberty be an occasion to the
flesh, but by love serve one an other. For I, when I am free, have made me
self servant to all, that I may win the more.

They therefore do specially abuse The (...) of (...)
Christian liberty, who seeking after carnal things under the color and
pretense of the spirit and of liberty, do make their bragges that they by
the preachinge of the Gospel are set free from all bodily debtes and duties:
and therefore they do deny to their masters, creditours, magistrates, and
princes the duty that they owe them, by that means reuolting and rebelling
against them. These fellows are seditious stirrers, and not the reuerencers
of the Euangelical doctrine. Paul cries: Give to every one that which is due:
tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to whom custom is due, fear to
whom fear, and honor to whom honor does appertain. Owe nothing to any
man, but this, that ye love one another. Moreover they also do abuse Christian
liberty, who when they have not received the spirit of liberty and of the
sons of God, when they are not as yet delivered from Satan, nor justified by
Christ, do notwithstanding promise liberty to all men, and think that for the
opinion which they have conceived of their liberty, they may do whatsoever it
pleases them, by yt means gainsaying good laws and severe discipline, with
exclamations and outcries, that liberty by laws is intrapped, betrayed, and
trod under foot. Against such, and especially against the teachers of that
vain and pernicious liberty Saint Peter takes stomach and says: These are
wells without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest, to whom the
myste of darkness is reserved for ever. For when they have spoken the great
swelling words of vanity, they entice through lusts in the voluptuousness
of the fleash, such as were clean escaped from them, which are wrapped in
error, while they promise them liberty, where as they them selves are the
bondseruaunts of corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, unto the same is
he brought in bondage. And so forth as follows. Licentiousness.
Now when men do after that manner abuse liberty, that licentious lust is
not worthy to be called by y^ name of liberty. Last of all they do abuse
Christian liberty, whosoever do abuse things indifferent, and have no regard
of their weak brethren, but do offend them unadvisedly. We must therefore,
in this case, always have in mind this notable saying of Saint Paul: All
things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all things are
lawful for me, but all things do not edify. Touching this matter there is
more to be seen in the fourteenth Chapter of S. Paul's Epistle written to the
Romans.

And here by occasion, yea rather, Of offenc^^.
being compelled by necessity, I will speak a little, and so much as shall be
requisite for the godly disposed to know, touching offenses. Scandalu^, which
word the Latins borrowe of the Greeks, does signifi^ a fallinge, a tripping,
a stumbling block, an offense, a let or hinderance: such as are stones in a
streate, that stick up higher then the rest, or ginnes that are of purpose
subtily set or hid to snare the feet of them that pass over them. For they
which do either light on or stumble at them, do fall or else are turned out
the straight path. Now this kind of snare or stumbling bl^ck is by a metaphore
transferred to the estate of religion and manners of me^. For he gives an
offense, whosoever does with overthwart, foolish, or unseasonable words or
deeds either do or say to another man any thing, whereby he takes an
occasion to sin. Therefore Scandalum is an occasion given to sin and do
wickedly, and the very impulsion or driving to a fall or to wickedness. Other
there are that do define Scandalum to be an offense joined with a contempt. For
an offense does usually draw a contempt with it, or as we may say also, an
offense does rise upon contempt. To conclude therefore it is put for an injury
offered by one man to another.

Now, we offend other men either How and by what means an offense is given.
by our words, or else by our deeds. The offense that is given by words is
partly in evil, foolish and unseasonable doctrine, and partly in our daily
talk or communication. The greatest offense is that, which does arise of
wicked doctrine directly contrary to the true doctrine of ye holy Gospel.
The next to this is that offense, which does arise of foolish and
unseasonable doctrine: which, though it be derived out of the word of God, is
notwithstanding either unaptly uttered, or unwisely applied. For the preacher
may sin either by too much sufferinge or lenity: or else by too much
sharpness and overthwart wai wardnesse, so that the hearers being offended,
do wholly draw back from all the hearing of the Gospel. And yet for all this
the light of the Gospel must not be hidden, nor the truth sliely winked at,
because men will be offended, but preachers must with all their diligence take
heed that the word of God be wisely set forth, and aptly dispensed.

What soever things are against the laws of God, those must most constantly
be accused, and without fear most diligently confuted, howsoever the world
and worldlinges do storm against the same. Now they do by their daily talk
cause their brethren to stumble, whosoever let their toungues run loose to
talk they care not what, and at their pleasure without advise to babble they
care not how: of which sort are filthy speech and ribaulorie, but especially
such blasphemous words as are irreverently uttered against God, the holy
Scriptures, and articles of our faith. For evil words corrupt good manners. I
do not here exclude the letters or writings of men which do unadvisedly
offend their brethren.

Lastly, stumbling blocks of offense are laid before many men, either by
promises, or else by threatenings: so often I mean as by alluring inticements
of many fair promises, or else by terrible threats and torments they are
turned from the right path of truth into bywayes and errors. For so did
Pharao lay a stone of offense before king Zedechias by causing him to make a
league with him, and by that means to trust more in the power of Egypt than
in the mighty hand of God.

Tyrauntes do often times give weak Christians causes of offense, while they
by torments drive them to deny ye name of their master Christ.

Now the deeds whereby men are offended be of two sorts, that is to say,
they be either lawful and at our free choice, or else unlawful and utterly
forbidden us. But even lawful deeds are by abuse made unlawful. For it is
lawful for the faithful to eat what they lust. For to the clean all
things are clean. But thy eatinge is made unlawful, if thou do eat with
the offense of thy weak brother. For he does not understand that it is
lawful to eat indifferently every kind of thing: and thou know very
well, that if thou eatest he will be offended, and yet notwithstanding thou
do eat and despise him, assure thy self in so doing thou give cause of
offense, and sinnest not a little against thy weak brother. To this we add
all unseasonable using of free things and indifferent.

But here ye must note that the doctors of the Church do diligently Weklings
(...).
distinguish and make a difference betwixt weak brethren and stubborn
persons. The weakelinges are such as be utterly ignorant in some points of
religion, and yet notwithstanding are tractable enough, and fear the Lord,
not erring of purpose with malicious ouerthwartnesse, but touched with a
certain weakness of faith and religion, suffering themselves nevertheless
willingly to be instructed.

Of such the Apostle says: Him that is weak in faith receive ye, not to
strifes of disputations. But the stubborn and obstinate people are they,
which, when they know the truth and liberty of the Saints, do
notwithstanding harden their minds and set them selves against the truth
and liberty, which they know, desiringe to have much granted them, and every
man to bear with them, not so much, for that they do ever mean to give place
to the truth, as, to the end that by this occasion once granted them, they
may at last subuerte the truth and Christian liberty, and in steed thereof
set up their trifles and superstitious vanities.

Of such men the Lord speaks in the Gospel saying: Let them alone, they be
blind leaders of the blind. And Paul in the second Chapter to the
Galathians says: Titus being a Greek was not circumcised, because of
incommers being false brethren, which came in privily to spy out our
liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage.
To whom not so much as for an hour we gave any place by subjection, that
the truth of the gospel might continue with you.

Moreover, to this place is to be referred the difference that some An offense
given and an offense taken.
men do very wisely make betwixt the giving, and the taking of an offense.

An offense is given then, when by thy fault, by thy importunity, I say, and
thy lightness, thou either do or say a thing: for which thy brother has
a cause to be offended. The other kind of offense is not given, but taken, or
picked out, not by thy fault, but by the malice or wickedness of another man:
as for example, when thou do sin neither in word nor deed, when thy
deeds are nothing insolent, nor thy words unseasonable, when thou either
say or do the thing that is both free and lawful for thee to say and
do, and yet another takes pepper in nose and is offended with that liberty of
thine. Which is all one, as if a man that walks in a plain pathe should
hap to trippe or stumble, and presently quarrel with his companion, as though
he had laid a block in his way.

Now the unlawful and forbidden deeds wherewith men are offended, do tend
against God and his laws, are done contrary to all seemlinesse, equity,
right, and reason, and stir up others to imitate the like revels and desire
of ill rule. For such are idolatry, murder, whoredom, covetousness, pride,
and luxury. So did the wicked king Jeroboam set up the golden calves to be a
stumblinge block unto all the people of Israel. And in like manner do many
with their drunken tippling, and ouerneece bravery in gawdie apparaile not
only offend others, but also make them worse, and by their ill example draw
them into like and more foolish vanities.

Finally, to give an offense is a very To give offense is a great sin.
great sin, as the saying of y^ Lord in the Gospel affirms. For in Matthewe
he says: Woe unto the world because of offenses. It must needs be that
offenses come, but woe to the man by whom the offense comes. Whosoever
offends one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for him
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
deapth of the Sea. And Paul the Apostle speaking to the brethren that give
offense, does say: Through thy giving of offense perishes thy brother for
whom Christ died. And again: And so ye sinning against your brethren, and
wounding their weak consciences, do sin against Christ him self. But what
can be devised more heinous then to sin against Christ? Let us all therefore
take heed, that by abusing Christian liberty, we give no occasion of offense
to the weak, but all ways do the things that do belong to charity.

Last of all we must especially confirm our minds against the enemies
Offenses (...) not of the Gospel out of the (...) of (...) gospel.
of the Gospel, who cease not daily to lay innumerable heaps of offenses
upon the preachers and zealous followers of the Euangelical doctrine. Ye, say
they, are the causes of all the broils, seditions, wars, and hurly burlies,
wherewith the world is at this day disquieted. Against these offensive outeries
I say we must confirm our minds with y^ notable saying of Christ in the
Gospel: I came not to send peace but a sword. For I am come to set a man at
variaunce with his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law: and a man's foes shall be they of
his own household. Here we must call to remembrance and lay before our eyes
the notable examples of the prophets and Apostles. King Achab said to Helias
the Prophet, that he was the disturber and plague of the kingdom. But the
Prophet replyeth that not he, but the king was the troubler of y^ country. The
rebellious Jews objected against Jeremy, that since ye time they began to
leave the worship of their (idol) gods, and to hearken to ye preaching of the
word of God, they never had one iott of felicity, but that mishappes by
troops fell one upon another neck. To which objection they were answered,
that those misfortunes did light upon them because of their sins, and
especially for their rebellion and unthankfulness sake. The unbelieving Jews
at Thessalonica cried out against Paul and Silas, saying: These fellows that
have troubled the whole world, are come hither also. But Paul speaking
against the Jews his enemies and persecutours said: They, as they have killed
the Lord Jesus and their own prophets, so do they persecute us: they please
not God, and are adversaries to all men, resisting us that we should not preach
the Gospel unto the Gentiles to their salvation, that they may still fulfill
their sins, and so at last the endless anger of God may fall upon them.
These sayings and such like let the faithful think upon and have in their
minds, and let them perseauer still with constancy and patience to spread
abroad the doctrine of the Gospel, howsoever the world does freate and cast
offenses in the way. And thus much hitherto touching offenses.

It remains now, as my promise in the beginning was, to say somewhat Of good
^oorkes.
in the end of this sermon concerning good works. For we have learned that
Christian liberty is not licentiousness, but an adoption into the number of
the sons of God, which do bestow all their life upon the study of
godliness and virtues. We have learned that the law of God is the rule and
doctrine of good works. The course of order therefore does now require to have
somewhat said touching good works.

First of all let us determine of the What wor^^s do (...) in the (...).
very true and certain signification of works, because the word is used
diversely, and is of ample signification. For works are the labors and busy
exercises of men, by which they get their livings. For Paul commands
every man to work with his own hands. The law forbids us to do any
work on the Sabbath day. And the Israelites were oppressed in Egypt with
hard and wearisome work and toil. There are also workmen to whom the Lord
in the Gospel commands to pay the hire that is their due. A work also is
the thing which is made or expressed by the artificer or workman. For the
Prophet Jeremy speaking of a potter says: He made a work upon a wheel.

Moreover, a work does signify an office or duty. For Paul says, do the
work (meaning the office) of an Evangelist. And the holy Ghost, speaking in
the church at Antioche, says: Separate me Paul and Barnabas for the work
whereunto I have chosen them. Furthermore the works of the Lord are the
mighty deeds of God, whereby he does declare his power and goodness unto
men: and in that signification, heaven, earth, and man him self are said to
be ye works of Gods hands. Works also are the benefits of God bestowed upon
us men. For in the Gospel he says: I have showed you many good works: as if
he should have said, I have done you many good turns. There are also evil
works, I mean, works of iniquity. Whereupon some men are called woorkers
of iniquity: whose deeds are the works of the flesh and of darkness.
Again, there are good works, I mean sundry virtues, the fruits of faith,
of which sort are justice, temperaunce, charity, patience, hope etc. For the
Lord in the Gospel said: Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works and glorify the father which is in heaven. The Apostle
says that we are made for good works, to walk in them. Those same are
called the fruits of repentance, and works worthy of repentance. They are
called ye works of light and the fruits of the spirit. The same are the
works of humanity, benevolence and charity, such are commended in Tabitha,
which is read to have been full of good works. Paul says: Let us work good
while we have time to all, but especially to them of the household of faith.
Such a like work of humanity and charity did Marie bestow upon Christ our
Savior: who said: She has wrought a good work on me. This being thus
declared we will now describe good works in their colors and qualities.

Good works are deeds or actions Good works what they are.
wrought of those which are regenerate by the spirit of God, through faith and
according to the word of God, to the glory of God, the honesty of life, and
the profit of their neighbor. This brief description I will prosecute by
parts and expound so well as the Lord shall give me grace.

First of all I will by proof show that there is none other welspringe The
original cause of good works.
from whence good works do flow, than God him self which is the author of
all good things. For the Prophet says: All men are liars, God alone does
speak the truth. And the Lord in the Gospel says: None is good but God
alone. Good works therefore must have their beginning, not of man who is a
liar and corrupt, but of God him self the welspring of all goodness. And God
does by his spirit and by faith in Christ Jesus renew al men, so that they
being once regenerate, do no longer their own, that is, the works of the
flesh, but ye works of the spirit, of grace, and of God him self. For the
works of them that are regenerate do grow up by the good spirit of God,
that is within them, which spirit, even as the sap gives strength to trees
to bring forth fruit, does in like manner cause sundry virtues to budde and
branch out of us men, as the Lord him self does in the Gospel testify and
say: I am the vine, ye are the branches. As the branch cannot bear fruit
of it self, unless it abide in the vine: so cannot ye also unless ye abide
in me. Whosoever abides in me, and I in him, he brings forth much
fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. To ye same cause is that to be
referred, whereas we say that a good work is done by faith. For faith is the
gift of God, whereby we lay hold on Christ, through which we are both
justified and quickened, as the Scipture says: The just shall live by his
faith. And in another place says Paul: By faith Christ dwells in our
hearts. And again: I live, yet now not I, but Christ lives in me. And the
life which now I live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God,
who loved me and gave him self for me. Now he that lives does the works
of life, through him, no doubt, by whom he is quickened: and he that is
justified does the works of righteousness, through him that justified him:
that is, the righteous do, through Christ, work righteousness, and
righteousenesse contains the whole company of virtues. So then God alone
remains still the only welspring and author of good works. But let us now
see the testimonies of Scripture by which we may evidently learn, that the
works of them, that be regenerate, are attributed to God him self, who by his
spirit and by faith does work in the hearts of the regenerate.

Moses testifies saying: The Lord shall bless thee, and the Lord thy God
shall circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou may love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live.

Lo here the cause ye godly men do rightly love the Lord does proceed of the
circumcision of the heart. Now who, I pray you, does circumcise the heart,
beside the Lord? The Prophet Esaie does more plainly say: Thou Lord shall
ordeine peace: for even thou haste wrought all our works in us.

In the Gospel after Saint John, our Savior says: He that works verity
comes to the light, that his works may be seen, because they are wrought by
God. And again: Whosoever abides in me, and I in him, he brings forth
much fruit. For without me ye can do nothing. Paul also to the Philippians,
says: To you it is given for Christ, not only to believe in him but also to
suffer for him.

And yet again more plainly: It is God that woorketh in you both to will, and
to do according to the good purpose of the mind. Likewise also Saint James
says: Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes
from the father of lights.

Moreover, Saint Peter ascribing all the parts of good works so God, deeth
say: The God of all grace, who has called you to his eternal glory through
Christ Jesus, restore, uphold, strengthen, and stablishe you. For we are not
able, as Paul in an other place says: Of our selves to think any thing, as
of our selves, but all our ability is of God. Therefore God alone remains
still the only welspring of all good works, from whom as from a spring head
good works do flow into the Saints as into sundry streams and channels.
(...).


Yet here by the way this must be added that good works although they do
in deed proceed from God, and are in very true and proper phrase of speech
the fruits of the spirit and of faith, both are notwithstanding, and are also
said to be ours, that is to say, the works of faithful men, partly
because God works them by us, and uses our ministry in the doing of the
same, and partly because we are by faith the sons of God, and are therefore
made the brethren and ioyntheires with Jesus Christ.

For by this right of inheritance all the works of God, which are in us Gods
gifts, do begin to be not another, but our own and proper works. Yea,
the very Scripture does attribute them to us as unto sons and freeborne
children. For the Lord in the Gospel says: The servant abides not in the
house for ever, the son abides for ever. Therefore, as all things in the
fathers house do by right of inheritance and title of propriety come to the
son, although the son has not gotten them by his own industry, nor
gathered them by his own labor, but has received them by the liberality of
his parents: even so the works of God which he does work in us and by us,
which are Gods gifts bestowed upon us, both are, and are said to be our own,
because we are the sons of the household, as it were by adoption, and
therefore are the lawful heirs. Wherefore it were the sign of a very
unthankful mind, for an adopted son, being forgetful of his fathers
beneficence and liberality, to make his bragges that all those goods, which
he enjoys by right of inheritance, were gotten and come by, through his
own labor and travail.

Whereupon Paul said very religiously: What have thou that thou have not
received? if thou have then received it, why do thou yet boast as though
thou receiuedst it not? Very well thought the holy martyr of Christ, Saint
Cyprian who was wont to say: We should boast of no thing, because we have
nothing of our own. And to this place belongs that saying of the Prophet
Esaie: Shall the axe boast against him that heweth with it? or shall the saw
brag against him that draws it? We verily are the instruments or tools of
God by which he woorketh. For the Apostle says: We are ioyntworkers with God,
ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building, according to the grace which God
has given me. Therefore, according to the meaning of the Apostles writing,
Saint Augustine lib. de Gratia et libero arb. in the sixte Chapter, does say:
When grace is given, then do our merits begin to be good, and that through
grace. For if grace be taken away, then man does fall, not being set up, but
cast down headlong by free will. Wherefore, when man begins to have good
works, he must not attribute them to him self, but unto God, to whom it is
said in the Psalm: Be thou my helper, oh forsake me not. In saying, forsake
me not, he shows, that if he be forsaken, he is able to do no good of him
self. So then in these words saint Augustine does plainly enough declare,
that good works are ours after that sort, that yet notwithstanding they
cease not to be the works of God: yea, that they ought nevertheless to be
ascribed to the grace of God, that works in us.

Now by this which we have hitherto No works do justify.
alleged out of the scriptures touching the true original cause of 1
good works, we may easily understand how and after what manner the
Scripture does attribute righteousness unto our merits. For I have in
another place sufficiently declared (and will again say somewhat when I come
to the treatise of the Gospel) that faith, not works, does justify us in
the sight of God: which is the especial point and chief foundation of the
Euangelical and Apostolical doctrine. All our works generally are either the
works of nature or the flesh, or else the works of the law, or else the
works of faith or grace. Now, the works of nature or the flesh do not
justify but condemn us: Because that which is borne of flesh is flesh. But
the lust of the flesh is death, and enimitie against God. What ye Apostle
thought 2
and said touching the works of the law, I did declare to you in my former
sermon: By the works of the law, says he, shall no flesh be justified. But
if we beat out and examine 3
the works of grace and of faith: we shall find that they both are, and have
been done by faithful and just men. Whereupon it is manifest that
justification did always go before the works of righteousness. For ye just
man does work righteousness, so ye righteousness is the fruit that ye just
do bring forth. Man verily is justified freely by grace, and not by works,
which follow after justification. What may be said to that, where ye
Scripture says, that even Abraham the father of all that believe, was not
justified by the works of grace and of faith? He lived 430 years before the
law, he believed in God, and by true faith did most excellent works: and yet
by those his works of faith he was not justified. For Paul does plainly
argue thus: If Abraham were justified by works, than has he wherein to boast,
but not before God. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God and it
was counted unto him for righteousness. To him that works is the reward not
reckoned of grace but of duty. But to him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

Now whereas we conclude that we also shall be justified according to the
example of Abraham by faith, and not by works, we ground that conclusion not
upon our own minds, but upon the Apostles doctrine, who says:
Nevertheless it was not written for him only, that faith was imputed to him
for righteousness: but it was written for us also, to whom it shall be
reckoned, if we believe in Christ. Touching this matter I have already
disputed in the sixte sermon of the first Decade. I verily am persuaded that
this doctrine of the Apostles and Evangelists ought to be laid up in the
bottom of every faithful heart, that we are justified by the grace of God,
not by merits, through faith, and not through works.

But while we urge and repeat Good works a^ no^ (...) their (...) is by
(...).
this doctrine unto the people, we are said of many to be the patrones of all
naughtiness, and utter enemies to al good works and virtues. But we by this
our preaching and doctrine of faith which does only justify, do not contemn
good works, nor think them to be superfluous. We do not say that they are
not good: but do cry out upon the abuse of good works, and the corrupt
doctrine of good works, which is defiled with the leaven of the Phariseis. For
we teach to do good works, but we will not have them to be set to sale, and
to be bought I cannot tell in what order of bargaining, we will not have any man
to put confidence in them, we will not have any man to boast of the gifts of
God, we will not have the power to justify or to merit life everlasting to
be simply attributed unto them. For by that means Christ should wax vile
and contemptible, who has with his death alone merited for us the heavenly
kingdom of God Almighty.

Neither do we by this, as many think we do, separate good works from
faith. Our doctrine is, that works and faith are not severed, but cleave
together as closely as may be: so yet notwithstanding that justification is
properly ascribed to faith, and not to works. For works do consist in our
worthiness, but faith does lean to the promise of God, which sets before
us both righteousuesse and life in the only begotten son of God Christ Jesus
our Savior. And Christ is sufficiently able of him self, and by his own
power and virtue, to justify them that believe in his name, without any aid
or help of ours at all.

I will not wink at some men's objection, but freely confess that the In
what sense the scripture does attribute justification unto good works.
Scriptures here and there do after a sort attribute both life and
justification unto good works. But the scripture is not contrary to it self:
therefore we must search and examine in what sense and how, life and
justification are ascribed to our works. Saint Augustine does so answer
this objection, that he refers our works unto the Grace of God.

For in his book De gratia et libero arbitrio the eighth Chapter, he writes:

If eternal life be of duty given to good works, as the scripture does most
plainly testify, saying: Because God will reward every man according to his
works: then how is eternal life of Grace, consideringe that grace is not
given as due to works, but freely and without deserts? as the apostle Paul
does say: to him that works, the reward is not reckoned of grace, but of
duty. And again:

The remnant, says he, are saved by the election of grace. And immediately
after be adds: If it be of grace, then is it not now of works, for then
grace is no more grace. How then is eternal life, which is gotten by works, a
gift? Or else did not the Apostle say that everlasting life is a gift? Yes
verily he said it so plainly that we cannot deny it.

Neither are his words so obscure, that they require a sharp understander, but
an attentive hearer. For when he had said, the reward of sin is death, he
adds streightwayes: but the gift of God is life everlasting, in Jesus Christ
our Lord. Me thinks therefore that this question can be none otherwise
resolved, unless we understand that even our good works, to which eternal
life is given, must be referred to the grace and gift of God: because the Lord
Jesus says, without me ye can do nothing. And the Apostle, when he had said,
ye are saved by grace through faith, does presently add: and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast.

Thus much hitherto out of Saint Augustine.

Now, although this answer of Saint Augustine be godly and plain enough to
him that simply searches for the truth, yet I am sure that some there are
which never will be answered with it. They will, I know, go about upon
Saint Augustines The (...) of the^ which (...) unto w^^kes.
words to infer, y^ works and not faith alone do justify us men. For thus
they argue: we are justified and do obtain eternal life by grace: good
works do belong to the grace of God: therefore good works do justify us.

Now, it is not amiss to cloase and buckle hand to hand with these
disputers, that in this little ye may perceive that they be mere shifts of
sophistry, which they set to sale under the name and color of very sound
arguments.

And first of all, there is no man so foolish, if he has read the doctrine
of Saint Paul, but knows very well that those two propositions cannot hang
together: we are justified by grace: and, we are justified by works. For that
sentence of Saint Paul is as clear as the Sun, where he says: If of
grace, then, now not of works: for then grace were no grace. We do freely
grant both their propositions, to wite, that we are justified by grace, and
that works belong to the grace of God, or be the gift of God. But we deny
their consequence, and say that it is false, to wite, that works do justify.

For, if that be true, then may we in like manner truly say: a man does see:
an hand does belong unto a man: and therevppon infer, therefore a hand
does see. But who would gather so vain a consequent. For all do understand
that a man does consist of sundry members, and that every member has his
effects and offices.

Again, what is he which knows not, that the grace of God, which is
otherwise undivided, is divided and distinguished according to the diverse
operations which it works. For there is in God a certain (as it were)
general Grace, whereby he created all mortal men, and by which he sends
rain upon the just and unjust. But this grace does not justify. For if it
did, then should the wicked and unjust be justified.

Again, there is that singular grace, whereby he does for his only begotten
Christ his sake adopt us to be his sons: he does not I mean adopt all, but
the believers only, whose sins he reckons not, but does impute to them
the righteousenesse of his only begotten son our Savior.

This is that grace which does alone justify us in very deed. Moreover,
there is a grace, which being powered into our minds does bring forth good
works in them that are justified. This grace does not justify, but does
engender the fruits of righteousenesse in them that are justified. Therefore
we confess and grant that good works belong to grace, but after a certain
manner, order and facion.

Again, they object and say: but Grace or faith, and works, justification
also and sanctification are so joined together, that they cannot be seauered
one from another: therefore the thing that agrees to one, is also applyable
unto the other.

I verilye, neither dare nor do in any case gainesaye, that faith and works
do cleave together: but I do utterly deny that they twain are all one, so
that the thing which is attributed to the one, may also be applied unto the
other.

For faith, although it be weak and imperfect in us, does notwithstanding,
lean and stay upon Christ his perfection alone, and so far forth it does
justify us. But our works have in them (for I use the myledest phrase of
speech) some sprinkling of vice and sparckle of error, because of the
original disease that is natural in us all: but it follows not therefore,
that the grace of God is polluted by any vice or fault of ours: which should of
necessity follow consequently, if by reason of the straight knott betwixt
them, the properties of the one were common to the other.

Although the light of the Sun be not separated from the heat thereof, yet
is not the light the same that the heat is.

Neither is it a good consequence to say: the Sun gives light to the
world: therefore, the heat of the Sun gives light to the world. Because
in the Sun the heat and light cannot be separated. Yea, rather the Sun, in
respect of his light, does lighten the world, not in respect of the heat
that it has. And yet the Sun does both warm and lighten the earth at once.

In like manner, we are freely justified by the merciful grace of God, for
Christ his sake our Lord, and Savior, not in respect and consideration of
the works of Grac^^ that are found in us: although (...) works are engendered
and brought forth by that free grace.

And so we must attribute all glory wholly to the grace of God, and not part
stakes with him, and take to our own share any part of his glory.

These wranglers have yet another shifte, and say: although we say that
eternal life is given by God to all faithful believers, not for faith only
in Christ Jesus, but also for the works of faith, all the glory nevertheless
shall redounde to God, namely since we acknowledge and confess that those
works are wrought in us by the power and grace of God. To this our answer is,
that glory must so be given to God, as he does please to have it given him. If
the will, purpose and counsel of God were to receive us into his friendship
for the works sake, which his spirit and grace does bring forth in us, then
should he unadvisedly without discretion have sent his only begotten son
into the world, and rashly have appointed him to the terrible pangues of
bitter death.

But God, in all that he has created, either in heaven or earth, much less in
this case which is the greatest that belongs to man, the chief and most
excellent creature that he has made, did never at any time do any thing
rashely without great aduisement. Wherefore it is assuredly certain, that it
was never the counsel and purpose of God for our own good works and virtues
to redeem us from the tyranny of Satan and to accept us for his sons, but
for the only sacrifice and satisfaction of his only begotten son Christ
Jesus our Lord and Savior. For the judgment of Paul in this matter
remains firm and invincible, where he says: If righteousness come of the
works of the law, then did Christ die in vain. And that divine saying of
Saint Peter remains for ever vncomptroleable: There is salvation in none
other.

Again, they do lay certain places of Scripture together, and thereupon do
argue thus. Although Paul in one place does say: Ye are saved by grace
through faith: yet in another place the same Paul does say, we are saved by
hope. Now, who knows not that hope is as it were vpheld and strengthened by
patience? Christ him self in the Gospel agreeing thereunto and saying: In
your patience ye shall possess your souls. Therefore not faith only but hope
and patience do bring us to salvation. To this we answer thus, that the
holy Apostle does sufficiently expound him self, if a man will take the
pains to read him through out, and weigh with him self the end and cause for
which he spoke every several sentence.

Ye are, says he, saved by grace through faith: and that not of your selves,
it is the gift of God: not of works, least any man should boast etc. Has he
not in these few words most evidently declared, what his belief is touching
grace or faith, and works? who would desire a plainer speech? There is none
so very a dorrhead, as that he understands not that the benefit of
salvation is wholly and merely ascribed to grace.

For he does not divide salvation or justification partly to faith or grace,
and partly to works: neither does he attribute the first place to faith,
and the second place to works.

He does utterly exclude all boasting. Ye are, says he: saved by grace
through faith. And immediately after he adds: and that not of your selves.
He annexeth the cause: It is the gift of God. And again: not of works. He
shows why: Least any man should boast.

He that understands not this, does undoubtedly understand nothing (...) to
them that speak against the (...).
at all. He that wresteth or otherwise cauilleth at this, does speak against
the Sun, and says that the light is darkness. Now, whereas ye same Apostle
does in another place say: We are saved by hope, it is by the marking of the
whole place to be gathered, that his meaning is, as if he had said: I told
you that they which believe in Christ, are the sons and heirs of God, and
have thereby their salvation and felicity: but I would have every one to
understand it in hope and expectation, not in enjoying the very thing it
self, and present fruition. Now, who can herevppon infer: therefore hope
does justify? But we do rather make this argument, patience is no patience at
all, unless the patient man be first justified by true faith: therefore the
commendation of patience does wholly depend upon faith, and not the praise of
faith upon patience, although faith be declared and showed forth by patience.

For it ts a sentence utterly unworthy to come out of a Christian man's
mouth, to say: that faith is made perfect by good works, that is to say:
where faith does want a piece, that there good works do patch it up. For when
we name faith, we do not name simply the quality of believing which is in
our min^es, but we have an eye to Christ him self our Lord and Savior
together with his righteousness and heavenly gifts: upon whom alone as
upon a base and sure foundation our faith does rest and firmly stand. But
to go about to supply the want of any thing in Christ Jesus, is nothing else,
but with devilish blasphemy to disgrace the son of God. The faith of
Saints I confess does declare and show it self by works: but it
follows not there upon that works do therefore make perfect that, which
seems to be wanting in Christ his perfection. For there is nothing lacking
in our deliverance, redemption, and justification wrought by Christ. The
Apostle James did say in deed: See thou how faith was made perfect by
works? but his meaning was none other but to say: see thou how faith, by
the works, which followed it, did declare it self to be a true and righteous
faith, and not an hypocritical faith? For before these words he said: See
thou how his faith was effectual through works? Again the Apostle Paul
said: I fulfill that which is lacking to the afflictions of Christ, in my
flesh for his bodies sake which is the church. But you may better translate
the Greek (...) to be that rather, which is behind, than that which is
lacking to the afflictions of Christ. For the Greeks call (...) not only those
things that are wanting, but also the remnant (which word Saint Ambrose also
used) I mean the remnant, and those things that are remaining behind.

And Saint Peter says that Christ suffered for us, leaving behind him an
example for us, that we might follow his trace and footesteppes. Therefore
the Apostle affirms that he by suffering fulfilled the remnaunt which was
behind.

After this again they allege the words of the Apostle Paul, where An other
objection.
he says: If I have all faith, so that I can remove mountains out of their
place, and yet have not charity, I am nothing. For upon this they infer:
Therefore not faith only, but also charity: yea, rather charity than faith
does justify.

But we say that Paul in this sentence does neither deny that faith alone does
justify, nor yet does attribute the justification of the Saints to
charity. For when we affirm that we are justified by faith, or when we make
faith the cause of justification, (which thing must be by often repetition
beaten into our memories) we do not understand that faith, as it is a virtue
in us, does work, and by ye quality that sticks to us, does merit
righteousness in the sight of God: but so often as we make mention of faith,
we understand the grace of God exhibited in Christ, which is through faith
freely applied to us, and received as the free gift of God bestowed upon us.
And in that sense does Paul use the name of faith, when he affirms that
faith does justify. But in this place of the thirteenth Chapter to the
Corinthians he does not so take the name of faith, but puts it for the
power of workinge miracles, as is manifest by that which follows, where he
says: So that I can remove mountains. That faith does not comprehend
Christ wholly, but only the power in showing of miracles.

And therefore it may be sometime in an unjust man and an hypocrite, as it was
in Judas Iscariot, to whom the faith of miracles profited nothing, because he
was without the justifying faith, which faith is never without (but of it self
ingendreth) charity.

Again, whereas they object that saying out of the Gospel of Saint John:
Whosoever knows my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves
me: and my father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our abidinge
in him. Therefore for the observation of the commandments, that is, for our
works sake, G^d is joined to us: we again allege this saying of the same
Euangeliste and Apostle John: By this we know that weabide in him, and he in
us, because he has given us of his spirit. But that spirit of God is a free
gift. Therefore we are joined to God by mere and free grace.

It follows in John: And we have seen and do testify, that the father has
sent the son to be the Savior of the world. Thou hear, I hope, by what
it is that the world is saved, and what Christ the Savior of the world is.
Now who knows not, that he was sent unto us of the father by the mere and
only grace of God? It follows now how that Grace is received: Whosoever
confesses that Jesus is the son of God, God abides in him, and he in God.
But in the sixte of John, in steed of confesses, is put believes. And no
merueile, since out of a true faith a true confession does arise. By faith
therefore are we saved, and by faith are we joined unto God. But letting pass
these wranglers, who will never be without store of such sophistical shifts,
we do again return to our purposed argument, to show you how, and in what
sense life and justification are attributed to works.

They that are well exercised in the reading of the holy Scriptures, that The
places ^f faith and works that ^eeme at a (...) to ^^sigree, (...) here (...).
they may reconcile the places of scripture, that seem at a blushe to be at
discord, do teach that faith and works in very deed are not separated one
from another. For the same holy spirit which gives faith, does therwithall
also regenerate the understanding and will, so that the faithful does
ardently desire, and do his endeavor in all things to do service to GOD his
maker.

Therefore, for the inseperable knott betwixt faith and good works, which
always keep company and attend upon faith, we say that justification is
sometimes somewhat improperly attributed to works, which is somewhat more
properly to be attributed to faith, but most properly of all to be ascribed
to Christ apprehended by faith, who is in very deed the foundation and
subject of our faith. I will yet assaye to make this more manifest. In true
faith there are two things to be considered, Reconciliation and Obedience.
Reconciliation, because by faith we understand and verily believe that God is
reconciled to us for Christ his sake, by whom we are adopted into the number
of the sons of God. And Obedience, because they that are reconciled do
wholly yield them selves to him, to whom they be reconciled, with carnest
desire and zeal to do his will and pleasure.

So then we say that faith is of two sorts, the justifying and ye obeying
faith. Of the justifying faith Saint Paul makes mention where he says:
Being justified by says, we have peace toward God, through the Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we are reconciled.

Again, he makes mention of the obeying faith, where he says: Know ye
not that to whom ye give your selves as servants to obey, his servants ye
are, to whom ye do obey: whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience
unto righteousenesse? that is to say: which obedience makes you to do the
things that are righteous, and to be the servants of righteousenesse, which
shall turn to you to eternal life: and not the servants of sin, which
turns unto death.

Now therefore, justification is properly attributed to the reconciling
righteousenesse through Christ Jesus, and is improperly ascribed to the
obeying righteousenesse, or righteousenesse of obedience. For the obeying
righteousenesse is of the reconciling, and without the reconciling
righteousness, obedience should not be called righteousenesse. To which this
also is to be added, that they which are justified do not put any confidence
in this obedience, as that which is always spotted in this world by reason of
our fleash.

To this also agrees this other explication which I will here annexe. The
most proper work of faith is purification and sanctification. For Saint
Peter does expressly say, that by faith our hearts are purified. But in
sanctification the holy scriptures do show to be two especial things.

First, that all the faithful are freely purified by the blood of Christ 1
Jesus.

For again, ye same S. Peter says: Ye know that you are redeemed not with
transitory things as gold and silver, but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of an unspotted Lamb. Saint Paul says: Ye are sanctified by the
will of God through the oblation of the body of Jesus Christ once made. For
with that one oblation he made them perfect for ever, which are sanctified.
Saint John also says: The blood of Jesus Christ the son of God does cleanse
us from al sin. Therefore the most proper phrase of speech is to say that
we are sanctified through faith by the blood of Christ, who said: I sanctify
my self from them, that they also may be sanctified through the truth. The
latter is, that they which are sanctified by 2
the blood of Christ through faith, do day by day sanctify them selves, and
give their minds to holiness. To y^ doing and study whereof the Apostles do
most earnestly exhort the Saints. For Peter says: As he which called you
is holy, so be ye also holy in your conversation, because it is written: Be
ye holy, for I am holy. Saint Paul says: This is the will of God, even
your holiness etc. 1. Thessal. 4. Saint John says: Now are we the sons
of God, and yet it does not appear what we shall be: but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is. And every one
that has this hope in him, purifieth him self, even as he also is pure. Now
this purging or purification, which is made by our care and industry, is
called by the name of sanctification, not because it is made by us as of our
selves, but because it is made of them that are sanctified by the blood of
Christ, in respect of Christ his blood.

For unless that sanctification, which is the very true and only
sanctification in deed, do go before, our sanctification (I mean that which
we work) is none at all. But if that go before, then is this of ours imputed
for sanctification, although in the mean while the spots of sin remaining
in us do defile it, and that we do put no confidence in it. Therefore so often
as thou shall read in the holy scriptures, that righteousness is attributed
to our good works, thou shall think streightwayes that it is done for none
other causes than those which I have hitherto already declared unto thee. For
the Apostolical spirit cannot be repugnant or contrary to it self.

This will yet be made a great deal more manifest, if we call to remembrance
The (...) the (...)
and do consider that the Apostles had to deal with two kinds of men, the
one sort whereof did affirm that they were sufficiently able of their own
strength to satisfy or fulfill the law, and that they could by their
deserts and good works merit eternal life: yea, they affirmed that the
merit of Christ was not sufficient enoughe to the gettting of salvation,
unless the righteousness of men were added thereunto.

Against these Paul disputed very constantly and pithiely in all his
Epistles. For they made Christ and the grace of God of none effect. The other
sort of men were such as abusing The ^^^stles ^gains^ abuse^ grace^ faith*
the doctrine of grace and faith, did wallowe like swine in all filthy sins,
because they thought that it was sufficient unto salvation, if they did say
that they believed.

But they never declared their faith or belief by any good works, although
occasion thereunto were given them. Against these did S. Peter very well and
wisely dispute in the 1. Chap. of his 2. Epistle: and S. James in the 2. Chap.
of his Epistle. For he affirms that Abraham was not justified by faith
only, but by works: that is to say, that he was not justified by a vain
opinion, but by faith which bare and was full of good woorks. For James does
use the names of Faith and justification in one sense, and Paul in another.
Paul puts faith for an assured confidence in the merit of Christ: and he
uses Justification for absolution and remission of sins, for adoption into
the number of the sons of God, and lastly for the imputing of Christ his
righteousness unto us. But in James faith does signify a vain opinion: and
justification does import, not the imputing of righteousness, but the
declaring of righteousness and adoption. For it is undoubtedly true that the
holy Apostles of Christ S. Peter and S. James would not by their writings make
void the grace and merit of Christ, to advance the merits of mortal men:
but rather to withstand the vnpurenesse of them, which put the faith of Christ
in peril of disgracing to the offense of all good men, living in the mean
while most wickedly in detestable sins without repentance. Therefore the
Apostles of Christ requiring good works at the hands of the faithful, do
first of all require a true and lively faith, and do refer them both unto
the grace of God.

Let us therefore most firmly hold that the Apostles do attribute
justification, (...)
life, and salvation to good works improperly: to true faith properly: but
most properly to Christ, who is the subject and foundation of true faith. For
although true faith is not without good works, yet does it justify without
good works, by it self alone. For it is most certain, that life and salvation
are bestowed on us, after the same manner, that health and life was given to the
children of Israel, which in the wilderness were poisoned of the Serpents.
They had their health restored them not by any works, but by the only
beholding and loking upon the brazen Serpent: therefore we also are made
partakers of eternal life by faith alone, which is the true be holding and
looking up to Christ. As Moses, says our Savior, did lift up the Serpent in
the wilderness, so must the son of man be lifted up, that every one which
believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. And the Apostle
Paul says, Ye are saved by grace through faith, not of yourselues, it is the
gift of God: not of works, least any man should boast etc. With this doctrine
of the Evangelists and Apostles do the testimonies of certain doctors of the
Church agree. Some of which I will recite unto you, dearly beloved, not
because these testimonies of the Scripture are not sufficient, but because we
will not seem to be the beginners and bringers in of new doctrines: although
in very deed that cannot be new which is derived out of the Evangelical and
Apostolical doctrine, albeit that all the doctors of the Church should
gainesay or deny it. Now therefore give ear how some, even of the best of
them, do not in words only say and write, but also by proofs show that faith
alone does justify.

ORIGIN a very ancient writer, upon the 3. Chap. of the Epistle of Origin in
3. cap. ad Roma.
Saint Paul to ye Romans does say, Paul says that the justification of faith
alone is sufficient for a man, so that every one that does believe only is
justified, although no works are once wrought by him. Now if we require an
example, where any was ever justified by faith alone without good works, that
thief, I suppose, is example good enough, who being crucified with Christ, did
cry from the Cross: lord Jesus remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom. In the writings of the Evangelists there is mention made of no good
work, which he in his life time did, and yet because of this his faith only
Jesus said unto him: Verily I say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me
in Paradise. Therefore, this thief was thoroughe faith justified without the
works of the law. For after this request and prayer of his, the Lord made no
inquisition what his works were all his life long, neither did he look
what works he would do after this faith and believing, but did immediately
upon his confession both justify and take him as a companion to go with him
to Paradise.

Moreover to the woman, of whom mention is made in the Gospel after Saint
Luke, not for any work of the law, but for faith only, he said, Thy sins
are forgiven thee. And again, Go in peace, thy faith has made thee safe.
Furthermore in many places of the Gospel we find, that our Savior used the
like kind of speech, making faith always to be the cause of men's salvation.
And a little while after the same Apostle says, God forbid that I should
glory in any thing, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the
world is crucified to me, and I to the world. Thou see here that the
Apostle glories not of his own righteousness, or chastity, or wisdom, or
other works or virtues of his own, but does most plainly pronounce and say:
Let him that glories, glory in the Lord, and so by that means all boasting
is excluded. And so forth, with many other sayings tending to this purpose.

S. AMBROSE in his exposition of Paul his Epistle unto the Ambrose
Romans, upon the third and fourth Chapiters, does say: They are freely
justified, says Saint Paul, because when they work nothing, nor do any
thing for GOD again, they are yet thorough faith only justified by the gift
of God.

According to the purpose of Gods grace, says Paul, it was so ordained of
God, that laying the law aside, the grace of God should require faith only
unto salvation.

This does by the example of the Prophet confirm the blessedness of the
man, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works: he calls them
blessed, with whom the Lord has couenaunted, that without labor, and keeping
of the law, they should be justified before their maker.

S. JOHN Chrysostom treating Chrysos^^^^
of faith, of the law of nature, and of the holy Ghost does expressly say:
I cannot prove that he which woorketh the works of righteousness without
faith, does enjoy eternal life. But I can by good proof show that he,
which believed without works, did both live and obtain the kingdom of heaven.
No man without faith has obtained life. But the thief believed only, and for
his faith was justified by the most merciful God. And whereas here
peradventure thou will obiecte that he wanted time to live justly, and to do
good works: I aunsweare that I do not greatly strive about that: but this
only I stick to, that faith alone did justify and save him. For if he had
lived any longer, and had neglected faith and works, he had undoubtedly
fallen from salvation.

But the only end and argument whereat I now shoot, is, that faith of it
self does bring salvation, and that works of themselves did never save any
workers that wrought them. As Chrysostom does at large declare by the example
of the Captain Cornelius. These testimonies I suppose are sufficient to
wits that will be aunsweared, and do not stand obstinate^^ in quarellinges
and ianglings. Othe^wise I could allege a great (...). But I will not be over
ted^ors unto you, dearly beloved, nor same to be endless in an evident
matter.

But now because to this treatise of the righteousness of works, there
(...) of (...)
is a question annexed touching the merits of good works, I will therefore
summarilie say somewhat of merits, or rather of the hire and reward of good
works: To this end especially, least any man thincking irreligiou^ly of the
merits of good works, do thereby win to himself not good, but evil works.

The name of Merits is an vna^quainted (...)
term, not used in the Scriptures. For in that signification wherein our Merit
woorkers use it, to wit, for meritorious works, for that, I mean, whereunto
both life and the grace of GOD is of duty given as debt that is due, in that
signification I say, it does obscure the Grace of God, and makes man too
proud and arrogant. What I pray you can our works deserve, since none of the
Saints durst be so bold as to plead their merits before the Lord? Job
cries, If I will justify me self, mine own mouth shall condemn me: If I
will go about to show me self to be an innocent, he shall prove me a
wicked doer. If I wash me self with snow water, and make my hands never so
clean at the well, yet shall thou dippe me in the mire, and mine own garments
shall defile me.

David cries, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified. Christ our Lord in the Gospel says, When
ye have done all things that are commanded you, then say, we are
unprofitable servants: we have done that we ought to do. But a little
before, our Lord said: Does the master thancke the servant which does
the things that are commanded him to do? The holy Apostle Saint Paul also
cries, I do not despise the Grace of GOD. For if righteousness be of the
Law, then did Christ die in vain. Again, in the Gospel after Saint Luke
the Phariscie is greatly blamed, which could not be content to put confidence
in his own righteousness, but would needs boaste of his merits also. And
Nabuchodonosor fealt no little plague, for saying that the kingdom of Babylon
did come unto him by his own art, industry, power and virtue. By how much a
greater punishment therefore shall we think them to be worthy off, which
are persuaded, and make their bragges that they by their merits have deserved
or earned the kingdom of heaven? A reward is given to good works.


And yet, all this does not tend to y^ making void of ye stipend of good woror
to the denying of the reward that is prepared for virtues. For he is true which
promised, and what he promised he will perform. Now he promised rewards to
them that work righteousness: even as also according to his justice and
truth he has threatened terrible punishments to wicked and impenitent
sinners. But the promises of God are of two sorts, to wit, they lay before
our eyes the gifts and rewards of this present life, and of the life to come.
For the Lord in the Gospel after S. Mark does say, Verily I say unto you,
there is no man that has forsaken house, or brethren, or lands for my sake
and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundredth fold now at this present with
persecutions, and in the world to come life everlasting. And Paul says,
Godliness is profitable to all things, having promise of the life that is
now, and of that which is to come. This is a sure saying and by all means
worthy to be received. For therefore we both labor and suffer rebuke,
because we have our hope settled in the living God, etc. And here it will do
well to reckon up and cite the testimonies of Scripture which do concern the
reward of good works, I will therefore recite a few, but such as shall be
evident and perteyning to ye matter. The Lord in Esaie cries, Say to the just
that it shall go well with him, for he shall eat the fruit of his study or
travail. And woe to the wicked sinner, for he shall be rewarded according to the
works of his hands. In Jeremy we read, Leave off from weping, for thy labor
shall be rewarded thee. And in the Gospel the Lord says, Blessed are ye when men
speak all evil sayings against you, lying, for my sake. Rejoice ye and be
glad, for great is your reward in heaven. The Apostle Paul also says, Glory,
honor, and peace to every one that works good, to the Jew first and also to
the Gentile. Again, We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may bear the deeds of his body according to that which he
has done, whether it be good or badd. And again, Every one shall receive a
reward according to his labor.

Now let us remember that the reward is promised and great gifts are To (...)
the (...) are (...).
prepared for them that labor manfully. To sluggardes and slowebacks are
imminent the evils of this present life, and also of the life to come. To them
that strive lawfully the garland is due. But if it happen that the reward be
defferred, and that they, which strive, receive not the promises by and by out
of hand, yet let the afflicted think that their afflictions tend to their
commodity, and that they are laid upon them by their heavenly father. Let not
their courage therefore fail them, but let them show themselves men in the
fight, and call to God for aid. For, whosoever perseueareth unto the end he
shall be saved. Let every one call to his remembrance the old examples of the
holy fathers, to whom many promises were made, the fruit whereof they did not
reap till many a day were come and gone, wherein they strove against, and did
overcome full many a sharp temptation. The Apostle Paul cries, I have fought
a good fight, I have fulfilled my course, I have kept the faith. Hence forth
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me in that day: not to me only, but to them also,
that have loved his appearing. They must lay before their eyes the truth of
God, who says, Heaven and earth shall pass: but my word shall not pass. The
Israelites verily were a long time holden captive in Egypt: but the Lord did
not forgett his promise. For in a fit and convenient time, he set them out at
liberty with abundant joy and glory for the triumph gotten over their
oppressors. The Amalechites, and Chanaanites did a great while, I confess,
exalte themselves in sin and wickedness. But when the measure of their
iniquity was fully filled, then were they thoroughly recompensed for their
pains by him, that is the severe revenger of unrepented wickedness. The
Scripture therefore exhorts all men to have sure hope, perseuearing patience,
and constancy invincible. Of which I spoke in the third Sermon of this third
Decade. To this place do beelong, as I suppose, those excellent words of S.
Paul where he says, It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him
we shall also live with him: if we be patient, we shall also reign with him:
if we deny him, he also shall deny us: if we be unfaithful, he abides
faithful, he cannot deny himself. And again, Cast not away your
confidence, which has great recompense of reward. For ye have need of
patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may receive the promise.
For yet a very little while, and he, that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. And the just shall live by faith: and if he withdraw himself, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them that withdraw our
selves unto perdition, but we pertain to faith to the winning of the soul.

Yet for all this we must not abuse (...) these places which confirm the
reward of good works.
these and such like testimonies touching the reward of works, nor the very
name of merits where it is found to be used of the fathers, neither must we
wreste it against the doctrine of mere Grace, and the merits of Christ our
Savior. We must think that the kingdom of heaven, and the other special
Hire is due but heritage proceeds of the parents good will.
gifts of God are not as the hire that is due to servant, but as the
inheritance of the sons of God. For although in the last day of judgment the
judge shall reckon up many works, for which he shall seem as it were to
recompense the elect with eternal life, yet before that recital of good works,
he shall say, Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for
you since the beginning of the world. Now if thou demaundest, why he shall in
the day of judgment make mention rather of works than of faith? Mine answer
is, that it is a point or usual custom in the law for judgment, not only
to be just, but also by the judges pronunciation to have the cause made
manifest to al men wherefore it is just. And God does deal with us after the
order of men. Wherefore he does not only give just judgment, but will also be
known of all men to be a just and upright Judge. But we are not able to look
into the faith of other men, which does consist in ye mind: and therefore we
judge by their words and deeds. Honest words and works bear witness of a
faithful heart, whereas dishonest prankes and speeches do bewray a kind of
unbelief. The works of charity and humanity do declare that we have faith
in deed: whereas the lack of them do argue the contrary. And therefore the
Scripture admonishes us, that the judgment shall be according to our works.

To this sense agrees that in the 12. of Matthew, where it is said, By thy
deeds thou shall be justified, and by the same thou shall be condemned. To
Abraham, after he had determined to offer his son Isaac, it was said, Because
thou have done this thing, and have not spared thine only begotten son, I
will bless thee and multiply thee exceedingly, etc. But it is manifest that
God made that promise to Abraham before Isaac was borne, yea, he made it as
soon as Abraham was brought out of his country: therefore the promise was not
now first of all annexed as a reward unto the works of Abraham. etc.

Therefore God examineth our How or in what sens^ God is said to give a reward
unto our good works.
works according to his own favorable mercy, and not with the extremity
and rigor of law, and does reward them with infinite benefits, because they
proceed from faith in Christ albeit that for the sin, which abides in us,
they be vnpure and nothing meritorious. Now he does hereby give us a proof
that he has a regard of us and our works: because in testifying the
greatness of his love toward us, he does vouchsafe so to honor not only us,
but also his own gifts in us, which he of his great goodness has graciously be
stowed upon us. Our bountiful God does herein imitate the manner of dealing
which fleshly fathers use in this world toward their children. For they bestow
gifts upon their children as rewards of their welldoing, thereby provoking
them to greater virtues, when as in very deed al things belong to the children
by right of inheritance, and the true and proper cause, of this reward, which
the father gives to the child, is not the obedience of the son, but the
mere good will and favor of the father. Moreover, herein are two things to
be observed. First, although God does after the manner of men allure 1
us with rewards, draw us on with gifts, and keep us in good works with
manifold recompenses, yet must not the reward or recompense be the mark where
at the woorker ought to look, respecting rather his own glory and
commodity, than the love and honor that he owes to God. God will be
worshipped for loves sake only, and he will be loved of mere goodwill, and not
for the hope of any reward. For as he requires a cheerful giver: so does he
look for such an vncoacted affection, voluntary love, and free goodwill as
children do naturally bear to their parents. The last is, That our works,
which some call merits, are nothing else but the ^
mere gifts of God. Now he were a very unthankful person, which, when of an
other man's liberality he has license given to occupy his land to his best
commodity, will at length go about to translate the right thereof from the
true owner, which lent it him, unto him self. But because I would be loath by
drawing out this treatise too far, to deteine you longer than reason would, I
will recite unto you, derely beloved, a notable conference of places in the
Scripture made by S. Augustine, whereby ye may evidently understand and
infer a conclusion, that the rewards of good works or merits of the
Saints are the very free and mere grace of God.

Therefore in the seventh Chapter of his book De Gratia and libero arbitrio
S. (...) the (...)
thus he says: John the forerunner of our Lord does say, A man can receive
nothing, unless it be given him from heaven. If therefore thy good works be
the gifts of God, then God crowns thy merits, not as thy merits, but as his
own gifts. Let us therefore consider the merits of the Apostle Paul, (that
is to say, the merits which he says are in himself,) whether they be the
gifts of God or no: I have says he, fought a good fight, I have fulfilled
my course, I have kept the faith. First of all, these good works had been no
good works, unless good thoughts had gone besore them. Give ear therefore
what he says of those good thoughts: Not because we can think any thing
of our selves, as of our selves, but our ability is of God. Then also let us
consider every several particularitie, I have fought, says he, a good fight.
I demand by what power he fought? Whether by that which he had of
himself, or by that which was given him from above?

It is unlikely that so great a teacher of the Gentiles, as the holy Apostle
Saint Paul was, should be ignorant of the law, which in Deuteronomie, is
heard to say: Say not thou in thy heart, mine own strength, and the power of
mine own hand has done this wonderful thing: but thou shall remember the
Lord thy GOD: because he gives thee strength and power to do it.

But what does it avail to fight well, unless the victory do ensue? And
who I pray you, gives the victory, but he of whom Saint Paul himself,
does say? Thanckes be to GOD which gives us the victory thoroughe our
Lord Jesus Christ. And in an other place when he had cited the place out of
the Psalms, where it is said: Because for thy sake we are killed all day, and
are counted as sheep appointed to the slaughter, he did immediately add, and
say: But in all these things we overcome or have the victory thoroughe him,
which loved us.

We have the victory therefore not thorough our selves, but thorough him that
loved us. After that again he said: I have fulfilled my course. But as he
said this, so in another place also he says: It is not of the willer, nor of
the runner, but of GOD which takes mercy.

Which sentence cannot be by any means so inuerted, that we may say: It is
not of God, which takes mercy, but of the willer, and of the runner. For
whosoever dare take upon him so to inuerte that sentence of the holy Apostle,
he does openly show that he flattly gainesayeth the words of Saint
Paul.

Last of all he said, I have kept the faith: but in an other place again
he confesses saying. I have obtained mercy that I might be faithful. He
said not, I have obtained mercy, because I am faithful, but, That I might
be faithful: declaring thereby that faith it self cannot be obtained
without the mercy of God, and that faith is the gift of God, as he does
most evidently teach where he says: Ye are saved by Grace thoroughe faith,
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. For they might say: We
have therefore received Grace, because we have believed: by that means
attributing, as it were, Faith to themselves, and Grace to God: but to prevent
that insinuation, the holy Apostle Saint Paul when he had said, By faith,
does streighte ways add, And that not of your selves, it is the gift of God.

Again, least they should say that they by their works did meritoriously
deserve such a gift, he does presently annexe: Not of works, least any man
should boast. Not because he did deny or make void good works, considering
that he says, that God does reward every man according to his works: but
forbecause works are of faith, and not faith of works. And so by this means
our works of righteousness proceed from him, from who^ that faith does also
come, touching which it is said: The just does live by faith.

All this have I hitherto word for word recited out of Augustine: wherein, all
that may be said concerning the merits of good works, are sufficiently well
contained, and so soundly confirmed by proofs of Scripture, that I mean not
to ad any thing unto them: for I see it is sufficiently manifest for all to
understand, what and how the ancient fathers thought and taught of the
merits of sinful men. For what can be said more briefly, sincerely, and
fully, than that a reward is prepared for the good works of men? but yet that
that reward is nothing else but the grace: and that the merits or good works of
the Saints are the gift of God: which merits while he crowns, he crowns
his own gifts. In all this therefore the Ecclesiastical and Apostolic
doctrine remains still immutable and unreprovable, That we are justified and
saved by ye grace of God through faith, and not through our own good works
or merits.

We do now again return to good works, and are come to expound Good
works must be done according to the rule of the word of God.
the description or definition of good woorks, which we did set down in the
beginning of this treatise. Now therefore unless our works do spring in us
from God through faith, they cannot have the name of Good Works. But
contrarily, if they do proceed from God through faith, then are they also
framed according to the rule of ye word of God. And for that cause did I in the
definition of good works significantly say, That they are done of them which
are regenerate by the good spirit of God, through faith according to the word
of God. For God is not pleased with the works, which we of our selves do of
our own brains and authority without warrantize of his word imagine and
devise. For the thing that he does most of all like and look for in us is
faith and obedience (which is most evident to be seen in the very example of
our graundfather Adam:) and co^trarilie he does mislike and utterly reiecte the
works of our own choice and our good intents which spring in and rise upon
our own minds and judgments: as I will by these testimonies of scripture
declare unto you. In the 12. of Deuteronomie we read, Every man shall not do
that which is righteous in his own eyes. Whatsoever I command you, that shall
ye observe to do it: neither shall thou ad any thing to it, nor take any thing
from it.

Moreover in the history of Samuel there is a notable example of this matter
to be seen. For Saul the king of Israel received a commandment to kill all
the Amalechites with all their beasts and cattle: but he contrary to the
precept through a good intent (as he thought) of his own, and for a religious
zeales sake of his own chosing, reserved the fattest Oxen for to be
sacrificed: and for that cause the Prophet came and said unto him, Is a
sacrifice so pleasant and acceptable to the Lord as obedience is? Behold, to
obey is better then sacrifice: and to hearken is better than the fatt of ramms.
For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as the
vanity of Idolatry. Lo here in these few words thou have the goodly praise
and commendation of the religion of our own inuenting, and of our own good
works which do arise of our own good intents and purposes. They, which do
neglecte the precepts of the Lord to follow their own good intents and
forecastings, are flatly called witches, Apostataes, and wicked idolaters. They
seem in their own eyes verily to be ^ellie fellows, and true worshippers of
God, and zealous followers of the traditions of the holy fathers, bishops,
kings and princes: but God, which cannot lie does flatly pronounce that
their works do differ nothing from witchcraft, Apostacy, and blasphemous
idolatry, than which there can be nothing more heinous by any means devised.
Therefore the Lord in the Gospel citing that place out of Esaies Prophecy
does plainly condemn, reiecte, and tread under foot all those works which
we choose to our selves, having their beginning of our own good inteates and
purposes, where he says: In vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines
the precepts of men. Every planting, which my father has not planted, shall be
plucked up by the roots. Let them alone, they be blind leaders of the blind.
And therevppon it is that S. Paul did so boldly affirm that the precepts of
men are contrary to the truth, and are mere lies. The same Paul in one place
says, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And in another place, Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Whereupon we may gather,
that the works which are not framed by the express word of God, or by a
sure consequence derived from it, are so far from being good works, that
they are plainly called sins. Enforce thou, I pray thee, never so great a
good turn upon a man against his will, and see what favor thou shall win at
his hand, and how thou shall please him with that enforced benefit. Therefore
good works do first of all require the precise and express observing of Gods
will, to which alone they ought to tend. In his Epistle to the Colossians the
same Apostle does openly condemn the Greek (...), that is, the voluntary
religion which they of their own choice and mind brought in to be observed.
And what need have we I pray you to invent to our selves other new kinds of
good works, considering that we have not yet done those works, which God
himself prescribes and does in express words require at our hands? By this
now our adversaries may perceive that we do not altogether simply condemn
good works, but those alone which we by rejecting the word of GOD, do
first set abroache by our own imaginations, and fantastical inventions: of
which sort are many vpstart works of our holy Monks and sacrificing
shauelinges. But to conclude, the works that are repugnaunt to the word of
God, are by no means worthy of any place or honor.

And that we may more rightly perceive the sense or meaning of good Good
works indeed
works, we must in mine opinion diligently observe these words of the
Apostle: We are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
before ordained, that we should walk in them. He makes here two notes
concerning those that are good works in deed. The first is, We are, says
he, created in Christ Jesus 1
unto good works. It does therefore necessarily follow, that good works are
wrought of him, which is by true faith graffed in Christ Jesus. For unless the
branch abide in the vine, it cannot bring forth fruit. All the works
therefore of the faithful, howsoever they shine with the title of
righteousness, are notwithstanding not good works in very deed. The latter
^
is, Which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. We must
not therefore make account that all the works, which men may do, are to be
counted good works in deed: but those only which God has ordained of old,
that we should walk in them. Now what works those be, the Lord in his law
(which is the eternal will of God) has very plainly expressed. And
therevppon it is, that the Lord in the Gospel being demanded questions
concerning eternal life, and the very true virtues, sends the demaunder unto
the law, and says: What is written in the law? And again, If thou will
enter into life keep the commandments. Therefore the ten commandments
are a most sure and absolute platform of good works. Which that ye may the
better understand, I will briefly recapitulate, and as it were in a picture
lay it before your eyes.

To the first precept thou shall refer the fear, the faith, and love of God,
The ten commandments are a platform of good works.
with assured hope, perseuearing patience, and constancy invincible in trouble
and afflictions. To the second belongs the true and sincere worship, wherewith
God is pleased, with the utter refusal of all superstition and perverse
religion. Upon the third does depend the reverence of Gods Majesty, the
free confession of his might, the holy invocation of his name, and the
sanctification of ye same. In the fourth is comprehended the moderate
conservation of the Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, y^ preaching of Gods word,
public prayers, and whatsoever else does belong to the outward service or
external worship due to God. To the fifte thou may annexe the natural love
of children toward their parents, of men toward their country and
kinese-folkes, the due obedience that we owe to the magistrates and all in
authority, and lastly the offices of civil humanity. To the sixte thou shall
join justice and judgment, the protection of widows and orphans, the
delivering of the oppressed and afflicted, weldoing to all men, and doing hurt
to no man. To the seventh thou shall add the faith of wedded couples, the
offices of marriage, the honest and Godly bringing up of children, with the
study of chastity, temperance, and sobriety. To the eighth is to be
reckoned upright dealing in co^tracts, liberality, bountifulness, and
hospitality. Under y^ ninthe is couched the study of truth through al our
life time, faith in words and deeds, with dece^t, honest, and profitable
speech. In the tenth and last, thou may remember good affections, holy
wishes, with all holy and honest thoughts. And so this is ye compendious
platform of good works. Now if you desire to have it more briefly expressed
than this that thou see, then turn thee self and hearken to the words of
Christ our Lord, who gathers these 10. into two principal points, and says:
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind: and thy neighbor as thy self. Whatsoever therefore ye would
that men should do to you, even so do ye to the^.

Upon these precepts of the Lord, let all the faithful (which desire to do
(...) be (...) to (...) of (...).
good works) most surely fix their eyes and minds, and that too so much the
more diligently and constantly, as they do more surely and evidently perceive
and see, that God in ye law and the prophets, does require nothing else, nor
any other works at the hands of his elect and chosen servants. Go to now
therefore, let us hear out of the holy Prophets some such evident testimonies
touching good woorks, as do consent and wholly agree with the law of the Lord.
Moses in Deuteronomy. cries: And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of
thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, to love him
and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? That
thou keep the commandments of the Lord and his ordinances, which I command
thee this day. And the kinglye Prophet David in the 15. Psalm asks this
question: Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? And presently answers it
himself, saying: Even he that walks uprightly, and does the thing that is
just and right. And so forth as is contained in the 10. co^maundeme^ts. Esaie
also in his 33. cap. moves the same question and answers it even so as David
had done before him. Jeremy in the 21. chap. does urge and reiterate these
words to the Jews: Thus the Lord commands: Keep equity and righteousness,
deliver the oppressed from the power of the violent, do not grieve nor oppress
the stranger, the fatherles nor the widow, and shedd no innocent blood in this
place. And Ezechiel in his 18. cap. knitteth up a beadrowe of good works, in
no point unlike to these, saving only y^ it is somewhat more largly amplified.
In Osee the Lord says: I desire mercy more than sacrifice: and the knowledge
of God more than whole burnt offerings. Micheas does diligently inquire what
the worshipper of God should do to please him with all, and what works he
should do to delight the Lord: and immediately by the inspiration of the holy
Ghost he makes answer, saying: I will show thee, O man, what is good, and
what the Lord requires of thee: namely, to do justly, to love mercy, and
with reverence to walk before thy God. In like manner the Prophet Zachary, to
them that demanded of him certain questions touching virtues, and such good
works as please the Lord, gave this answer, saying: Thus says the Lord of
hosts, Execute true judgment, show mercy and loving kindness every man
to his brother: do the widow, the fatherless, the stranger, and the poor
no wrong. Let no man imagine evil in his heart against his brother: neither
be ye lovers of false oaths, for these are the things which I do hate, says
the Lord.

With this doctrine of the Prophets does the preaching of the Evangelists and
Apostles fully agree, teaching in every place, that charity, righteousness
and innocence, are the scoape and sum of all good works. The Apostle James
says: Pure religion and undefiled before God and the father, is this: To
visit the father less and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself
unspotted of the world.

It remains now for me to draw to an end, and in the rest that is yet be To
what end good works must be done.
hind to be spoken touching the description of good works, to confer places of
ye Scripture for ye confirmation and plain exposition of ye same. Now therefore
we said y^ good works in deed are wrought by them that are regenerate, to the
glory of God, the orname^t of our life, and the profit of our neighbor. For
the Lord in the Gospel prescribes this end to good works, where he says: Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven. The Apostle Paul also oftener than
once exhorting us to good woorks does, as a most effectual cause to set them
forward, add: That by those works of ours, we may adorn the doctrine of our
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. And even as a comely and cleanely garment
adorneth a man, so do good works in deed set forth the life of Christian
people. For herevppon it rises that the Apostles of Christ did so often
persuade us to put off the old man and put on the new, which is created to the
similitude and likeness of God. For thereby we obtain both honor and
glory. We both are, and are called, the servant, yea and the sons of our
Lord and God, whose property and virtue shines in us, to the glory and
praise of his holy name. And as he does require good works at our hands, so if
we do them, we on the one side do please and delight him, and he on the other
does honor us again: as may be proved by many testimonies of the holy
Scripture. But the thing it self is so plain, and without all controversy,
that it needs no business to prove it at all. He verily does every minute
augment in us his gifts, while we are intentive to do good works. For in
the Gospel he says, To every one that has shall be given, and he shall
abound. And from him that has not, shall be taken even that which he has not,
and shall be given to him that has. To this also may be added that God is
favorable to them that work righteousness, and does enrich them even with
many temporal gifts, and at the last bring them to life everlasting. For the
Apostle Paul does expressly say, God shall reward every Romans 2.
man according to his deeds, to them which by continuing in welldoing seek
for glory, and honor and immortality, eternal life. And again, Glory, and
honor, and peace to every one that works well. Although the Godly in all
their good works do not (as I told you before) respect so much the recompense
and reward at Gods hand, as the advancement of Gods glory, the fulfilling of
his will, and profit of their neighbor. For Paul says, Do all things to
the glory of God. And again, Let no man seek his own, but every one an
others profit: even as I do in all things please all men: not seeking mine
own commodity, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. Therefore all
the Godly do so direct and temper their works, that they may please,
delight, or honor God, and profit many men. For in so doing they express or
represent the nature of God, whose sons they both are, and are also called.
For he does liberally power out his benefits upon all creatures: and
therefore his sons are beneficial and bent to do good to all men.

Thus much had I hitherto to say, touching the nature or property, cause end,
and effect, that is, the very true and right meaning of good works: by which
I hope it is evident to be perceived, how and in what sense the Lord in the
Scriptures is said to attribute the name of righteousness and justification
unto the good works of the Saints his servants: and that that true
principle of our rereligio^ remains firm and unreprovable, wherein we
confess and hold, That we are justified by the Grace of God for Christ his
sake thorough faith and not for works. Now therefore there is nothing more
behind, but this only, for us to make our humble petition to God, for true
faith in Christ our Lord, and that by his grace he will so guide us, that we
may (...) in works put that in practice, (...) hitherto we have been taught
in (...) words of this treatise, that is to say, that we may in good works
in deed, express the faith, which we in words profess that we have in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Of sin, and of the kinds thereof, to wit, of original, and actual sin,
and of sin against the holy Ghost. And lastly of the most sure and just
punishment of sins.
The tenth Sermon.
We Have lastly now to discourse of sin, which as I told you, is to be
referred to the treatise of ye law. Of which, that I may lawfully,
religiously, rightly, and profitablie speak to the edifying of you all, I shall
desire you to make your humble prayers with me to God the father in the name
of Christ his son our gracious Lord and mediator.

Sin, is of most men taken for (...) came (...).
error, for that, I mean, whereby we do not only err from the thing which is
true, right, just and good, but do also follow and decline to that which is
naught. The Latins derive their word peccatum (sin) of pellicatus
(whorehunting) which is a fault of wedded people that are corrupted with the
spirit of fornication, as when me^ prefer harlotts before their lawful
wives. And this definition verily does wonderfully agree to this present
treatise. For all we, that do believe, are by faith handfasted to our God as
to our spouse and husband: if therefore we prefer other Gods before him, or
choose rather to serve them: If, I say, we let pass the true Gods in deed, to
follow the shadow of Gods, vain hopes, and ye pernicious pleasures of this
world, then do we sin in deed, and commit fornication against our spouse and
husband. But the learned sort do for the most part, put a difference betwixt
peccatum and delictum, (which both in effect do signify sins:) But they
call that delictum, when the thing is not done that should be done: and that
they call peccatum, when that is done that should be left undone. S. Hierome
seems to have taken delictum for the first fall to sin. S. Augustine
says, that peccatum is committed of him y^ sins wittingly, and delictum of
him that sins of ignorance. I see that those words are in some places
confounded, and that the one is used for ye other. In some places the error or
delictum, is used as ye mylder term, peccatum in a more grievous sense, and an
heinous crime, a mischief, a reuolting or wickedness for the greatest of all.
For S. Augustine says, Neither is every peccatum crimen, because every crimen
is peccatum. Therefore we say that the life of a man living in this
transitory world may be found to be without that heinous offense, crimen,
for which all the world does cry out upon and accuse him: but if we say we
have nullum peccatum, no sin (as the Apostle says) we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us. Among the Hebrews sin is called by sundry
names, which do import and signify ouerthwartnesse, perverseness, a fault, an
error, a reuolting, infirmity, vice, ignorance, and transgression. For to
transgress does signify to depart from the truth, from our duty or office,
not to keep the right path, but to turn awrie from the prescript rule of the
law of God. Now that rule or law of God is of the Hebrews called Thora, that
is to say, a direction or a leading by the hand. For it does direct a man in
the ways that are acceptable to the Lord. And therefore the Greeks call sin
by the names of (...). Again in the Hebrew tongue sin is as much to say, as
a turning away from good to evil: also a reuolting, as when thou drawest thy
neck from out of the yoke of his power, to whom thou art a servant: finally,
it signifies the crime or guilte, whereby we indaunger our selves to the
rodd of punishment.

Verily S. Augustine takes much The definition of sin.
pains to find out a proper definition of sin. In his second book De
co^sensu Euangelistarum, he says: Sin is the transgression of the Law. Ad
Simplicianum lib. 1. Sin is an inordinatenesse or perverseness of man, that
is, a turning from the more excellent Creator, and a turning to the inferior
creatures. De fide contra Manichaeos Cap. 8. he says, What is it else to
sin, but to err in the precepts of truth, or in the truth it self. Again,
Contra Faustum Manichaeum. Lib. 22. Cap. 27. Sin is a deed, a word, or a
wish against the law of God. The same Augustine De duabus animabus co^tra
Manichaeos cap. 11. says, Sin is a will to retain or obtain that which
justice forbids, and is not free to abstain. And In Retract. Lib. 1. Cap.
15. he says: That will is a motion of the mind, without compulsion either
not to loose or else to obtain some one thing or other. All which
definitions as I do not utterly reiecte, so do I wish this to be considered
and thought off with the rest, Sin is the natural corruption of manhinde,
and the action, which arises of it, contrary to the law of God, whose
wrath, that is, both death and sundry punishments it brings upon us.

Thou hear how well this definition does consist upon his parts. Thou
hear in it of our natural corruption: in the naming whereof appears how
this definition does not agree to the sin of our first parents, in whom
there was no natural corruption. Of which I mean to speak in place
convenient. Thou hear the action named, which arises of that natural
corruption and is repugnaunt to the law of God. Thou hear that sin does
bring upon us the wrath of God, that is, death and sundry sorts of
punishments appointed by the mouth of God to plague us for our sins. Of which
I will speak in order as they lie, so far forth as the Lord shall give me
grace and ability.

Now therefore it seems that this treatise may most aptly be begone (...)
at the discussing of the original cause, and beginning of sin. Some there
be that do derive the original cause of evil or sin, from the influence
of the Planets, saying: I sinned, because I was borne under an unlucky Planet.
Other there are, which when they sin, and are rebuked for it, do make this
aunsweare, Not I, but the devil is in fault that I have committed this grievous
crime. And sometime laying a side all excuses, they do directlye cast the
blame upon God, and say: Why, God would that it should be so: For if he
would not have had it so, I had not sinned. An other says, Since God could
have let it, and would not, he is the cause and author of my sin.

But it is no new thing now that men do wh^t their blasphemous tongues
against God the maker and ruler of all things. For our first parents, when
they had sinned, and were accused of it by God himself, found a shifte for to
translate the sin which they committed, from themselves to other, and would
not confess the truth as it was in very deed. Such is the abominable
wickedness of man. For Adam as it were aunswearing GOD ouerthwartlye, casts
the fault of his offense, not only upon his wife, which God had coupled unto
him, but also upon GOD himself. The woman, says he, whom thou gave to
be with me, gave me of the tree and I did eat. As if he should have said:
If thou had not given me the woman, I had not sinned. But the Lord coupled
him to a wife, not to the end that she should be an occasion of evil, but
that the man might be in the better case and condition.

Again, the woman does simply impute the cause of that evil unto the devil,
saying: The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. Lo these are most corrupt,
false, wicked and detestable opinions touching the original cause of sin,
wherewith the justice and truth of God is mightily offended. Neither is the
nature of man the The nature of man is not the cause of sin.
cause of sin. For God, which created all things, did also create the nature
of man, and made it good, even as all things else which he created were also
good. Therefore the nature of man was good. For it is an accidental quality
that hapened to man either in, or immediately after his fall, and not a
substantial property, to have his nature so spotted with corruption as now
it is. Now we being borne in sin of sinful progenitors, have sin by
descent as our natural property. For Saint Augustine writing De Fide contra
Manichaeos Cap. 9. says: And if we say that any men are evil by nature,
we mean that they are so because of the original descent of our first
parents sin, wherein we mortal men are wholly borne. But this now
requires a more exact and ample declaration.

That the devil alone is not the author The devil alone is not the cause of
sin.
of sin, so that when we sin, the blame thereof should redound to him, and
we that sinned escape without fault, this does greatly argue, because it is
in his power to egg and persuade, but not to enforce a man to do evil. For
God by his power restrayneth the devil from being able to do the thing that he
would do. He can do no more the^ God permits him to do: for if he had no
power over an hierd of filthy swine, how much l^sse authority has he over
the excellent souls of Gods most excellent creatures? He has, I confess,
great subtilties and more then Khethoricall force, wherewith to persuade us:
but God is stronger, and never ceasseth to prompt good and hoalesome counsels
unto ye souls of his faithful servants. Nether does he permit more to Satan
than is for our commodity: as is to be seen in the example of that holy man
the patient Job: and also in the example of Paul 2. Cor. 12. and in his words
saying, God is faithful, which will not suffer us to be tempted, above that
we are able to bear. They therefore are vainly seduced, which cast the
fault of their sin upon the devils shoulders.

To proceed, if thou demaundest of them, which lay the blame of their sin
upon their evil destiny, what That destiny is not the cause of sin.
destiny is? they will answer, either that it is a course knitt together by
eternity, and lincked to it self, as it were a certain chain and continual
roawe of counsels, and works necessarily following one upon an others neck,
according to the disposition and ordinance of God: or else that it is ye evil
stars or planets. Now if thou demaundest again, who made the stars? they
have none other answer, but God: it follows therefore consequently that they
enforce the cause of their sin upon God himself. But all the ancient and
best Philosophers did never pretend or allege destiny, much less such
Christians as did freely confess the mighty power of their God and maker. And
even among our men, I mean, among them that would seem to be Christians,
they which stood in the opinion of destiny and constellations, were such
kind of fellows as wise men would be ashamed to follow them as authors.
Bardesanes imputed to destiny the co^uersations of mortal men. And the
Priscillianists, who were condemned in the first counsel held at Toledo,
thought and taught that man is tied to fatal stars, and has his body
compact according to the 12. signs in heaven, placing Aries in the head,
Taurus in the neck, and so consequently to every sign his several limins.
S. Augustine, In opusculo S 2. quaestionu^. Quist. 45. confuting soundly the
destinies of Planets, among other his reasons says, The conceyuing of twinns
in the mothers womb, because it is made (...)
in one and the same act, as the Physicians testify (whose discipline is
far more certain and manifest than that of the Astrologers) does happen in
so small a moment of time, tha^ there is not so much time as two minutes of a
minute betwixt the conceyuing of the one and the other. How therefore comes
it, that in twins of one burden there is so great a diversity of de^des,
wills, and chances, considering that they of necessity must neds have one and
the same planet in their conception, and that the Mathematicals do give the
constellation of them both, as if it were but of one man? To these words of
S. Augustine great light may be added, if you annexe to them and examine
narrowely the example of Esau and Jacobs birth, and sundry dispositions. The
same Augustine writing to Boniface against two epistles of the Pelagians Lib.
2. cap. 6. says: They which affirm that destiny does rule, will have not
only our deeds and events, but also our very wills, to depend upon the placeing
of the stars, at the time wherein every man is either conceived or borne,
which placeings they are wont to call Constellations.

But the grace of God does not only go above all stars, and heavens, but
also above the very Angels them selves. Moreover, these disputers for
destiny, do attribute to destiny both the good and evil that happen to men.
But God in the evils that fall upon men does duly and worthily recompense
them for their ill deserts: but the good, which they have, he does bestow
upon them not for their merits, but of his own favor and merciful
goodness through grace, that cannot be looked for of duty: laying both good
and evil upon us men not through the temporal course of planets, but by the
deep and eternal counsel of his severity and goodness. So then we see that
neither ye fallinge out of good or evil has any relation unto y^ planets.
Therefore this place may be concluded with the words of the Lord in the
Prophet Jeremy, saying: Thus says the Lord, ye shall not learn after the
manner of the heathen, and ye shall not be atraide for the tokens of heaven,
for the heathen are afraid of such, yea, all the observations of the Gentiles
are vanity. For the planets have no force, to do either good or evil. And
therefore the blame of sins is not to be imputed thereunto.

I have now to prove unto you that (...) is not (...).
God is not the cause of sin, or the author of evil. God, say they, would
have it so. For if he would not have had it so, I had not sinned. For who may
resist his power? Again, since he could have let it, and would not, he is
the author of my sin and wickedness. As though we knew not the crafty
quarrels and subtle shifts of mortal men. Wh^, I pray you, knows not that
God does not deal with us by his absolute power, but by an appointed law and
ordinance, I mean, by commodious means, and a probable order? God could I
know by his absolute power keep off all evil: but yet he neither can nor will
either corrupt or mar his creature and excellent order. He deals with us
men therefore after the manner of men: he appoints us laws, and lays
before us rewards and punishements: he commands to embrace the good, and
eschew the evil: to the perfourming whereof he does neither deny us his
grace, without which we can do nothing: neither does he despise our diligent
good will and earnest travail. Herein, if man be slack, the negligence and
fault is imputed to man him self, and not to God, although he could have kept
off ye sin, and did not: for it was not his duty to keep it off, least
peradventure he should disturb the order, and destroy the work which he him
self had made and ordained. Therefore God is not the author of sin or
naughtiness. Touching which matter I will first add some testimonies of the
holy Scripture: then answer to sundry objections of the adversaries of this
doctrine: and lastly declare the original cause or headspring of sin and
wickedness.

The testimonies, which teach that God being good himself created all things
good which be created.
God is not ye author of sin or naughtiness, are many in number, but among
the rest, this is an argument of greatest force and probability, because God
is said to be good naturally: and that all which he created were made good in
their creation. Whervppon it is that Solomon says: God has not made death,
neither has he delight in the destruction of the living: for he created all
things that they might have their being, and the beginnings of the world were
health full, and there is no poison of destruction in them, nor the kingdom of
hell upon the earth: for righteousenesse is immortal, but unrighteousness
brings death: and the ungodly call it to them both with words and works,
and thereby come to naught. And so forth, as is to be seen in the first
Chapter of the book of wisdom: which words do passingly agree with y^
first Chapters of that most excellent prophet Moses.

In the fifth Psalm, David says: Thou art the God, that have no pleasure in
wickedness: neither shall any evil dwell with thee: the unjust shall not stand
in thy sight: for thou hate all them that work iniquity: thou shall
destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord does abhor both the bloudthirstie
and deceiptful man. Lo, thou can devise nothing more contrary to the nature
of God than sin and nau^htinesse: as thou may more at large perceive in ye
34 Chapter of the book of Job.

The wiseman says: God created man good, but they sought out many inventions
of their own. And therefore the Apostle Paul deriueth sin, damnation, and
death, not from God, but from Adam, and from God he fetches grace,
forgiveness and life, through the mediator Jesus Christ.

That place of Paul is far more manifest than that it needs any large
exposition: let it only be considered and diligently weighed of the Readers
and hearers: whom I would wish always to bear in mouth and mind the very
words and meaning of this notable sentence: Even as by one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin. And so forth as follows.

The same Apostle in the seventh to the Romans, does evidently declare that
the law is holy, the commandment good and just, and thereby he does
insinuate that in God or in his will there is not, and in his law, which is
the will of God, there springs not any spott or blurre of sin or
naughtiness. In our fleash, says he, the evil lurketh, and out of us
iniquity arises. I know, says he, that in me, that is, in my flesh,
there is no good. In that Chapter there are many sentences to be found, which
do wonderfully confirm this argument.

Again, in the third to the Romans, the same Apostle says: If our
unrighteousness sets forth the righteousness of God, what shall we say?
Is God unrighteous which takes vengeance? (I speak after the manner of men,
that is, I use the words of wicked people) God forbid. For how then shall
GOD judge the world? for if the truth of God has more abounded through my
lie unto his glory, why am I as yet judged as a sinner? etc. Verily if God
were the author of sin and all evil, and that he would have the wicked to be
such, as in very deed they are, then why, I pray you, should he judge or
punish them as transgressors, since they by sinning fulfilled his will?

To this place also does belong that testimony of the blessed Euangeliste and
Apostle John in his canonical Epistle, where he says: If any man love the
world, the love of the father is not in him. For all that is in the world as
the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not
of the father, but of the world.

And the world passes away and the lust thereof. But he that fulfilleth the
will of the father, abides for ever. Lo here, God is utterly free from all
evil: evil, says he, is not of the father, but of the world. And he which does
the will of the father, does not what the world will, but what God will.

Therefore these two good and evil, sin and the will of God are directly
opposed and repugnant the one against the other. These testimonies though
few in number, are notwithstanding, in my judgment, sufficiently significant
and able to persuade a godly disposed hearer.

Now upon this we do first infer a conclusion and boldly warrant that
point of catholic doctrine, which has ever since the Apostles time always
been defended with much diligence against the vnpure Philosophy of some
(although yet I do not utterly condemn all ye parts of Philosophy: knowing
very well that some points thereof are very necessary and profitable to the
zealous lovers of God and godliness:) that God is not the author of evil, or
(...)
cause of sin. Then out of ye same testimonies we gather that the original
cause of sin or evil is derived of man him self, and his suggester and
prouoker the devil: so yet that we say, that the devil being first him
self corrupted, did corrupt man, being nevertheless not able of him self to
have done any thing, had not man of his own accord consented unto evil.

And here we must set before our eyes the fall of our first father Adam, that
by the consideration thereof we may be the better able to judge of the
original cause of sin and iniquity. God created Adam the first father of
us all, according to his own similitude and likeness, that is to say, he made
him good, most pure, most holy, most just, and immortal, and adorned him
with every excellent gift and faculty, so that there was nothing wanting to
him in God, which was auailable to perfect felicity.

Touching this similitude or likeness to God I shall take occasion upon the
words of Paul to speak hereafter. So then he was endued with a very
divine, a pure, and sharp understanding. His will was free without constraint,
and absolutelye holy. He had power to do either good or evil. Moreover, God
gave him a law which might instruct him what to do, and what to leave undone.
For God in saying: Thou shall not eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge
of good and evil, did simply require at his hands faith, and obedience, and
that he should wholly depend upon God: all which he had to do not by
compulsion or necessity, but of his own accord and free good will.

For very truly and holily writ the wise man in the fifteenth of
Ecclesiasticus, saying: God made man in the beginning, and l^ft him in the
hand of his counsel. He gave him his commandments and precepts, if thou will, thou shall keep my commandments, and they shall preserve thee.

Therefore when the Serpent tempted the mind of man, and did persuade him to
taste of the forbidden tree, man knew well enough what peril was laid before
him, and how the serpents counsel was flatly repugnant to the Lords
commandment. In the mean time, neither did God compel him, nor Satan in the
serpent enforce him to sin, while he resisted and did withstand him. For God
had said: Ye shall not eat of that tree, nor touch it: if ye do, ye shall
die for it. Therefore he was at his own free choice, and in the hand of his
own counsel, either to eat or not to eat. Yea, God declared his mind unto
him in giving precise commandment, that he should not eat: and to the
commandment he annexed the danger of the breach thereof, withdrawing him
thereby from the eating of the fruit and saying: Least perhaps thou dye. And
as Satan could not, so also he did not, show any violence, but used such
probable words to counsel him, as he could, and did in deed at length
persuade him. For when the woman's will gave ear to the word of the devil,
her mind departed from the word of God, whereby she rejected the good law
of God, did of her own perverse will committ that sin, and drew her
husband, that yielded of his own accord, into the fellowshippe of the same
offense: as the Scripture does most significantly express in these words:
And the woman seeing that the tree was good to eat of, and pleasant to the
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, took of the fruit thereof,
and did eat, and gave to her husband with her, and he did eat also. Lo here
thou have the beginning of evil, the devil: thou have heard what it was that
moved the mind or will of man unto that evil, ^o wite, the false persuasion
of the di^el, or his subtle praise of the fruit of the tree, and so
consequently a mere lie, and the pleasant show of the delicate tree.

But that, which our first parents did, they did of their own accord, and
free good will, being ledd by hope to obtain a more excellent life, and
profounder wisdom, which the seducer had falsely promised them. We do
therefore conclude y^ sin does spring not of God which hates and does
prohibit all evil, but of the devil, the free election of our graundparents
and their corrupted will, which was depraved by the devils lie, and the false
show of feigned good. So then the devil, and the yeldinge or corrupted mind of
man are the very causes of sin and naughtiness.

To proceed now, this evil does by Sin (...) of (...) devils (...) our
corrupt (...)
descent flow from our first parents into all their posterity, so that at
this day sin does not spring from else where, but of our selves, that is to
say, of our corrupt judgment, depraved will, and the suggestion of ye devil.
For the root of evil is yet remaining in our flesh by reason of that first
corruption: which root brings forth a corrupt branch in nature like unto
it self: which branch Satan even now, as he has done always, does by his
sleightes, subtilties, and lies, cherish, tend, and tender as an impe of his
own planting: and yet notwithstanding he labors in vain, unless we
yield our selves to his hands to be framed as he lists. Now therefore that
there may herein appear less doubt or darkness, I will for confirmations
sake add two most evident testimonies, the one out of the writings of the
Evangelists, the other out of the doctrine of the Apostles.

The Lord in the Gospel says: The devil was a murderer from the beginning,
and stood not in the truth: because the truth is not in him. When he
speaks a lie, he speaks (...). 8.
of his own, because he is a liar, and the father of lies. By these words of
the Lord we gather that evil is to be referred to the devil, who being
created in truth and goodness, did not stand fast in truth and goodness,
but degenerated from his nature, wherein he was made good, and fell into
another nature, corrupt and wicked, and has out of him self dispersed al evil
(as it appeared by the history of our first parents) into the world, to
wite, murder and lies, (under which two are comprehended all other evils) of
which he is expressly said to be the father, that is, the cause, the author,
the welspring, and beginning: not because he was made such an one of God, but
because he stood not fast in the truth. To them therefore that do demand:
of what beginning Satan came, and whether God made him or no? Our answer is,
that God in deed made all the Angels, and those also which afterward did
become reprobates and wicked devils: but we do not therefore say, that the
cause of evil does redound to God. For we know that God in the beginning made
all the Angels good. For all things which he made were good.

Furthermore, it is said that the devil stood not in the truth, that is,
that he revolted from the truth: from which he could not have revolted, if he
had never stood in it. Therefore God in the beginning did place all his Angels
in the truth. He required of them truth, faith or fidelity, and the duty
that they ought him: which they were able to have done, if they them selves
would. But they did disloyally fall from their allegiaunce and sinned, as the
Apostle Peter testifies, against the Lord, and therefore the fault of their
falsehood, and of all their naughtiness was not in God, but in the rebellious
and reuolting Angel. For since the time of his fall, there is no truth, no
fidelity, no integrity, no fear of God, no light or goodness to be found in
him. Therefore truly said Saint John in his Canonical Epistle: He that
commits sin is of the devil, for the devil sins from the beginning.
For he is the first sinner and the beginning of sin. To this also may this
note be added, that of Peter and John, the devil is said to sin. For sin
is repugnant to the will of God: therefore God would not have had him perish,
whereupon, since he perished, it follows that he perished, not by the fault
of God, but by his own fault.

Let us now hear the other testimony concerning the corrupt will of man,
which is in very deed the cause of sin. Saint James the Apostle says: Let
no man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. But every man is tempted when
he is drawn away and enticed of his own concupiscence: then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, brings
forth death. In these words Saint James, I hope, does evidently enough make
God to be free from all fault of sin, and does derive it of us our selves,
showing by the way the beginning and proceeding of sin. Neither does James
in this place gainsay the place in Genesis, where Moses said: God tempted
Abraham. For in Moses, to tempt, does signify to make a trial or a proof.
But in this argument of ours, it signifies to stir or draw to evil, and so
to corrupt us. Therefore, God, as he cannot, says he, be ^^mpted of evil,
that is to say, as God is by nature good and vncorrupt, so does he not
corrupt, deprave or defile any man with evil. For that is contrary to the
nature of God: From whence then has sin his beginning? The holy Apostle
answers saying: Yea, every one is tempted, corrupted and drawn into evil,
while he is withdrawn and enticed with his own concupisence. Lo here, sin
takes beginning of our concupiscence, and is accomplished and finished by our
own work and labor.

Note here by the way, what a weight and Emphasis every one of y^ Apostles
words does carry with it. For first, he makes concupiscence our own, or
proper to us al, even as the Lord before did say of Satan: When he speaks a
lie, he speaks of his own. Now because concupiscence is our own, therefore
sin is our own also. For concupiscence does withdraw us from that that is
true, just and good, to that which is false, unjust and evil. The same
concupiscence enticeth us, that is, by making a show of false hope it does
deceive us: as foulers are wont with meat to entice birds into their nets,
which, when they have deceived them, they catch up and kill. What I pray you
could be spoken more plainly? we are by our own concupiscence cast into
evil.

This concupiscence draws us from God, it does entice and utterly deceive us.
And then having laid the foundation of sin, and opened y^ welspring from
whence it flows, he does very properly allude, and by an Allegory show us
y^ genealogy, that is, the beginning and proceeding of sin. That
concupiscence, says he, which is proper unto us all, does as it were a matrix
conceive sin in us, and immediately after does bring it forth, to wite, when
our lust bursteth out into the act, when we do greedily prosecute that which
we lusted after, and being once obtained we do inioye it against the law of
God: upon the neck whereof, death does follow without intermission. For the
reward of sin is death. I have, I trust, by these evident proofs of
Scripture plainly declared, that God is not the cause of evil, but our corrupt
will, or concupiscence, and the devil, which stirs, provoke and inflameth
our depraved nature to sin and wickedness, as he which is the tempter and
utter enemy to mankind and his salvation.

It will not be a miss here to hear the objections of certain cauillers
against Objections are a^swered.
this doctrine, and to learn how to answer them according to the truth.
Some there are, which when they see that we derive sin, not of the nature of
God, but of the corrupt will of man, and false suggestion of the devil, do
presently object, that God created Adam, and so consequently created sin in
Adam. To this we answer, that sin is the corruption of ye good nature made
by God, and not a creature created by God either in, or with man. God created
man good, but man being left to his own counsel, did through the persuasion
of Satan, by his own action, and depraved will, corrupt the goodness that
God created in him: so now that sin is proper to man, I mean, man's
corrupt action against the law of God, and not a creature created in him of
God. To this they reply, but the will and ability that was in Adam, was it
from else where than from God him self? undoubtedly no, it was from God.
Therefore, say they, sin is of GOD.

I deny it, for God gave not to Adam will and power of working, to the end
that he should work evil. For by express commandment he forbadd him to do
wickedness. Therefore Adam him self did naughtily apply the will and power
which he received of God, by using them untowardly. The prodigal son
received money at his fathers hand, whose meaning was not that he should waste
it prodigally with riottous living, but that he might have whereupon to live
and supplye the want of his necessities.

Wherefore, when he had lauishly lasht it out, and utterly undone him self,
the fault was in him self for abusing it, and not in his father for giving it
unto him. Furthermore, to have the power to do good and evil, as Adam had of
God, is of it self a thing without fault: even as also to have poison, to
bear a weapon, or wear a swoorde, is a thing that no man can worthily blame.
They have in them a force to do good or harm. They are not naught unless
they be abused. And he that gives thee them, does leave to thee the use
thereof.

If he be a just man, he puts them into thy hand, not to abuse, but to
use as equity and right requires. Wherefore, if thou abusest them, the fault
is imputed to thee self, and not to him that gave thee them.

Now, since God, which gave Adam that will and power, is of him self most
absolutely just, it follows consequently, that he gave them to Adam not to
do evil but good: why then is the most just God blamed in such a case, as
sinful man is without all blame in? We do therefore conclude, because
affection in Adam being moved by sense, and egged on by the serpent did
persuade him to eat of the forbidden fruit, when nevertheless his
understanding did yet hold the word of God, which forbadde him to eat, and
that his will was at free choice and liberty to incline to whether part it
pleased him, he did notwithstanding will and choose that which God had
forbidden him, (we do therefore, I say, conclude) that sin is properly to
be imputed to man, which willingly transgressed, and not to God, which charged
him, that he should not sin.

Here again the adversaries ask Why God created man so fickle that he should
fall
this question, why did God create man so frail that he of his own will might
incline to evil: why did he not rather confirm in him the goodness and
perfect soundness of nature, that he could not have fallen or sinned? To this
the Scripture aunsweareth, saying: What art thou that disputest with God? woe
to him that strives with his maker. Woe to him that says to the father, why
begottest thou? and to the mother, why broughtest thou forth?

Unless God had made man fallable, there had been no praise of his works or
virtue. For he could neither have willed nor choosed but of necessity have
been good. Yea, what if man ought altogether to be made fall-able?

For so did the counsel of God require him to be. God gives not his own
glory to any creature. Adam was a man and not a God. But to be good of
necessity is the proper glory of God, and of none but God. And as God is
bountiful and liberal, so also is he just. He does good to men: but will
therewithal that men acknowledge him and his benefits, and that they obey
him, and be thankful for the same. He had bestowed innumerable benefits
upon Adam, there lacked nothing therefore but to give him an occasion to
declare and show his thankfulness and obedience to his good God and
benefactour. Which occasion he offered him by the making of ye law, or giving
his commandment. We see therefore, that God ordained not that law to be a
stumblinge block in Adams way, but rather to be a staff to stay him from
falling. For in the law he declares what he would have him to do. He shows
that he wishes not the death or destruction of Adam: he teaches him what to
do, that he may escape death, and live in felicity and perfect happiness. For
which cause also he provided that the law should be a plain and easy
commandment: Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat,
says To what e^d God gave the law to Adam.
the Lord, for if thou do thou shall dye the death: but of any other tree
in the garden thou shall eat. What else was this, than as if he should have
said? thou shall in all things have an eye to me, thou shall stick to me,
obey me, be subject unto me, and serve me: neither shall thou from elsewhere
ferche the forms of good and evil than of me: and in so dding thou shall
show thy self obedient and thankful unto me thy maker. Did God in this,
desire any unjust thing or more than he should at the hands of Adam? He showed
him the tree as a sacrament or sign of that, which he enjoined him by the
giving of the law, to wite, that the tree might be a token to put him in
memory that he ought to obey ye Lord alone, as a wise, bountiful, excellent,
and greatest God and maker. And what difficulty I pray you, or darkness was
there herein? Saint Augustine is of the same opinion with us, who in his book
De natura boni aduersus Manichaeos Cap. 35. says: He did therefore forbidd it,
that he might show, that the nature of the reasonable soul ought to be, not
in man's own power, but in subjection unto God, and that by obedience it
keeps the order of her salvation, which by disobedience it does corrupt and
mar. And herevppon it comes that he called the tree, which he forbadd, by
the name of the tree of knowledge of good and evil: because Adam, if he
touched it against the Lords commandment, should by trial feel the
punishment of his sin, and by that means know what difference there was
betwixt the good y^ follows obedience, and the evil which ensues the sin
of disobedience. Now therefore when the Serpent was crept in, and began to
tell man of other fourmes of good and evil directly contrary to the law of
God, and that man had once received them as things both true, and credible,
he did disloyally revolt from God, and by his own fault through disobedience
he wrought his own destruction.

Therefore God did always deal justly with him, and man contrarily dealt too
too unjustly, and was utterly unthankful, howesoeuer men will go about to
cloak, or not to hear of his unthankful stubbornness.

But whereas we say, that man was made fall-able, we will not There was
(...) corrup^^^^ or in^^^m^tie in ^dam be^^re his fall
have it to be so understood that any man should think that there was in
Adam any one iotte or prick of infirmity before his fall. For, as he was in
all points most absolutely perfect, so was he in no point created so frail
that he should sin or perish by death.

For God, which is one in substance, and three in persons, said: Let us make
man in our image, after our own likeness. Note here that Zaelaem does
signify the picture or counterfaite of an other thing, and that Demuth
imports the very pattern whereby any picture is drawn or image portrayed.
Therefore, in God is the example or pattern, to the resemblance whereof there
was a picture or similitude framed. But that representing likeness cannot be
this (...) image (...) God.
body of ours. For God is a spirit, in no point like to the nature of dust
and ashed: we must of necessity therefore resemble the image of God to
spiritual things, as to immortality, truth, justice and holiness. For so
has the Apostle Paul taught us, where he says: Be ye renewed in the spirit
of your mind, and put on that new man, which after God is shapen in
righteousenesse and holiness of truth.

Wherefore, there was no want in our graundefather Adam, of any thing that was
auailable to absolute perfectness: so that even a blind man may perceive,
that man was not created to death and destruction, but unto life, felicity,
and absolute blessedness.

But, say they, God did foreknow (...)
the fall of man, which, if he would, he could have withstood: now since he
could and would not, God is to be blamed because Adam sinned. It is a goodly
matter in deed, when all fear of God being laid aside, men will at their
pleasure fall flatly on railing against the majesty of God almighty.

I answered in the beeginning of this discourse to this objection. And yet
this I add here more over, that upon Gods foreknowledge there followech no
necessity, so that Adam did of necessity sin, because God did foreknowe
that he would sin. A prudent father does foresee by some untoward tokens,
that his son will one day come to an ill ending. Neither is he deceived in
his foresight for he is slain being taken in adultery. But he is not
therefore slain, because his father foresawe that he would be slain: but
because he was an adulterer.

And therefore Saint Ambrose, or whosoever it is, that was author of the
second book De gentium vocatione. Chap. 4. speaking of the murder which
Cain committed, says: God verily did foreknowe, to what end the fury of that
mad man would come. And yet because Gods foreknowledge could not be deceived,
it does not thereupon follow, that necessity of sinning did urge the crime
upon him etc.

And Saint Augustine, De libero arbitrio. Lib. 3. Cap. 4. says: As thou by
thy memory do not compel those things to be done that are gone and past,
so God by his foreknowledge does not compel those things to be done which are
to come. And as thou remembrest some things that thou have done, and yet have
not done all things which thou remembrest; so God foreknoweth al things which
he does: and yet does not all which he foreknoweth. But God is a just revenger
of that, whereof he is no evil author. And so forth.

Like unto this is an other objection, which they make, that say: God An
objection.
did before all beginninges determine with him self to deliver mankind from
bondage: therefore it could not otherwise be, but that we should first be
entangled in bondage: therefore it behooved us to be drowned in sin, that by
that means the glory of God might shine more clearly as the Apostle said:
Where sin was plentious, there was Grace more plentious.

But it is marvel that these cauillers do no better consider, that God of him
self without us is sufficient to him self unto absolute blessedness and most
perfect felicity, and that his glory could (as it does) of it self reach
above all heavens, although there had never been any creature brought into
light. Is not GOD without beginning? but we his creatures had a beginning. God
is glorious from before all beginninges: therefore he is glorious without us:
and his glory would be as great as it is, though we were not.

But what dullarde is so foolish as to think that that eternal light of God
does draw any brightness of glory at our darkness: or out of the
stinking dungeon of our sin and wickedness? Should Gods glory be no glory,
if it were not for our sins? The wise man in Ecclesiasticus, says: Say not
thou, it is the Lords fault that I have sinned: for thou shall not do the
thing that God hates. Say not thou: he has caused me to do wrong: for he
has no need of the sinner. Or, for the wicked are not needful unto him. God
hates all abomination of error, and they that woorship God, will love none
such. Why therefore do we not change our manner of reasoning, and so
consider of the matter as it is in very deed? God of his eternal goodness
and liberality, whereby he wishes him self to be parted among us all to
our felicity, did from everlasting determine to create man to his own
similitude and likeness: but for because he did foresee that he would fall
headlonge into a filthy and miserable bondage, he did therefore by the same
his grace and goodness ordeine a deliverer to bring us out of thraldom: to
the end, that so he might communicate him self unto us, that we might
praise his gracious favor, and render thanks to his fatherly goodness.

And so whatsoever we men have sinned and turned to our own destruction, that
same does God convert again to our commodity and salvation: even as he is
read to have done in the case of Joseph and his brethren, which is as it were a
certain type of spiritual things and cases of salvation. And we must wholly
endeavor our selves to do what we may in reasoning of this argument so to
turn it, that all glory may be given to God alone, and to us nothing else
but silence in the sight of God.

Now, last of all, there are yet behind some places of Scripture How (...)
gives over (...).
which must, by the way, be run through and expounded. The Apostle verily
says: God gave them up to a reprobate sense.

But this kind of giving over is, as Augustine also says, a work of
judgment and justice. For they were worthy to be given up unto a reprobate
sense. The cause is prefixed in the words of the Apostle. For God had made
him self manifest unto them: but they were not only unthankful toward
him, but waxed wise also in their own conceiptes, and went about to obtrude
unto him, I wot not what manner of religion and woorship. Therefore, that they
might by proof see, that they were fools and ungodly, God gave them up unto
filthy lusts.

In like manner, king Amazias would not give ear and hearken to the Lord,
because God had determined to punish his iniquities: as is to be read in the
fourth book of Kings (...)
the fourteenth Chapter. and 2. Paralipo. 25. Chapter. Likewise did the Lord
putt the spirit of error into the months of the false prophets and they
seduced Aegypte, Esaye 19. So also did a seducing spirit go out from the
Lord of judgment, and was a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets:
as is to be seen in the last Chapter of the third book of Kings. Now the
Lord does all (...) c^p.
these things with just and holy judgment.

Again, GOD is said to blind (...)
men's eyes, so often as he does revoke or take away the contemned light of
his truth and sincerity, leaving them, that delight in darkness, to walk
and stick in their darkness still. For then the Lord permits his word
to be preached to the unthankful and ungodly receivers unto their judgment or
condemnation. For so verily does the Evangelical and Apostolic doctrune
teach us to think.

This, says the Lord, is condemnation, or, this is judgment, that the son
of God the very true light came into the world, and the world loved darkness
more then light. And Paul said: If yet the Gospel be hidd, it is hid in them
that perish: in whom the God of this world has blinded the senses of the
unbelievers etc.

In the same sense, God is said to To harden
harden man. For when the Lord calls man, and he resists, making him
self unworthy of the kingdom of heaven, he does then permit him unto him
self: that is, he leaves man unto his own corrupt nature, according unto
which the heart of man is stony, which is mollified and made tractable by the
only grace of God: therefore, the withdrawing of Gods grace is the hardening
of man's heart: and when we are leafte unto our selves, then are we
hardened.

Pharao king of Egypt did by his murdering of the Israelitish infants, by his
tyranny, and many other vices, horribly committed against the law of nature,
offend the eyes of Gods most just and heavenly majesty: therefore it is no
marvel that he hardened his heart. But if any man will not admit or receive
this exposition, yet can he not deny that God in the Scriptures does use our
kinds of phrases and manner of speeches. Now we are wont to say: this father
does by too much cockering or over gentle dealing mar or harden his son,
he makes him stubborn and stiffen^cked, and yet the father does not tender
him to destroy, but to save him: ye son in deed by the abuse of his fathers
clemency does both destroy and harden him self.

Therefore whereas ye son is hardened, that comes by his own, and not his
fathers fault, although the father bear the name to have hardened him or made
him past grace. And verily if thou do diligently consider the history of
Pharao, thou shalt oftener than once find this sentence repeated there: And
God hardened Pharaos heart, namely when some benefit or God hardened Pharao^s
heart.
delivery from evil was wrought before.

As though the Scripture should have said: by this benefit of delivering him
from evil, did God harden ye heart of Pharao, while he abused the goodness of
God, and supposed that al things would be afterward out of peril and
danger, because God had taken away the present punishment, and did begin to
do him good. And yet I confess that God before he had benefited, or laid any
punishments upon Egypt, did immediately upon ye calling of Moses, say: I
know that the king of Egypt will not let you depart. And again: See that
thou do all these signs and wonders which I have put in thy hand before
Pharao: but I will harden Pharaos heart, that he shall not let the people go.
But these sayings do not tend hereunto, that we should make God the author of
all Pharaos falsehood, rebellion, and stubborn dealing against the Lord: but
rather they were spoken to the comfort and confirmation of Moses, who is
therefore so premonished, that when he deals earnestly with the king, and yet
cannot obtain his suite, he should notwithstanding know that he had Gods
business in hand, and that God by his long sufferance is the cause of that
delay, when as notwithstanding at the last he would temper all things to
his own honor and glory.

The case by a similitude is al one, as if an householder should send his
servant to his debitours, saying: Go thy way and demand my debtes: but yet
I know that thou shalt receive none of them.

For I by my sufferance and gentle dealing will cause them to be the slacker
to pay it. But yet do thou thy duty. And I in the mean while will see what
is needful to be done.

To this may be added, that even in those very Chapters, where it is so so
often said: God hardened Pharaoes heart. This also is afterward annexed,
which lays the hardening of Pharaos heart upon Pharaos own head, saying: He
hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them.

In the ninthe of Exodus, when Pharao was well whipped, he cries: I have now
sinned, the Lord is just, but I and my people are unjust or wicked. And
immediately after again: But when Pharao saw that it ceased rayning, he
sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, and it was hardened. So then these and
such like places must be conferred with these words: I have hardened Pharaos
heart, and out of them must be gathered a godly sense, such a sense, I mean,
as makes not God the author of evil.

Now also the Prophet Amos does very plainly say: There is no evil Amos
(...)
in a city, but the Lord does it. But Augustine Contra Adimantum. Ca. How
(...) is (...) euil^
26. did very religiously write: Evil in this place, is not to be taken for
sin, but for punishment.

For the word (evil) is used in two significati^s: the one is the evil which a
man does: the other evil is y pain which he suffers. Now the Prophet in
this place speaks of that evil which is the punishment that men do suffer.
For by the providence of God which rules and governs all things, man does to
committ the evil, No^e here (...) first (...) is the (...), the (...) the (...)
evil (...).
which he will, that he may suffer the evil which he would no^. Therefore the
evil that God does, is not evil in respect of God, but is evil to them upon
whom his vengeance lights. So then he in respect of him self does good:
because every just thing is good: that vengeance of his is just: and so
consequently it is good. The place of Esaie also must be none otherwise
understood in his 45 Chapter, saying: I am the Lord, and there is else none:
it is I that created light and darkness: I make peace and evil: yea, even I
the Lord do all these things. For here he takes evil for war, and makes
it the contrary to peace. Again Saint Augustine De natura (...) things
(...) of god (...) Go^, and (...) God.
boni contra Manichaeos Chap. 28. says: When we hear that all things are of
him, and by him, and in him, we must understand it to be spoken of all the
natures, that are naturally. For sins are not of him, because they do not
keep but defile nature: which sins the holy Scriptures do diversely
testify to be of the will of them which committ them. Thus much Augustine.

Neither is it a matter of any great difficulty to answer to that sentence of
Solomon's, where he says: God created all things for his own sake: yea, the
ungodly against the evil day. Proverb. 16. For we believe that the most
just God has appointed a day of affliction, judgment, or punishment, which
shall come upon them in due time and season. But whereas the Apostle says: He
has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he ^ardeneth: we must not so
wr^st it, to say, that God does of necessity drive any man to sin, and that
therefore he is the cause of sin. For the will of God is good and just, and
wills nothing, but what is expedient, and not repugnant to nature and the
word of God. And therefore it is, that the Prophet cries: The Lord is just
in all his ways and holy in all his woorks. Psalm 145. Thus have I out of
much, that may be said, picked out a little, and laid it before your eyes,
dearly beloved, for you to consider of the cause of sin.

We are now come to demonstrate the first parts, which were set The
differences of sin.
down in the description of sin immediately upon the beginning of this
sermon. They are in number two, the first is: Sin is the natural corruption
of mankind. The latter is: and the action that rises of it contrary to the
law of God. Some verily in setting down the kinds or differences of sins
do very well and advisedly say: Of sins, one is original, and another
actual. I mean in order to speak of both, so far as God shall give me
grace: and first, of the same natural corruption in mankind, that is, of
original sin. Now therefore, it is called original Original sin.
sin, because it comes from the first beginning, being derived from our
first parents into us all by lineall descent and continual course from one to
another.

For we bring it wi^h us in our nature from our moth^rs womb into this life.

Of this sin there are many definitions made, which, as they do not
Original sin what it is.
disagree among them selves, so yet is one of them more full and evident than
another of them is. Some say, Original sin is the corruption of nature from
the first perfectness. Other some say, it is the corruption of man's nature
which makes that we do not truly obey the law of God, and are not without
sin. Again, some call it a want or defect: other call it concupiscence,
which might better seem to be the fruit of original sin, that is, of our
corruption.

Other call it, an inordinatenesse of appetites, which is leaft in nature.
Anshelmus a late writer, says: Original sin is the want of original
righteousness. But this is thought to have been spoken somewhat too briefly.
For the force of sin seems to be not sufficiently expressed. For our
nature is not only void and baren of goodness, but also most abundant and
fruitful of all evils and naughtiness.

Therefore, the definition of Hugo is taken for the better, who says:
Original sin is ignorance in the mind, and concupiscence in the fleashe.
But yet this seems to be a far fuller and better definition: Original
sin is the vice or deprauation of the whole man, whereby he cannot
understand GOD and his will, but of a perverse judgment of things, does
ouerthwartly, and peruerteth all things. And now among all these definitions,
I wish you (dearly beloved) to consider of this also: Original sin is the
inheritablie descending naughtiness or corruption of our nature, which does
first make us indaungered to the wrath of God, and then brings forth in us
those works, which the Scripture calls the works of the fleashe.

Therefore this original sin is neither a deed, nor a word, nor a
thought, but a disease, a vice, a deprauation, I say, of judgment and
concupiscence, or a corruption of the whole man, that is, of the understanding,
will, and all the power of man, out of which, at last, do flow all evil
thoughts, naughty words, and wicked deeds.

This sin takes beginning at, and of Adam, and for that cause it is called
the inheritablie descendinge The beginning (...)
naughtiness and corruption of our nature. Concerning the corruption and
sin of Adam, out of whom we are all borne sinners, I have allreadie
sufficientlye spoken, where I treated of the cause of sin, and by and by
hereafter shall follow somewhat more of the same argument, so that I have no
need to repeat any thing here: I will therefore now pass forth to the rest.

The Pelagians denied that this evil of Original sin was hereditarie. The
Pelagians.
For these are the very words of Pelagius him self. As without virtue, so
are we also borne without vice. And before the action of our own will, that
alone is in man, which God created. These words of his are somewhat obscure,
but Caelestius the partener of Pelagius did more openly spue out this poison,
and say: We did not therefore say that infants are to be baptized into the
remission of sins, to the end that we should seem thereby to affirm that
sin is Ex traduce, or hereditarie, which is utterly contrary to the
Catholic sense. Because sin is not borne with man, but is afterward put in
ure by man: because it is declared to be, not the fault of the nature, but of
the will.

Again, Pelagius said: that that first sin did not hurt the first man
only, but all mankind also, his issue and offspring: but he does immediately
add: not by propagation, but by example, that is to say, not that they which
came of him, drew any vice of him, but because they that sinned afterward did
in sinning imitate him that sinned first, and before them. This is to be seen
in Aurelius Augustinus De peccato originali contra Pelagium and Caelestium.
Lib. 2. Cap. 6. 13. et 15.

We therefore must prove by the testimonies of holy Scripture, that (...) in
and (...) man.
the evil is hereditarie in man, and that original is borne together with us,
that is, that all men are borne sinners into the world. The Prophet therefore
does plainly cry, Psalm 51. Behold, I was borne in wickedness, and in sin
has my mother conceived me. Or as another translation out of the Hebrew
says: Beeholde, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin my mother cherished or
warmed me. That is to say, sin did then immediately cleave unto me, when I
was once conceived and nourished in my mothers womb. Now that happened
undoubtedly not by any vice of matrimony: for the wedlock bed is holy and
undefiled: but Extraduce and by propagation. For Job in his fourteenth Chapter,
says manifestly: Who can make or bring forth a pure or clean thing of that
which is unclean? no body undoubtedly is able to do it. Of that sort also
there are many other sayings in the fifteenth and 25 Chap. of the same book.

And Paul the holy Apostle of Christ, in the fifte to the Romans, does
most evidently say: As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin: even so death entered into all men, in so much as all have sinned: for
unto the law was sin in the world: but sin is not imputed when there is
no law. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam unto Moses over them also, that
had not sinned with like transgression as did Adam etc. Does not the Apostle
in these words manifestly show the propagation of sin, saying: Sin
entered by one man into the world, death entered into all men, in so much as
they have all sinned, to wite, in so much as they are all subject to
corruption. And that no men either before or after Moses might be excepted, he
adds: Death reigned from Adam unto Moses over them also, which had not sinned
with the like transgression as did Adam: that is to say, over them which had
not sinned of their own will, as Adam had, but drew from him original sin by
propagation.

Saint Augustine does more fully excusse and handle this argument in his first
book, De peccatorum meritis et remissione: in the ninth, tenth and eleventh
Chapter: and the rest as they follow in order. Again, Paul in the seventh
to the Romans calls this evil, the sin y^ dwells in us, that is to say,
the sin y^ is begotten and borne with us. For he adds, I am carnal, sold
under sin. And, I know that in me (that is my fleashe) there dwells no
good. And therefore the blessed Apostle and Evangelist John tells us, that, if
we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us.

He says very significantly (we have) and not (we have had) or (we shall
have.) For by our corrupt nature we have that proper unto us. Therefore it is
manifest that the fiction of the Pelagians is false, whereby they affirm, that
we are borne without vice: it is false, that the voluntary action only, and
not y^ corruption or deprauation which is not yet burst forth to the deed, is
sin. And Augustine does in one place call Voluntary sin.
even that voluntary sin, original sin, and that two sundry ways:
first, not simply of it self, but in respect of Adam, because it being
committed by the naughty will of Adam is drawn and made hereditarie in us.
Secondly, because a naughty lust may be named a will. For Lib. Retract. 1.
Cap. 15. he says: If any man does s^ye, that even the very lust is nothing
else, but will, such a will yet, as is vicious and subject to sin, he
needs not to be ga^^said: for, where the thing is manifest we must not
strive about terms and words. For so it is proved that without will, there is
no sin, either in deed, or in propagation: that is either actual or
original.

Thus much Augustine, who does also allege other sayings like to this, in his
third book Contra Iulianum Pelagianum Chap. 5. It shall be sufficient to us,
even without them to learn by the testimonies of the holy Scriptures, that
sin is not only a voluntary action, but also an hereditarie corruption or
deprauation, that comes by inheritance.

Not unlike to all this is that sentence in Ezechi^l, where the Lord The son
shall not bear the iniquity of the father.
says: The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, but every man
shall dye in his own sin. For Adams fall should do us no harm, if it were
not ^o that eue^ from him there is sprung up in us such a perverseness, as is
worthy of Gods just judgment. But now since all the inclination,
disposition, and desire of our nature, even in a child but one day old, is
repugnaunt to the purnesse and will of God, which is only good, no man
therefore is punished for his father, but every one for his own iniquity: and
calamities fall even on the youngest babes, whom we see to be touched with
many afflictions by the holy and just judgment of the most just God.

Neither is their objection any To be borne o^ hol^ par^nts.
whitt stronger which say, that the children of holy parents cannot draw or
take any spott of their parents. For they have their line all descent of the
fleshely generation, and not of the spiritual regeneration.

And whe^eas the Apostle said: The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the
wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your
children unclean, but now are they clean: it is not repugnant to our former
allegations. For they are called holy, not by the prerogative of their birth
or generation, as though children were borne holy without any spott or vice at
a^l: but for because they beeinge borne by nature corrupt, are by the virtue of
the covenant and grace made pure, and uncleanness is not imputed to them, for
Christ his sake or the remission o^ sins, which is pronounced in these
words: I will be thy God and the God of thy seed after thee. For of old,
even those children which of the seed of Abraham were holy and blessed,
received notwithstanding the sign of circumcision. Now, what need I pray you
had they had of Circumcision, or purging, if by their birthe they had had no
uncleanness in them?

That therefore is utterly false which (...).
ye heard even now that Caelestius the Pelagian did utter in these words: We
did not therefore say that infants are to be baptized into the remission of
sins, to the end that we should thereby seem to affirm that sin is
extraduce or hereditarie, which is utterly contrary to the catholic sense.
For it is catholic and true doctrine, that the children of the Jews were
circumcised, not so much only because they were partakers of the divine
covenant, as for because that all the antiquity of holy fathers did so
confess, that in infants there was somewhat which had need of cutting, that
is, which had need to be remitted by the grace of God, and not be imputed to
them unto death. It is catholic and true doctrine that the infantes of
Christians are baptized, not so much because they are the children of God, and
freely received into the covenant, as for because there is in them, even from
their birth, somewhat which the Lord by his grace does wash away, least it
should bring upon them death and damnation. Yea, that cannot be catholic,
which does so manifestly repugne so many evident places of Scripture, which
prove that in infa^ts there is sin by propagation. To confirm this, we may
add that S. Augustine in his first book Contra Iulianum Pelagianum Cap. 2.
gathers together the testimonies of the most excellent bishops and doctors
in the primative Church, by which he proves that all the ministers of the
Churches, even from the Apostles time, did both acknowledge and openly teach
original sin. In that place he cites the testimonies All the ancient
doctors or f^thers of the church confess (with one assent) original sin.
of Irenus, Cyprian, Retilius, Olympius, Hilarie, and Ambrose his father and
master in Christian doctrine, Innocent, Gregory, Basil, and John Chrysostom.
And at length he infers: Will thou now call so great a consent of
Catholic priests a co^spiracie of naughty men? Neither think thou that S.
Hierome is to be contemned, because he was but a priest only and no bishop,
who being skilful in the Greek, Latin and Hebrew tongues, and passinge from
the West unto the East Church, lived in holy places, and the study of the
sacred Scriptures even to his croane and crooked age. He read all or in a manner
all the works of them, which in both The East and west churches.
parts of the world did write of Ecclesiastical doctrine: and yet he neither
held nor taught any otherwise of this point of doctrine. And again That is, he
taught and held ori^^nall sin.
the same Augustine in his third book De peccatoru^ meritis and remissione.
Cap. 7. says: Hierome, expounding the prophe^ie of Jonas, when he came to
that place, where mention is made that even the little children were chastened
with fasting, says: It began with the eldest, and came even to the youngest.
For there is none without sin, no, not he which is but one day old, nor he
whose gray head has seen many years. For if the stars are not clean in
the sight of God, how much more unclean are duste and putrefying earth, and
those which are in subjection to the sin of Adams transgression? To these
words of Hierome does Augustine himself annexe this that follows: If it
were so that we might easily ask it of this most learned man, how many
teachers of the holy Scriptures in both the tongues, and how many writers of
Christian treatises would he reckon up, which since the time that Christ his
Church was first planted, have themselves nether thought, of their
predecessors learned, nor taught their successors any other tha^ this
doctrine touching original sin? I verily, though I have read nothing so
much as he, do not remember that I have heard any other doctrine of
Christians, which admit or receive both the testaments, whether they were in
the unity of the Catholic Church, or otherwise in Schisms and heresies: I
do not remember that I have read any other thing in them, whose writings
touching this matter, I could come by to read them, if either they did follow,
or thought that they did follow, or would have men believe that they did
follow, the Canonical Scriptures.

Thus far has Augustine, teaching in the very beginning that all the
Saints did by a full consent and agreement in doctrine, most expressly
grant and confess that original sin is even in new borne infants. Me
thincketh that Saint Hierome did not only in Jonas, but also much more
evidently in Ezechiel, confess and affirm original sin. His words are to
be seen Comment. lib. 14. in cap. 47. ad Ezechielem, and are verbatun as
follows: What man can make his boaste that he has a chaste heart: or to
whose mind by the windows of the eyes the death of concupiscence, or (to use a
mylder term) the tickling of the mind does not enter in? For the world is set
in wickedness: and even from his childhood the heart of man is set to
naughtiness: so that not the very first day of a man's nativity, his nature is
free from sin and naughtiness. Whereupon David in the Psalm says: For
behold I was conceived in iniquity, and in sin my mother conceived me. Not
in the iniquities of my mother, or in mine own sins, but in the iniquities
of our mortal state. And therefore the Apostle says, death reigned from Adam
unto Moses, over them also which had not sinned with the like transgression as
did Adam. Thus much has Hierome: and we have hitherto alleged al these
sayings, to the end we might prove, that original sin is the natural or
hereditarie corruption of man's nature.

Let us now see what and how What (...) how (...) the (...) of (...) nature
(...)
great the hereditarie naughtiness or corruption of our nature is, and what
power it has to work in man. Our nature verily, as I showed you above, was
before the fall most excellent and pure in our father Adam: but after the
fall, it did by Gods just judgment become corrupt, and utterly naught, which
is in that naughtiness by propagation or Extraduce, derived into all us,
which are the posterity and offspring of Adam: as both experience and the
thing it self do evidently declare, as well in sucklings or infantes, as
those of riper years. For even very babes give manifest tokens of evident
deprauation, so soon as they once begin to be able to do any thing, yea,
before they can perfectlye sound any one syllable of a whole word.

All our understanding is dull, blunt, gross, and altogether blind in
heavenly things. Our judgment in divine matters is perverse and frivolous.
For there arise in us most horrible and absurd thoughts and opinions touching
God, his judgments, ^ wonderful works: yea, our whole mind is apt and
ready to errors, to fables, and our own destruction: and when as our
judgments are nothing but mere folly, yet do we prefer them far above
Gods wisdom, which we esteem but foolishness in comparison of our own
conceiptes and corrupt imaginations. For he lied not which said: The
natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God: for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spirituallie
discerned. Now Paul calls him the natural man, which lives naturally by
the vital spirit, and is not regenerate by the holy Ghost. And since we all
are such, we are therefore wholly overcome and governed of Philautie: that is,
too great a selfeloue and delight in our selves, whereby all things that we
our selves do work, do highly please us: loking still very busily to
our own selves and our commodity, when in the mean time we neglecte all
others, yea rather do afflicte them. Neither did Plato unadvisedly esteem
that vice of selfeloue to be the very root of every evil. Furthermore, our
whole will is ledd captive by concupiscence, which as a root enuenomed with
poison, infecteth all that is in man, and does incline, draw on and drive man
to things carnal, forbidden, and contrary to God, to the end that he may
greedily pursue them, put all his delight in them, and content him self with
them.

Moreover, there is in us no power or ability to do any good. For we are
s^owe, sluggish, and heavy to goodness, but lively, quick, and ready
enoughe to any evil or naughtiness. And that I may at last conclude, and
briefly express the whole force and signification of our hereditarie
deprauation and corruption, I say, that this deprauation of our nature is
nothing else but the blotting of Gods Image in us. There was in our father
Adam Our deprauation is the blotting out of the Image of God in us.
before his fall, the very Image and likeness of God, which Image, as the
Apostle expounds it, was a conformity and participation of Gods wisdom,
justice, holiness, truth, integrity, innocence, immortality, and eternal
felicity. Therefore what else can the blotting or wiping out of this Image
be, but original sin, that is, the hatred of God, the ignorance of God,
foolishness, distrustfulnesse, desperation, selfeloue, unrighteousness,
uncleanness, lying, hypocrisy, vanity, corruption, violent injury,
wickedness, mortality, and eternal infelicitie? This corrupt Image and
likeness is, by propagation, derived into us all, according to that saying in
^he fifte of Genesis: Adam begatt a son in his own similitude and likeness.
Therefore as our father Adam was him self corrupted, depraved, and full of
calamities, so has he begotten us his sons, corrupt, depraved, and full of
miseries: so that all we which do descend of his vnpure seed, are borne
infected with the contagious poison of sin. For of a rotten root do spring
as rotten branches, which in like manner put over their rottenness into the
little twiggs that shoot out and grow upon them.

And this evil verily, this corruption, and this sin, although it lie
Original sin condemns.
hidd in infants, and by reason of their tender age does not break forth
into any deed doing, yet notwithstanding it is a sin, and such a sin
verily, as makes them indaungered unto Gods wrath, and separateth them from
the fellowship of God.

For with the most holy God, who is a consuming fire, no man can abide but he
that is unspotted and clean from the filthiness of sins. And Paul says:
All have sinned and are destitute, or have need of the glory of God. This
glory of God is the very image of God: whereof because they are destitute,
they being corrupted with original sin, are worthily excluded from the
fellowship of God. To this place does belong the whole treatise of
concupiscence in the fourth Sermon of this third Decade: where I taught you,
that bare concupiscence, which is not yet burst forth to the deed doing is a
sin, and that to, such a sin, as makes all men subject to the curse of
God. For it is written: Cursed be every one which abides not in all things
that are written in the book of this law. Therefore the first effect of
original sin is this, that it brings wrath, death, and damnation upon
very infants, and so consequently upon all mankind: whereof, that it may
the more firmly be settled in every man's mind without all scruple of
doubting. I will by some store of testimonies out of the scripture make manifest
proof unto you, not by repeating those places again, which I have already
cited in this Sermon, and in the fourth Sermon of this third Decade.

The Lord in the Gospel says to Nicodemus: Verily I say unto thee, unless
a man be borne from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And again:
Unless a man be borne of water and of the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. That, which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: and that,
which is borne of the spirit is spirit. In these words are comprehended two
things worthy to be remembered, and very consonant to our present argument.
First, none enter into the kingdom of heaven but 1
those that be regenerate from abcue by the holy Ghost: therefore our^ f^^st
birthe tends to death and not to life. For in our first nativity we are
borne to death. The latter is, That which is borne of flesh is flesh: therefore
^
in our first nativity we are all borne flesh. But touching the disposition
of the flesh, and the force thereof the Apostle says: The fleshly mind is
enimitie against God: for it is not obedient to the law of God, neither can
be. Therefore that fleshly birthe inge^dreth us, not the friends and sons,
but the enemies of God: and so consequently does make us indaungered to the
wrath of God.

Paul in his second Chapter to the Ephesians, says: We were by nature the
sons of wrath, even as other. In which words he pronounces that all men are
damned. For all those that are damned, or are worthy of eternal death, and all
such with whom God has good cause to be offended, he calls the sons of
wrath, after the proper phrase of the Hebrew speech. For the wrath of God does
signify the punishment which is by the just judgment of God laid upon us men.
And he is called the child of death, which is adjudged or appointed to be
killed. So is also the son of perdition etc. Now mark that he calls us all
the sons of wrath, that is, the subjects of pain and damnation, even by
nature in birth from our mothers womb But whatsoever is naturally in all men,
that is original: therefore original sin makes us the sons of wrath,
that is, we are all for our original corruption made subject to death and
utter damnation. This place of Paul for the proof of this argument is worthy
to be remembered.

The same Apostle in the first to the Colossians, says: God has delivered us
from the power of darcknesse, and has translated us into the kingdom of his
dear son. Now if we be translated into the kingdom of the son of God,
then were we once in the kingdom of the devil. And to this place belong very
many testimonies of the same Apostle in the fifte Chapter of his Epistle to ye
Romans: By one man's sin many are dead. Again, By one that sinned came
death, For judgment came by one unto condemnation. Again, For the sin of
one, death reigned by the means of one. And again, By the sin of one, sin
came upon all men unto condemnation. Finally, original sin is by David and
Paul expressly called sin: therefore death is due to original sin. For
the reward of sin is death.

We do therefore conclude that infants do bring damnation with them ^^iginall
(...) to all.
into this world, even from their mothers wombes: because they bring with them a
corrupt nature: and therefore they perish not by any others, but by their own
fault and naughtiness. For although S. Augustine does in one place seem to
call this sin peccatum alienum, that is, an others sin (that thereby he may
show how it is by propagation derived from other into us) yet does he confess
that it is in very deed and truly proper to all, and every several one of us.
And although it be so, that for lack of age in a new borne babe this disease
has not already brought forth the fruit of his iniquity, yet
notwithstanding the very whole nature of the babe is nothing but filchie
corruption, and a certain seed of sin and wickedness, which cannot choose
but be abominable unto the Lord. For God does hate al manner of uncleanness.

With this agrees that sentence of Where there is no law there is no
transgression.
Paul, where he says: Where no law is, there is no transgression. For the
Apostle does not absolutely say, that the sin or transgression, (which is
sin in very deed in the sight of God) is no sin: but he respects the
estimation of men how they do repute it, For, men, before sin does appear
and is opened unto them by the law, do not so repute or think of sin, as
it ought in very deed to be esteemed. The same Paul in an other place says:
Sin without the law was once Romans 7.
dead: and I once lived without law. But when the law came, sin revived. If
so be now that sin revived, then did it live before the law, before it was
stirred up by the law, although it did not so rifely then, as now, show forth
the strength and force of it self. To this also is to be added that saying of
Paul, Sin was in the world even to the law: but sin is not imputed when
there is no law. Lo here sin was in the world before the law, but it was
not imputed: not, because God did not impute it, but because men do not impute
it to themselves. Under cinders does fire lie hid, which is very fire in deed,
but because it casts out no flame or light of it self, it is not thought
for to be fire. And for y^ cause the learned and godly man of famous memory
Vlderick Zuinglius, did diligently Vldericke Zuinglius of original sin.
distinguish betwixt sin and disease or infirmity, when once he had occasion
to dispute of original sin, which he chose rather to call a disease than
sin: because by the name of sin all men do understand ye naughty act
committed by our own consent, and will against the law of God: but by the
name of disease or sickness they understand a certain corruption and
deprauation of the nature, that was created good, and the miserable condition
of bondage whereinto it is brought. Eue^ as also we heard before that Augustine
did call this original sin Peccatum alienum, an others sin, that thereby
he might give us to understand that it is hereditarie, and does descend from
others into us: and yet he denied not, but it is proper to every several one
of us. In like manner Zuinglius denied not original sin: as some did falsely
slander him: he thought not that by it self it is unhurtful to infants: but
so far forth as it is by the grace of God thoroughe the blood of Jesus
Christ in the virtue of gods promise and covenant made harmless unto them.
His mind was to make an exquisite difference betwixt the actual and original
sins. For in rendering an account of his faith in the counsel held at
Augusta, the year of our Lord 1530. he said: I acknowledge that original
sin is by condition and contagion borne in and with all them, that are
begotten by the act of a man and a woman: and I know that we are the sons
of wrath. Nether am I any thing against it, that this disease and condition
should as Paul terms it, be called sin: yea, it is such a sin as that
they, who soever are borne in it, are the enemies and adversaries of God
Almighty. For hither does the condition of their bi^the draw them, and not
the committing of wickedness, except it be so far forth as our first parent
committed it. The very true cause therefor of our disloyalty and death is
the crime and wickedness, which Adam committed and that in very deed is
sin: And this sin which cleaves to us, is in very deed a disease and
condition, yea it is a necessity of dying. And so forth as follows. For
hitherto I have rehearsed his very words.

There is now remaining the other Original (...)
effect of original sin for me to expound. It breaks out and brings
forth in us those works, that the scriptures call the works of the flesh, even
like as when an oven set on fire does cast out flames and sparkles, or as a
fountain that ever springs, does power out water in great abundance. There
is no quietness in the nature of man: For covetousness with filthy lust
arises in it, ambition cleaves to it, anger inuadeth it, pride puffs it up
and causes it to swell, drunckennesse delights it, and envy torments both
thee self and others. Therefore the Lord in the Gospel says: Out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts, murders adulteries, whoredoms, thefts, falswitnesse
bearings, and evil speakinges. Again, Paul in the 5. cap. to the Galat. does
reckon up no small number of the works of the flesh: even as he does the like
also in the first and third Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans. In the
fourth to the Ephesians he does very properly describe those works of the
flesh, which spring out of the natural corruption of all them, which are not
regenerate by the holy Ghost. This I say, says he, and testify unto you,
that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in vanity of their
mind: darckened in cogitation, being alienated from the life of God, by the
ignorance, that is in them, by the blindness of their hearts: which being
past feeling, have given themselves over unto wantonness, to work^ all
uncleanness with greediness.

This, though it be but little, shall suffice for this place. For I will more
largly prosecute it in the treatise of actual sin: to the handling whereof I
will presently pass, so soon as I have by the way admonished you, that I have
not without good cause thus far in many words spoken of the cause of
original sin, yt is, of man's deprauation and the corruption of all his
strength.

For as in these are opened the veins of pure doctrine, so in them are placed
the foundations of our faith, and whole belief. For if there be no original
(...)
sin, then is there no grace: or if there be any, yet shall it have nothing
to work in us. If our own strength is whole and sound, then have we no need
o^ any Physician. In vain therefore came ye son of god into ye world. For
then shall men be saved by their own strength and ability, and so shall ye
foundation of our faith be quite turned vpside down. Therefore S. Augustine is
very vehement in this cause, whose golden words I will recite unto you, dearly
beloved, out of his 2. book De originali peccato contra Pelagiu^ and
Caelestium. In the 23. 24. Cap. I find written as follows: There is great
diversity in these questions, which are thought to be beside the articles of
faith, and those, wherein (keeping sound the faith whereby we are Christians) it
is either not known what is true, and so the sentence definitive is suspended,
or else it is otherwise gheassed at by human and unassured suspicion, than
the thing it self in very deed is: as for example, when it is demanded of
what sort and where Paradise is, where God placed man whom he had made of the
dust of the earth, when as notwithstanding Christian faith doubts not but
that there is a Paradise? And after the recital of a few more such questions,
at last he says: Who may not perceive in these and such like sundry and
innumerable questions apperteining either to the most secret works of God, or
the most darck and intricate places of the holy scripturs, which it is hard to
comprehend or define in any certain order, both that many things are unknown
without the peril of Christian faith, and also that in some points men do err
with out any crime of heretical doctrine? But concerning the two men: by the
one of who^ we are sold under sin, by the other redeemed from sin: by one
we are cast headlong into death, by the other we are made free unto life:
because that man did in himself destroy us by doing his own will, and not
the will of him that mad^ him, but this man has in himself saved us by doing
not his own will, but the will of him that sent him. Therefore in the
consideration of these two Christian faith consists in the consideration of
two men.
men Christian faith does properly consist. For there is one God and one
mediator of God and man the man Christ Jesus. Because there is none other name
under Heaven given unto men, in which they must be saved: and in him has God
appointed all men to trust, raising him up from death to life. Therefore
Christian verity doubts not but that without this faith, that is, without
the faith of the only mediator of God and man the man Christ Jesus, without
the belief, I say, of his resurrection, which God has prescribed to men,
which cannot be truly believed without the belief of his incarnation and
death: without the faith therefore of the incarnation, death, and resurrection
of Christ, none of the ancient just men could be cl^nsed and justified of God
from their sins: whether they were in the number of those just men, whom
the holy Scripture mentions: or in the number of those just men, whom the
Scripture names, and yet are to be believed to have been, either before the
deluge, or betwixt the deluge and the law, or in the very time of the law:
not only among the children of Israel, as the Prophets were: but also without
that people, Some were saved beside Israel: but not without Christ.
as Job was. For even their hearts were cle^sed by the same faith of the
mediator, and charity was powered into them by the same holy spirit, which
breaths where he lists, not following after merits, but even working the
very merits themselves. For Gods grace will not be by any means, unless it
be free by all means. Although therefore death reigned from Adam unto Moses,
because the law given by Moses could not overcome it. For there was no such law
given as could quicken, but such a law, as whose office was to show that the
dead, to the quickening of whom grace was necessary, were not only
overthrown by the propagation and dominion of sin, but were also condemned
by the hidden transgression of the very law it self, not that every one
should perish that did then understand it in the mercy of God, but that every
one being through the dominion of death appointed unto punishment, and detected
to himself by the transgression of the law, should seek for the help of
God, that where sin abou^ded grace might more abound, which alone does
deliver from the body of this death. Although therefore the law given by Moses
could not ridd any man from the kingdom of death, yet in the very time of the
law were the men of God, not under the terrifying, conuinceing, and punishing
law, but under the delectable, saving, and delivering grace. There were among
them some which said: In iniquity was I conceived, and in sin has my mother
fedd me in her womb. And so forth. For hitherto I have cited the very words
of S. Augustine.

I have thus far spoken of original sin, of the native and hereditarie
corruption of our nature, which is ye first part in the definition of sin
here follows now the latter part, to wit, the very Action, which arises of
that corruption, the actual sin, I say, which is so called Ab actu, that is,
an act or a deed doing. For in so much as that corruption which is borne
together with, and is hereditarie in us, does not always lie hidd, but
woorketh outwardly and shows forth it self, and does at last bring forth an
imp of her own kind and nature, which impe is actual sin: therefore we
define actual sin to be an action or work, or fruit of our corrupt and
naughty nature, expressing it self in thoughts, words, and works against the
law of God, and thereby deserving the wrath of God.

So then by this the cause of actual The (...) of (...) sin.
sin is known to be the very corruption of mankind, which shows forth it
self through concupiscence and evil affections: affections entice the will,
and will being helped with the other faculties in man, that work together with
it, does finish actual sin. And that ye may more clearly perceive that
which I say, I wish you to note that our mind has two parts: The
understanding, or reason, or judgment: and the will or appetite. In the reason
are the laws of nature, whereunto must be added the preaching, or reading, or
knowledge of Gods word. And now as of good works in man there are two
especial causes, to wit, sound judgment well framed by the word of God, and
a will consenting and obeying thereunto (and yet notwithstanding there is
principally to be required the coming to of the holy Ghost from heaven, to
illuminate the mind and move forward the will) even so we may most properly
say that actual sin is finished, when any thing is of set purpose, with
advised judgment, and the consent of our will committed against the law of
God. And yet to these there do many times happen other outward causes both
visible and invisible. For evil spirits move men, and evil men move men, and
other infinite examples of corruption that are in ye world. Hope, sear, and
weakness, do also move men. Augustine, Quaest, in Exodum 29. says: The
beginning of vice is in the will of man: but the hearts of men are moved by
sundry accidental causes, now this, now that: sometimes the causes are all
one, the difference is in the manner and order, according to every ones proper
qualities, which do arise of every several will. Again in the 79. Psalm he
says: Two things there are that work all sins in mortal men, desire and
fear. Consider, examine and ask your hearts, search your consciences, and
see, if any sins can be but by desiring, or else by fearing. Thou a^t
promised, if thou will sin, to have such a reward given thee as thou do
delight in, and for desire of the gift thou crackest thy conscience, and do
commit sin. And again on the other side, though peradventure thou will not
be seduced with gifts, yet being terrified with threatenings, thou do for
dread of that which thou fear commit the iniquity that other wise thou
would not. As for example, Some one man or other would with gifts corrupt
thee to bear false witness. Thou presently have turned thee self to God and
have said in thy heart, what does it advantage a man if he gain the whole
world, and suffer the loss of his own soul? I will not be hired with gifts
to loose my soul for the gain of money: thereupon he which before enticed
thee, does now turn himself to terrify thee, and for because his gifts did
fail to hire thee, he begins to threaten unto thee damage, banishment,
wounds and death. In such a case now if greediness could not, yet fear
perhaps might cause thee to sin. The same Augustine again, in his book
De Sermon Domini in mo^te, says: Three things there be, by which sin, is
accomplished, suggestion, delectation, and consent. Suggestion, whether it be
wrought by the memory or senses of the body: as when we see, hear, smell,
taste, or touch any thing. Now if we be delighted to have it, that unlawful
delight must be restrained: As for example, when we fast, if at the sight of
meat, our appetite do arise, it is not done without delectation: but we must
not give our consent to that delectation, but suppress it with the power of
reason. For if the consent be given, then is the sin accomplished. These
three things are correspondent to the circumstances of the history, that is
written in Genesis: so that of the serpent was made that suggestio^: in the
carnal appetite, as in Eua was the delectation, and in reason as in Adam did
the full consent appear: which being finished, man is expelled as it were out
of Paradise, that is, out of the blessed light of righteousness into death and
damnation. Thus much says Augustine touching the cause of sin.

But here we must especially note in the definition of actual sin the very
Sin is repugnant to the law of God.
property or difference, whereby this action is discerned from all other
actions, and whereby the most proper note of sin is made manifest. This
action therefore, even as all sins else do, does directly tend against Gods
law. But what the law of God is, I have in my former sermons at large
declared. Verily it is none other but the very will of God. Now the will of
God is, that man should be like unto his image, that is, that he should be
holy, innocent, and so consequently saved.

This will of his did God express, first by the law of nature, then by the
law which he writ in two tables of stone, and lastly by the preaching of the
holy Gospel. Now those three tend all to one end, to wit, that man should
be holy, innocent, and so consequently saved. And whatsoever things are done
of men either in thought, word, or deed against that holy law of God, they
both are, and are called actual sins. Therefore in the judging or esteeming
of men's sins, the law of God must be only looked unto. For the things that
are not contrary to Gods law, are not sins. Neither has any man authority
to make new laws, for the tra^sgressing whereof men should be counted sinners.
That glory belongs to God alone, to whom David cries: To thee alone have I
sinned, and against thee have I wrought wickedness. Neither is it any part of
our office to take upon us by our own judgments to determine which be the
smallest, and which the greatest sins. For which of us would think that it
were sin to say to his brother, Thou fool? And yet the Lord in the Gospel
pronounces it to be a sin: who in the same Gospel also affirms, that we
shall give account for every idle word, at the latter day of Judgment. Very
rightly therefore says Saint Augustine in his second book De Bapt. Contra
Donatistas Capit. 6. In esteming of sins let us not bring in deceiptfull
balances, wherein to weighe, both what we list, and as we list* after our
own mind and fantasy* saying: This is heavy, and that is light: but let us
bring in the weights of Gods holy Scriptures, as out of the secret treasuries
of the Lord, and thereby let us weighe what is heavy and what is light, nay
rather let not us weigh them, but acknowledge, and so accept them, as they are
weighed by the Lord. The (...) and (...) of (...)


And although this might seem to be sufficient, as that which has
sufficiently declared the nature of actual sin, yet will we more at large
consider the sundry sorts or kinds, and differences of sins. The Stoikes
were of opinion that all sins were equal: whom perhaps Iouinian
followinge (as the Patriarchs of heresies are by Tertullian said to be
Philosophers) is written to have affirmed the very same with them, as is
extant in S. Augustines Catalogue of heretics.

The holy Scripture teaches us That k(...) and (...) of ^
that God is just: whereupon we do conclude that all sins therefore are not
equal. For we see that God, as he is a just Judge, does punish some sins
more sharply than otherseme. For in the Gospel the Lord says: Woe to you
Scribes and Pharisers hypocrites, which devour widows houses under the pretense
of long prayer, therefore shall ye receive the greater damnation. And again,
It shall be easier, says the Lord, for the land of Sodom, in the day of
Judgment, than for the city that rejects the preaching of the Gospel.
Likewise in the eleventh of Matthewe he says: It shall be easier for Tire and
Sidon in the day of Judgment than for you. To Pilate also he said: The man,
that delivered me to thee, has the more sin. Again, The servant that
knew his masters will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to
his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: But he that knew not, and did
commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes.

To proceed now, sins do arise by steps, and increase by circumstances.
(...) by (...) and (...)
For first there is a hidden sin, contained in the very affection or desire
of man. But I have already told you that affections and desires are of two
sorts, to wit, natural affections, which are not repugnaunt to the law of
God: of which sort are the love of children, parents, and wife: and the
desire of meat, drink and sleep: although I know, and do not deny, but
that sometimes those affections are defiled with the original spott. Again,
there are carnal desires or affections in men, directly contrary to the will
of God. Those affections are nourished and do increase by vain thoughts and
carnal delights increasing in thy bosom: and at last they break out into
the sin of the month, yea and after that to the deed doing, or actual
sin it self. As for example: Thou ^ustest after an other man's wife, and
^ettlest the lust in the bottom of thy ^eart, still delighting thee self
with vain cogitations, while thou call to mind her passing beauty and
lineaments of body, and do by thy often and vehement imagination both
delight and set thee self on sire. And not being content herewithall alone,
thou ceassest not to lie at her, whom thou love, with words and writings to
spott her chastity: and if occasion serve thee, thou do by the deed doing
defile her: and also do reiterate the sin, which thou have once committed:
and lastly, laying aside the fear of Gods plague, and the shame of the world,
thou do daily frequent it, and openly use it. See thou here by this
example how one and the same sin does increase by degrees, and does still
require a sharper punishment according to the greatness and enormitie of the
crime? Verily the Lord in the Gospel after Saint Matthewe confirms this
and says: Ye have heard how it was said to them of old. Thou shall not kill.
Whosoever kills shall be in danger of Judgment. But I say unto you, that who
so is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be in danger of Judgment. And
who soever shall say unto his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of a Counsel:
but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

In these words of the Lords thou hear first the differences of sins, as
anger, the tokens of angry minds, and open scouldinges, which do for the
most part end in open fightinges. And then thou hear that as the sin
increases, so the greatness and sharpness of the punishmente is still
augmented. It was therefore no unapt or silly distinction, that they made in
actual sin, which said that there is one sin of the thought, an other of
the mouth, and an other of the deed, which they did again divide into
certain kinds and sorts: reducing them again partly into Scelera, Scelera
and delicta.
and partly into Delicta. Scelera are those heinous crimes which are conceived
and committed of set purpose and pretended malice: of which sort are those
especially which are called the Crying sins, as murder, Peccata clamantia.
usury, oppression of the fatherless and widows, Sodomie, and the withheld
hire of the needy labourer. For touching murder the voice of the Lord in
Genesis, says: The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me. And in the
twenty two of Exodus he says: If ye vex the fatherless and widows, and
they cry to me I will hear them and slay you. The word of GOD does with
bitter quippes, baighte usury and utterly condemn it. The sin of the
Sodomites ascended up to heaven, requiring vengeance to light upon the
villaynous beasts. And James the Apostle says: Behold the hire of the
laborers which have reaped down your fields, which hire of you is kept
back by fraud, cries: and the cries of them, which have reaped, are entered
into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

To these sins, other men do also annexe those seven principal vices, The 7.
principal vices, commonly called the 7. deadly sins.
pride or vain glory, anger, envy, sloth, covetousness, gluttony, and
lechery. Yea, they make these the seeds and first beginnings of all sins and
wickedness, and therefore do they call them the principal sins. As is to
be seen in the sentences of Peter Lombard.

Moreover, they call those sins delicta, which are committed of infirmity or
unwittingly, to wit, when the good is forsaken, and duty to God or man
neglected by a certain kind of idle sluggishnesse, where peradventure
Pec^atum alienum, an othe^^ sin, is (...) an other made to sin by (...) mea^es,
(...) ye shall hereafte^ perceive*
are to be numbered the sin of ignorance, the sin called Alienum, and the
sin of unwillingness: although even they also are often times made both
heinous crimes, and detestable offenses.

Ignorance is said to be of two sorts, the one is natural and very
ignorance, which springs of original The (...) of ignorance.
sin: ye other is affected or counterfeite, which rises of a set purpose
and pretended malice. The natural ignorance is a disease, a fault, and a
sin: because it springs of a poysened original, and is a work of
darcknesse, as it appeared above by the testimony of the Apostle Saint Paul.
Verily Saint Augustine in his third book De libero arbitrio Cap. 19. says:
That which every one by ignorance does not rightly, and that which he cannot
do though he wills rightly, are therefore called sins, because they have
their beginning of the sin of free will. For that precedent did deserve to
have such co^sequents. For as we give the name of Tongue, not to that member
only, which moves in the mouth while we speak: but even to that also which
follows upon the moving of that member, to wit, the form and tenor of
words, which the tongue does utter: according to which phrase of speech we
say, that in one man there are diverse tongues, meaning the Greek and the
Latin tongues. Even so we do not only call that sin, which is properly
called sin, (for it is committed of a free will wittingly) but that also which
follows upon the punishment of the same. Of which I have said somewhat
before.

Other do cloak their ignorance with that saying of the Lord in the Gospel:
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had had wherewithal to cloak
their sin, or they should have had no sin. For herevppon they infer:
Therefore they to whom nothing has been preached, are free from blame and
accusation of sin. But the Lord said not so. For first he spoke of their
pretended color, and not of their innocence. And every pretense is not just
and lawefull. He said: I confess, they should have had no sin: but he
adds presently: Now have they nothing to cloak their sin withal.
Secondarilie he does not universally acquit the ignorant from all kind of
sin, but from the sin of rebellion only. For S. Augustine upon John
says: They have an excuse not for every sin, but for this only, that they
believed not in Christ, because he came not unto them. For all, which neither
have heard, nor do hear, may have this excuse, but they cannot escape
condemnation. For they, that have sinned without law, shall perish without
law. And Paul also in the first to Timothy the first Chapter, says: I
thank him, because he has counted me faithful, putting me into the
ministry, who was before a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and an oppressor:
but yet I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief. Lo
here the Apostle says that he obtained mercy because he sinned thorough
ignorance: this ignorance he deriueth of unbelief, and attributes to it most
filthy fruits. Furthermore we call that false and counterfeite ignorance,
which is of very malice feigned by obstinate and stubborn people. As if thou,
when a thing displeases thee, should say, that thou do not understand
it, or if, when thou may, thou will not understand it. Such is the ignorance
that was in the Jews the professed enemies of Gods grace in Christ. For Paul
says: I bear them witness that they have a zeal of God, but not according
to knowledge. For being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and seeking to set
up their own, they were not subject to the righteousness of God. For the
Lord in the Gospel said to the Phariseis, when they demanded if they were
blind also? If ye were blind ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We
see: therefore your sin abides.

The sins called Aliena, are not those which we our selves commit, Peccata
aliena. Others sins.
but those which other men do, yet not without us, to wit, while we allow,
help forward, persuade, command, wincke at, give occasion, or do not resist
or gainesay them, when we may. The Apostle Paul forbids Timothy to lay
hands on any man hastily, nor to communicate with other men's sins. Therefore
to give an unfit man orders, and to place him in the Ecclesiastical
ministry, is that kind of sin which we do call an Others sin. For to
thee is worthily imputed what vnseemeelinesse soever is committed against God
and his Church, by the ignorance of the man, whom thou have so ordained. They
sin an Others sin, which offer violence, and do by torments and
threatenings compel men to deny the truth, or to commit some heinous offense.
For the denial of the truth is Peccatum alienum, an Others sin to him,
which compels the denier to renounce Both these sins an referred t^ the
compeller, the one in respect of the man compelled, the other in respect of the
compeller him self.
it, and therwithall to the same man, his Own sin, in respect of himself,
is impiety, tyranny, sacrilege, and murder, for causing the other to
renounce the truth.

Where, by the way, we are well admonished, that of sins some are wilful
and some vnwilfull, or enforced. They call that the vnwillfull sin, which is
committed either by an other man's inforceing, or else by our own ignorance.
Therefore Peccatum voluntariu^ and inuoluntarium.
that, which is done neither by compulsion, nor by ignorance, is concluded to
be the voluntary or wilful sin. Again, of enforced sin they make two
sorts: whereof they call one absolute, the other conditional. Now, they
think that the absolute violent sin is, when it lies not in us either to
do or not to do, but when it comes from some other man, without the consent
of him, to whom the violence is offered. Even as if the wind should drive us
to any place unlooked for. Or if the kings officers do perforce compel thy
hands to offer incense to idols, while thou to thy power resistest, and do
deny it so far as thou can. In such a case they acquit the man, so
compelled, from all blame, punishment, and reproach.

Now touching the second kind of violent sin, which they call
conditional, they think that it rises upon sundry causes. But that we
may not stick to long upon this point, we do simply say: The vnwilfull
or violent sin either has, or has not the consent of him which is
compelled. If he give his consent, as for example, either to the renouncing of
the Evangelical truth, which he has hitherto professed, or to the
committing of other grievous and horrible crimes, then is not the man
compelled, void of blame.

For neither can the fear of death, nor torments be an excuse for him. Choose
death rather than to deny the truth, to committ any heinous crime, or See
Augstine, demenda^^ ad Co^se^tium. cap 9. and. 10. ^^
to be compelled to consent to a wicked and horrible sin. If thou shall
rather choose to die than to do a filthy deed, the tyrant shall not enforce
or compel thee against thy will. He may, in deed, kill thee: but to compel
thee to do evil against thy will, he is not able. For by dyinge thou
confesseste the truth, and by dyinge thou declarest that thou will not do
that, which while thou lyueste they do exact of thee. And by that means
they neither overcome nor compel thee: but are themselves overcome and
compelled to see and have trial of that which greeueth them full soar.

Antiochus Epiphanes did what he might, to have polluted the holy bodies of
the Machabees, with the use of unclean and forbidden meat. But they,
choosinge ratherto die than by living to be defiled, did by dyinge overcome
the tyraunte, and could not be compelled And verily it is a thing received
and approved among all professors of sound Religion, that death and all
extremities whatsoever, must sooner be tasted, than any thing committed which
is by Nature filthy and repugnaunt to religion.

To proceed now, if consent be not given, but mere and unavoidable violence
is offered to a godly man, (for here we make a difference beetwixte him that
upon compulsion does yield to do wickedness, and him which by compulsion
cannot be brought unto it) that violence spotteth not his vncorrupt and holy
mind. As for example, if a Godly man having his feet bound and arms fast
pynnioned, be perforce brought into an idol Temple, and there compelled to be
present at their detestable sacrifice: or if an unspotted virgin or honest
matrone be in the wars or barbarous broiles villanousiye abused, without
their consent to the deed doing, and cannot have leave rather to die
untouched, then so to be indecently handled, she is, assure your selves,
unspotted before the face of God. For very wisely said Saint Augustine: Not
to suffer unjustly, but to do unjustly, is sin before GOD: Lib. de Libero
arbitrio 3. Capit. 16. Again, De Mendacio ad Consentium Capit. 7. he says:
That which the body, where lust went not before, does violently suffer,
ought rather to be called vexation than corruption. Or if all vexation be
corruption, yet all corruption is not filthy, but that corruption only,
which lust has procured, or whereunto lust has consented.

Again, in his first book De Ciuitate Dei, Capit. 18. he says: Where the
purpose of the mind remains constant, by which the body is sanctified,
there the offered violence of an others lust takes not from the body the
purposed holiness, which the constant perseuearance of the parties own
chastity does still retain. Much more like to this has he in the same
place, and also in the sixteenthe, nineteenth, and twenty eighth Chapiters of
the same book, etc. (...) men's (...) is (...) to be (...) the best


So also we must think the best of the vnwillfull death of men beside their
wits, that in their madness kill them selves. For otherwise it can not be
found in the Canonical books of holy Scripture, that GOD did either give
leave or commandment (...) man (...) haste^ (...).
to us mortal men, to kill our selves, thereby the sooner to obtain
immortality, or to avoid some imminent evil. For it must be understood that
we are forbidden so to do, by the law, which says: Thou shall not kill:
namely since he adds not, Thy neighbor: as he did in the other precept,
where he forbids to bear false witness. For because he names not thy
neighbor, he does in that precepte include thee self also. Therefore is the
doctrine of Seneca to be utterly condemned, which counsels men in misery
to dispatche themselves, that by death their misery may be ended.

And Saint Augustine disputing against them that do therefore murder
themselves, because they will not be subject to other men's filthy lusts,
does say: If it be a detestable crime, and a damnable sin, for a man to
murder himself, as the truth does manifestly cry that it is: who is so madd
to say: Let us sin now, least peradventure hereafter we happen to sin: Let
us now committ murder, least hereafter perhaps we fall into adultery? If
iniquity have so far the upper hand, that not innocence, but mischief is
most set bye, is it not better by living to hazard the chance of an
uncertain deflouration in time to come, than by dying to commit a certain
murder in the time present? Is it not far better (in such extreme times of
calamity) to committ such a fault as by repentance may be forgiven, than to
do such a sin whereby no time is left to repent in?

This have I said, because of those wilful men and women, which to avoid not
others, but their own sin, least perhapps under an others lust, they should
consent to their own being stirred up, do think that they ought to ridd
themselves from it by shortening their lives. But far be it from a Christian
mind which trusts in our God, and with a settled hope does stay on him as
on his surestayde. Far be it, I say, from such a mind to yield to any
pleasures of the flesh unto the consenting to filthiness. But if the
concupiscentiall disobedience, which dwells yet in our mortal members, is
against the law of our will stirred up, or moved by a law of her own, how
much rather is it without blame in the body of him that consents not, if it
be without blame in the body of him that sleeps? Thus much out of Augustine.
Now do we return to our purpose again.

To proceed therefore, they divide Sins hidd^n and (...).
actual sins into hidden or private, and into manifest or public sins.
Those hidden sins are not such as are hidd from men being known to none but
God alone, of which sort is hypocrisi^ and the deprauation of man's
disposition, but such as are not utterly without witnesses, although they be
not openly known and made manifest to all men. For on the other side the
manifest and public sins are committed with the knowledge and offense of
the whole Church. And these verily are of both, the greater, and those the
lighter, because they touch the church, and p^ocure the offense of many men.
Touching which the Apostle speaks in the fifth Chapter of his first Epistle to
Timothy.

But the most vulgar and apt distinction of actual sin, which does Sins
mortal and venial.
in a manner contain in it self all the other kinds and parts thereof, is
that, wherein it is called either mortal or venial sin. They think that
mortal sin is every sin which is committed of an unfaithful person. And
that venial sin is every sin that is done of a faithful man. I do
simply and according to the Scriptures suppose that all the sins of men are
mortal. For they are done against the law or will of God. But death is due to
sins. For the Prophet cries: The soul that sins shall die it self. And
the Apostle says: The reward of sin is death. Yea, and deadly sins do
take the name of death. To this now do belong these testimonies of the
Apostle: This ye know, that every fornicatour, or unclean person, or
covetous person, which is a worshipper of Idols, has none inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ and God. The same sentence being again rehearsed in the
fif^e to the Ephesians, is again to be found in the fifte to the Galathians,
and the fifte and sixth Chapiters of the first to the Corinthians.

But the sins, which are of their own nature mortal, are thoroughe grace
in ye faith of Jesus Christ made venial: because they are thoroughe Christ
forgiven by Gods great favor and mercy. And therefore the Apostle in the
sixte Chapter to the Romans did not say: Let not sin be in your mortal
body: But, Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey to
it thoroughe the lusts thereof. And again, There is therefore no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit. And again, Brethren we are debtors not to the flesh to walk
after the flesh. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall die: But if by the
spirit ye shall mortify the deeds of the flesh ye shall live. Therefore
there is sin in our body always so long as we live: but by Grace it is not
imputed unto death, and they, to whom it is not imputed, do by all means
endeavor to walk after the spirit and not after the flesh: and yet they do
very often times slip and fall, which falls and slippings nevertheless
together with that infirmity of mortal men are counted sins, I mean,
sins pardonable and not to be punished eternally.

Now, to mortal sins is that sin especially to be referred, which is
called the sin against the holy Ghost: which some do, not without a cause,
suppose to be most properly called mortal sin. Of which I will speak, when
first I have somewhat briefly answered to certain questions that do depend
upon this argument. First of all here is demanded, ^hether (...) the (...)
in (...) after (...) sin (...)
whether y^ sin or disease, which after baptism remains in infants, be
sin in very deed? Now, it is manifest that concupiscence remains in them
that are baptized, and that concupiscence is sin: and therefore that sin
remains in them that are baptized: which sin, notwithstanding, is through
the Grace of God in the merit of Jesus Christ, not imputed unto them. So did
Saint Augustine resolve this knott in the first book De Peccatorum meritis
and remissione Cap. 39. where he says: In infants verily it is so wrought, by
the Grace of God through the baptism of him that came in the likeness of
sinful flesh, that the flesh of sin should be made void. And yet it is
made void so, not that the concupiscence which is spredd and bredd in the
flesh, while it lives, should of a soudeine be consumed, vanish away, and
not be, but that it should not hurt him now being dead, in whom it was even
at his birth. For it is not given in baptism to them of more years, that the
law of sin, which is in their members, contrary to the law of their mind,
should utterly be extinguished, and not be at all, but that all the evil
whatsoever is faide, done, or thought of man, when with his captive mind he
served that concupiscence, should be utterly wiped out, and so reputed as
though it never had been done, Thus much has Augustine.

Another question, is, whether those Whether the virtuous works of the heathen
are sins, or no?
works, that the Gentiles do, which have a show of virtue and goodness are
sins, or else good works? It is assuredly true, that God, even among the
Gentiles also had his elect. Now so many such as were among them, were not
without the holy Ghost and faith. Therefore their works which were wrought
by faith were good works, and not sins. For in the Acts of the Apostles
mention is made that the prayers and alms deeds of Cornelius the Centurion
were had in remembrance before God. And the same Cornelius is said to have
been a devout man and fearing God, whereupon I infer that he was
faithful: whose faith afterward is made fully perfect, and upon whom the
gift of the holy Ghost is more plentiously, bestowed.

Moreover the worthy deeds of ye heathens are not to be despised nor utterly
contemned. For as they were not altogether done without God, so did they much
avail to the preserving and restoring of the tranquillity of kingdoms and
commonweals. And therefore did the most just Lord inriche certain excellent
men, and commonweals with many and ample temporal gifts. For upon the
Greeks and many Roman Princes he bestowed riches, victories, and abundant
glory. And verily, civil justice and public tranquillity was in great
estimation among many of them.

Other received infinite rewards, because they did constantly and manfully
execute the just judgments of God upon the wicked rebels and enemies to
God. Neither is it to be doubted but that the Lord granted that invincible
power to the Roman empire under Octauius Augustus and other Roman Princes, to
ye end that by their strength he might break and bring down the invincible
malice of the Jewish people, and so by the Romans revenge the blood of his
son, his holy Prophets, and blessed Apostles, which had been shed by those
furious and blasphemous beasts. Note here, that immediately after the
subuersio^ of Jerusalem, the Roman Empire began to decline. Now let us
return to the matter again.

Lastly they do demand, whether Whether the good works of the Saints are
sins or no?
the good works of the Saints and faithful ones, be sins or no? Verily,
if thou respectest our corruption and infirmity, then all our works are
sins, because they be the works of us, which are our selves not without
filthy spots, and therefore ye works, which be wrought by us, cannot be so
perfect, as otherwise they ought to be in the sight of God. And yet the very
same works, for the faithes sake in us, and because we are received into the
Grace of God, and that therefore they are wrought of us, which are now by
Grace the sons of God, both are in deed and also called good.

For to this end tends that saying of the Apostle: With the mind, the same
I, or even I, do serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.
Lo here, one and the same Apostle, even being regenerate, does retain in him
self two sundry dispositions, so that his very work working in diverse
respects is both sin and a good work also. For in as much as in mind he
serves God, so far forth he does a good work: but in so much as he
again did serve the law of the flesh, therein his work is not without a
spott. For he him self a little before in the same seventh Chapter said: I
find when I would do good, that evil ((...), that is to say) is present,
with, by, and in me: which evil undoubtedly making always a show of it
self in all our words, works, and thoughts, does cause, that the work
which is done of us, when we are regenerate, cannot be so pure, as Gods
justice does look that it should be: by the Grace therefore and the mercy of
God, it is reputed and esteemed as pure.

Here unto now does that sentence of our Lord in the Gospel after Saint
John belong, where he says: He that is washed, has no need, save to wash
his feet, but he is clean every whitt. For if he be clean every whitt,
what need has the clean to wash his feet? But if the feet must be washed,
how then is he clean every whitt? And yet these sayings are not repugnant
betwixt them selves, even as also that saying is not, where we say that good
works are sins.

For according to the plentifullnesse and imputation of Gods grace and mercy,
we are clean every whitt, being thoroughly purged from all our sins, so
that they shall not condemn us. And yet, for because there is always in us
the law of sin, which shows it self in us so long as we live, therefore
our feet, that is, those evil motions and naughty lusts of ours must be
resisted, and to our power repressed: finally we must acknowledge that we our
selves and our very works are never with out an imperfection: and therefore
consequently that all our works and we do stand in need of the grace of God.
These questions beeinge thus resolved, we are now come to expound the sin
against the holy Ghost.

The sin against the holy ghost, is a perpetual blaspheminge of the
revealed Of the sin against the ^oly ghost
and known truth, to wit, when we against our conscience, falsely reuolting
from the known truth, do without intermission both inueigh and rail against
it. For blasphemy is the evil speech or despightfull tantes, wherewith we
inueighe against, or slander any man, by casting forth wicked and detestable
speeches against him, whereby his credit and estimation is either crackte, or
utterly disgraced.

We d^e therefore blaspheme the magistrates, our elders, and other good men,
when we do not only withdraw our obedience, and the honor due unto them,
but do also with reprocheful words bayte them, not ceassing to call them
tyrauntes, bloudsuckers, wicked headds and odible guides: but we do
especially blaspheme God, when we detracte his glory, gaynsaye his grace, and
of set purpose do stubbornly contemn and dispraise his truth revealed unto
us, and his euidente worckes declared to all the world.

Every sin verily is not blasphemy, What blasphemy is properly.
but all blasphemy is sin. For because it tends against God and his
will, it is sin: but therewithal this property more, and singularity it
has, that it does also despise God and speak reprochfullie against his
works. Many do sin against the doctrine of the truth, because they do
either neglecte and not receive the truth: or else because, when they have
received it, they do not reverence and set it forth: but these kind of men
though they be sinners, do not yet deserve to be called blasphemers: but if
they begin once with tauntes and quippes to mock the doctrine, which they
neglect, calling it Heretical, Schismatic, Seditious and Diuellishe, then
may they rightely be termed blasphemers. Wherefore the property of the sin
against the holy Ghost is, not only to reuolte from the truth, but also
against all conscience to speak against the truth, and with floutes
incessauntly to ouerwhelme, both the very work, and most euidente
revelation of the Lord.

For the conscience, being by the evidence of the revelation or work of the
holy Ghost convinced, suggesteth or tells them, that they ought not only
to temper them selves from reproachful speeches, but that they ought to do an
other thing too, that is, that they ought to yield to the truth, and give to
God his due honor and glory.

But now to exclude this inspiration of the holy spirit, to reiecte and
ouerwhelme it with stubborn falsehood, flatt apostacy, wicked contradiction,
and perpetual contempt, is flatly to committ sin against the holy Ghost.
And this verily takes The beginning of this sin against the holy ghost
beginning of original sin, and is nourished and set forward by devilish
suggestions, our perverse affections, by indignation, envy, hope or fear, by
stubborn and selfewilfull malice, and lastly by contumacie and rebellion.

But now, the course of the matter requires to hear what the Lord said in
the Gospel concerning this sin. In the twelfth of Matthewe he says: Every
sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the
holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaks a word
against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaks
against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world
nor in the world to come. The same sentence of our Savior is thus expressed in
the third Chapter of saint Marks Gospel: All sins shall be forgiven unto
the children of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: but
he that speaks blasphemy against the holy Ghost, has never forgiveness,
but is in danger of eternal damnation.

In the twelfth Chap. after Saint Luke, these words in a manner are uttered
thus: Who soever speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven
him: but unto him that blasphemeth the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven.

In these words of the Lord we have here mention made of blasphemy against
the son of man, and of blasphemy against the holy Ghost: of which, that
against the holy Ghost is utterly unpardonable, but that against the sone of
man is altogether venial.

Blasphemy against the son of man is committed of the ignorant, Blasphe^^^
against (...) son of man.
which are not yet enlightened, and does tend against Christ, whom the
blasphemer does think to be a seducer: because he knows him not. Such
blasphemers the word of the Lord does manifestly testify that Paul him
self before his conversion, and a great part of the Jews were. For upon
the cross, the Lord prayed, crying, Father for give them: for they wott not
what they do. And the Apostle Paul says: If they had known the Lord of
glory they would not have crucified him. Whereupon Saint Peter in the Acts
speakinge to the Jews, says: I know that ye did it through ignorance, now
therefore turn you, and repent, that your sins may be wiped out. Act. 3. But
the blasphemy against the holy Ghost is said to be a continual faultfinding
The (...) against (...) holy (...)
or reproach against the holy spirit of God, that is, against the
inspiration, illumination and works of the spirit. For when he does so
evidently work in the minds of men, that they can neither gainesaye it, nor
yet pretend ignorance, and that for all this they do resist, mock, despise,
and continually snapp at the truth, which they in their consciences do know
to be most hoalsome and true: in so doing, they do blaspheme the holy Spirit
and power of God. As for example: the Phariseis being by most evident reasons,
and unreprovable miracles co^uinced in their own minds, could not deny but
that the doctrine and works of our Lord Jesus Christ were the truth and
miracles of the very God: and yet against the testimony of their own
consciences, they did of mere envy, rebellious doggednesse, and false
apostacy continually cauil, that Christ did al by the means and inspiration of
Beelsebub the devil. And little or nothing better than the Phariseis are those,
which when they have in these days once understood that the very truth and
assured salvation are most simply and purely set forth in Christ, do
notwithstanding forsake it and allow of the contrary doctrine, condemning and
with mockes railing upon the sound and manifest truth, yea, and that more
is, they cease not to clappe their hands and hiss at it, as a damnable
heresy. As this sin is of all other ye Sin against the holy ghost (...)
not remitted.
filthiest, so is it not venial, but utterly unpardonable. For in the Gospel,
the Lord has expressly said, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this
world, nor in the world to come. Which sentence in Saint Mark is thus
pronounced: He has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal
damnation. The cause is manifest. For it is impossible without faith to please
God. Without faith there is no remission of sins. Without faith there is no
entrance into the kingdom of God. But the sin against ye holy Ghost is
mere apostacy and flatt rebellion against the true faith, which the holy
Ghost by his illumination does power into our hearts. Which illumination
these untoward Apost ataes do incessantly call darkness, they name it a
mere seduction, and do with tauntes blaspheme it openly. Therefore the sin is
never forgiven them. For they tread under foot the Grace of God, and do
despise and make a mock of the way which leads to salvation. Wherefore
Saint Paul in the tenth to the Hebrews says: If we sin willingly, after
we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for sins, but a fearful looking for of judgment and violent fire, which
shall devour the adversaries. Now I pray you what is it to sin wilingly?
Forsooth, to sin willingly, is not to sin through infirmity, or often
times to fall into one and the same sin: but to sin willingly, is with a
most stubborn co^te^pt to sin: as they are wont to do, which wittingly and
willingly do reiecte and spurn at the Grace of God, not ceassing to make a
mock of the cross and death of Christ, as though it were foolish and not
sufficiently effectual to the purginge of all our sins. For to such there
is prepared none other sacrifice for sins. And such the Apostle calls the
adversaries, that is, the contemners and enemies of God. And therefore the same
Apostle in the sixte Chapter of ye same Epistle says: It cannot be, that they
which were once lighted, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were become
partakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and
the powers of the world to come, and they fall away, should be renewed again
into repentance, crucifying to them selves the son of God afreshe, and
making a mock of him. He speaks not here of every fall of the faithful: but
of wilful and stubborn apostacy. For Peter fell and was restored again
through repentance: which happens to more than Peter alone. For all sinners
are through repentance daily restored But unrepentant Judas is not restored,
because he was a wilful apostatae. Mockers and blasphem^rs are not restored
through repentance, because they do obstinately stand against the known
verity, and cease not to blaspheme the way by which alone they are to be
ledd unto eternal life. Therefore those places of S. Paul do make never a
whit for the Nouatians, but do expound to us the nature and enuenomed force of
the sin against the holy Ghost. Saint John the Apostle and Evangelist
disputing of this sin in his Canonical Epistle, says: If any man see his
brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give
him life for them, that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death, I
say not that thou should pray for it. All unrighteousness is sin, and
there is a sin not unto death. We know that whosoever is borne of God
sins not: but he that is begotten of God keeps him self, and that evil
touches him not.

Saint John here makes mention of two sorts of sins. The one unto death,
that is mortal and unpardonable, for which we must not pray: that is to say,
prayers cannot obtain pardone for it. That sin is contumelious reproch^
against the holy Ghost, reuolting apostacy, and incessant mocking of the
Gospel of Christ. For in the Gospel after S. John, we read: Verily, verily I
say unto you, if a man keep my sayings, he shall not see death for ever. And
again: If ye believe not that I am, ye ^hal dye in your sins.

And apostacy in very deed is iniquity, and a purposed and perpetual
sin. For what is more sinful or unjust, than to strine against, and make a
mock of the known verity? The other sin is venial, not unto death, the
which, of what sort it is, Saint John declares, when he adds: We know
that every one which is borne of God, sins not. Now that saying must not be
so absolutely taken, as though he sinned not at all: but we must understand
that he sins not to death. For otherwise the very Saints are sinners, as
it is evident by ye first Chapter of this Epistle.

Furthermore, that which does immediately follow in John, makes manifest
that which went before: He that is begotten of God, says he, keeps him self,
that is, he stands steadfastly in the known truth, and takes heed to him
self, that that evil touch him not, that is, that he entrap him not, stir
him up against God, nor retain him in rebellion. Thus much have I hitherto
said touching the sin against ye holy Ghost, which Augustine did in Or
endler unrepentance.
one place call final impenitencie, which does follow upon Apostacy,
blasphemy, and contempt of the holy Ghost, or of the word of truth revealed
by the holy Ghost.

And although I have already in the handling of Original sin and Of the
(...) and certain^ punishme^^ of sinners.
sin against the holy Ghost, partly touched the effects of sin, yet to
conclude this treatise withal I will briefly show you somewhat touching the
just and assured punishment that shall be laid upon sinners. For, in the
definition of sin I said, that sin brought upon us the wrath of GOD, with
death and sundry punishments. Of which in this place I mean to speak. It is
as manifest, as what is most manifest, by the scriptures, that God does
punish the sins of men. yea, that he punishes sinners for their sins. For
many places in the scriptures declare that God is angry and grievously
offended at the sins of mortal men. David cries: The Lord loves the just:
as for the wicked and violent, his soul does hate them, Upon the ungodly he
shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall be their
portion to drink. For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, with his
countenance he does behold the thing that is just. In like manner Paul says:
The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
uncleanness of men, which withholde the truth in unrighteousness. And what
may be thought of ye moreover, that the wrath of God for the sins of us men
would be by no means appeased, but by the death of the son of God? Wherein
verily the excellency of the great price of our redemption does argue the
greatness and filthiness of our sin. To all which we may add, that the
good Lord, who loved mankind so well, would not have overwhelmed us, with so
many pains and exceeding calamities, had not our sin been passing horrible
in the sight of his eyes. For who can make a full beadrowe of all the
calamities of miserable sinners? The Lord for our sins absenteth The places
of (...).
him self from us. But if the Sun be out of the earth, how great are ye
mystes and cloudie darkness in it. If God be away from us, how great is the
horror in minds of men?

Here therefore as punishementes due to sinners, are reckoned, the tyranny of
Satan, a thousand torments of conscience, the death of the soul, dreadful
fear, utter desperation, innumerable calamities of body, and of our other
faculties, which Moses the servant of God does at large rehearse in the 26.
of Leuiticus, and the 28 Chapter of Deuteronomium. And now, since new sins
are daily scourged with new kinds of punishements, what end, I pray, is any
man able to make, if he should go about to reckon them all?

It is not to be doubted verily, but The Lord does punish sinners justly*
that the Lord does punish sinners justly. For he is him self a most just
Judge. And for because it is a madd man's part to doubt of the justice,
omnipotency, and wisdom of god: it follows therefore consequently, that
all religious and godly men do hold for a certeintie, that the punishments
which God does lay upon men, are laid upon them by most just judgment.

But how great and what kind of punishment is due to every fault and
several transgression, belongs rather to Gods judgment to determine, than
for mortal men too curiously to inquire. Whereupon Saint Augustine Tracta,
in Joan. 89 said: There is as great diversity of punishments as of sins,
which how it is ordained, the wisdom of God does more deeply declare, than
man's conjectures can possibly seek out, or utter in words. He verily which
in his law given to man gave this for a rule: according to the measure of the
sin, so shall the measure of the punishment be: being him self most
equal and just, does not in judgment exceed measure.

Abraham in the notable communication had with God, which is reported in the 18
of Genesis, does among other things say: W^lt thou destroy the just with the
wicked? that be far from thee, that thou should do such a thing, and slaye
the righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked.

That is not thy part, that iudgest all the earth: thou shall not make such
judgment. Hereunto also belongs that notable demonstration which the Lord
uses toward Jonas, being angry with the Lord because of his judgments:
for he shows that he has justly a care of the infants, yea, and of the
cattle in Niniue. The place is extant in the fourth Chapter of the prophecy of
Jonas. Let us therefore steadfastly hold, that the Lord, when he punishes,
does injury to no creature which he has made. Here therefore the
disputations and questions come to an end, wherein men are wont to demand
why ye Lord does sometimes use so sharp torments toward infants or
sucklings? or why he rewards temporal offenses with eternal punishments? For
ye Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. As David
did most truly witness, whereas in another place he says: Thou art just, O
Lord, and thy judgment is right. Blessed is he that stumbleth not here, and
does not murmur against the Lord.

But if (...) so happen that the Lord God punishes most surely.
at any time do somewhat long defer the judgment and punishment, we must
not therefore think that he is unjust, because he spares the wicked, and
sharply corrects his friends and their vices. Let us rather lay before our
eyes the Evangelical parable of the rich glutton and poor silly Lazarus.
For Lazarus, though he was the friend of God, did notwithstanding die for want
of food. The other though he was Gods enemy, did spend his life in deintie
fare and pleasures, and felt none ill. But hearken, after this life, what their
judgment was: Abraham says to the rich glutton: My son, remember that thou
in thy life time receiuedst thy good, and Lazarus likewise received evil: but
now he rejoices, and thou art tormented. Therefore, if the godly be at any
time afflicted in this present life, they shall be abundantly rewarded for it in
the life to come. But if the wicked be spared in this world, they are more
grievously punished in the world to come. For God is just, and rewards every
man according to his merit. If hereafter therefore thou shalt chance to see
the wicked live in prosperity, think not thou by and by that God is unjust,
suppose not that his power is abated, and say not that he sleeps, and sees
them not. For that saying of the Prophet, which is also used by the Apostle
Peter, is assuredly true: The eyes of the Lord are upon the just, and his ears
open unto their prayers. Again: The eyes of the Lord are upon them that do
wickedness. We must in such a case fortify our minds with the just
examples of Gods judgments, gathered together out of the holy Scriptures. Let
us consider that the world was destroyed with the general deluge, when God had
in vain a long time looked after repentance. Let us remember that Sodom,
Gomorrha, Exampl^ of Go^ justly (...)
and the cities adjacent thereaboute were burnt with fire sent down from
heaven. Let us think upon Egypt how it was stricken with diverse plagues,
and the inhabitants drowned in the red sea. Let us call to mind the things
that happened by the holy and just judgment of God to the Amorrhites, the
Chanaanites, the Amalechites, and the very Israelits, first under their
Judges, then under their Kings. Their measure at last was fully filled.
Neither did they at any time despise God and his word, but were at the last
paid home for their labor. They never sinned and went scotf^^e long. The
history of Paulus Orosius, yea, the universal history of all the world do
minister unto us inumerable examples like unto these, declaring the certeintie
of Gods judgment. Let us think that God does not therefore allow of sins,
because ^ods long (...)
he is slack in punishing them, but let us persuade our selves that he by the
prolonging of punishment does of his unmeasurable goodness both look and
stay for the repentance and conversion of miserable sinners.

For in ye Gospel the Lord bids not to cut down the barren figg tree,
because he looked to see if it would bring any fruit the next year following.

The Apostle Paul says: Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
patience, and long sufferaunce, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance? But thou after thy stubbornness and heart that cannot
repent, heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and declaration
of the righteous judgment of God, which will reward every man according to
his deeds: to them which by continuing in weldoing seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality, eternal life: But unto them that are contentious,
and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, shall come indignation
and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man, that does evil.

This I say let us firmly hold, and with this let us content our selves, not
grudging to see the wicked live long in prosperity without pain or
punishment. The holy, just, wise, and mighty God, knows best what to do,
how to do, why and when to do every thing conveniently. To him be glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

To this belongs also, that God does as well afflicte the good as the Why
sin^ a^ plagued with temporal punishments considering that they are forgiven
by the grace of God.
badd. Touching which I spoke at large in the third Sermon of this third
Decade. Now, here therefore some there are which demand, why God does with
diverse punishements persecute those sins which he has already forgiven to
men? For he forgave Adam his sin, and yet he laid on him both death, and
innumerable calamities of this life beside. To David we read that the Prophet
Nathan said: The Lord has taken thy sin away: and yet immediately after,
the same Prophet adds: The sword shall not depart from thy house. To this
we answer simply that these plagues which are laid on us before the
remission of our sins, are the punishments due to our sins, but that after
the remission of our sins they are conflictes and exercises, wherewith the
faithful do not make satisfaction for their sins, which are already
remitted by Grace in the death of the son of God, but wherewith they are
humbled and kept in their duty, having an occasion given of the greater
glory.

And here I will not stick to recite unto you (dearly beloved) Saint
Augustines judgment touching this matter in his second book De peccatorum
meritis et remissione Chap. 33. and 34. where he says: Things, the guilt
whereof God absolueth or remitteth, to the end that after this life they should
do no harm, and yet he suffers them to abide unto the conflict of faith,
that by them men may be instructed and exercised, profiting in the conflict of
righteousness. etc. And presently after: Before forgiveness they are the
punishments of sinners: but after remission they are the conflictes and
exercises of just men. And again, after a few words more he faith, The flesh
which was first made, was not the flesh of sin, wherein man would not keep
righteousness among the pleasures of paradise. Wherefore God ordained, that after
his sin, the flesh of sin being increased, should endeavor with pains and
labors to recover righteousness again. And for that cause Adam being cast
out of Paradise, dwelt over against Eden, that is, against the place of
pleasures, which was a sign, that with labors, which are contrary to
pleasure, the flesh of sin was then to be invred, which being in pleasures,
kept not obedience, before it was the flesh of sin. Therefore even as those
our first parents by living justly afterward, whereby they are rightly
thought to be by the blood of Christ delivered from utter punishment, deserved
not yet in that life to be called back again into Paradise: so also the
flesh of sin, although, when sins are forgiven, a man live righteously in
it, does not presently deserve not to suffer that death, which it drew from the
propagation of sin. Such a like thing is insinuated to us in the book of the
Kings, concerning the patriarche David, to whom when the prophet was sent, and
had threatened unto him the evils that should come upon him through the anger
of God, because of the sin which he had committed, by the confession of the
sin he deserved forgiveness, according to the answer of the prophet, who
told him that that sin and crime was forgiven unto him, and yet those
things Absol^^ defiled (...) fathers bed, (...) by he (...) that (...) was
humbled.
betyded him which god had threatened unto him, to wit, that he should so be
humbled by the incest of his son. etc. And what is the cause that they
demand not, if God for sin did threaten that scourge, why then when he had
pardoned the sin, did he fulfill that which he threatened? but for because
they know (if they demand that question) that they shall rightly be answered,
that the remission of the sin was granted, to the end the man should not be
by his sin hindered to obtain eternal life: but the effect of Gods
threatening did follow after the remission of the sin, to the end that the
godliness of the man might be tried and exercised in that humility. In like
manner, God has for sins laid bodily death, as a punishment upon the body
of man, and after the forgiveness of sins has not taken it away, but left
it in the body, to be a mean to the exercise of righteousness. Thus far
has Augustine.

Now as concerning the punishments How wicked punish^^
of the wicked (If the most just God do in this world touch them with any) let
us know that they be the arguments of Gods just judgment, who in this world
begins to punish them temporally, and in the world to come does not
cease to plague them everlastingly. The wicked verily perish thorough their
own default. For God begins to whippe them in this life, to the end that
they being chastened may begin to be wise, and turn to the Lord: but they by
his chasticement are the more indurate, and murmur at the judgments of God,
converting that to their own destruction, which was ordained to have been to
their health. For as to them that love GOD all things work to the best, so to
them that hate the Lord all things do work to their utter destruction.

This argument might be extended further yet: but for because I have already
spoken a great deal to this effect in the third Sermon of this third Decade,
that which is here left out may there be found, and therefore I refer you
to the looking upon that. And so now hitherto touching sin.

I have, with somewhat too long a Sermon, (dearly beloved) by more than the
space of two whole hours deteyned you here. That therefore I may now make an
end, let us humbly acknowledge our sins, and meekely cry with prayers unto
the Lord, which sits in the throne of Grace, saying: Have mercy upon us,
O Lord, for against thee have we sinned, and do confess our offenses. Thy
debtors are we. Forgive thou us our debtes, as we forgive our debtors: and
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen. ()

The end of the third Decade of Sermons.
The fourth Decade of Sermons, written by Henry Bullinger.
Of the Gospel of the Grace of God, who has given his son unto the world,
and in him all things necessary to salvation, that we believing in him,
might obtain eternal life.
The first Sermon.
AFter the exposition of the law, and those points of doctrine, that depend
upon the law, I think it it best now to come to the handling of the
Gospel, which in the exposition of the law and other places else has been
mentioned often times. Now therefore (dearly beloved) as I have been
hitherto helped with your prayers to God, so here again, I request your
earnest supplications with me to the father, that I by his holy spirit may
speak the truth to your edification in this present argument.

Euangelium, is a Greek word, Euangeliu^ the gospel
but is received of the Latins and Germans, and at this day, used as a word
of their own. It is compounded of (...) which signifies good, and (...) to
tell tidings. For Euangelium signifies the telling of good tidings, or happy
news: as is wont to be blown abroad, when the enemies being put to foil,
we raise the siege of any city, or obtain some notable victory over our
foes. The word is attributed to any joyful and luckie news concerning any
matter luckily accomplished.

The Apostles did willingly use that term: not so much because the Prophets
had used it before them, as for that it does wonderfully contain, and does, as
it were, lay before our eyes the manner, and work of our salvation
accomplished by Christ, whereunto they have applied the word Euangelium. The
Prophet Esai. 61. Luke. ^
Esaie, as Luke interprets it, brings in Christ our Lord speaking in this
manner: The spirit of the Lord upon me, because he has anointed me, (...),
that is, to preach the Gospel has he sent me, to heal the broken hearted, to
preach deliverance unto the captive, and recovering of sight unto the blind^,
freely to set at liberty them that are bruised, and to preach the acceptable
year of the Lord. Lo here, the Sauiuiour of the world doe^h in the Prophet
and the Evangelist expound to us what Euangelium is, and whereunto it tends.
The father, says he, has sent me to preach Euangelium, the Gospel to the
poor. And immediately after, to show who those poor should be, he adds:
which are broken hearted, or broken minded, to wite, such as find in them
selves no soundness, or health, but utterly despairinge of their own
strength, do wholly depend upon the help of Christ their cunning and willing
Physician. Now the Gospel or good tidings, which is showed to the afflicted,
is this, that the son of God is descended from heaven to heal the sick and
diseased souls. To which also, to make it more evident, he adds another
cause, saying: that the son of God is come to preach deliverance unto
captives, and the recovering of sight to the blind etc. For all men are held
captive in the bonds of damnation: they do all serve a sorrowful slavery
under their cruel enemy Satan: they are all kept blind in the darkness of
errors. And to them it is that redemption, deliverance, and the acceptable year
of the Lord is preached. Now this joyful tidings is called Euangelium, the
Gospel.

Therefore the Gspell is of all men ^he Gos^^ll what (...).
in a manner after this sort defined. The Gospel is a good and a sweet
word, and an assured testimony of Gods grace to us ward exhibited in Christ
unto all believers. Or else, the Gospel is the most evident sentence of the
eternal God, brought down from heaven, absoluing al believers from all their
sins, and that too freely, for Christ his sake, with a promise of eternal
life. These definitions are gathered out of the testimonies of the Evangelists
and Apostles. For Saint Luke brings in ye Angel of the Lord speaking to the
amazed sheepeheards, and saying: Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings
of great joy, that shall be to all people: for unto you is borne this day, in
the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

Lo here, he takes from the sheepeheardes all manner of fear with the (...)
of good tydinges, that is, with (...) of health, which is a (...) is full of
joy, and always brings gladness with it. The tidings are: that there is
borne the Savior of the world, even the Lord Jesus Christ: he is borne, and
that too, unto, and for us, that is, to the health and salvation of us mortal
men. Saint Paul says: That the Gospel was promised before of GOD by the
prophets in the holy Scripture of his son, which was made of the seed of
David after the flesh: who has been declared to be the son of god with
power after the spirit that sanctifies, by his resurrection from the dead.
And again: The Gospel is the preaching of Jesus Christ according to the
revelation, which has been kept cloase from before beginninges, but is now
made manifest and by the writings of the proph^ts opened to all nations unto
the obedience of faith, according to the apointment of the eternal God. And
yet again more briefly he says: The gospel is the power of God unto
salvation to all that do believe, that is to say, the Gospel is the preaching
of Gods power, by which all they are saved that do believe. But Christ is the
power of God. For he is said to be the arm, the glory, the virtue and
brightness of the father. Now Christ brings salvation to every one that does
believe: For he is the Savior of all.

Of all this we do now gather The definition of the Gospel.
this definition of the holy Gospel: the Gospel is the heavenly preaching of
Gods grace to us ward, wherein it is declared to all the world being set in
the wrath and indignation of God, that God the father of heaven is pleased in
his only begotten son our Lord Christ Jesus, whom, as he promised of old
to the holy fathers, he has now in these latter times exhibited to us, and
in him has given us all things belonging to a blessed life and eternal
salvation, as he that for us men was incarnate, dead, and raised from the dead
again, was taken up into heaven, and is made our only Lord and Savior,
upon condition y^ we acknowledging our sins, do soundly and surely believe
in him.

This definition I confess, is somewhat with the longest: but yet withal I
would have you think that the matter, which is in this definition described,
is it self very large and ample: which I have therefore in this long
definition or description, with as great light as I could, endeavored my self
to make manifest to all men. Wherefore, I neither could, nor should have
expressed it more briefly. This definition consists of just parts, which
being once severally expounded and thoroughly opened, every man, I hope, shall
evidently perceive the nature, causes, effects, and whatsoever else is good to
be known concerning the Gospel.

First of all, that the Gospel is tydinges That the Gospel is tidings from
heaven.
come from heaven, and not begone on earth, that does most of all argue,
because God our heavenly father did him self first preach that tidings to our
miserable parents, after their fall in Paradise, promising his son, who
being incarnate, should crushe the Serpents head.

Then again, the Apostle Paul does in express words say: God in time past
at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke unto the fathers by the
Prophets, and has in these last days spoken to us by his son.

And John before him is read to have testified, saying: No man has seen God
at any time: the only begotten son, which is in the bosom of the father, he
has declared him. And again: He that comes from an high is above all: he
that is of the earth is earthly, and speaks of the earth: he that comes
from heaven is above all: and what he has seen and heard, that he testifies.
To this belongs that the Prophets were believed to have prophesied by the
inspiration of the holy spirit. Now they did in the holy Scriptures
foreshewe the Gospel: the especial or chief points whereof were by Angels
descending from heaven declared unto men.

For the incarnation of the son of God is by the Archangel Gabriel told
first to the holy virgin, and after that again to Joseph the supposed father
of Christ, and tutour of the unspotted virgin. The same Angel did preach to
the sheepeheardes the birth of the son of God. Moreover, to the women that
came to the grave, mynding, after their country manner, to annoynct the body
of the Lord, the Angels declared that he was risen from the dead again. The
same Angels at the Lords ascension did testify to the Apostles, whose eyes
were turned and surely fixed into ye clouds, that he was taken up into heaven,
and that from thence he should come again to judge the quick and the dead.
And to all these testimonies may be added the voice of the eternal father him
self uttered from heaven upon our Lord and Savior, saying: This is my
beloved son, in whom I am pleased, hear him. Which testimony of the
father, the blessed Apostle Peter does in the zeal of the Spirit repeat in
the first Chapter of his second Epistle. Therefore, the preaching of the
Gospel is a divine speech, unreprovable, and brought down from heaven, which
whosoever believe, they do believe the word of the eternal God: and they that
believe it not, do despise and reiecte the word of God. For it ceasseth not
to be the word of God, because it is preached The Gos^ell is the ^orde of ^^d
al^hough it (...) uttered ^y the (...) of ^en.
by the ministry of men. For of the Apostles we do read that the Lord did
say: It is not ye that speak, but the spirit of my father which is within
you. And therefore we read that they departed not from Jerusalem, until they
were first instructed from above, and had received the holy Ghost. Neither is
there any cause why the word of God should be tied to the Apostles only, as
though after the Apostles, no man did preach the word of God. For our Lord in
Saint John's Gospel does plainly say: Verily I say unto you, he that
receives whom soever I send, receives me: and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me. Now our Lord the high priest and chief bishop
of his catholic church, does send, not Apostles only, but al them also that
are lawfully called, and do bring the word of Christ. Therefore we understand
it to be spoken concerning all the lawful ministers of the church, where the
Lord does say: Whose sins soever ye forgive, they are forgiven them: and
whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained. And again: whatsoever thou
loosest on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: and whatsoever thou byndest on
earth, shall be bound in heaven. For in an other place the Lord says: Verily I
say unto you, it shall be easier for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the
day of judgment, than for that city that receives you not, and hears not
your sayings. Now, who knows not with how filthy and horrible sin the
men of Sodom did defile them selves, and that the Lord rayned fire, brimstone
and pitche from heaven, wherewith he burnt up both the city and her
inhabitants? Who therefore cannot gather therevppon, that rebels and
blasphemers of the Gospel of Christ do sin more grievously than the
Sodomites did, and that God which is a sure revenger, will surely plague them
for it, either in this life, or in the world to come, or else in both with
unspeakable miseries and endless torments? Let us therefore believe the
Gospel of the son of God, first preached to the world by God the father,
then by ye Patriarchs, after that, of the Prophets, and lastely of the only
begotten son of God Christ Jesus, and his Apostles: whose heavenly voice does
even at this day sound to us in the mouths of the mynisters sincerely
preaching the Gospel unto us.

Secondarily, we have to consider The ^^sp^ll (...)
what it is that the heavenly preaching of the Gospel does show unto the
world, to wite, the Grace of God our heavenly father. For the Apostle Paul in
the twentieth Chapter of the Acts, says: that he received the ministry of
the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God. Now therefore, I
will at this present say so much of the grace of GOD, as is sufficient for
this place.

The word grace is diversely used The word ^race.
in the holy Scriptures, even as it is in profane writings also. For in the
Bible it signifies Thankesgiuinge: and also a Benefit, and alms. as 2. Cor.
8. Moreover, it signifies praise and recompense, as in that place where the
Apostle says: If when ye do well ye are afflicted, and yet do bear it: that
is praisworthie before God. It does also signify faculty or license, as when
we say, that one has gotten grace to teach, and execute an office. For the
Apostle says that he received grace: and immediately, to expound his own
meaning he adds: to execute the office of an Apostle. Moreover ye gifts of
God are called grace: because they are given gratis, and freely bestowed
without looking for of any recompense. And yet Paul in the fifte to the
Romans, distinguishes a gift from grace. For Grace does signify the favor
and good will of God toward us. But a gift is the thing which God does give
us of that good will, such as are faith, constancy, and integrity. They are
said to have found Grace with God, whom God does dearly love and favor
more than other. In that sense Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord:
Joseph found grace in the eyes of the Lord of the prison. And the holy
virgin is read to have found grace with the Lord, because she was beloved of
God, and very dear unto the Lord, as she whom he had singularly chosen from
among all other women.

But in this place and present argument, Grace is the favor and goodness
(...) is.
of the eternal godhead, wherewith he according to his incomprehensible
goodness does gratis, freely for Christ his sake embrace, call, justify and
save us mortal men. Now here me thinks before we go any further, it is
not amiss to examine and search out the cause of this Gods love to us
exhibited. For we see yt there is a certain relation betwixt the favor of God,
and us men, to whom his favor is so bent. It is a matter neither hard nor
tedious to be found out. For in us The (...) of God^ grace.
there is nothing wherewith God can be in love, or wherewithal he may be
moved or stirred up to embrace us: yea, in so much as we are all vnpure
sinners, and that God is holy, just, and a revenger of iniquities, he has
matter enough to find in us, for which he may be angry at, and with just
reuengement plague us. So then the cause of Gods love to us wards must of
necessity be, not in us, nor in any other thing beside God, (considering that
nothing is more excellent than man) but even in God him self. Moreover, the
most true Scripture does teach us, that God is of his own inclination
naturally good, gentle, and as Paul calls him Philanthropon, a lover of us
men, who has sent his own son of his own nature into the world for our
redemption: whervppon it does consequently follow, that God does freely of
him self, and for his sons sake love man, and not for any other cause.
Whereby immediately all the preparamentes, incitaments and merits of men
being dissolved by the fire of Gods great love, do vade and pass away like
smoke. For the grace of God is altogether free, and unless it be so, I cannot
see how it can be called Grace. But it behooves us in a thing so weighty to
cite some evident testimonies of the holy Scripture, to confirm our minds
withal against all sophistical trifles, and temptations of the devil. Our
Lord in the Gospel said: So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten son for the world: that every one which believe in him should not
perish, but have life everlasting.

Lo here, this goodwill of God, which is the favor and love wherewith God
embraces us, is the cause of our salvation. For Christ having suffered for us
is our salvation. Now God of very love has given Christ both to us, and for
us. Neither may we think that God was first moved by our love to him ward,
to show like mutual love to us again, and to give his son for us. For he
had determined before the beginning of the world to work our redemption
through Christ his son. And John the Euangeliste in his Canonical Epistle,
says: Herein is love, not that we loved God: but that he loved us, and sent
his son to be an atonement for our sins.

To these testimonies although sufficiently plain and strong enough, I will
yet add some proofs out of the Apostle Paul, y^ so this argument may be more
evident, and that ye great agreement may appear, which is betwixt Evangelists
and Apostles in this doctrine of grace. Paul therefore says: All have sinned,
and stand in need of the glory of God: but are justified freely by his grace,
thorough the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Again to the Ephesians he
says: Ye are saved thorough grace by faith, and that not of your selves, it
is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast. Again to
Titus: The grace and love of God our Savior toward all men has appeared: not
of the works of our own righteousness, which he did: but according to his
mercy has he saved us. Likewise in the 2. Epistle to Timothy the first
Chapter he says: God has saved us, and has called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus. I think verily that if a man had
been set of purpose to have feigned any thing for the defense of this matter,
he could not have framed any sentence, so fit and evident as these words
are. So now it is manifest that the grace of God is altogether free, as that
which excludes all our woorks and merits. And this free The cause of the
Gospel.
love of God is the only cause and true beginning of the Gospel. For which
cause Paul calls the Gospel the Preaching of Grace.

But now, although the grace of God does not depend upon us or our The
working of gods grace
woorks, yet does it not idly abide in God, as if it were utterly without us,
and altogether far from us, as the thing that is neither felt, nor yet
works in us. For we understood by the cited testimonies, that grace is the
favor of God, wherewith he loves us men. We understood that men are saved by
grace. For since God loves men he would not have them perish, and therefore
he has thorough grace sent his son to deliver them from destruction, and
that in him the justice and mercy of God might be known to all the world. But
none are delivered save those that believe, therefore grace has somewhat
whereby to work in man. For by the pouring of the holy Ghost into our hearts,
the understanding and will are instructed in the faith. To be short, Grace (as
I have already told you) does call, justify, save or glorify the faithful:
so that we must make our account that ye whole work of our salvation and all
the virtues of the godly do proceed of the only grace of God alone, whose
working we do at all times acknowledge and confess. And that is again proved
both by divine and humane testimonies. Paul to the Romans says: Those which
he knew before, he also did predestinate: and those, which he did predestinate
he also called: and those, whom he called, he also justified: and those whom
he justified, he also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If
God be on our side who can be against us? which spared not his own son, but
gave him for us: how shall he not with him also give us all things? Again in
the first cap. of his Epistle to the Ephcsians, he has referred the whole
work of election and salvation with all the parts thereof unto the grace of
God. Moreover the holy fathers in the counsel Mileuentanum, among whom also
S. Augustine was present, made this decree touching the grace of God. If any
man say, that mercy is without the grace of God bestowed from above upon us,
believing, willing, desiring, endeavoring, studiing, asking, seeking, and
striving (as of our selves:) does not confess, that even To believe, To will,
and To be able to do all these things as we should do, is wrought by the
pouring in and inspiration of the holy Ghost: if he join the humility or
obedience of man as an help unto grace: and if he does not consent that it is
the very gift of grace, even that we are humble and obedient, he is directly
contrary to the Apostle, who says: For what have thou that thou have not
received? And, By the grace of God I am that I am. Thus much say they. Now
these divine and humane testimonies being thoroughly considered, there is none,
I hope, which may not understand that the grace of God is ye same that I told
you, to wit, the favor and goodwil of the eternal Godhead, wherewith he
according to his incomprehensible goodness does embrace, call, justify, and
save men freely for Christ his sake our Lord and Savior.

The blessed man Aurelius Augustine had a sharp conflict with Pelagius The
co^trouers^^ betwixt Augusti^^ and Pela^^us touc^ing the grace of God.
the Britton, concerning the grace of God. For the heretic did by grace
understand nothing, but the benefit of ye creation: which, as Augustine denied
not to be grace, so did heveheme^tly urge that the Apostle did especially
speak of that free grace, whereby without any merit of ours we are freely
saved for Christ his sake. This did he urge therefore the more earnestly, be
cause he saw that the heretic affirmed, that his own humane nature was
sufficient unto him, not to do only, but also to do perfectly the
commandments of God by free will. But of these matters s. Augustine does
very largely and religiously dispute in his 95. Epistle Ad Innocentium. Many
of ye late writers, for teachings sake, have divided Grace, *into Grace that
does 1. Grati^ gratum ciens. 2. Grat^^ gratis (...) 3. Grat^^ opera^^ gratia
opera^^ 4. Gra^^^ praeue^^ens. and tia (...) quent.
things acceptable, and *Grace that is gratis or freely given. Again, they
have divided it into *working Grace, and ioynte working Grace. Finally, they
part it into *Grace that goes before, and grace that follows after. And ye
very same writers also reckon up the operatio^s or effects of grace after this
manner almost. Grace heals the soul, and makes it first to will well, and
then to work effectually y^ thing that it wills: so it causes it to
perseueare in goodness, and at length to come to eternal glory.

But I am not so careful to reckon up the sentences of writers, to show you
every ones several opinion (which both were an excessive labor, and also
more than my ability is to do) as I am willing to cite ye places of scripture
(which is the one and only rule how to think, and how to judge rightly) to
show you thereby what the scripture would have you think: as I have in my
former treatise of the grace of God, both briefly and evidently enough, I hope,
declared unto you. And also the discourse of Christ, which follows
hereafter (thorough whom the father has powered the most excellent and
heavenly grace into us) shall help to make up y^ which seems to be wanting here.

But now before I depart from this (...) are (...) by (...).
argument. I thought good to admonish you, that the sentences of Gods word do
not jar among themselves, when we do in sundry places read and hear, first
that we are saved freely or by the Grace of God: then that we are saved by the
love of God: thirdly that we are saved thoroughe the mercy of God: fourthly
that we are saved thoroughe Christ: fifthly that we are saved thorough the
blood, or death, or incarnation of Christ: and lastly that we are saved through
faith in Christ, or in the mercy or grace of God. For all these speeches tend
to one and the same end, and do ascribe the whole glory and cause of man's
salvation unto the very mercy, or grace of God. The pledge of grace, yea, and
our only Savior, is the only begotten son of God betrayed unto death.
Sincere faith lays hold on mere grace in Christ and nothing else.

Now therefore having thus expounded, according to my small ability, (...).
that which I had to speak in general of the grace of God, I do here
descend to handle that singular or particular work of Gods grace, which is
nothing else, but that the merciful father has exhibited to us his son in
that manner and order, as he promised him to us in the old prophets, and that in
him he has fully given us al things requisite to eternal life, and absolute
felicity: because he is the Lord and Messiah or only and true Savior,
which was incarnate, dead, raised to life, and taken up into heaven for us
and our salvation. For Christ is both king and high priest, that is, our
savior, he is the mark, the star, and very Sun light of the preaching
of ye Gospel. Now in expounding these things particularly, I will use this
course and order. First of all I will out of the law and the Prophets recite
unto you some evident promises of Christ made by God unto ye church: which shall
be those especially y^ the Apostles themselves have already touched and
expounded. Seco^dlie I will prove unto you that God has now performed that,
which he promised so long ago, to wit, that he has already exhibited to us
his only begotten son: and that he is that true and so long-looked-for Lord
and Messiah, which should come to save the world. Lastly I will show you how y^
in this Son, the father is pleased and reconciled to the world again: in
whom also he has fully given us all things requisite to eternal life and
absolute felicity. For he for us and for our salvation was incarnate, dead,
raised to life again, and taken up into heaven, there to be our mediator for
ever, and advocate unto his father. And in these points do lie the lively
veins of the Gospel, which flow with hoalesome waters unto eternal life. For
in them does consist the sound consolation of the faithful, and the enduring
tranquillity of a quiet conscience. Without them there is no life or quiet
rest.

The promises made by God concerning The promises touching Christ our Savior.
Christ, which are uttered in the holy Scriptures, are threefold or of three
sorts. I therefore to make them the playner unto you, do divide the promises
of one and the same sort, according to the times.

The first promises were made to the patriarchs or ancient fathers before the
giving of the law: and these again consist of two sorts. For one sort of
them are plain, uttered evidently in simple words without all types and
^^^uratiue shadows. The other sort ^re figurative and couched under types. The
first and most evident promise The first Euangelie Gospel or preaching of glad
tidings. Genesis 3.
of all was made by the very mouth of God unto our first parents Adam and
Euah, being oppressed with death, calamities, and the horrible fear of Gods
revenging hand for their transgression: which promise is as it were the pillar
and base of all Christian religion, whereupon the preaching of the Gospel is
altogether founded: and out of which all the other promises in a manner are
derived. That promise is contained in these words of the Lord: I will put
enimitie betwixt thee (meaning the serpent, the devil, I say in the serpent)
and the woman: and betwixt thy seed, and her seed: and it shall tread down
thy head, and thou shall tread upon his heel. God in these words promises
seed, the seed, I say, not of man, but of woman: and that too of ye most
excellent woman, to wit, that most holy Virgin Marie, the woman that was
blessed among all other women. For she conceived, not by any man, but by the
holy Ghost, and being a Virgin, still was delivered of Christ our Lord: who
by dying and rising again, did not only vex or wound, but also crush and
tread down the head, that is, the kingdom of Satan, to wit, sin, death,
and damnation, taking away and making utterly void all the power and tyranny
of that our enemy and deceiuer. In the mean while satan troade on Christ his
heel: that is to say, he by his members Caiaphas, Pontius Pilate, the Jews,
and Gentiles, did with exquisite torments and death vex and kill the flesh,
which was in Christ the lowest part, even as the heel is to the body. For the
Lord in the Psalms says: I am a worm and no man. They have brought my life
into the duste. But he roase again from the dead. For had he not risen again,
he had not trodden down the serpents head. But now by his rising he is
become ye Savior of all, that do believe in him. Out of this promise is
derived that singular and notorious one, which the Angel of the Lord recites
unto our father Abraham in these words following: In thy seed shall all the
nations of the world be blessed. But Paul in his Epistle to the Galathians
does in express words declare, that that blessed seed is ours, which was
promised to Abraham. Now our Lord is called by the name of Seed, because of ye
first promise made to Adam and Euah, and because he was for us incarnate and
made very man. Neither is this promise repugnant to the first. For although
Christ our Lord be here called the seed or son of Abraham, yet is he no
other way referred unto Abraham, than by the Virgin, which was the daughter of
Abraham and mother of Christ. Now what good does the son of Abraham to us by
his incarnation? Forsooth he blesses us. But a blessing is the contrary unto a
curse. Therefore what cause soever we drue from the sin of Adam, that does
Christ heal in us, and bless us with all spiritual blessing. Neither does
he bestow this benefit upon a few alone, but upon all the nations of the
world that do believe in him.

The Patriarch Jacob being inspired with the holy Ghost, foretold the chances
that should betide his children, and at length when he came to Judah, among
the rest, he says: The Scepter shall not depart from Judah and a lawegiuer from
between his feet, till Schilo come: and unto him shall the gathering of the
people be. Lo here in these words the Messiah is not only promised, but the
very time also is prescribed when he should be incarnate, with a declaration
both what, and how far forth he should be. The kingdom says he shall
remain under Judah until the coming of the Savior. And albeit that the
tribe of Judah shall not always have kings to govern them, yet shall it not
lack nobles, capitaines, lawegiuers, learned men and sages to rule the people.
And therefore the Evangelical history does faithfully witness that Christ
came at that time, when al power, authority, and rule was translated to the
Romans, unto whose Emperor Octa. Augustus, the Jews were enforced to pay
taxes and tribute. Now Schilo signifies felicity or the author of felicity,
it signifies, plenty, stoare, and abundance of al excellent things. For
Christ is the treasury of all good things. And the Chaldee interpreter where
he finds Schilo translateth it CHRIST. Finally, to him as to their Savior
shall all people be gathered: as ye Prophets did afterward most plainly
declare, Esaie in the second, and Micheas in the fourth chapiters of their
books or prophecies.

Furthermore the types and figures of Christ are, Noah preserved in the arcke.
For in Christ are the faithful saved: as S. Peter testifies. 1. Pet. 3.
Abraham offers up Isaac his only begotten son, upon the topp of the same
mountain, where many years after the only begotten son of God was offered
upon the Cross. Joseph is by his brethren sold to the heathen, he is cast in
prison: but being delivered, he does become their Savior, and is of all the
people called the preserver of the Egyptian kingdom. In all these things was
Christ our Lord prefigured.

The latter promises also are of two sorts, either openly uncovered, or
hidden, as it were under a veil or figure. They are contained in the law and
the Prophets even till the time of the captivity at Babylon. The blessed
Apostle Peter does in the 3. chap. of the Acts cite the prophecy of Moses
touching the coming of the greatest of all Prophets. The prefigured promises
of Christ are the sacrifices, which Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews does
in a wonderful summarie shortly declare. The same Paul in the fifth of the
first to the Corinthians applies the Paschal lamb to Jesus Christ. The like
does Peter in his first Epistle. Again the stony rock, that was 1. Pet. 1.
struck and gushed out with water. S. Paul calls Christ. And Christ himself
in the Gospel after S. John does say, that he was prefigured in the brazen
Serpent, which was lift up in the desert: the mystery whereof I have in an
other place more fully declared. Many more there are like unto these: a good
part whereof I have already touched, when I had occasion to treat of the
ceremonies and their signification. Where he that lists may read of it at
large. The vnfigured and uncovered promises are almost without number in the
Psalms and the Prophets. Yea, the Lord himself in the Gospel after S. Luke
does testify that the description of all his office and business is at large
contained in ye law, the Prophets, and the Psalms. And when S. Peter had
preached the Gospel, wherein he promised both Christ and the full remission of
sins to all that believed, he did immedately add: All the Prophets also from
Samuel, and these that followed in order, as many as have spoken have likewise
told you of these days. David verily in the 2. 22. and 110. Psalms, has
notably set down the two natures of Christ, his Godhead and his Manhood.
Again he has laid before all men's eyes his hoalsome preaching, his eternal
priesthood, his everlasting redemption, and most bitter death and passion.

What shall I say of the Prophet Esaias? who was by no small doctor of ye church
of Christ very worthily called an Evangelist, rather than a Prophet: as if he
had writ a story of things already past and done by Christ, and not of
things that should be done: so truly did he foretell ye state of Christ. Now he
makes Christ to be very God, and very man, borne after the flesh of the
unspotted Virgin: who had to preach the word of life, like a good shepherd to
feed his fearful sheep, to be the light of the Gentiles unto the vttmost
parts of the earth, to give sight to the blind, to heal the lame and
diseased, to be betrayed by his own, to be spitt upon, to be smitten, to be
hanged beetwixt thieves, to be offered up a sacrifice for sin, and finally
to make intercession for transgressors, that he himself being just, might
justify all that believe in his name. Read Esaie, 7. 8. 9. 11. 28. 40. 49. 50.
53. Chapiters, and also all the last Chapter of all his Prophecy, wherein he
does most fully describe the church or congregation of Christ Immanuel. Jonas
bare the most manifest type of the Lords sharp death and joyful resurrection.
Micheas also does name Bethleem to be the place wherein Messiah should be horn,
whose beginning, to wit, of his divine nature he does refer to before all
beginnings. He does also foretell that the preaching of the Gospel should from
out of Jerusalem be sown abroad through all the compass of the world.
Jeremy says, that God would raise up to David a true seed or branch, that
is, the looked-for Messiah. And in that Prophecy he alluded to the law,
concerning the raising up of seed to the deceassed brother. For the Virgin
conceiving by the holy Ghost, brought forth a son: whose name is JEHOVAH,
Deus (...) and essent^^lis.
being very God in very deed: whom Esaie calls Immanuel, and is the true
righteousness of all that do believe in him. For by Christ are the faithful
justified. For the same Prophet in the 31. Chapter does promise in Christ
full or absolute remission of sins, and abundant grace of the holy Ghost:
which thing Joel also did not conceal. Thus out of many testimonies I have
picked out only these few in number. For the whole books of the Prophets are
occupied in the description of Christ and his offices. The last promises
concerning Christ, were by God revealed to ye Prophets, and by them declared to
the Church of God, even in the very time of the captivity at Babylon, or else
immediately upon their return to Jerusalem. Ezechiel prophecieth of the
shepherd David, and of the sheep receyuinge that sheepeheard: which
prophecies the Lord does in Saint John's Eospel expound of himself. The same
Prophet treats very much of grace and francke and full remission of sins,
thorough the Savior Christ, especially in the 34. 36. and 37. Chapiters of
his prophecy. Daniel verily has visions and many dreams: but in them he
does so set Christ out unto us, that it is impossible to have him more better,
more evidently and excellently described. In his second Chapter he teaches
us of his eternal kingdom, and tells us that Christ should come under y^
Roman Monarchy, at what tune the Roman Princes being by affinity allied
together, should mutually in battle destroy one an other. Which was
fulfilled when Pompeie and Julius Caesar, Antonie, and Octauius Augustus
mainteyned civil war. Moreover, Daniels weeks are unknown to no man,
wherein he does as it were with his finger (...). 9.
point at Christ, the coming of Christ, and the reprobation of the Jews,
because of their disloyalty and unbelief. Haggee the Prophet foretold the
manner how the temple should be builded, I mean the true temple in deed, to
wit the Church of Christ. Zachary does excellently paint to us many mysteries
of Christ. He lays before us the kingdom and priesthood of our Lord and
Savior. He commends to us that one and only eternal sacrifice, which is
effectual enoughe to cleanse the sins of all the world, Zacha. 3. 9. 14.
Chapiters. Yea he prophecieth of nothing else but of Christ and his kingdom.
Malachias foresheweth the forerunner of the Lord, and handles no small number
of mysteries concerning Christ. Whereby we do perceive that Paul writ most
truly in the first to the Romans, saying. That God did before promise the
Gospel by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures.

Now by these holy promises we we gather this also, that there are not (...)
not (...).
many or diverse Gospels (although we deny not, but that the same Gospel
was penned by diverse Enangelistes) but that there is one alone, and that too,
as it were, eternal. For the very same Gospel, which is at this day
preached to us, was at the beginning of the world preached to our first
parents. For it is assuredly certain, that by the Gospel were saved Adam,
Euah, Abel, all the Patriarchs, Prophets and faithful people of the old
Testament. Which thing we have in an other place at large declared.

We are now come to the second part, where we have to show God the father
has through Christ performed to us that which he promised to our
forefathers.
you, that GOD the father has faithfully performed to us that, which he
promised to our forefathers, in giving to us his only begotten Son, who is
that true and looked-for Messiah, that is to be blessed world without end: In
making this matter manifest, the Evangelists and Apostles of our Lord have
taken great pains, and set it forth so well and faithfully, that it cannot be
bettered.

They show that Christ does come of the stock of David, descending lineally
of the seed of Abrraham: they tell that his mother was the Virgin which did
conceive by the holy Ghost, and being a Virgin still brought him into the
world. They note the time wherein Christ was revealed, in all points
correspondent to the Prophets prophecies.

They add, that the place of his nativity was aunswerable to that, which
Micheas foretold. In the East there appears a star, which moves the
Princes or wisemen to go and salute the new borne King. They come therefore,
and even in Jerusalem do openly profess, that the Messiah is borne, and that
they are come out of the East to worship and honor him.

According to their words so were their deeds. For when by the leading of
the star they had once found him, they fall down before him, and do by
offering to Christ the gifts that they brought, not obscurely declare, how
joyful they were, and how much they set by their Lord and Savior. In the
very city of Jerusalem the most just man Simeon, with great joy of heart,
and godly gratulation, does in the temple openly testify that God according
to his eternal goodness and constancy, had given to the world his only
begotten son whom he had promised unto the fathers: therewithal protesting
that he was willing to die. He adds ye cause, For that, says he, mine eyes
have seen thy salvation, to wit, that Schilo, the Savior, whom thou O God,
have determined to set before al people: a light to lighten the Gentiles, and
to be the glory of thy people Israel: that is, that he shaking off al
darckenes, should bring the light of truth and life unto the Gentiles to
lighten them withal, and that he should be the glory and life of the people
of Israel. Hereunto also belongs ye testimony of that notable man Zachary
the holy priest of God, saying: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he
has visited and redeemed his people: and has raised up a horn of salvation
for us in the house of his servant David. As he spoke by the mouth of his
holy Prophets, which have been since the world began.

And so forth as is to be seen in the first of Lukes Gospel. Moreover John the
son of this Zachary syrnamed the Baptist, than who we read not that any one
more holy was ever borne of women, did with his finger point at Christ Jesus,
and openly declare that he is that looked for Messiah, whom Jesus is Christ,
th^^ is that looked for Messia^.
all the Prophets promised, and that God, by giving him unto the woorld, has
done that he promised, and wholly powered himself with all his benefits into,
and upon all faithful believers. And as the people waited, says Luke, and
thought in their hearts of John, whether he were very Christ, John
answered, saying to them all. In deed I baptize you with water, but one
stronger than I comes after me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to
vnlo^se, he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. And in the
Gospel after S. John we read: The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him,
and says: Beehold the lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world.
This is he of whom I said: After me comes a man, which is preferred before
me, because he was before me, and I knew him not: but that he should be
declared unto Israel, therefore am I come baptising with water. And immediately
after, he says: I saw the spirit descending from heaven like unto a dove,
and it abode upon him. And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with
water, the same said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the spirit descending,
and tarying still on him, the same is he, which baptiseth with the holy
Ghost. And I saw and bare record that this is the son of God. Again when
the disciples of John did envy ye happy success of Christ, and that it
grieved them to see their master John, as it were, neglected in comparison of
Christ, John said to his disciples: Ye your selves are witnesses that I said, I
am not Christ, but I am sent before him. He that has the bride is the
bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which stands and hears him,
rejoices, because of the bridegroom. Therefore this my joy is fulfilled: he
must increase, but I must decrease. The father loves the son, and has given
all things into his hand. He that believes in the son has life everlasting:
he that believes not in the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides upon him. These testimonies are firm, clear, and evident enough, and
might suffice for the confirmation of this cause. But let us yet of a many more,
pick out and add a few, which may declare that Christ is already exhibited
unto us. Therefore our Lord himself, whom we believe to be Messiah, when
he had a great while been very greatly commended by the testimony of John,
does at length come abroad and preach the word of life. But it is not read
that in any age before or since there was ever any y^ taught with so great
grace. And therewithal he showed almost incredible and wonderful miracles,
which do easily argue who he was, and were sufficient to win such a man,
with whom no words might possibly prevail. He was loving and gentle to
sinners, repeating still and beating into their heads, that he was come to
save them, and call them to repentance. Therefore, when the disciples of John
did once come unto him, saying: Art thou he that should come, or shall we
look for an other? He aunsweared: Go ye and tell those things to John
which ye see and hear. The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised to life, and
to the poor is preached the glad tydinges of the Gospel.

Now by these, his doctrine, I mean, and his works or miracles, his mind
was to show that he was exhibited the true Messiah unto the world, and that
none other is to be loked-for. Moreover in the Synagogue at Nazareth where he
read and expounded Esaies prophecy of the coming of Messiah, he declared
there that that Scripture was in himself fulfilled. And to the history is
immediately annexed: And all bare record unto him, and wondered at the gracious
sayings that proceeded from his mouth. Again, in the tenth Chapter of S. John
his Gospel: The Jews came round about the Lord and said: How long do thou
make us to doubt? If thou be Christ, tell us plainly. Jesus aunsweared them,
I told you and ye believe not: the works that I do in my fathers name, these
bear witness of me. But ye believe not because ye are not of my sheep. And
presently after he adds: Ye say that I blaspheme, because I said, I am the
son of God. If I do not the works of my father, believe me not: but if I
do, and if ye believe not me, believe my works: that ye may know and
believe that the father is in me, and I in him.

In the seventh of John we read: They that believed in him said, Will Christ
when he comes, show more signs than this man has showed? that is to say,
Admit we grant that there is an other Christ to be looked-for, yet this is
most sure, that the other Messiah cannot do more and greater miracles, than
this man does. Let us therefore believe that this is the true Messiah.

Before Caiaphas the high priest and the whole counsel of the Peers of
Israel: also before Pontius Pilate in the judgment hall of the Roman Empire,
our Lord Christ did openly in express words confess that he is that true
and looked-for Messiah. He verily, as the Prophets foretold of him, did of
his own accord die for sinners, the third day after that he roase again
from the dead, he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God
the father. And the Evangelists reciting faithfully the words and deeds of
Christ, do to the most notable ones always add: All this was done or said,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet.

Wherefore, it were not worth the labor here to gather together the
prophecies of the Prophets, by them to examine the words and deeds of
Christ, and by the manifest agreement betwixt them for to conclude: That GOD
has performed to us, that which he promised unto our fathers, in giving to us
his only begotten Son Christ Jesus, which is the true and looked-for
Messiah. For this have the Evangelists already done, and that too with so
great faith and diligence, that for the plainness of the thing it cannot be
bettered. To this place now ye may refer all, that I have in my former
Sermons said touching the signification, or mysteries, fulfilling and
abrogating of the Law.

And to content our selves with a smaller number of testimones, might not this
one, which is read in ye fourth of Saint John, be in steed of many thousand
confirmations? The woman of Samaria, says to the Lord: I know that the
Messiah shall come which is called Christ: therefore when he comes, he
shall tell us all things. Jesus aunsweared her, I am he, that speak to thee.
Lo what could be said more plainly? I, says he, am the Messiah, even I, I
say, that do even now speak to thee, and did at the first say: If thou
knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink,
thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee water of life.
For whosoever shall drink of the water, that I shall give him, he shall
never be more a thirste: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a
well of water springing up into eternal life.

They therefore are the most thirsty and unfortunate of all men, which
longe-for and look after an other Messiah beside our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus. The Apostle Saint Peter in a meetely long Oration, well grounded, and
confirmed with Scripture and strong reasons, in the second of the Acts, does
show that our Lord Jesus is that true Messiah. For with this sentence he
shuts up his Sermon: Therefore let all the house of Israel surely know,
that GOD has made both Lord and Christ this Jesus, whom ye have crucified.
To the same marcke tends that large and learned Oration of the first martyr
S. Steven, which is extant to be seen in the seventh Cap. of the Acts. Philip
does out of Esaies Prophecy declare to the Eunuche of A^thiope, that Jesus is
Christ. Saint Paul in all the Iewishe Synagogues puts forth none other
proposition to preach on but this, Jesus is Christ, that is, Jesus is the king,
the bishop, and the Savior of the faithful. And in the thirteenthe Chapter
he does at large declare and prove that proposition true.

So now these most evident and clear testimonies of holy Scripture cannot
choose but suffice such heads, as are not of purpose set to cavil and
wrangle. I will not at this present The Jews (...) that christ is (...), or,
(...) Jesus (...) Christ.
too busily and curiouslye dispute against the ouerthwarte Jews, who look
for an other Messiah, and do deny that our Lord Jesus the son of God and
the Virgin Marie is the true Messiah. The wretches feel that to be true, which
the Lord in the Gospel did foretell them, saying: When ye shall see the
abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the
holy place, let him that reads understand. Then let them that are in Jury
flee to the mounteynes. But woe to them that are with child and give suck in
those days. For great shall the affliction be.

And again speaking of the City of Jerusalem, he says: The days shall
come upon thee, that thine enemies shall compass thee with a trenche, and
hemme thee in, and lay seege to thee on every side, and shall make thee eauen
with the ground, and thy sons that are within thee. And they shall not leave
in thee one stone standing upon an other: because thou know not the time
of thy visitation.

And again, There shall be wrath upon this people: and they shall fall with the
edge of the sword, and shall be led captive into al nations. And Jerusalem
shall be trod under foot of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled: Now since they feel these things to be so finished, as they were
by Christ foretold in the Gospel, why do not the wretches give God the
glory, and in other things believe the Gospel, acknowledging Jesus Christ
the Son of God and the Virgin Marie, our Lord and Savior, to be the true
and looked-for Messiah? What have they wherewith to cloak their stubborn
incredulity? They have now by the space of more than a thousand and five
hundredth years been without their Country, I mean, the land of promise that
flowed with milk and honey: they have wanted their Prophets: and lacked the
solemn service and Ceremonial rites. For where is their temple? where is the
high priest? where is the altar? where are the holy instruments? where be
the sacrifices, that ought to be offered according to the Law? All the glory
of Gods people is now translated unto the Christians.

They joy to be called the sons of the faithful Abraham: they enjoy the
promises made unto the fathers: they talk and make mention of the fathers:
they judge rightly of the law and covenant of the Lord: they have the holy
Scriptures, and in expounding them they have great dexterity: they have the
true Temple, the true high priest, the true altar of incense and burnte
offeringes, even Christ Jesus the Lord and Savior: they have the true
worship which was of old prefigured only in those external Ceremonies.
As I have already declared unto you in that place, where I handled the Iewishe
Ceremonies.

The Gentiles are out of every quarter of ye world called unto Christ Jesus.
All the promises touching the calling of the Gentiles have been hitherto most
abundantly fulfilled, and are even at this day.

Now are we the chosen flock, according to the doctrine of Saint Peter, We
are the royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, being called
hereunto, that we should preach the power of him, which has called us out of
darckenesse, into his marvelous light. Therefore let the unhappy Jews
(unless perhaps they had rather to be entangled in greater errors, to be
vexed dailye with endelesse calamities, and so at last perish eternally)
turn unto Christ by faith, and together with us begin to worship him, in
whom their fathers hoped, and in whom alone is life and salvation. For, that
I may with the Apostles words conclude this place: GOD is made manifest in the
flesh, justified in the spirit, seen to the Angels, preached to the
Gentiles, believed in the world, and received in glory. And every one that
believes him shall live eternally, and never be confounded.

We have now behind the last part to expound the contents whereof God the
(...) the world, is pleased with it in the Son.
are, that God the father, who before was angry with the world, is pleased
now in his only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord. First of all
therefore, I have to show you that God was angry with the world: which is no
hard matter to prove. For God is angry at sins. But ye whole world is
subject to sin, therefore it must of necessity be, that the most just God
is mightily angry with all the world. And Paul says: The wrath of God is
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men.
Again the same Apostle says, that all men are subject unto sin: for
confirmation whereof he cites these sentences of the holy Scriptures, saying:
There is none righteous, no not one: there is none that understands or
seeks after God: They are all gone out of the way, they are all become
unprofitable: there is none that does good, no not one. Their throat is an
open sepulcher, they have used their tongues for to deceive, the poison of
aspes is under their lips. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness:
their feet are swift to shedd blood. Hearts grief and misery are in their
ways: and the way of peace have they not known. There is no fear of God
before their eyes.

Now least the Israelites should aunsweare, that these things do not
perteine to the people of GOD, but to the heathen and ungodly alone, he
adds: We know that whatsoever the law says, it says it to them, which
are under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and that all the world
may be endaungered to God. No man is here excepted. For to the Galathians the
same Apostle says: He has shutt up all under sin, that he may have
mercy on all. It follows therefore that all the world was subject to the
wrath or indignation of the most just and righteous God: as is at large proved
in the second, fourth, and fifte Chapiters to the Ephesians.

But the heavenly father is appeased or reconciled to this wicked world,
thorough the only begotten son our Lord Jesus Christ. And this, I hope, I
shall abundantly prove by the only testimony of God himself. For the father
by sending down a voice from heaven unto the earth upon Christ, first
ascending newely out of the water after his baptism, and then again at his
transfiguration in the sight of his disciples, did significantly say: This is
my beloved son in whom I am delighted, pleased, or reconciled, hear him.
This testimony is read to have been foreshewed in the 42. Chapiters of Esaies
Prophecy. And Peter the Apostle repeateth the same in the first cap. of his
second Epistle. Paul also did as it were expound this, and say: It pleased
the father that in the Son should dwell all fullness, and by him to reconcile
all things unto himself, since he has set at peace thoroughe the blood of
the Cross by him, both the things in earth and the things in heaven. In
heaven is God, and we men here upon earth. Now Christ is the mediator,
which goes betwixt us, and reconcileth us unto his father, so that now we
are the beloved of ye father, in his beloved son. For in the Epistle to the
Ephesians the same Apostle says: He has made us accepted in the beloved: in
whom we have redemption thorough his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace. All this shall be more fully understood
by that which follows.

For now I must prove that God the father has in his son given us (...)
things (...) to (...) are (...) given (...) christ (...).
al things, that are necessary to a happy life and eternal salvation. I name
here two things, a happy life, and everlasting salvation. By a happy life I
understand a holy and godly life, which we live and lead quietly and honestly
in this present world. Eternal salvation is that felicity of the life to
come, which we with assured hope do verily look for. Now we have in
Christ a most absolute doctrine of a happy life taught us by the Gospel,
wherein also we do comprehend the example of Christ his own trade of life.
Verily our heavenly father has made him our teacher, in saying: Hear him.
And he himself in the Gospel after Saint Matthewe says: Be ye not called
masters: for ye have one master, even Christ, who in the Gospel after S. John
is called The light of the world. In an other place also he testifies that his
doctrine is contained in the holy Scriptures: whereupon it comes, that he
refers his disciples to the diligent reading of the holy scriptures:
Touching which Scriptures, Paul the teacher of the Gentiles, and the
universal Church of Christ, does say: All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable to doctrine, to reprove, to correction, to instruction,
which is in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, instructed in
all good works. Wherefore although the whole world be madd, and that the
obstinate defenders of the traditions rather than the Scriptures do whet their
teeth for anger, yet maugre their heads the word of the Apostle shall abide
most firm, wherein he testifies that the doctrine of the scriptures,
otherwise called the Christian doctrine, is in all points most absolute and
thoroughly perfect. Touching which matter, because I have already spoken in
the first Sermons of the first Decade, I am therefore here a great deal the
briefer. Now concerning the eternal salvation fully purchased for us by
Christ, thus ye must think. Eternal salvation, is the seeing and enjoying
of the eternal God, and so consequently an inseperable joining or knitttng
unto him. For David says: There is fullness of joys in thy sight, and at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore. And Saint John says: Now are we the
sons of God, and yet it appears not what we shall be. But we know that when
he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is. Moreover
the Lord in the Gospel, says: Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall
see God. But all men are endued with vnpure hearts: therefore no man shall see
God. Because no uncleanness abides in consuming fire. And God is a consuming
fire: therefore we cannot be partakers of salvation, unless we be purely
cleansed. But without the shedding of blood there is no cleansing or remission
of sins: I do not mean the blood of Rams or Goats, but of the only
begotten son of GOD our Lord Christ Jesus. He therefore took our flesh and
blood, he came into the world, died willingly for us, and shed his blood for
the remission of our sins: and so by that means purged the faithful, so
that now being clean they may be able to stand before the most holy God, who
is a consuming fire. To this may be annexed the consideration of the
incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, his death, resurrection, and ascension
into heaven, whereof I did above make mention in the definition of the Gospel.
For in those points does consist the whole mystery of our reconciliation.
Touching which, I do in this place speak so much the more brieflye, because
in the e^position of the Apostles Creed I have handled so much, as seems to
concern these points of doctrine: which whosoever will know, may look and
find them there.

Now that Christ alone is our most absolute life and salvation, it may be
Christ alone is our life and salvation.
gathered by that, which is already spoken, and yet not withstanding I will
here allege some testimonies more, to the end that the verity and
sincerity of the Evangelical truth may be the more firm and evident to all
men. That in Christ alone our life and salvation does consist, so that without
Christ there is no life and salvation in any other creature, y^ Lord himself
does testify, saying: Verily verily I say unto you, he that enters not by
the door into the sheepefold, but goes in some other way, he is a thief and
a robber: Verily verily I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep: as many
as came before me are thieves and robbers. Lo here there is but one door
only, through which the way does lie unto eternal life. And Christ is that
door. They therefore, which do by other means than through Christ strive to
come to life and salvation, are thieves and robbers. For they steal from
Christ his honor and glory, considering that he both is, and abides the
only Savior: and in so doing they kill their own souls. The same Savior in
the Gospel says: I am the way, the truth, and the life. No man comes to
the father but by me. Has he not in these few words rejected and utterly
excluded al other means of salvation, making himself alone our life and
salvation? This phrase of speech, No man comes to the father but by me, is
the same that this is, Through Christ alone we come unto the father.

Moreover the Lords Apostles have so laid Christ alone before our eyes, that
no man can choose but understand that without Christ Jesus, there is no life to
be found in any other creature.

The holy Apostle Saint Peter in the Acts says, There is in none other any
Salvation. For there is none other name under heaven given among men, wherein
we must be saved. And Saint Paul in the fifth Chapter to the Romans does
often times repeat, That by the righteousness of one man Jesus Christ, all
the faithful are justified.

Again, the same Paul says: Thoroughe him is preached to you, the remission
of sins: and through him is every one, that believes, justified from all the things from which ye could not be justified by Moses law. Like to this
also he has other testimonies in the second Chapter of his Epistle written
to the Galathians. It is manifest therefore that thoroughe Christ alone, the
forgiveness of sins and life everlasting are freely bestowed upon all the
faithful: which gifts, as they are not without Christ at all, so are they
not bestowed by any other means, than thorough Christ alone. Concerning the
remission of sins, which is the chief tydinges of the Gospel, I have at
large already discoursed in the ninthe Sermon of the first Decade and other
places more.

Now for the proof that our Lord (...) fully (...).
does fully absolve from sins, fully remitte sins, and fully save
repentaunt sinners, so that nothing more can be desired or wished for, and
consequently that the Lord himself is the most absolute fullness of all the
faithful, without whom they, that believe, neither do nor can wish for any
thing else to life, salvation, and absolute felicity, he does himself in
the Gospel say, Every one that drinks of this water shall thirst again:
but whosoever shall drink of the water which I shall give him, he shall live
eternally. And again, I am the bread of life. He that comes to me shall
not hunger: and he that believes in me shall never thirste. The Apostles
therefore after they had eaten this celestial bread, that is, after they had
once believed in Christ. when many departed and did forsake Christ, being
demanded whether they also would leave him, did answer, Lord to whom shall
we go? Thou have the words of eternal life, and we believe and know that
thou art Christ the son of the living God. Lo here they neither will nor
can forsake Christ. Because there is none other to whom they may join
themselves. For he alone is the life and salvation of them that believe, and
that too, so absolute and perfect, that in him alone they may content and
stay themselves. With the writings of the Evangelists does the doctrine of the
Apostles fully agree. For Paul to the Colossians says: It pleased the father
that in the son should dwell all fullness. And again, In the Son does
dwell all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are fulfilled in him.

And in the Epistle to the Hebrews he affirms that the faithful have full
remission of sins: because sacrifices for sin do cease to be offered, and
that God does by the Prophet Jeremy promise so absolute remission of sins,
that he will not so much as once remember or think on them hereafter. To
this place belongs the whole Epistle written to the Hebrews: and the
conclusion of the eighth Sermon in the first Decade, wherein I reckoned unto
you ye treasures that God ye father does give to us in Christ his son our
Lord and Savior.

Upon this now does follow consequently, The vnsin^ere preaching of the
gospel.
that they have not yet rightly understood the Gospel of Christ nor
syncerely preached it, whosoever do attribute to Christ Jesus our Lord the true
Messiah either not only, or else not fully all things requisite to life and
salvation. It is a wicked and blasphemous thing to ascribe either to men or to
things inferior and worse tha^ men, the glory and honor due unto Christ. The
principal exercises of Christian religion cannot, by derogating from the
glory of Christ, challenge any thing unto themselves. For sincere doctrine
does directly lead us unto Christ. Prayer does invoke, praise, and give
thanckes in the name of Christ. The Sacraments do serve to seal and
represent to us the mysteries of Christ. And ye works of faith are done of
duty, although also of free accord: because we are created unto good works.
Yea through Christ alone they do please and are acceptable to God the father.
For he is the Vine we are the branches. So all glory is reserved untouched to
Christ alone: which is the surest note to know the true Gospel by.

Thus hitherto we have heard, That God the father of mercies, according The
sum of the gospel.
to his free mercy taking pity upon mankind, when it stuck fast and was
drowned in the mire of hell, did, as he promised by the Prophets, send his
only begotten son into the world, that he might draw us out of the mudd, and
fully give us all things requisite to life and salvation. For God the father
was in Christ reconciled unto us, who for us and our salvation was incarnate,
dead, raised from death to life, and taken up into heaven again.

And although it may by all this be indifferently well gathered, to whom that
salvation does belong, and to Salvation preached in the gospel does belong to
all.
whom that grace is rightly preached, yet the matter it self does seem to
require in flatt words expressly to show that Christ, and the preaching of
Christ his grace declared in the Gospel does belong unto all. For we must
not imagine yt in heaven there are laid two books, in the one whereof the names
of them are written, that are to be saved, and so to be saved, as it were, of
necessity, that, do what they will against the word of Christ, and commit
they never so heinous offenses, they cannot possibly choose but be saved: and
that in the other are contained the names of them, which, do what they can,
and live they never so holilie, yet cannot avoid everlasting damnation. Let us
rather hold that the holy Gospel of Christ does generally preach to the whole
world, the grace of God, the remission of sins, and life everlasting. And in
this belief we must confirm our minds with the word of God, by gathering
together some evident places of the holy Scriptures, which do manifestly prove
that it is even so. Of which sort are these sayings following: In thy seed
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. Genesis. 22. Every one that
calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. Joel. 2. We have all gone
astray like sheep: and God has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Esaie
53. Come to the waters all ye that thirst. Esaie. 55. There are of this sort
innumerable places in the old testament.

Now in the Gospel, the Lord says: Every one that asks receives, and he
that seeks finds, etc. Matthew. 7. Come to me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will ease you of your burden. Matthewe 11. Teach all
nations, baptisinge them in the name of the father. etc. Matthew. 28, Go ye into
the whole world, and preach the Gospel unto all creatures. Whosoever believes
and is baptized, he shall be saved. Marc. 16. So God loved the world that he
gave his only begotten son, that every one which believes in him should not
perish, but have eternal life. John 3. In the Acts of the Apostles Saint
Peter says: Of a truth I perceive, that there is no respect of persons with
God, but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness, is
acceptable unto him. Acts. 10. Paul in the third to the Romans says: The
righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ comes unto all, and upon all
them that believe. And in the tenth Chapter he says: The same Lord over all
is rich to all them that call upon him. In his Epistle to Titus, he says:
There has appearrd the grace of God that is healthful to all men. And in the
first to Timothy the second Chapter he says: God will have all men to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. These and such like are the
manifest testimonies whereupon all the faithful do firmly stay them selves.

But now if thou demaundest how ^^erfore (...) are (...) saved.
it happens that all men are not saved, since the Lord would that all should
be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth? The Lord in the Gospel
does him self answer thee, saying: Many in deed are called, but few are
chosen. Which sentence he does in the fourteenth of S. Lukes Gospel more
plainly expound, where he does in a parable show the causes, why a great part
of mortal men does not obtain eternal salvation, while they prefer earthly
things and transitory before celestial or heavenly matters. For every one
had a several excuse to cloak his disobedience withal: one had bought a
farm: an other had five yokes of Oxen to try: the third had newly married a
wife. And in the Gospel after Saint John the Lord says: This is
condemnation, because the light came into the world, and men loved darkness
more than the light. With this doctrine of the Evangelists does that saying
of the Apostle agree 2. Corin. 4. Chapter. And in the first to Timothy the
fourth Chapter, he says: God is the Savior of all men, especially The
faithful are saved.
of those that believe. Whereupon we gather that God in the preachinge of the
Gospel requires faith of every one of us: and by faith it is manifest that we
are made partakers of all the goodness and gifts of Christ. And verily there
is a relation betwixt faith and the Gospel. For in the Gospel after Saint
Mark the Lord annexeth faith to the preaching of the Gospel. And Paul says
that To him was committed the preaching of the Gospel unto the obedience of
faith. Again he says: The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to all
them that do believe. And in the tenth Chapter to the Romans he does by
Gradation show that the Gospel is received by faith. But that faith may be
rightly planted in the hearts of men, it is needful that the preaching of
repentance do first go before. For which cause I in the latter end of the
definition of the Gospel, added: So that we acknowledginge our sins may
believe in Christ: that is to say: the Lord will be our Savior and give us
life everlasting if we acknowledge our sins, and do believe in him. And
therefore here now may be annexed the treatises of faith and repentance.
Touching faith, I have already largely spoken in the 4. 5. and 6. Sermons of
the first Decade. Concerning repentance I will hereafter speak in a several
sermon by it self. In this place I will only, touch summarily such points of
repentance as seem to make for ye demonstration of the Gospel.

Our Lord Christ Jesus does in the preaching of the Gospel require faith The
Gospel teaches faith and repentance. How
and repentance: neither did he him self when he preached the Gospel,
proceed any other way. For Mark has: Jesus came into Galile preaching the
Gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying: the time is fulfilled, and the
kingdom of God is at hand, repent and believe the Gospel. Neither did he
otherwise instruct his disciples, when he sent them to preach the Gospel
unto all nations. For S. Luke says: Christ said to his disciples, so it is
written, and so it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again the third day
from the dead, and that in his name should be preached repentance, and the
forgiveness of sins unto all nations. Saint Paul, like a good scholar
following his master in the Acts of the Apostles says: Ye know that I have
held back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have
taught you openly, and throughout every house: witnessing both to the Jews and
also to the Greeks the repentance, that is toward god, and the faith that is
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. In his Epistle to the Romans, where he does
compendiousely handle the Gospel, he takes occasion to begin the preaching
thereof at sin, conuincing both Jews and Gentiles to be subject thereunto.

Now he begins at sin to this end and purpose, that every one
descending into him self may see and acknowledge that in him self he has no
righteousness, but that by nature he is the son of wrath, death, and
damnation: not that such acknowledging of sins does of it self make us
acceptable unto God, or else deserve remission of sins and life everlasting:
but that after a sort it does prepare a way in the minds of men to receive
faith in Christ Jesus, and so by that means to embrace Christ Jesus him
self, who is our only and absolute righteousness. For the hoale need not the
Physician, but such as are sick and diseased.

They therefore which think them selves to be clear without sins, and
righteous of them selves, do utterly reject Christ, and make his death of none
effect: but on the other side they that feel the diseases of the mind, and do
from the bottom of their hearts confess that they are sinners and
unrighteous, not putting any trust in their own strength and merits, do even
pant for the haste that they make to Christ, which when (...)
they do, then Christ does offer him self in the Gospel, promisinge unto
them remission of sins and life everlasting: as he that came to heal the
sick, and to save repentant sinners. But the promise is received by faith, and
not by works: therefore the Gospel and Christ in the Gospel are received by
faith. For we must diligently distinguishe betwirte the precepts, and the
promises.

The promises are received by faith: the precepts are accomplished by works.
Whereupon Paul is read to have said: If the inheritance be of the law,
then is it not now of promise. But god gave Abraham the inheritance by
promise.

The same Apostle to the Romans conferring the law and the Gospel together
does say: The righteousenesse which is of the law does say, whosoever does
these things, shall live by them. But the righteousenesse of faith does saiye,
if thou beleeuest thou shall be saved.

The law therefore is grounded upon works, whereunto it seems to
atttribute righteousness. But because no man does in works fulfill the law,
therefore is no man justified by works, or by the law. The Gospel is not
grounded upon works. For sinners acknowledge nothing in them selves but sin
and wickedness.

For they feel in them selves, that they are wholly corrupted: and therefore
they flee to the mercy of god, in whose promises they put their trust hoaping
verily that they shall freely obtain remission of their sins, and that for
Christ his sake they are received into the number of the sons of God.

I would speak more in this place concerning faith in Jesus Christ, the
remission of sins, and the inheritannce of life everlasting, if I had not
already in the sirste Decade declared them at large. Here by the way, ye have
to remember that the Gospel is not sincerely preached, when ye are taught that
we are made partakers of the life of Christ, for our own deserts and
meritorious works. For we are freely saved without respect of any works of
ours either first or last.

And although I have oftener than (...) is (...) and (...) by (...).
once handeled this argument in these Sermons of mine: yet because it is the
hook whereupon the hindge of the Evangelical doctrine (which is the door to
Christ) does hang, and that this doctrine (to wite, That Christ is received
by faith and not by works) is of many men very greatly resisted, I will for
the declaration and confirmation sake thereof, produce here two places only,
but such as be apparent enough, and evident to prove and confirm it by: the
one out of the Gospel of Christ our Lord, the other out of Paul's Epistles.

Our Lord Jesus Christ being about How Christ did preach the Gospel.
to teach briefly the way to txue salvation, that is, to preach the gladd
tydinges of life unto Nichodemus in the Gospel after Saint John, does first
of all begin at repentance, and does wholly take Nichodemus from him self,
leauinge him no merits of his own, wherein to put his trust.

For while he does utterly condemn the first birth of man, as that which is
nothing auailable to obtain eternal life, what does he, I beeseech you,
leave to Nicodemus wherein he may brag or make his boaste? For he does
expressly say: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, unless a man Of regeneration
more largely is spoken in the Sermon of repentance.
be borne from above, he cannot see the kingdom of god.

If the first birth and the gifts thereof were able to promote a man to the
kingdom of God, what need then should he have to be borne the second time?
The second birth is wrought by the means of the holy Ghost, which being
from heaven powered into our hearts, does bring us to the knowledge of our
selves, so that we may easily perceive assuredly know, and sensibly feel:
that in our flesh, there is no life or righteousenesse at all: and so
consequently that no man is saved by his own strength or merits. What then?
The Spirit forsooth does inwardly teach us that, which the sound of the
Gospel does outwardly tell us, that We are saved by the merit of the son
of God. For the Lord in the Gospel says: No man ascends into heaven, but
he that descended from heaven, the son of man that is in heaven. For in an
other place he does more plainly say: No man comes to the father, but by
me. And again, to Nicodemus he says: As Moses did lift up the Serpent in
the Wilderness, so must the son of man be lift up, that every one which
believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life.

Now Moses did hang up the brazen Serpent for the health and recovery of them
that were poisoned by the bytings of the Serpents. For they died presently that
were stung with ye Serpents: unless they did immediately look up to the
brazen Serpent: for at the very sight thereof the poisoned sting did loose all
force, and the person enuenomed was out of hand restored and cured again.
Neither was there in the host of the Israelites any other medicine, but that
alone, which whosoever despised, he died without remedy. For the force of the
poison was not expelled, and the life of ye infected was not preserved either
by the power of prayers, or the multitude of Sacrifices, or medicinable
herbs, or any kind of Physic, or other means of man's invention. If any
would escape the peril of death, it behooved him to behold the brazen serpent
aloft.

Now, that brazen Serpent was a type or figure of Christ our Lord: who being
lift up upon the Cross, is ordained of God to be the only salvation. But
now to whom does that saving health befall? To them forsooth that do behold
him being so lift up. The Lord him self tells us what to behold does
signify, and in steed thereof does put, to believe. Therefore no works,
none other means, nor merits of ours do save us from eternal death, and from
the force of sin, that is, the poison where with we are all infected by the
old Serpent our adversary Satan. Faith alone, whereby we believe in Christ,
who was lift up for the remission of our sins, and in whom alone our life
and sure salvation does assuredly consist, is the only thing that quickens
us, which are already dying by the enuenomed sting of Satan, which is sin.

Hear moreover, what the Lord does add, instructing Nicodemus yet more fully
in the true faith, and making the only cause of our salvation to be the mere
and only grace of God, which is received by faith in Christ. For so (says he)
GOD loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that every one
which beeleeueth in him should not perish, but have eternal life. For God sent
not his son to condemn the world, but that the world might be saved by
him. He that believes in him is not condemned: but he that believes not in
him, is already condemned: be cause he believes not in the name of the only
begotten son of God.

Lo, what could be spoken more plainly? By faith, we are made partakers of
Christ. By repeatinge faith so often, his meaning was so to beat it into our
heads, that no man should hereafter do once so much as doubt of so manifest
and evident a piece of doctrine. But if here now thou do little set by the
authority of Christ, then whose authority will thou esteem? But thou will
not, I know, reject his testimony. Yet albeit that his warrant is sufficient,
give ear notwithstanding to that disciple whom the Lord loved, who in his
Epistle expounding as it were the words of the Lord, and by the way of
exposition repeating and beating them into all men's minds, does strongly cry
out: If we receive the witness of men, the witness of John. 3.
God is greater: for this is the witness of God which he testified of his
son: he that believes in the son, has the testimony in him self. He
that believes not God, does make him a liar, because lie believed not the
record that he gave of his son. And this is the record, that God has given
us eternal life, and this life is in his son. He that has the son has
life, and he that has not the son of God has not life. But what else is it
to have the son of god, than to believe in him? For this sense is gathered by
that which went before, being of it self so evident, that for me to add any
thing unto it, is to do nothing else, but as it were to go about with a
tallowe candell to help or adlight the Sun at his rising.

Now are we come to the place of Saint Paul, which is to be seen in (...)
Paul (...) gospel.
the third and fourth Chapters of his Epistle to the Romans. The
rightousenesse of God, says he, without the law is made manifest, being
witnessed by the testimony of the law and the Prophets. Paul in this place
does preach the Gospel most evidently. For I know not any other place
wherein he does it more plainly. He teaches herein how we are justified
before God, what is the true righteousenesse and salvation of mankind, and by
what means it comes unto us.

He says, that the righteousness of God, that is to say, the righteousenesse
which God bestows, or which does prevail before God, is revealed without
the law, that is to say, does come unto us without the help of the law, to
wite, without the aid and merits of the works of the law. For touching the
testimony of the lawe^ and ye Prophets, they witness both together, that they
which believe are justified by the righteousness of God. Now, what that
righteousenesse is, he does immediately declare, saying: The righteousenesse of
God comes by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that
believe. The righteousenesse, says he, whereof we speak, is not humane or of
mortal man, but altogether divine or of God him self. For as God alone is
only just, so the righteousenesse of God is the true and only righteousenesse
of God that saves us. Which righteousenesse God makes us to be partakers of
by the faith of Jesus Christ, to wite, if we believe in Christ and hope in
him for to be saved. Neither is there here any man excluded from
righteousness and salvation. For Paul does plainly say: Unto all, and upon
all, that do believe. Wherefore God does repute and esteem all them to be
righteous, which do believe in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord and
Savior. Now he does presently annex the cause, why he attributes salvation
unto the righteousness of God and not of man, or why the Gospel commends to
us ye righteousenesse of God, saying: For there is no difference: al have
sinned, and have need of the glory of God, For because all men of their own
nature are destitute of the glory of God, that is, since they are without the
true image of God, to the likeness whereof they were created in ye beginning:
therefore all men verily are unrighteous and sinners: whereupon it follows,
that in them there is no righteousness, and that they have nothing wherein to
boast before the righteous God.

For, what else, I beseech you, do sinners carry from the judgment seat of
God, but confusion and ignominy? And for because all men are such, and in that
case, therefore the Apostle does very wisely add: but they The man^er and
order of our sanctification, purification, and justification.
are justified freely by his grace thorough the redemption in Christ Jesus:
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation or reconciliation through
faith in his blood. Which is all one as if he had said: men are justified for
Christ his sake by ye mere grace or mercy of God, without any help or
merit of their own. If so be they do but believe that God has given his
son to the world, to shedd his blood, and to reconcile the purified sinners
unto his father in heaven. In which words there are most fully and plainly
declared the whole manner and order of sanctifying, purifying and justifying of
sinners. But it is good here to repeat the Apostles words, and more nerely
to examine and deeply to consider them. They are, says he, freely justified.
But wherefore freely? because forsooth, they are justified by the mere grace
of God, without the help of their own works or merits. For all men are
sinners, and therefore they have nothing of them selves to allege for their
justification: whereupon it follows, that, since some are justified, they
are justified freely by the grace of God. For the same Apostle in the eleventh
to the Romans, says: If we be saved by grace, then now not of works: for
then grace is no more grace: but if by works, then is it now no grace. But
there follows in Paul immediately that which does yet make that argument
more manifest, which is notwithstanding very manifest already, through the
redemption, says he, that is in Christ.

Our righteousenesse and salvation is the work of mere grace: because we are
redeemed. For in respect of our selves, our works and merits, we were the
servant of death, and the devil, in so much as we were sinners and
subject to sin. But God by sending his son redeemed us, when as yet
beeinge his enemies we were bound to the devil his open adversary.

Therefore, he did freely redeem us: as Esaye the Prophet did in his 52.
Chapter, plainly foretell, that it should come to pass. But true salvation is
not in any other whatsoever he be, save in Christ alone our true Lord and
Savior. For, the heavenly father did by his eternal counsel set forth his
son our Lord Jesus Christ to be our propitiation, to wite, that he might
be our reconciliation, for whose sake only the father being pacified,
adopte^h us into the number of the sons of GOD: which is accomplished by none
other way, but through faith in his blood, that is, if we believe that the
son being sent of the father did shed his blood, thereby to set us
cleansed, justified, and sanctified before his heavenly father. Wherein we see
again that our salvation does freely consiste in faith in Jesus Christ.

These points being thus unfolded, the Apostle proceedinge to show (...)
they (...) that (...) has seemed.
how far the benefit of redemption and justification does stretche, does
immediately add: To declare his righteousness, by the forgiveness of the
sins that are past, which GOD did suffer, to show at this time his
righteousenesse.

God, says he, has set forth Christ to be the only propitiation, that he
might show that there is but one and the same righteousenesse of all ages,
Christ, I say, him self, who is the righteousenesse of all that believe.
Now, here he makes mention of two several times, that ancient age of the
fathers, and this present time wherein we now live. The ancient age is that,
which went before the coming of Christ. This latter age of ours is that, which
begins at Christ, is now at this present, and shall be extended to the end
of the world.

And God verily did of his long sufferaunce bear with, and suffer the sins
of that old age for Christ his sake, by whom and for whom, he has
forgiven them. Neither does he set before us at this day any other
righteousenesse, save Christ alone, to be received and embraced by faith. For
the Apostle does not obscurely, afterward add: That he might be just, and
the iustifier of them that believe on Jesus. As if he should have said: now
the meaning of all this is, that we should understand that all men are
unrighteous and altogether sinners, but that God alone is righteous, without
whom there is no righteousenesse at all: and that he does communicate his
righteousenesse to all them that do believe in Cstriste, to wite, which do
believe, that for Christ his sake the father is pleased and reconciled unto us,
and that for him we are reputed both just and holy.

By these words of the Apostle Errors refuted.
there are two very wicked and blasphemous errors of certain fellows
notably refuted. The one of the twain is the error of them, which say that
our fathers were justified, not by faith in Christ, but by the law and their
own merits: affirminge that Christ suffered not for the fathers, but for them
alone, that lived when he was upon the earth, and for them that followed after
his death. The other error is theirs, which say that Christ offered up his
body for the fathers, for original sin only, not for us and all our
sins, and therefore that we must make satisfaction for our own sins. But
the Apostle Paul does in this place condemn both these opinions.

And the holy Evangelist John agreeing with Paul does say: The blood of the
son of GOD does cleanse us from all sin: for he is the propitiation for
our sins: not for our sins only, but for the sins of all the world.
Therefore the merit of Christ his redemption does extend it self to all the
faithful of both the testaments.

The Apostle Paul proceeds, and upon that which he had said, he infers:
Where is the boasting? it is excluded. By what law? Of works? Nay, but by
the law of faith. He gathers by the Evangelical doctrine hitherto taught,
that all the boasting of every man's own righteousenesse, and all the
bragginge of every ones merits is utterly taken away, altogether exempted and
vanished.

Not by the law of works, that is, not by the doctrine concerning works
which is wont for the most part to puff men up, and make them swel: but by
the law of faith, that is, by ye doctrine concerning faith, which does empty
and leave in us nothing but an humble confession and acknowledging of our own
lack of merits, attributing all our help to grace in Christ Jesus. And at
the last gathering the chief proposition, he says: We do therefore hold
that a man is justified without the works of the law.

This is the sum and breuiarie of the whole Gospel, that we are justified,
that is to say, absolved from sins, from the definitive sentence of death
and damnation, and sanctified and adopted into the number of the sons of God,
by faith, that is, by an assured confidence in the name of Christ, which is
given by the father to be our only Savior. And here are works, by name
excluded, to the end there should be given to us no occasion to entangle faith
with works, or to attribute to works the glory and title due to faith alone,
or rather to Christ, upon whom our faith is grounded and vphelde.

This proposition being once put forth, he does presently after confirm with
arguments, showing withal, that this salvation is common both to the Jews
and Gentiles, saying: Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the
Gentiles? yes even also of the Gentiles. For it is one God that shall justify
the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith. He fetches
the confirmation of that which he said, from the nature of God. There is but
one God, who is of his own nature both life and righteousenesse. And he is the
God both of the Jews and the Gentiles: therefore he is the life and
righteousenesse of both the people: which righteousenesse he bestows on them
by faith: therefore faith does justify or make them both righteous.

This is declared by the example of Cornelius the Centurion. For he is
justified, or, as I should rather say, being once justified, he is declared
to be acceptable to God, by the sendinge down of the holy Ghost in a visible
form upon him, when as he neither was circumcised, nor yet had kept the
law, but had only heard y^ preaching of the Gospel, and had believed in
Jesus Christ. Now GOD did not justify Cornelius so alone, but will also
justify all other nations by faith: even as he will not by any other means
than by faith alone justify the Jews.

It follows in Paul: Do we then destroy the law through faith? God
forbid: but we rather maintain the law. For the defenders or the disputers
in the defense of works, or rather of justification by works, are wont to
obiecte, if faith alone in Christ does justify: then is the law or doctrine
of the law altogether unprofitable. For to what end are we commanded to do
good works, if good works do not justify? The Apostle answers, that the
law is not abolished by faith, but rather maintained. For since faith does
directly tend to Christ, in whom alone it does seek and find all
fulness: and that the law it self is the scholemystresse unto Christ, and
does shut up all under sin, so that justification is by faith given to the
faithful, it is most evident that the law is not destroyed or darkened, but
confirmed and made light by ye doctrine of faith.

The Apostle goes on in his confirmation, and says: What shall we (...)
A^raham ^e father (...) the faith (...) is iusti^^^d.
say then that Abraham our father, as pertaining to the flesh did find?
For, if Abraham were justified by works, then has he wherein to boast, but
not before God. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was
counted unto him for righteousenesse. There are verily many examples of the
holy fathers: but among all the rest, the Apostle chose out this of Abraham, to
handle it at large. For he in the Scriptures is called the father of them that
do believe. Whereupon it is assuredly certain, that the children shall be
justified after the same sort that their father was: as the Apostle has in
express words taught in the latter end of the fourth Chapter. Moreover
Abraham was famous for good works, above all the rest of the holy fathers:
therefore if any other could have been justified by his good works or
merits, much more might Abraham before all the rest. But forbecause he was
justified by faith, and not by works, it is manifest therefore that all the
Saints also both have been and are justified by faith and not by works.

Furthermore Abraham lived 430 years before the law was revealed by Moses:
whereupon it follows that his works cannot be called the works of the
law, by them that are the denyers of the justification by faith without the
law. Therefore the works that he did, he did them of faith, and his works
were ye works of faith, and yet was he not justified by them, but by faith.
Therefore the ^lorie of the justification of faith remains sound, unspotted,
and unmingled with any thing else. What, says he, shall we say that our
father Abraham found, concerning the flesh, to wite, so far forth as he is
a man, and we also men of him? What, I say, shall we say that he deserved?
To this demand this answer must be added: he found nothing, and by his
works he deserved nothing. For the proof follows, if by his works he
deserved any thing, or was by his merits justified, then has he wherein to
boaste. But he has nothing wherein to boast: therefore is he not justified by
his works. For God alone is righteous, and keeps this his glory unto him
self alone without any partener or ioyntpossessour with him, freely justifying
them that are of the faith of Jesus Christ, to the end that his grace may be
always praised.

But Paul him self by bringing in a place of Scripture does show that
Abraham had nothing wherein to make his boast. For what, says he, does the
Scripture say? Abraham believed God, and it was counted un to him for
righteousenesse. Lo here the Scripture does most plainly say, that Abraham was
justified by faith, or rather that faith was imputed to him for
righteousenesse, and therefore that Abraham was for his faith counted righteous
before the most just and righteous God.

But let us hear Paul, how he applies this place of Scripture unto his
purpose. It follows then: To him that works, is the reward not reckoned of
Grace, but of duty. But to him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousenesse. Which words
verily may be briefly reduced into this kind of argument. Who soever does
with his works deserve any thing, to him the reward is given as a thing of
duty due unto him, and not imputed freely as though it were no debte.

But faith is imputed to Abraham unto righteousenesse, therefore he received
righteousenesse, not as a reward of duty ought unto him, but as a gift not
due, but freely given him. And again: To him that works not, but believes
in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is reckoned for righteousenesse.
But to Abraham faith was imputed unto righteousenesse: therefore he obtained
righteousenesse, by faith and not by works.

Now, there is an Emphasis in that he faith: But believes in him that
justifies the ungodly. For thereby is signified, that he which is to be
justified does bring nothing with him, but the only acknowledginge of his own
misery and ungodliness, to seek for mercy at the hand of the Lord. For he
understands that he is destitute of good works, and such as may abide the
trial of Gods just judgment. He does therefore fly to the mercy of God,
presuming for a certeintie that the righteousenesse of faith is the aid or
help of the sinner that must be freely saved by the grace of God.

Here by the way ye must note that The righteousness of Christians is
imputative.
Christians righteousenesse both is, and is said to be imputative
righteousenesse. Which thing alone is able to break the neck of all our
boastinge: for imputation is the contrary unto debte. God is not of duty
bound to us, either for our own sakes, or for our works sakes, but so far
forth as he has bound him self to us of his free grace and goodness. And
in us there are many things that hinder the perfection of righteousenesse in
us. Whereupon David cried: Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in
thy sight shall no man living be justified. Therefore GOD does freely impute
to us the righteousenesse of faith, that is, he reputeth us for righteous,
because we believe him through his son. So we read, that in the Evangelical
parable the Lord did say: But when the debtors were not able to pay, he
forgave them both the debte. For GOD also forgiueth us our debtes or sins,
not reputinge them unto us, but countinge us for righteous for Christ his sake.

For the same Apostle most evidently testifying the same thing in the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, says: God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself, by not imputing sins to men. And after that again: Him,
which knew no sin, he made sin for us, that we might be the
righteousenesse of God in him. What can thou require more evident, than that
we are counted righteous before GOD, because, by Christ his sacrifice our
sins are so purged, that we should hereafter, be no longer held with the
guylte of the same?

We proceed now to reckon up the other arguments of Saint (...) of (...).
Paul, as firm and manifest as these that are already rehearsed. In the
same Chapter therefore it follows: Even as David describes the blessedness of
the man, to whom the LORD imputes righteousenesse without works, saying:
Blessed are they, whose vnrighteousenesses are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered.

Blessed is that man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. In the
beginning he does, with clear and evident words, express the thing that
he intends to prove or confirm, to wite, that GOD imputes righteousenesse
to the Saints without works. What could be said more plainly?

And to prove it to be so, here he infers the testimony of David, which
does, in a manner, conteyne three sundry members or clauses. First, Blessed,
says he, are they whose vnrighteousenesses are forgiven. Then, Blessed are
they, whose sins are covered. And lastly, Blessed is that man to whom the
Lord will impute no sin.

Now, the force of the argument or demonstration does consist in the words:
Forgive, Cover, and not Impute. The creditour forgiueth the debtour that,
which he has not paid him, whether he be able or not able to pay it him.
We in respect of our sins (which are our debtes) are able to pay nothing
to GOD.

Forgiveness therefore of those debtes or sins of ours, is the gift of
Gods mere grace and liberality. For the creditour cannot forgive the thing
that is already paid unto him. For when he gives back the thing that he
has received, in so doing, he does not forgive, but give, and that deed in
the Scriptures is called Donum, a gift, not Remissio, a forgiueing.

Whereupon Saint Paul says: GOD gave to Abraham the inheritance: therefore,
Abraham with his works did not merit the same. Secondarily, some filthy
thing that offends the eyes of men, is usually wont to be covered, and yet
notwithstanding the filthy thing abides filthy still, although it does
not appear outwardly unto the eyes of men.

And our merciful God has covered our sins, not that they should not be,
but that they should not appear or come to judgment: which thing is the
gift of grace, and not of merits. For the coueringe is nothing else, than the
blood of the son of GOD: for, for his bloudes sake we sinners are not
damned. Lastely, GOD might by right and justice impute sin unto us: but of
his grace he imputes it not. And all these laid together, do confirm and
prove, that righteousenesse is freely, by faith, without works, imputed unto
us.

This very same place of Saint Paul taken out of David, does discuss and
make plain unto us other points of doctrine also, whereof there is some
controversy. For we learn that justification is nothing else but
sanctification, forgiveness of sins, and adoption into the number of the
children of God. We learn that Saint Paul speaks not only of the
Ceremonial woorks of the Law, but also of the Saints good works of every
sort.

Furthermore, we learn that both sins and iniquities, that is, all manner
sins of the faithful are freely pardoned and utterly forgiven. Moreover,
we learn, that sins are fullye remitted, not the fault only, but the
punishment also: which punishment some say, is retained: but God does not
impute sins. In an other place, he says: that he will not have any
remembrance of our sin at all. Lastly, we learn that ye satisfactions for
sin of man's invention is a most vain lie, and flatlye opposite to the
Apostles doctrine.

I have hitherto alleged two most evident places: the one out of the Gospel
of Christ, the other out of saint Paul his Epistle written to the Romans,
by which I meant to prove that Christ being preached to us by the Gospel is
received, not by works, but by faith: and I hope I have by divine testimonies
so declared this matter of importance, that no man shall need hereafter either
to doubt, or waver in the same. To all this now I add this note still most
necessary to be observed, that all good and holy men in the Church of Christ
must with all their power do their endeavor, that this doctrine of the Gospel
may abide sincere and utterly uncorrupted.

For they must in no case admit, that justification is partly attributed to
faith and the mercy of God, and partly to the works of faith and our own
merits. For if that be admitted, then does the Gospel loose all force and
virtue. I think therefore that all men must only and incessantly urge this,
that the faithful are justified, saved, or sanctified by faith without works,
by the grace and mercy, I say, of GOD thorough Christ alone. And I suppose
verily that this doctrine of the Gospel must be kept sincer^ and incorrupt
in the Church for very many causes, but among all other for these especially
which follow hereafter.

First of all, it is manifest, that Why (...) doctri^^^ ^aith that justifies
without works is to be ke^^ uncorrupted in the Church (...) Christ.
the often repeated doctrine, of the Grace of God, which in his only son
does thorough faith alone work justification, is by so many divine
testimonies even from the beginning of the world, by so many demonstrations,
and so many determinations of unreprovable counsels, both so plainly
declared, and thoroughly inculcated, that the very consent of all ages in ye
truth revealed from heaven, and the authority of the most holy men in all
the world do sufficiently inuit us to retain, maintain, and keep that
doctrine uncorrupted.

We have the justification of our blessed father Abraham a little above
expounded by no obscure author, but even by Paul the teacher of the Gentiles,
and elected vessel of GOD him self. We have the doctrine of instification
taught by the most glorious king and Prophet David, a man even after Gods
hearts desire, the great grandsyre of Christ our Lord, declared and expounded
by the same Apostle Paul.

Now, Abraham and David were always men of chief account in the Church of
God. With which twain the whole company of the Prophets do wholly agree.
For the Apostle Peter says: All the Prophets bare witness to Christ, that
by his name every one which does believe in him, should receive remission of
his sins. And even now by the mouth of Paul, we heard say, that by the
testimonies of the law and the Prophets, it is proved, That the
righteousenesse of God is freely bestowed by faith, with out the Law.

We have also the very son of God Jesus Christ our Lord, whose authority,
excelling far all y^ worlds beside, may confirm us well enough in this
piece of doctrine. For he, as it were in certain assembled counsels, did
determine and decree that, which we in this place do counsel al men to
retain. For having gathered together his disciples at Caesarea Philippi he
demanded of them, what men did think of him. Now, when they answered
diversely, according to the diversity of opinions that the common people had of
him, he inquired of the^ what they them selves thought of him. Then Peter in
the name of all the rest said: Thou art that Christ the son of the living
God. To whom the Lord replied: Happy art thou Simon Bar Iona, for flesh and
blood has not revealed this to thee, but my father which is in heaven. In
these words he concludes two several things.

First, that true faith does make us happy. Neither is it to be doubted but
that to make happy, is used here in that signification, which ye heard out of
Paul even now that David used it in. Lastly, that that sanctifying faith is
not the work of our own nature, but the heavenly gift of God. And then
also he takes occasion upon that notable confession of true faith, to give a
new name to Simon Peter, for the eternal memory of the thing, and for the
imprintinge of the signification of that mystery in all men's minds. Peter
confessed, that Christ was a stone or rock. Therefore Christ syrnameth Peter
a Petra, that is, a stone, as if one should call him a living stone laid
upon a living stone, or of Christ a Christian. Yea, and least peradventure
any man should tie the thing universally beelonginge to the whole church,
unto Peter alone, the Lord him self does apply it unto all the Church, and
says: And upon this stone will I build my church: and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it. As if he should have said: that which now is done in
thee Peter, shall hereafter be done in all the faithful.

Thou by faith art laid upon me, which am the stone, and art made a member of
the Church. I therefore do ordeine, that whosoever confesses me to be the
stone, shall be a member of the Church, sanctified, justified, and delivered
from the devil and the power of death. Thy confession, (that is, I Christ the
son of God, whom thou confessest:) shall be the foundation of the Church,
upon which foundation, whosoever are laid, they shall be justified and freely
saved.

For Paul also said: An other foundation cannot be laid, than that that is
already laid, which is Christ Jesus. And the Apostle John says: This is the
victory that has overcome the world, even your faith. Now least Peter and
his other fellow disciples should not know the way how other men should
be admitted into the fellowship of the Church, and received into the communion
of Christ, he adds immediately: And I will give thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou loosest in earth, shall be loosed in
heaven etc.

He gave the keys when he sent the Apostles to preach the Gospel.
Therefore, by the preaching of the Gospel (which is the keye of ye kingdom of
heaven) is heaven opened, and the way poynted out, how we being graffed in
Christ and the church, may be made the heirs of eternal life, to wite,
through faith in Christ, which we are taught by the Gospel of Christ.

Thus much touching the counsel, whereof Christ himself was President, held at
Caesarea Philippi. There is extant in John an other counsel held at Capernaum,
both famous and full of people. For in a great multitude of his Disciples and
other men, he does determine, that eternal life is gotten by faith in
Christ: and that there is none other way for us to come to life, than this:
To eat his flesh, and to drink his blood: that is, to believe in him. And
when among^ the audience, there was a Schism by reason that many revolted from
Christ, he demanded of them that were his nearest disciples, whether they
also would forsake him, then P^ter in the name of all the rest did answer:
since in thee, O Christ, there is life and salvation, if we depart from
thee, we cannot be partakers of lif^, and therefore by faith, we will
^^rmely stick and cleave close to thee for ever.

Moreover, here are to be reckoned two counsels also that were held by the
Apostles. The one of which no man can deny to be very general or
universal. For in it there were d^uout men of every nation under heaven. In
that counsel did Peter the Apostle in express words teach: that Christ is
the Savior of the world, whom whosoever believes, he shall have life
everlasting. The place is known in the Acts of the Apostles the second
Chapter.

Before the chief of the Jews the same Apostle declares, that there is
salvation in none other than in Christ alone. The place is extante in the Acts
of the Apostles the third Chapter. The like he does to the first fruits of
the Gentiles, Cornelius and his household in the tenth Chapter. The second
counsel, which was famous also, and passingly adorned with all good gifts, is
described in the fifteenth Chapter of the Acts: in which Counsel this
proposition was allowed: That faith without works does justify freely.

Touching which matter I have spoken at large in an other place. See the (...)
of (...) Acts (...) the Ap^stles, (...) the (...) Sermon the (...)
Now, by all this I would have it proved, that the doctrine of Faith that
justifies without works, ought to be retained unmingled and incorrupt in
the Church, because, as I may so say, it is most Catholic, and altogether
unreprovable: to the breach whereof this cu^sse or Anathematisme of the
Apostle is added, saying: If we, or an Angel from Heaven shall preach to you
any other Gospel, than that which we have preached, let him be accursed.

The second cause, why it is expedient, that this doctrine be kept sincere
in the Church, is, because, if it be once put out of ioynte, the glory of
Christ shall be in danger of wrack and in ieopardie. For the glory of
Christ is darkened and corrupted in the minds of men (although of it self
it remains always sound and clear) if we begin to divide the
righteousenesse, whereby we stand and appear before GOD, attributing it to
our own merits, and good works of our own. For this is the glory of the
son of God, that under Heaven there is none other name given unto men, in
which they must be saved.

Herevppon it is that Paul said: Christ is made of none effect to you, who
soever are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. And again: I do
not despise the grace of God. For if righteousenesse be of the Law: then did
Christ dye in vain. If he dyed in vain, then is the glory of Christ his
Cross perished.

The third cause is, the certain and assured reason of our salvation. Our
salvation should be utterly uncertain, if it did depend upon our works
and merits, who, because of our natural corruption, unless we be beside
our selves, do say, or ought to say with Job: If I have any righteousenesse,
I will not answer, but humbly beeseeche my Judge.

Therefore did Paul very rightly say: If the inheritance be of the Law,
then is faith void, and the promise made of none effect, Therefore is it of
faith, as according to Grace, that the promise may be firm to all the seed.

The fourth cause is, because, by this doctrine especially there is repaired in
us the image of GOD, to the likeness whereof we were at the first created.
For, by faith Christ dwells and lives in us, who is also delighted in our
humility. But then is the image of the devil stirred up in us, when we
begin once to be proud in our selves, and to usurp the glory of God,
which is done undoubtedly so often as we do attribute our righteousenesse
and salvation unto our selves: as though by our own works or merits we
had deserved the kingdom of GOD. The devil swells with pride and does his
endeavor to rob God of his glory. The Saints do know and acknowledge that
they are saved by the true grace and mercy of God: and do therefore attribute
to him all honor and glory, and to them selves confusion and ignominy.
Whereunto undoubtedly belongs the parable in the gospel of the Phariseie
boastinge in his good works, and of the Publicane praying and saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner: of which twain the Publicane is read to have gone
heavy to his house rather justified than the other.

The fifte cause is, the value or estimation of the sin. For that seems to
be no great fault, which may by men's works be blotted out before God. But
the holy scripture teaches, that sins could be by none other means cleansed,
but by the death and innocent blood of the son of God. Now, by that every
man that has any understanding may easily gather, that sin in the sight of
GOD is a most abominable and detestable thing. Whereupon there does arise
in the faithful Saints a careful and diligent watchinge against sin, and
a continual bewaylinge of our miserable condition with a passinge humility,
and exquisite modesty.

I could yet add to these some causes more, why al men ought to st^iue and
endeavor, to keep this doctrine: (that the Catholic church i^ justified by
the grace of God in his only be^otte^ son, through faith and not through
works) sincere and vncorrupt in ye church of Christ: but these I hope are
sufficient for them that are not of purpose set to quarrel against us. And yet
notwithstanding there is no peril why by this doctrine good works should be
neglected: of which I have spoken in place convenient. But if there be any that
cease not, of purpose to cauil against ye manifest truth of the Gospel, I
object against them that saying of Paul: that neither we nor the churches of
God do stand to wrangle in so manifest a light.

To conclude, the sum of all that which hitherto I have said touching The
conclusion and sum of all.
the Gospel is this: that al men that be in the world are of their own nature
the servants of sin, the devil, and eternal death, and cannot be loosed
or set at liberty by any other means, but by the free grace of God, and the
redemption, which is in the only begotten son of God our Lord Christ Jesus.

Of which redemption they only are made partakers, that do believe and trust
in him. For whosoever do by true faith receive Christ Jesus through the
preaching of the Gospel, they are therewithal justified, that is, acquitted
from their sins, sanctified and made heirs of eternal life. But they that
by their unbelief and hardness of heart, do not receive Christ, are given
over to the eternal pains, and bonds of hell. For the wrath of God abides
upon them.

Let us therefore give hearty thanks to God our redeemer, and humbly beseech
him to keep and increase us in the true faith, and lastely to bring us to life
everlasting. Amen.

Of Repentance, and the causes thereof, of Confession and remission of sins,
of satisfaction and indulgences, of the old and new man, of the power or
strength of men, and the other things perteining to Repentance.
The Second Sermon.
I Promised in my last Sermon, that I made of the Gospel of JESUS Christ, to
add a discourse of Repentance, which by the help of GOD, and your good
prayers, I purpose in this Sermon for to perform.

They among the Latins are To repent
said to repent, which are agreeued at, or ashamed of the thing that they have
done. Thou have done a good turn, and thinckest him unworthy of it, for whom
thou have done it, and for that cause art sorry to thy self: that sorrow of
thine is repentance. We Germans call it Denriiwen. The Greeks do name it
Metanoeam. Now, they which are skilful of y^ tongue, say that (...) signifies
to bethink afterward: so that Metanoea is there properly used, where a man
having once slipped, by dooynge some thing foolishelye, does notwithstanding at
length come to himself again, and verily purpose to correct his own error.
It is the^rfore referred, not to the thought of the mind only, but also to
the deed done. For he, that perceives that he has offended, does devise with
himself how to amend it. So now the thing begins to displease thee, which
before did please thee: so now thou eschuest the thing, that before thou
ensuedst. Moreover the Hebrews call Repentance Theschuah, that is a
conversion, or returning to the right way, or mind again. The Metaphore
seems to be taken of them, which once did straye from the right path, but
do again at length return into the way. Which word is translated to the
mind, to the manners, and deeds of men.

But now this word is diversely used. (...) of (...) word (...)
For Repentance signifies the changing of the purpose once conceived, or of
any other thing. For by Jeremy the Lord says: If they turn from evil, I
will also repent me of the evil, which I meant to lay upon them. Therefore
God does then repent, (...) it is.
when he changes his purpose: he repents not, when he does not alter it.
Paul says: The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. And David
said, The Lord has sworn, and will not repent. Elsewhere Repentance is
figuratively attributed to God like to the affection of mortal men: as when
he says, It repents me that I have made man. For God of his own nature
does not repent as men do, so that he should be touched with grief, and
that the thing should now mislike him, which he before did like off, but he
does barely alter that, which he has done. Among Ecclesiastical writers
they are said to repent, which after a prescribed manner of punishment do
penance for their sins, which they have committed. The scripture in an other
place does use it for ye whole effect and matter of the Gospel: For in the
Acts we read that God gave to the Gentiles repentance unto life. But we in
this disputation of ours, will use Repentance for a converting or turning to
the Lord, for the acknowledging of sins, for the grief conceived for sins
committed, for mortification, and the beginning to lead a new life, and
finally for the change, correction, and amendment of ye life from evil to
better: that which we Germans call Bekeerung, Enderung oder Besserung.

And as diversely too is Repentance What repentance is.
defined of the Ecclesiastical writers: howbeit all agree that it is a
conversion or turning to the Lord, and an alteration of the former life and
opinion. We therefore do say, that Repentance is an unfeigned turning to God,
whereby we being of a sincere fear of God once humbled, do acknowledge our
sins, and so by mortifying our old man, are afresh renewed by the spirit of
God. This definition does consist upon her parts, which being somewhat more
largely opened and diligently expounded, will declare unto us and lay before
our eyes ye whole nature of Repentance.

First we say that Repentance is Conversion to God.
an unfeigned turning unto God. For I will hereafter show you that there are
two sorts of Repentance, to wit, feigned, and unfeigned. And the Apostle Peter
says, Repent and turn, that your sins may be blotted out, expounding as it
were the first by the last, to wit, Repentance, by Returning (he means) to
him from whom they had turned themselves away.

For there is a certain relation beetwixt turning to, and turning fro. If thou
had never turned away, then had thou had no need to have turned to again.
But we have all turned away from the true, just and good God, and from his holy
will, unto the devil and our own corrupt affections. And therefore must we
again turn us from the devil, and from our old naughty life and will, unto
the living God, and his most holy will and pleasure. We do here significantly
say To God, and not To creatures, or any help of man. For the Lord in Jeremy,
does say: If Israel, thou will return, return to me. Whosoever therefore do
not turn to God, nor make themselves conformable to his holy will, how soever
they do turn to creatures, and other means of man's invention, yet are they
not to be esteemed or counted penitents.

Now there is none so blind, but sees that for the stirring of us up to
repentance, the preaching or doctrine The doctrine of verity is needful to
repentance
of the truth is needeful and requisite, to teach us what God is, to whom
we must be turned: what the goodness and holiness is, to which we must be
turned: who the devil is, and what the evil and wickedness is, from which
we must be turned: and lastly what the thing is, that must be amended in our
mind and life, and also how it must be altered and amended. Truly the
Prophets and Apostles of ye Lord in exhorting men unto repentance do
traueile much, and stick very long in describing of Gods nature, goodness,
righteousness, truth and mercy, in painting out the laws and offices of the
life of man: and in accusing and heaping up the sins of men, whereunto they
add the grievous and horrible tokens of Gods just judgments: as is in every
place of the Prophets writings to be found very rifely. And therefore some
there are, which bidd us even now to preach the law to those men, whom we
would draw unto repentance: which thing as I do not gainesay, but very well
like it, so do I with-al admonish them that the preaching of the Gospel also
does obiecte to men their sins, and grievously accuse them. For the Lord in
the Gospel says, When the holy Ghost comes, it shall argue the world of
sin, because they believed not in me. Whervppon S. Peter in the Acts of the
Apostles, vpbrayding to the Jews their sins committed, and preaching unto
them Christ and faith in Christ, exhorts them unto repentance. The places
are very well known. Acts. 2. and 3. S. Paul going about to draw the
Athenie^s unto Repentance, does say: God, who has hitherto winked at the
times of this ignorance, does now preach to al men every where that they
should repent, because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world
with righteousness through Christ. Let them therefore, to whom charge is
given to draw men unto repentance, learn here to use much liberty and
wisdom that all men may acknowledge their sin, and ye greatness of their
iniquity. Moreover God does stir up men to repentance, not by his word
only, but also by diverse afflictions, and sundry sorts of punishments. Yea,
all the calamities that happen in the world are certain Sermons, as it were,
persuading and drawing us unto repentance. For that I may in silence
ouerpasse that which is written in the Prophets, did not our Lord himself in
the Gospel, when he heard tidings of the slaughter which Pontius Pilate had
made upon the Galilans, and the death of the 18. men upon whom ye tower in
Siloc fell, presently say: Think ye that they were greater sinners than the
rest? No verily: but unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. It is
assuredly certain therefore, that war, famine and plagues do always inuit
us unto repentance, that is, they premonishe us by laying sin aside to be
converted unto God, and wholly to give our selves to sincere integrity.

But in vain is repentance preached (...) fear (...) God to (...).
unto us, unless by fear and trembling conceived in our minds, we do
reuerendly dread the wrath and judgment of Almighty God conceived against us
because of our sins and wickednesses. Now this fear is outwardly stirred in
us by the external preaching or discipline of the minister as I told you
before, but that external doctrine avails nothing alone, unless inwardly,
that is, in our hearts, we be moved by the holy spirit of our heavenly father.
And therefore Jeremy in his Lamentations, cries: Turn us, O Lord, and we
shall be turned. And in the 31. Chap. Turn thou me, O Lord, and I shall be turned:
because thou art the lord my God. And after I was turned, it repented me of
evil. We read that S. Peter being provoked by the words of the damsel that
kept the door, and of the soldiers did foulie deny his master Christ: but
being revoked at the cocks crowing, he repented his fault or folly from the
bottom of his heart. And yet it was not the crowing of the cock of it self
alone that stirred that motion in him, but that and the word of Christ
together, who had said unto him: Verily I say unto thee, the cock shall not
crow, till thou have denied me thrice. Whereupon S. Matt. says, And Peter
remembered the words of the Lord which had said unto him, Before the cock
crow thou shall deny me thrice, etc. With these also is joined a more secret
touching of Peter's mind. For the good Lord touched the heart of Peter, as the
Euangeliste testifies, saying: And the Lord turning himself about, looked upon
Peter. That loking back of ye Lord made Peter's heart to melt, and drue it from
the destruction wherinto it was about to fall. Therefore if our cares be
pierced with the word of God, and our hearts touched with his holy spirit,
then shall we like true penitents unfeignedly reverence and dread the Lord.

And therewithal being humbled Our humbling and acknowledging of our sins.
before the most just and holy God whom we with our sins do so much offend
and provoke to wrath and indignation, we confess his judgment to be just
against us, and freely acknowledge all the sins and iniquities yt in the word
of God are objected against us, crying out, and saying with the Prophets: Thou
verily, O Lord, art righteous, thou art true, and thy judgments just: but we
are most unrighteous, liars, wicked, and wholly overwhelmed with detestable
iniquities. There is nothing sound or sincere within us. All that we have is
corrupt and miserable. We have sinned, we have been wicked, we have done
unjustly, we have forsaken thee. We have gainesaid thy servants the Prophets,
we have not obeyed the words of thy mouth. To thee therefore, O God, does
righteousness belong, and to us wretches shame and confusion. This humiliation
and free confession of sins does God require of penitent sinners: touching
which I will hereafter speak somewhat more. For now I return more fully to
expound the fear of the Lord.

At this present I speak of the sincere The fear of God is of two sorts.
fear of God: for we confess that the fear of God is of two sorts, sincere
and insincere. The sincere fear of God is perceived in the faithful, and is a
godly reverence, consisting in the love and honor of God. For the Prophet
brings in God saying: The son honors the father, and the servant the
master. Therefore if I be a father, where is my honor? If a Lord, where is my
fear? And Paul says: Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again
unto fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption, by which we cry Abba
father. Therefore the sincere fear of God, in them that do repent, is not the
servile dread of punishment, but a careful study mixed with the love and
honor of God. An honest wife fears her husband, and a gracious daughter
fears her father, and yet each of them does therewithal love, the one her
father, the other her husband, and does with an holy love endeavor herself to
keep his favor, and fear, least at any time she should do any thing to loose
it. And therefore penitents do not only fear, because they know being taught
by the spirit of God, that they have committed sins, for which they have
deserved to be forsaken of the Lord: but do also love him as their merciful
father, and are therefore sorry with all their hearts for their sins
committed, and do above al things most ardently require to be reconciled
again to their merciful GOD and loving father.

For with this sincere fear of God is joined the grief or sorrow, which
Sorrow to God ward.
is conceived by the spirit of God for our sins that we commit. S. Paul
makes mention of two sorts of sorrows. The sorrow that is to Godward,
says he, does bring forth repentance not to be repented of, but contrarily
the sorrow of the world brings death. The king and Prophet David sorrowed
to Godward, when he cried: Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand does
press me soar. There is no whole part in my flesh, because of thy
displeasure: there is no rest in my bones by reason of my sin. And so forward
as is to be seen in the 38. Psalm. Which, although it were written of his
grievous disease or sickness, does yet notwithstanding as it were in a
shadow show us the great grief, that is in the Saints for offending their
good and gracious father with their continual sins. To Godward was the
sinnful woman sorry in S. Luke, who, falling prostrate at the Lords heels, did
wash his feet with tears, and wyped them with her hair. To Godward was S.
Peter sorry, and wept, (as we read) full bitterly for his offense. The godly are
greatly grieved because they do so oftentimes offend so foully, so good a God
and gracious father. No words, I think, can possibly express the grief
and sorrow that they conceive. But the Prophet Jeremy describing the
contrary affection of impenitent sinners, does say: Do men fall so that
they may not rise again? Does any man go so astray, that he may not turn
again? How does it happen then that this people of Jerusalem is turned away
so stubbornely? I gave ear and hearkened, they spoke not rightly: there was
none that did repent him of his wickedness, to say, what have I done? Every
one of them turned to his own course, like a fierce horse headlong to the
batteile.

The worldly grief is the sorrow of such men, as know not God, and are
without faith and the true love of God, yea of such, as yield under the burden
of sorrow, adversities and very sins. Like to this also in a manner is the
consideration of the insincere fear of God. For the wicked with their head the
devil do fear God, not as a father, whom they are sorry to offend, and to
whom they desire to be reconciled as to a father, but as a tormentour,
because they know that he will revenge their evil deeds. And therefore with
Judas they run to the roape. There is in them no love of God, no honor, no
goodwill, no reverence, but mere hatred, horror, and utter desperation: But
such fear the Apostle and Euangeliste John denied to be in charity, saying
that perfect charity casts out all fear: I mean not that fear of the
Lord, that is ye beginning of wisdom, but that, of which I have spoken all
this while, the fear, I mean, that is in the devil, and wicked men his
members.

And now by this we gather, that (...) is (...) in (...) that (...).
unto penitentes faith in God and the merit of Christ is most of all and
especially needeful. In which sense it is, I think, that many have made faith
a part of repentance: which as I do not greatly deny, so yet do I see that
S. Paul made, as it were, a difference betwixt faith and repentance, when in
the 20. of the Acts he says: that he witnessed both to the Jews and
Gentiles the repentance that is toward GOD, and the faith in Jesus Christ.
Therefore repentance and faith, seem to be diverse: not that true repentance
can be without faith, but because they must be distinguished and not
confounded. We do all know that true faith is not without works (as that,
which of necessity shows forth good works) and yet we make a difference
betwixt faith and works, so yet that we do not separate them or rend the one
from the other: and in like manner we acknowledge that true faith and true
repentance are vndiuidedly knit together, and closely fastened the one to the
other. I will not stand in argument whether faith be a part of repentance, or
does by any other means depend upon it. It seems to me a notable point of
folly, to go about to tie matters of Divinity to precepts of Logic. For we
learn not that of the Lords Apostles. I admonished you before in a Sermon of
the Gospel (which thing I do here repeat again) that the acknowledging of
sins does not of it self obtain grace or forgiveness of sins: even as
the bare acknowledging of a disease is not the remedy for the same. For eue^
damned men also do acknowledge their sins, and yet are not therefore healed.
The acknowledging of sin is a certain preparatiue unto faith: as ye
acknowledging of a disease, does minister occasion to think upon a remedy.
To this at this present we add, that not the very fear of God, how sincere
soever it be, not the very sorrow conceived for our sins how great soever
it be, nor the very humiliation how submisse soever it be, do of
themselves make us acceptable to god, but rather that they prepare an entrance
and make a way for us unto the knowledge of Christ, and so consequently do
lead us to Christ himself being incarnate and crucified for us, and our
redemption, and lay us upon Christ alone by him to be quickened and purely
cleansed. For he that is truly converted to God, is utterly turned from
himself and all hope of worldly aid. Who so does truly fear God, and is
sorry in very deed from the bottom of his heart, he does fear and is sorry
for his sins committed, and not for that alone, but because he finds
himself to be corrupted wholly, and to have in himself no soundness or
integrity: yea, because he reuere^ceth God as his father, he does disclose to
him his wounds as to a Cheirurgian, desiring instantly to be reconciled to him
as to his loving father. And whereas here true godliness does cry, that no
man can be reconciled to God the father, but by the only begotten son: the
penitent does by faith lay hold on the son and so seek the means of his
reco^ciliation. Faith is grounded upon the only grace or mercy of GOD
exhibited to us in Christ Jesus, and the penitent beleeneth yt he is accepted
of God for Christ his sake alone: and therefore he makes his supplications to
God, committing himself wholly unto his mercy, as we read that David, and the
prodigal son in the 15. cap. of S. Lukes Gospel did. To this place might be
annexed the doctrine of the Gospel, of faith in Jesus Christ, and of the
remission of sins, touching which I have already spoken.

And here I think it not amiss, Sins are fully and surely forgiven unto
penitents.
that the minds of penitents must by all means be confirmed with many and
evident places of scripture plainly uttered concerning the full remission of
sins, to the end that hereafter we have no scruple of conscience, to cause
us to despair or doubt in our temptations. Wherein notwithstanding I repeat
again and again this note to be thoroughly marcked, for the confirmation of
the glory of the only begotten son of God our lord Christ Jesus, that
penitent sinners have their sins remitted, not for their repentance, in
respect that it is our work or action, but in respect that it comprehends
the renewing of man by the holy Ghost and true faith, which delivers us to
Christ our Physician, that he may heal all our diseases, and bind up al our
griefs. And although this treatise does properly belong to the common place
of faith, and the Gospel, of which I have so briefly, as I could, already
discoursed, yet notwithstanding I will here recite some evident sentences
touching the grace of GOD, and free remission of our sins.

David in the hundredth and third Psalm, says: Praise the Lord, O my soul,
and forget not the things that he has done for thee: which forgiueth all
thy sins: and heals all thine infirmities. Which saves thy life from
destruction: and crowns thee with mercy and louinge kindness. He has not
dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our wickedness.
For look how high the heaven is in comparison of the earth, so great is his
mercy toward them that fear him. And look how far the East is from the
West: so far has he set our sins from us. Yea, like as a father pitieth
his own children, so is the lord merciful to them that fear him. For he
knows that we are frail (proane to sin) and does remember that we are but
dust.

Esaie in the first Chapter of his Prophecy, says: Thus says the Lord,
Though your sins be as red as Scarlet, they shall be made whiter then snow:
and though they be redd as purple, they shall be made like vndied woll. Again
in the forty and three Chapter, he brings in the Lord, saying: I, I am
he, that blott out the transgressions, and that for mine own sake, and I will
not remember thy sins.

In the 31. Chapter of Jeremy, which saying is also alleged by Paul in the
eighth and tenthe Chapiters to the Hebrews, the Lord says: This is my
covenant, that I will make with them after these days. I will be merciful unto
their iniquities, and not remember their sins any more.

In the 36. Chapter of Ezechiel the Lord says: I will sprinckle clean water
upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your uncleanness. A new heart
also will I give you, and and a new spirit will I put within you: as for that
stony heart, I will take it out of your flesh, and give you a fleshie heart. I
will deliver you from all your uncleannesses. But I will not do this for your
sakes, says the Lord, be ye sure of it etc.

Daniel in his ninth Chapter leaves to us a manifest example of confession of
sins, and does in express words say, that by the Messiah, sins are
forgiven, iniquity purged, and everlasting righteousness brought in, in steed
of it. So does the Prophet ^acharie in his third Chapter affirm, that the
iniquity of the earth is purged by the only Sacrifice of Christ Jesus.

The Lord in the Gospel after S. Matthewe does say: They that are whole need
not the Physician, but they that are sick. Neither did I come to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. And therefore is he called Jesus, that
is, a Savior. For the Angel said: He shall save his people from their sins.
And Saint Paul to Timothy says: It is a sure saying, and worthy by all
means to be received, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.

In the same Gospel the Lord says: Every sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven men: but blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven
men. And whosoever shall say a word against the son of man, it shall be
forgiven him: but whosoever speaks a word against the holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him nether in this world, nor in the world to come. Concerning
sin against the holy Ghost I have already spoken in another place. Now to
this place do belong all the examples of that most liberal kind of
forgiveness, which is expressed in the Gospel, as for example, of the
sinful woman, Luke the seventh. Also John y^ fourth, and Matthew the eighth
Chapter. Of Zachee, Saint Peter, and the thief upon the Cross. But who is
able briefly to reckon them all? To this also do apperteine the three
parables in the Gospel after the Euangeliste Saint Luke.

In the Gospel after Saint John, the forerunner of the Lord does cry out
saying: Behold the lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. And
the Lord himself did say to his disciples: Whose sins soever ye forgive,
they are forgiven.

Peter the Apostle in the Acts does cry and say: All the Prophets bear
witness to Christ, that whosoever believes in him should by his name receive
remission of his sins. The same Apostle again in his Epistle, says: Christ
his own self bare our sins in his body upon the Cross, 1. Pet. 2.
that we being dead to sin, might live to righteousness: by whose stripes
ye are healed.

The Apostle Paul in the 5. chap of his 2. Epistle to the Corinthians, says
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputinge their
sins unto them. For him, that knew not sin, he made sin for us, that
we through him might be made the righteousness of God. And in the tenthe to
the Hebrews he has, Christ having offered one sacrifice for sin, is set
down at the right hand of God for ever, from henceforth tarying till his foes
be made his footestoole. For with one offering has he made perfect for ever
them, that are sanctified.

Moreover, the blessed Apostle and Euangeliste John, does no less truly than
evidently testify, saying: The blood of Jesus Christ the son of God, does
cleanse us from all sin. And again, And he is the propitiation for our
sins: not for ours only, but for the sins also of the whole world.

But now most vain, and the very Against the Nouatians and Anabaptists.
messingers of satan himself, are the Nouatians and Anabaptists, which
feign that we are by baptism purged into an Angelical life, which is not
polluted with any spotts at all: but if it be polluted, then can he, that is
so defiled, look for no pardon at all. For to pass over many other places of
holy Scripture, was not S. Peter consecrated to God in baptism? had he not
tasted of Gods good grace? After that notable confession which he made, the
Lord said unto him: Happy art thou Simon Bar Iona, flesh and blood has not
revealed this unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. Again when the Lord
demanded of his disciples, saying: Will ye depart also? Then Peter in the name
of them all aunsweared, Lord to whom shall we go* Thou have the words of
eternal life: and we believe and know that thou art Christ the son of the
living God. And yet this very fame Peter after his baptism and tasting of the
grace of God, sins notwithstanding, and that too not lightly, in denying and
foreswearing his Lord and master. Now was he, for this sin of his,
altogether vnpardoneable? was his return to God again stopped up by his
stumbling? No verily. For when he heard the cock crow, he remembered
presently the words of the Lord, he descended into himself, he considered
what he had done, he wept bitterly, and mourned lamentably. And yet he was
not long tormented in that grief without consolation. For the third day
after, to the women which came to ye Lords sepulcher, it was said by the
Angels: Tell his disciples and Peter, that he is risen and goes before you
into Galilee. Lo here the Lord will have it known to Peter by name, that he
was risen. And why to Peter by name? Because forsooth he had sinned more
grievously than the other: not that the Lord did like of Peter's sin, but
because he would thereby declare to us that penitents do obtain forgiveness
of their sins, so often as they do turn to the heavenly grace of God again.
And not many days after he restored Peter to the ministry again, commending
to him the charge of his sheep. Moreover the Lord in Jeremy speaks to the
people of Israel, saying: If any man put away his wife, and she marry to an
other man, will her first husband turn to her again? But is not this land
defiled? Have thou not committed fornication with many? yet turn thee to me
again, says the Lord. And the Galathians being once rightly instructed by ye
Apostle Paul, but after that seduced by the false apostles, revolted from the
truth and preaching of the Gospel: yet notwithstanding they obtained pardon.
The Corinthians also after they had received grace, did wittingly and willingly
sin in many things: but yet upon repentance the Apostle Paul promised them
forgiveness of their sins at ye hands of the Lord. And what is more
manifest than this, that all the saints do daily in earnest and truly, not
hypocritically, or falsely pray, saying: Forgive us our trespasses? They
which pray thus, do plainelye confess that they are sinners. And the Lord
promises to hear those, that pray with faith, therefore even those sins
are forgiven at the prayers of penitents, which are committed after the grace
of God is once known and obtained. Now the places in the Epistle to the
Hebrews which the Nouatians allege for the confirmation of their opinion, I
have in an other place so thoroughly discussed, that I need not here busily
to stand long upon them.

But now to gather a sum of those things, which I have hitherto said
concerning repentance, let us (...).
hold that repentance is a turning to God, which, although he does by his
word and other means stir it up in us, is notwithstanding especially by
the holy Ghost so wrought in us, that with fear we love, and with love we
fear our just God, and merciful Lord, from whom we were turned back, being
sorry now withal our hearts that we with our sins did ever offend so
gracious a father. For being humbled before his eternal and most sacred
majesty, we acknowledge the sins that are objected against us by the word of
God: yea, we acknowledge that in us there is no integrity or soundness: but
do heartily desire to be reconciled with God again: and since that
reconciliation cannot be otherwise made, than by the only mediator the Lord
Christ Jesus, we do by faith lay hold on him, by whom we, being acquitted
from all our sins, are reputed of God for righteous and holy. This benefit
whosoever do sincerely acknowledge, they cannot choose but hate sin, and
mortify the old man. I would therefore now add other members belonging to this
treatise of repentance, to wit, the mortification of the old man, and the
renewing of the spirit, were it not, that the very matter it self does require
to have somewhat said touching the confession of sins, and satisfaction for
ye same. For some there are, that, when they speak of Repentance, do speak
somethings contrary to the truth. To the end therefore, dearly beloved,
that ye be not ignorant what to think of these points according to the
truth, I will not stick to stay somewhile in the exposition of the same. And
I hope ye shall out of my words gather such fruit, as ye shall not hereafter
repent your selves of.

To confess, or a Confession is in the holy Scriptures diuersely used. Of the
confession of sins.
For it signifies, to praise the Lord, and to give him thanckes for the
benefits, that we receive at his hands. And therefore Confession is put for
praise and thanckesgiuing. For the Prophet says: O praise the Lord, for he
is good, and his mercy endures for ever. Paul in his Epistle to Titus
speaking of hypocrites, says: In words they confess that they know God,
but in their deeds they deny him.

Here, to confess, does signify to say, to profess, or to boast. In an
other place it is taken for to trust, to stay upon Gods goodness, and to
testify that confidence as well by words as deeds. And in that sense did
Saint John use it in the fourth Chapter of his first Epistle, and Paul in
the 10. to the Romans. Moreover to confess is, to give glory to God, and
freely to acknowledge thy sin, and the judgment which is objected to thee
for thy sin. Solomon in the twenty eighth Chapter of his Proverbs says:
Whosoever hides his iniquities (or does as it were defend them) nothing shall
go well with him: but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, to him shall be
showed mercy. The Hebrew tongue uses the word Iadah for that, which we call
to confess. Now Iadah signifies to let slack, or loose, as when a bow once
bended is vnbended again. And Modeh, which comes of Iadah, is as if one
should say, confessing, yielding, or granting to be vanquished. For God
accuses us, and pleads us guilty of sin, and indaungered to punishment:
which our flesh does presently acknowledge, but yet stands stiff like a
bended bow, until at length when that stiffenesse is vnbended it does
acknowledge every thing that God obiecteth against us: This acknowledging is
called Modeh, that is a confession. And we Germans say, Es hat gelassen. Er
hat geschnellt, when we mean that any thing has yielded, or that a man has
at last confessed that, which he did before, either flattly deny, or else
dissemble.

But now confession of sins is Confession of sins ordained of God.
of more sorts than one. For the one is divine, the other humane. I will first
speak of the divine confession, then of the humane. We call that divine,
whereof there be evident testimonies or examples in the holy Scriptures, and
which is instituted by God himself. That is a free acknowledging and flatt
confession of the sin, which God obiecteth against us, whereby we do
attribute all glory to God, and to our selves shame and confusion, and
therewithal do crave pardon of God, and of our neighbor, against whom we
have sinned. Now sin is objected to us by God himself, who outwardly by the
word, or the ministry of men, and sometime by signs and wonders, and
inwardly by the secret operation of his holy spirit, does plead us guilty of
sin, and indaungered to punishment, requiring of us a free and voluntary
confession of our sins. For he likes of a free, and voluntary, not a
feigned or extorted confession. Truly the citizens of Jerusalem, and people of
the Iewishe religion, did of their own accord come to the baptism of John,
confessing their sins, which John in his preaching had objected against
them. And after the Ascension of Christ into heaven, Saint Peter accused the
sins of the Jews: and immediately upon the accusation it follows in the
history, When they heard this they were pricked in their hearts, and said to
Peter, and the other Apostles, Men and brethren what shall we do? and so forth
as follows in the second of the Acts. Likewise also the keeper of the prison
at Philippos, feeling the earthquake sprang out and being instructed with ye
Apostles words confessed his sins, and was baptized. And the men of Ephesus
which were given to Magical arts, when they heard the calamity, which the
devil brought upon the sons of Sceua their fellows and practisers in
Magic and sorcerie, did fear exceedingly, and came and did confess their
sins. Upon these causes for the most part does the confession of sins
especially arise.

Again, of the confession instituted by God, there are two sorts, whereof ^he
con^^ssion (...) is (...) to ^od.
the one is made to God, ye other to our neighbor. That which is made to god
is either private, or public. We do then make our confession to God
privately, when we disburden our hearts before God, open the secrets of our
hearts to him alone, and in acknowledging the sins that are in us, do
earnestly beseech him to have mercy upon us. This confession is necessary to
the obteyning of pardon for our sins. For unless we do acknowledge our
own corruption and unrighteousness, we shall never by true faith lay hold on
Christ, by whom alone we are to be justified. But here we think not that
penitentes must hasten to any other confessor to confess their sins unto,
but unto God alone. For he alone does forgive and blot out the offenses of
penitents. He is the Physician, to whom alone we must discover and open our
wounds. He it is, that is offended with us, and therefore of him, we must
desire forgiveness and reconciliation. He alone does look into our hearts,
and search our reins, to him alone therefore we must disclose our hearts.
He alone calls sinners unto him: let us therefore make haste unto him,
prostrate our selves before him, confess our faults unto him, and crave
pardon for them of him.

This confession, if it be made of a zealous mind to Godward, although it
cannot be made by word of mouth by reason of sonie impediment, or want of the
tongue, is notwithstanding acceptable to God, who does not so much respect the
mouth, as the mind of man. On the other side if we make confession with the
mouth, and in heart are not thoroughly bent to the same, although we make that
confession to God or the high priest, yet does not the Lord regard so vain a
confession.

Concerning that true confession to God I have already spoken, whereas in the
definition of Repentance, I said that penitentes do acknowledge their sins.
Of which the Scripture does in many places substantially speak. David in the
Psalms does pray saying: Have mercy upon me, O God, according to the
greatness of thy mercy. For I acknowledge my sins, and my sin is ever
before me. To thee alone have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight. And so
forth.

And in an other Psalm: I have made my fault known unto thee, and mine
unrighteousness have I not hidd. I said, I will confess mine unrighteousness
unto thee against me self, and thou have forgiven the wickedness of my
sin. In the Gospel the Lord teaches to pray, and in prayer to confess and
say: Forgive us our debtes, as we forgive our debitours. And, when we pray
so, he bids us to go aside into our Chamber, that our heart, and the
devotion of our hearts may there appear unto our heavenly father alone.

The prodigal son did in the field, where none but swine alone were to be
seen, privately both make and offer the confession of his sin unto his
father. And that Publicane in the Gospel, which is compared with the
Phariseie, knocks his breast and with a lamentable voice does to him self
confess and say, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Let us now also hear
John the holy Apostle and Euangeliste, comprehending all, that may be truly
spoken touching this confession, in this one saying: If we say, that we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess
our sins, God is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse
us from all iniquity. With this private confession which is made to God, is
that voluntary confession always joined that is made before men. For
penitents are humbled so often as the matter, ye glory of God, and safeguard of
our neighbor requires, and do before men openly testify, that they have
sinned unto God. For so David, when Nathan ye Prophet told him of his sin,
cried out saying: I have sinned to the Lord. So also Zacheus understanding that
the Lord was vppbrayded for receiving him, does openly confess his sin, and
promise amendment.

We verily do publicly make our confession to God so as I told you a little
above, but so much the rather yet, Public or open confession
when after the hearing of the word of truth, we do after that public or
solemn manner either in ye Church, or otherwise in some congregation or holy
assembly, recite our sins committed, and cry to God for mercy and pardon
of the same. Truly of old the Lord appointed in our forefathers days, that
the priest going before in words premeditated for the purpose, Leuit. 10.
the whole people should follow him word for word, and openly confess their
sins in the temple. Whervppon undoubtedly it is at this day received in the
Church of the Christians, that the pastor or doctor of the Church going
before in words conceined, at the end of the exposition of the Scriptures,
before the assembly is dimissed, all the people should openly in the temple
confess all their sins against God, and heartily desire him of his mercy to
forgive them the same. The public confessions of sins are notably known
which were made by Daniel, Esdras, and Nehemias. And I say plainly that that
was a public confession of sins, which Saint Matthewe in his third
Chapter says that the Jews did make. For all Jury came out to John the
forerunner of the Lord, and were baptized of him in Iordane, confessing their
sins. For when they did publicly receive Baptism, then did they thereby
declare and openly confess their sins. For baptism is the sign of ye
cleansing of sins: therefore they that are baptized, confess that they are
sinners. They that were not baptized, thought themselves to be otherwise
purged, and that they needed not any sanctification.

The Ephesians did publicly confess Acts. 1*
their sins, when gathering their books of witchcraft together they burned
them in ye fire. For by the burning of those books they did confess, that
they had committed wickedness, that was to be purged with fire.

Now the confession that is made to our neighbor is of this sort: Thou have
offended thy brother, or else he Confe^^ that is made t^ our (...).
perhaps has done thee injury, for which ye are at discord, and do hate
one an other: in this case verily ye must think of reconciliation: let the
one therefore go to the other, and confess and ask pardon for the fault
committed, and let him, that is innocent in the matter, freely forgive him that
confesses his fault, and so beecome his friend again. Of this confession the
Apostle James spoke, saying: Confess your faults one to an other, and pray
one for an other, that ye may be healed. And our Lord and Savior did before
James teach us, saying: If thou offerest thy gift at the altar (for he
speaks to those, among whom at that time the sacrifices of the law were yet
in use:) and do remember there, that thy brother has any thing against thee,
leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy ways, first be reconciled
to thy brother: and then thou may come and offer thy gift. To this also
does belong that parable which the Lord puts forth and expounds in the
eighteenthe Chapter after S. Matthewe, of him that was cast into perpetual
prison, because when he had found favor at his Lords hand, he was over
cruel upon his fellow servant, to whom he would not forgive so much as a
farthing. For in the sixte Chapter after Saint Matthewe the Lord says: If
ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also forgive you.
But if ye forgive not men their trespasses: no more will your father forgive
you your trespasses. Not that, for our forgiving of others, our sins are
forgiven us. For so the forgiveness of our sins should not be free, but
should come by our merits, and as a recompense of our deserts. But now when
our sins are freely forgiven thorough faith, verily that unreconcilable and
hard heart is an assured argument, that there is no faith in a hard,
stubborn, and unappeasable man. But where there is no faith, there is no
remission. Therefore voluntary forgiveness in a man toward his neighbor, is
not that, for which we are forgiven of God our father, but is an evident
sign, and natural fruit of true faith and the grace of God with-in us.

To these two kinds of confession some men add that, whereby they, that
Consultation.
are oppressed in conscience with any grievous sin, do consulte or ask
counsel either of the Pastoure of the Lords flock, or else of some other that
is expert and skillful in the law of God. But that is rather to be termed a
consultation than a confession. And it is in no place either commanded or
forbidden, and therefore left free at every man's choice. Wherefore no man
ought to be compelled to this co^sultation. But if any brother do demand
counsel either of the minister of the Churhc, or of any other private brother,
then charity commands thee, to satisfy him, if so be that thou can.
Yea, if he demands not, and thou do see thy brother to be in danger,
charity again commands thee to admonish him that is so in danger, and to
handle him as a brother. For Paul to the Galathians says: Brethren, if a man
be prevented in any fault, ye, which are spiritual, restore such an one in
the spirit of meckenesse: considering thee self least thou also be tempted.
Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. But this
belongs nothing to confession, therefore we return to our purpose again.

Thus much have we hitherto Confession of sins ordained of men.
said touching the confession of sins, which God has instituted. Now we
will annexe somewhat touching the confession of sins that men have ordained.
That confession also is of two sorts, the one is public, rituall or
ceremonial, which for the most part they call (...): The other Exhomologesis.
is private or secret, and is called Auricular.

I call the public confession Rituall, not so much because it is the
acknowledging or confession of sin, as for that it is the penitential action
for the sin committed. For Isidore the bishop Libro, Etymol. 6. Cap. 18.
says: Exhomologesis is the discipline of prostrating and humbling men in
habit, in huing, to lie in sack and ashes, to deface the body with filthe,
to mourn and lament with a sorrowful mind, and thorough sorrow to amend
that, wherein they sinned before.

These words of bishop Isidore I would not have recited unto you, (dearly
beloved) who is an author not very famous, unless I had seen the same
words in a manner to be read in the book which Tertullian wrote of
Repentance: and unless I had found an example thereof in Eusebius, who in the
fifte book and last Chapter of his Ecclesiastical history I find him
otherwise called Natalius.
says: Natalis the martyr being seduced by heretics, and at leng the
understanding his error, rises up in the morninge, and putting on a
sackecloth, sprinckling himself with ashes, and with many tears bewayling his
error, casting himself prostrate at the feet of Zephyrinus the bishop, and
all other, not Clearks only, but Laye-men also, with great lamentation and
exceeding sorrow provoked all the congregation with earnest and continual
prayers to request of Christ Jesus to pardon his offense.

Touching the rites of repentance I will hereafter speak. Now this rituall
or ceromoniall Repentance, as it was used among them of old, appears not to
have been commanded of God, that whosoever at this day commits any sin,
should be compelled presently to confess it openly, in such sort as they were
wont to do it. For where is it read, that such penance was enjoined to the
sinful Luke. 9. Ioha. 8.
or adulterous woman, that is mentioned in the Gospel? Many other sinners are
received by Christ into the grace of GOD without such outward penance. For it
is very well known how Christ dealt with Matthew, with Zacheus, with Peter
that denied him, and with many other. Therefore we do not amiss believe that
the old bishops and priests did invent that public kind of penance, for
disciplines sake, and that they of their times might have less liberty to
sin. Truly Hermius Sozomenus Salaminius that notable writer of the
Ecclesiastical history, in his seventh book and sixteenth Chapter says:
In the beginning it pleased the priests, that as it were, in a theater, where
all the congregation might bear record of the same, the sins of offenders
should be openly published. Lo, here he says, It pleased the priests.

He adds also that there was An (...).
a Priest appointed to whom they that sinned should come and confess their
sins, and should hear of him the penance, to wit, what they should do, or
how they should abye for their transgression. Immediately after he describes
the manner of penance in the Roman Church used. And to that again he
adds, that in the Church at Constantinople there was a priest appointed to
hear penitents, which office remained still, till at the length a certain
Gentlewoman, which for the sins that she had confessed, was enjoined by such
a penitentiarie to fast, and to pray to God, and thereby haning occasion to be
long in ye church, was at last bewrayed to have played the whore with a deacon.
For which cause the priests were evil spoken of. But Nectareus ye bishop
devising how it were best to deal with such a greenous crime, deprived the
deacon, that had done the sin, of his deaconshipp. And for-because some
persuaded him, to leave it free to every one, according to his own conscience
and confidence to come to the communion of the mysteries, he did quite take
away the office of that penitentiarie priesthood: and ever since that time
has that counsel, given to Nectareus, prevailed, and does even to this day
endure. And so forth. The same in the beginning of the Chapter says:
Nectareus the bishopp of Constantinople did first take out of the church the
priest, that was appointed to hear the confession of penitents, whom all the
other bishops did in a manner follow. Thus far he.

But the bishop Nectareus would not have abrogated that Exhomologesis, (being
so holy a man as in deed he was) if he had understood that it had been
instituted by God himself: neither had it been lawefull for him to have
abrogated it. Therefore he knew, even as Sozome does also confess, that by
the counsel of the bishops, that order of penance was usurped in the
Church. Neither do we read that John Chrysostom who succeeded Nectareus, and
was a very diligent and severe bishopp did ever restore that rituall penance,
which his predecessor had abrogated before him. For in the 31. Homily upon
S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews he (...).
writes: I bidd thee not to bewraye thee self openly, nor yet to accuse thee
self to others: but I will have thee to obey the holy Prophet, who says:
Open thy way unto the Lord. Therefore confess thy sins before GOD the true
and vprighte Judge with prayers for the imurie committed: not with thy tongue,
but with the memory of thy conscience. And then at length believe that thou
may obtain mercy, if thou have it in thy mind continually, And so forth.

Again upon the 56. Psalm: If thou art ashamed to tell thy sins to any
man, because thou have sinned, yet say them daily in thine own heart. I bid
thee not confess them to thy fellow, that he should vpbraid thee: tell them
to thy God who does regard them. If thou tellest them not, God is not ignorant
of them, for he was at hand when thou did them. And again in an other place
he says: I bring thee not forth into the theater of thy companions: I
compel thee not to discover thy sins unto mortal men. Rehearse thy
conscience before God, and declare it unto him. Show thy wounds unto the Lord
thy best Physician, and ask of him a salve for the same.

Again: Take heed that thou tell not a man of thy sins, least he bewraye
thee, and upbraid thee for them. For thou need not to confess them to thy
companion, that he should bring them abroad, but to the Lord, which has the
care of thee, who also is a gentle Physician: to him therefore thou shall show
thy wounds.

Moreover, he brings in the Lord speaking and saying: I compel thee not to
come into an open theater, and to make many privy to thy sins: tell thy
sin privately to me alone that I may heal thy sore. Thus much out of
Chrysostom.

Now all this does manifestly argue that that Ceremonial penance (as it was
once used in the Church) not instituted by God, was without any injury taken
out of the Church, and not restored again by the bishops that succeeded.
They do not altogether in vain tell us that some relics of that rituall
repentance abided still in the Roman Church. But what have we to do what
every Church has taken to it self, either to keep or else to lay away? We
rather ought to inquire, what Christ has delivered unto us, and what his
Apostles have taught us, of whose doctrine I have I think spoken enough
already.

The private or secret confession of sins was wont to be made, when Of
auricular confession.
none were bye but the priests alone. For one goes secretly and whispereth
his sins into the ear of the priest that was appointed to hear those
secret confessions, and being by him absolved, does think that by the
recital of a few ordinary words, he is purged from all his sins. And
therefore I call it Auricular confession. This was unknown in the Apostles
times, and although it be now a good sort of years ago^ since it first took
root, yet notwithstanding it was free from the beginning. At last we read
that it was commanded and roughly extorted by the Bishop of Rome, when the
state of the Church was most corrupted about the year of Grace 1215. And yet
it was about 80. years or more in controversy, before it was by decree laid
upon all menns necks, Whether it were enough for a man to confess himself
to God alone, or else to a priest also, for the purging of his sins? Hugo in
his book of the Churches power to bind and loose, does say: I dare boldly
say, if before the priests absolution, any man do come to the Communion of the
body and blood of the Lord, that he does assuredly eat and drink his own
damnation, although he repent him never so much, and does never so greatly
lament his offenses. This did Hugo say boldly without his warrant, unless the
word of God does instruct us falsely. He lived about the year of our Lord
1130. Within a little while after him vppstarted Peter Lombard commonly called
the Master of Sentences, because he gathered together the sentences of the
fathers, and laid forth their doctrine as it were in a Summarie: of whose
work I mean not here to tell my judgment what I think. It is thought
that he flourished about the year of Christ 1150. He, Sententiarum lib. 4.
Dict. 17. and 18. does by the authority of the fathers show, first that it
suffices to make the confession of sins to God alone. Then he annexeth
other sentences which teach the contrary. And lastly concludes of himself
and says: By these it is undoubtedly proved, that we must offer our
confession first to GOD, then to the priest, and that otherwise we cannot
enter into Paradise, if we may (have a priest) Again, It is certified that it
is not sufficient to confess to GOD without a priest: neither is he truly
humble and penitent that does not desire the judgment of a priest.

Gratian, that gathered the Decretalls together, was somewhat honester than
Peter Lombard, who lived and flourished at the same time with Lombard. He
determines nothing definitiuely, but shewinge sentences for either side, both
that we must confess our sins to the priest, and not confess them, does
leave it indifferently unto the readers judgment. For thus he concludes: Upon
what authorities and reasons both the opinions of confession and satisfaction
are grounded, we have briefly here declared. But, to which of these we ought
rather to stick, that is reserved for the reader to choose. For both parts
have wise and religious men to their fautours and defenders. Thus says Gratian
about the end of the first distinction of penance.

About fifty years after followed Lotharius Leuita a doctor of Paris, (...)
was (...) com^^^ded.
the Scholar and earnest follower of Peter Lombard. He being once made Bishop
of Rome, and named Innocent the third, called together at Rome a general
counsel called Lateranense, in which he made a law, which Gregory the ninthe
re^iteth in his Decretall of Penance and Remission Lib. 5. chap. 12. almost in
these very words: Let every person of (...).
either sex, after they are come to the years of discretion, faithfully
confess alone, at least * once in a year their sins unto their own proper
priest: and do their endeavor with their own strength to do the penance
that is enjoined them: receiving reverently at Easter, at the least the
Sacrament of the Euchariste, unless peradventure by the counsel of their own
priest, for some reasonable cause, they think it good for a time to abstain
from receiving it. Otherwise in this life let them be prohibited to enter into
the church, and when they are dead, to be buried in Christian burial. This
is that new law, which contains many absurd and wicked blasphemies. And to
let pass very many of their absurdities, I will recite unto you not past one
or twain of the foulest of them. Is it not a wicked thing to send a sinner
to I wot not what kind of priest of his own, when Christ has given but
ministers and preachers to his Church only, being still him self the
universal priest, and proper priest to every one in the church even until
the end of the world: to whom alone all the faithful ministers do send
sinners from them selves for to confess their sins to him? For John said: I
am not Christ, but am sent before him to bear record of him. What may be
said to this moreover, that it is a detestable blasphemy to attribute the
remission of sins to our own confession and the priests absolution, as to
the works of mortal men? And who I pray you is able to reckon up all his
sins unto the priest? does not Jeremy cry: The heart of man is evil, and
unsearchable? Does not David say: Who knows his sins? Cleanse me from my
hidden faults. It is impossible for a man to confess all his sins. While
therefore a man compelled by the law does consider these reasons and ponder
them in him self, he cannot choose but must needs be drowned in the
bottomless depth of desperation: so great a burden is laid upon the free
necks of Christ his faithful people, as a thing so necessary, that without
it they cannot obtain eternal salvation, directly contrary to the Apostles
decree, that is to be seen in the fifteenth of the Acts. And lastly, what I
pray you is a sinner able to do of his own strength? What power I pray you
have we silly wretches of our selves to do good?

But it greeueth me, and I am ashamed Auricular confession can be proved by
(...) place in all the scripture.
of these men's impudency, to see that they will have this their auricular
confession to be instituted of God, and that they go about to uphold and
confirm it by the Scriptures guilefullye wresting that place in the Gospel,
where the Lord says to the Lepre, Go thy way, show thee self to the
Priest. Now they do not impudently wreste this place alone contrary to the
true sense, but do also corrupt all the other testimonies of holy Scriptures,
which they are wont to cite.

Among all the rest I will tell you of this one. Bonauentura in his
commentaries Ad sententias Magistri lib. 4. Did. 17. Quaest. 3. imagines two
things to be in confession. The one formal, to wit absolution, or the power
to heal: and this he says, was instituted by the Lord at the giueing of the
keys. The other is material, to wit the disclosing of the sin: and this he
says that the Lord himself did not institute, but only insinuate. For
immediately after, he adds these words.

And therefore confession was insinuated by the Lord, instituted by the
Apostles, and openly proclaimed by James the Bishop of Jerusalem. For as he
proclaimed the decree of not keepinge the ceremonial laws Acts. 15. So also he
published, and laid upon all them that sin, the necessity of confession,
saying, confess your sins one to an other. Thus much has Bonauentura. But
who will not wonder at the blyndenesse of that age?

This writer acknowledges that auricular confession was not instituted by the
Lord, but obscurely, and, as it were, by conjectures of the consequents: That
the Apostles expounded the mind of Christ and instituted it: And that S. James
in the name of all the Apostles did by a decree openly proclaim it. He adds,
that the words of the proclamation were, Confess your sins one to an
other. Now what is it else to wreste the Scriptures, if this be not to wrest
them? Even he that is the blindest does easily se that these champions are
unweaponed in this same combat, bringing forth a spear made of a wrapped up wisp
of hay, which they shake and keep a coil with, as if it were the lance-staffe
of Hector or Achilles.

It is most evident that the Apostle speaks not of secreat and auricular
confession, but of ye confession which by a certain reciprocation is made of
them, that have mutuallie offended one an other: And now again freely
confessinge their faults one to another are mutuallie reconciled, and pray
one for an other again. Of which I have said somewhat allreadie a little
before. They do not see that in the Apostles words there are two things,
which being diligently considered do make the^ mere mockinge stocks to them
that perceive them. For first the Apostle in that place uses this word
(...), which signifies mutuallie, one an other, one for one, and as it were
reciprocately. There upon we infer thus, if according to the Apostles
precepte we must confess our selves one to an other, and that (...), does
signify, mutuallie or reciprocately, yt is, that we must confess our selves
by turns, as it were first, I to him, and then he to me, as it signifies so
in very deed: Then must it needs be that after the Laymen have confessed
them selves to the Priests, the Priests should again confess themselves
unto the Laye-men. For that is, to make confession one to an other. For we
say, (...), that is, they love one another mutuallie, he him, and he him
again.

But if this trouble ye priests, to have their confessions heard of laymen,
let them then acknowledge that this place of the Apostle doth-make nothing for
their secret and auricular confession, which they have devised for their own
commodity. Then the Apostle adds, And pray ye one for an other that ye may
be healed. He does therefore associate and as it were join under one yoke
both confession and prayer. And upon that we do again gather, if we must
confess to none but Priests, then must we pray for none but Priests. But
we must not pray for Priests alone, Ergo we must not confess to priests
alone, but every one, one to another.

The same place of Saint James must not be understood of secreate and
auricular confession, but of that open or public Confession, by which they
return into charity again by the mutual confession of their faults, which
had before offended each other with mutual injuries, and being now again
reconciled do pray one for another, that they may be saved.

We do therefore leave this for an undoubted truth, that the disputers for
auricular confession, neither have proved, nor can prove, that it was
instituted and ordained of GOD.

But when they see, that this their (...)
confession will to wrack, they go about with weak proppes, God wot, to stay
it up, and say, that that confession is to be retained still in the Church,
if it were for nothing else but for disciplines sake, to make men blushe, when
their sins come to light, which is a cause many times, that some do sin
the seldomer. And also they say that it is to be retained for private
absolution, and peculiar or singular consolation of the Gospel.

But if auricular confession be so needful, and profitable for the Church,
as they will seem to have it, how chanced it that the Church for the space
of a thousand years after the Apostles times was utterly without it? It is
marvel then that the Apostles did in no place either use it or command it.
And again it is manifest yt the times which were before the coming of
Christ did not once so much as dream of this confession: neither did the
Apostles leave the Church of GOD destitute of any thing necessary unto
salvation. Now what discipline this auricular confession planted in the Church
of GOD is, the abominable deeds and wicked acts that insued it do plainly
declare. For both he that did confess, and he that heard the confession,
learned horrible wickedness even by the examination and beatinge out the
circumstaunces of sins committed. By that means, there were given and taken
causes and occasions of whoredoms and adulteries. Under the pretense of those
confessions the chastity of matrons and virgins has been assaulted, and also
corrupted oftener times and more sundry ways than is decent to be named.
Those confessors fished out the secrets of every man's conscience: which
thing auayled greatly to the establishinge of their tyranny.

By those confessions the confessors could cunningly spoil and rob their
shrift-children, as they called them, of their goods and substance: because
they knew what riches every one had, and how he came by them And when the
Peers of every common wealth knew that the priests were privy to their
faults, they could not choose but fear the priests. And so it came to pass,
that they did not so strongly, as they might, set them selves against the
extreme corruption and lust of the priests, that was otherwise not to be
suffered.

They have been heard to say: I have learned by confessions, and know at my
fingars ends, what kind of men, of women, and of maidens are in this city. I
know how to handle every one according to his disposition. They do all fear
and stand in awe of me, because they know that I am privy to their most
secret deeds and thoughts of their minds, The secrets told in confession
are many times foolishely blabbed abroad with the peril of the silly soul y^
first confessed them. By the means of confessions no small and many treasons
are hatched up and put in practice. And surely, it is a goodly matter, when we
for the fear or carnal bluss^ing that we have by the means of one man, I
mean (as some term him) of our ghostly father, we shall cease to sin,
rather, then for the sincere fear that we have of God, when as in deed we do
not blushe at all to think that he shall be a witness against our
conscience, nor yet do fear the severity of his judgment, that shall lighten
upon us. What may be said to this moreover, that by this auricular confession
once established in the Church, nothing else is wrought, but that the word of
god should be the less regarded through our traditions, and we made the
slacker to confess our sins to hun, to whom of right we ought for to
confess them? For so often as we remember our sins, we do carelessely put
them off again, until the time of confession come. And when it is come, then,
who I pray you, goes to it with a cheerful mind? Let wise men therefore
judge what kind of discipline this is, and how well it pleases God.

That, which they allege of private absolution, is a mere devise of When
aurie^^ confe^^ is to (...) kept (...) chur^^ (...) solut^^ sake^
man's invention, which has not in the sacred Scriptures any precept or
example to back it self withal. For in very deed none does absolve us men
from sin, blame, and punishment, but God alone, to whom alone, that glory
does belong. The minister by the preaching and consolation of the Gospel does
pronounce and testify that to the faithful their sins are forgiven.
Therefore, this preaching of forgiveness being fetched from out of the mouth
or word of God, is the absolution wherewith the minister absolueth. Neither
is that absolutio^ made any whit yt more effectual, if the minister do
privately whisper it into the sinners ear. The public preaching of the
gospel, as it is instituted by Christ our Lord, does satisfy a faithful
mind, which does not so much respect the demeanor of the minister, as he
regards the truth of him in whose name the minister does it. But, if a
sinner, say they, do hear privately said unto him, I absolve thee from thy
sins, and that by the virtue of the keys, he does far better understand
that his sins are remitted, than when forgiveness of sins is generally
preached and publicly pronounced. But we do in this case set against them
the Apostles example, whom when the men of Jerusalem had heard to preach,
they were pricked in heart, and said: Men and brethren, what shall we do? To
whom Peter answered: Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of
Christ Jesus unto the remission of your sins etc. And there were added to
the church that same day about 3000 souls. Now, who understands not, that
upon so great a multitude baptism was at once bestowed, and the remission of
sins universally preached unto them all, and not that every one had this
saying or the like whispered severally into his ear: brother thy sins are
forgiven thee? And verily a godly minded man may learn true faith in Jesus
Christ (through which his sins are forgiven him) as well by the public
preaching of the Gospel, as by ye private whisperinges of privy
penitentiaries and absoluinge confessors: namely, since that public
preaching does contain the commandments of God: when as those whisperinges
do nothing so: and finally, since that the public preaching of the Gospel
does apply to every one the grace of God, and that the Sacraments do testify
the remission of sins, and the heavenly gifts prepared for all them that do
believe in Jesus Christ. And yet I say not this, because I think it amiss,
when occasion serves so to do, if the minister do preach privately to one or
two ye Gospel of our Lord, or else in the words of Christ do promise remission
of sins to him that believes: but I do here dispute against them, which do
suppose that public and general preaching (as it was used of the Apostles)
declaring to all and every several man the remission of sins, is not
sufficient, except the sinner going to the priest do confess his sins, and
privately ask and receive private or peculiar absolution of him for the same.
For they think that for that private absolutions sake, this private or
auricular confession must be retained in the Church.

But we will not, say they, that all and every peculiar sin with the
circumstances thereof should be reckoned up or rehearsed. What of that then?
Who, I pray you, commanded us to whisper any sins at all into the priests
ear? The primitive Church was wont to confess to the priests, neither few,
nor many, nor any sins at all. Bonauentura records that before Pope
Innocent y^ third, they were not counted heretics, which affirmed, that
confession made to God alone, without any priest, is sufficient to them, that
do faithfully believe: but after the decree which he published touching
confession to be made of every man unto his own priest, they were judged
heretics, that taught men to be confessed to God only. As though it lay in
Pope Innocent to make a new article of faith, which the church was without, by
more than the space of 1200. years after Christ. Therefore, if all they that
lived before Innocent were without suspicion of heresy in that point: and
since we read that Nectarius, and the church at Constantinople was not
condemned of heresy, for abrogating and castinge out of the church their
Exhomologesis, which seems yet to be far better than this auricular
confession: no godly man undoubtedly will condemn us, which maintain the
confession instituted by God, that is wont to be made to god and our neighbor:
but dee only resect and hiss at that secret and auricular confession, as
that which brings more discommoditie than honest profit to the church of God.

And for because I have hitherto Of the satisfaction of works.
said thus much of secret or auricular confession, upon which the treatise
of satisfaction does depend, I should here, even of necessity, say somewhat
of satisfaction, had I not sufficiently spoken of it in mine other sermons of
this work, as in the sixte and ninthe Sermons of the first Decade, and in the
third Decade, where I entreat of the Saints affliction in the tenthe Sermon
of the same Decade, and also in the fourth Decade where I spoke of the Gospel.
The priests and Monks do teach that repentance of the sin committed, and
faith in Christ, are not sufficient for the purgeing of sins, without the
satisfaction of our own works and merits, which they make to be, wearing
of sackcloth. fastings, tears, prayers, alms deeds, offeringes, sundry
afflictions of the body, pilgrimages, and many other odd knackes like unto
these.

For they affirm, that by these means, Note here the difference that they
make betwixt Paena and culpa peccati.
the penalty due to sins (the guilt whereof, they say, is only pardoned) is
washed away, as with a shower of water powered down upon it. But we already
have taught out of the Canonical Scriptures, that God does not only forgive
freely the guilte, but also the penalty of our sins. We have already
taught that men are not justified by their own works and merits, but by ye
mere grace of God, through the faith of Christ Jesus. For otherwise he
should in vain have taken our flesh upon him, and in vain should Christ have
qiuen him self unto the most bitter and reprochefull death of the Cross.
Now we add, if we are not justified by works, then do we not with our
works make satisfaction for our sins. For in effect (although I acknowledge
that there is a difference, and do not confound them) justification and
satisfaction come both to one end. By the justification of Christ we are
absolved. By the satisfaction of Christ, or rather, for his satisfactions sake
we are also absolved. Christ is our righteousenesse, and therefore also our
satisfaction. The price of our redemption is in Christ, not in our selves. If
we make satisfaction for our selves, then is the price of our redemption in
our selves. And therefore are we both Christ's and Saviors unto our selves:
which thing does flatly make Christ of none effect, and therefore is it
extreme blasphemy. Moses in his law does with little business or none
dissolve all the arguments for satisfaction wrought by our works. For where he
describes ye manner of cleansing sins, he places no iott thereof in the
works of men, but shows that it all consists in the Ceremonial
sacrifices. Now we do all agree and jointly confess that in those sacrifices,
the only sacrifice of Christ was plainly prefigured. And to that is added,
that that only preaching and promise of the new testament is this: I will be
appeased upon their vnrighteousenesse and sins, and will no more remember
their iniquities. Now, where such a remission is, there is no oblation or
satisfaction for sin. And we in the Creed, verily do believe the
forgiveness of sins. But, if the debtor make satisfaction to the creditor,
then what I pray you does ye creditor forgive him? Therefore, this article of
our faith, the principal promise and preachinge of the new testament is
utterly subverted, if we admit the doctrine of the satisfaction of our works
for sins.

We do acknowledge, that tears, fastings, wearing of sackcloth, alms ^od
afflic^^^ them those (...) he (...).
deeds, and the other works of piety, humiliation and charity have a place
in repentance. Of which I will speak in place convenient: but we deny that
with them we make satisfaction for our sins, least we should make the
price of Christ his redemption of none effect. We acknowledge that at some
times the Lord has whipped them, whose sins he has forgiven, as he did to
our parents Adam and Euah, and to king David after his adultery and murder of
Vrias. But I have already showed you that those afflictions were not
satisfactions for the sins, which God had pardoned, but exercises of Gods
discipline and humiliation, which does by those means keep his sernaunts in
their duetifull obedience, and does declare to all men how hartilye he hates
sins, although he does freely forgive and pardon them. Therefore, least we,
because of that free forgiveness, should be the more inclined and prove to
sin, he promises them whom he makes to be examples for us to take heed
by. Neither do we read that the Saints did simply attribute the benefit of
justification or satisfaction unto their afflictions. I confess that Daniel
the Prophet gave counsel to the most mighty king Nabuchodonosor, and said:
Let thy sins be redeemed in righteousness and thine iniquities in showing
pity to the poor.

But in these words, the king was taught how to lead the rest of his
life, that was yet behynd, and how to rule the state of his kingdom. The king
had till then oppressed many nations, and sinned in merciless cruelty:
whereupon he persuadeth him to change his old kind of life, to embrace
justice, and deal well with all men.

Therefore, he speaks not of the satisfaction of his sins before God, but
before men. For there is salvation in none other than in Christ alone. But if
any man do stubbornly stick upon the letter, we say that the
righteousenesse of Christians is faith, by which their sins are properly
cleansed: and that faith is not without good works and charity, to which
justification is improperly ascribed. Of which matter I spoke in the treatise
that I made of good works.

Therefore, when Saint Peter does cite that place of Solomon: Charity
covers the multitude of sins, the word Covers is not there used for
Purging: For, by the only blood of Christ all sins are purged and wiped
away: but it is taken for Turning away. For as self-love in a manner is the
root of all sins: so charity is thought to be the driuer away of all
mischiefs. For love does none ill to his neighbor. Now, whereas they obiecte
that sentence of the Gospel, where the Lord says: Many Many sins be
forgiven her, because she ^oued much.
sins be forgiven her, because she loved much: they do miss here in,
because they understand not, that the word (...), which is commonly
englished, because, or, for that, is here a note of inferring somewhat, and
that no other sense is gathered than this:

Many sins be forgiven her, therefore she loved much: Or, whereby it
comes, that she loves much.

Neither do we here wrest ye words of the Gospel to maintain a wrong
opinion. For in the history there goes before: First, When they were not able
to pay, he forgave them both. If he forgave them, and if they were not able
to pay, he did not then forgive the^ for their love. For if they had been
able to pay, he would not have forgiven them. Secondarily, there goes before:
Whether of these will love him more? Simon says, He to whom he forgave the
more. Therefore, the Lords answer could in effect be nothing else but this:
I have forgiven her very much, therefore has she loved much. So then, I
say: love is of forgiveness, and not forgiveness of love. And then it
follows immediatelye. And he said to the woman: thy faith has saved the, go
in peace. We do therefore conclude, that there is but one only satisfaction
for the sins of all ye world, to wite, Christ once offered up for us, which
are by faith made partakers of him.

But now, as we do not acknowledge or admit the satisfactions that Of
indulgencies.
are obtruded unto us in the doctrine of the priests and Monckes, so do we by
all means detest the indulgences of the Bishops of Rome. They called these
Indulgences, a beneficial pardoning of crimes, or remission of the punishment,
or of the guilt, or of both: to wite, by the power of ye keys bestowed by the
Lord: and for the merit of the Martyrs blood (for so they say) granted or
given to them that are rightly contrite in heart, and do confess their sins.
For these fathers of Indulgences are wont with their Indulgences to remitt
again ye rigor and severity of the satisfaction which lies in them to
order at their discretion. Truly, as one said: The fathers gentle Indulgence,
does make the children naught: So have their Indulgences utterly corrupted
true repentance. But thou can read in no place that such power was given to
the Popes as they did feign. We read, that to the Apostles the keys were
given by the Lord: but those keys were nothing else but the ministry of
preaching the Gospel: as I in place convenient will show unto you. Now the
Gospel promises to us remission both of the guilt and penalty, for Christ
his sake, and faith in Christ, and does admonish us that in the latter times,
there shall come men that shall say: we are Christ's, that is, which shall
attribute to them selves the things that do properly belong to Christ alone,
such as is especially the forgiveness of sins. But it commands us to fly
from them, and by all means to take heed of them, as of wicked seducers. The
same Evangelical truth does teach that the faithful are cleansed by the
only blood of the son of God.

Their indulgences do promise me^ the cleansing of their sins through ye
blood of S. Peter, S. Paul and other holy Martyrs. And for that cause are they
the profanation of the blood of the son of God. The Saints do wash their
garments in the blood of the Lamb, not in the pardoning bull, or box of
indulgences, nor in ye Martyrs blood. Yea, Paul him self denies that either
he, or Peter, or any other of the Saints was crucified for the Church of God.
And yet their indulgences were so set forth, as though God were pleased with
us for the blood of the Martyrs. Therefore their indulgences are flatly
contrary to the Apostles doctrine. And I admonished you in my Sermon of good
works in these words of Paul: I fulfill that which is behind, of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church,
that that fulfilling is not referred to the work of the purging or
propitiation of Christ, which is consummate, unless Christ at his death did
testify falsely saying: It is consummate, but to those afflictions where with
ye members of Christ, that is, the faithful are exercised by the cross, so
long as they live in this frail fleashe. Verily the Lord makes account of
the afflictions laid upon the faithful, as of his own. For to Paul he
said: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

Moreover, when he says: For the church, he means not, for the expiation of
the church, but for the edification and profit of the same. And Paul
sustained greeuons afflictions at the hands of the Jews, because he preached
the Gospel to the Gentiles: And it was expedient that in him there should be
showed to the Church an example of Patience, so rare as could not lightly be
found again. Yea, other have often times objected against these indulgence
defenders, this godly saying of the holy man, Pope Leo, in his 81. Epistle.
Although the death of many Saints is precious in the sight (...).
of the Lord, yet the slaughter of no man subject to sin, is the propitiation
for the sins of the world. Again, The righteous have received, not given
Crowns of glory: and of the manful constancy of the Martyrs are sprung
examples of patience, not the gifts of righteousness: for their deaths were
singular: neither did any one by his ending pay the debt of another since there
is one Lord Jesus Christ, in whom they are all crucified, dead, buried and
raised up again. Thus much out of pope Leo. We have therefore by divine and
humane testimonies evidently proved, that the indulgences given to sinners by
the merit or treasure of the Martyrs blood, are mere blasphemies against God,
and open injuries against his holy Martyrs.

I have hitherto spoken of those indulge^ces, which were of old freely
bestowed The filthy mart of indulgences.
by the Popes of Rome. although at this day they be few in number and curtayled
too: now therefore I will say somewhat of their indulgences, which they for the
most part do sell and make traffic of. To sell indulgences is in the
Church of God, a sin so detestable, as that it is hard to name any one more
horrible. And yet it is and has been a common practice and merchandise these
many years, with the Bishops of Rome and their factors, whom they call
Apostoliques, not having any one word in the scripture wherewith to cloak y^
wicked invention. And now though I slip over and do not show you how
Indulgences are nothing but a bare name with out any stuff or matter, and that
under that vain name miserable men and silly souls are foulely deceived: yet
note that Christ the chief and only high Priest of his Catholic and holy
Church, in the days of his flesh, did with a whip drive the buyers and
sellers (as impudent dogs) out of the Church of God: which thing he did
twice. Once at the beginning of his preaching: and an other time a little
before his Passion. At the first time he added: Away with these things from
hence, and make not my fathers house an house of mercha^dize. At the latter
time he said: It is written, my house shall be called the house of prayer, but
ye have made it a den of thieves. And Simon Magus also in the Acts of the
Apostles, seeinge that by the laying on of the Apostles hands, the holy Ghost
was given, did offer them money, saying: Give me this power also, that on whom
soever I lay my hands, he may receive the holy Ghost.

But hearken how Peter accepts his petition. Thy money (said he) perish
with thee: because thou have thought that the gift of GOD may be obtained with
money. Thou haste neither part nor fellowship in this business. For thy heart
is not right in the sight of God.

Lo, the gifts of God are not gotten with money. Lo, their heart is not
right that make merchandise of Religion. Lo, they have no part or fellowship
in the inheritance of the kingdom of Heaven, or in the preaching of ye glad
tidings: therefore what shall we say now of the Indulgences which the Popes
Apostoliques do set to sale for money? What shall we say of the very
Indulgenciaries, and the Pope him self whose Hierlings they be? We must
confess verily that they are the fellows of Simon (not Peter but) Magus. For
Peter did by the just sentence of God, curse such kind of merchantes. Your
money (says he) perish together with you.

This is a heavy and terrible, but yet a most just judgment of the most
just God. The same Apostle Peter, foreseeing that in the church there would be
many such merchants does in his last Epistle say. There were false Prophets
among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, which privily
bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought them, and
bring upon themse^ues swift damnation. And many shall follow their damnable
ways, by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And with covetousness
through seigned words shall they make mercha^dize of you. For what is it with
fained words through couetousenesse, to make merchandise of the miserable
idiotes, if this is not, when they say that they do give full remission of
sins, unto all them that are contrite, and do confess their sins? For if
any man do acknowledge his sins, and with a true faith convert him self to
God through Christ, even without their Indulgences, he does obtain plenarye
remission of all his sins. Those foxes therefore make money of smoke,
deceiving simple souls, and selling for coin the thing which they never had,
neither possibly can be purchased with money, And thus much hitherto of bought
and sold Indulgences. Of which other writers have made very long discourses. I
suppose that by this little, any man may easily understand how to judge of
them a-right.

We are now at length come past those rocks and shelfes, to which we did of
purpose sail, that when we had viewed the most perilous places, we might
admonish the unskillful passagers, to take heed how they strike upon them,
for making shippwrack of their souls, by thincking that in these Indulgences
does lie she true force of sufficient Repentance, wherein there is nothing
but the utter displeasing of Gods most holy majesty.

Therefore letting that alone, as it is, we do now return to declare she last
member of repentance, whereby we said that penitentes do mortify the old
man, and are renewed spiritutually.

First of all therefore it seems good to tell, what the old man is, what the
new or regenerated manne is, and what the power or strength of man is. For by
the demonstration thereof we shall the better understand what it is to mortify
the old man, and to be renewed in the spirit. We say that the (...)
old man is all that which we have of nature, or of our first parents, to wit,
not the body only or the flesh, I mean the grosser and substantial part of
the body, but even the very soul, with the strength, the power and faculties
of the same. Therefore whereas in some places of the holy Scriptures, the
flesh is put for man, we must not only understand the massy substance and
grosser part of the body, but the very flesh together, with the soul and
all the faculties thereof, that is, the whole man not yet regenerate.

For the Lord in the Gospel says. That, which is borne of the flesh, is
flesh: and that which is borne of the spirit, is spirit. And this he speaks
concerning regeneration, which is not according to the flesh (as Nicodemus did
falsely imagine) but according to the spirit. The word Flesh therefore does
importe the natural power and faculties of man, even all that, I mean,
which we have or take of our first grandsyre Adam. The new man is said to be he
that is regenerate by the spirit of God in Christ, or is rerenued according
to the image of Christ, with all the gifts and virtues of the holy Ghost.
And as the (...)
flesh is usually put for the old man, so is the spirit by an Antithesis
commonly used and taken for the new man.

Now here the very place requires to discourse somewhat of the power or
virtues of man. Of which although I have elsewhere disputed all redye, as in
the Sermon of Freedom and bondage, and of sin, yet here again I will touch
such points as I thinck to suffice for this present Argument.

There are two parts or faculties of our soul, Understanding and Will. Of the
power of man.
Understanding does discern in things object, what to receive or what to
refuse: and is as it were the light and guide of the soul. Will chooses, for
in it does lie both to will and to nill: which are again impeld by other
powers and faculties. Now Understanding.
the understanding is of two sorts. For we understand either Earthlye or
Heavenly things. I call those Earthly things, which do apperteine not to the
life to come, but to the life present: whereunto we refer all liberal arts
and handicrafts, the governing of public weals, and the ruling of private
houses. By heavenly things I understand God himself, eternal felicity, and
life everlasting, the knowledge of God and all kinds of virtues, faith, hope,
charity, righteousness, holiness, and innocence of life. Now let us see what
this understanding of man is able to do, and what power it has. The Judgment
and understanding of man in Earthly things, is not altogether none at all: but
yet it is weak, and very small, God wot.

The understanding therefore that is in man does come of God: but in that it
is small and weak that comes of man's own fault and corruption. But the
bountiful Lord does augment in men those gifts of his, whereby it comes
that man's wit brings woonderful things to pass.

For which cause we read in the holy Scriptures that the arts and wits of
men are in the hands of God. But in the knowledge or understanding of heavenly
matters there is not one small spark of light in man, his wit of it self is
nothing but darckenesse, which at the beginning was created by God most
sharp and lightsome, but was afterward by man's corruption utterly rebated
and darkened again. For therefore it is that Christ in the Gospel said: No
man comes to me, unless my father draw him.

And in the prophets it is written: All shall be taught by GOD. And Paul says:
The natural man perceives not the things that are of the spirit of God: for
they are foolishness unto him: Neither can know, because they are spiritually
discerned. The natural man (that is, that old man, which is not yet
regenerate by the holy Ghost) is not a block altogether without all sense or
feeling. For if he were utterly without all the discourses of reason, then how
should the preaching of the Gospel seem foolishness unto him? He does
therefore by the gift of God hear and understand the words and sense of the
holy scripture: but by reason of his natural corruption, he is not touched with
them, he does not rightly judge of the^: they seem mere folly unto him:
neither does he perceive that they must be discerned spiritually, because he
is not regenerate, and is yet without ye true light of Gods most holy Spirit.

For, in another place the Apostle says: We are not able to think any good as
of our selves, but all our ability is of God. And therefore it is that we do
so often in the Scriptures find mention of Inlightening or I lumination: which
should without cause be expressed or named, if so be man's understanding
were clear and of it self not dark and mistie. There is therefore borne
together with all men a blindness of heart and mind, a doubting in the
promises of God, and an unbelief and perverse judgment in all heavenly
things. For albeit that man has at Gods hand received understanding, yet by
reason of his own corruption, ignorance is a peculiar and proper heritage
belonging unto him. For he is then in his kingdom, when he is blind, when he
does err, when he does doubt, when he does not believe, nor use the gifts
that God has given him, rightly as he should, that is, to his own salvation,
and the glory of his maker.

Let us now see, what the will of the old man is able to do. Therefore, Will.
since this will does follow a blind guide, God wot, that is to say corrupt
affection, it is unknown to no man, what foolish choice it makes, and
whereunto it tends. And although the understanding be never so true and
good, yet is the will like to a ship tossed to and fro with stormy
tempests, that is, of affections. For it walloweth up and down with hope,
fear, lust, sorrow, and anger, so that it chooses and follows nothing but
evil.

For the holy Apostle speakinge of him self does say: I know that in me,
that is, in my fleash there dwells no good thing. For, to will is present
with me, but I find no means to perform that which is good.

For the good that I would, do I not: but the evil which I would not, that
do I.

But now, since the Apostle spoke this of him self, when he was regenerate,
what I pray you shall we say of the will of the old man? The old man
wills all things which God wills not, and breakinge into all kind of
wickedness, does foulie fulfill his filthy lusts: that is to say, he
gives his members servants unto uncleanness and wickedness, from one
iniquity unto another. We have of this, very many examples exhibited unto us,
both by the holy Scriptures and daily experience.

Let us now against this oppose or set the new man, that is, the man Of the
(...) man, (...) of re^eneratio^.
which is regenerate by the spirit of GOD, through the faith of Jesus Christ.
Now regeneration is the renewing of ye man, by which through the faith of Jesus
Christ, we, which were the sons of Adam, and of wrath, are borne again the
sons of God, and do therefore putt off the old man, and put on the new,
which both in understanding and will does freely serve the Lord.

This regeneration is the renewing of the mind, not of the body: as we heard
in an other place out of the third Chapter of Saint John's Gospel. The author
of this regeneration, is the holy Ghost, which is from heaven given unto man,
I mean to a faithful man. For the gift of the holy Ghost is given for
Christ his sake, and that too, unto none but those that do believe in Christ.
This spirit of God does testify with our spirit, that we are the sons of
God, and therefore, the heirs of his kingdom.

We are therefore, a new creature, repaired now according to the image of
GOD, and endued with a new nature or disposition: whereby it comes to pass,
that we do daily put off that old man, and putt on the new: which thing
is done when we walk, not in concupiscence after the Carnal inclination of the
flesh, but in newenesse of sense, according to the woorkinge of the holy
Ghost, by whom we are regenerate. The same substance and form of the body
abides still, the mind is changed, the understanding and will renewed. For, by
the spirit of God the understanding is illuminated, faith and the
understanding of God and heavenly things is plentiousely bestowed, and by it
unbelief and ignorance, that is, the darkness of the old man are utterly
expelled, according to that saying of the Apostle: Through Christ ye are made
rich in all things, in all speech and knowledge. Again: We have not
received the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of GOD, to know
what things are given of Christ to us. And again: We have (or know the
spirit or) mind of Christ. And again: ye have no need that any man teach
you: but as the very annoynting does instruct you of all things, and is true,
abide ye in it. And in this regeneration of man, the will also does receive an
heavenly virtue, to do the good, which the understanding perceived by the
holy Ghost, so that it wills, chooses, and woorketh the good that the
Lord has showed it: and on the other side nilleth, hates, and repelleth the
evil that the Lord has forbidden it. For Paul says: I know to be humble,
and I know to exceed. I can do all things through Christ who strengthens
me.

And again to the Philippians, he says: To you it is given for Christ, not
only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him. And again, yet he does
more plainly say. It is God that works in you, both to will and to perform,
according to the good purpose of the mind. But now note this that what soever
they do, which are regenerate by the spirit of God, they do it freely, not
by compulsion, nor against their wills. For like as God requires a cheerful
giver: so where the spirit of the Lord is, there is free liberty and hearty
goodwil. And Zachary the Father of John Baptist said: That we being
delivered from the hands of our enimyes, might serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.

Yea, and our Lord him self in the Gospel says. If ye abide in my sayings,
ye shall be my Disciples in deed, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth
shall make you free. And again, If the son set you at liberty, or make you
free, then shall ye be free in deed. Touching this liberty of the sons of
GOD, I have already discoursed in the ninthe Sermon of my first Decade. What,
and of what kind, the Liberty is that is in man.


This liberty of the sons of God we do willingly acknowledge, and freely
confess: but the arrogant disputations of some blasphemous praters concerning
free will, as though it were in our power, of our selves to do any heavenly
thing, we do utterly reiecte and flatly deny. And yet we do not make man
subject to fatal necessity, nor turn upon GOD the blame of iniquity. As
we have elsewhere more at large declared. And S. Augustine, in his
controversy with the Pelagians did so attemper his disputation, that he
attributed the good to the Grace of God, and the evil unto our nature: so that
(the sense being sound, uncorrupted, and well weighed) he attributes free
will, which he grants to be in us, unto the grace that woorketh in us, yea,
to the regeneration of the Spirit, rather than to our selves or our own
power. I will here cite and rehearse unto you (dearly beloved) this one
testimony only out of all his writings, as it is to be found in the first
Chapter of his book, De Correptione et Gratia, where he says: We must
confess that we have free will to do both evil and good: but in the doing
of evil, every one is free from righteousenesse, and bound to sin: but in
good, no man can be free, unless he be made free by him which said: If the
son make you free, then shall ye be free in deed. And yet not so, that when
every one is set free from the condemnation of sin, he should then no more
stand in need of his deliuerers aid: but so rather, that, where he hears
his deliverer say: Without me ye can do nothing, he should presently say
to him again: Be thou my helper: O forsake me not.

And verily, I am glad that in our brother Florus I found this faith,
which, without doubt, is the true, prophetical, and Apostolical faith.

For here must the grace of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord be needs
understood: by which alone we men are delivered from evil, and without which
we do no good, either in thought, will, love, or deed. Not only that by the
showing, or teaching of grace, men should no more but know what is to be
done: but also, that by the very woorking and perfourminge of grace they
should with love do the thing that they know. And so forth. For, I have
hitherto rehearsed unto you Saint Augustines opinion touching free will, of
which this is sufficient for a note by the way: now I return to my purpose
again.

We have heard what the old man is, what the new man is, and (...) the
(...) man (...) by (...) spirit.
how we are renewed by the holy spirit: now therefore, when we say, that
penitentes do mortify the old man, and are renewed by the spirit, or
spiritually, we say nothing else, but that to all penitents the affections,
senses or lusts of the fleashe, I mean, even the very understanding, which
we have of old Adam, together with the will, are not only suspected, but
also convicted of impiety, and that therefore in all their thoughts, words,
and deeds, they do never admit their affections into their counsel, but do
by all means resist them and continually study to break the neck of them:
and on the other side, in all our counsels, words, and deeds to admit and
receive, yea, and with prayers to call unto us that heavenly guide the spirit
of Christ, by whose conduite and leading we may perceive, judge, speak, and
work, that is to say, either omit or do that, which we have learned in our
graunde pattern Christ, according to whose likeness we must be reformed,
that henceforth we may apply our selves to holiness, righteousness and
good works to Godwarde.

But now all this we shall understand more rightly and plainly by the words
of the Apostle, where he says: This I say, and testify in the Lord, that
ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk in vanity of their mind,
darkened in cogitation, being alienated from the life of God by the ignorance
that is in them, by the blyndnesse of their hearts, which being past feeling
have given them selves over unto wantonness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be ye have heard him and
have been taught in him, as the truth is in Jesus, to lay down according to
the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the lusts
of error, but to be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and to put on that
new man, which after God is shapen in righteousenesse and holiness of truth:
and so forth as follows in the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians. The same Apostle
in the third to the Colossians says: Mortify your members which are upon
the earth: fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry, for which things sake,
the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience: among whom ye also
walked sometime when ye lived in them. But now put ye off also all these
things, wrath, fierceness, maliciousenesse, blasphemy, filthy communication
out of your mouth: lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old
man with his works: and have put on the new man, which is renewed into the
knowledge and image of him that made him. Put on therefore, as the elect of
god, holy and beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness modesty, meekness, long
suffering, forbearing one an other, and forgiving one another, if any man have
a quarrel against any: and so forth.

To which, if thou addest that, which the Apostle has of the same matter in
the sixth Chapter to the Romans, every point will be more express and plain
unto the hearer.

Now, these words of the Apostle do not only teach us what the old Of the
worthy fruits, or, of the fruits worthy of repentance.
man is, what the new man is, what it is to mortify the old man, and how
penitents are renewed in the newness of the spirit, or of the mind: but do
also show what the fruits be that are worthy of repentance, to wite, those
rehearsed virtues, or those offices of life toward God and our neighbor. We
owe to God fear or reverence, humbleness of mind, the knowledge of our
selves, faith, hope, the hatred of sin, the love of righteousenesse, charity
toward our neighbor, well doing toward all men, and innocence in all
things. These kind of fruits did the holy man John Baptist require of the
Jewish nation, when he said: Bring forth fruits that become repentance.

For in Saint Luke, beeinge demanded of the people, of the Publicanes and of
the mercenarie or garrison soldiers, what thing they should do worthy of
repentance, he prescribes none other than that, which we even now recited.
For the Lord him self by Esaie in the 5. Chapter of his prophecy rehearsed
up none other fruits than those.

And in the Revelation made to S. John, speaking to the minister of the Church
of Ephesus, he says: Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do
the first works. Whereunto agree the words of S. Paul, speaking to
Agrippa, and saying: I have preached to the Jews and Gentiles, exhorting them
to repent, and to turn to God, and to do such works, as become them that
repent.

And again in the seventh Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians
he says: Sorrow, which is to Godwarde, causes repentance unto salvation
not to be repented of. For, behold this self same thing that ye were made
soarie to Godward, how much carfulness it has wrought in you? yea, what
clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what
vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what punishment? Now, this carfulness
is an intentive diligence to correct that which is amiss. Verily out of
careless looseness does arise invred custom to committ sin, and negligent
security. Penitents do not stand in defense of their sins, but make their
supplicant apology to God, to have them remitted. Hypocrites excuse themselves
and seek out shifts and starting holes, not confessing freely their sins and
offenses, nor praying to God to have them forgiven. He, which repent^th truly
and in very deed, is angry with him self because of his wicked manners and
life already lewdly spent. The punishment which he does exercise upon him
self, preuenteth and turns away the reuengeing and imminent wrath of God.

Moreover with fear he does take heed how he sins any more. For the
contempt of GOD is the original of mischiefs, and bond of an impenitent
life. Furthermore, he, which does truly repent, is ravished with the passing
vehement desire or love of GOD and heavenly things: he burns with zeal,
whereby it comes to pass, that he neither foadeth off from day to day, nor
yet does coldly nor slackely go about that, which he has learned by the word
of God to be required at his hand to be done and performed. Briefly what soever
he does, he does it with all his mind even from the very bottom and root of
his heart. For so says the great Prophet of God the holy man Moses: If thou will turn to the Lord thy God, and hearken unto his voice, with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul: the Lord thy God also shall turn thy captivity, and
show pity upon thee in the bowels of mercy. Thus much touching the fruits of
Repentance.

Now upon all the premises we infer this consequent, that Repentance
(...) of all (...).
(whose only scope, whereto it tends, is the renouation by the spirit of
Christ, of the image of God, which was by Adams fall of old defiled) is not a
work of a day or twain, or of a prescribed number of years, but a continual
obseruaunce of our whole life, and so consequently a daily putting off and
renewing of the old man for ever. For they that are regenerate by the holy
spirit of God, are never so purged that they feel no motions of the flesh, of
sin, and of carnal affections. There is always obiecte to the eyes of the
faithful this sentence of s. Paul, that cannot by any means be plucked out of
their minds. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh there dwells no good
thing. For to will is present with me, but I find no means to perform
that, which is good. For the good, that I would, I do not, but the evil, that
I would not, that do I. For we bear about the relics of the flesh thorough
all our life. Whereupon it comes, that in the Saints there is a perpetual
and very sharp battle. For they do partly obey the spirit, and are partly
weakened of ye flesh. By the spirit they are lifted up to the contemplation
and desire of heavenly things. But by the flesh they are thrust down to
earthly things, and troubled with the allurements of this naughty world. For
even the Apostle feeling that combat in himself said, The flesh lusts
contrary to the spirit, and the spirit contrary to the flesh. For they are
so at enimitie beetwixt themselves, that what ye would ye cannot do. And in an
other place he says: Even I, the same, do in the mind serve the law of God,
but in the flesh the law of sin. And to help the matter forward withal,
there lackes no deceit, no craft, and a thousand temptations of the subtle
crafts master our enemy the devil. Therefore the labor and peril of the
true penitent, that is, of a Christian man, is far greater, than that our
prayers are comparable unto it.

But now who does not here perceive What things are necessary in penitentes.
how great watching, abstine^ce, constancy, fortitude, and patience are
needeful for those y^ do repent? What great need they have of earnest and
continual prayers? Let us in this sharp conflict lay before our eyes the
instruction of that valiant champion the Apostle Paul. For that, which he
says, may be to us in steed of a large and ample commentary. For he will in
few words passingly instruct us how to behave our selves in this troublesome
combat, how to vanquish, and how to triumph when the victory is gotten. In
his Epistle to the Ephesians, thus he says: Brethren, be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might. Put on all the armor of God, that ye may stand
against the assaults of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood
only, but against rules, against powers, against worldly governors, of the
darckenesse of this world, against spiritual subtiltis in heavenly things.
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist
in the evil day, and having finished all things, to stand fast. Stand
therefore, having your loins girt about with the truth, and having on the breast
plate of righteousness: and your feet shodd in the preparation of the Gospel
of peace. Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the
sierie darts of the wicked: and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of
the spirit, which is the word of God. Praying always in all prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watching for the same with all instance. And so
as follows in the 6. to ye Ephesians.

Here therefore are also to be rehearsed y^ outward exercises of repentance The
outward exercises of repentance.
or rites of penance, wherewith the Saints do exercise themselves, partly to
tame and keep under the motious of flesh, and partly to testify their
repentance unto the congregation. Those exercises are carelessenes of the
flesh, tears, sighs, sackcloth, fastings, weeping, lamenting, neglecting and
hatred of deintie diet, trimming of the body, and also of allowable pleasures:
which, although they be done, and yet do not proceed from the very heart and
from true faith, are notwithstanding nothing available to him that uses them.
But it is best here to learn, and as it were, in a painted table to behold
them pictured in ye word of God. The Prophet Joel says, Turn ye to me, says
the Lord, with all your hearts with fasting, with weeping and with mourning:
and rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God,
for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great goodness, and he
will repent him of the evil. Who knows whether the Lord will return and take
compassion, and will leave behind him a blessing? Blow up a trumpet in Sion,
proclaim fast, call an assembly, sanctify the congregation, gather the
people, gather the elders, assemble the children and sucking babes. Let the
bridegroom come forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. Let the
priests the Lords ministers weep betwixt the porch and the altar, and let
them say: Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not over thine heritage unto
reproach, that the heathen should rule over them. Wherefore should they among
the heathen say, where is their God? To these divine and evident precepts let
us annexe that notable example of the truly repentaunt Ninevites, out of the
holy scriptures: of whom y^ holy Prophet Jonas has left this in writing: The
men of Nin^uee believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth from
the greatest of the^ unto the least of them. And word came to the king of
Niniuce, which arose from his throne, and put off his robe, and covered
himself in sackcloth and sat down in the ashes. Moreover by the kings
commandment proclamation was made throughout ye whole city, saying: Let
neither man nor beast taste any thing, neither feed nor yet drink water: but
let both man and beast put on sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let
every man turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness that is in his
hands. Who can tell whether God will turn, and be moved with repentance and
turn from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? And now it is good to hear
how effectual true repentance is in the sight of the Lord. Therefore it
follows in ye same chap. And God saw their works, that they turned from their
evil ways, and he repented of the evil which he said he would do to them, and
did it not. And here also (derely beloved) ye must note y^ repentance is of 2.
sorts, to wit, (...).
private or secret, and public or manifest. Every one does secretly to
himself repent privately, so often as, when he has sinned against god, he does
desce^d into himself, and with the candle of gods word does search all the corners
of his heart, and confess to God al his offenses: being grieved yt he has
offended him, and yet does turn unto him, believing verily yt he will be
reconciled unto him in Christ his savior, and for his sake does utterly hate
sin, and entirely love righteousness and innocence, in following them so near
as he can. The public or solemn repentance is used in great calamities, in
dearth, in pestilence, and war: and of ye repentance it is, that the prophet
Joel speaks, whose words ye heard a little before. And yet private repentance is
in many points all one with the public. For Peter weepeth bitterly: and
private penite^ts do fast privately, and abstain severely even from all allowed
pleasures, much more then from the allurements and baits of the world. But they
y^ do truly repent either publicly or privately, both do and must specially
hate colored hypocrisy and vain ostentation. Moreover both (...).
kinds of repentance are free and voluntary, not extorted or coacted, but
proceeding of a willing mind. The pastor of the Church and teacher of the
truth, I confess, does severely call upon al sinners without delay to repent
themselves truly for their sins committed, but yet he does by express law
lay upon no man's neck any precise order prescribing yt time, manner, place, or
number, but leaves it free to every ones choice, so yt they do the thing that
is decent, according to the prescript rule in ye word of God. But public
repentance is for the most part wont to be proclaimed, and openly received of
the whole congregation so often as piety requires it, and necessity
co^pelleth it, and does out of the word of God therewtal declare what and how
al things must be done and decently ordered. Again it is manifest y^ there
False and True repentance.
are 2. sorts of repentance more. For there is true repentance and false
repentance. The true repentance is y^, which does exercise, that is regenerate
by the spirit of God, and is without all color and craft, co^teyning in it al
those things that I have hitherto told you off. The scriptures contained in the
old and new testament, do minister to us many examples of true repentance,
which I have at large laid forth unto you in y^ that I have already spoken.
Those examples are excellent which we find of our parents Adam and Euah, of ye
people of Isreal's often repenting in the 33. of Exodus in the book of Judges,
and the books of Kings. Yet more excellent than the rest is that of David in
the 12. cap. of the 2. of Samu and 1. Par. 21. And that of Manasses, and
Josias. 2. Re. 33. and 34 In the Gospel also we have to see the examples of
Matthewe, Zachus, the sinful woman, and Peter, beside other more, that here
for shortness sake I do wittingly pass over. But false or cou^terfeit
repentance proceeds of a feigned heart: and though at a blush it seem to have
the circumstances of true repentance, yet for because it wants a turning to
God and a sound confidence in him, it is insincere and utterly false. For of al
other it is most certain that the repentance of Judas Iscariote was false and
counterfeite: and yet he confessed his sin, he bare record to the truth,
and did with much anger and sorrow restore to the priests the price, which he
took for y^ innocent blood: but because he did not wholly turn to Christ, and
put his whole confidence in his mercy and goodness, all his repentance was
without al fruit. And without all profit do hypocrites, and those, that are
without the faith of the Gospel, torment themselves, and make a show of
outward repentance.

But they are most happy and in an heavenly case that do with all their True
penitentes are in an happy ca^e.
hearts truly repent with faith unfeigned: for they receive infinite
goodness of their most bountiful and liberal God: who is at-one again with
penitents, and does now love them, that before he did for their sins most
heartily, and yet most justly, hate and abhor. The punishments also, which he
determined to lay upon them, he turns into benefits. For he does fill, and
as it were, load penitentes with all manner good things both temporal and
eternal. Now ye understood (dearly beloved) by my former sermons, that God
bestows so great benefits upon us, not for our works of Repentance, but for
Christ his sake in whom alone the Saints do trust, not putting any confidence
in their works of repentance, how holy and commendable soever they be. For in
so much as the father loves Christ, and that we by faith are graffed in him,
God does therefore love us and our works do please him, which works of
ours, when he does recompense, he crowns not our works, as our own works,
but crowns in us the grace, which he himself has given us. Again it must
needs be that vnrepentauntes Vnrepentantes are unhappy.
are most unhappy. They hear with what sins and transgressions they have
offended God, and provoked his just vengeance against themselves, but
therewtall they think not how to prevent the wrath of God being readily
imminent to take vengeance of them, nor how to obtain his favor again.
What else therefore does remain behind for them, but a most certain and
just destruction both of body and soul, of all their goods, and whatsoever
things else they do most esteem in this transitory life? It is good here to
call to mind that notable sentence of the Lord Jesus in the Gospel, saying:
Woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida: for if the wonders had been
done in the city of Tire and Sidon, that have been done in you, they would
have repented long ere this in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it
shall be easier for Tire, Sidon, and Sodoma in the day of judgment than for you.
The parable of the unfruitful figgetree is known to all men, whereof mention
is made in the Gospel, which withered up by the Judgment of God, to be an
example to teach and terrify all impenitent sinners. What shall fall, may we
think, upon the men of these days, that do so boldly despise repentance,
now so many years, so plainly preached unto them and beaten into their heads?
Some there are, a Gods name, that will outwardly for a shows sake only seem
to be desirous of the Euangelical truth: other are utter enemies, contemners,
and persecuters of the Gospel: and an infinite rabble thou shall find of
Lucianists, Epicures, Nullifideans, and Atheistes: now since all these do
equally in a manner sweetly deride, or rather scoffingly mock at this hearty
repentance, we cannot do otherwise but still expect and look when the
terrible judgment of Gods mighty arm should fall upon such unrepentant
sinners. Let them, y^ wish well to themselves, speedily turn to ye lord, and
consider with themselves continually and earnestly, how great the damage is to
keep the transitory joys of this present life, and so to loose the eternal
joys of ye kingdom of heaven. Let every one make have to do that, which he
perceives to be done the better by so much, by how much the sooner it is taken
in hand.

And yet I would not that any man should despair in his sins, if so be y^
(...) not (...).
he does not stubbornely despise the remedy of repentance, nor because of the
facility and gentleness of his heavenly father, does not maliciously by ye
way of contempt defer repentance even til the very end. And if any man be
hindered by the flesh, the world, and the devil, so that it be late or ere he
apply his mind to repentance, neither would I have him to fall to
desperation. But now because I have somewhat more long drawn out this
discourse of repentance, than I had thought to have done, that I may here at
last make an end of my sermon, I will in steed of a conclusion recite unto you
those golden words of ye holy martyr s. Cyprian bishop of Carthage, where he
writes against Demetrian to this effect following. Believe and live, and ye,
that now for a time do persecute us, rejoice with us for ever. When ye are
once out of this life, then is there no place for repentance, nor any effect
of satisfaction. In this world the life is either won or lost. In this world
eternal salvation is provided for, by the unfeigned worshipping of God, and
the fruits of true faith. Let not any man either by his sins, or years be
held back from coming to lay hold upon Salvation. So long yet, as a man is
in this world, no late No repentance comes too late.
repentance does come out of season. The entry is open unto Gods indulgence:
and to them that seek and understand the truth the path to pardon is passing
plain. Thou eue^ at the very end and last gasp of this temporal life ask
pardon for thy sins at the hands of him, which is the true and only GOD,
call to him for the confession and faith of his knowledge: to him, that
confesses, pardon is granted, and to him, that believes, salvation is given,
and he even presently upon his departure does pass to immortality. This
grace does Christ communicate: this gift he does attribute unto his own
mercy, by making death subject unto the triumph of the cross, by redeeming
him that believes with the price of his blood, by reco^ciling man to God the
father, by quickening the mortal by the heavenly regeneration. Let us all if it
be possible follow him. Let us all profess his sign and sacrament. He
opens to us the way of life. He brings us to paradise again. He leads
us to the kingdom of heaven. With him we shall always live, and being by him
made the sons of God, we shall with him always rejoice, being restored by
the sheding of his blood. We shall be Christians glorified together with Christ,
blessed in God, rejoicing with perpetual pleasure always in the sight of God,
and evermore giving thanckes to God. For he cannot choose but be merry always
and thanckefull, who being once in danger and fear of death, is now made
secure in immortality.

The end of the second Sermon.
TO THE MOST RENOVMED Prince Edward the sixth, King of England and France, Lord
of Ireland, Prince of Wales, and Cornwall, defender of the Christian faith,
Grace and peace from God the father, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
THE promise, that not long ago I made to your most Royal Majesty, I do
now perform, offering here the other eight Sermons of the 4. Decade, which I
dedicate unto your Royal Majesty, that of me you may have two Decades of
Sermons full and wholly finished. In March I sent 12. Sermons unto you: which
were favorably accepted of your Royal Majesty as I understand by the
letters of that Godly and worthy learned man master I. Hooper, the most
vigilant bishop of Gloucester, my brother and reverend fellow father in Jesus
Christ. Who also by the commendation of your Royal M. goodwill to me ward has
hartened me on, so that now, with far more confidence and liberty than
before, I send unto your Majesty this other part of my work, entreating of
most weighty and holy matters. In this my dedication I respect nothing else,
but that, which I declared in my former Epistle, to wit, that I, according to
the gift that the Lord has endued me withal, may help forward and advance
the state of Christian religion, now again happily springing up in the famous
realm of England, by your Royal Majesty's good beginnings, and counsels of
your worthy Nobles. All they of every nation, that is in Christendom, which
do truly believe in Christ Jesus, do heartily rejoice on your Maie^ties
behalf, and the behalf of your most flourishing kingdom for this renouation
of true Religion, and do earnestly pray to Christ the Lord, that he will
happily bring to a good end the thing, that you in the fear of him have
happily begone.

Your Royal Majesty verily has adventured upon a work both very great and
full of troubles: but he will never fail your Godly endeuoures, that said,
Behold I am Math. ^
Whether they that mind to reform the Churches must state to look for the
determination of a coun^^^^.
with you for ever unto the end of the world. And now also, even as it has
been always from the first beginning of the Church, there are many letts and
great impediments, that are object against most holy and wholesome intentes,
doing what they can to hinder and trouble the reformation of religion: and
among other stoppes this is one of the greatest, that no small number, eue^ of
the wisest sort do say, that there ought no such have to be made upon private
authority, but that the determination of the general counsel in controversies
of religion must needs be stayed for, and altogether looked after, without the
judgment whereof, say they, it is not lawful for a kingdom, much less for
any other common weal to after any one point in religion once received, and
hitherto used. But the Prophets and Apostles do not send us to the counsels of
priests or elders, but to the word of God: yea in Jeremy we read, How say ye,
we are wise, we have the Jeremy. 8.
law of the Lord among us? Truly the lying pen of the Scribes have wrought a
lie. The wise have been ashamed, they were afraid and were taken. For lo
they have cast out the word of the Lord. What wisdom then can there be
among them? Again in the Gospel we read, No man, that lays his hand to the
plough, and looks back, is fit for the kingdom of God. Therefore the Luke.
9.
authority of the Prophets and Evangelists gives counsel, fully to absolve
and perfectly to end the reformation of religion once begone with the fear of
God, out of, or by the word of God, and not to look for or stay upon
counsels, which are directed, not by the word of God, but by the affections and
motions of men.

For the late examples of some ages within the space of these 400. last years
or there What counsels have been in these latter age^ celebrated.
about do sufficiently teach us, what we may look for by the determinations of
general counsels. The causes of counsels of old were the corruption either of
doctrine or else of the teachers, or else the ruin of Ecclesiastical
discipline. And good and zealous men have strongly cried now by the space of
500. years and more, that there are crept into the Church superstitions,
errors, and abuses, that the salt of the earth is unsavory, that is, that the
ministers of the Churches are by sloth, ignorance, and wickedness become
unseasonable, and that all discipline in the Church is fallen to ruin. Bernard
Clareuallensis, being one among many, is a notable witness of the thing and
condition. And for that cause there have been many counsels of priests
celebrated, at the calling together of the bishop of Rome, together with the
mutual aid of many kings and Princes. But what became of them, what was done
in them, and what small amendment or correction of doctrine, teachers, and
discipline there was by them obtained, the thing it self (the more it is to
be lamented) does plainly declare. For the more that counsels were assembled,
the more did superstition and error prevail in doctrine, abuse in ceremonial
rites, pride, riot, covetousness, and all kind of corruption in the teachers
or priests, and a foul blurring out of all honest discipline. For such men
were made presidents of the counsels, as had need first of all, themselves
either to be brought into a better order, or else to be utterly excommunicate
out of the congregation of the Saints, and they being presidents did in the
counsels handle causes neither lawful, nor lawfully. For the word of God had
among them neither due authority nor dignity, neither did they admit to the
examination and discussing of causes those men, whom it was decent to have
chiefly admitted, but them whom they themselves did think good to like off,
and in them they sought not the glory of God, and the safeguard of the Church,
but sought themselves, that is, the glory and pleasures of this transitory
world. Therefore in the holding of so many general counsels we see no
amendment or reformation in the Church obtained, but rather errors, abuses,
and the kingdom and tyranny of the priests confirmed and augmented.

And even at this day, although we would wincke and not see it, yet we cannot
choose What christians at this day may look for by general counsels.
but even with our hands feel, what we may look and hope for in a general
counsel. There shall at this day no counsel have any authority, unless it
be lawefully (as they expound lawfully) called together. None seems to be
lawfully called together, but that which the bishop of Rome does call together,
and that which is holden according to the ancient custom and laws received,
namely, that, wherein they alone do sit, and have, as they call it, deciding
voices, to whom power is permitted to determine and give sentence in the
counsel, and to them, who shall think it an heinous crime, and directly
contrary to the oath that is given them, to do once so much as think, much more
to speak any thing against the bishop and sea of Rome, against the decrees of
the fathers, and constitutions of the counsels.

What therefore may you look for in such a counsel? That forsooth, which I
told you that now by the space of 400. years and more the afflicted Church
of God, to the detriment of Godliness has seen and felt, namely, that the
sincere doctrine of Christ being trod under foot, and holy discipline utterly
oppressed, we see that every day more and more with the great and intolerable
tyranny of the Sea and Church of Rome, there do increase and are confirmed
unsound and faulty doctrine, most filthy abuses, and too too great
licentiousness and wicked living of the priests. They forsooth do cry that
it is an heresy to accuse the Pope of error, in the chest of whose breast all
heavenly doctrine is laid up and contained. They cry that all the decrees of
the Apostolical sea must be received even so, as if they were confirmed by the
very voice of Peter himself. They cry that it is a wicked thing to move any
controversy or to call into doubt the doctrine and Cermonies received and used
in the Church of Rome, especially touching their Sacraments, whereof they to
their advantage do make silthie merchaundize. They cry that the Church of
Rome has power to judge all men, but that no man has any authority to judge
of her judgment. There are in the decretals most evident canons that do set
out and urge these things, as I have told them. Now what manner reformation
shall we think that they are likely to admit which stand so stiffely to the
defense of these things? Truly they would rather that Christ with his Gospel,
and the true Church his spouse should wholly perish, tha^ they would depart one
ynch from their decrees, rites, authorities, dignities, wealth, and pleasures.
They verily come into the counsel not to be judged of others, that they may
amend those things which even their own consciences and all the world do say
would be amended, but they come to judge and yoke all other men, to keep still
their power and authority, and to overthrow and take away whatsoever
withstandeth their lust and tyranny. For before there were sent out horrible
thunders against the accusers or adversaries of the Sea Apostolic, that is,
of the Papisticall corruption: after followed the hot boltes of that thunder,
even sentences definitive of excommunication: the secular power has now by
the space of 30. years and more been called on, and persecution has been
every where raised up against guiltless Christians, not for committing
heinous crimes and defending naughtiness, but for inueighing against
mischiefs and mischiefous men, and for requiring the reformation of the
Church: and yet even at this day most cruel edicts are out, and cruelty is
exercised every day more and more against them, that confess the name of
Christ: yea, such is their impudency and brasen-faced boldness, they
dissemble not that the counsel, if any must be celebrated, shall be called for
the rooting out of heresies, yea they do openly profess, that the counsel
once held at Trent, was to this end assembled. Now since these things more
clearly than the sun are perceived to be most true, thou shall, most holy
king. do wisely and religiously, if without looking for the determination of
a general counsel, thou shall proceed to reform the Churches in thy kingdom
according to the rule of the books of both testaments, which we do rightly
believe, being written by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, to be the very
word of God. It is lawful for enerie Christian Church to reform things out
of order


But now that it is lawful for every Christian Church, much more for every
notable Christian kingdom, without the advice of the Church of Rome and the
members thereof, in matters of religion depraved by them, wholly to make are
formation according to the rule of Gods most holy word, it is thereby manifest,
because Christians are the congregation, the Church, or subjects of their king
Christ, to whom they owe by all means most absolute and perfect obedience,
Now the Lord gave his Church a charge of reformation: he commended unto it the
sound doctrine of the Gospel together with the lawful use of his holy
Sacraments: he also condemned all false doctrine, that I mean, that is
contrary to the Gospel: he damned the abuse and profanation of the
Sacraments: and delivered to us the true worship of God, and proscribed the
false: therefore Christians obeying the Laws and commandments of their
Prince do utterly remove or take away all superstition, and do restore,
establish, and preserve the true religion, according to the manner, that Christ
their Prince appointed them. He verily is a fool or a mad man, which says
that the Church of Christ has none authority to correct such errors,
vicces, and abuses as do daily creep into it. And yet the Romish tyranny has
so bewitched the eyes of many men, that they think that they cannot lawfully
do any thing, but what it pleases Rome to give them leave to do. The
Ecclesiastical histories make mention of provincial Synods held in sondrie
provinces, wherein there were handled matters of faith, and the reformation of
the Churches, and yet no mention once made of the bishop of Rome. What may be
thought of that moreover, that in certain Synodes not heretical, but
orthodoxasticall and Catholic, thou may find some that were
excommunicated for appealing from their own Churches unto the Church of Rome?
Saint Cyprian writing to Cornelius the bishop of Rome does say, Since that it
is ordained by us all, and that it is just and right, that every man's cause
should be heard there, where the crime is committed, and that to every several
pastor is appointed a portion of the flock, which every one must govern, and
make account of his doings before the Lord, it is expedient verily that those,
over whom we have the charge, should not gad to and fro, by that means with
their subtle and deceiptfull petulancy to make the concord of bishops to be
at jar, but to plead their causes there, where they may have their accusers
present, and witnesses of their crime committed. But letting pass the
testimonies of men we do now come to the testimonies in the book of God. The
most holy king Josias Holy King Josias.
(most godly Prince) may alone in this case teach you what to do, and how to do
with the warrant and authority of God himself. He by the diligent reading of
the holy book of God, and by the contemplation of things present, and the
manner of worshipping God, that then was used, did understand that his
ancestors did greatly and very far err from the plain and simple truth,
for which cause he calls together the princes and other estates of his
kingdom, together with all the priests to hold and celebrate a counsel with
them. In that counsel he stands not long disputing whether the examples of
the elders ought rather to be followed, or Gods commuandement simply received:
whether he ought rather to believe the Church, or the Scripture: and whether
all the judgment of religion ought to be referred to the high priest. For
laying abroad the book of the Law, he submits both himself, and all his
unto the Sacred Scripture. Out of the book of the Law both he him self does
learn, and bids all his to learn, what thing it is that pleases God,
namely, that which was commuanded and learned in the reading of the Law of
God. And presently he gave charge that all men should do and execute that,
not having any regard to the ancient custom, or to the Church that was at
that time: he made all subject to the word of God. Which deed of his is so
commended, that, next after David, he is preferred before all the kings of
Judah and Israel.

Now your royal Majesty cannot follow any better or safer counsel than
this, considering Faith cannot be reformed but b^ the
that it proceeds from God, and that it is most fit for the cause which is
even now in hand. The disputation is of the Reformation of Religion, and the
true faith of word of God.
Christ. You know that that does spring from heaven, namely, that it is taught
by the word of God, and powered into our hearts by the holy Ghost. For Paul
says: Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ. Therefore
as true faith is not grounded upon the word of man so is it not taught or
planted by the same. For in an Romans 10.
other place the same Apostle says: My preaching was not in the enticing words
of man's wisdom, but in the showing of the spirit and of power, that your
faith might not be in the wisdom of man, but in the power of God. Not without
good cause therefore do we refuse the traditions of men, and turn only to
the 2. Cor. 2
doctrine of the word of the Lord, without which it is assuredly certain, that
there is no doctrine nor any foundation of true faith.

Neither are they worthy to be heard, who think that the Canonical
Scriptures are not plain enough, full enoughe, or sufficient enough, to
minister a perfect platform of reformation. They blaspheme the spirit of God,
imputing unto it obscurenesse and imperfection, The scriptures do sufficiently
minister a full platform how to refourme the church
which faults no profane writer can well abide to hear off. Saint Paul in
defense of the truth says: All Scripture given by inspiration of God is
profitable to doctrine, to reprove, to correction, to instruction, which is in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, instructed unto all good
works. What now I pray you is omitted in these words, that may seem to
apperteine to a most absolute reformation? What I beseech you have those
impudent fellows to say against this? Proceed, therefore, proceed (most holy
king) to imatate the most godly princes, and the infallible rule of the holy
Scripture, proceed, I say, without staying for man's authority, by the most
true and absolute instrument of truth, the book of Gods most holy word, to
reform the Church of Christ in thy most happy England. The Lord Jesus, the
head and mighty Prince of his Church, presirue and lead thee his most
faithful worshipper in the way of his truth, until the end, to the glory of
his name, and the good estate and welfare of the whole Christian Church. At
Tigure, in the month of August, the year of our Lord 1550.

Your Royal Majesty's most duetifully bounden. Henry Bullinger minister of
the Church at Tigure in Swicerland.

The other eight Sermons of the fourth Decade written by Henry Bullinger.
Of God, of the true knowledge of God, and of the diverse ways how to know
him: That God is one in substance, and three in persons.
The third Sermon.
I Have hitherto in 32. sermons discoursed upon ye word of God, and the lawful
exposition of the same, upon Christian faith, the love of God and our
neighbor. I have also spoken of the law of Nature, of man's law and Gods law,
and of the parts of Gods law, namely, y^ Moral, the Ceremonial, and the
Judicial laws. Of the use of the law, and of the fulfilling and abrogatio^
of the same, of the likeness and difference betwirt the two testame^ts and
people, the old and the new. Of Christian liberty, of offenses, of the
effect and merits of Good works. Of sin and the sundry sorts thereof:
and also of the Grace of God, or the Gospel of Jesus Christ, in whom our
heavenly father has given us all things belonging to life, and eternal
salvation: finally, I have treated of Repentance, and of the things that do
especially seem to belong thereunto. And forbecause our purpose is to
dispute discretly upon ye principal points of Christian religion, and that in
the premises we have heard often mention made of God, of the knowledge and
worship of God, of Jesus Christ, of the holy Chost, of good and evil spirits of
ye church, of Prayer, of the Sacraments, and such like holy things, since we
are now come to an end of those former points, necessity it self does here
require, yt we should speak somewhat now of al and every one of these latter
principles according to ye holy Scripture, so far forth as the Lord shall
give me grace and ability to do the same.

Concerning God there were of old Sundry opinions concerning God.
many erroneous opinions, not among the ruder sort of people only, but even in
the whole pack of Philosophers, and conuenticles of false Christians. As
touching the Philosophers that ancient and learned writer Tertullian was wont
to say, that Philosophers are the patriarchs of heretics: and touching false
Christians the Apostle John said, They went out from us, but they were not of
us: for, if they had been of us, they would have remained ^. John. 12
with us.

Neither do I see what gain you should get by it, if I should proceed to
reckon up unto you all their opinions. It is good perhaps to know wherein they
erred, least we also do strike upon the same rock, that they did. Therefore, if
any, y^ have a desire unto it, do wish to see the opinions of the heathen
sort, and of heretics concerning God, let them search Plutarch in his
Placitis Philoso. lib. ^. Cap. 7. Or in other heathen writers: Or in Cyrils
first book Contra Iulianum, and in the 4. Chapter Dogmatum vel de finitionum
Ecclesiast. I will at this time trouble the attentive ears and minds of the
godly hearers with that burden. That diversity of Whereupon the diversity
of opinions concerning God do rise, and from whence the true knowledge of him
must be setched.
opinions is derived from none other founteine, than from the boldness and
unskillfulness of men, which are not ashamed, of their own device and brain
to add and apply to God the things from which he is most far and free. And
now that here, I may not stick long in declareing the narrow straightness
and mistie darcknesse of man's wit, who I pray you is able with his understanding
to conceive the Being of God, when as in deed no man did ever fully
understand, of what fashion the soul of man is, of what sort many other
things are, y^ be in man's body, and of what manner substance the Sun and
Moon are made? There are given many reasons of natural Philosophy: but the
work of God does still abide more great and wonderful than that the wit or
speech of man is able to comprehend or express it. Let no man therefore, that
goes about to know any certeintie of God, descend into himself to search him
out with thoughts of his own, neither let him ground his opinion upon men's
determinations and weak definitions. For otherwise he shall always worshipp
the invention of his own heart, mere folly, trifles and foolish fantasies.
But on ye other side again, the man cannot choose but think rightly, judge
truly, and speak well of God, that attributes nothing to himself, deuiseth
nothing of his own brain, nor follows y^ toys of other men's inuenting, but
in all things gives ear to the word of God, and follows always his holy
revelation. Therefore, let this stand as it were for a continual rule, that God
cannot be rightly known, but by his word: and that God is to be received and
believed to be such an one, as he reuealeth himself unto us in his holy word.
For no creature verily can better tell what, and what kind of one God is, than
God him self.

Now since this God does in his word, by the woorkemanshipp of the world, by
the holy Scriptures, and by that (...) is a God
his oracles uttered by the mouth of the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles,
yea, and in the very minds and consciences of men testify, That He Is,
therefore did the kingly Prophet David say: The fool has said in his heart
there is no God. For he must needs be Psalm. ^
an ass or a fool, which denies the thing, that is evident to all men in
the world which are not beside their wits, namely, That there is a God:
considering that even Cicero an heathen authoure in his book De natura Deorum
does say, It is bred and borne together with men and graffed in their hearts,
to think, That there is a God. Truly they that deny God, do deny him,
whom nevertheless they fear, and therefore by that fear they confess y^ he
Is, by that means conuinceing them selves of lying and falsehoode.

Again, this is to be noted that in A (...) is to (...) kept (...) and (...)
God (...)
demanding, who and what God is, although that question is made and does arise
even by the beating out and discussing of the Scriptures, yet a measure is to
be kept, and in any case observed. For to go about over curiously to inquire
after, search out, and seek ye very eternal Being of God, is both perilous
and also flatly forbidden. Solomon cries, As it is not good to eat Pro. (...)
much honey: so he, that is an ouercurious searcher out of Gods Majesty,
shall be confounded of his glory.

Before that singular and notable communication, where-in our God in the
mount Sinai talked with the whole people of Israel, it is said to Moses: Set
bounds unto the people round about the mountain, and say (...). 19.
unto them, Take heed to your selves that ye go not up into the mount, or
touch the border of it. Whosoever touches the mount, let him die the death
etc. Lo here, it was present death, to pass the limits or bounds
prescribed. Therefore our studies are and ought to be definite, not infinite.
Truly we read in many places of the holy Scriptures that the most entire and
excellent friends of God stood amazed trembling, so often as God in any
outward show did of his own accord offer himself unto their eyes. I need
not to busy me self too much in reckoning up examples. Ye know how Abraham
behaved himself in ye talk which he had with God Genesis 18. Ye know what the
parents of Gedeon said in the book of ye Judges. And what Helias spoke, 3.
Reg. 19. Peter, after that he by the miraculous taking of the great draught of
fishes did understand that Christ was more than a man, cried out, saying: Go
out from me, O Lord, for I am a sinnfull (...).
man. Therefore the Saints if in any other matters belonging to God, than in
this especially are humble, modest and religious, understanding that his
eternal and incomprehensible power and unspeakable majesty are altogether
vncircumscriptible, and cannot be comprehended in any name whatsoever.

Very eloquently, truly, and godly (...).
does Tertullian in his book De Trinitate say: The proper name of God cannot
be uttered, because it cannot be conceived. For that is called by a name, that
is conceived by the condition of it own nature: for a name is ye significant
notifying of that thing, which may be conceived by the name. But when the
thing, which is handled, is of such sort, that it cannot be rightly conceived
by our very senses and understanding, how shall it be rightly named by an apt
term and fit nomination? which while it is beyond understanding, must needs
also be above the significancie of the term whereby it is named: so that, when
God upon certain causes or occasions does annexe or declare to us his name
in words, we may think and know that the very property of the name is not
expressed so much in words, as a certain significancie is set down, to which
while men in prayers do runn, they may seem to be able by it to call upon,
and obtain the mercy of God. And again he says: Concerning God, and those
things, that are of him, and in him, neither is y^ mind of man able to
conceive what they be, how great they be, and of what fashion they be.
Neither does ye eloquence of man's mouth utter in speech words in any point
aunswerable unto his majesty. For to the thincking upon, and uttering out his
majesty, all eloquence is mute and dumb, and the whole mind is too too
little. For it is greater than the mind: neither can it be conceived how
great it is: because if it can be conceived, than must it needs be less than
man's mind, wherein it may be comprehended. It is also greater than all speech,
and cannot be spoken. Because if it may be spoken, then is it lesser than man's
speech, by which, if it be spoken, it may be compassed and made to be
understood. But whatsoever may be thought of him shall still be less than
he: and whatsoever in speech is showed of him, being compared with him shall be
much less than he. For in silence to our selves we may partly perceive him:
but as he is, in words to express him, it is altogether impossible. For if
you call him Light, then do you rather name a creature of his, than him, but
him you express not. Or if you call him Virtue, then do you rather name his
power, than him, but him you declare not. Or if you call him Majesty, then do
you rather name his honor than him, but him you describe not. And why should
I, in running through every s^uerall title, prolong the time? I will at once
declare it all. Say all of him whatsoever thou can, and yet thou shall still
rather name some thing of his, than him himself. For what can thou fittlye
speak or think of him, that is greater than al thy words and senses? Unless
it be, that after one manner, and that too as we can, as our capacity will
serve, and as our understanding will let us, we shall in mind conceive what
God is, if we shall think that he is that, which cannot b^e understood, nor
can possibly come into our thought, what kind of thing, and how great, it
is.

For as at the seeing of the brightness of the Sun the sight of our eyes does
so dazell and wax dim, that our sight cannot beeholde the very circle of
the same, by reason that it is overcome of the brightness of the beams that
are obiecte against it: even so fares it with the sight of our mind in all
our thoughts of God: and by how much more she settleth herself to consider
of GOD, by so much more is she blinded in the light of her cogitation. For (to
repeat the same thing again) what can thou fittly think of him, that is
above all loftiness, higher than all height, deeper than al depth, lighter
than al light, clearer than all clearenesse, brighter than all brightness,
stronger than all strength, more virtuous than all virtue, fayrer than all
fairness, truer than all truth, greater than all greatness, mightier than
all might, richer than all richesse, wiser than all wisdom, more liberal
than all liberality, better than all goodness, iuster than all justice, and
gentler than all gentleness. For all kinds of virtues must needs be less
than he, that is the father and God of all virtues: so that God may truly
be said to be such a certain Being, as to which nothing may be compared. For
he is above all that may be spoken. Hitherto have I cited the words of
Tertullian.

Although now these things are The fourm^^ and m^^ners o^ knowi^^ God.
so, and that no tongue either of Angels or of me^ can fully express what,
who, and of what manner God is, seeing that his Majesty is incomprehensible
and unspeakable, yet the scripture, which is the word of GOD, attempering it
self to our imbecillitie, does minister unto us some means, forms and
phrases of speech, by them to bring us to some such knowledge of God as may at
least wise suffice us, while we live in this world: so yet notwithstanding,
that still we should think that the thing, that is incomprehensible, cannot
be defined, but that by those phrases an occasion is only given, by which
we are to be brought to greater things through the illumination of the
spirit: and that we should in this disputation, have still before the eyes of
our mind, that true and assured sentence of the eternal GOD unto his
servant Moses, saying: Thou can not see my face. For no man shall see me
and live. Exodus*
For when we are once departed out of this life, and are unburdened of this
mortality, and mortal frailetie, then shall we see the Majesty of God. For
the Apostle S. John said: We know, that when he appears, we John. 3.
shall be like unto him: for we shall see him as he is.

And to these let us annexe the words of the Apostle Paul, where he says:
Now we see in a glass even in a darcke speaking, but then we shall see face
to face. Therefore let no man go beyond the limited bounds, or prevent the
time appointed, nor yet presume by wicked boldness and curiosity in this
life to behold the face, that is, the very Essence or being of GOD. Let that
revelation of God suffice every one, which GOD him self voucheth safe in his
word to open unto us, namely, so much as he of his goodness thincketh
necessary and profitable for us to know. And I do here with warraunt say
that that wisdom is the true wisdom, which will not in this matter go about
to know or savor more, tha^ the eternal wisdom does teach to know.

The first and chiefeste way to know God is derived out of the very The (...)
of (...).
names of God attributed unto him in the holy Scripture. Those names are many
and of sundry sorts, because his virtue, his wisdom, I mean, his
goodness, justice, and power are altogether infinite. I will reckon up and
expound unto you according to my skill, the most excellent and usual among
the rest.

Among all the names of GOD that is the most excellent, which they (...).
call Tetragrammaton, that is, (if we may so say) the four lettered name:
for it is compounded of the four spiritual letters, and is called JEHOVAH. It
is derived of the Verb substantive Houah, before which they put Iod and make
it JEHOVAH, that is to say, Being, or I am, as he that is (...), a Being of
him self, having his life and Being not of any other, but of him self,
lacking no-bodies aid to make him to Be, but giving To Be unto all manner of
things, to wit, eternal God, without beginning and ending, in whom we
live, we move, and have our Being. To this do those words especially
belong which we find to have passed betwixt God and Moses in the third
Chapter of Exodus: And Moses said to GOD, Behold when I come unto the
children of Israel (to whom thou do now send me,) and shall say unto
them, The God of your fathers has sent me unto you, and they shall ask me
saying, What is his name? What answer shall I make them? And God said to
Moses, I am that I am, or, I will be that I will be, And he said, Thus shall
thou say to the children of Israel, I am, or Being, or I will be, has sent
me unto you. That is, I am God that will be, and he has sent me, who is him
self Being, or Essence, and God everlasting. For their future tense
contains three sundry times, He that is, He that was, and He that will be
has sent me.

Truly the Euangeliste and Apostle John seems in his Revelation to have had
an eye to these words of the Lord, which also he went about to interpret,
saying in the person of GOD: I am Alpha and Omega Apoc. 1.
the beginning and the end, or the first and the last, says the Almighty
Lord, which is, and which was, and which shall be.

Some there are which observe this for a note, that in all tongues almost, even
of the barbarous sort, ye name of God is written with four letters. Concerning
his name in Hebrew it is assuredly so. And in the Greek, Latin, and Germane
tongues it is so also. For God in Greek is called (...), in Cabala is a
tradition of the Jews, leafte to them by Moses, not in writing, but from the
father to the son wherein is contained as well the secrets of nature, as the
mystical sense included in the words of the holy scripture.
Latin Deus, and with us Germans he is called Got. They add moreover that
the Persians call him (...), and the Egyptians (...) or (...) and by
contraction (...). And in the four letters the Cabalists say that there are
wonderful mysteries contained. Of which as other have written very
diligently, so I have leifer here not to stand upon them or trouble your
patience with them. Like to this also are these names of GOD, Iah and Hu.
Whereof, the first is oftener found in the Psalms than once. For David says:
Hallelu-Iah, that is: Praise ye the Lord. The later is also mentioned by David,
saying: Hu, that is, he, I say, God, the Being and creator of al things,
spoke the word and it was done. Hu, he commanded and it was. In Esaie the
Lord says: I am the Iah and Hu.
Lord, Hu is my name, and my glory will I give unto none other. Hu signifies
He or this.


Now those words also are derived of Being, and do teach us that God is always
like himself, an Essence which is of it self eternally, and which gives To
be unto all things that are: as he by whom, in whom, and to whom all things
are, being himself a perpetual and most absolute (...), or perfect
hauingnesse.

But the Hebrews do not read or express ye fourelettered name of God, by
calling it Jehovah, but in steed of Adonai.
it, they use the word Adonai. For they say that Jehovah must not be uttered.
Now al interpreters in their translations where they turn it into Latin do
call it Dominus, that is, Lord. For GOD is the Lord of all things, both visible
and invisible. Neither is there in all ye world any other Lord, but this one,
and he alone, to whom all things in the world are subject, and do obey. For
he has a most mere dominion, and absolute Monarchy over all his creatures.
And therefore for plainness sake sometime the word Sabbath is annexed to the
name of God: which some translate the Lord The Lo^^ of Sabbath or o^ Hosts.
of Powers, and some the Lord of hosts. For God being Almighty, does by his
power or strength show forth, and in his host declare what mighty things he
is able to do, and of how great power and might he is. For since that he is
the GOD of all creatures, and that he does dispose and use them as a Capiteine
does his soldiers, to work mighty and marvelous things, he does even by
small things declare how great he himself is, and how great his power is.

In the host of God are all the Angels, of whom Daniel said: Thousand Daniel
thousands, and hundred thousands did minister unto him. One of which Angels
did in one night kill in the Assyrians camp under the banner of the most
puissaunt king Senacherib, one hundredth foure-score and five thousand
soldiers. In the host of God are all the winds, all the stars, and all the
fiery, aerie, and waterie impressions. In the host of God are all evil
spirits, all men, Kings and Princes, all the warlike furniture of every
nation, and finally all creatures, both visible and invisible: and al these he
uses according to his own pleasure, yea according to his own good and just
will, when, how much, and how long he lists, to finishe and bring to pass
his own will and judgments. In punishing the first world at the deluge he
used water. In destroying of Sodoma, and the Cities there about he used fire:
and in rooting out the Chanaanites and Jews he used the means of mortal
men, or soldiers. Sometimes there is ascribed to ye Lord ye word Aeleon, and
the Lord is called Aeleon, that is to say, high. For in the 113 Psalm we read.
The (...) high (...).
Lord is higher than all nations, and his glory is above the heavens. Who (...)
is like the Lord our God, which sets him self so high in his habitation?
And in the 97. Psalm he says. Thou Lord art higher than all that are in the
earth, thou art exalted far above all Gods.

Again, God is called El, because of his strength. For what he will, that can
he do, and therefore is he called a strong God or a Giant. For Jeremy (...).
says. The Lord is with me as a strong Giant. Esaias says: The Lord shall come
forth like a Giant, he shall (...).
take stomache unto him like a man of war, he shall rore and overcome his
enemies. And like to this is the word Eloah, whose plural number is Elohim.
That name betokens the (...).
presence of God, which never fails his woorkma^ship and worshippers.

Jeremy brings in God speaking and says. Am I God, that sees but the thing
that is nigh at hand only, (...).
and not the thing that is far off? May any man hide himself, so that I shall
not see him, says the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and earth.

For before him also David said, Whether shall I go from the breath (...).
of thy mouth? And whether shall I flee from thy countenance? If I ascend into
heaven thou art there: and if I descend into hell thou art there also. If I
take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the vtmoste parts of the sea, even
there thy hand shall rule me, and thy right hand shall hold me fast.

Therefore the Apostle Paul says, God is not far from every one of ^s. Acts.
17.
For by him we live, we move, and have our being. And for that cause
peradventure God was of the Greeks called (...), to wit, (...), because of his
readiness and present succor, because he never fails mortal men, but
always and in all places does aid and relieve them. Likewise Plato in
Cratylo, and his interpreter Proclus do think that, (...), (God) is derived,
(...), that is, of running: but that course or running is not referred to the
presence or help of God, but to an other thing.

For when men saw the Sun, the Moon, the stars, and heaven it self by
running still to be turned about, they thought that they were Gods. Some there
are that will derive it (...), that is to say, of fear or dread. For fear or
Religion believes and persuadeth men that there is a God.

The Latins peradventure framed their Deus (God) of the Greeks, (...). But
some do think rather that Deus.
Deus is derived A dando, of giving, because he gives all things unto all men.
For so among the Hebrews (...).
he is called (...) (as I will anon declare) or Schadday because he is
sufficient to him self, he lacks nothing but gives to all men all good
things and necessary. Some other will have God in Latin to be called Deus,
quod ipsi nihil deest, that is, because there is nothing wanting in him.

But now the Scripture does attribute the plural number Elohim, Elohim.
not to God alone, but also to Angels, to judges, and to men in authority:
because God is always present with them, while they labor in that office
which he has appointed them unto, and does by the ministry of them work
the things which he him self will, and which are expedient for the welfare
of mortal men.

And although the word Elohim be of the plural number, yet is it set before
Verbes in the singular number, as in the first of Genesis we find: In the
beginning, Bara Elohim, Creauit This Dii importech as much as if one should
say, Gods.
Dii, God created (for Bara, created, is the singular number) Heaven and Earth.

In that phrase of speech is showed unto us the mystery of the reverend
Trinity. For Moses seems to have said in effect. In the beginning that GOD
in Trinity created Heaven and Earth.

In the 7. chapter of the second book of Samuel, Elohim in the plural number
is ioygned with Verbes of the plural number, to declare that there is a
difference of persons in the blessed Trinity.

Moreover, in the league which God makes with our father Abraham, Schaddai
Gene. 17
God gives him self an other name. For he says, I God am Schaddai, that is,
sufficient, or sufficiency. Therefore God is called Schaddai.

Some in their translations turn it Vastator a destroyer, as if GOD should name
him self a just revenger.

But Moses Aegyptius says: The Nowne Schaddai is compounded of the Verb Da^i
(which signifies, he suffices) and the letter * Schin which has the same
meaning that Ascher has, and signifies, He that. So that Schaddai is as much
to say, as, He that suffices to him self, and is the sufficiency or fullness
of all things.

Peradventure the Heathen have upon this occasion derived their Saturnus,
Satur^^^
which name they gave to them whom they did wickedly take to be Gods.

For as Diurnus comes of Dies a day, so is Saturnus derived a Saturando, of
satisfying or filling.

Therefore GOD is that He, to whom nothing is lacking, which in all things and
unto althings is sufficient to him self, who needs no man's aid, yea, who
alone has all things, which do apperteine to the perfect felicity, both of
this life and of the world to come: and which only and alone can fill and
suffice all his people It seem that we English men do borrow of the (...) manes
their (...) Got, (...) turn their (...), T, (...) D, (...) we so^^ God, (...)
we sho^^ say, (...)
and other creatures.

For this cause the Germans call him Got, as who should say Guot, good, or
best. Because, as he is full of all goodness, so he does most liberally
bestow upon men all manner of good things. The Germane word is not much
unlike to the ancient name whereby the Egyptians called God. For they called
God Theuth, or, Thoth. Now if we for, Th, put G, then is it Goth, and we say,
Got.

The Lord him self in the sixth chapter of Exodus puts these two names
together, Schaddai and Jehovah, as two of the most excellent names, that he
has, and says: I am Jehovah. And I appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as
God Schaddai: but in my name Jehovah I was not known unto them. Not that the
Patriarchs had not heard or known the name Jehovah. For that name began to
be called upon in the time of Seth, immediatelye (...). 4.
after the beginning of the world. Therefore it seems that the Lord meant
thus in effect. I opened my self unto the Patriarchs as God Schaddai, who am
able in all things sufficiently to fill them with all goodness, and therefore
I promised them a land that flows with milk and honey.

But, in my name Jehovah, I was not yet known unto them, that is, I did not
perform unto them that which I promised.

For we have heard all ready, that he is called Jehovah, of that which he
makes to be, and therefore he brings his promise to perfourmaunce.

Now therefore, (says he) I will in deed fulfill my promise, and show my
self to be, not only Deum Schaddai, an all-sufficient or Almighty GOD, but
also to be Jehovah, an essence or being eternal, immutable, true, and in all
things like my self, or standing to my promise.

Last of all we read in the third of Exodus, that God said to Moses: Thus
shall thou say to the children of Israel. (...)


The Lord GOD of our fathers, (...) God (...).
the GOD of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob has sent me unto
you. This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial from one generation
unto an other.

So then here now we have an other name of GOD. For he will be called the God
of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob.

This, says he, shall be my memorial from one generation unto an other, to
wit, wherein I will keep in memory my benefits bestowed upon those
Patriarchs, that by them the posterity may know me, and remember me.

For when we hear the names of those Patriarchs, they do put us in mind of
all the excellent and innumerable benefits, which God bestowed on our
forefathers: which are not in vain with so great diligence peculiarely
reckoned up of Moses, in his first Book called Genesis. For he will be our GOD
even as he was theirs: if so be we do believe in him, as they did believe.

For to us that believe he will be both Schaddai and Jehovah, eternal and
immutable truth, Being life, and heaped-vp store of all manner good things.

And now by the way, it is not without a mystery, that when he is the God also
of other Patriarchs, as of Adam, Seth, Enos, and especially of Enoch and
Noah, yet out of all the number of them he picked those three, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, and to every one of their names prefired severally his own name,
saying:

I am the GOD of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. For so he did
evidently teach Trinity.
the mystery of the Trinity, in the unity of the divine substance, and that
every one of the persons is of the same divinity, majesty and glory, that
is, that the father is very God, the Son very God, and the holy Ghost
very God: and that these three are one God. For he says. I am God etc. Of
which I will speak in place convenient.

Thus much hitherto concerning the names of God, out of which an indifferent
knowledge of God may easily be gathered. I know that one Dionysius has made a
busy commentary Dionysius of the names of God.
upon the names of God: but I know too, that the godly sort, and those that
are studious of the Apostles doctrine do understand, that the disciples of the
Apostles did far more simplye handle matters belonging unto Religion. I know
that other do make accounte of 72. names of God, out of the Scriptures and
books of the Cabalists, which as I have in an other place rehearsed, so will I
hereafter out of Exodus, repeat to you the chiefest of them.

Secondarilie, God is in the word Visions and prosopographie of God.
of God exhibited to be seen, to be beheld, and to be known by visions and
divine mirrors, as it were in a certain parable, while by Prosopographie,
Prosopographie is a picturing or reprseentinge of bodily lineame^ts.
Prosopopeie, or mortal shapes he is set before our eyes. And yet we are
warned not to stick upon those visible things, but to lift up our minds from
visible things, to things invisible and spiritual. For neither is God bodily
in his own substance, because Prosopopeie is where those are brought in to
speak that do not speak.
he is in visions exhibited to us in a bodilye shape like to a man. Neither
did any of the old saints before the birth of Christ, express God in the
shape and picture of a mortal man, because God had in that shape exhibited him
self to be seen of the Patriarchs and Prophets. It is the doting error of
the Anthropomorphites, Anthropomorphites.
to say that God is bodily, and that he has members like to a mortal manne.
And that no man do in this case deceive him self, by attributing falsely to
GOD the thing that is against his honor. I will here in sted of a remedy
against that poison, recite unto you (dearly beloved) the words of S.
Augustine, which he out of the pure understanding of the holy Scriptures, and
assured testimonies of Catholic true Doctors writ to Fortunatius De
Videndo Deo, against the Anthropomorphites. Concerning the members of How
(...) tribute^ God (...) i^ bodilesse.
God (says he) which the Scripture does in every place make mention of,
know this, that least any man should believe that according to the facion and
figure of this flesh, we are like to God, the same scripture did also say that
God has wings, which it is manifest that we men have not. Therefore even as
when we hear wings named, we understand Gods protection and defense: so when
we hear of hands, we must understand his operation: when we hear mention made
of feet, we must understand his present readiness: when we hear the name of
eyes, we must understand his sight, whereby he sees and knows all things.
And when we hear of his face, we must understand his justice, whereby he is
known to all the world: and what soever else like unto this, the same
scripture does make mention of, I believe verily that it must be understood
spiritually. Neither do I alone, or am I the first, that think thus: but even
all they also, which even with a mean understanding of the scriptures, do
withstand the opinion of them that are for that cause called Anthropomorphites.
Out of whose writing because I will not cite over much, to cause to long a
stay, I do here mean to allege one testimony out of S. Hierome. For when
that man most excellently learned in the holy scriptures expounded the
Psalm, where it is said: Understand ye unwise among the people, ye fools at
length be wise. He that planted the care P^^lm. 94.
shall he not hear, or he that made the eye shall he not see, did among other
things say: This place does most of These ^ordes of (...) taken (...) of
^^^tullia^.
all make against the Anthropomorphites, which say that God has members even
as we have. As for example, he is said to have eyes. The eyes of the Lord
behold all things, the hand of the Lord makes all things. And Adam heard
(says he) the sound of the feet of the Lord walking in Paradise. They do
understand these places simply as the letter lies, and do refer mortal
weakness to the magnificent mightiness of the immortal God. But I say that
God is all eye, all hand, and all foot.

He is all eye, because he sees all things. All hand, because he works all
things. All foot because he is present every where. Therefore mark ye what he
says. He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? or he that made the eye
shall he not see? He said not, therefore has he no eyes? But he said, he that
planted the ear shall he not hear? or he that made the eye, shall he not see.
He made the members, and gave them the efficient powers. And a little
afterward the same S. Augustine says. In all this which I have cited out of
the saints and doctors, Ambrose, Hierome, Athanasius, Gregory (Nazianzene)
and whatsoever else like these of other men's doeings, I could ever read or
come by, (which I think to be too long here severally to rehearse) I find
that God is not a body, or that he has members like to a man, neither that he
is divided by the distance of places, but by nature vnchaungeably invisible.
And I do in the help of God without wavering believe, and so far as he gives
me grace, I do understand, that not by the same (invisible) nature and
substance, but by a visible shape taken unto him, he appeared as it pleased
him, to them, to whom he did appear, when in the holy scriptures he is
reported to have been seen with corporal eyes. Thus much out of Augustine.

To these now I will also add the words of Tertullian, a very ancient
ecclesiastical writer, in his excellent book De Trinitate. By members, (says
he) are showed the efficient powers of God, not the bodily fashion of God, or
corporal lineaments. For when the eyes are described, it is set down because
he sees althings. And when the ear is named, it is therefore named because he
hears all things. And when the finger is mentioned, then is a certain
signification of his mind declared. And when the nosethrilles are spoken of,
the receiving of prayers, as of sweet smells, is thereby notified. And when the
hand is talked of, it argues that he is the author of all creatures. And when
the arm is specified, thereby is declared that no nature can withstand the
power of God. And when the feet are named, that puts us in mind, that God
fills all things, and that there is nothing where he is not present. For
neither members nor the offices of members are necessary to him, to whose will
only without any words all things obey, and are ready at hand. For why should
he require eyes, which is him self the light? Or why should he seek for feet,
which is him self present every where? Or how should he go in, since that
there is no where for him to go out from him self? Or why should he wish for
a hand, whose will without words does work all things? Neither does he
need ears that knows the very secret thoughts. Or wherefore should he
lack a tongue, whose only thincking is a commanding? For these members were
necessary to men and not to GOD. Because the counsel of men should be of none
effect, unless the body did fulfill the thoughts: but to GOD they are not
needful, whose will the very works do not only follow, without all
stirring business, but do even immediately with his will proceed and go
forewarde. But he is all eye, because he wholly sees: He is all ear, because
he wholly hears: He is all hand, because he wholly works: And all foot,
because he is wholly every where. For what soever is simple, that has not in it
self any diversity of it self. For those things fall into a diversity of
members, whatsoever are borne unto disolution, but the things that are not
compact together cannot feel (diversity.) And so as follows. For all these
hitherto are the words of Tertullian.

Therefore when we read that Moses did see GOD face to face, How the
p^triarchs (...) see God.
and that Jacob, Israel, and the Prophets saw GOD plainly, and not obseurely,
thereby is meant that to them was exhibited a vision most manifest,
effectual, and very familiar. For truly said Theodoretus the Bishop of
Cyrus: We say that the fathers did not see the divine nature or substance,
which cannot be circumscribed, comprehended, or perceived in the mind of man,
but does it self comprehend all things: but we say that they fawe a certain
glory and certain visions, which were aunswerable to their capacity, and
did not pass the measure of the same. For these assured sentences of the holy
Scripture do always remain most true.

No man did ever see GOD at John. 1.
any time. GOD dwells in the light that no man can atteine unto, 1. Tim. ^
whom no man has seen nor can see. And again, No man shall see Exodus 33
my face, and live, that is, so long as he lives upon this earth, in the
corruption and imperfection of this our flesh, no man shall behold the
essence of GOD, which is eternal, and light that cannot be looked upon.

For when we are once delivered from this corruption, and are clarified, then
shall we see him as he is. Therefore God is said to have been seen of the
fathers, not according to the fullness of his divinity, but according to the
capacity of men.

Tertullian thinks, that all things in the old Testament were done God
(...) do (...) thing (...) with (...) fathers his So^^
of God the Father by the Son, who taking upon him a competent shape
appeared to men and spoke unto the Fathers.

Paul in the beginning of his Epistle to the Hebrews does significantly speak
of the Son of God incarnate, not denying absolutely that the Father did ever
any thing by the Son.

Tertullian says: To the Son was given all power in Heaven and in Earth. But
that power could not be of all things, unless it were of every time.
Therefore it is the Son that always descended to talk with men from Adam
unto the Patriarchs and Prophets, in Vision, in Dream, in a Myrrour, and in
Oracle. So always it pleased God to be conversant in the earth with men, being
none other, than the Word which afterward was to be made Flesh. And it
pleased him so to make a way for us to Faith, that we might the more easily
perceive that the Son of God descended into the world, and that we might
know that such a thing was done. And so as follows. For all these are the
words of Tertullian. After this premonition, we will now add the visions of
Gods majesty exhibited to holy men.

God exhibited to his servants many and sundry visions, wherein he (...).
after a manner did shadow forth his majesty unto them: all which visions it
would be too long a labor for me to rehearse, and expound unto you. Ye shall
find the most notable ones, Exodus. 19. Esaie. 6. Ezechiel. 1. Daniel. 7. and
in the Apocalypse of the blessed Evangelist and Apostle John. It is sufficient
to have put you in mind of them. But now the most renowned and excellent one
of them all I will here recite and handle at large. It is to be seen in the
33. and 34. Chapter of Exodus. Moses had trial of the facility and goodness
of God, and that there was nothing, which he obtained not at Gods hand,
therefore he takes upon him boldly to ask this also of the Lord, to see God
in his substance, glory, and majesty, (...)
which thing all the true wise men of every age did only wish and long
for.

For Moses says, because I understand that thou, O GOD, wishect well unto me,
and that thou can deny nothing, go to I beseech thee, show me thy glory,
that is, suffer me I pray thee to see thee so, as thou art in thy glorious
substance and majesty.

Now GOD aunswering to this request, which is the greatest of all other, does
say unto him. I will make all my good to pass by before thee: and I will cry
the name of the Lord: Or, in the name of the Lord before thee. In which
words he promises two things to Moses. The one is, All my good shall pass by
before thee. But this chief good of GOD can be nothing else, than the good and
mighty GOD him self, or rather the word of God, I say the very beloved son
of God, in whom we believe that all the treasures of wisdom, divinity,
goodness, and perfectness, are placed and laid up. For he set before Moses
eyes the show of him in a humane and visible shape, such in sight as he in the
end of the world should be incarnate in. The other thing, that he promised, is,
I will cry the name of the Lord: Or in the name of the Lord before thee, that
is, I will proclaim the names of my glory, by which thou may understand,
who I am, and seem in thy mind.

But now that no man should attribute so excellent a vision to the merit God
gives his gifts freely without respect of man's merits.
of Moses, the Lord does add this sentence following. This vision does not
happen to thee because of thine own merit. For without man's merits, I
reveal my self to whom I will, and without respect of persons will have
compassion on whom it pleases me, which consideration of the free grace and
liberal goodness of God, does greatly belong to the true knowledge of God.
Then the lord goes too again, and does more significantly declare to Moses,
in what manner and order he will exhibit or show him self unto him.

Thou may not (says he) in this life see my face, that is, thou may not
fully see me in my substance. For that is reserved for the blessed spirits, and
clarified bodies in the world to come. I will therefore in this fashion show
my self unto thee. Thou shall go up into the mounteine: there in a rock I will
show thee a clifte, wherein thou shall place thee self: and I will lay mine
hand upon thee, that is, a cloud, or some such thing, that as I come toward
thee, thou may not look directly in my face. In that phrase of speech the
Lord does imitate the fashion of men, whose order is to spredd their hands
over the eyes of him, whom they would not have narrowely to behold any thing.
The Lord then adds: and in the mean while I will pass by, that is, the
image which I take, to wit, the shape of a man, wherein I will exhibit me
self to be seen, shall pass by before thee. And when I am once past so that
thou can not see my face, I will take away the hand wherewith I hidd thine
eyes, and then thou shall behold the back of the figure, or my hinder parts.
Now the hinder part of GOD are the words and deeds of God, which he leueth
behind him that we by the^ may learn to know him. Again, the beholding of
Gods face is taken for the most exact and exquisite knowledge of God. But
they that see but the back only do not know so well as they that see the
face. And in the hinder or latter times of the world, God sent his son into
the world borne of a woman, whom who so ever do in faith behold, they do
not see the Godhead in his humanity, but do by his words and deeds know
who God is, and so they see the father in the son. For they learn that God
is the chief good, and that y^ son of God is God, being coequall and of the
same substance with the father. Now let us see how God (according How Go^ did
show him self to Mose^
to his promise made) did exhibit him self to be seen of Moses. Moses rising
up betimes ascends up into the mounteine cheerfully unto the rock which
the Lord had showed him, placeing himself in the clift, and looks greedily,
for the vision or revelation of God. At length the Lord descended in a cloud,
and came upon the mounteine unto the clifte of the rock wherein Moses stayed
for him. And presently when Moses his face was hidden, the figure of God, that
is, the shape of a man, which God took upon him, did pass by before him: and
when as now the back of the figure was toward Moses, so that he could no more
see the face thereof, the Lord took his hand away, and Moses beheld the
hinder parts of the same. Whereby he gathered, that GOD should once, that is
to say, in the hinder times of the world, be incarnate and revealed to the
world. Of which revelation we will hereafter speak somewhat more. And when
the Lord was once gone past, he cried, and as his promise was, so in a certain
Catalogue he reckoned up his names, whereby, as in a shadow, he did declare
his nature.

For he said, Jehovah, Jehovah, GOD merciful and gracious, long suffering and
abounding in goodness and truth, keeping mercy in store for thousands,
forgiving wickedness, transgression, and sin: and yet not suffering the
wicked to escape unpunished, visiting the wickedness of the fathers upon the
children and childers children, unto the third and fourth generation. What What
else is this than if he had said? I am (...)
the uncreated essence, being of my self from before all beginning, which
gives Being to all things, and keeps all things in Being. I am a strong and
almighty God. I do not abuse my might. For I am gentle and merciful. I love
my creatures, and man especially, on whom I do wholly yearne in the bowels of
love and mercy. I am rich and bountiful and ready at all times to help my
creatures. I do freely, without recompense, give all that I bestow. I am long
suffering, and not irritable to anger and hasty to revenge, as mankind is. I
am no nigarde or envious as wealthy men in the world are wont to be. I am
most liberal and bountiful, rejoicing to be divided among my people, and to
heap up benefits upon the faithful. Moreover I am true and faithful. I
deceive no man, I lie in nothing: what I promise, that I stand to and
faithfully perform it. Neither do I nor can I so waste my richesse, that all
at length is spent, and I my self drawn dry. For I keep good turns in
stoare for a thousand generations, so that although the former age did live
never so wealthily with my richesse, yet they that come and are borne even
until the very end of the world, shall nevertheless find in me so much as
shall suffice and satisfy their desire. For I am ye wel-springe of good that
cannot be drawn dry. And if any man sin against me and afterward repent
him of the same, I am not unappeasable. For even of mine own free will I do
forgive errors, sins, and heinous crimes. And yet let no man therefore
think that I am delighted with sins, or that I am a Patron of wicked doers.
For even I, the same, do punish wicked and impenitent men: and chasten even
those, that are mine own, yt thereby I may keep them in order and office. But
let no man think that he shall sin and escape unpunished, because he sees
that his ancestors did sin and were not punished: that is, did sin and
were not utterly cut off, and wiped out. For I reserve reuengement till just
and full time, and do so be have my self, that all are compelled to confess
me to be a God of judgment. Now when Moses the servant of God had heard and
seen these things, he made haste, and fell down prostrate to the earth, and
worshipped. Let us also do the same, being God does most evidently open him
self through Christ.
surely certified that the Lord will not vouchsafe, so long as we live in this
transitory world, to reveal himself and his glory any whit more fully and
brimly, than in Christ his Son exhibited unto us. Let therefore the things
that sufficed Moses, suffice us also, let the knowledge of Christ suffice and
content us.

For the most evident and excellent 2. Cor. 4.
way and mean to know God, is laid forth before us in Jesus Christ the son
of God incarnate and made Hebr. 1.
man. For therefore we did even now hear, that before Moses was set the
shadow of Christ, when it pleased God most familiarly to reveal himself
unto him.

And the Apostle Paul places the illumination or appearinge of the knowledge
of the glory of God to be in the face of Jesus Christ. And in an other place
the same Paul calls Christ the brightness of his fathers glory, and the
lively image of his substance. Truly he himself in the Gospel does most
plainly say, No John. 6. Math. 11.
man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him. For he is the way unto the father: and the father is seen and beheld in
him. For we do again in ye gospel read, No man has ever seen God at any
time, the only begotten John. 14. John. 1.
son, which is in the bosom of the father, he has revealed him unto us.

But again the Apostle says, After that in the wisdom of god the world
through their wisdom knew not 1. Cor. 1.
God, it pleased god through foolishnes of preaching to save the^ that believe.
That which he in this place calls the wisdom of God, is the very creation
and workma^ship of the world, and the woonderful works of God, in which God
would be known to the world: and in the beating out and considering whereof,
all the wisdom of all the wisemen till then, did altogether lie. But for
because the consideration of those things did no good, by reason of man's
wisdom, for ye most part, referring the causes of things to somewhat else,
than to God the true and only mark, whereto they should be referred, and while
men thought them selves wise, as ye same Apostle teaches us, even in their
own reasonings Romans 1.
they became fools, it pleased God by an other way to be known to the world,
to wit, by the foolish preaching of the Gospel, which is in very deed most
absolute and perfect wisdom, but to the worldly wisdom of mortal men, it
seems foolishness. For it seems a foolish thing to the men of this world,
that the true and very God being incarnate or made man, was conversant with
us men here in the Earth, was in poverty, was hungry, did suffer and die. And
yet even this is the way whereby God is most evidently known to the world,
together with his wisdom, goodness, truth, righteousness, and power. For ye
wisdom of God, which no tongue can utter, does in ye whole Gods wi^dome
appears.
ministry, and woonderful dispensation of Christ, shine out very brightly,
but far more brimly if we discuss and beat out the causes (of which I speak
else where) and thoroughly weigh the doctrine of Christ. In ye incarnation of
the son of God it appears how well god wishes Gods goodne^^ appeare^^^
to ye world being sunk and drowned in sin, as y^, to which he is bound by an
indissoluble league, and does through Christ adopt the sons of death and of
the devil, into the sons and heirs of life everlasting. Now whereas God^
truth a^peareth
Christ does most exactly fulfill all those things, which the Prophets by
ye revelation of god did foretell of him, and whereas he does most liberally
perform the things which GOD the father did promise of him, that does declare
how unchangeable and true the eternal God is. In the deeds or Gods (...) and
(...) sufferi^^ appear^^^ to the worl^
miracles of Christ our Lord, in his resurrection, in his glorious ascension
into Heaven, and most plentiful pouring out of his holy spirit upon his
disciples, but especially in converting the whole world from Paganism and
Iudaisme, to the Evangelical truth, do appear the power, long suffering,
majesty and unspeakable goodness of GOD the father. In the Gods (...)
death of Christ the Son of GOD does shine the great justice of God the
father, as that which being once offended with our sins, could not be
pacified but with such and so great a sacrifice. Finally, because he spared not
his only begotten son, but gave God^ (...)
him for us that are his enemies and wicked rebels, even therein is that
mercy of his made known to the world, which is very rightly commended above
all the works of GOD. Therefore in the son, and by the son God does
most manifestlye make himself manifest to ye world, so that what so ever is
needful to be known of God, or of his will, and what soever is belonging to
heavenly and healthful wisdom, that is wholly opened and thoroughly perceived
and seen in the son. Therefore when Philipp said to Christ, Lord show us
the father and it suffices us: we read that (...). 14.
the Lord answered, Have I been so long with you, and do ye not yet know me?
Philipp, he that has seen me, has seen the father. And how say thou,
show us the father? do not thou believe that I am in the father, and the
father in me? Now he rein he ^alleth back all the faithful from over curious
seaching after God, laying before them the mystery of the dispensation,
wherein he would have us to rest, and to content our selves, namely in that
that God was made man. Therefore whosoever desire to see and know God truly,
let them cast the eyes of their mind upon Christ, and believe the mystery of
him contained in words and deeds, learning by them what and who God is. For
God is such an one, as he exhibiteth him self to be known in Christ, and in
that very know ledge he does appoint eternal life to be, where he says. And
this is eternal (...). 17.
life, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ who^e
thou have sent. Let him y^ wishes well to himself take heed that he go not
about to know any more than God him self does teach us in Christ. But who
soever neglecting Christ does follow y^ rule and subtilties of man's wit, he
verily does come to naught and perish in his thoughts. The fourth mean to
know god by, is fetched out of ye conte^plation (...).
of his works. David says, The heavens declare the glory of god, and the
firmament shows forth the works of his bands. And the Apostle Paul Romans 1.
says, His invisible things being understood by his works, through the
creation of the world, are seen, that is, both his eternal power and god
head. Lo, the power and godhead of God, are those invisible things of God, and
yet they are understood by the consideration of Gods works: therefore even
God himself is known by the works of God. But now the works The works of
God are twoe ways considered. 1.
of God are doubly considered, or be of twoe sorts. For either they are laid
before us to be beehelde in things created for the behoof of men, as in
heaven and in earth, and in those things that are in heaven and in earth, and
are governed and preserved by the providence of God, of which sort are the
stars and the motions or courses of the stars, the influences of heaven,
the course of time, living creatures of all kinds, trees, plants, fruits of
the earth, the sea, and whatsoever is therein, stones, and whatsoever things
are hid within, and dug out of the earth for the use of men. Of these. S.
Basile and S. Ambrose have written very learnedly and godly in their books
entitled, The work of six days, the which they called Hexaemeron. Here
may be inserted that history of nature, which ye glorious and worthy king
David Psalm. 104.
does in ye psalms, especially after the 100. psalm most fitly apply to our
purpose. But lest we should entangle and make intricate ye course of this
present treatise, I will hereafter speak of the creation of ye world, and of
gods government and providence in ye same. At this present it shall suffice to
know ye heaven and earth, and all that is therein do declare to us and set,
as it were, before our cies an evident argument that God, as he is most wise,
is also most mighty, woonderful, of an infinite majesty, of an
incomprehensible glory, most just, most gracious and most excellent. Esaie
therefore, a faithful teacher of Esai. 40.
the Church, giving good counsel for the state of mortal men, does say unto
them. Lift up your eyes on high, and consider who has made these things that
come forth by heaps, calling them all by their names, whose strength is so
great, that none of them does fail. For although that even from the beginning
the stars have shined to the world, and have in their course performed
that, for which they were created, yet are they not woarne by use, nor by
continuance consumed away or darckened ought at all. For by the power of their
maker they are preserved whole.

Jeremy also cries, O Lord there Iere. 10.
is none like unto thee. Thou art great, and great is thy name with power. Who
would not fear thee O King of the gentiles. For thine is the glory: for
among all the wise men of the Heathen, and in all their kingdoms there is none
that may be likened unto thee. And immediately after again, The Lord God is a
true and living God and king: If he be wroth the earth shakes, nether can the
gentiles abide his indignation. He made the earth with his power, with his
wisdom does he order the whole compass of the world, and with his discretion
has he spread the h^auens out. At his voice the waters gathered together in the
a^re, he draws up the Clouds from the vttermoste parts of the earth, he
turns lightning to rain, and brings the winds out of their tresures. Or
else ye works of God are set forth for us to behold 2
in man, the very Lord and prince of all creatures: not so much in the
workmanshipp or making of man which Lactantius and Andreas Wesalius have
passingly painted out for all men to see, as in the woorks which toward man, or
in man, or by man, the Lord him self does finish and bring to pass. For God
does justly punish some men and by punishing them he does declare that he
knows the dealings of mortal men, and hates all wrong and injury. Upon
other he heapeth up very large and ample benefits, and in being beuntifull
unto them he declares that he is rich, yea, that he is the founteine of
goodness that cannot be drawn dry, that he is bountiful, good, merciful,
gentle, and long suffering. Hereof there are innumerable examples in the
history of the Bible. Caine for the murder committed upon his brother lived
here in earth a miserable and wretched life. For the just lord does revenge the
bloudshedd of the innocent. The first world was drowned in ye deluge, a plague
was laid it on for ye contempt of God. But Noah and his were sauedin the Arc
by the mercy of God.

God brings Abraham from Vr of the Chaldees, and places him in the land of
Chanaan, blessing and loading him with all manner of goods. He does
woonderfullie keep Jacob in all his troubles and infinite calamities. Through
great afflictions he lifts up Joseph from the prison unto the throne of
Egypt. He does grievously plague the Egyptians for ye tyranny showed in
oppressing Israel, and for the contempt of his commandment.

But it would be too long and tedious to make a beadrowe of all the examples.
Now by these and such like works of GOD we learn, who, and how great our
GOD is, how wise he is, how good, how mighty, how liberal, how just
and rightful, and with-all we learn that we must beeeue, and in althings obey
him For Asaph sath, The things that we have heard and known, and (...). 78.
such as our fathers have told us, those we will not hide from our sons, but
will show to the generations to come, the praise of the Lord, his mighty and
wonderful works, which he has done: that the children, which are borne,
when they come to age, may show their children the same, that they may putt
their trust in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his
commandments. And so as follows in the 78. psalm.

An other way to know God by, next to this, is, that which is gathered (...)
upon comparisons: for the Scripture does compare all the most excellent
things in the world with God, who^e it prefers before them all, so that we
may thereby gather, that God is the chief good, and that his majesty is in
co^prehensible. This one place of Esaias may stand in sted of many, where in the
40. cha. he says, Who has measured the waters with his fist? Who has mesured
heaven with his span? Who has held the dust of the earth betwixt three
fingers and weighed the mounteines and hills in a balance? Who has directed
the spirit of the Lord? who gave him counsel? who taught him? who is of his
counsel, to instruct him? Behold, all people are in comparison of him as a
drop of a bucket full, and counted as the least thing that the balance
weighs. Yea he shall cast out the Isles as the smallest crumb of dust.
Libanus were not sufficient to minister him wood to burn, nor the beasts
thereof were in ough for one sacrifice unto him. All people in comparison of
him are reckoned as nothing, and if they be compared with him, they are
counted as less than nothing. Understand ye not this? has it not been
preached unto you since the beginning? have ye not been taught this by the
foundation of the earth? It is he that sits upon the circle of the world,
whose inhabiters are (in comparison of him) but as Grasshoppers. He spredeth out
the heavens as a covering, and stretches the^ out as a tent to dwell in. He
brings princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the earth as though they
were not. And so forth. To this place now do belong the Prosopopeiall
speeches of God, of which thou shall find su^drie and many, beside the visions
which we placed in the second way or mean to know God. But the most excellent
are extant in the 18. Psalm, and in the 5. Chapter of Solomon's Ballad, both
which I pass over untouched, because I mean not to stay you too long. For we
must descend to the other points.

Last of all, God is known by the God is learned by the sayings and sentences
of the prophets and Apostles.
sayings or sentences uttered by the mouths of the Prophets and Apostles. Of
which sort is that notable speech of Jeremy, where he says, Let not the wise
man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man
in his riches: but let him that glories, glory in this, Iere. 9.
that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord and do mercy,
judgment, and righteousness upon earth: therefore am I delighted in such
things alone, says the Lord. Now by the mercy of God we are saved, and
adorned with sundry great benefits. By his judgment he punishes the wicked
and disobedient according to their deserts, and therewithal he keeps equity.
Even as also his righteousness does truly perform that which he promisseth.
Therefore we say that God is a savior, a liberal giver of all good things, an
upright judge, and assured truth in performing his promises. And hither now
is to be referred the doctrine of the Prophets and apostles, which teaches
that to be the true knowledge of God, y^ acknowledges God to be one in
essence, and three in persons. Concerning the unity of the divine essence God
is one in Essence, or Being.
(by the allegation whereof the plurality of the heathen Gods are utterly
rejected and flatly condemned) I will cite those testimonies out of the holy
Scripture, that seem to be more euidente and excellent than all the other,
which are in number so many that a man can hardely reckon them all.

The notablest is that, which is grounded upon the Prophetical and
Evangelical authority, and being cited out of the 6, Chap. of Deuteronomie,
is in the 12. of Mark set down in these words. Jesus said: The first of all
the commandments is, Hearken Israel, the Lord our GOD is one Lord. And thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy
mind, and with all thy strength. This is the first commandment, and the
second like this is, thou shall love thy neighbor as thee self. There is
none other commandment greater than these. It follows now in the Gospel.
And the Scribe said, Well master thou have said the truth, that there is one
god, and that there is none other but he, and that to love him with all the
heart, with all the mind, with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to
love a man's neighbor as him self, is greater than all the burnt offerings
and sacrifices.

With this testimony also do all the other notable ones agree, that are in
the law. For in the 20. of Exodus we read, that the Lord him self with his
own mouth, did in mount Sina say, I am the Lord thy GOD, which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: have thou none other
Gods but me. Again Moses in the end of his Song, brings in GOD saying, Deuteronomy.
Se now how that I, I am GOD, and there is none other God but I. I kill and
make alive again: I wound, and I heal, neither is there any that can deliver
out of my hand. With the testimonies in the law do those of the Prophets also
agree. For David in the 18. Psalm says, The way of God is an undefiled way,
the word of the Lord also is tried in the fire. He is the defender of all
them that put their trust in him. For who is God but the Lord? or who has any
strength except our God? There are of this sort many other places in the
volume of the Psalms. The Lord in Esaie, and by Esaie cries and says. Esai.
^^
I am the Lord, (...) is (...)
Hu is my name, and my glory will I not give unto any other, nor mine honor
to graven images. I am the first and the last, Esai. ^^
and beside me there is no God. And who is like to me? (If any be) let him call
forth and openly show the thing that is past, and lay before me what has
chanced since I appointed the people of the world, and let him tell what
shall happen hereafter, and come to pass: I, the Lord, do all-things, I spread
out the heavens alone, and I only have laid forth the earth by me self. I
make the tokens of witches of none effect, and make the soothsayers fools. As
for the wise, I turn them backwarde, and make their wisdom foolishness. I
set up the word of my servant, and do fulfill the counsels of my messingers.
I am the Lord, and (...). 45.
there is else none, which created light and darcknesse, and makes peace and
trouble: yea even I the Lord do all these things.

To these testimonies of the Prophets we will now add one or two out of
Saint Paul, the great instructor and Apostle of the Gentiles. He in his
Epistle to Timothy, says. There is one GOD and one mediator (...)
of GOD and men, the man Christ Jesus. And again he says, One Lord, one
faith, one baptism, (...). 4.
one God and father of all, which is above all, and through all, and in you
all. Again the same Apostle to the Corinthians says, There is none (...).
other God but one. And though there be that are called Gods, whether in
heaven or in earth (as there be Gods many and Lords many) yet unto us there
is but one God, even the father, of whom are all things, and we in him: and
one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

Now I suppose these divine testimonies are evident enough, and do
sufficiently prove, that GOD in substance is one, of Essence incomprehensible,
eternal, and spiritual.

But under the one essence of the (...).
Godhed, the holy scripture does show us a distinction of the Father, of the
son, and of the holy Ghost. Now noate here that I call it a ^istinction,
not a division, or a separation. For we adore and worshipp no more Gods but
one: so yet that we do neither confound, nor yet deny or take away the three
Subsistences or persons of the divine essence, nor the properties of the same.

Noetus, Anoetus in very deed, and Noetus is as much to say as a man of
understanding which term was the proper name of a man. Anoetus* signifies a
^ool^ or (...) without understanding.
Sabellius the Libyan, a godless, bold, and very rude Ass (of whom sprang
up the gross heresy of the Patrispassians) taught that the father, the
son, and the holy Ghost did importe no distinction in GOD, but that they
were diverse attributes of GOD. For they said that GOD is none other wise
called the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, than when he is named good,
just, gentle, omnipotent, wise, etc.

They said, the Father created the world, the same in the name of The gross
error of the Patr^^ passians.
the Son took flesh and suffered, and again in chaunginge his name, he was
the holy Ghost, that came upon the Disciples. But the true, Prophetical,
and Apostolical faith does expressly teach that the names of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost do show to us what God is in his own proper
nature. For naturally and eternally God is the the Father, because he did from
before beginnings vnspeakeablye begett the Son. The same GOD is naturally the
Son, because he was from before beginnings begotten of the Father. The same
GOD is naturally the holy Ghost, because he is the eternal spirit of them
both, proceeding from them both, being one and the same God both with them:
and when in the Scriptures he is called a gentle, good, wise, merciful, and
just God, it is not thereby so much expressed what he is in him self, as
what a one he does exhibit him self to us.

The same Scripture does openly say, that the Father created all things by
the Son: and that the Father descended not into the earth, nor took our flesh
upon him, nor suffered for us. For the Son says, I went out from the Father,
and came into the world: Again, I leave the John. 16.
world, and go unto the Father. The same Son fallinge prostrate in the
mount of Olives prays, saying: Father if it be possible let this cup pass
from me. Again, in the Gospel he Mat. 27.
says, I will pray to the Father, and he shall give you an other comforter.
John. 14.
Lo here he says, the father shall give you an other comforter. And yet
again least by reason of those persons, and properties of those persons, we
should separate or divide the divine nature, the Son in the gospel says,
John 10.
I and the father are one. For when he says One, he overthrows them that
separate or rent the divine substance or nature: and when he says, We are, He
speaks plurally.
and not I am, therein he refuteth them that do confound the subsistences or
persons in the Trinity. Therefore the Apostolic and Catholic doctrine
teaches and does confess that they are three, distinguished in properties,
and that of those three there is but one and the same nature, or essence, the
same omnipotenci^, majesty, goodness, and wisdom. For although there be an
order in the Trinity, yet can there be no inequality in it at all. None of
them is in time before other, or in dignity worthier than other: but of the
three there is one godhead, and they three are one and eternal God.

And the primitive Church verily under the Apostles, and the times that came
next after them, did believe so simply, despising and rejecting curious
questions and needless disputations. And even then too did arise pestilent men
in the Church of God, speaking perverse things, who^e the Apostle does upon
good cause call grievous A disp^tation (...) God sproo^ up.
woolues not spareing the flock. They first brought in very strange and
dangerous questions, and sharpened their blasphemous tongues against Heaven it
self. For they stood in it, that Acts
three persons could not be one nature or essence, and therefore that by naming
the Trinity, the christians worship many Gods, even as the Heathen do.

And again, since there can be but one GOD, they infer consequently that the
same God is father, son, and holy ghost unto him self. For so it was
agreeable yt they should doat in folly, whom the word of God did not lead,
but the gross imagination of mortal flesh. And God did by these means punish
ye Gia^tlike boldness of those me^, whose minds being without all reverence
and fear of God, did wickedly strive to fasten the sight of the eyes of the
flesh, upon the very face of God. But the faithful and vigilant overseers
and pastors of the Churches were compelled to drive such woolues from the
foldes of Christ his sheep, and valiauntly to fight for the sincere and
catholic truth, that is, for the Unity and Trinity, for the monarchy and
mystery of the dispensation. That strife bred forth diverse words, with which
it was necessary to hold and bind those slipperie merchants. Therefore
immediately after the beginning, there sprang up the terms (...)
of Unity, Trinity, Essence, Substance and Person. The Greeks for the most
part used Ousia, Hypostasis, and Prosopon: which we call, Essence,
Subsistence, and Person. Of these again there did in the Churches, spring
up new and fresh contentions. They disputed sharply of the Essence and
Subsistence, whether they are ye same or sundry things. For Ruffinus
Aquileiensis in the 29. Chapter and first book of his Ecclesiastical history
says: There was moved a controversy about the difference of substaunces and
(...).
subsistences, which the Greeks call (...) and (...). For some said that
substance and subsistence seem to be all one: and because we say not that
there are three substaunces in God, therefore that we ought not to say, that
there are three subsistences in him. But on the other side again, they that
took substance for one thing and subsistence for an other, did say, that
substance notes the nature of a thing and the reason whereupon it stands:
but that the subsistence of every person does show that very thing which does
subsist. Basilius Magnus wrote a learned Epistle to his brother Gregory, about
the difference of Essence and subsistence. And Hermius Sozomenus in the 12.
Cap. of his fifth book of histories says: The bishops of many cities meeting
together at Alexandria, do together with Athanasius and Eusebius Vercellensis
confirm the decrees of Nice, and confess that the holy Ghost is coesse^tiall
with the Father and the Son, and name them the Trinity, and teach that the
man, which God the Word took upon him, is to be accounted perfect man, not
in body only, but in soul also: even as the ancient doctors of the Church
did also thinck. But forbeecause the question about Ousia and Hypostasis, did
trouble the Churches, and that there were sundry contentions and disputations
concerning the difference betwixt them, they seem to me to have determined
very wisely, that those names should not at the first presently be used in
questions of GOD: unless it were that, when a man went about to beat down
the opinion of Sabellius, he were compelled to use them, least by lack of
words he should seem to call one and the same by three names, when he should
understand every one peculiarly in that threefold distinction. Socrates in the
7. Chap. and third book of his history adds: But they did not bring into
the Church a certain new religion devised of themselves, but that which from
the beginning even till then the Ecclesiastical tradition taught, and prudent
Christians did evidently set forth. And so forth.

Therefore away with the Popes champions to the place whereof they Al things
that are to be believed of God are fully contained in the canonical Scriptures.
are worthy, which, when we teach y^ all points of true godliness and
salvation are fully contained and taught in the Canonical Scriptures, by the
way of objection do demand in what place of the Scripture we find the names of
Trinity, Person, Essence, and Substance, and finally where we find that
Christ has a reasonable soul? For although those very words consisting in
those syllables are not to be found in the Canonical books (which were by
the Prophets and Apostles written in an other, and not in the latin tongue)
yet the things, the matter, or substance, which those words do signify are
most manifestly contained and taught in those books: which things likewise
all and every nation may in their language express, and for their commodity
and necessity speak and pronounce them. Away also with all Sophisters, which
think it a great point of learning to make the reverend mystery of the sacred
Trinity darcke and intricate, with their strange, their curious, and
pernicious questions. It is sufficient for the godly, simply according to the
Scriptures and the Apostles creed to believe and confess, that there is one
divine nature or Essence, wherein are the father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost. Neither is it greatly material whether ye call them substances, or
subsistences, or persons, so that ye do plainly express the distinction
betwixt them, and each ones several properties, confessing so the Unity, that
yet ye confound not the Trinity, nor spoil the persons of their properties.

And here now it will do very well out of the Scriptures to cite such evident
Testimonies out of the Gospel to prove the Trinity.
testimonies, as may evidently prove the mystery of the Trinity, with the
distinction and several properties of the three persons. The Lord in the
Gospel after S. Matthew says: All power is given to me in heaven Math. 28.
and in earth: go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptising them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to
observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you. Tertullian alleging
those words against Praxea, says: He did last of all command his disciples
to baptize into the Father, Tertullia^ contra Praxeam.
and the Son, and the holy Ghost. We are baptized not into one, nor once, but
thrice at every name, into every several person. Thus much Tertullian.

Now as every several person is severally expressed, so the divinity of them
all is therein singularely taught to be one and common to them all, because he
bids to baptize, not only into the name of the Father, but also of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. The Apostle and elected vessel Paul does
flatly deny, that any man either ought to be, or ever was baptized into the
name of any man, which is nothing else but mere man. Were ye, 1. Cor. 1.
says he, baptized in the name of Paul? So then the Father is God, the
Son is God, and the holy Ghost is GOD, into whose name we are baptized.

The same Lord in the Gospel after S. John says: When the comforter John.
14. and. 16.
comes, whom I will send unto you from the father, that is the spirit of
truth, he will lead you into all truth. He shall not speak of himself: but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak. He shall glorify me, for he
shall receive of mine and shall show unto you. All things that the father has
are mine: therefore said I unto you, that he shall take of mine, and show
unto you.

In these words of the Lords thou hear mention made of the person of the
father from whom the spirit is sent, of the person of the Son which
sends him, and of the person of the holy Spirit which comes unto us. Thou
hear also of the mutual and equal communion of the Divinity, and all good
things betwixt the three persons. For the holy Ghost speaks not of
himself, but that which he hears. He shall, says the Son, take of mine.
And again: All things that the father has, are mine: And therefore what things
the Son has, those are the fathers: and the divinity, glory, and Majesty
of them all is coequall.

With these most evident speeches, do these two manifest testimonies of John
Baptist agree. First he says, He John. 3.
whom God has sent, does speak the words of God. For God gives not the
spirit by measure unto him. The Father loves the Son, and has given all
things into his hand. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life.
etc. Lo here again, in the one Godhead, thou hear the three persons
distinguished by their properties. For the Father loves and sends the Son,
and gives all things into his hand. The Son is sent, and receives all
things, but the holy Ghost is given of the Father, and received of the son
according to fulness. Then again the same Baptist cries the second time and
says, I saw the spirit descending from heaven like unto a Dove, and it
abode upon him. And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with
water, the same said unto me, upon whom soever thou shall see the Spirit
descending, and tarying still upon him, the same is he, which baptiseth with
the holy Ghost. And I saw and bare record, that this is the Son of GOD.

Here again are showed unto us as clearly as the daylight, the three
persons distinguished, and not confounded. For he that sends John is the
Father. The holy Ghost is neither the Father, nor the Son, but appears upon
the head of Christ in the likeness of a dove. And the Son is the son, not
the Father, and that too the son of the Father, upon whose head ye holy Ghost
did abide. And now to this place does belong the testimony of the Father
uttered from heaven upon his Son Christ. For he says: This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am Math. 3. and. 17.
well pleased. But one and the same cannot be both Father, and Son unto
himself: the father is one, and the son is one: and yet not diverse things,
but one and the same God, of one and the same nature. For the son in one
place does most plainly say, I and the father are one. John. 10.


Moreover, what could be more clearly spoken for the proof of the express
distinction and properties of the three persons in ye reverend Trinity, than
yt where the Archangel Gabriel in s. Luke, declaring the sacrament of the Lords
incarnation, does evidently say unto the virgin ye mother of God? The holy
Ghost shall come upon Luke. 1.
thee, and the power of the highest shall ouershadow thee: Therefore also that
holy thing, that shall be borne, shall be called the son of God. What I pray you
could have possibly been invented of purpose to be more manifestly spoken for
the proof of this matter, than these words of the Angel? Thou have here the
person of the highest, that is of the father. For in the words of the Angel,
a little before, it is said: He shall be great, and shall be called the son of
the highest. Now the son is the son of the father. We have also ye persons
of the son and of the holy Ghost expressed, with their properties, neither
mingled nor confounded. The father is not incarnate, nor yet the holy Ghost,
but the Son. To the father is borne of the virgin a Son, even he that was
the son by the eternal and unspeakable manner of begetting. But the holy
Ghost which is the power of the most highest, did ouershadowe the virgin, and
made her with child. And so by this means thou may see here the persons
distinguished, not divided, and how they differ in properties, not in Essence
of dietie, or in nature.

Here now (although these places might seem to suffice any reasonable The
Apostles testimonies concerning ^he Trinity.
man) I will yet add other testimonies of the holy Apostles, and that too of
three the most excellent among all the Apostles. S. Peter preaching ye word of
the Gospel before the Church of Acts. 2.
Israel, as Luke testiffeth in the Acts of the Apostles, does among other
things say: This Jesus has God raised up, and exalted him to his right hand,
and he having received of the father the promise of the holy Ghost, has shedd
forth this which ye now see and hear. Lo God the father raises up and
does exalte the Son. The Son is raised up, exalted, and sits at the
right hand of the father. And the Son receiving of ye Father the holy
Ghost, does bestow it upon the Apostles. Therefore the spirit proceeds
from the Father and the Son, subsisting in his own person, but being one and
the same spirit of them both. Moreover in the Sermon made at Caesarea in the
congregation of the Gentiles, that is, in the house and family of Cornelius
the Centurion, the same Apostle does as plainly express Acts 10.
the person of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and knitteth ye
Trinity together into one Essence of the Divine Nature.

Saint Paul in the beginning of Rom 1.
his Epistle to the Romans says, that he was appointed to preach the Gospel
of God, which he had promised before by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures, of
his Son which was made of the seed of David after the flesh, and has been
declared to be the son of God with power after the Spirit that sanctifies.
Again to the Galathians he says: God sent his son made of a woman, that we
by Gala. 4.
adoption might receive the right of sons. And because ye are sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba,
father. And again to Titus he says: God according to his mercy Tit. 3.
has saved us by the founteine of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost,
which he shedd on us richly thorough Jesus Christ our Savior. Therefore S.
Cyril speaking very truly of the Apostle Paul Libro in Joan. 9. Cap. 45. does
say: That holy man did rightly know the enumeration of the sacred Trinity: and
therefore he teaches that every person does properly and distinctly subsist:
and yet he preaches openly the immutable self-same-nesse of the Trinity.
Concerning Identitas.
which matter, if any man would gather together and reckon up all the
testimonies that Paul has for the proof of it, he must of necessity recite
all his Epistles.

The blessed Apostle and Evangelist 1. John. 2.
John does more strongly and evidently than the other affirm and set forth
the mystery of the Trinity and distinction of the persons: as well in his
Evangelical history, as in his Epistle. Among many this one at this time
shall be sufficient. In his Canonical Epistle he says: Who is a liar, but he
that denies that Jesus is Christ? The same is Antichrist that denies the
Father, and the Son. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the
father. Therefore let that abide in you which ye have herd from the beginning.
And presently after he says again: Ye need not that any man teach you, but as
the same annoynting teaches you of all things, and it is true and not lying.
In these words ye hear the Father, ye hear the Son, ye hear the
annoynting, that is, the holy Ghost. The father is not the Son, the Son is
not the Father, neither is the holy Ghost the Father, or the Son: but the
Father is the Father of the Son, the Son is the Son of the Father, and
the holy Ghost proceeds from them both. And yet those persons are so joined
and united, that he which denies one of them, has in him none of them. Yea,
whosoever denies this Trinity is pronounced to be Antichrist. For he denies
God which is one in Trinity and three in unity, and so consequently
confounding or taking away the properties of God, he denies God to be such
a one, as he is in very deed.

Now I suppose that these so many The mystery of the Trinity is shadowed by
^imili^^des.
and so manifest testimonies do suffice the Godly. For they believe the
Scriptures, and do not over curiously pry into ye Majesty of God, being
content with those things alone, wherein it has pleased God of his goodness
to appear and shine to us mortal men. Some thereare, which do their endeavor
by certain parables or similitudes to shadow this matter, that is to say, to
show how the three persons are said to be distinguished, and yet
notwithstanding to be one God. But in all the things that God has made (as I
did admonish you in the beginning of this treatise) there is nothing, which
can properly be likened to the nature of God: neither are there any words in
the mouths of men, that can properly be spoken of it: neither are there any
similitudes of man's invention, that can rightly and squarely agree with the
divine Essence. And. S. Basile, disputing De Ousia and Hypostasi, says. It
cannot be that the comparisons of examples should in all points be like to
those things, to the use whereof ye examples do serve. Thou may say that
injury is done to ye Majesty of God, if it be compared with mortal things.
But for because the holy scripture does not a little condescend and attemper
it self to our infirmity, I will put a similitude, although in very deed
much unlike, which is usually taken and commonly used. Behold the Sun, and
the beams that come from it, and then the heat that proceeds from them
both. As the Sun is the head-spring of the light and the heat: so is the
Father the headspring of ye Son, who is light of light. And as of the Sun
and the beams together the heat does come, so of the Father and the Son
together the holy Ghost proceeds. But now, put case, or imagine that the
Sun were such, as never had beginning, nor ever shall have ending, and should
not then I pray you, ye beams of this everlasting Sun be everlasting too?
and should not the heat, which proceeds of them both, be everlasting, as
well as they? finally should not the Son be one still in Essence or
sustaunce, and three by reason of the three subsistences or persons? This
parable of the Sun Tertullia^ contra Praxeam.
did Tertullian use, whose words, which do also contain other similitudes, I
will not be grieved to recite unto you. I will not doubt (says he) to call I
would wish the skillful in the latin tongue to read this similitude in the
latin copy, for though it be here translated, ad verbu^, yet our English
tongue will not bear it soliuely as the latin does.
both the stalk of a root, the brook of a springhead, and a beam of the
Sun, by the name of a Sun: for every original is a parent, and every
thing, that issues of that original, is a son: much more then ye word of
God (may be called a Son) which eue^ properly has the name of Son, and
yet neither is the stalk separated from the root, nor the brook from the
springhead, nor the beam from the Sun, no more is the word separated from
God. Therefore according to the fashion of these examples I profess that I say
there are two, God and his Word, the Father and his Son. For the root and
the stalk are two things, but joined in one. And the springhead and the
brook are two kinds, but undivided. And the Sun and the beams are two
forms, but both cleaving the one to the other. Every thing, that comes of
any thing, must needs be second to that, out of which it comes, and yet
it is not separated from that, from which it proceeds. But where a second is,
there are two, and where a third is, there are three. For the third is the
spirit of God and the Son: even as the third from the root is the fruit of
the stalk, the third from the springhead is the river of the brook, and the
third from the Sun is the heat of the beam: yet none of these is alienated
from the matrix, of which they take ye properties that they have. So the
Trinity descending by annexed and lincked degrees from the father, does not
make against the or, Unity.
Monarchy, and does defend the Oiconomical state, that is, the mystery of the
dispe^sation. Understand every where that I profess this rule, wherein I
testify that the father, the son, and the holy Ghost are vnseparated one
from an other, and so thou shall know how every thing is spoken. And so forth.
For all these are the words of Tertullian, who flourished in Africa, not long
after the age of the Apostles.

But letting pass the parables, similituds, or comparisons of man's invention,
The certe^ntie of the doctrine touching the Trinity.
let us steadfastly believe the evident word of God. What man's capacity cannot
atteine unto, that let faith hold fast. What the sacred scriptures declare unto
us, what Christ in his flesh did teach us, what was by so many miracles
confirmed for our sakes, what the spirit of God in the true Church does tell
us, that must be thought more true and certain, than that, which is proved by
a thousand demonstrations, or that which all thy senses are able to conceive.
Paul denies that he would hear an Angel, if he should speak any thing
contrary to the Gospel of Christ. Yea surely it is a prancke of arrogant
foolishness to doubt of the things, that are in the Scriptures with so great
authority laid forth, and taught us. But it is a greater madness, if a man
will not believe the oracles of God, for none other cause, but for that our
understanding cannot atteine to ye knowledge of all things, when as
nevertheless we know that our understanding is naturally blind, and hates
God. Among Philosophers he is counted an impudent fellow, which relecteth
the authority of any notable and approved writer. It was enough to persuade
the scholars of Pythagoras, for a man to say to them, (...), He said it. And
then dares a Christian seek starting holes, and iangle about asking of
curious questions, when it is said unto him: GOD said it, and taught thee to
believe it? No man doubts of the kings letters patents, if so be the seal
be acknowledged: therefore what a folly is it to doubt of the divine
testimonies, which are so evident, and firmly sealed with the spirit of God?

Wherefore that I may here recapitulate The su^me of things to be beeleued
concerning the Trinity.
and briefly express the principal sum of this our exposition, I will
recite unto you (dearly beloved) the words of the holy father Cyril, which
are to be found Libro in Joan. 9. Cap. 30. in this sense following: True faith
is in God the father, and in the Son, not simply, but incarnate, and in the
holy Ghost. For the holy and consubstantiall Trinity is distinguished by the
differences of names, that is, by the properties of ye persons. For the father
is the father, and not the son: and the son is the son, and not the
father: and the holy Ghost, is the holy spirit proper to the father and the
son. For the substance of the Deity is all one, or the same: wherefore we
preach not three, but one God. Therefore we must believe in God: but
distinctly and more fully expounding our faith, we must so believe, that we
may refer the same glorification to every person. For there is no difference
of faith. For we ought not to have a greater faith in the father, than in the
son, and in the holy Ghost, but the measure and manner of it must be one and
the same equally consisting in each of the three persons: so that by this
means we may confess the unity of nature in the Trinity of persons. This
faith must firmly be grounded in our minds, which is in the father, and in
the son, (and the son, I say, even after that he was made man) and in the
holy Ghost. Thus much out of Cyril.

Now all these points shall be thoroughly confirmed with more full testimonies,
when we come once to prove the divinity of the son of GOD, and of the holy
Ghost. Which I mean to reserve till time convenient.

But let a man think that this belief The mys^^rie of ^he Trinity was ve^ie
well known to the Pa^riarchs and Prophets.
of the Unity and Trinity of the Godhead was either invented by the fathers,
or bishops of the churches, or first of all preached by the Apostles
immediately upon Christ his death and ascension. For after the same manner,
that I have hitherto declared unto you, even from the beginning of the world
did all the holy Patriarchs, Prophets and elect people of GOD believe and
ground their faith. Although I deny not, but that the mystery of the Trinity
was more clearly expounded to the world by Christ, yet is it evident by some
undoubted testimonies, which I will add anon, that the mystery of the
Trinity was very well known unto the Patriarchs and the Prophets: but first
by the way I will admonish you that the holy Patriarchs and prophets of GOD,
did hold themselves content with the bare revelation and word of GOD, not
raysinge curious questions about the Unity and Trinity of God.

They did clearly understand that there is one God, the father of all, the
only savior and author of all goodness, and that without or beside him
there is none other God at all. And they again did evidently see, that the
Son of GOD, that promised seed, has all things common with the father: for
they did most plainly hear, that he is called the Savior, and is the
redeemer, from whom all good things do proceed, and are bestowed upon the
faithful: whereby now it was east for them to gather, that the father, and
the son are one God, although they differ in properties. For in so much as
they were assuredly certain, that the damnable doctrine of the plurality of
Gods did spring from the devil, they did not worship many but one God, whom
notwithstanding they did believe to consist of a Trinity of persons. For Moses
the undoubted servant of God, Gene. 1.
in the very first verse of his first book says, In the beginning (Creauit
dij) As who should say Gods created, respecting the Trinity of the Godhead.
God created heaven and earth. He joins here a Verb of the singular number
to a Noune of the plural number, not to make incongruitie of speech, but to
note the mystery of the Trinity.

For the sense is, as if he should have said: That GOD, which does consiste
of three persons, created heaven and earth.

For a little after God consulting with him self about the making of man does
say: Let us make man in our Image. Lo, here he says, Let us make, and not,
Let me make, or, I will make. And again he says, In our Image, and not, In
my Image. But least any man should think that this consultation was had with
the Angels, let him hear what God him self does say in Esaye: I the Lord,
says he, make all things, and stretch out the heavens alone of my self
(that is, of mine own power without any help or fellow with me) and set the
earth fast. Therefore the Father consulted with the Son, by whom also he
created the world. And again least any man should think, as the Jews
obiecte, yt these things were after the order and custom of men spoken of God
in the plural number for honors sake and worshipp, thou may hear what
follows in the end of the third Chapter: Behold this man is become as one of
us, in knowing good and evil. Now here, by Enallage, he puts these
words, Is become, for Shall become, or Shall happen: so that his meaning is,
as if he should have said, Behold the same shall happen to Adam that shall come
to one of us, yt is, to the Son: to wit that he should have trial of good
and evil, that is, that he should feel sundry fortunes, namely sickness,
calamities and death, and (as the proverb is) should feel both sweet and
sour. For that is the lot or condition of man. But the Son being incarnate
for us, not the Father, nor the holy Ghost, was found in shape as a man, and
had trial of sundry fortunes and of death: which was foretold to Adam, as it
is manifest, for consolations sake, and not in the way of mockage. For as the
good Lord did with a garment strengthen the body of our first parent against
the unseasonableness of the air, when for his sin he purposed to banishe
him out of Paradise: so did he comfort and cheer up his sorrowful mind with
a full example of the sons incarnation and suffering. And when he had so
armed him in body and soul, he casts him out of the Garden of felicity into
a careful and miserable exile. There are in every place many examples of this
matter like unto this. For Abraham Gene. 18.
saw three, but with them three he talked as with one, and worshipped one.
And, The Lord rayned upon Gene. 1^.
Sodom and Gomorrha brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven, and
overthrew those cities. But least any man should interpret it and say, The
Lord rayned from the Lord, that is, from heaven, he himself does presently ad,
From heaven. For as the father created all things by the Son: so does he by
him preserve al things, and does eue^ still by him work all things. Next
after Moses the notablest Prophet, David in his Psalms does say: By the word
of the Lord were the Psalm. 33.
heavens made: and all the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth. So here
thou hear that there is one Lord, in whom is the word and the spirit,
both distinguished, but not separated. For the Lord made the heavens, but by
the Word: and the whole furniture of heaven does stand by the Breath of the
mouth of the Lord. The same David says, The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou
on my right Psalm. 110.
hand, until I make thine enemies thy footestoole. Note that in an other place
the same David does flatly say, that beside the Lord there is none other. And
yet here again he does as plainly say: The Lord said to my Lord, meaning
the father, who had placed the son, which was David's Lord, at his right hand
in heaven. Out of Esaie may be gathered very many testimonies. But the
notablest of all the rest is that, which Matthewe the Apostle cites in these
words: Behold my son whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul is
pleased: Esai. 42. Matthew. 12.
I will put my spirit upon him. etc. With this agrees that which Luke
cites, saying: The spirit of the Lord upon me, because he has anointed
me, to preach the Gospel Esai. 61. Luke. 4.
to the poor has he sent me. etc. In these testimonies here thou have the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost. A few out of many. For I do not covet
to turn over the whole scriptures of the old testament.

So then this faith, wherewith we do believe in God the father, y^ son, The
mystery of the Trinity, must not be joined with curious dispucations.
and the holy Ghost, we have received of God himself, being delivered unto us
by the Prophets and Patriarchs, but most evidently of all declared by the
son of God him self, our Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy Apostles:
whereupon now we do easily gather wherefore it is, that all the sincere
bishops or ministers of the Churches, together with the whole Church of
Christ, have ever since the Apostles time with so firm a consent mainteyned
and had this faith in honor. It were verily a detestable impiety to leave
this catholic and true rule of faith, and to choose and follow one newly
invented. There are even at this day extante most godly and learned books of
Ecclestasticall writers, wherein they have declared and defended this catholic
faith by the holy scriptures against all wicked and blasphemous heretics.
There are extant sundry symboles of faith, but all tending to one end, set
forth and published in many synodall asse^blies of bishops and fathers. There
is at this day e^tant, learned, and rehearsed of the universal Church, and all
the members thereof both learned and unlearned, and of every sex and age, that
Creed commonly called ye Apostles Creed: wherein we profess nothing else than
that, which we have hitherto declared, namely that we believe in one God to
wit, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost. And forbecause this consent of
all the Saints concerning this true faith has been ever since the beginning
of the world so sure and firm, it was very well and godly provided of ancient
kings and princes, that no man should once dare be so bold either to call into
doubt, or with curious questions and disputations to deface or make intricate
this belief concerning the unity and Trinity of the Almighty God. He of
old among the Israelites was stricken through and Exodus 19.
slain, which passed beyond ye bounds that the Lord had limited out. And we
also have certain appointed bounds about the knowledge of god, which to
pass is hurtful unto us, yea, it is punished with assured death.

God grant that we may truly know, and religiouslye worship The
conclusion.
the high, excellent and mighty God even so, and such, as he him self is. For
hitherto I have as simply, sincerely, and briefly as I could, discoursed of
the ways and means how to know God, which is in substance one, and three in
persons. And yet we acknowledge and do freely confess, that in all this
treatise hitherto there is nothing spoken worthy of, or comparable to his
unspeakable majesty. For the eternal, excellent and mighty God is greater
than all majesty, and than all the eloquence of all men, so far am I from
thincking that I by my words do in one jot come near unto his excellency.
But I do humbly beseech the most merciful Lord, that he will vouchsafe of
his inestimable goodness and liberality to enlighten in us all, the
understanding of our minds with sufficient knowledge of his name, thoroughe
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

That GOD is the creator of all things, and governs all things by his
providence: where mention is also made of the good will of God to us ward, and
of Predestination.
The fourth Sermon.
DErely beloved, it remains now for me in this days Sermon for a conclusion
to that, which I have he-ther-to spoken concerning God, briefly to add
somewhat of that creation or work of God, whereby he being the maker of all
things, has to mankindes commodity wholsomely created all things, both
visible and invisible, and does now as always most wisely govern and order
the same. For by so doing we shall obtain no small knowledge of God, and many
things shall be more openly laid forth unto us, which we in our last treatise
did but touch and away. In the searching out, considering, and setting forth of
the creation of the whole and the parts thereof, all the diligence of all wise
men has been set on work, does labor, and shall be troubled so long as
this world indureth. For what is he, though he were the wisest, the cunningest,
and diligentest writer of the natural history, that leaves not many things
untouched for the posterity to labor in, and beat their brains about? Or
what is he at this day, which, although he use the aid and industry of most
learned writers, is not compelled to wonder at more and greater things, than
either they ever did, or he ever shall atteine unto you? The most wise Lord
will always have witty men, that are enriched with heavenly gifts, to be
always occupied and evermore exercised in the searching out and setting forth
the secrets of nature, and of the creation. But we do simply by faith
conceive that y^ worlds were made of nothing, and of no heap of matter, of
God thorough the word of God, and that it does consist by the power of the
holy Ghost or spirit of God. For so did Psalm. 54. Heb. 1^.
king David, and Paul the teacher of the Gentiles both believe and teach.

But although the order of y^ whole, and the manner of the creation cannot be
knitt up or declared in few words, yet will I do my endeavor to utter
somewhat, by which ye sum of things may partly appear to the diligent
considerer. And here I choose rather to use an other manns words than mine
own, especially because I suppose this matter cannot be more lively expressed,
than Tertullian in his book De Trinitate, sets it forth as follows: The
history of the creation contained, in few words.
GOD has honge up heaven in a lofty height, he has made the earth massiue
with a low and pressed-downe weight, he has powered out the seas with a leuse
and thin liquor, and has planted all these, being decked, and full with
their proper and fit instruments. For The Sky and Stars.
in the firmament of heaven he has stirred up the dawning risings of the
Sun, he has filled the circle of the glittering Moon for the comfort of
the night with monthly increasings of the world, and he lighteneth the beams
of the stars with sundry gleames of the twinkling light (the night he
means) and he would that all these should by appointed courses go about the
compass of the world: to make to mankind days, months, years, signs,
times, and commodities.

In The Earth.
the earth also he has lift up high hills aloft, depressed down the
valleys below, laid the fields out euenly, and profitablie ordained flocks
of beasts for sundry services and uses of men. He has made the massiue
oaks of the woods for the behoof of man, he has brought forth fruit to
feed him withal, he has unlocked the mouths of springs and powered them into
running rivers. After all which necessary commodities, because he would
also procure somewhat for the delight of the eyes, he cladd them all with
sundry colors of goodly flowers to the pleasure and delight of those that
beheld them.

In The Sea.
the sea also, although for the greatness and profit thereof it were very
wonderful, he framed many sorts of living creatures, some of a mean, and
some of a monsterous bigness, which do by the variety of the woorkemanshipp
give special notes of the woorkemans wit. And yet not being therewithal
content, least peradventure the rage and course of the waters should with the
damage of the earthes inhabitauntes break out and occupy an other element,
he cloased up the waters limitts within the shoares, that thereby when the
raginge waves and foaminge water did rise up from the depth and channel, it
might turn into it self again, and not pass beyond the bounds appointed,
keeping still the prescribed course, to the end also that man might be so
much the more ready to keep Gods Laws, when he perceived that even the very
elements did observe and keep them.

Last of all he sets Man.
man to be Lord over the world, whom he made to the likeness and Image of
GOD: to whom he gave reason, wit, and wisdom that he might imitate God:
whose body, although it were made of earth, was yet-not-withstanding inspired
with the substance of the heavenly breathe and Spirit of GOD. To whom when
he had put all things in subjection, he would have him alone to be free
without subjection.

And least that liberty being let loose at randon might come into peril
again, he gave a commandment, by the means of which commandment, it
could not be said, that evil was out of hand or by-and-by present in the
fruit, but should then be in it, when once he perceived in the will of man the
contempt of that commandment. For both he ought to be free, least the
Image of GOD, should seem to be bond bond indecently: and also a law was to
be given, least at any time the unbridled liberty should break out to the
contempt of him that gave the liberty: that he might consequently receive
either due rewards of obedience, or merits of punishment for disobedience,
having that given him, to whether part he was willing by the motion of the
mind for to incline: whereby the envy of mortality does return to him, who
when by obedience he might have escaped it, did yet run headlonge into it,
while he made too much have to become a god, etc. The same add in the parts
above the firmament, which are not now to be beheld of our mortal eyes, that
first there were ordained Angels, then there were ordered spiritual virtues,
then there were placed thrones and powers, and many other unmeasurable spaces
of the heavens, and that many works of holy things were there created etc.
Thus far Tertullian.

Now the sum of all this is, God did by his power create of nothing heaven,
earth, and the sea, which he did immediately adorn and enriche with all
kinds of good things. And into this world, which takes y^ name of the
furniture that is in it, as in a most sumptuous palace, well furnished with all
sort of excellent necessaries, it pleased him to bring man, to whom he did put
all things in subjection: as David does with wondering and merueyling set it
forth, where he says, O Lord our governor how David celebrateth the creati^
of the world.
excell^t is thy name in all the world? For thy glory is lift up above the
heavens. Out of the mouths of very babes and sucklinges have thou ordained
strength, because of thine enemies, that thou may destroy the enemy and
the auenger. For I will consider the heavens, even the works of thy fingers:
the moon, and the stars, which thou have ordained. What is man that thou
art so mindful of him, or the son of man that thou have care over him? Thou
made him somewhat lower than the Angels, (or than God) thou crownest him with
glory and honor, thou made him to have dominion of the works of thy
hands. Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet, sheep and
oxen, and the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of
the sea, which walk thoroughe the paths of the sea. O Lord our governor how
excellent is thy name in all the world. Psalm. 8. The same again in an other
place does say, The heavens are thine, O God, and Psalm. 9.
the earth is thine: thou have laid the foundation of the round world, and
all that therein is. The day is thine, and the night is thine, thou have
ordained the lights, and the Sun, thou layedst all the borders of the earth,
thou have made both Summer and winter. Now who is so very a sot, as that he
does not by these proofs easily gather how great our GOD is, how great the
power of God is, how good, rich, and liberal to man, who never deserved any
such thing at his hand, our GOD is, which has created so great riches, so
exquisite delights, and such furniture as cannot be sufficiently praised, for
man alone, and has made them all subject, and will have them all to obey man
as their Lord and master?

But here by the way in the creation of the world we have to consider God
governs al things.
the preservation and government of the whole, by the same GOD.

For neither does the world stand and endure by any power of it own, neither
do those things move and stir of their own accord, or (as we say) at all
adventures, which are stirred or moved how so-euer. For the Lord in the
Gospel says: My father woorketh hitherto, and I work. And Paul says,
God by John. 5.
his son has made the worlds, and Heb. 1.
does rule and uphold them with the word of his power. And again, By God we
live, and move, and have our Acts. 17.
being. And again, God left not himself without witness, in that he showed
Acts. 14.
his benefits from heaven, giving us rain and fruitful seasons, filling our
hearts with food and gladness, And Theodorete, De prouide^tia, says, It is
a most absurd thing to say Of Gods providence.
that God has created all things, but that he has no care of the things
which he has made, and that his creature as a boat destitute of a steirsema^
is with contrary winds tossed to and fro, and knocked and cracked upon shelues
and rocks. Therefore in this place we have to say somewhat of Gods providence
and government: which all the wicked, together with the Epicures, do at this
day deny, saying in their hearts: Is it likely, that he that dwells in
heaven, should regard ye things on earth? And does the Almighty observe and
marcke the very smallest of our words and works? He has given to all creatures
a certain inclination and nature, which he has made their own, and so
leaves them now in the hand of their own counsel, that they of their own
nature may move, increase, perish, and do even what they lust. Tush God
neither knows nor does greatly trouble himself about these toys. Thus do
the wicked reason very wickedly: but the Scripture does expressly in many
places pronounce and prove, that God by his providence does care for, and
regard the state of mortal men, and of all ye things that he has made for
the use of mortal men And therefore here it is profitable and necessary to
cite some testimonies out of ye holy scriptures for the proof of this
argument. David Psalm. 45.
in his Psalms says: The Lord shall reign for ever, and his kingdom is a
kingdom of al ages, and his dominion from generation to generation. Lo, The
kingdom of God (says he) is a kingdom of all ages, and his dominion
throughout all generations. Therefore God has not only created the world, and
all things that are in the world, but does also govern and preserve them at
this day, and shall govern and preserve them even till the end. For the same
kingly Prophet celebrating the providence of God about man and his estate,
does say: Thou, O Lord, know my down sitting Psalm. 139.
and mine vprising, thou spiest out all my ways. For there is not a word in my
tongue, but thou, O lord, do know it altogether. Thou have fashioned me
behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. And so forth as follows in
the 139. Psalm, which Psalm does wholly make to this purpose. With this
doctrine of David does the testimony of Solomon agree, where he says, The
kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, like Prou. 21.
as the rivers of water, he may turn it whither soever he will. Every man's
way seems right in his own eyes, but the Lord drives, or rules the heart.
And in the gospel the Lord said, Are not two little sparrowes sold for a
farthing? And one of them shall not Matthew. 10.
light on the ground without your father. Yea, even all the hairs of your
head are numbered.

There are besides these other evident testimonies also of the providence of
God. Daniel the wisest man of all the East, and the most excellent prophet of
God, does say, Wisdom and strength are the Lords: It is he that Daniel 2.
changes the times and seasons: he takes away kings, and sets up
kings: he gives wisdom unto the wise, and understanding to those that
understand: he reuealeth the deep and secret things: he knows the thing
that lies in darkness, for the light dwells in him. Moreover Ethan the
Ezrachite says, Thou Lord rulest Psalm. 89.
the raging of the sea, thou stillest the waves thereof, when they arise. Thou
have an almighty arm, thou strengthenest thy hand, and set up thy
right hand. In justice and equity is thy royal throne stablished, goodness
and faith do go before thy face. And David says, Of the fruit of thy
works, O God, shall the earth Psalm. 104.
be filled. And he brings forth grass for cattle, and hear be for the
use of man, and bread to strengthen the heart of man, and wine to make him
merry. And immediately after in the same Psalm: All things do wait upon
thee, that thou may give them their meat in due season. When thou give
it, they gather it: and when thou openest thy hand they are filled with good.
If thou hidest thy face they are troubled, and if thou take away their
breath, they die, and are turned into their dust. Again, The Lord vppholdeth
all such as fall: and Psalm. 104.
lifts up all those that be down. The Lord loses men from their fetters:
the Lord gives sight unto the blind. The Lord keeps the stranger, he
defends the fatherless and widow, and the way of the wicked he turns
vpsidedowne. Great is our Psalm. 147.
Lord and great is his power, and of his wisdom there is none end. He tells
the number of the stars, and calls them al by their names. He covers the
heavens with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth. He gives fodder unto
the cattle, and meat to the young Ravens that call upon him. He gives snow
as woll, and scatters the hoare frost like ashes. He casts forth his yse
like morsels: who shall abide before the face of his cold? He shall send out
his word and melt them, he shall blow with his wind and the waters shall
flow. And again, I know that the Lord is great and that he is above all
Godds. What Psalm.. 135
pleased him, that has he done in heaven and earth, and in the sea, and in all
deep places. He lifts up the clouds from the ends of the world, and
turns lightening unto rain, and brings the winds out of their treasuries.
There are many testimonies like to these to be seen in the 38. and 39. Cap. of
the book of Job, and rifely in the Psalms and books of ye holy Prophets:
but these, that hitherto I have recited, are sufficient enough, testifying
abundantly, that God by his providence does govern this world, and all
things that are therein, and especially man himself the possessour of the
world, for whom all things were made.

We do here attribute nothing to Against Gentili^me.
destiny, either Stoicall, or Astrologicall, neither have we any thing to do
with that ethnicke fortune either good or ill. We do utterly detest
Philosophical disputations in this case, which are contrary to the truth of
the Prophets writings, and doctrine of the Apostles. We content our selves in
the only word of God, and do therefore simply believe and teach, y^ God by
his providence does govern all things, and y^ too, according to his own good
will, just judgment, and comely order, by means most just and equal: which
means whosoever despises, and makes his boast only of y^ bare name of gods
providence, it cannot be yt he should rightly understand the effect of Gods
providence. They make this objection: because all things in the world are done
by Gods providence, therefore we need not to put in our oar: we may snort
idly and take our ease: it is sufficient for us to expect the working or
impelling of God. For if he need our aid, he will whether we will or no even
impel us to ye work, which he will have to be wrought by us. But the saints in
the The Saints do not neglecte good means.
scripture are laid before us, and showed to have thought, spoken, and judged
more sincerely of Gods providence. The Angel does in express words say to Lot:
Have thee to Zoar and save thee self there: for I can do nothing until thou
Gene. 16.
art come thither. Lo here by Gods providence Lot with his are saved, ye
citizens of Sodom are destroyed, and of all the cities thereabout. And yet even
in the very work of his preservation, Lots labor is required, and he bidde^
to do his good will to save himself. Yea, I cannot, says the Lord, do any
thing till thou art come into Zoar. The king and Prophet David does plainly
say: I have hoped in thee, O Lord, I have said thou art my god: my days are in
thy hand. And yet even Psalm. 31.
he which did wholly betake himself to the providence of God, did earnestly
consider with himself, how with his diligence and industry he might deceive
and escape from the layings in wait of Saul his father in law. Neither ^. Sam.
19.
does he despise the aid and shifts of his wife Michol. He does not reply to
her again and say, All things are done by the providence of God, therefore
there needs no wyles to be^ wrought. The Almighty is able to take me out of
ye hands of our fathers soldiers, or otherwise to save me by some miraculous
means: let us content our selves and suffer God to work his will in us. He
did not argue thus, but did understand that as Gods providence does proceed in
a certain order by middle means, so that it is his part to apply himself
to means in the fear of God, and by all assayes to do his best for his own
defense. S. Paul does hear the Lord flatly saying: As thou have borne witness
of me at Jerusalem, Acts. 23.
so must thou bear record of me at Rome. And although he did nothing doubt of
the truth of Gods promises, and was not ignorant of the power of Gods
providence, yet notwtstanding he did privily send his sisters son, which told
him that the Jews had co^spired to kill him, unto the Tribune, to desire of
him that Paul might not be brought forth at the Jews request. Neither did he
show himself discourteous or unthankful to the soldiers that carried him to
Antipatridis, nor to the horsemen that went with him to Csarea. Again as he
sailed in y^ Adriaticke sea, when he was in peril of dangerous shipwreck, and
y^ all his company were stricken with fear, he said, Sirs, I exhort you to be
of Acts. 27.
good cheer: for there shall be no loss of any man's life among you, but of
the ship. For there stood by me this night the Angel of God, whose I am, and
whom I serve, saying: Fear not Paul, thou must be brought before Caesar, and
lo, GOD has given thee all them that sail with thee. Wherefore, sirs, be of
good cheer. For I believe God, that it shall be even as it was told me. But a
while after when the mariners went about to leave the ship, the same Paul said
to the Centurion, and to the soldiers: Unless these abide in the shipp, ye
cannot be saved. Therefore means Meteores, impressio^s or appearaunces, which
sometimes, for their rareness and stragnes, make men to marvel.
do belong to the providence of God by which he woorketh: and therefore are
they not to be neglected. Truly it is by Gods government or providence, that
we have all these *impressions of what sort soever, either fiery, or ayrie, or
watrie. For by the power of God, and not by any power of their own, does the
air make the earth fruitful, the waters flow and ebb again, and the earth
does bring forth her increase. And although the saints think verily that
none of all this is done for any merits sake of theirs, because the Savior
himself in the Gospel, says: The father sends rain upon the just and
unjust: yet for all Matthew. 5.
that they do never forget the words of the Prophet where he says: If ye
Esai. 1.
will be willing and obedient ye shall eat the good of the land: but if ye be
obstinate and rebellious ye shall be devoured with the sword: For the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it. For the great Prophet Moses long Deuteronomy. 18.
before Esaie, had said: If thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the
Lord thy God, to observe and do all his commandments, all these blessings
shall come upon thee. Thou shall be blessed in the city, and blessed in the
field. Blessed shall the fruit of thy body be, and blessed shall the fruit of
thy ground be. The Lord shall open heaven unto thee, and give rain to thy land
in due season. But if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God,
to observe and do his commandments, then all these curses shall come upon
thee. Cursed shall thou be in the city, and cursed in the field. The heaven
above thy head shall be brass, and the Lord shall smite thee with many
plagues, etc. And histories bear record that all these things happened to the
people of God, even as they are here foretold, and that too, not without the
providence of the Lord their God. All good successes and prosperity are the
good blessings of God, and on the other side, all calamities and adversities
are the curses of God. Therefore herevppon the Saints do gather that men's
affairs and state are wholly governed by Gods providence, so yet that they
must not therefore sit (as we say) with their hands in their bosoms idly,
and neglect good means, but rather watchfully and diligently walk by the grace
of GOD in the ways, and means, or precepts, and ordinances of the Lord. For
the providence of God does not disturb the order of things, it does not
abrogate the offices of life, nor labor and industry, it does not take a just
dispensation and obedience, but by these things it works the health of those
men, which do through yt help of God religiously apply themselves to the
decrees, purpose, or woorking of the Lord: to whom they do rightly ascribe
what good soever does chance or betyde them, imputing to man's corruption, to
our own unskillfulness, and to our sins, what evil soever does happen unto
us. Therefore the saints acknowledge, that although wars, plagues, and
diverse other calamities do by God his providence afflict mortal men, yet
notwithstanding that the causes thereof do arise of nothing else than of the
sins of man. For God is good, which wishes us rather well than evil. Yea,
oftentimes he of his goodness, turns our evil purposes unto good ends, as
is to be seen by the history of Joseph, in the book of Genesis.

Truly upon the earnest consideration of Gods providence all the godly Gods
goodwill (...) learned by his pro^^dence.
sort do gather, that their good God wishes well unto man. For he has a
great care over us, not in great things only, but also in the smallest. He
knows the number of the days of our life. In his sight are all our members,
as well within as without. For the Lord in the Gospel says, yt all the hairs
of our head are nu^bered. He by his providence defends us from all manner
diseases and imminent perils. He feeds, refreshes, and preserves us. For as
he made all creatures for man's health and behoof, so does he preserve and
apply them to man's good and commodity. The doctrine of the foreknowledge Of
Gods ^redestina^^on, or fore-appoyntme^t.
and predestination of God, which has a certain likeness with his
providence, does no less comfort the godly worshippers of God. They call
foreknowledge that knowledge in God, whereby he knows all things before they
come to pass, and sees even present, all things that are, have been, and
shall be. For to the knowledge of God all things are present, nothing is past,
nothing is to come. And the predestination of God, is the eternal decree of
God, whereby he has ordained, either to save or destroy men, a most certain
end of life and death being appointed unto the^. Whereupon also it is elsewhere
called a foreappointment. Touching these points, some have diversely disputed,
and many verily curiously and contentiously enoughe, and in such sort surely,
that not only the salvation of souls, but the glory of God also with the
simple sort is indaungered. The religious searchers or interpreters of the
scriptures, confess, that here nothing is to be permitted to man's wit, but
that we must simply and wholly hang upon what so ever the scripture has
pronounced. And therefore these words of S. Paul, are continually before their
eyes, and in their minds: O the depth of the riches of Romans 11.
the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable (or incomprehensible) are
his judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who has known the mind
of the Lord? or who was his cou^seller? Or who has given unto him first? and
he shall be recompensed. They never forget the admonition of the most wise man
Jesus Syrache, saying: Seek not out the things that are too hard for thee:
Eccle. 3.
neither search after things which are too mighty for thee. But what God has
commanded thee, think thou always thereupon, and be not too curious in many
of his works: for it is not needful for thee to see, with thine eyes, the
things that be secret. In the mean time truly, they do not contemn, neither
yet neglect those things, which it has pleased God, by the open scriptures to
reveal to his servants touching this matter. Of Gods foreknowledge, there are
many testimonies, especially in the prophecy of Isaie, chapter. 41. and in the
chapters following, whereby also the Lord does declare that he is the true
God. Furthermore, God, by his eternal and unchangeable counsel, has
foreappointed, who are to be saved, and who are to be conde^mned. Now, the end,
or the decree of life and death is short, and manifest to all the godly. The end
of predestination or foreappointment, is Christ, the son of God the father.
For God has ordeydeined and decreed to save all, how many so ever have
communion and fellowship with Christ his only begotten son: and to destroy or
condemn all, how many so ever have no part in the communion or fellowship of
Christ his only son. Now the faithful verily have fellowship with Christ,
and the unfaithful are strangers from Christ. For, Paul in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, says: God has chosen us, in Christ, before the foundations of the
world were laid, Ephe 1.
that we should be holy, and without blame before him through love: who has
predestinate us into his sons, through Jesus Christ into him self, according
to the good pleasure of his will, that the glory of his grace may be praised,
wherewith he is pleased with us in his beloved. Lo, God has chosen us, and he
has chosen us before the fou^dations of the world were laid, yea, he has
chosen us, that we should be without blame, that is, to be heirs of eternal
life: howbeit, in Christ, by and through Christ has he chosen us. And yet
again more plainer: he has predestinate us, says he, to adopt us into his
sons, but by Christ, and that too has he done freely, to the intent that to
his divine grace glory might be given. Therefore, who so ever are in Christ,
are chosen and elected: For John the Apostle says: Who so has the son
has life: who so has not John. 5.
the son of god, has not life. With the doctrine of the Apostles agrees
that also of the Gospel. For in the Gospel the Lord says: This is the will
of him that sent me, the father: John. 6.
that every one which sees the son, and believes in him, should have
everlasting life: and I will raise him up in the last day. Lo, this is the
will or eternal decree of GOD, says he, that in the son by faith we should
be saved.

Again, on the contrary part, touching those that are predestinate to death,
the Lord says: He that believes John. 3.
not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the
only begotten son of God. And this is the condemnation, that light is come
into the world, and men have loved darkness more than light. Therefore if thou
ask Who is elected and predestinate to life.
me, whether thou art elected to life, or predestinate to death, that is,
whether thou art of the number of them that are to be damned, or that are to
be saved, I answer simply out of the scripture, both of the Evangelists and
the Apostles: If thou haste communion or fellowship with Christ, thou art
predestinate to life, and thou art of the number of the elect and chosen: but
if thou be a stranger from Christ, how so ever otherwise thou seem to
flourish in virtues, thou art predestinate to death, and foreknowledged, as
they say, to damnation.

Higher and deeper I will not creep into the seat of Gods counsel. And here I
rehearse again the former testimonies of Scripture: God has predestinate us,
to adopt us into his sons through Jesus Christ. This is the will of God,
that who so believes in the son should live: and who so believes not
should dye. Faith therefore is a most assured sign that thou art elected,
and whiles thou art called to the Communion of Christ, and art taught faith,
the most loving GOD declares toward thee his election and good will.

The simpler sort verily are greatly A so are tentation in this case.
tempted and exceedingly troubled with the question of election. For the devil
goes about to throw into their minds the hate of GOD, as though he enuyed us
our salvation, and had appointed and ordained us to death. That he may the
more easily persuade this unto us, he labors tooth and nail wickedly to
infeeble and overthrow our faith, as though our salvation were doubtful,
which leans and is stayed upon the uncertain election of God. Against
these fiery weapons the sernauntes of GOD do arm their hearts with
cogitations and comfortes of this sort fetched out of the Scripture.

Gods Predestination is not stayed or stirred with any worthiness or
unworthiness of ours: but of the mere grace and mercy of GOD the father, it
respects Christ alone. And because our salvation does stay only upon him,
it can not but be most certain. For they are wrong that think those that are
to be saved to life, are predestinate of GOD for the merits sake or good
works which GOD did foresee in them. For notably says the Apostle Paul:
He has chosen us in Christ, into him self, according to the good pleasure of
his will, that the glory of his grace might be praised. And again, It is not
in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy.
Romans 9.


Again: GOD has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, ^. Tim. 1.
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace,
which was given unto us through Christ Jesus, before the world was, but is
now made manifest, by the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Freely
therefore of his mere mercy, not for our deserts, but for Christ's sake, and
not but in Christ has he chosen us, and for Christ's sake does embrace us:
because he is our father, and a lover of men. Of whom also speaks the
Prophet Psalm. 103.
David, The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great
kindness. And as a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord
compassion on them that fear him: for he knows whereof we be made, and
remembereth that we are but dust. Moreover in the Prophet Isaie we read: Can
a Isai. 51.
woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb?
Though she should forget, yet will not I forget thee. Truly in Christ the
only begotten son of God exhibited unto us, GOD the Father has declared
what great store he sets by us. Thereupon does the Apostle gather, Who
spared not his son, but gave him for us al, Romans 8.
how can it be that he should not also with him give us all things? What
thing therefore should we not reckon upon, and promise our selves from so
beneficial a father? For thou can not complain that he will not give unto
thee his son, or that be is not thine, who as the Apostle says was given for
us all.

Moreover, the Lord him self, Matthew. 1^.
crying out in the Gospel, says: Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will refreshe you.

And again to his disciples: Go Mark. 16.
ye in to all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that
shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved. Whereupon also Paul says:
God our Savior will 1. T^m. 4.
that al men shall be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth.

In old times long ago, it was Gene. 22.
said to Abraham: In thy seed shall all the tribes (or nations) of the earth
be blessed. And Joel says: And it Joel. 2.
shall be, that who so ever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be
saved. The which Peter also has repeated in the Acts, chapter, 2. and Paul
to the Romans, chapter 10. Isaie also says: We have all gone Isai.. 53.
astray like sheep: we have turned every one to his own way: and the Lord
has laid upon him the iniquities of us all. And therefore durst S. Paul say:
As by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation: Romans 5.
Even so also by the justification of one, the benefit abounded toward all
men, to the justification of life. Therefore the Lord is read in the Gospel,
to have received sinners and publicanes with outstretched arms and embracings,
adding moreover these words: I came to seek that which was lost. Neither
Matthew. 9.
came I to call the righteous, but sinners Luke. 19.
to repentance. Al which sayings do hitherto belong, that being more narrowly
weighed, they might confirm and establishe us of Gods good will toward us,
who in Christ has chosen us to salvation: which salvation, truly, can not
but be most certain, and by all means undoubted: especially, for that the
Lord him self in the Gospel says: My sheep hear my voice, and I know them,
and they John. 10.
follow me: and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. etc.

I know what here again does sting and grieve the minds of many. Of the
drawing of those
The chosen sheep, say they, of Christ, do know Christ his voice, and being
endued that are predessinate to lif^
with a steadfast faith, stick in Christ inseparably, since they have felt
that drawing, whereof the Lord speaks in the gospel: No man comes John. 6.
to me, unless my father draw him: as for me, as I feel no such manner of
drawing, so do I not with and full and perfect faith stick in the son of
God. First of all verily, true faith is required of the elect. For the elect
are called, and being called, they receive their calling by faith, and frame
them selves like him that caled them. He that believes not, is already 1.
Tim. 4.
condemned. Whereupon also Paul says: God is the savior of all men,
specially of the faithful. Furthermore, unless we be drawn of the heavenly
father, we can not believe. And we must be very careful, least we conceiving
vain opinions of that divine drawing, neglect the drawing it self. God verily
drew Paul violently, Acts. 9.
but he does not draw all unto him by the hair. There are also other ways of
drawing, by which God draws man unto him, but he does not draw him like a
stock or a block. The Apostle Paul says: Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing Romans 10.
by the word of God. God therefore does then draw thee, when he preaches unto
thee the Gospel by his servants, when he touches thy heart, when he stirs
thee to prayer, whereby thou may call and cry for his grace and assistance,
his inlightening and drawing. When thou feel these things in thy mind, I
would not wish thee to look for an other drawing, despise not thou grace
offered, but use it whiles tune present serves, and pray for the increase of
grace. For to greater and perfecter things thou aspirest godlily afterward,
in y^ mean space there is no cause why thou should despise the lesser. In
ye Gospel after S. Matthewe, they receive large riches, who having received
but a few talents, occupied the Matthew. 25.
same faithfully. But he that despised the talent wherewith he was put in
credit, and cloaked his slothfulness with I wot not what care, is greatly
accused, yea, he is spoiled of the money which was once given him, and is
thrown into everlasting torments, being bound with bonds of condemnation. For
the Lord pronounces Matthew. ^3.
generally, Who so ever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have
abundance. But who so ever has not, from him shall be taken away, even that
which he has. He has, who acknowledges, magnifieth, and reuerenceth the
grace of God. To his heap of graces more is added, so that it is made more
aboundaunt. He has not, which does not acknowledge the gifts of God, and
imagines other, I can not tell of what kind, in the mean time, he does not put
in ure the grace received and which is present. And these are wont to use
excuses, that that drawing came not to them as yet: and that it is a matter
very dangerous, to use occupying, or to make merchandise of the gifts of God.
But S. Paul judging far otherwise, says: So we as workers together beseech
^. Cor. 6.
you, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain. And to Timoth. I put ^.
Tim. 2.
thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee. Not
that without God we are able to do any thing of our selves, but that the Lord
requires our endeavor, which notwithstanding, is not without his assistance
and grace.

For truly said the self same Apostle: God works in us both to (...). 2.
will and to do, even of his good pleasure. Again, Not that we 1. Cor. 3.
are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing, as of our selves: but al
our sufficiency is of God.

Furthermore, I wish not any man to despair, if by and by he feel and Faith
has her increasinges.
try not in his mind a most ripe and perfect faith. The Gospel says: Of her
own accord does the earth bring forth fruit: first the blade, then the ear,
and afterward full corn in the ear. For so likewise has faith her
increasings, and therefore did the very Apostles of the Lord pray: Lord Mark.
4.
increase our faith. Furthermore, in Mark truly a woeful man cries unto our
Savior: If thou can do any thing Lord, have compassion Luke. 11.
upon us and help us: but he heard the Lord streightwayes saying unto him: If
thou can believe it. All Mark. 9.
things are possible to him that believes. And this silly soul cried out: I
believe Lord, help mine unbelief. Lo, this woeful wretch believed, feeling in
his mind faith given him of God, which notwithstanding he perceived to be so
weak, that he stood in need of Gods help and aid. He prays therefore:
help mine unbelief, that is, my faith, which, if it be compared with an
absolute and perfect faith, may seem but unbelief. But hear (I beseech you)
what this faith, how little soever it was, wrought and brought to pass, what an
humble mind, and hanging upon the only mercy of God, was able to do. For
streightwayes he healed the child of the woeful father, and being restored
unto health, and as it were raised up from the dead, gives him again to his
faithful father. If any therefore does feel faith in his mind, let him not
despair, although he know that it is weak enough, God wot, and feeble: let
him cast him self wholly upon Gods mercy, let him presume very little, or
nothing at all, of his own merits, let him pray incessantly for the increase
of faith. In which purpose verily, these words of our Savior very full of
comfort, out of the Gospel, may confirm and strengthen any man most
wholesomly: Ask and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock,
and it shall be opened unto you. For who Matthew. 7. Luke. 11.
so ever asks receives: and who so ever seeks finds: and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened. Is there any man among you, who, if his son ask
him bread, will give him a stone? or if he ask fish, will give him a serpent?
If you therefore, which are evil, can give good gifts unto your children,
how much more shall your heavenly father give good things, even the holy Ghost
it self, if you shall ask of him? These and such like sayings, set forth
unto us in the holy gospel for our consolation, ought more to move and
establish our minds, of the good, yea the right good will of God toward us,
than the eggings of the devil, wherewith he goes about not only to ouerwhelme
the hope of our election, but to make us suspect and doubt of God, as though he
had his creature in hatred, whom he had rather have destroyed than saved. But
he is well enough known to the Saints by his subtilties and trains. For so he
deceived our first parents. Gene. 3.
Let us keep it deeply printed in our breasts, that God has chosen us in
Christ, and for Christ his sake predestinate us to life, and that therefore
he gives and increases faith to Christ ward in them that ask it, and that
it is he that puts it in our hearts. For all things that tend to our salvation,
come from the grace of God, nothing is ours, but reproach and shame. These
things (brethren) thus far have I laid before you, concerning the
marvelous and wonderful work of the creation, wrought by the eternal, true,
and living God, without any trouble (doubtless) or pains taking. For he spoke
the word, and they were made. He commanded, and they were created. A little
we have added touching the most wise and excellent governing of all things by
Gods divine providence, which is always just and most righteous: Likewise, of
Gods good will toward us, of Predestination, and certain other points unto
these belonging. All these things truly have we rehearsed, to beautify the
glory and knowledge of God our Creator. To whom both the perpetual and
universal course of nature, as well of things invisible, as also visible,
bears witness. Whom the Angels worship, the stars wonder at, the seas
bless, the earth reuerenceth, and all inferiall things behold. Whom the mind
of every man feels, albeit it do not express him. At whose beck al things
are moved, the springs cast forth their streams, rivers decrease, the waves
arise aloft, all things bring forth their increase, the winds are forced to
blow, showers to fall, seas to rage, al things in all places to deliver abroad
their frutfulnesse, who planted a peculiar garden of felicity for our first
parents, gave them a commandment, and pronounced sentence against their
sin: delivered righteous Noe from the dangers of the Deluge, translated
Enoche into the fellowship of his friendship, did choose Abraham to him self,
defended Isaach, increased Jacob, appointed Moses the captain over his people,
set free from the yoke of bondage the groaning children of Israel, wrote a
law, brought the offspring of the fathers into the land of promise, instructed
his Prophets with his spirit, and by all these promised his only begotten
son again, and at the same instant that he had promised to give him, has
sent him, through whom also he would be acquainted and come in knowledge with
us, and has poured forth upon us all his heavenly graces. And because of him
self he is liberal and bountiful, lest this whole world, being turned away
from the rivers of his grace, should wax dry, he would have Apostles to be
sent by his son as teachers throughout the whole world, that the state of
mankind might acknowledge their maker, and if they followed him, might have in
stead of a GOD, one whom in their petitions and prayers, they might call
Father, Whose providence has not only extended it self and is now extended,
not only severally unto men, but also unto very towns and cities, the ends of
which he foretold by the voices of his Prophets, yea, throughout the whole
world. Whose ends, plagues, decays, and punishments for their unbelief he
has described.

And least any should think, that this infatigable providence of GOD extended
not to every thing, though never so small, the Lord says, Of two sparrowes,
the one of them falls not to the ground without the will of the father. And,
The hairs of your head are all numbered. Whose care also and providence
suffered not the garments of the Israelites to wax old, nor their simple
shoes on their feet to be worn and torn. And not without good reason. For
if this God comprehends that which conteyneth all things, and all things
and the whole does consist of parts and particulars, than shall his care
reach consequently, even to every part and particular, whose providence has
reached already to the very whole whatsoever it is. To this God be all glory.

Of adoreing (or worshipping,) Of inuocating (or calling upon) and of serving
the only, living, true, and everlasting God. Also of true and false religion.
The fifth Sermon.
TOuching GOD, what he is in person, what in quality, and what in substance,
I have told you already, not as I ought, but as I was able. I have likewise
shadowed out how good and ready his will is toward man, whom he has
ordained to life everlasting, in his only begotten Son, whom also he has*
made Lord of all things in this present world, all things being brought in
subjection unto him.

Now, that man should not be ignorant what he owes to so mighty a god, and to
a father so loving and liberal, I will anon join a disputation touching this
living, true, and everlasting GOD, of man to be adored, called upon, and
worshipped. For man is neither created nor borne, to behold and gaze upon the
stars, as y^ Philosopher doted, but that he should be the image and temple
of God, in whom God might dwell and reign, and that he should therefore
acknowledge God, reverence, adore, call upon, and worship, and also be joined
unto God, and live with him eternally. And first of all, I will speak of
adoreing God, next of calling upon God, and lastly of serving God. Whereupon
we shall perceive without any trouble at all, which is the true religion, or
which is the false. The places truly propounded are very plentiful, but in
few words I will comprehend what the scripture does teach us concerning them,
howbeit not every one particularly, but the chiefest, and so much as seems
sufficient for our salvation and sound knowledge.

To adore or worship, in the holy scriptures does signify, for honors To
adore and worship, what it is.
sake to uncover the head, to bend the body, to incline or bow the knee, or
with the whole body to lie prostrate upon the ground, to fall flat on the face
at ones feet, after the fashion of suppliants or petitioners, in token of
humility, submission, and obedience: and it is referred chiefly to the gesture
or habit of the body. The Hebricians use one only word Schahah, which all
interpreters have expounded by this word Adorare, to adore, bend, bow, and
lie along with the face downward. The Grecians have expounded it by the word
(...), that is, I bow the knees, I uncover or make bare the head, I humbly
beseech or adore. And (...), adoration, is so called, either of kissing, or of
moving the hat. For, (...), signifies I kiss. And that a kiss was sometimes
a sign of worshipping, reuerencing, or adoreing, it is to be gathered out of
the 31. of Job. What, and is it not a fashion very much used even at this day,
for honor and reverence sake, to kiss the hand? Again, (...), signifies a
hat, a bon^et, or a cap, so that to adore, is to make bare and uncover the
head for reverence sake. The Latinistes also peradventure had an eye to the
habit of the body. For Orare, to pray signifies both as well to crave as to
speak a thing. He therefore does adore, that casting his countenance upon a
man, does crave something suppliantly. Likely it is, yt the Germans also had a
respect hereunto. For they turn Adorare to adore, by this word Anbatten.
Which might moreover have been turned Zu fussen fallen. In the ninth of
Matthewe thou do read: Behold a certain ruler came to Jesus, and
worshipped (or adored) him. But Mark writing the same history, And behold,
says he, there came one of the Princes of the Synagogue, whose name was
Iairus, and when he saw him, he fell down at his feet, and besought him
instantly (or much:) thus expounding to us what to adore is, to wit, to fall
down at ones feet, and to submit and beseech like a suppliant. For so we
read in the old testament of Jacob Israel our father: And he going before
them, bowed Gene 33.
him self to the ground seven times, until his brother Esau approached and
drew near. Of David and Abigael thus we read in Samuel: 1. Sam. 23.
When Abigael saw David, she hasted, and lighted off her Ass, and fell before
David on her face, and worshipped g^ound, and she ^ell (...) his ^^ete, saying:
Let that iniquity be counted mine, ^. Reg. 3.
my Lord, etc. Likewise, of Nathan the Prophet, it is (...) thus written: And
when he was (...) in ^o the king, he worshipped (or made obeysaunce) upon his
face on the ground. For, GOD communicating this honor, does allow the same
unto men, either To adore (...) worship ^en.
for their old age, their authority, or worthiness sake. For, man is the
lively image of God. And it pleases Psalm. ^^.
God himself to call men that excel other in authority, Gods. Whereupon the
Apostles of Christ, Peter and Paul, instructing the people of God taught
them, He verily, Fear God, honor the king: and This, the ^ Pet. ^.
magistrate is Gods minister: Give therefore to all men, honor to whom Romans 13.
honor belongs: fear, to whom fear is due. In the law the Lord says:
In presence of a hoare head, rise up. And, Honor thy parents.

In consideration of this commandment of God, y^ godly do reverence the aged,
their parents, and magistrates, and please God also with faithful obedience.
But to adore, worship, or honor images, what representation or likeness
soever they bear, the Lord does no where like or allow. For he says in
the Law: Thou shall not bow down nor worship Exodus ^0.
them. And by his Prophet Isaie, None, says he, considers with him self
of this matter, and says: One (...). 44.
piece of the wood I have burnte in the fire, I have baked bread with the
coals thereof, I have roasted flesh therewithal, and eaten it, and should I
now of the residue make an abominable idol, and fall down and worship a
rotten piece of wood? In the same Prophet thou read with much indignation
pronounced: Their land is f^l of vain Gods (or idols:) before the works of
their hands have they bowed themselves and adored it, yea, even before the
thing that their own fingers have made. There kneeleth the man, there falls
the man down (before them:) therefore forgive them not. Therefore, that
ancient writer In his second bok^ and 18. chapter.
Lactantius inspired with a prophetical spirit, disputing against the
Gentiles, has thus left it written: The images themselves which are
worshipped, are representations or counterfects of dead men. And it is a
perverse and an absurd thing, that the image of a man, should be worshipped
of the image of GOD, to wit, man. For he worshippeth the thing that is worser
and weaker. Besides that, the very images ofsainctes, which most vain men do
serve, are void of all sense and feeling, because they are earth. And where
is he that understands not, that it is a wicked and sinful act for an
vprighte and straight creature to be bowed down and to adore and worship
earth? which to that end is under our feet, that it should be trodden upon,
and not adored of us, who therefore are made to go vppright and look vppward,
that we should not lie groueling downward, that we should not cast this
heavenly countenance to the earth, but thither look and direct our eyes,
whither the condition of their nature has guided them.

Whosoever therefore endeavors to maintain the mystery of man's Chap. 19.
creation, and to hold the reason of his nature, let him raise up himself from
the ground, and with a raised mind bend his eyes unto heaven: Let him not
seek a God under his feet, nor dig from under his footesteps that which he
may adore or worship. Because, whatsoever lies under or is subject to man,
the same must needs be inferior unto man. But let him seek aloft, let him
seek in the highest place: because, nothing can be greater than man, but that
which is above man. But God is greater than man, he is therefore above, not
beneathe, neither is he rather to be sought in ye lowest, but in the highest
region or room. Wherefore there is no doubt, but that wheresoever an image is,
there is no religion. For if religion consist in divine things, and that
nothing is divine, unless it be among heavenly things, than do images
lack religion. Because in that which is made of earth, there can be no
heavenly thing. Which matter, even by the very name it self, may appear and
be manifest to a wise man. For, whatsoever is counterfecte, that must needs be
false: neither can that which has a representation or gloss of truth, at any
time take unto it the name of truth. If then not every representation or
cou^terfect, be not a thing in earnest but as it were a toy and a sport,
religion is not in images, but there is less religion where they be. That
which is true therefore, is to be preferred before all things that are false.
Earthly things must be trodden under foot, that we may get or obtain
heavenly things. These words, not unadvisedly, have we cited hitherto out of
Lactantius. We return now to our purpose.

But because the outward gesture or habit of the body is commonly Spiritual
adoration or worshipping.
framed according to the inward quality of the mind, and the outward habit
of his body which adoreth, submits, yealdeth, and makes subject him that
worshippeth to him which is worshipped, therefore adoration is translated
likewise to the inner man, so that to adore, is to reverence and respect God,
to bequeath our selves wholly unto him, and to cleave inseparably unto him,
upon him only and alone to hang in all things, and to have recourse unto him
in all our necessities whatsoever.

Furthermore, the outward adoration does immediately, when it is needful, and
ability granted, follow a mind rightly endued with true faith and holy
fear of God. For adoration Adoration or worshipping (...) is of two sorts.
is two-fould, or of two sorts, one of the mind or spirit, which is inward,
sound, sincere and true: another of the body, which is outward, unsound,
counterfecte and false, which may proceed from him, in whom there is no
sparckle of religion. True adoration is the fruit of true faith and holy fear
of God, namely a lowly or suppliant yielding and humble consecrating, whereby
we bequeath our selves, yeald and submitt our selves unto our God, whom as
we understand to be our best and most merciful father, so to be our most high
and Almighty God: upon him therefore alone we do wholly depend, and to him
only we have respect: which also forthwith so soon as occasion is
ministered unto us, we express and testify by outward adoration. All this we
shall the better understand by these testimonies of Scripture following. David
says: O come let us singe unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in God our
salvation. Let us come before Psalm. 9
his presence with thanckesgiuing, and show our selves joyful in him with
Psalms. For the Lord is a great GOD, and a great king above all Gods: because
in his hand are the corners of the earth, and the highte of the hills are
his. For the sea is his, and he made it, and his hands fastened the dry land.
O come let us adore (or worship) and fall down, and kneel before the Lord
that has made us. Because he is the Lord our GOD, and we are the people of
his pasture, and the sheep of his hands.

Thou perceiuest therefore, that we must adore or worship God, and that we must
cleave unto him, and singe praises to his name, because he is the most mighty
GOD, creator of all things, yea, our creator, our father, and our
sheepeheard. Likewise in the Gospel according to Matthewe, adoration does
follow faith, and does as it were grow out of it, and by it is nourished.
For, after that the disciples being taught by miracle believed that Jesus was
Christ, they came (says Matthewe) and adored (or worshipped) him, saying:
Thou art Matthew. 14.
truly the son of God. Again, thou read in John, that the Lord (...). 9.
asked the blind man that was excommunicate or caft out of the Synagogue,
whom he restored to his sight, saying: Do thou believe in the son of God?
And that the blind man answered: Who is he, Lord, that I might believe in
him? And that Jesus aunsweared: and said: Thou have both seen him, and he it
is that talks with thee. Moreover upon this by and by follows in the
history, But he said: I believe Lord, and he worshipped him.

Hitherto now belongs that which the Lord said to the Samaritane in the
Gospel. The true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and in
truth. For the Lord does allow spiritual and inward adoration or
worshipping, not that outward, counterfecte, or hypocritical worshipping, but
that which proceeds from a mind regenerated by faith through the holy
Ghost, and that tends sincerely toward one God. For we read in the
history of the old In the history of the Kings.
testament, that those princes worshipped in truth, which consecrated and
made holy themselves unto one God, with their whole heart, and on him only
depended: again, that they worshipped not the Lord with their whole heart,
which being destitute and void of sincere faith depended also upon creatures.

Now, a reason of this adoration or worshipping the Lord adioyneth in the
Gospel. Worshipp (says he) ought in all poincts to agree with him that is
worshipped. But God that is worshipped is spirit and truth, and is delighted
with spiritual worshipp and unfeigned faith: in spirit and truth therefore
he must be worshipped.

Wherefore the Saints have a Truly to adore or worshipp^ God, what it is.
special care and regard, that the inward worship of the mind be sound, and
that first of all they worship in heart and truly, with a sincere faith and
a reverence of Gods Majesty: and whiles they are inwardly so occupied, they
do no less outwardly, falling on their faces with humility, and do worship
in Gods presence. For the outward worship is a companion of the inward, and
follows it. Hypocrites also worship God in body suppliantly and lowly
enoughe, but because their minds go a woll-gathering, and neither with faith
nor reverence cleave unto the Lord, they hear this spoken of the Lord by the
Prophet: This people honors me with their lips, but their heart Isai. 29.
is far from me: but in vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines Matthew.
15.
precepts of me^. And this verily is the counterfecte and false worshipping.
And that worshipping also is false, nay, it is most wicked and abominable,
wherewith the creatures are worshipped, either with GOD, or for God, or without
God. And to say sooth, they do not worship God at all, which neither fear
God, neither believe in God, nor yet depend or hang only upon God.

All men truly confess that God must be worshipped, but every one does not
surely acknowledge and confess That God only and alone is to be worshipped.
that God only and alone is to be worshipped. It remains therefore to be
declared, that God only and alone is to be worshipped of men. Adoration or
worshipping is joined with true faith, and perfect or sincere reverence of
Gods majesty, which seeing they are due to GOD alone, it follows that god
alone is to be worshipped: and therefore is this saying so often cited and
beaten upon in the Law and the Prophets, Thou shall worship the Lord thy GOD,
and a strange God thou shall not worship. Now, a strange God is whatsoever
without and beside the only, living, true, and everlasting God, thou choosest
unto thee self to be worshipped: the only and alone true, living, and
everlasting GOD therefore is to be worshipped.

In the history of the Gospel we read, that the devil tempted our Lord
Matthew. 4.
Christ, and having ledd him up into an high mounteine, showed him from
thence all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, and said: All
these will I give thee, if thou falling down wilt worship me: and that the
Lord made answer: Avoid Satan, for it is written: Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And surely worshipping and
serving are lincked mutually the one with the other, that they cannot be
severed or put a sunder. Whereupon it follows, that seeing the Lord
requires only and alone to be served, he will doubtless in like manner only
and alone be worshipped. And Helie the great prophet of God, teaching that God
can in no 3. Reg. 1^*
case abide to have one joined unto him in worship, cries out unto the people
worshipping God, and with him their God Baal, How long (says he) do you halt
on both parts? If the Lord be God, follow him: If Baal be God; go after him.
As if he should have said: You cannot worship God and Baal at once. No man can
^erue two masters. For the Lord our God Matthew. 6.
requires, not a piece, but our whole heart, our whole mind and soul: He
leaves nothing therefore for us to bestow upon any other. In the Epistle
Deuteronomy. 6. Heb. 1.
to the Hebrews Paul shows, that Christ is more excellent than Angels,
because ye Angels adore or worship Christ, but they again are not worshipped.
If then the Angels are not worshipped, whom shall we grant, beside the
living, true, and everlasting God, that deserves to be worshipped? God
therefore only and alone is to be worshipped.

For in the Revelation of Jesus Christ, made unto the blessed Apostle and
Euangeliste John, thus we read written: And I saw another Angel fleeing
through the midst of heaven, Apoc. 4
haueing the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell upon the
earth, and to all nations, and kinreds, and tongues, and people, saying with a
loud voice: Fear God, and give him honor, because the hour of his
judgment i^ come, and worship him, that has made heaven and earth, the sea,
and founteynes of waters. And again in the same book we read, And I fell
down before the feet of the Angel, to worshipp him. Apoc. 19.
And he said unto me: See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant and of
thy brethren, having the testimony of Jesus, worship God. Again, in the end
of the same book thou do read: And after I had heard and seen, I fell down
to worship before the feet Apoc. 22.
of the Angel, which showed me these things. And he said unto me: See thou
do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets,
and of them that keep the words of this book. With this thing the saying and
doing of S. Peter Acts. 10.
does not greatly disagree, at whose feet when Cornelius the Centurion fell
down, and worshipped, Peter said: Arise, I also me self am a man, and
therewithal laying his hand on him which lay a long, did lift him up, and set
him on his feet. Right religiously therefore wrote Augustine touching True
religion, saying: Let not religion be unto us the worshipping I^ his book
in^^^uled (...) religi^^^. cap. 55
of man's handie work. For better are the workmen themselves, which make
such, whom notwithstanding we ought not to worship. Let not religion be to us
ye worshipping of mortal men: because if they have lived godlily, they are
not to be esteemed, as those that would seek such honors: but their will it
is, that he should be worshipped of us, who inlightening them, they rejoice
that we are made fellow partakers of his merit. They are to be honored
therefore for imitation or following sake, not to be worshipped for religions
sake. And if they have lived ill, they are not to be worshipped, wheresoever
they be. The same Augustine in his first book De consensu Euangelistarum, of
the Why the Romans never received the God of the Jews to be worshipped.
consent of the Evangelists, and eighteenth chap. reasoning: why the Romans
never received both the God, and the worship of the God of ye Hebrews,
considering that they received y^ gods almost of all the Gentiles to be
worshipped? And he answers, That that came to pass by none other occasion,
than because the God of the Hebrews would only and alone be worshipped without a
mate or partener. If any require his words, they are these: There rests
nothing for them to say why they have not received the holy rites and worshipp
of this God, save only because he would be worshipped alone: and has
forbidden them to worshipp the Gods of the Gentiles whom nevertheless these
people did worship. For the sentence or opinion of Socrates (who, as by Oracle
it was ratified, was the wisest of all men) is, that every God ought in such
sort to be worshipped, as he himself has given commandment he would be
worshipped. Therefore were ye Romans of very necessity forced not to worship ye
God of the Hebrews. Because, if they would worship him after another fashion,
than he himself said he would be worshipped, they should not then worshipp
him, but that which they themselves had devised and made. And if they would in
that manner worship him, as he himself prescribed, than they saw that they
were debarred from worshipping other Gods, whom he forbad to be worshipped:
And upon this they refused the worshipp of the only true God, to the intent
they might not offend many counterfecte and false Gods: thincking that the
anger of them would rather be more to their disprofite, than the goodwill of
him to their benefit. Thus says Augustine.

And although these things are written concerning the worship and service of
God, and that we dispute of adoring Gods Majesty, yet notwtstanding they are
not impertinent or beside our purpose. For the worshipping and serving of GOD
are inseparably lincked and knitt together. Of this serving of God we will
speak more hereafter.

But by the words cited before we do gather, that only and alone the true,
living, and everlasting God is to be worshipped, according to that
commonly-knowne sentence of the law: Thou shall worship the Lord thy GOD, him
shall thou Deuteronomy. 10.
fear, and him only shall thou serve: To him shall thou cleave, and in his
name shall thou swear.

Furthermore, God from the beginning Rewards and punishments for them that do
and do not worship God.
has promised and performed, yea, and will perform whiles this world
stands, great rewards to his true woorshippers. Contrariwise, we believe
that great mischiefs or punishments, are prepared for those, which either do
not at all worship God, or else in steed of the true GOD do worship
strange Gods. The Lord in his Revelation showed to John the Apostle, says:
The fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable and murderers, Apoc. 21.
and whooremongers and sorcerers, and Idolaters and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death.

These things have we hitherto spoken of worshipping GOD, we To invoke, or
call upon, what it is.
will now speak in the second place of inuocating or calling upon God, of
which poinct we promised to speak. To call upon, and calling upon, is
diversely taken in the Scriptures. For it signifies to bring forth as a
witness, or a calling to witness. So Moses calls heaven and earth to
witness against the children of Deuteronomy. 32.
Israel, by the figure Prosopopo^ie. Again, the name of any one to be called
upon over an other, is to be called by, or after, his name. Let my name
(says Jacob) be called upon Gene. 48*
them, that is upon Ephraim, and Manasseh, that is, let them be named by my
name, as if they were my children, and let them be called, not the sons of
Iosephe, but the sons of Jacob Israel. So say the wives to their husband:
Let thy name be called upon us, that is, suffer, or give Isai. ^.
leave, that we may be named by thy name, and that we may be made thy
wives. For these women thoroughe the knott of wedlock, take unto them their
husbands names.

After the same manner do we oftentimes read in the Prophets and holy
history of the Bible: The house upon which thy name is called, That is, the
house which is called after thy name, and is named the Lords house.

Likewise Ioab, General of ye kings army, says unto David: Take thou 2. Sam.
1^
the city (Rabbah, the chief city, or seat royal of the Ammonites) least I
take it, and my name be called upon it, That is, least I be called the
conqueror of Rabbah. Most ignorant therefore and unskillful are they of the
Scriptures, and the phrases of speech used in the Scripture, which cite that
saying of Jacob, which even now we declared, in defense and maintenance of
the invocation of Saints. As though Jacob would have his name to be called
upon of his posterity and ofspringe.

In Daniel thou do read: A people Dan. 9.
upon whom the name of God is called: Which signifies nothing else tha^, A
people that is called Gods people. Here is no mention of invocation whereby
we ask or desire any thing.

Furthermore, invocation or calling upon, is taken for religion. For Luke
says in the Acts: Saul had power (or authority) to bind all Acts. 9
those that called upon the name of the Lord. And Paul says: Let every one
that calls upon the name ^. Tim. 2.
of the Lord, depart from iniquity. Also, Seek after peace with all them that
call upon the name of the Lord, That is, which are of the true Christian
religion. Lastly, to invoke or call upon signifies, to cry or call for
help, and with continual outcries to crave somewhat.

That invocation therefore, or calling upon GOD, whereof at this Invocation
(...) calling upon God what it is.
time we entreat, is a lifting up of man's mind to GOD in great necessity,
or in some desire, and a most ardent craueing of counsel and assistaunce by
faith, and also a beequeathing or committing of our selves into the protection
of God, and as it were a beetaking of our selves to his Sanctuary and only
safeguard.

In invocation therefore, (true invocation I mean) a faithful mind is first
of all required, which does acknowledge GOD to be the author and only giver
of all good gifts, who is willing to hear them that call upon him, and is
able to grant us all our requests and desires whatsoever. An vncessaunt and
ardent petition or beseeching is also required. But of these poinctes more
shall be said, when GOD shall give us leave, in our Sermon of the prayer of the
faithful. For invocation is a kind of prayer.

Now verily I will show, that That God is to be called upon
in all our desires, GOD is to be called upon, yea, only and alone to be
called upon. Surely there are express commandments of GOD, chargeing us to
call upon the name of the Lord, who promises that for the good will and love
which he bears us, he will hear our requests and suites, and largelye
give unto us, things tending to our health and benefit. Of many I will cite
one or two testimonies. Solomon the wysest of all men, does teach us to call
upon GOD in all 3. Reg. ^.
and every one of our necessities, making a particular rehearsal of men's
special desires.

The same argument does Solomon's father, that most holy king David, handle
throughout the whole hundredth and seventh Psalm. He reckons up therefore
the diverse casualties, chances, and miseries of men, their affliction or
oppression, their wanderinges and dangers in their iourneye, their bonds and
imprisonmentes, their diseases, and the fear of death, which sometimes is
more terrible and hideous, than death it self, their ieopardies on the sea and
roughe waters, barrenness, scarcity, calamities, contempt, shame and
ignominy, etc.

Those crosses, says he, if they light on any man, let him not ascribe them
either to his God to whose defense he has committed himself, or to Fortune,
or to his constellation and destiny, but to that god that knows all things,
and can do all things, and upon y^ God let him call earnestly by faith. For
often does the prophet repeat these words: And when they cried unto the
Lord in their tribulation, he delivered them out of their distress. And for
that cause does he so often reiterate those words, to the end that we having
conceived a perfect trust in our hearts and sure belief, might learn in all
chances to call upon the name of the Lord. For Solomon in his Proverbs yet
again says: The name of the Lord is a most strong tower, unto it does the
righteous Pro. 18.
man run, and he shall be advanced, or he shall be set free from danger. Asaph
Psalm. 50.
also in his holy songs says: Sacrifice unto the Lord, a sacrifice of praise,
and pay thy vows unto the most highest. And, Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And he brings
in the Lord himself speaking and requiring sacrifices, not of beasts, not of
gold, or silver, but of praise and invocation. Therewithal he promises
help, and witnesses, that by inuocating and praising he is honored, (or
glorified:) whereupon David said: In my trouble I will call upon the Lord,
and I will cry unto my God, and he shall hear my voice Psalm. 17.
out of his holy temple, and my cry shall enter into his ears. Joel also
said: Every one that calls upon the Joel. 2.
name of the Lord shall be safe. And the Lord by the prophet Jeremy says: Ye
shall call upon me, and ye shall Iere. 29.
live: ye shall pray unto me, and I will hear you: ye shall seek me, and ye
shall find me: if with your whole heart ye seek me.

Furthermore, we do not read that our holy and blessed fathers, in their
petitions or requests, were they small or were they great, called upon any
other than that GOD, who lives everlastingly world without end. For the Lord
himself by Asaph, says: In thine extremities and troubles (O Israel Psalm. 81.
) thou calledst upon me, and I delivered thee. Also David says, Our fathers
hoped in thee, they hoped in Psalm. 22.
thee: and thou deliueredst them. Unto thee they cried, and were delivered. In
thee they trusted, and were not confounded. Now add unto all these the
commandment of Christ our Lord: When you pray, say: Our Father etc. Add also
the words which follow in Luke 11. and Matthew 7. Ask, and it shall be given
you. And so forth. We conclude therefore, that ye true, living, and
everlasting God, ought of all me^, in all their necessities, to be called
upon. But to no purpose peradventure I take pains in this poinct, seeing That
God only and alone is to be called upon.
that there are but a few, or none at all, which deny that God is to be
called upon. This seems to require a more diligent declaration, that God
only and alone is to be called upon. For many doubtless do call upon GOD,
but together with God, or for God, certain chosen patrones, whereupon insueth
that they call not upon God only and alone.

Now, that he alone is to be called upon, in this sort we declare. By
invocation or calling upon we require help or succor, either that good
things may be given to us, or that evil things may be turned away from us.
Which needs no further proof, seeing it cannot be denied of any that is
ruled by his right wits. Now, God only and alone is our helper, who only
gives good things, and takes away evil things. For the Lord says in the
Gospel: There is none good but one, to Matthew. 18.
wit, God, where One is taken for only and alone. Again, in the law, by ye
Deuteronomy. 32.
mouth of Moses, ye Lord says: Behold that I am God alone, and that there is
none other God beside me.

And again by Isaie: Have not I, the Lord? and there is none other God beside
me: a just God and a savior, Psalm. 45.
there is none beside me. And David, Who (says he) is God besides the Lord?
and who is mighty (or a rock) save our God? In very evil part therefore did
the worshippers of Psalm. 18.
God take it, so often as men asked of them those things, which are in the
Lords hands only to give. Rahel said to Jacob: Give me children, or else I
die. But the scripture by and by Gene. 30.
adds, And Jacob being angry said: Am I in Gods stead, which has denied
thee (or withholden from thee) the fruit of the womb? So when the king of
Syria desired and besought Ioram the king of Israel (a king, I 4. Reg. 5.
wisse, not so godly) that he would heal Naaman, who was infected with the
leprosy, Ioram says: Am I a God, that I should be able to kill and to give
life? For he sends to me, that I should heal a man from his leprosy.
Wherefore most certain it is, that to God only it belongs to give good
things, and to turn away evil things. Whereupon it does consequently
follow, that God only and alone must be called upon. For if these patrones,
whom they call upon as their helpers and succourers that do not call upon the
only God, be able either to give those things that are good, or to turn away
those things that are evil, then certeinely there is not one only God. For
those should likewise be Gods. But Gods they are not, because there is but one
God, who only and alone gives (or bestows) good things, and takes away (or
remoueth) evil things: God only and alone therefore is to be called upon:
Patrones are not to be called upon, in so much as they are able to do us
neither good nor harm. As touching that which of their own heads some do
here object, that Patrones do us good and harm, not of them selves, but of
God, it is doubtful, yea, it is most false. For the Lord him self by the
Prophet says: I am ^sai. 42.
the Lord, Hu (This, or Being) is my name, and my glory I will not give to an
other, neither my praise to graven Images. So that all glory belongs to God,
because he is only and alone, not only the wel-spring of all good graces
which is never drawn dry, but also a most just and equal distributer of the
same, and for that cause he is called upon, worshipped, and served of men.
Psalm. 50.

Furthermore, in so much as we ought to sacrifice unto none, but to one God,
certain it is, that we must worship but one only God. The Lord cries in the
law: He that offers unto other Gods, than to the only God, let him be
rooted out. And therefore Paul and Barnabas, when ye people of Lystra were
preparing Acts. 14.
sacrifices to offer unto the Apostles, they rent their clothes thereat, as at
intolerable blasphemy. For in the law of the Lord we read again: Who so
ever shall make for him self Exodus 30.
a composition (or perfume) of incense, to smell thereto, he shall be cut off
from among his people. But the sacrifices of the godly are prayers,
thankesgiuings, and inuocations on Gods name. For David says: Unto thee will I
sacrifice a sacrifice of praise Psalm. 115.
and I will call upon the name of the Lord. And again: Let my prayer be
directed in thy sight, as incense: Psalm. 141.
and the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice. Paul likewise says:
By Christ we offer the sacrifice of praise always unto God, that is, the
fruit of lips which confess Heb. 13.
his name. For the Prophet Osee bids Osee. 14.
us offer y^ calves of our lips. For so much therefore as one only God is to
be sacrificed unto, therefore one only God is to be called upon. Neither is it
possible, that they, whom such as call not upon the only God name heavenly
patrones, would, if they be Saints, require of men such manner of inuocations:
Nay rather, both against God, and against the Saints do these offend,
ascribing that to such, which no blessed spirits do acknowledge. S. Augustine
says, that they are not the Angels of the good God, but wicked devils, which
will have, not the only and most high God, but themselves, to be w^rshipped
and served with sacrifices. Besides that, the blessed spirits (or Saints)
during the time that they lived in their mortal bodies, prayed: Thy will be
done, as in heaven, so in earth: therefore being now delivered and set free
from all corruption, they do much more fully, yea, most perfectly agree unto
the will of God, which commands all men to worship and call upon the only
God.

Again, he that looks into and sees the hearts of them that call upon him,
hears their petitions or requests, and is able to fulfill the desires of all
men living, he (I say) is lawfully and fruitfully called upon. And surely, it
is requisite and necessary, that he know all things, that he be almighty,
and the searcher of hearts. Wherefore, seeing the only God is he, the only
God without further question ought to be called upon. For, that God only is
the searcher of hearts, comprehended in no place, but present every where, and
omnipotent, Solomon in these words does testify. Behold, the heavens, and the
heaven 1. Reg. 8.
of heavens are not able to contain thee: how much more unable than is this
house that I have built? Thou therefore shall hear in heaven, in the place of
thy habitatio^ (or in thy dwelling place) and shall have mercy. For thou only
know the hearts of the sons of men. Thou shall do (and give) to every
one according to al his ways, which know his very heart. As for the heavenly
patrons, as these men call them, they do neither know the thoughts of men,
neither is their power spread throughout the heaven, the earth, and the seas,
neither do they know althings, or yet are every where present, or be omnipotent.
For if it were so with them, they should be transformed and changed into a
divine nature, and should cease any more to be creatures: but, although by
Christ they enjoy everlasting blessedness, yet notwtsta^ding, they remain
creatures still, neither do they know al things, neither are almighty, therefore
are they at no hand to be called upon. In one prick and moment of time truly,
innumerable thousands of mortal me^ offer up their vows, and make their
petitions: so that he verily, which hears, must at a pinche, and in a very
moment, and not at sundry seasons or degrees of time, know and be able to do
all things, yea, and in a moment also reach out his helping hand unto all.
Which, as no creature though never so excellent can do, so the only God that
knows al, and is omnipotent, can do all things, and therefore only and alone
is to be called upon. I wot well what the defenders of heavenly patrones (or
Saints) object against that which I have spoken, to wit, that they of their
own nature do neither see, nor yet hear, what is done of us upon the earth:
but in the face of God, as in a most lightsome looking glass, to see all
things what so ever God vouchsafes to reveal to them, and that so they have
an vnder-knowledge of all our affairs, and also help us. But this imagination
or forgerie in all points doutfull, can be proved by no authority out of the
holy scriptures. But touching the celestial Saints, the scripture does rather
affirm the flat contrary. For in Isaie the people of god cry out: Thou O God
art our father: though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know ^sai. 63.
us not, yet thou, O Lord, art our father, and our redeemer. If than the
patriarchs so studious and careful for their people, knew not what they did,
which of the Saints (I pray you) shall we grant or point out, that knows what
we do, and that intermedleth with the affairs of the living? True doutlesse is
y^ that ye holy Psalm sou^deth. Because my father and my mother have left (or
forsaken) me, the Lord Psalm. 27.
has taken me up. If our parents forsake and leave us, how (I pray you) can
they tell, or do they care how it fares with us? Let that suffice us wherwt David
held himself thoroughly content, saying: The lord has taken charge over me. We
read y^ Josias was translated out of this life into an other, to the end he
should not see the mischiefs, (or plagues and punishments) which the Lord
determined to bring upon ye Israelitish people, for their most wicked and
naughty life. The blessed souls therefore, enjoy the sight of god, and thereby
participate light, and endless joy or gladness, they know none of our
affairs, neither is it needful they should know them, considering that the
Lord alone has all things in his government.

Now is that also most certain, that invocation springs from faith, as the
fruit from the root. For Paul using that saying of the Prophet: Who so ever
calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be safe, does by and by add: But how
shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.
See how the Apostle brings in one upon an other: He is not called upon,
who is not believed. Wherefore in whom we believe, upon him we do also call.
But in God only and alone we do believe, therefore on him only do we call.
For where so ever true faith is, there likewise is the gift of the holy Ghost.
For the Apostle says, If any have not the Romans 8.
spirit of Christ, this man is none of his. And again, You have not received
again the spirit of bondage, Matthew. 6.
unto fear: but you have received the spirit of adoption, by which we cry,
Abba father. They therefore that are endued with a true belief in God, call
upon God, whom they do acknowledge and confess to be the only father of
all. Neither might so much as the lest part in that solemn form and order of
invocation, delivered unto us by the son of God, be attributed by any means
unto Patrones, or Saints. The only God therefore is to be called upon.

The heart of sinful man trembles Of the intercessour with God
and quaketh, to approach near unto so great a majesty. For who may seem
worthy in him self, to appear and come before the presence of the most holy,
the most just, and the most terrible God? Here therefore some supply and make
up the matter with the patronship or intercession of celestial Saints, by
whose mediation and making way before us, passage lies open for us unto God.

But this they bring forth without the warrant of the scripture. The
scripture has laid before us, a law as it were, of calling upon god, and
thereunto has annexed most ample or large promises: so the commandment does
set forth unto us, by and through whom we should call upon God, adding
thereunto a most excellent promise, and opening unto us through Christ Jesus
only, a ready way to the Father. For in the Gospel the Lord says: Verily
verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask John. 16.
the father in my name, he shall give it you. Hitherto you have not asked any
thing in my name, Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be perfect, (or
full.) And, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, I will do it, John. 14.
that the father may be glorified by the son. If you shall ask any thing in
my name, I will do it. What could be spoken more fully and clearly, than these
words? Christ bids us by (or in) his name to call upon god the father, and
promises that he will give the faithful, what so ever they ask in Christ his
name. Who doubts now any whit at all of the truth and constancy of him which
promises? What need we therefore henceforth ye intercession of Saints? Of
calling upon them, or of coming to God by their mediation, we have no
testimony of scripture, we have no promise? Whereunto I add, that he
contemns the commandment and precept of God, who so ever seeks by any
other, than by Christ, and his intercession, to come to the father. He that
obeys the commandment of Christ, and in his name makes invocation, the
same needs not at all the mediation of Saints. Has not he all things
plentifully in Christ? We say therefore, and affirm, that only Christ is
the mediator, intercessour, Christ alone is the intercessor and advocate with
the Father.
and advocate with the father in heaven, of all men which are in earth, and in
such sort the only mediator, etc. that after him it is needelesse to have
other advocates. Many do grant, that Christ is given unto us an intercessour
with God, but because A mediator of redemption and intercession.
they join with him many other, they do not surely send all unto him alone,
neither yet do they preach one only mediator. They imagine that Christ is
the mediator of redemption, yea, and the only mediator, how be it, not the
only mediator of intercession, but together with him many more. But the
scripture sets forth unto us Christ, as the only mediator of redemption,
so also of intercession. The office of a mediator, touching redemption, and
intercession, is one and the self same. A mediator puts him self in the
midst between them that are at variance or disagreement, and he is joined to
each in disposition and nature. An intercessour puts him self in the midst,
between them that are at strife and dissension, and unless he be indifferent
for either side, he can not be an intercessour. On both parts reconciliation
(or atonement) is required and looked for. There must needs therefore be a
certain cause of discord, which being taken away, the discord or debate does
also cease. The cause of discord is sin. It is the duty therefore of a
mediator or intercessour quite to raze out sin, that disagreement may no
longer remain. For this there is no amends or satisfaction made with words
or with prayers, but with blood and death. Hebr. 9. Whereupon we do
necessarily gather, that only Christ is the mediator or intercessour with ye
father. For principally Christ may set him self in ye midst between God and
men: because he only is partaker of both natures. The Saints participate but
only one. For they are men. But Christ is both God and man. Furthermore, he
that is an intercessour, must also be a reconciliatour or an attonement-maker.
For the end whereat he y^ makes intercession does shoot, is reconciliation.
But Christ is the only reconciliatour of men, therefore also the only
intercessour. For it belongs to an intercessour, to disolue the cause of
contention and discord, that is to say, to abolish and take away sin. But
Christ alone, and no creature, takes away sin. It remains therefore, that
Christ is the only intercessour. Hitherto do now perteine the testimonies
of scripture. Paul says: There is one god, and one reconciler (or mediator)
1. Tim. 2.
of God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave him self the price (or
ransom) for the redemption of all. And although the Apostle speak expressly
of redemption, yet notwithstanding, these words are placed in the midst
between the disputation of the invocation upon God, which is done by Christ,
who is the only mediator of redemption and intercession. For as he alone
redeemed us, so does he alone even now commend us, being redeemed, unto the
father. Touching this, let the Apostle be heard once again, saying to the
Romans: Christ, when as yet we were sinners, dyed for us: much Romans 5.
more therefore no we being justified (or made righteous) by his blood, we
shall be saved from wrath through him. And yet again somewhat playner, For if
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to god, by the death of his son,
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. For in an other
place, the same Apostle Heb. 7. Romans 8.
says: Christ ever lives, for this end, to make intercession for us. And
again: It is God that justifies, who is he that can condemn? Christ is he
that dyed, yea, that is raised up, who also is at the right hand of God, and
makes intercession for us. The same Christ opens the way (or makes
access) for us unto the father. Hebr. 4. chapter, and Ephesians. 2. chapter. For
the Lord Jesus him self in the gospel, does not show unto us many doors, but
one only door: I am (says he) the door. And John. 10.
again: I am (says he) the way, the truth, and the life. None comes to
John. 14.
the father but by me. Does not he, which says, I am the way, the truth, and
the life, yea, and such a way, that there is access to the father, by none
other than by me, that is, by me only and alone, exclude all other means, al
other ways, and al other patrones or advocates what so ever? Also in an other
place of the Gospel, least any through shamefastness, ^nowledge of their own
unworthiness, and guiltiness of sins, or the majesty and glory of Christ
the son of God, should be hindered from calling upon God in the name of
Christ, and commiting them selves to Christ his defense, he in his own
person, plainly and lovingly calling all unto him, and to the benefit of his
defense, cries: Matthew. ^^.
Come unto me al you that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Out of ye Epistle to the Hebrews, no less evident testimonies tha^
these, and that good store, may be gathered. Amongst other, this one is
excellent: Christ, for that he endures for ever, Heb. 7.
says the apostle, has an ever lasting priesthood. Wherefore, he is able
perfectly to save them that come unto God by him: seeing he ever lives (for
this end) to make intercession for the^. For such an high priest it became us
to have, (which is) holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and
made higher than the heavens, etc. Mark (I pray you) how many arguments in
this testimony of Paul, we have, to prove that Christ is the only
intercessour of the faithful, in heaven with the father. The proper or
peculiar office of the priest is, to make intercession: But only Christ is
priest in the presence of God: He therefore is the only intercessour. Now also
the priesthood of Christ is everlasting, or unchangeable. Therefore, not by
once offering up has he redeemed us, being made the only and alone mediator
of redemption, but the everlasting and perpetual mediator also of
intercession, making intercession for us even till the end of the world. For
albeit our Lord be a judge, yet notwithstanding he is a judge of the
unfaithful, a defender and vpholder of the faithful, and at the length, when
the world is at end, a judge of all. And if so be he have an everlasting
priesthood and ((...)) not conueyable, I say, or remoueable, which can not,
either by succession, resignation, or part-taking, pass over to any other,
then certeinely Christ only and alone remains intercessour of the faithful.

Moreover, there is no cause, why we should choose and take to our selves,
either after Christ, or with Christ, other intercessours. For he is able him
self alone, to work our salvation at the full: leaving unto others nothing
at all whereabout to busy them selves. Let us also first of all note that,
which expressly he does add: That come unto God by him: by him I say, that
is, our Mediator, Priest, and Intercessour Christ. For by him only and
alone, the way lies open for us, to go to the father. Unto which also is
annexed, that he lives, and (for this end) he lives, to make intercession
for us. The heavenly Saints also do line in the kingdom of God, with
Christ: but they live for them selves (or for their own benefit) not for us,
(or our advantage.) Christ lives for us, and makes intercession for us:
therefore he alone makes intercession. Saints do not make intercession. These
reasons do prove unto us most manifestly, I think, that the Apostle speaks
of the mediation of intercession, not of redemption. Last of all, he
requires in an intercessour such manner of marks, (or properties) as a man can
not find in any, save in Christ the Lord only and alone. For, although the
Angels be innocent and harmless, yet notwithstanding, they are not higher
than the heavens. The heavenly Saints, although they be now purged and made
clean from sins, yet for all that by nature, they are not separated from
sinners, neither are they made higher than the heavens, as being Lords over
Angels and over every creature. Only the son is such a one, and for him
this glory is reserved and kept: he alone therefore is the intercessour of the
faithful with the father.

Unto these testimonies of Paul, we will yet join one of Saint Peter, and an
other of the most blessed Apostle 1. Pet. ^.
and Evangelist John. Saint Peter does teach, that the Saints, that is, we
which are faithful in this world, are laid as lively stones, by faith upon
Christ the lively stone, and that we are made a spiritual building (or house)
and an holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ. Lo, we are laid, not upon Saints, but upon Christ the lively
stone: by whom we are both quickened, and preserved in the building. We are
made a spiritual house, and an holy prtesthood, for this end, that we should
offer, not sacrifices of beasts, but spiritual sacrifices, to wit, our own
selves, and our prayers unto God, by Jesus Christ, not by Saints. For they
also are the spiritual house with us, the lively stones, laid upon Christ,
and living through Christ.

Furthermore, John writes: My babes, these things write I unto you, that ye
sin not: and if any man 1. John. ^.
sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the just: (or the
righteous.) And he is the propitiation (or reconciliation) for our sins: and
not for ours only, but also (for the sins) of the whole world. I do not
think that any thing could be devised or spoken more agreeable to our purpose,
more evident, more strong, or better than this. We hear that Christ is
appointed and made unto us of God, not only a mediator of redemption, once to
redeem, but to be an everlasting mediator, yea, of intercession, who so often
stands an advocate before God the father, how often sinful man offends,
and has need of his help and defense: unto who^ also the guilty may boldly
have access, and commit unto him their cause to be pleaded before God. If any
man sin, says John, we have an advocate with the father. Lo, John calls
him an advocate, whom the defenders (or mainteiners) of the partroneship of
Saints, do call a mediator of intercession. For, Aduocatus, (...), an
advocate, signifies a Tutour, a defender, a favorer, a comforter, a patron,
or a proctour, which pleads, or has our cause in handling. But mark whom
he defines and sets forth to be our advocate: not the holy virgin, not
Peter or Paul, not him self or Stephan, but Jesus Christ. If he had thought
or believed, that the patroneship of heavenly Saints had been over and
besides necessary and wholesome for men, then would he have joined the^ with
Christ the lord, now he sets forth unto us Christ alone. He adds The just
(or the righteous) As if he had said: There is no cause why any should distrust
or stand in doubt of his patroneship, or think him a patron not in his
fathers favor and love. He is the son, He is Christ, He is the iustor
righteous, therefore he is highly in his fathers favor, and most acceptable:
who in the presence of the most just God, may appear for us that are unjust.

Such righteousness is not found in any one of Adams children. But it is
required in an intercessour. Indeed he does communicate his righteousness to
the Saints, by faith, but that righteousness is imputed to the Saints, and
it is imputative: In Christ righteousness is natural, and as it were borne in
him, yea, it is properly his own. For Christ Jesus, he is the only righteous
in heaven and in earth, who needs not first for his own sins, and then for
the offenses of the people, either to pray or to offer sacrifice.

For he only has no sin, and he is the righteousness of all: He therefore
makes intercession with the father, because none naturally and properly is
righteous, but Christ alone. And it is not amiss in this place first of al to
mark, that Christ is called a propitiation, or satisfaction, not for sinners
or people of one or two ages, but for all sinners and all faithful people,
throughout the whole world. One Christ therefore is sufficient for all: one
intercessour with the Father is set forth unto all. For how often thou
sinnest, so often thou haste ready a righteous intercessour with the father.
Not that we should imagine in Heaven as in a court, the Father What manner of
intercession Christ's i^.
upon his throne to sit as a judge, and the son, our patron, so often to
fall down on his knees, and to plead or entreat for us, as we sin and
offend: but we understand with the Apostle, that Christ is the advocate, and
the universal priest of the church, and that he only appears in the
presence of the father: because as the power and force of his death (albeit he
die not daily) so the virtue of his intercession is always effectual. Let us
therefore draw near and come to God by Christ, the only mediator of our
redemption and intercession, our only intercessour and advocate. We can not
but be acceptable unto God the father, if we be commended unto him by his only
begotten son.

Furthermore, weak are the arguments An answer to certain argume^^s or
reasons of the adversaries. Romans 3.
wherewith the maynteiners of the heavenly patrones, go about to establish
their patroneshippe or intercession. The spirit, say they, makes
intercession for us, according to the doctrine of the Apostle, therefore Christ
alone does not make intercession. I answer, that Paul speaks not of an
other intercessour in heaven, but of the spirit of man praying in this world,
which being enlightened and kindled with the spirit of God, groneth and makes
intercession for the Saints. The words of the Apostle are plain. These men do
yet add, We read in scripture of the prayers of Angels, and that they offer
the prayers of the faithful in Gods presence: therefore, not Christ alone
prays or makes intercession for us in heaven, but also the Saints. We deny
that this follows: because the scripture teaches that Angels are ministering
spirits: and, according to their office, offer Prayer of Angels. Heb. 1.
prayers only as ministers in the presence of God, but not to make
intercession, or that men are heard for Angels sakes, but for Christ's sake,
who makes intercession, and for whose sake, the prayer which is brought and
offered unto God, is acceptable unto him. Now if so be they will bring forth
the like also touching the blessed souls of the Saints, and reason Asimili,
from that that is like, let them first teach that souls are appointed and
made ministering spirits. But they can not: and if they could, yet had they not
proved, that the heavenly Saints are intercessours. For, not the Angels
themselves doutlesse, are therefore intercessours, because they offer the
prayers of men unto God. They agree (say they) and are knit unto us in the same
knot of charity and love, and forbycause the spirits of the blessed which
live in heaven, do love us here in earth, therefore, according to the nature and
disposition of this love, they also pray for us. We answer, that they gather
this without warrant of scripture. For, that we may without wrangling, grant
them this, that the Saints in heaven are not without the love of their
neighbor: yet notwithstanding we add, that this love in the heavenly Saints
has not now that nature or disposition, and those offices, which in times
past it had in earth. Otherwise, we should attribute many more absurdities to
the Saints, as though they either did or suffered those things, which they
neither do, nor yet suffer. Whilst they lived in earth, according to ye
disposition and nature of love, they were sorry, and they were glad, and they
prayed with us, yea, they also made intercession for us: but now that they
have put off this corruption, and have left us, leading their lives in heaven
with the Lord, they neither know our affairs, neither are moved with any
earthly affections. They understand that it is passing well with us, without
their help. They understand likewise, that the work of our salvation is
already wrought and accomplished, so that they may acquiet them selves, and
rest from their labors, and rejoice in Christ, who is doubtless the only
intercessoure with the father of all men living in their misery, because he
knows all, and can do al, neither is he moved at, neither wearied or tired
with, or yet is ignorant of any thing: but takes upon him most absolutely,
and dispatcheth all things whatsoever are incident or belong to an
intercessour. They understand that this glory agrees unto the only son of
God: and therefore they go not busily about it, that they in Christ's stead
might appoint or make the^ selves intercessours. For here the love yt they
bear to God, surpasses the love of their neighbor. But these me^ object, yt
the saints pray not in heaven after the rite and fashion of that only
intercessour, but after the same manner that they prayed for their
fellow-brethre^ in earth. Even now we said that it did not follow, This they
did in earth, therefore they do the same in heaven. Neither can it be proved by
manifest scriptures, that the Saints in heaven pray for us. Why then do they
set forth unto us doubtful opinions for certain? For, that we may grant
them, that the Saints pray in heaven, which thing not a few of the fathers
have written, it does not therefore follow, that the Saints are to be called
upon. For that sentence of S. Augustine is very well known, which is read
written in his book De Ciuitate Dei. 22. chap. 10. The Gentiles did both build
temples, made altars, ordained priests, and offered sacrifices unto their
Gods. But we do not erect temples to our martyrs, as unto Gods, but
reme^braunces as unto dead men, whose spirits live with God. Neither do we
there set up altars, upon which we might sacrifice unto martyrs, but we
sacrifice to one God, who is the sacrifice both of the martyrs, and also our
sacrifice: according to which sacrifice as men of god, that have overcome the
world in the confession of him, they are named in their place and order.
Howbeit, they are not called upon of the priest that sacrifices. Because he
is Gods priest, and not theirs. Now, the sacrifice it self is the body of
Christ, which is not offered unto them: because they also them selves are the
same. Thus says he. Testifying plainly enough, that the Saints are not called
upon, or to be called upon, because sacrifice belongs unto God, and not to
the Saints. Wherefore, when the adversaries add, That the Church many years
called upon the Saints, that The Church calling upon saints.
the church erred not, and therefore they that call upon the Saints do not
err. We answer, that the church does not err, when she hears the voice of
her bridegroom and shepehearde: but that she does err, when neglecting the
voice of her shepherd, she follows her own decrees. The whole church of
Israel erred, together with their high Priest Aaron and the elders of the
people, when transgressing the law of God, they worshipped god represented by
an image with singings and dauncings, otherwise than he him self had
appointed. Neither are the Israelites absolved from error and sin, for that
many years they put not down their high places. They add again, The saints
have helped when they have been called upon, therefore they are to be called
upon. Oftentimes that falls out well, which is instituted against the word
of God. But who can thereupon gather that that is good which is instituted
against the word of God? as though the innocent and harmless were therefore
to be spoiled with war, because we see that by war merciless soldiers
wax rich. The Gods of the Gentiles likewise seemed to hear the petitions of
their supplyants, but are the Gods of the Gentiles therefore to be called upon?
But we mean not to answer to every one of their arguments, because we have
done that already elsewhere, according to our talent. We conclude therefore,
that the word of truth uttered out of the mouth of God, does teach us
invocation of Gods name, by the mediation of Jesus Christ: neither do we
read, that any holy man either in the old or the new testament, (of whom
the scripture undoubtedly has made mention) called upon any, though never so
excellent a Patriarch or Prophet departed this life, or upon any Apostle, or
Apostles disciple, otherwise than by the name of Jesus Christ. Let us therefore
hold fast, that that doctrine is most perfect and most safe, which bids us
all to call upon God alone by his only son, and that God him self requires
this of every one of us: and that when we obey, we please God.

The last place, touching the serving of God, does remain behind. This word
Colere, is in Latin of large signification. For we say, Colere amicitiam, to
maintain friendship, Colere literaru^ studia, to love learning, Colere arua, to
till or husband our lands, and Colere senes, to reverence old men. We in this
place use Colere for Seruire, that is, in all points like a servant To serve,
what it is.
to be dutiful, and to show him self obedient, to reverence, or have in
veneration, and to ^e worship. The Hebricians use their word Abad, which the
Latin interpretour translateth, Seruiuit, coluit, or, sacrificauit, that is,
he served, worshipped or sacrificed. In the book of Kings thou do read: And
Achab served Baal, and worshipped him. The Grecia^s call this service, either
(...), or, (...). 3. Reg. 16.
The one is taken for the other: though, in deed, Seruire to serve, be more
than Colere to worship. For thou can abide without any ado to worship some
man, but to serve the same, thou can not so well away withal. We say
therefore, that the service of God is a service, whereby men submit them selves
reverently The service of God.
unto God, and obey him, and according to his will worship him. They therefore
serve God which serve him earnestly, behave them selves duetifully in obeying
him, serving him inwardly and outwardly, as he has appointed.

For the service of God is twofold or of two sorts. The true, and the The
service of God is ^^^-fould (...) of two sorts.
false. The^ true is called true religion, true faith and godliness. The false
is called superstition, idolatry, and ungodliness. For that is the true
service of God, which springs from the true fear of God, from a sincere
faith, which submits it self to God alone, and applies it self in all
things to the will of God. The false service consists in the contrary.
Touching the which we will say more, when we come to speak of superstition.
The true service of God is divided again, for perspicuitie or plainness
sake, into the inward service of God, and the outward. The inward service is
known to God alone, who is the searcher of hearts. For it is occupied in the
fear of The (...) ser^ice of God.
God, and perfect obedience, in faith, hope, and charity, from whence do
spring the worshipping of God, ye calling upon him, thanksgiving, patience,
perseueraunce, chastity, innocence, weldoing, and the rest of the fruits of
the spirit. For with these gifts of God and spiritual things, God, who is a
spirit, is truly served. Without these no service is allowed of God, how so
ever in the sight of men it seem gay, glorious, and pure. This service of god
has testimonies both divine and humane, but first of all of the Law, the
Prophets, and the Apostles. For in the law Moses says: And now Israel, what
does (...). 10.
the Lord thy God require of thee? but that thou should fear the Lord thy
God, and walk in all his ways, that thou should love him, and that thou
should serve the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
that thou should keep the commandments of the Lord, and his ordinances,
which I command thee this day for thy wealth. Micheas the Prophet brings in
one Mich. 6.
asking questions concerning the true service of God, in what things the same
consists, and he makes answer: I will show thee (O man) what is good, and
what the lord does require of thee, surely to do justly (or judgment) to love
mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God. S. Paul the Apostle
says: I beseech Romans 12.
you (brethren) by the mercies of god, that ye give up your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God (which is) your reasonable serving of
God. And fashion not your selves like unto this world, but be ye changed by
the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the will of god, and what
is good, and acceptable, and perfect. The same Apostle comprehending in few
words, the true service of God to be a turning from Idols unto God and the
faith of Jesus Christ, says: They of Macedonia, and other nations, (or 1 Thessalonians. 1.
quarters) show of you, how you are turned to God from Idols, that ye might
serve the living and true god, and look for his son from heaven, whom he
raised from the dead, even Jesus, who delivers us from the wrath to come.
Moreover, S. James the Apostle says: Pure religion and James. 1.
undefiled before God the father, is this, to visit the fatherless (or
orphans) and widows in their adversity, and to keep him self unspotted of
the world. These divine and evident testimonies of holy scripture declare
plentifully enough (dearly beloved) which is ye true inward service of god.
Humane testimonies nevertheless, nothing disagreeing from divine, very many and
every where found in Ecclesiastical writers. Lactantius lib. Institut. 6. cap.
9. says. Therefore the knowledge of God, and his service is all in all: In
this consists all the hope and salvation of man: this is the first step (or
degree) of wisdom, that we should know who is our true father, that we
should reverence him alone with due godliness, that we should obey him, and
most devoutly serve him: and to obtain his favor, let all labor, care, and
industry be bestowed. Of this kind the same author cites other testimonies
also largely in the tenth chapter of the same book, and in the first chapter
of his book De vero Dei cultu, he gives us manifest. But in stead of many, we
like well the citing of that one testimony, touching the true service of God,
freely uttered by the mouth of a Roman martyr before The testimony of (...)
Roman martyr concerning the true service of God.
judge Asclepiades, at y^ Roman Consistory. For after he had both
courageously and religiously told, what God was in person, and what in
substance, he adds.

Thou know God: now understand as well
The form and man-ner how he served is,
What kind of Church it is where he does dwell,
What gifts to give he thought it not amiss,
What vows he asks: whom he (beside all this)
Will have his priests, and in his Church like-wise,
What he commaundes to bring for sacrifice.
Unto him self, even in the mind of man
A Church he has vouchsafed up to rear,
A lively, feeling, breathing Church, which can Gods Temple or Church

Not sundered be, fair, beautiful, and clear,
And never like destructions dint to fear,
With lofty top, and painted pleasantly
With colors fresh of great diversity.
At the holy porch a priest is standing there,
And keeps the doors before the Church which been,
Faith is her name, a virgin chaste and clear, Gods Priest.

Her hair tied up, with fillets like a Queen,
For sacrifices simple, pure, and cleene
And which she knows are pleasing, bids this priest
Offer to God, and to his dear son Christ.
A shamefast look, a meek and harmless heart,
The rest of Peace, a body pure and chaste,
The fear of GOD, which sinners does conuart: Gods Sacrifices.

The rule like-wise of knowledge truly plaste,
A sober fast from all excessive waste
Of Gluttony, an hope which does not faint,
A liberal hand which gives without restraint.
From these oblations a vapor does arise,
Which savors sweet by virtues force compelles,
It does ascend and pearce the azure skies,
The sent of Baulme, and Safron it excelles,
Yea Franckincense, and Persian spices smelles:
From earth to heaven it mounteth up aloft,
And pleases God therewith delighted often.
And so forth as follows to this purpose. These things I think sufficient,
concerning the inward service of God: wherein I confess in the mean while to
be somewhat, which may be referred also to the outward service of God.

The outward service of GOD springs from the inward, neither The outward
ser^ice of God.
is it known to God alone, as this other, but is open to the judgment of man,
and it is a keeping or executing of the rites instituted of God himself,
whereby we do both testify unto men the inward service, and practice them to
the glory of God and our profit. Of this kind were, among the ancient people,
the temple, the priesthood, and all the ceremonies instituted of God, which
are very often called the service of God. And this service had his appointed
limits. For it was not lawful for every one to feign a service of God after
their own pleasure: as is showed at large in the law and in the holy
history. Now that outward service served to the glory of God, and the
profit of the faithful. Which thing I have declared, when I was in hand with
the Jewish ceremonies. Furthermore, as Christ abrogated those old rites, so
in their stead he placed again a very few. For he instituted an holy
assembly: wherein his will is, that his word should be preached and expounded
out of the holy scripture, to his own glory, and to our profit: common
prayer to be made, and the sacraments to be ministered and received. To which
things a convenient place is necessary, fit time, due order, and holy
instruments. Where again, the godly do in nothing follow their own wills. For
from the word of that God, whom they serve, they fetch the whole manner and
order of serving him. Whereof somewhat is spoken in the fourth commandment of
the first table, and shall be spoken more at large in due place and order. To
be short, they serve god with outward service, who by faith and obedience,
gather themselves into the holy assembly, at limited times, who keep the
Ecclesiastical discipline derived out of the word of God, who hear the word
of God, or the holy exposition of the sacred scriptures, who pray publicly
with the Church, who religiously participate the sacraments, and observe other
lawful and wholesome rites or ceremonies. By this their service, they glorify
God among men, and receive of God no small reward, namely, his blessing, and
increase of heavenly gifts. There is no need, I think, in this place, of
testimonies, of the Scriptures, to confirm these things that we have hitherto
spoken, touching the outward service of God. For every where in the history
of the Gospel, in the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles, very many are to be
found. For the Lord Jesus does every where gather together holy assemblies, to
whom he preaches the Gospel, and commends prayer. Of Marie sitting at his
feet, and hearing his preaching, he says: This one thing is necessary, Marie
Luke. 11.
has chosen the good part, which shall not be taken from her. And in an
other place: Blessed are they, says he, which hear the word of GOD, and keep
it. Surely the Lord him self instituted and put in use the sacraments. For to
John, not consenting to baptize him at his asking, and saying: I have need to
be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? he answered: Let it be so now.
For so it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Whereupon the Apostle
Paul likewise diligently commending Ecclesiastical discipline to the
Churches, ordained most decently holy assemblies. The places are very well
known unto all, 1. Cor. 11. 14. 16. Likewise 1. Tim. 2. and elsewhere.

But before I conclude this place, I will show that only God is to be That
only God is to be served.
served. And surely the service it self whereof we have hitherto entreated,
can not be bestowed upon any creature, neither Angels nor celestial Saints,
to GOD alone it agrees. Wherefore there is none so blind, but may see, that
God alone must be served with these. And when God requires of us his service
or duty, he requires our whole heart, nothing therefore is left us to
bestow upon other. Moses full of the spirit of God says in his law: Ye
shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear Deuteronomy. 13.
him, his commandments shall ye keep, and ye shall hearken unto his voice,
and ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him. Neither makes it any matter that
here the word Alone is not added, seeing that the words are uttered with an
Emphasis or force. For when he says: Him shall ye serve, and to him ye shall
cleave, what other thing do we understand, than to him and not to any other,
therefore to him alone? Furthermore, in the sixth chapter of Deuteronomie, thou
do not read: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and him alone shall thou
serve, and thou shall swear by his name: But, Thou shalt fear the Lord thy
God, and him (Emphatically) shalt thou serve, and thou shall swear by his
name. Furthermore, the Lord in the Gospel bringing these words of the law
against the tempter, and making the emphaphasis plain: It is written (says
he) Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
Matthew. 4.
Which testimony doubtless being most effectual and pithie, is only
sufficient for our demonstration, that God alone is to be served. I will
moreover add hereunto the testimony of a man, howbeit established by divine
authority, which we also elsewhere set down in our books. S. Augustine, De
quantitate animae, does show, that GOD alone is to be served, in this sort.
Whatsoever the soul does serve as God, needful it is that she think the same
better than her self. But we must believe, that neither the earth, nor the
sea, nor the stars, nor the moon, nor the sun, nor any thing at all that
may be felt, or seen with these eyes: to be short, not heaven it self, which
can not be seen of us, is better than the nature of the soul: yea rather,
that all these are far worsse, than is any soul, assured reason does
convince.

And anon, If therefore there be any otherthing of those that god has created,
something is worsse, something is as good: worsse, as the soul of a beast,
equal, as the Angels: but nothing is better. And if happily something of these
be better, this comes to pass by sin, and not by nature. By which sin
notwithstanding, it becomes not so ill, that the soul of a beast is either to
be preferred before it, or to be compared with it. God therefore alone is to be
worshipped of it, who alone is the author of it. And as for any other man,
though he be most wise and most perfect, or any soul endued with reason, and
most blessed, they are only to be loved and followed, and according to desert
and order, that is to be exhibited How Saints are to be wor^^^pped.
unto them, which agrees and is fit for them. For it is written: Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. These be Saint
Augustines words. And thus far have we entreated of one only, living, true,
and everlasting God to be served.

Moreover, whosoever cleave unto God, with a sincere faith, and worship, Of
true religion.
call upon, and serve one GOD lawfully, they are rightly named religious: their
study and action is true religion. Some will have Religion, to be derived a
Relinquendo, because thereby we leave or forsake false gods all errors, and
earthly desires, and seek after the true God, after truth, and heavenly
things. Massurius Sabinus says: That is religious, which for some holiness
sake, we put by, and severally set aside. The word, Religion, has his name a
Relinquendo, as Ceremoniae a Carendo. But M. Cicero supposes, that Religio is
so called a Relegendo (of selecting or putting apart) because they that be
religious, do carefully choose all things, which seem to belong to the service
of the Gods. But he is confuted in many words, of Lactantius Firmianus, an
ancient writer of the church, Lib. Instit. 4. cap. 28. where among other things
he says: On this condition we are borne, that being borne, we might do to
God just and due service, that we should know him alone, and that him we
should follow. With this bond of godliness we are straightly bound and tied
unto God, whervppon religion it self took her name.

And anon after, We said that the name of religion was derived from the bond
of godliness, because GOD has tied and bound man unto him self in
godliness: for that is needful that we serve him, as a Lord: and obey him
as a father.

Other Ecclesiastical writers also following him, as Hierome and Augustine,
derived Religion a Religando, of tying or binding. For Hierome in his
Commentary upon the ninth chapter of Amos, says: This bundle tied up with the
religion of the lord which is one. Religion therefore took her name a
Religando, of tying together, and binding into the lords bundle. And Augustine,
in his book De quantitate animae, chapter. 36. says: True religion is,
whereby the soul tyeth her self through reconciliatio^ to one God, from whom
through sin she had, as it were, broken away. The same Augustine in his book
De vera religione, and last chapter, says: Let religion tie us unto one God
almighty, whereof it is believed to be What true religion is
named religion. We say therefore, y^ true religion is none other thing, tha^ a
friendship, a knitting, and a unity (or league) with the true, living, and
everlasting God, unto whom we being lincked by a true faith, do worship, call
upon, and serve him alone, upon whom we do wholly depend, living in all
things according to his will, or according to the prescript rule and law of
his word. Therefore most rightly is ye whole matter of salvation and faith
comprised in this one word Religion: which elsewhere is called in scripture a
league and covenant, and elsewhere again, marriage or wedlock. For as they
which be confederate, are united and made one by a league: so God and man are
knit together by religion. And as by marriage the husband and the wife are
made one body, so by religion we are knit into a spiritual body with God, as
with our husband, and with the very son of God, as with our bridegroom and
our head. Hitherto therefore does belong what so ever things are uttered in the
scriptures, touching the keeping of the league or covenant, and the faith of
marriage. Truce Breakers are they, disloyal, and infamous through their
adultery, who so ever being not knit to one God by faith, worship him alone,
call upon him through Christ, and serve him also as he him self has said in
his word he would be served. The very same are also called superstitious.

For superstition is false religion, which does not serve God, but somewhat
else for God, or not God alone, or not rightly or lawfully. This word
superstition stretches it self even to old wives tales and doting errors.
For in Dutche we call superstition, Aberglouben, mis; glouben, vnd mis; brijth.
But Lactantius reasoning most exactly of this word, in his fourth book of
Institutions, and 28. chapter, writes in this sort. Religion is the service of
the true God: superstition of the false. They are said to be superstitious, not
that wish their children to out-liue them: for that we do al wish: but either
they that reverence the memory remaining of the dead: or else they, that
whiles their parents were alive, worshipped their images within their houses:
like household Gods. For those which did take unto them selves new rites, to
the intent they might, in stead of Gods, honor the dead, whom they thought
were taken from among men, and received into heaven, those (I say) they called
superstitious: but those that worshipped and served public and ancient Gods,
they named religious. Whereupon says Virgil.

Vain superstition, ignorante
Of the old and ancient Gods.
But seeing we do find that our ancients, have been in semblable manner
consecrated Gods after their death, they therefore which serve many and false
Gods are superstitious: but we are religious, which pray and make our
supplications to one God, being the true God, etc.

Superstition consists chiefly in To leave, or forsake the true God, and to
serve strange Gods.
these points, Either when the Lord is not served, but other Gods in his
stead, the only one, true, and living God being left and forsaken: Or else
when the Lord is served, but not alone, but other together with him: or else
when he is served, but not with his lawful service. In the first kind of
superstition did the Gentiles in a manner offend, who knew not the true God,
in so much, that they in stead of the true God, worshipped false, feigned, or
strange Gods. And that the Israelites also Gods people, were sick of the same
madness, ye holy prophet Jeremy is a witness, who expostulating and
reasoning the matter with the people, says: Hear ye the word of the Lord, O
house of Jacob, (...). ^.
and all the families of the house of Israel. Thus says the Lord: What
iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and
have walked after vanity, and are beecome vain? For they said not, Where is
the Lord that brought us up out of the land of Egypt? that led us thorough
the wilderness, thorough a desort, and wast land, through a dry land, and by
the shadow of death, by a land that no man passed thorough, and where no man
dwelt? And I brought you into a plentiful country to eat the fruit thereof,
and the commodities of the same: but when ye entered ye defiled my land, and
made mine heritage an abomination. The priests said not, Where is the Lord?
and they that should minister the law, knew me not: the pastors also
offended against me, and the prophets prophesied in Baal, and went after
things that did not profit, or followed idols. Wherefore, I will yet plead
with you, says the Lord, and I will plead with your childrens children. For
go ye to the Isles of Chittim, and behold, and send unto Kedar, and take
diligent heed, and see whether there be such things. Has any nation
changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? but my people have changed their
glory for that which does not profit, or for an idol. O ye heavens, be
astonnied at this, be afraid, and utterly confounded, says the Lord. For my
people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me the founteine of living
waters, to dig them pittes, even broken pittes, that can hold no water.

Thou do hear, that the people of Israel, by an heinous offense, and for
the which no amends might be made, forsook God the lively spring, and
dug unto themselves broken pittes. The waters do signify the perfect
Good, wherewith the desire both of the soul and the body may be satisfied.
Such a plentiful spring is God alone, the highest, excellentest, and
perfectest Good. This being forsaken, they dug, that is, with very great
pains and costs they provided for themselves pittes, that is, they turned
themselves to creatures, to them that are no gods, neither yet are able to
satisfy their desires. This mischief even at this day also is common, whiles
many having forsaken God, are turned unto celestial Saints, of whom they
desire that which was to be desired of God, neither can be given but of God
alone. Here has idolatry a place, that is the worshipping of images. For not
they only are superstitious, which feign unto themselves false Gods, having
forsaken the true GOD, or that put their trust in things of nothing, but they
also which worship and reverence ye images either of God, or of Gods, are also
superstitious. For images or counterfectes are set up, either to the true God
himself, or else to false Gods, to creatures (I say) themselves. But it is not
laweful by any image or counterfecte to represent the exceeding great,
everlasting, and living GOD world without end: neither is it lawful to
worship or serve him being expressed by an image or likeness: much less
therefore is it lawefull to consecrate unto creatures images or counterfectes,
to worship and serve them. There are very many testimonies of scripture extant
against idolatry, as in Exodus 20. Isaie 40. 44. Psalm 113. 1. Corinthians 5.
10. Romans. 1. Galathians 5. 1. Thessalonia^s 1. 1. Peter 4. 1. John 5.
Jeremy 10. etc.

Furthermore I do here diligently admonish the simpler sort, that they suffer
not themselves to be deceived. For none can avoid the name of an idolater,
that does worship, reverence, and fear images, that puts some part of his
confidence in them, that lies along before them, that offers them gifts,
that keeps them in a place of solemnity and honor, that sticks up tapers
and burns incense unto them, that loves, beautifyeth, mainteyneth,
enricheth, and serves them with any kind of sacrifice or holy service
whatsoever. But concerning idolatry we have spoken very largely elsewhere.

Furthermore, they served (who doubts it?) the God of Israel, howbeit Not to
worship God alone but to worship other Gods also together with the true God.
not alone, but with the true God other Gods also, of whom we read in the
history of the kings, And yet they served (or feared) the Lord: and they
appointed out priests (even of the basest) unto themselves for the high places,
who prepared for them sacrifices in the houses of the high places. And when
they served the Lord, they served their own Gods also, after the manner of the
nations from whence they were brought into Samaria. And again, So these
nations feared the Lord, and served their images also, so did their children,
and their childrens children: as did their fathers, so do they unto this day.

This mischief, in like manner, is altogether common at this day. For a man
may find worshippers and seruers of God, who will at no hand be persuaded
that God alone is to be served, yea, boldly affirming that it is flat and
damnable heresy to deny, that together with God Saints are both to be
worshipped, called upon, and served. Against whom we have elsewhere, and in
this our present Sermon also, sufficiently disputed.

Here likewise comes next to hand to be marked the diverse manner, and
sundry fashion of serving God superstitiously. For neither does he only and
alone serve God superstitiously, who in deed first feigneth or imagines in
his mind a GOD, and then afterward expresses the same God by an image or
counterfecte, whereunto, by and by upon that, he offers sacrifices and
incense, and lying prostrate upon the ground worshippeth in presence of the
same, and suppliantly serves it with all reverence: but he principally serves
God superstitiously, who does communicate ye incommunicable properties of God
to creatures, albeit he express God by no representation, likeness, or The
properties of God are, i^ no case, t^ be attributed unto strange Gods.
counterfecte: or he which thincketh that the gifts which he has received
from heaven at the hands of God, are given and bestowed upon him of celestial
Saints.

Furthermore, the incommunicable properties of God, are, able to do all
things, to know all things, to be present in every place, to hear all
things, to help, succor, or assiste, to be loving, bountiful, just,
righteous, Isai. 41. 4^ etc.
and merciful. Verily, Isaie the best learned of the prophets, and of singular
authority, proves and co^uinceth by these most strong and substantial
arguments or reasons, that the Gods of the Babylonians and Eentiles are no
Gods: Because they cannot foretell or know things that are to come hereafter:
neither yet can do good or evil.

Wherefore, able to inriche and stoare with all manner of benefits, and to
chastise with due deserved punishments: so also, to know all things, and to
be of power to compass and do all things, they are the properties of God
alone, communicable to no creature: he therefore is superstitious, which
attributes these properties to celestial Saints, and for that cause does
serve and call upon Gods gifts ^re not to be attribu^ed to ^traunge Gods.
O^ee. 2.
them. Osee the Prophet does very soar inueighe against the Jews, who gave
and attributed to strange Gods, the gifts of GOD, insomuch that he names
the Synagogue of such, a strumpet or harlott. I will have no pity (says he)
upon her children: for they be the children of fornications. For their mother
has played the harlott: she that conceived them has done shamefully. For she
said, I will go after my lovers that give me my bread, and my water, my
wool, and my flax, mine oil, and my drink. And anon after, Now she did
not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied (or gave
her much) her silver and gold, which they bestowed even upon Baal. And it is
a thing much used at this day, to ascribe unto celestial saints, and not to
the only GOD, the increase of the earth, and the temperate or sharp seasons
of the year, as though they came from them. But that is superstition, not
godliness or religion.

Furthermore, God is superstitiously served, when in deed he is served alone,
To serve God, but not lawfully.
howbeit not after a lawefull manner. Unlawful service proceeds from the
will and imagination of me^, and it is contrary to the word and ordinance of
God. For God is then lawfully served, when he is served according to his own
will and word. In the law thus has the Lord commanded: Beware that thou seek
not after Deuter. 12
the gods of the Gentiles, saying: How did these nations serve their Gods, that
I may do so likewise? Thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God, etc.
(Therefore) whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: Thou shall put
nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom. Nadab and Abihu offer Leuit. 10.
strange fire unto the Lord: therefore are they burned up in the presence of
the Lord with fire from heaven. Oza also perished, because he handled the 2
Reg. 6.
Arcke of GOD, otherwise than the Lord had commanded in his law. Micha in the
book of Judges, instituted Judge. 17.
unto the true God, whose name is JEHOVAH, an image, an altar, a chapel, and
a service. But it is reproved in the sacred Scripture: because it was not
only not fetched out of the holy Scripture, but was in all respects quite
contrary and utterly against the Law of God. Jeroboam 3. Re. 12. 13
also ordained passing sumptuous service, he instituted cathedral churches,
and set up golden images, all to the God of Israel; but for that they were
not agreeable to the word of the Lord, they are all, one with another, utterly
condemned for execrable and accursed sacrileges.

Yea, what we may think in general of all the services which are neither
instituted of GOD, nor agreeing with the word of GOD, but feigned upon a good
intent and meaning of our own, y^ only testimony of ye most excellent
prophet Samuel does declare to us, which he pronounced against Saul and his
sacrifices in these words: Has the Lord 1. Reg. 15.
as great pleasure in burnte offeringes and sacrifices, as when the voice of
the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken
(is better) than the fat of rams. For, rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft: and transgression is wickedness and idolatry. Hereunto makes
that which we read in Isaie: He that kills a I sai. 66.
bullock, is as if he slew a man. He that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut
off a dogs neck. He that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines
blood. He that remembers incense, as if he blessed an idol. All these
things have they chose^ in their own ways, and their soul is delighted in
their own abominations. Vain therefore and abominable are those services,
which are not reduced and framed to the pure word of God. For the same Prophet
says, In vain do they I sai. 29. Matthew. 15.
serve me, teachinge doctrines of men.

The living, true, and everlasting God, who will and ought only and alone to
be worshipped, to be called upon, and to be served, give unto all men true
religion, and deliver them 2. Reg. 7. Matthew. 5.
from all vain superstition: thoroughe Jesus Christoure Lord. Amen.

A. F.

That the son of God is unspeakably begotten of the father, that he is
consubstantiall with the father, and therefore true God. That the self same
son is true man, consubstantiall with us, and therefore true God and man,
abideing in two unconfounded natures, and in one undivided person.
The sixth Sermon.
THe things themselves and their order do require, that after I have spoken
generally of God, of his Unity, and of his Trinity, I further entreat
particularly of ye persons of ye reverend Trinity, and first of al of our lord
Jesus Christ true God and man, then of the holy Ghost: wherewt if our minds be
endued, all things whatsoever we speak, and hear, shall tend to the glory of
Gods name, and to the salvation of our souls. Let us therefore pray, etc.

That everlasting father the original and author of all things, begott The
son i^ begotten
the son by an everlasting and vnspeable begetting. For ye whole scripture of
the Father, vnspeakeablie from everlasting.
with one agreement does call God, a father, yea truly, an eternal or
everlasting father. But none is a father of his own self, but a father of his
son: and for because he is the everlasting father, he must therefore
necessarily have an everlasting son, equal unto himself in all respects,
coeternall, and consubstantiall with him. Saint Paul undoubtedly for the
confirmation of this catholic verity, alleges out of ye old testament two
testimonies. Unto which, says he, of his Angels said GOD at any time, Thou
art my son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be his father,
and he shall be my son: all which words he applies unto Christ Jesus the
son of God. Of whom also Micheas bears witness, saying: And thou
Beth-lehem Ephrata art little to be among the (...). 5.
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that
shall be the ruler in Israel: whose goeinges forth, (or spreadings abroad) have
been from the beginning, and from everlasting. Whereupon the son of God
himself, in the Gospel after John says: Verily I say unto you, before
Abraham was, I am. And John. ^.
John says: In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, John. 1.
and God was the word. But he does understand by, The word, not ye word which
is spoken and so vanishes, not the counsel of God, but the person of the
son. For by and by he adds: And the word beecame (or was made) slesh. And
we do know that the son of God, not the determination or purpose of God
(as heretics do vainly imagine) was incarnate. But he which in time was
incarnate, was with the father from everlasting and before all beginnings, and
therefore also true God with the true God. For, The word (says he) was with
God, and God was the word: because in the beginning, namely from everlasting,
he was with God. These simple and plain testimonies delivered unto us out of
the scriptures, and therefore most true, concerning the everlasting begetting
of the son by the father, are sufficient, I think, for them that are not
curious. For ye scripture does not here fulfill the vain desires of curious
men, neither yet reasons of these poinctes subtilely, but rather delivers
and sets down but a few things, in which it is our parts to believe. But
that which the scripture either does not set down, or else in few words
shadoweth out, either we are ignorant of to our health, or else stickinge to
that that is set down, we seek not further for more. The holy father Cyrill
expounding that saying of the Evangelist John, In the beginning was the word
says: Let us not seeking things infinite and which cannot be contained
within bounds, busy our brains about a consideration that cannot be
expressed, and never can have an end. For neither will we grant a beginning
of beginning, neither yet will we yield that the son was begotten of the
father in time: but we will confess that he is with the father from
everlasting. For if he was in the beginning, what mind may be able at any
time to clime beyond that WAS? Or when shall we so comprehend in our mind
that WAS, that it go not before, or outreache, our thoughts? Upon good
reason therefore and worthily the Prophet Isaie being astonnished, cries
out: And who shall declare Or age, as other translate it.
his generation? For he, passing all capacity of minds, and being far above
and beyond all reason of man, is unspeakable. And anon after he says:
Because the son is before all worlds, he cannot be begotten in time: but
he is evermore in ye father as in a founteine: as he says of him self, I
went out and came from the father. For we do understand ye father as a
founteine: in whom ye word is his wisdom, his power, the engraven form of
his person, his brightness, and his image. Wherefore, if there never were any
time, wherein the father was without his wisdom, his power, the engraven form
of his person, his brightness, and finally his image, we must of necessity
and force confess, that the son also is coeternall and everlasting with him,
since he is the wisdom, power, etc. of the father everlasting. For how is he
the ingraue^ form of his fathers person, or how is he the most perfect image
of his father, unless he have perfectly obtained and possess ye beauty of him,
whose image he is? And it is not absurd that we said, ye son is to be
understood in ye father as in a founteine. For the name of founteine does
signify nothing else than as from whom: And the son is in the father and
from the father, not flowing abroad, but either as brightness from the Sun, or
as heat from the fire, wherewith it is endued. For in these examples we see
one from one to be brought forth, and both to be so coeuerlasting, that ye one
can neither be without the other, nor yet keep and retain ye quality of
their nature. For how shall it be the sun if it be deprived of his
brightness, or how shall brightness be, unless there be a Sun from whence
it does come? And how shall that be fire that wants heat? Or from whence
should heat come, but from the fire, or else from somewhat else peradventure
not far distant from the substantial quality of fire? As therefore the
qualities which proceed from these bodies are together with them from whence
they do proceed, and evermore declare from whence they do come: so is it to
be understood in the only begotten. For, he is understood to be of ye father,
but he is believed to be likewise in the father: not differing from the nature
of his father, neither yet next his father second in nature: but always in the
father himself, and with him, and from him, according to the manner of his
unspeakable begetting. Thus far Cyrill. And these poinctes surely concerning
the father, and ye unspeakable beegetting of the son of God, are steadfastly
to be believed according to the scriptures.

Furthermore, touching the son of God, let us firmly hold and undoubtedly A
confession concerning Jesus Christ the son of God our Lord.
believe, that he is consubstantiall (or, of the same substance) with his
father, and therefore true God: that the self same son being iucarnate for
us, and made man, subsisteth in either nature, as well of God, as also of man:
howbeit so, that these natures are neither confounded between themselves, nor
yet divided. For we do believe, one and the self same our Lord Jesus Christ to
be true God and true man. All and every one of which points throughout their
parts we will plainly and according to the measure of grace that God shall give
us, declare unto you.

About ye word Homoousius, which the Latinists agreeably have translated That
the son is consubsta^tiall with the Father
Consubstantiale, consubstantiall, the Ecclesiastical history, does testify
that there has been long and much altercation among the ancient writers.
What it signifies, and how it was taken of that most famous and solemn
Synod of Nice, ye most learned and godly Eusebius Pamphili bishop of Csarea,
briefly and pithily expounded in this sort. In that the son is said to be
consubstantiall with the father, it has an express signification: for because
the son of God has no similitude or likeness with creatures that were made,
but is rese^bled and likened to the father alone who begat him: neither is he
of any other substance, essence, or being, than of the father. And the same
Eusebius anon after says: Unto which sentence and opinion in this manner
expounded, it appears we may well subscribe: seeing we do know that the
best learned and famous bishops and interpretours among those that were
ancient, reasoning of the Godhead of the father and the son, used this word
Homoousius.

These be Socrates his words, in the first book of histories and the eighth
Cap. Surely, the godly governors of churches, being constrained by the
hypocrisy, craftiness, and malice of heretics, did themselves use and
caused others also to use, words most pithie, and as little doubtful as might
be, whereby partly they might manifestly express the sound truth, and partly
discover and reprove, yea, and also thrust out the deceipts and malicious
practices of heretics. Arius confessed that ye son of God was God, but in
the mean while he denied that the son was co^substantial with his father:
wherefore he declared that he did not sincerely confess the true Godhead of
the son. Neither makes it any great matter though there be not expressed in
the holy Scripture some apt and fit word to set out and declare the thing in
so many letters as it is written in another tongue, so that that be read to be
manifestly expressed in the scriptures, which by the word is signified.
Wherefore, if we show that the son is of the same substance or nature with
the father, and so equal with and like unto God, and one with him, we have then
made sufficient and plentiful demonstration, that the son i^ Homoousius or
consubstantiall with the father. The prophet Zachary, bringing in ye person
of God speaking, says: Arise, O thou sword, upon my sheepeheard, and upon
the man that is my fellow (or my coequall:) Smite the sheepeheard and the
sheep (of the flock) shall be scattered abroad. Lo, God calls the shepherd
that is smitten his fellow or coequal. And who is that sheepeheard y^ was
smitten, the history of ye Gospel does declare, poincting out unto us ye
very son of God himself our Lord Jesus Christ. Neither does it hinder, but
further our cause that Hierome reads not, The man that is coequall with me,
but, The man cleaving unto me. For, as he denies not that Amith does
signify coequall, so he sets down another word no less effectual. For,
when he translateth it, The man cleaving unto me, he would express the
inward and very substantial (that I may so term it) inherence or coequalitie
of the father and the son. For he adds in his Commentaries: And the man
which cleaves unto God, who is it but even he that says? I am in the father,
and the father is in me.

Again, we read in the Gospel of John: The Jews therefore sought to kill
Jesus* not only because he had broken the Sabbath day, ((...),) but said also
that GOD was his father, (even his proper, or very own:) making himself
((...)) equal to God. Furthermore the Grecians expound (...), that is to say,
Equal, by this word, (...), that is to say, Like. Neither can that equality
any where else have place, than in the substance. For ye Jews understand that,
whereof the Arians will be ignorant, that the Lord after a certain peculiar
and special manner called GOD his father, to wit, (...), his proper or very
own father, by nature or by birth, of whom the son being naturally
begotten, is natural and consubstantiall with his father.

For it follows: Making himself equal to (or with) God, namely in virtue or
power, in euerlastingnesse and Essence. For the same Lord says in the same
Evangelist: I proceeded and came from God. He did not say only I came: but, I
proceeded. He proceeded from the father such a one in substance as the father
is, surely Light of light, Very God of very God. For he says again to the
Jews: Verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am. He does not say, I
have been, or, I will be, but, I am, alluding to the name of the Lord Jehovah,
and declaring, that the substance of his Godhead is the very same with the
substance of the father, and that he is therefore consubstantiall with the
father. For yet again he says more plainly: I and the father are one. One,
I say, not in concord or agreement, but in Identitate et essentia.
selfe-same-nesse and Being. For in that place the power and Majesty of God
are handled. And when the Jews would, without further stay, stone ye Lord to
death having spoken these words, they declared plainly enough, after what sort
they understood his words. For they stoned blasphemers to death, who with
reuileings either empaired Gods glory, or else usurped and took the same unto
themselves.

Hitherto belongs that which Paul speaks concerning the son of God,
saying: Who is the image of the invisible God, the first borne of all
creatures, because all things were created by him. For if he be ye image of
the invisible God, he must needs be fellow (or coequall) with God. For in
another place Paul calls the same Christ, The engraven form of god, and
his express image, and aunswearable in all respects most truly to his pattern
or first figure. An image verily and likeness is of things that are not
unequal or unlike, but of things equal and like. And he is called The first
borne, because he is Prince and Lord, not that he is reckoned among
creatures. For all things that were made, by him they were made: therefore he
is no creature, but true God, to wit, of the nature and substance of God, one
with the father. The same Apostle says to the Philippians, that the son is
in ye form (or shape) of God. But to be in the form (or shape) of God, is
nothing else, than in all respects to be fellow (or equal) with God, to be
consubsta^tiall with him, and so in deed GOD himself. For, what it is to be
in the form or shape of God, is by the contrary clause very manifestly
declared. For it follows: He took upon him the form of a servant.
Which is again expounded by that which follows: Being made in the
likeness of men, that is to say, being made very man, unlike in nothing to
all other men, sin excepted: which in another place is plainly expressed.
And here he adds again: And found in figure as a man. Therefore, to be in
the form of God, is to be coequal and consubstantiall with God. For he
adds: He thought it no robbery to be equal with God. For, robbery is ye
taking away of that which another does owe, for it is possessed by injury. The
son therefore is coequal with the father, and true God, by Nature and after the
most proper manner. And this is the meaning of S. Paul his words: Albeit the
son were of the same glory and majesty with the father, and could have
remained in his glory, without humiliatio^ or debafement, yet had he rather
abase himself, that is to say, take unto him the nature of a man, and cast
himself into dangers, yea even into death it self. For otherwise according
to his godhead he suffered no change. For God is unchangeable, and without
variableness. Since the case so stands, godly is the saying of S. Ambrose in
his book De fide, against the Arians, and fifth chap: Seeing therefore thou
do know this unity of substance in the father and the son, not only by
the authority of the prophets but also of the Gospel, how say thou that
Homoousius, consubstantiall, is not found in the sacred scriptures? as though
Homoousius were somewhat else, than that he says: I went out from God the
father: And, I and the father are one, etc. The scholar S. Augustine, following
his master Ambrose, in his controversy had with Pascentius, confirms
Homoousius by places of scripture, and declares that this is holily used in
our faith and religion. The same does he also in his third book against
Maximinus bishop of the Arians, and 14 chapter. But what needs heaping up of
more words? For I trust it is plainly enough declared by evident places of
holy Scripture, that the son is consubstantial with the father, and that so
it must be believed. We hope also that in the treatise following, this self
same point shall not a little be made manifest by testimonies of Scriptures.

Arius with his accomplices denied that the son of God our Lord Jesus That the
son of god is tru^ and very God
Christ is true God. But the most true Scripture does so evidently prove and
confirm it, that none which loves the truth from his heart can doubt any
thing at all thereof. We will presently cite some testimonies and arguments that
are most plain and apparaunt, whereby thorough the assistance of the holy
ghost, our faith may be established, and the Catholic and sound truth it
self made manifest.

In the third chapter of Matthew, the heavens are opened to our Lord as he was
baptized by John Baptist, and the holy Ghost came down in the likeness of a
Dove, and allighted upon the head of our Lord Jesus Christ, and forthwith
was a voice heard out of the clouds, pronounced by the glorious God in this
sort: This is my beloved son in whom Matthew. 18.
my soul is well pleased. And John John. 1.
says in his Gospel: I saw the spirit descending from heaven, in the
likeness of a Dove, and it abode upon him: and I knew him not, but he that
sent me to baptize with water, he said unto me: Upon whom thou shall see
the spirit descending and abiding upon him, this is he which does baptize
with the holy Ghost. And I saw and bare witness that this is the son of God.
Hereunto belongs that which Peter being asked of the Lord: But whom do ye
say that I am? answered Matthew. 16.
in the name of all the Disciples: Thou art that Christ the son of the
living God.

And again, the Lord obiecting this: Will you also be gone? Peter again made
answer in the name of them all: Lord, unto whom shall John. 6.
we go? Thou haste the words of everlasting life, and we believe and have
known that thou art Christ the son of the living God. We also verily are
called the sons of god, howbeit by adoption: But Christ Christ is ^he
natu^all son of God.
not by adoption, neither by imputation, but by nature. For in the 14. chapter
of Mark, the high Priest says unto our Lord: Art thou Christ the son of
the blessed? In Matthe we also the same high priest says: I adjure (or charge)
thee by the living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be the son of the
living God? Jesus answered: I am, For ye shall see the son of man sitting at
the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Which appears
to be repeted out of the seventh chapter of Daniel. Furthermore, they bring
this confession of the Lord before Pilate, as blasphemous, and not to be
satisfied but with death, crying: We have a law, and according to our law
he ought to dye: by cause John. 19.
he made him self the son of God. But they them selves in the history of
the gospel thunder out these words against the Lord: We are not borne of
fornication, we have one father, even Leui. 14. 23 John. 8.
God.

It is certain therefore, that the Jews accused our Savior for none other
cause of high treason committed against Gods majesty, than for that he named
him self the natural, not the adopted son of GOD. For the first did not
deserve death, but the last was worthy of death. For we read also in the first
of John, Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, not only because he
had broken the Sabbath day, but also for that he said that God was his father,
making him self equal with God, (or Gods fellow.) Lo, thou haste the manner
how he called him self the son of God, not by adoption, or reputation, but
by nature and substance. For yet again the Lord himself obiecteth this to
them that would have stoned him: Many good works have I showed you from my
father, for which John. 10.
of these good works do ye stone me? The Jews answered again, saying: for thy
good works (or well going) we do not stone thee, but for blasphemy, namely,
because thou being a man, make thy self God. Lo, what could be spoken more
plainly? Thou make thy self God. And what (I pray you) had he spoken,
whereof they gathered these things? I give unto my sheep everlasting life,
neither shall they perish for ever, neither shall any pluck the^ out of my
hand. My father which gave them me, is greater than all: and none can pull
them out of my fathers hand. I and the father are one. To give life
everlasting, does belong to the power of God: to preserve, and so to preserve
that none may be able to pluck them out of his hands, belongs to the same
power. Now the Lord proves his saying with this argument or reason. None is
able to pull the sheep out of my fathers hands: therefore none can pull them
out of my hands. The proof of his antecedent: because the father is greater
than all: that is to say, is the greatest of all: whose divine power is above
all. The proof of his consequent: because I and my father are one, to wit, not
in will and agreement only, but in majesty also and power, whereof we do at
this present entreat, not of concord or agreement, but of power to make alive
and to preserve. Touching which the Lord him self most plentifully
discourses throughoute the whole fifte chapter of Saint John's Gospel,
showing that he forgiueth sins, that by his power he makes alive, and
rayseth up from the dead, even as his father does: therefore that he is of
one and the same divine power and majesty with God the father.

These things are so evident, plain, and manifest, that albeit we had none
other testimonies, yet these may abundantly suffice to prove the assertion of
the true Divinity or very Godheade of the son of God, that the son
indeed is true and very God.

Again, the self same our Lord and Savior, with great liberty of speech,
and playnenesse of words, without all manner of riddle, dark sentence, and
obscurity of words, openly and expressly says to his disciples: Let not
your heart be troubled (or vexed.) You believe in God, John. 14.
believe also in me. I am the way, the truth, and the life. He that has
seen me, has seen the father. Do ye not believe that I am in the father,
and the father in me? And certain it is, that Christ our Lord is the
heavenly doctor or teacher, the most constant defender of the truth, who
neither has seduced, neither yet could seduce and lead out of the way, no,
not so much as one. But bids us believe in him, as true and very God.
Therefore our Lord and Savior is true and very God. For in another place he
says most plainly: I am the lively bread (or the bread of life) that came
down John. 6.
from heaven: He that believes in me has life everlasting.

He again in the Gospel plainly pronounces and says: Father, the hour is
come, glorify thy son, John. 17.
that thy son may also glorify thee. As thou haste given him power of al
flesh, that so many as thou haste given him, he might give them life
everlasting. And this is everlasting life, that they should know thee only
true GOD, and whom thou haste sent Jesus Christ. By which words he has
expressly proved both the unity of GOD (that is to say, that there is but one
GOD,) against the Ethnickes, who worshipped many GODS, and notably touched the
distinction of the persons, in the mean while likewise declaring him self to
be very GOD with the father. For by and by he adds: Glorify thou me, O
Father, with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee, before
this world was.

Here I think must not be ouerslipped of me the argument of Tertullian,
which I will recite unto you (Dearly beloved) out of his book De Trinitate,
wherein he does gather together very many most sound and strong reasons of
Christ his divinity or Godheade. If (says he) Christ be only man, why has
he appointed and set us down such a rule to believe, wherein he should say:
And this is life everlasting y^ they might know thee y^ only true (or very)
God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ? If also he would not be known to
be God, why does he add: And whom thou haste sent Jesus Christ, but for that
he would be taken also for GOD? Because, if he would not be known to be GOD,
he would have added: And whom thou haste sent the man Jesus Christ: but now
Christ neither has added, neither yet has delivered unto us in doctrine that
he is man only, but has joined him self to GOD; to the end he would be
known by this conjunction or joining together, that he also is God, as indeed
he is. We must therefore believe, according to the prescript rule, in one Lord
true and very God, and consequently in him whom he has sent Jesus Christ:
who had at no hand (as we have said) joined him self to the father, unless
he would be known to be God also. For he would have separated him self from
the father, if he would not have been known to be God. For he would have
placed him self among men only, if he had known that he was man only:
neither would be have joined him self with god, if he had not also known him
self to be God: now also touching as he is man he says nothing, because no
man doubts that he is man: and he joins him self to God not without good
cause, that he might set down a form of his divinity or godhead to them that
should believe. If Christ be only man, how is it that he says? And now
glorisie me with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. If
before the world was he had glory with God, and possessed glory with the
father, then was he before the world. Neither had he had glory, if he had not
been before, that he might possess glory. For none can have a thing, unless he
which possesses the thing be before. But Christ had glory before the creation
of the world, therefore he was before the creation of the world. For if he
had not been before the creation of the world, he could not have had glory
before the creation of the world, when he him self was not. But he could not
as man have glory before the creation of the world, who then was, when yt
world was made: but Christ had glory, he was therefore before the world was
made: he was not therefore man only, who was, before the world was made.
Therefore he is god because he was before the world was made, and possessed
glory before the world was made. After these words Tertullian does show, that
these things are not meant of the Predestination, but of the substance of
Christ. But thus far of this.

S. Paul the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans declares in plain words
not once or twice, yt our Lord Jesus Christ is true and very God. For he
speaking of Christ in his ninth chapter, says: Which is God, Romans 9.
in all things to be praised for ever. The words are very well known, which
the same Apostle writes in his first Epistle to the Corinth. and eight
chapter. S. John the Apostle and Evangelist does so manifestly declare ye
divinity or Godheade of the son in his Canonical Epistle, that he which
sees and perceives it not, is blind both of body and mind. In the end of the
Epistle he says: We know that 1. John. 5.
the son of God is come, and has given us a mind, that we should know
him, who is true: and we are in him that is true, in his son Jesus Christ.
This same is true (or very) God, and eternal (or everlasting) life.

Now it is God by whom we live, move, and have our being, as Paul Acts. 17.
witnesses: but by Christ our Lord we live, move, and have our being, (as he
him self has expressly taught in the Gospel after John:) Christ therefore is
true and very God.

In the 43. and 45. chapters of Isaie the Lord says: I am, I am the Lord, and
there is no savior without me. A just God and a savior, there is none beside
me.

But Jeremy in his 23. chapter calls (...). 23.
Christ the son of David, Jehovah, and our righteousness. Likewise in Esaie,
the father speaking of his son, says: I have given (or made) thee the light
of the Gentiles, that Isaie. 49.
thou may be my health unto the end of the world. Moreover, seeing there
is none other God but one, none other salvation and righteousness save that
divine righteousness only, it follows consequently doubtless, that Christ
is true and very God, in all respects coequall with his father.

In the same Isaie the Lord says: Isaie. 45.
I have sworn by mine own self, the word of righteousness shall go out of
my mouth, and it shall not be drawn back again: because every knee shall
bow unto me, and all tounges shall swear (by my name.) And Paul says: There
is a name Philip. 2.
given unto Christ which is above al names, that in the name of Jesus every
thing should bow, of things in heaven, of things in earth, and of things
under the earth: and that every tongue should confess that the lord is Jesus
Christ, to the glory of God the father. It must needs be therefore y^ Christ
is true and very God. For seeing he is worshipped and also served, seeing we
confess him to be lord, that surely turns not to the reproach and ignominy,
but to the honor and glory of God the father. For in the Gospel after John
thus says the Lord: The father has given all John. 5.
judgment (to wit, all jurisdiction, and all government, all glory, power,
and authority) to the son, that all might honor the son as they honor
the father. He that honors not the son, honors not the father that sent
him. Hereunto therefore belongs that which we read in the Prophet Isaie: I
the Isaie. 42.
Lord, Hu (or, I my self) is my name, and my glory I will not give to an
other, (or to a stranger, etc.) But he gives his glory to the son, he
therefore in his substance, according to his divinity or Godheade, is not a
stranger or severed from the father, albeit he be acknowledged to be an other
several person. What? does the Lord in the Gospel after John say? And now, O
father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory John. 17.
which thou gave me with thee, before this world was. No, but, Which I had
with thee yer the world was, I had, says he, not, I received, albeit the
scripture does oftentimes use this word for the mystery of dispensation. In
Micheas the Christians say, All people (one with an other) walk in the name of
their God: as Mich. 4.
for us* we will walk in the name of our God. Furthermore, they walk in the
name and ye way of Jesus Christ saying in the Gospel: I am the way and the
door, I am the light of the John. 10. 14. 8.
world, He that follows me, does not walk in darkness. That Christ
therefore is God, who is he that can be ignorant? For the Lord says in
Ezechiel: I will feed my flock my self alone. And anon he adds, My Ezech.
34.
servant David shall feed it, meaning Christ, the son of David, that only
universal Pastor or shepeheard of the Church, and therefore true God. For
the universal Pastor or shepeheard, must be a king and a priest, must be
everlasting, must know all things, must be omnipotent, must be present with
all men in all places. The son of God therefore is true and very God, because
he is the Messiah.

Furthermore, what is more manifest and less called in controversy, than that
God only forgiueth sins? It must needs be therefore, that nothing is more
evident and less doutfull, than that we believe Christ to be true and very
God, because He is the Lamb of God that takes away the Mark. 2. John. 2.
sins of the world.

Again, whereas Paul truly calls Christ Our hope: for Esaias foretold, 1.
Tim. 1.
In him shall the Gentiles trust, Isai. 11.
And whereas Jeremy cries, Curssed be the man that puts his trust in Iere.
17.
man, but blessed is the man that puts his trust in GOD, we must
necessarily confess that Christ is God. For in John he oftentimes repeateth,
Verily I say unto you, he that believes in me, has everlasting life. I could
bring innumerable examples of this kind out of the scriptures, which witness
that the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ is of one and the self same
nature with the father, and therefore is very God of very God: but I trust
that to holy hearers, and not given to contention, those which I have
already cited will suffice. It remains that we declare unto you, that the
son of God was incarnate for us, and was borne very Of the incarnation or
true humanity of Christ.
man of the Virgin Marie, consubstantiall, or of the self same substance
with us in all points, sin excepted. The Law, the Prophets, and the
Apostles show unto us most manifest arguments, of the true flesh or humanity
of the son of God. For in the law the Lord says. The seed of the woman
shall crushe the Gene. 3.
serpents head. But who knows not that the head of the serpent, is the
kingdom, force, or power of the devil? And that Jesus Christ brake this
power, the whole scripture does witness. And here he is called the seed of
the woman. And truly he is called seed, to verify his true humane nature: and
he is termed the seed of the woman, not of the man, because of his conception
by the holy Ghost, and his birth of the Virgin Marie. And because she was
the daughter of David, of Abraham, and Adam, it follows, that the son of
Marie was very man. For as we have heard it said to Adam, The seed of the
woman shall bruise the serpents head: so also we read that the same promise
was renewed and repeated to Abraham in these words: In thy seed shall all the
nations of the world be blessed. Gene. 22.
And Paul to the Galat. manifestly Gala. 3.
says, that this seed of Abraham, wherein we have obtained blessing, is Christ
Jesus. The same Apostle says, For in no sort took he the Angels, but Heb. 2.
he took the seed of Abraham. By Angels doubtless excluding all manner of
spiritual substaunces: by the seed of Abraham, understanding the very
substance it self of the flesh of man.

For he adds: Wherefore in all things it became him to be made like Heb. 2.
unto his brethren. And because they be partakers of flesh and blood, he also
him self likewise took part with them (of the same.) Verily the Scripture
draws the lineall descent of Christ most diligently, from the loins of
Abraham unto Jacob, and from him again to Judas, and from him in like sort to
David. To him again the promises of the incarnation of the son of God are
remied. For Nathan says to David: Thus says the Lord, When thy days be
fulfilled, 2. Reg. 7.
thou shall sleep with thy fathers, and I will set up thy seed after thee,
which shall proceed out of thy body, and will stablish his kingdom: he shall
build a house for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom for
ever.

Neither is there any cause why any man should interpret this of Solomon. For he
was borne while his father David lived, and his kingdom quickly decayed. But
Nathan speaks of a son, which should be borne to David after his death,
When thou shall sleep with thy fathers, says he, I will set up thy seed after
thee. And what manner of seed this should be, he most evidently declares, and
says: Which shall proceed out of thy body. For in the 132. Psalm we read,
Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy seat. Furthermore, Marie the
virgin descend lineally of the seed of David, of whom Christ our lord was
begotten and borne, of whom the Angel speaking, and expounding those old and
ancient prophecies, says unto the Virgin, And the lord Luke. 1.
God shall give unto him the seat of his father David, and he shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be none end.
Hereunto also belongs that which Elizabeth says to the virgin which came
out of Galilee into the hill country of Judah, And whence comes this to me,
that the mother of my Lord should come to me? Blessed art thou among women,
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. Truly Matthew. 1.
Matthewe and Luke draw the lineall descent of Christ, from the loins Luke.
3.
as it were of David, even unto the virgin Marie, which conceiueth by the
holy Ghost, that is, the holy Ghost making her fruitful. She, when the
months were fulfiled, that she should be delivered, brought forth a son:
and he which is borne, in all respects appears to be true and very man: he
is laid in a manger, wrapped in swathling cloutes, he grew in stature, and
increased in years, according to the manner of man's body, he is wearied, he is
refreshed, he is glad, he is sad, he is hungry, he is thirsty, he eats, he
drinks, he fears, and to be short, he dies. Which the truth of the
history of the Gospel in many words declares.

Neither is the Scripture it self ashamed, to call Marie the mother of Matthew.
1. John. 2.
our Lord, not the putatiue or supposed, but the true and natural mother,
which of the substance of her own body gave true flesh and substance of
man, to the son of God, the Angel of God so witnessing with Esaie and saying:
A virgin shall conceive Esai. 7. Luke 1.
in her womb, and shall bring forth a son. Lo, he says, In her womb.

And again, in Matthewe the self Matthew. 1.
same Angel says, That which is conceived in her is of the holy Ghost.
Whereupon the Apostle unto the Galathians says, that The son of God is made
of a woman, to wit, according to man's nature. For Christ Gal. 4.
is the fruit of the body of David, and of the virgin Marie, begotten and
borne of the loins of David: and John also the Apostle and Evangelist says,
The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. In calling God John. 1.
flesh, doubtless, he calls him very man. For the same Apostle in an other
place faith: Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God: And every 1. John. 4.
spirit which confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not
of God. Therefore we freely pronounce, that Valentinus, Marcion, Apolles, and
Manichus, denying the true and very flesh of Christ, are of the devil, and
therefore that they by all means together with all their disciples and
sectaries, are to be avoided. This treatise of the true flesh of Christ, we
knit up with these most plain words of Paul: When Christ was in the form of
God, he made himself of no reputation, Philip. 2.
taking on him the form of a servant, and made in the likeness of men, and
found in figure as a man. He humbled him self, made obedient vndeath, even the
death of the cross. Wherefore it is without doubt, that the son of God took
true and humane flesh, and in the same is consubstantiall or of the self same
substance with us in all points, sin excepted.

Neither did our Lord, after he was risen again from the dead, though The
Lord after he was risen, laid not a side his true and very body.
he were glorified, put off or lay aside his true body, which he had once taken
and put on. And his glorification does not take away the truth of his nature.
For he says unto his disciples, A spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see
me have. Wherefore he carried that his true and very flesh into heaven with
him, in his true flesh he appears always for us in the sight of good the
father: in his true flesh he will come to judge the quick and the dead, in his
true flesh they shall see him which crucified him. Christ according to this
nature (who in respect of his Godheade is no creature, but a creator:) is a
creature. For the flesh of Christ has beginning, and lineally descended from
Adam, who is the creature of the living God. And albeit these things be
sufficiently fenced with the force of the scriptures, yet it shall not seem
yrckesome unto you (dearly beloved) to rehearse the opinion of the blessed
father Cyril, which concerning the same matter he has left written in his
Epistle unto Successus Bishop of Isauria Diocese, in these words. Because I
found in your advertisement such a kind of thing, as though the holy flesh of
Christ the savior of us all were turned into the nature of his deity after
his resurrection, so that now he should seem to be wholly and solie god, we
thought good also to make answer unto this. And a few words after, After the
resurrection, certeinely it was the self same body, which suffered, but yet
not having now in it self man's infirmities. For we affirm not yt it abides
hunger, labor, or any such like thing, but we confess that now it is
incorruptible: and not this only, but also that quickneth and gives life. For
it is a body that both has and gives life, that is to say, of the only
begotten son of God, and it is glorified with the most worthy brightness of
God, and it is known and taken to be the body of God. Therefore if any man
say that that is Gods body, as the body of a man is man's body, he swarueth net
from allowable reason. Whereupon I think that most ^lessed Paul also said,
Though we have known 2. Cor. 5.
Christ after the flesh, now yet henceforth know we him no more. For being,
as I said, the proper body of God, it far passes all humane bodies. But a
body made of earth could not abide to be turned into the nature of the Deity
or Godhead. For this is impossible: Otherwise we abase the Godhead, as if it
were made, and as if it had taken somewhat into it self, which according to
nature does not properly belong to it. Hereby it is proved to be as much folly
to say, that the body is turned into the nature of the Godhead, as that which
is the word to be changed into the substance of flesh. For as this is
impossible: because it is proved to be a body not able to be turned and
changed: so also it is not possible, that any creature can be turned into the
essence or nature of the Godhead, but flesh is also created. And therefore we
say, that the body of Christ is divine, because it is the body of God, and
beautified with unspeakable glory, and now let us confess that it is
incorruptible, holy, and giving life: but that it is changed into the nature
of the Godhead, neither have any of the holy fathers so thought or taught,
neither do we so think. Thus far Cyrill.

And Theodoretus Bishop of Cyrus, Dialog. 2. Eranist. says, I will show, that
the body of the Lord, yea after the ascension, was called a body. Hear Paul
therefore, saying, Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for a
Savior the Philip. 3.
Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body. Therefore it is not changed into an other
nature, but remains indeed a true and very body, replenished with divine
glory, and casting forth beams of light. But if it be changed into an other
nature, their bodies also shall likewise be changed. For they shall be
fashioned like unto him. But if the bodies of Saints keep the substance of
their nature, the body of the Lord likewise has his substance unchangeable.
Thus far Theodoret.

Furthermore, when we profess that Christ has true and very flesh, Christ
^ath a reaso^able soul.
we do not mean flesh without soul. For we must confess, that Christ
has a reasonable or humane soul, not void of a mind. Arius taught, that the
son of GOD took flesh only without a soul, and that the word was in
place of the soul. And Apollinarius did attribute unto Christ, a soul, but
he took away the mind, denying that it was reasonable. The scripture does
both attribute unto Christ a soul, and takes not away the mind from the
soul. The Lord himself says in the Gospel: The son of man came not to
be Matthew. ^0.
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his soul a redemption for many.
The same Matthew. has left written of him: He began to be sorrowful and heavy,
And Jesus said, My soul Matthew. 26.
is heavy, even unto the death. And in another place the Lord himself says:
Now my soul is troubled. And if so be that this soul of Christ lack the
John. 12.
mind which is the chiefest part of the soul, how has he a soul? how could
he be sorrowful, and understand, desire, and remember? With hearty Luke. 22.
desire (says the Lord) have I desired, to eat this passover with you before
I suffer. But this desire came not from his godhead, neither from his flesh
only, nor from his soul wanting a mind, but from his perfect manhood of body
and mind.

Moreover we read in the Gospel that the Lord said: The son of man came not
to destroy men's souls, but Luke. 9.
to save them. Therefore he took not flesh only, but a reasonable soul also.
For man had perished both soul and body, therefore that he might be saved
both body and soul, our savior Christ took a very man's body, and a
reasonable soul, that is to say, a most perfect man. Therefore blessed
Athanasius teaching us according to ye scriptures the confession of true faith,
said, Christ is God of the substance of his father begotten before all worlds,
and man of the substance of his mother borne in the world, perfect God, perfect
man, of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh subsisting. Thus far in these
words have we showed that The heretical error and the sound truethe
touching the mystery of Christ's ^ncarnation.
Jesus Christ our Lord, is very God, and very man, consubstantiall or of the
same substance with the father according to his Godhead, and consubstantial or
of the same substance with us according to his manhood. For he has a
reasonable soul, and humane flesh in very deed. We will speak furthermore of
the conjunction or uniting of these natures into one person: in which matter
histories declare, that certain ancient writers in old time fowlie erred. For
Eutiches admitted one nature only in Christ, and the same made (that is) meddled
or confounded together of a divine and humane nature: from whom the
Monothelites were not far beyond, acknowledging only one will in Christ.
Nestorius willing to avoid a col^pitt, * Aprouer biall kind of speech, whereby
is meante that in avoiding a less error, he fall into a greater.
fell into a lime kill. For he confessing two natures, seems to affirm that
there are so many persons, teaching that the word is not united to ye flesh
into the self same person, but that it only dwells therein: whereupon also
he forbad the holy virgin to be called Gods mother. Against whom the common
assertion of the whole church holding opinion according to ye scripture, has
taught that two natures in Christ, and the properties of those natures, are to
be confessed, which are so coupled together into one undivided person, that
neither the divine nature is changed into the humane, nor the humane into the
divine, but either of them retain or keep their own nature, and both of them
subsist in the unity of person. For Christ according to the disposition of his
divine nature is one and the self same, immortal: according to the
disposition of his humane nature, mortal: and the self same immortal GOD and
mortal man is the only savior of the world. Of which thing we will speak
anon, by Gods grace, somewhat more largly and plainly. Touching the very
conjunction Of the vnitinge of Chrste his Godhead and manhood.
or uniting of the true Godhead and manhood in Christ, the prophets and
Apostles have not crabbedlie nor craftily disputed. For they speaking simply
said, God was made man. Or God took on him man. For John the Apostle and
Evangelist says: The word was made flesh, that John. 1.
is, God was made man, or the word of God became flesh. S. Paul says, God
was made manifest in the flesh. ^. Tim. 3.
And again, The son of God in no sort took the Angels, but he took the Heb.
2.
seed of Abraham. Therefore we according to the doctrine of the Apostles,
expounding the mystery of the conjunction of ye divine and humane nature in
Christ say, God was incarnate or made man, God took on him man, God appeared or
was made manifest in humane flesh. He that will sift out deeper matters than
these, it is to cast himself into great dangers. Some there are who in
expounding these points more fully, use the words of society or
fellowshipp, participation, and communion, or part-taking, and that not without
authority of the scriptures, Paul saying, Forasmuch then as the children are
partakers of Heb. 2.
flesh and blood, he also himself like wise took part with them.

Nevertheless we must here first of all take heed that we do not m^dle
Christ reteineth both natures vnmeddled, or unconfounded to gether.
or confound the two natures joined together in one person, nor that we robb
them of their properties. For GOD of his own nature is everlasting and
unchangeable, God therefore remaining always one and the self same, is not
changed into an humane or into any other nature, but joins, coupleth,
takes, yea and unites unto himself the humane nature. Again, unless in his
humane nature he remain a creature, and be the selfsame which he is said to
be, it is not an humane nature, this therefore remaining in it own substance
is taken to the divine nature. Therefore two natures remain in the one person
of Christ, ye divine and the humane, and either of them does retain their
own disposition, and their own property. Which we will now declare by some
places of scripture. Isaie in his seventh chap. says: A virgin shall
conceive and bring forth a son, and his name shall be called Immanuel. (...). 7.
He acknowledges both natures in Christ, for according to his divine nature
he is called Immanuel, that is to say, God with us: according to his humane
nature he is conceived and borne. The same prophet says, A child is borne
unto us, and a son is ^sai. 9.
given unto us, etc. For he is given, who is from everlasting: and he is
borne whose beginning and being is in the world. Wherefore one and the self
same reteineth both the divine and the humane nature. For Micheas also says:
And thou Bethlehem (...). 5.
Ephrata art little in deed among the thousands of Judah. Out of the shall he
come forth unto me, which shall be the governor in Israel, whose outgoings have
been from the beginning, and from everlasting. Lo what could be spoken more
plain? One and the self same has two ofspringes, for insomuch as he is God,
his generation is from everlasting, and as he is man, he is borne in Bethlehem.
Wherefore one and the self same Christ, is very God, and very man. Again in
the Gospel according to S. Matthew. ye Lord asks the Phariseis, saying: What
Matthew. 22
think you of Christ? whose son is he? They said unto him, the son of
David. He says unto them, how then does David in spirit call him Lord?
saying: The Lord said unto my Lord, Psalm. 110.
sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footestoole. If
David call him Lord, how is he the^ his son? As if he said: Since Christ
without doubt, is ye son of David, and he calls him Lord (not by humane
affection, but by the holy ghost) that is to say, very god of ye self same
power with the father, the sequel is ye Christ is very man and very God. The
angel Gabriel noting no less plainly both these natures, says to ye virgin
Marie, That holy thing which shall be borne, Luke. 1.
shall be called the son of god. For of ye virgin he is borne, very man of very
man: and this is ye son of God. For Elizabeth also calls ye virgin ye
mother of the Lord, to wit, of God. Moreover in the Gospel of John thou may
read very many sayings of this sort, which point out as it were with ye
finger, both natures in the self same Christ. Ye believe (says the Lord)
John. 14.
in God, believe also in me. And again, The father is greater than I. Also, I
went out from the father, and came into the world. Again, I leave the world
and go to the father. And again in another place, The poor shall ye have
always with you, but me always Mark. 14.
ye shall not have. And again, Behold I am always with you, even unto the end
of the world. Matthew. 28.


Which sentences truly, as it were co^tra^^^ cannot be all true at once,
unless (...) ^nowledge that Christ reteyneth the properties of (both) natures
unconfounded or unmingled. Paul unto the Romans manifestly says, that He
was called to be an Romans 1.
Apostle to preach the Gospel of GOD, which he had promised before by his
Prophets, in the holy scriptures, concerning his son which was made of the
seed of David according to the flesh: and declared mightily to be the son
of god, touching the spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection from the
dead. The Apostle therefore acknowledges both natures in Christ. For according
to the flesh (says he) Christ is the son of David: but if we behold ye
power of his miracles, his resurrection from the dead, which gives life, and
that Christ sends the holy Ghost, and sanctifyeth all the faithful, it
appears that he which is the son of David after the flesh, is also the
son of God according to his divine power. The same Apostle in the second
chapter to the Philippians, does no less plainly and evidently affirm both
natures in Christ. But because that place has been already oftentimes
alleged, I pass over to the citing of other.

Saint Augustine expounding not only the confession of his own faith, The
Natures in Christ are not mingled or confounded.
but of the whole church in all ye world which flourished in his time, in his
epistle to Dardanus 57. has thus left written: Doubt not, that the man Christ
Jesus, is there now, from whence he shall come: and have in ready
remembrance, and faithfully hold the christian confession: because he roase
from the dead, ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of the father,
neither shall come from elsewhere, than from thence, to judge the quick and
the dead: and in such sort shall he come, that voice of the Angel so
witnessinge, as he was seen to go into heaven, that is to say, in the self
same shape and substance of flesh, to which in deed he gave immortality,
(but) took not the nature away. According to this shape he is not to be
thought every where present. For we must beware least we so fortify y^
divinity of man, that we take clean away the truth of his body. For it
does not consequently follow, that that which is in GOD, should so be every
where as God. For the scripture which cannot lie says even of us, that in him
we live, move, and have our being, howbeit we are not every where as he is:
but he is after another sort man in God, because he is also otherwise God in
man, after a certain proper and singular manner. For one person is God and
man, and both of them is one Jesus Christ, every where in that he is God, but
in heaven in that he is man.

And the same author says a little after: Take away space of places from
bodies, and they shall be no where: and because they shall be no where, they
shall be no bodies. Take the very bodies from the qualities of the bodies and
there shall be no place for them to be, and therefore it must needs be that they
have no being. And in the end of the epistle the same Augustine says: Doubt
not that Christ our Lord the only begotten son of God, coequall with the
father, being also the son of man, whom the father exceeds in greatness,
both to be present every where, as he is God, and also to be in the same
temple of GOD as God dwelling there. And yet to be in some certain place of
heaven according to the manner of his true body.

The self same thing, the same author as yet expounds more at large in his
50. treatise upon John. And Contra Faelicianum Arianum Cap. 9. 10. and 11.
Also in his treatise De agone Christi Cap. 24. unto Cap. 27. To which we will
also join the testimony of the holy martyr Vigilius bishopp of Trident. For
he disputing against Eutyches in the defense of both natures in Christ, says:
If the nature of the word and flesh be one, how is it that since the word is
every where, y^ flesh also is not found every where? For when the flesh was in
earth, surely it was not in heaven: and because it is now in heaven, surely it
is not in earth: and so far is it from being in the earth, that according to
flesh, we do look for Christ to come from heaven, whom according to the
word we believe to be with us on earth. Therefore acording to your opinion,
either the word is contained with his flesh in place, or else the flesh with
ye word is in every place. Whereas one nature receives not into it self any
thing contrary and unlike. But it is contrary and far unlike, to be
limited within a place, and to be every where: and because the word is in
every place, but his flesh not in every place, it is evident that one and ye
self same Christ is of both natures: and that he is every where according to
the nature of his Godhead, and is contained in place according to the nature of
his manhood: that he is both created, and also without beginning: that he is
subject to death and also can not die: one of which is agreeable to him by the
nature of the word, whereby he is God: the other by the nature of the flesh,
whereby the selfsame God is man. Therefore one and the self same son of God,
being also made ye son of man, has a beginning by the nature of the flesh,
and has no beginning by the nature of his divinity: by the nature of his
flesh, he is created: and by the nature of his divinity he is not created:
by ye nature of his flesh he is limited in place: and by the nature of his
divinity he is not contained in place: by the nature of his flesh he is
inferior also to Angels, and according to his divinity he is equal to the
father: by the nature of his flesh he died, but by the nature of his
divinity he died not. This is the catholic faith, and Christian confession,
which the apostles delivered, the martyrs confirmed, and the faithful even
unto this day do observe and keep. Hitherto we have rehearsed ye words of
Vigilius, martyr and bishopp, to this end, that the most notable agreement of
the holy scripture, of the universal church, and of the most Godly and learned
fathers in this principle might be understood, wherein we confess, that the
properties of both natures in Christ remain unconfounded. Again, we must by
all means Christ in one person remains undivided
take heed, least thorough defending and reteyning the properties of the two
natures, we divide and pull asunder the unity of the person: as though there
were two Christ's, whereof the one should be subject to suffering and mortal,
the other not subject to suffering and immortal. For there is but one and ye
same Christ, who according to his Godhead is acknowledged immortal, and
mortal according to his manhood. Nestorius denied that the blessed virgin
Marie was the mother of GOD. For he said God was unchangeable, and therefore
that he could not be borne, and that he had no mother. Whereupon sprange a
suspicion, that he should say ye Lord was bare man, and that he should
maintain the heretical opinion of Paulus Samosatenus, and Photinus. Which
thing Socrates handles at large, Historiarum Lib. 7. Cap. 32. But Nestorius
was injurious to ye Scripture, and to true faith. For Elizabeth the wife of
Zachary and the mother of S. John Baptist, being full of the holy Ghost, in
express words saluteth the holy virgin (Marie) and calls her the mother of
the Lord, that is, the mother of God. And albeit his heavenly nature be without
generation and corruption, yet notwithstanding it is most certain, that he
whom Marie brought forth was God in very deed. For that which is borne of
her, says the Angel, is the son of God: therefore she brought forth God,
and she worthily is called the mother of God. For if she bare not God, she
brought forth bare man, neither has the son of GOD coupled man vnseparablie
to himself. In like manner since God of his own nature is immortal, truly
he cannot die: but if any man for that cause should absolutely deny, that God
was crucified and offered, yea and died for us, he should gainesaye Paul,
saying, Had they known it, they would not have cr^cified the 1. Cor. 2.
Lord of glory. But who is ignorant that the God of glory or glorious god
cannot be crucified? In the mean while since he, which according to the flesh
suffered, and was nailed on the cross, was God, not bare man only, we
rightly say that God suffered and was nailed on ye cross for us: though he
which suffered, suffered according to that only, which could suffer. For Peter
the Apostle says, Christ has suffered for us in the flesh. The first
Toletane counsel, following him, decreed in these words, If any shall say or
believe, that the God head may be borne, let him be accursed. If any shall say
or believe, that the deity of Christ may be turned, changed, or iubiecte to
suffering, let him be accursed. If any shall say or believe, that the nature of
the Godhead and the manhood is one in Christ, let him be accursed. And
Damasus bishop of Rome says: If any shall say, that in suffering on the
cross, the son of God and God suffered pain, and not the flesh with the
soul which he put on in the form of a servant, which he took on him as
the Scripture says, let him be accursed. Therefore whereas Paul says, that
God has purchased Acts. 20.
to himself a Church with his own blood, who is so madd to believe, that the
divine nature has, or ever had blood? In the mean while who is such a
dorrhead that he understands not, that the flesh which God took has blood,
and since that God accounts not that as an others but his own which he took
unto him self, we most truly say, that GOD with his own blood redeemed the
world. Whereupon Theodoretus also bishopp of Cyrus Dialog. Eran. 3. a little
before the end says. If Christ be both GOD and man, as both the holy
Scripture teaches, and as the most blessed fathers have always preched, then
as man he suffered, but as God he was not subject to suffering. But when we
say, the body or flesh or humanity suffered, we do not separate the divine
nature. For as it was united to his humane nature, which was hungry and
thirsty, and weary: yea and slept also, yea and was vexed with sorrow and
heaviness for the passion which he should suffer, abiding in deed none of
those, but suffering that to abide the affections and passions of nature: even
so was it joined unto him, when he was crucified, and permitted that his
passion should be thoroughly ended, that by his passion he might suffer death,
not feling grief truly by his passion, but making his passion agreeable and
convenient for himself as the passion of his temple or dwelling place, and of
his flesh joined unto him, by the which also they that believe are called the
members of Christ: he himself is called the head of those that believe. Thus
far he.

This figure of speech is called of some (...) alteration or changing, Of
communicatinge of ^^ope^ties.
of John Damascenus (...) mutual giving or an interchaunging of properties.
That is wont to be called a communicating of properties, to wit, when that
property is given to one nature, which is proper to another. As for example,
No man has ascended up into heaven (says ye Lord) John. 3.
but he that came down from heaven, even the son of man which is in heaven.
Truly his humane nature was not then in heaven, when ye Lord spoke this, but
in earth: yet notwithstanding because flesh is taken into the fellowshipp of
his Godhead, that which is proper to this, is attributed to his manhood. And
bishop Fulgentius making mention of this interpretation, in his second book to
king Thrasimundus, has thus left written: He said this, not that the humane
substance of Christ is present in every place, but because one and the self
same son of God, and son of man, very God of the father, as he is very man
of man, though according to his true humanity, he was then locallie in earth,
yet according to his divinity (which by no means can be contained in place)
he did wholly fill heaven and earth. Thus says he.

Wherefore the sentences bearing witness of Christ in the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles are diligently to be marked. For some are peculiarly
referred to his divine nature, as are these: I and the father are one. Before
Abraham was, I Am. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with GOD,
and God was that word. He is before all things, the image of the invisible
God, by whom all things are made.

And some are particularly referred to his humane nature: or to the mystery of
his embassage or ministration: of which sort are these: The father is greater
than I. Thou made Heb. 2.
him a little inferior to the Angels. My soul is heavy even to the death.
Again there are testimonies which have respect to both natures, but to
neither of them severally do they sufficiently agree. Such are these: My John.
6.
flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. I have power to
John. 20.
forgive sins, to raise to life whom I will, and to give righteousness, and
holiness. I am the sheepeheard, the door, the light, the way, the truth,
and the life. No man comes to the father, but by me. For these do set
forth and commend unto us the very substance of Christ, the person I mean
of our true savior and mediator God and man. For no man forgiueth sins but
God only. Again, they are not forgiven without death and sheading of blood as
the Apostle witnesses in the ninth Chapter to the Hebrews.

Again there are testimonies, which cannot aptly be declared, but by
communicating of words. Touching which I hope this is sufficient. Again, he
does not divide the person The person of Christ is not divided.
of our mediator God and man, whosoever for the unities sake of natures does
not so far extend his humanity as his divinity is extended. For in the
Gospel after S. Matthewe, the Lord goes not with his body into ye house of
the Centurion, whereas yet notwestanding Matthew. 8.
there is no doubt, that his Godhead being present and not absent, the servant
of the Centurion was cured of his disease. And who will say that therefore the
person is divided by S. Matthewe, for that he has not extended the humanity
of Christ even unto his divinity? The Angels speaking to the women concerning
the body of Christ risen from ye dead, and now glorified, say: He is not
here, he is risen. But we are not ignorant that Mark. 16.
his divinity is in every place. And yet the Angels divided not his
inseparable person, in that they did not make equal in all respects the humane
body of Christ with his Godhead. The Angels them selves do not divide the
person of Christ, when his body being Acts. 1.
taken up from the mount Oliuet into heaven, they standing on the earth
testify, that he shall come again after the same manner, as they saw him
depart from them.

But who dare deny that ye Lord was then also present with them? Therefore our
Lord after the manner of his very body, is in heaven not in earth: but
according to his infinite godhead he is every where, in heaven and in earth.
Man consists of soul and body, and these most contrary in natures between
them selves make one person, not two. And who so ever attributes and defends
that which is proper to either of them, does not divide the person. The body
sleeps, the soul sleeps not: these properties of parts, make not two
persons. Hereunto seems to belong that which Theodoret has left written in
his 3. Dialogue, saying: We do not divide the natural unity of the soul and
the body, neither separate we the souls from their own proper bodies: but
consider those things which properly belong to their natures. Therefore when
the scripture says, And devout Acts. 8.
men carried Stephan to his burial, and made great lamentation over him, will thou say that his soul was buried with his body? I think not. And when thou
shall hear Jacob the Patriarch saying: Bury ye me with my fathers, thou do
understand that to be spoken of his body, not of his soul.

Again, thou do read, There they buried Abraham and Sara his wife, etc. In
which speech the scripture does not make mention of the body, but in all points
signifies the soul and body together. But we rightly divide and say, that
the souls are immortal, and that the bodies only of the patriarchs are
buried in the double cave. Even so we also are wont to say, In this or that
place, this or that man was buried. We do not say, This man's body, or that
man's body, but this man or that man. For whosoever is well in his wits knows
we speak of the body. So whereas the Evangelists so oftentimes make mention
of Christ's body buried, at the length they set down the name of the person
and say, that Jesus was buried and laid in the grave, etc. Thus far Theodoret.

And since it is without controversy, that this faith and doctrine, from
Christ's time even unto our age, has flourished in the holy Church of God, and
against innumerable assaults of satan and heretics, has remained most
steadfast, and the self same is delivered and confirmed by testimonies of
scripture, and consents of holy counsels, I exhort you (dearly beloved) that
calling on the name of Christ, you may persevere and continue in the same
doctrine, and being (...) by true faith and obedience to Christ, very God
and man, you may give continual thanks, worshipping him that reigns for ever.

Of Christ King and Priest, of his only and everlasting kingdom and
Priesthood, and of the name of a Christian.
The seventh Sermon.
I HAVE declared unto you (dearly beloved) y^ Christ Jesus our Lord is very
God and man, which will bring more plentiful profit, if we understand what
the fruit of that thing is. Which is chiefly known by the offices of
Christ our Lord. He is King and Priest of the people of God, therefore he
has a kingdom and a priesthood. Which things if we shall somewhat more
diligently consider, they shall declare unto us the exceedinge great benefit
of the divinity and humanity of Christ.

Christ Jesus is a king, therefore he is Lord of all, ruler and governor of
all things, which are in heaven Christ is king of al.
and in Earth, and specially of the catholic Church it self, which is the
communion of Saints: and for so much as he is King and Lord, truly by his
royal or Kingly office he is the deliverer or preserver, the revenger and
defendour, and finally, the lawgiuer of his elect. For he Gene. 3.
crusshed the Serpents head, that strong and most cruel enemy of Luke. 11.
Gods people, whom when he had Colos. 1.
conquered, he bound, and spoiled.

He delivered the elect out of the power of darcknesse, and set them into the
liberty of the sons of God, that we might be his peculiar people sanctified
through the blood 2. Pet. 2.
of our king, a purchased people, to serve him in righteousness and
holiness. He is humble, loving, and gentle, which the history of the Gospel
also out of Zachary rehearses of him, Matthew. 21. He watches for us, he
defends and gardeth us, he enricheth us with all manner of good things, and
furnishes us against our enimyes with spiritual armor, and gives us,
abundantly, power to resist and to overcome.

He has purged the Temple of God, casting out the Chanaanites, Matthew. 21.
he has cancelled unrighteous laws, he has delivered us from them, and now
he rules and gouernethe us with the scepter of his mouth, exceeding good and
most just laws being proclaimed. For he is God and man, therefore he is the
only Monarche, Christ is a monarche.
the King of kings, and the Lord of Lords, for he has all the kings and
rulers in the world subject unto him: some verily of their own accord
through faith being obedient, and other though striving and rebelling against
him, made subject by his power. And therefore says the Prophet David, Be wise
O ye kings, be learned ye that are Judges Psalm. 2.
of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence,
kiss the son least he be angry and so ye perish from the right way. For in
an other place the same Prophet says, The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou on
my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy fotestole. The Lord will send
forth the rodd of Psalm. 110.
his power out of Sion, be thou ruler even in the mids among thine enemies.
Esaias also bringing in the Lord speaking says, I will lift up my hands Esai. 49.
unto the Gentiles, and set up my standarde to the people, and they shall
bring thee their sons upon their shoulders, for kings shall be thy nursing
fathers, and Queens shall be thy noursing mothers. Which thing ecclesiastical
histories declare more largely.

Of this King Christ, the Prophets prophesying said, And in mercy shall Isai.
16.
the seat be prepared, and he shall sit upon it in truth in the tabernacle
of David, judging and seeking judgment: and making haste unto righteousness.
And again, Behold the time Ierem. 23
comes, says the Lord, that I will raise up the righteous brau^che of
David, which King shall bear rule, and he shall prosper with wisdom, and
shall set up equity and righteousness again in the earth. In his time shall
Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell without fear: and this is the name, that
they shall call him, The Lord our righteousness. And because our Lord is a
king, therefore be must needs have a Of the kingdom of God.
kingdom. As well the realm and dominion subject to a king is called a
kingdom, as principality, empire, power, and manner of government it self.
Therefore the church, the communion or fellowship of saints, being obedient
and subject to their king Christ, is called the kingdom of God. For Micheas
says, And the Lord shall reign Mich. 4.
over them in mount Sion: therefore Sion (which signifies the church) is the
kingdom of God. And god is said to reign, when in the church he rules,
governs, keeps, and defends those that be his, and indueth and makes
the^ fruitful with diverse graces. For Paul says, The kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but righteousness, Romans 24.
and peace, and joy in the holy ghost. Moreover ye kingdom of god is that
eternal glory and felicity, which God d^eth communicate to his elect. For
the Lord says in the gospel, Comeye Matthew. 25.
blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom which is prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. And the thief even at point of death making his pra^er
to the Lord who was ready to dye on the cross, and desiring to be ^artaker of
this kingdom says, Lord remember me when thou co^mest into Luke. 23.
thy kingdom* Again since y^ gospel teaches us how God reigns in us in
this world, in time to translate us unto him self into that other, that is,
since ye gospel is yt thing by which the Lord reareth up his dominion, it is
not unadvisedly called of Matthew in his 13. cap. the kingdom of god. In
another place for the same cause it is called the word of the kingdom. To be
short, we at this present by ye kingdom of God, understand the congregation of
saints it self, the catholic church I mean, and the power or administration
of God reigning therein, that is, preserving, governing, and glorifying the
same. And this kingdom of god is verily but only one, for there The king^ome of
God which (...) one, i^ ^wo wai^* ^^nfidere^.
is but one God only, one king Christ only, one church ^ life ^uerlasting. But
his one kingdom of god according to he dispensation (...) two ways. First
acording to y^ om^ipotencie of god. For he (...) he i^ the highest and
omnipotent, has and executes over all creatures, visible and invisible, ^oste
just rule and equal power^ nill they or will they be obedient. Secondly
according to his spirits, whereby he reigns in his elect. And so y^ kingdom
of God is again two ways considered. For either it is earthly and is called
the kingdom of grace: or else it is heavenly, and is called the kingdom of
glory.

The earthly kingdom of grace, is not Gods kingdom of grace in ^arth.
therefore called earthly, as though it were carnal and earthly: like the
kingdom of Babylon, Persia, Alexander, or Rome: but because it is on earth.
For a good part of the holy church of God is conversant on this earth,
being partaker of flesh and blood while it ^^eth on the earth: though it live
not an earthly life according to the ^^esh: For acording to ye spirit whereby
it is ruled, it lives a heavenly life. Not that the partakers of the kingdom
of God sin not, For the just man falls and rises seven times Pro. 24.
in a day. Whereupon it is also called the kingdom of grace. For as long as we
1. Sam. 7.
live in this world, our King and Lord never denies his grace and mercy to us
that crave pardon. And the faithful do How Can reig^et^ on (...) in ^is
king^ome.
wholly hang upon the grace of their king, they embrace continual
repentance, and endeavor the^ selves to things of more perfectness. For they
frame all that they do according to the laws of their king and prince. For he
reigns in his elect by the word of truth, and by the holy ghost. By the
word of truethe, he teaches what the Saints should do, and what they should
avoid. By his holy spirit he moves their hearts, ^poc. 1.
and gives strength to (...) evil, and follow that is good. For truly our
king reigns not so much for him self The spiritual kingdom of God.
as for us. For he makes us also kings, that we being delivered from the
devil, damnation, sin, and the curse, may be Lords over the devil,
damnation, sin and the curse, yea and over all things: and ioyn^t-heires
with the son of God him self. For these causes ye kingdom of God is called a
spiritual kingdom. For the partakers of the kingdom of God, endued with the
spirit of God, do bring forth the fruits of the spirit, not the works of
the flesh, and to be short, are governed with ye spirit of God. Neither truly
does our Lord reign after the manner of the kings of this world, saying
to Pilate, My kingdom is not of this world. Which sentence some abuse,
gathering y^ there is no ou^ward government in ye church of God, under which
name they also take away ye office of a Magistrate, and speak so subtilely of
the kingdom of God, that a man cannot tell where the kingdom of God is, or
who be partakers of this kingdom. They understand not, that the meaning must
be gathered upon the occasion of that saying.

The Jews accusing the Lord before Pilate, laid to his charge that he
ambition fly sought after a kingdom. The lord clering him self of this crime,
shows Pilate that his kingdom shall not be such a one, which after he had
cast out Tiberius Caesar should be gotten and kept with arms, and be governed
after the manner of this world, declaring, that he adds: If my kingdom were
of this world, then would my servant surely fight, that John. 18.
I should not be delivered to the Jews. Therefore he infers, But now is my
kingdom not from hence: and therefore they fight not for me, to place main the
throne of the kingdom Tiberius being cast out.

And anon he says, For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into
the world, that I should bear witness unto the truethe, and all that are of
the truethe, hear mye voice. As therefore Christ by truth, (not by lyinge,
deceipts, and crafty practices, like the Princes of this world:) prepares
him self a kingdom, so by truth he does both retain and govern his
kingdom: and whosoever embrace truth are partakers of Christ's kingdom,
whether they be princes or of the co^monaltie: all these obey the voice of
their king, and serve their highest prince.

Here nevertheless we expressly add, y^ Kings can no otherwise serve their
Lord and king, than Kings, that is, in doing those things which Kings ought
to do, namely, to execute judgment and justice. For albeit these be in the
world, yet r^le they not after the world, because they are now governed by
the spirit of their king Christ, and direct all their doings to the
prescripte rule of Gods word, and in all things yield them selves to be guided
by the spirit of God: and so far surely their kingdom is not of this world.

Of these things I have else where cited much out of S. Augustine acording to
the scripture. And our king Christ defends his Church and his ministers,
sometime by the aid of Princes, sometimes he preserves and spreads abr^ade
the same, lying open to persecutions through infirmity and weakness. For it
is pressed down, but not oppressed or kept under still, Christ the mightiest
Prince always reigning and ouercomming in those that ^ee his.

Now the bounds of this Earthly kingdom of Christ reach unto The ^ounds of
Christ's kingdom ^n earth.
the vtter-moste parts of the Earth. For all the kingdoms of the world and
all nations perteine unto the kingdom of Christ. Hereunto belong all ye
testimonies of the Prophets touching the calling of the Gentiles, whereof thou
may find very manis in Esaias and Zachary, who excellentlye describe the
kingdom of Christ in Earth. Whereupon the Jews took occasion to feign, I
wot not how great and glorious things of the majesty and victeryes of the
Messiah, which nevertheless long since were aboundantlye fulfilled in
Christ, but more spiritually than carnally.

But they, while they dream of, and look for carnal things, loathe
spiritual, and loose both. But the faithful through the bountifulness and
liberality of Christ their king, most aboundauntly obtain those good
things, which the Prophets promised, namely plentiful peace both with God
and men, and all kind of felicity, always to be blessed, always to be safe
(though they fight continually) from all enimyes as well visible as also
invisible, and to enjoy everlasting salvation. Which things the Prophets in
their writings have set forth in a most large kind of style, yet
understanding nothing else, than as even now we said, that ye faithful shall
be most happy, and shall possess in Christ all good gifts both of soul
and body, as much indeed as is necessary and healthful for the Saints. And
this is that kingdom (now we understand both, as well that of grace, as this
of (...)) which that Joseph of Aramathia, just Simeon, and Anna y^ Prophetisse,
with other Saints awaited and looked for.

This same kingdom Philippe the Deacon preached to them of Samaria, and Saint
Paul the Apostle to them of Rome: which thing Luke does testiffe in the
Acts of the Apostles, Chapter. 8. and 28.

But the seat or throne and palace of our king is Heaven. For he ascended The
seat of our King Christ.
a conqueror into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the father
almighty, from thence ^^ y^ Sun of righteousness he shines to all which
live in his Church, or in his kingdom: yea and he ^h^^s^th the hearts of the
faithful to him self, wherein he may dwell. Furthermore, that we may
understand ou^ King, though not corp^rally present in earth, but ascended
into Heaven, not therefore to be absent from his kingdom, he verily in his word
compares himself to the head, and us to the body or the members. Now
therefore as ye body is never without the head: so the kingdom of God is not
without Christ the prince. And as the vital spirit from the heart, and the
power or virtue of feeling and moving from the head is powered into the body:
so are we quickened or made alive by our Prince Christ: he justifying,
preserving, comforting, confirming, and defending us from all evil. As all the
members are ruled by the head: so all the faithful, in the kingdom of Christ,
are governed by their King Christ. Paul therefore says, God raised Christ
from the dead, and set him on his right hand (...). 1.
in heavenly places, far above all rule, and power, and might, and every name
that is named, not only in this world, but also in the world to come. And has
put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things, to
the Church, which is his body, y^ fullness of him that fills all in all. Of
which kind there are very many other to be found in ye writings of the
Apostles: first of all, that, Christ is the head of the church, and he it is
which gives salvation to the body, for he Ephe. 5.
gave him self for the church, to sanctify it when he had cleansed it in the
founteine of water in the word, that he might present it unto him self a
glorious church, etc. And thus much hitherto of the kingdom of Christ in
earth, which is both called the kingdom of grace, and the Church militant.

Moreover the kingdom of God is called the kingdom of heaven and of Gods
kingdom of glory in heaven.
glory, for that occasion, because those whom our Lord and king has
sanctified on earth, and guided with his spirit, yea and also justified, being
deliueied from the flesh, and taken out of this world, he glorifieth in
heaven, and rec^iueth the into joy, and into the fellowship both of himself
and of all the saints. For the souls of the faithful, eue^ as soon as they
depart out of their bodies, are forth with received into heaven, to reign
with Christ the everlasting king, and for ever to rejoice with all the Saints.
But in the last judgment, wherewith we believe that the quick and dead shall
be judged of Christ our king, the bodies of the Saints shall be raised up,
clarified, coupled again to their souls, and how many soever have cleaued
unto Christ their king from the beginning of ye world, shall live for ever and
reign in glory together with Christ their king and prince. Of this kingdom
of the Saints, the Prophets and Apostles have spoken much, and chiefelye the
Apostle Saint John in his Revelation. Apoc. 21. and. 22.
Some have called this kingdom the Church triumphant.

This kingdom of GOD or of Christ, is an everlasting kingdom. The kingdom
of Christ is in everlasting kingdom
For as even to the worlds end the Church shall be on earth, howsoever this
world, and the Prince of the world do rage: so the faithful after judgment
shall live and reign with Christ, happy for ever both in body and soul.
For the Lord says Matthew. 16
in the Gospel, The gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church. Also
Matthew. 24
the last times shall be as the days of Noe were, wherein though the wicked
did far in number exceed the Church of the faithful, yet Noe and his were
saved in the Arc, but the wicked were destroyed with the flood, in such sort
surely shall iniquity by all means prevail in the end of ye world, but in the
mean while those that are elected into ye kingdom of Christ, shall be saved
by Christ, whom they shall look for to be their Judge, and shall see their
redeemer coming in the clouds of Heaven.

Daniel also in his Prophecy describes Dan. 7.
the rising and fallinge of all kingdoms, and of Antichrist also, but
attributes no end to the kingdom of the Saints, or holy people, but
witnesses yt it shall be everlasting.

The same does the Prophet Zachary also in his 12. chapter. For the Saints
reign on the Earth by Christ, and being translated from the Earth into
Heaven, they shall reign together with their king Christ for ever. And the
Scripture is wont oftentimes to speak of one of these kingdoms only. Of
both these kingdoms we understand many places of Scripture, first of all
that which is spoken by our sautour, When ye pray, say, O our father which
Matthew. 6.
art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come. For we pray y^ he
would reign in us, while we live on earth, that we also may reign over the
world, and the Prince of the world, and that we be not ruled by Satan,
neither that sin reign in us, but rather that we here being governed by him
self, may in time to come reign with Christ in Heaven.

Contrariwise, what manner of kingdom, the kingdom of the world is, it
appears by considering The kingdom of the world what manner of one it is.
the head or the king and prince thereof, which is the devil, the Author of
sin, of uncleanness, and of death.

He reigns in the world, the Prince doubtless of the kingdom of
darcknesse. Not that God and his Christ is not king of all things: but because
unfaithful apostataes through their own proper malice, reuolting from God to
the devil, do appoint him for their prince, to whom even of their own
accord they submitt and yield them selves to be governed, liueing in all
ungodliness, wickedness, and uncleanness, framing them selves like to their
head the devil, with whom they shall be punished everlastingly in the world
to come, as in this world they have suffered them selves to be governed of
him, doing his will.

This prince of this world, else where also called, The GOD of this world,
has Christ the true King and Monarche of the world overcome, John. 12.
and has destroyed his kingdom: not that he should not be, as long as this
world indureth, but 2. Cor. 4. 1. John. 3.
that he should not hurt the elect.

Satan does live and shall live for ever, how be it in misery, which life in
very ^e^e is death) but he has no power against them y^ be redeemed by Christ
the prince. He has and shall have a kingdom even unto the end of the world, but
in the children of unbelief: this kingdom also in this world is in decaying,
and as it were mome^tany and for a short time. For the world passes away, and
all worldly things perish, but all the elect of God are very strangers from
this kingdom, yea they are as it were sworn enemies of this kingdom. Neither
can the prince of darcknes by his power, pull away the partakers of the kingdom
of Christ, into his kingdom of iniquity. Truly he goes about this diligently
and with diverse tentations vexes the elect: but those ouerco^e through him,
which in time past vanquished ye false King and prince of thieves, and taught
us, that despising this filthy prince, and the world, and the lusts of the
world, giving our minds to innocence, we should yield our selves to ye good
spirit to be governed These things have I thus far declared, as briefly as I
culd touching the king Christ, and his only and everlasting kingdom. And now
Christ Ie^us the ^^gh pries*
Christ our Lord is a Priest, yea that chiefest, only, and everlasting priest,
whom the high priests of ye old people did prefigure and shadow out. For
David in his song altogether divine says, The Lord swear and will not repent
Psalm 110.
him, thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek. Which words
the blessed Apostle alleging and expounding in his Epistle to the Heb. 6.
Hebrews has left these words written, The forerunner (says he) is for us
entered into heaven, after the order Hebr. 7. Genesis 14.
of Melchizedek made a Priest forever. For this Melchizedek, King of Sale^,
priest of the most high god, who met Abraham coming from the slaughter or
kings, and blessed him, to whom also Abraham gave the tenthes of all things,
who first indeed is caled by interpretation the king of righteousness, the^ also
king of Salem, which is king of peace, of an unknown father, of an unknown
mother, of unknown kin, neither having beginning of days, nor end of life:
but likened to the son of God, remains a priest for ever.

Surely our Lord Jesus Christ, is both a righteous and peaceable king, and the
righteousness and peace of the faithful: and he is that everlasting Priest,
who according to his humanity is believed to be borne of the virgin without
seed of man, and therefore of an unknown father: and according to his
divinity begotten of the father, and therefore of an unknown mother: and
unspeakably begotten from everlasting, and therefore of unknown kin, having
neither beginning nor end of life. For albeit according to his humanity he was
dead and buried, yet according to his divinity, he remains God immortal and
everlasting. The self same which is a king is also acknowledged a priest, not
according to ye order of Aaron, but according to ye order of Melchizedek. For
as the scripture reme^breth this one a priest: so one Christ remains priest
for ever, having an everlasting priesthood. But high priests in time past were
caled and anointed, they did not thrust the^ selves into such an office by
force or deceit. Whereupon ye Apostle said, No man takes the honor Hebr. 5.
to him self, but he that is called of god, as was Aaron: so also Christ took
not glory to himself to be made high Priest, but is made and confirmed of him
who said unto him, thou art my son this day have I begotten thee.

As he says also in another place, Psalm. ^
Thou art a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedech. But you do no
where read that that our Priest was anointed with visible oil: for he Christ
is a^noynted.
was anointed with invisible oil, namely with the fullness of the holy
Ghost, as ye prophet witnesses, Thy god has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. And again, The spirit of the Lord upon Psalm. 45.
me: for the Lord has anointed me, and sent me to preach good tidings unto
Esai. 61.
the poor. Furthermore, when we read that the office of Priests in times past
was to serve in the tabernacle, to teach the people, to make intercession
between God and men, to pray for the people and to bless them, to sacrifice
also, and to consecrate or sanctify, and that now it is manifest that Jesus
Christ is ye lawful priest, it is certain y^ he is tied to ye self same
offices, but indede to so much more excellent tha^ these, by how much he has
obtained a more excellent priesthood. Those priests after the order of Aaron
How Christ our priest does the offices of a priest.
served in ye corruptible and figurative tabernacle: but our Lord being taken
up into the true tabernacle heaven it self, ministers to all ye saints of
God. For Heaven and the church of Saints is the true tabernacle and temple of
our high priest. Christ our priest is the only and everlasting Christ the
teacher of the church
teacher and master of his universal Church. For not only that age has so
taught, which lived in the days of his flesh, but the spirit of Christ was
in ye Prophets, by whom now also he rules all the seats of his catholic
church. Christ himself as yet speaks unto us, and will speak even unto ye
end of the world, by the mouth or writings of the holy Apostles and all
teachers preaching the doctrine of the Apostles.

And this doctrine is sufficient for the catholic Church. For it
comprehends all those things fully, which perteine to a holy and happy
life. Christ our high priest makes intercession for all the Saints in
Christ makes intercession.
his own Temple. For he being the only advocate and patron of all the
faithful, prays to the father for us on the right hand of God. For he
ascended unto the right hand of God the father, that he should always appear
there in the presence of God, to follow all our suites faithfully.

Of which thing I have spoken more at large in my last Sermon, where I
entreated of Invocation, and Intercession. The same our Lord only blesses us.
For he was made a Christ blesses.
malediction and curse for us, yt we might be blessed in him, according to
that notable and aunciente Prophecy, In thy seed shall all the nations of the
world be blessed. Moreover Christ our Lord sacrifices for us. Christ
sacrifices
For he offers incense when he makes supplication for us, and appears on
ye right hand of God. And he offers a sacrifice for sins unto ye living
god, not a sacrifice of a beast, but him self, always an effectual
sacrifice, to make satisfaction for all the sins of the people. Whereof,
since I have entreated abundantly in the treatise of Ceremonies, here of
purpose I am the breefer.

Again, since our lord Jesus Christ Christ san^^ifieth.
is y^ holy of holiest, doubtless he sanctifies and consecrateth his
catholic church, anointing it with the oil of the holy ghost, that we may
be made both holy, and priests to offer spiritual sacrifices to God. For we
read y^ that holy ointme^t, powered on Aarons head, ran down to his beard, and
even to the skirts of his clothing. For Christ the high priest of his
universal Church powers his spirit as well upon them that are very far
off, as upon them that are near at hand. For he cries in the Gospel, If
any man thirst, John. 7.
let him come unto me and drink. He that believes on me, as the scripture
has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life. And again,
For their sakes sanctify I my John. 17.
self, that they also might be sanctified in truth.

To be short, when we say and confess that Jesus Christ is the priest or
bishop of the faithful people, we say this, that Christ is our chosen and
appointed teacher and master, to govern and teach his universal church, to
make intercession for us, and to plead all our suites faithfully, before the
Father in heaven, which is the only patron, mediator, and advocate of the
faithful with God, who by the sacrifice of his body is the perpetual and
only satisfaction, absolution, and justification of all sinners throughout the
whole world, who consecrateth into priests those that believe, that that they
also might offer to God the Father through Jesus Christ acceptable sacrifices,
and might be the house and tabernacle of God.

Out of this it shall be easy to judge, what manner of priesthood Christ's Of
Christ's priesthood
is, who is our high priest and Bishop. His priesthood is the very office or
very function and working of the priest, whereby Christ the priest him self
executes all things in heaven and in the Catholic Church, which beelong
to his priestly office. Wherefore, it must needs be, that this Priesthood of
Christ our high Bishop, is not visible and corporal, but altogether
spiritual. For very well says Paul, Christ were no Heb. 8.
priest if he were on the earth: where they that are of the tribe of Levy do
minister in the tabernacle or temple: where there is a temple or tabernacle
with manyfolde holy garments and vessels. But Christ our Lord is of the
tribe of Judah, borne I say of a royal tribe: albeit we are not ignorant in
the mean while, that the royal tribe, that is, the tribe of Judah, and the
priestly tribe, that is, the tribe of Levy, were mingled together. For we
read that Elizabeth which was of ye daughters of Aaron, was Cosen to ye
virgin the mother of God, she being of the line of David. Neither is our Lord
read at any time to have used the temple, or the holy vessels in his ministry.

For although sometime he taught in the temple, yet he taught not only in the
same. He never sacrificed in the temple at the holy altars either of incense or
of burnt offerings. He never used priestly garments which were figurative.
Whereof I spoke when I expounded the ceremonial laws.

Therefore, when he would sacrifice for the satisfaction of the sins of the
whole world, he suffered without Heb. 13.
the gate, and offered himself a lively and most holy sacrifice: according as
the shadows, or types, prophecies and figures foreshewed in the law of Moses,
whereof in like manner I have entreated in the discourse of the ceremonial
laws. And when he had offered the sacrifice of his body, he ascended into
heaven, and sits at the right hand of the father, that from thence he may
give light unto his Church, and there appear always for us in the presence of
God the Father. And therefore he does not now corporally execute his priestly
office on earth, in like sort teaching us now as in the days of his flesh he
taught the men of his age. For now he does illuminate with his spirit the
minds of his, and daily repaireth or renueth the Evangelical doctrine of the
Apostles, and yet for all that he himself speaks by the mouth of the^ that
teach and preach the Gospel. He blesses us from heaven, that is to say, he
inricheth us with all heavenly blessing. Of him the Apostle speaking says, And
the annoynting, which ye have received of him, dwells in you: and ye need
not that any 1. John. 2.
man teach you, but as the same annoynting teaches you of all things, and it
is true, and not lying, and as it has taught you, ye shall abide in it. Of him
the divine Prophet speaking says, I will power water upon the Esai. 4 4.
thirsty, and floudes upon the dry ground: I will power my spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thy stock (or buddes:) They shall grow together
like as the grass, and as the willowes by the waters side. By which words we
learn that Christ our high priest has no need of a bishop, suffragane, or
vicar, in his Church. For he himself is present with his Church, and
governs it by his spirit. The self same Christ at the right hand of the
father in heaven, does not so oftentimes humbly fall down on his knees, and
make intercession for us, as we do sin. In the days of his flesh when he
did offer up prayers Heb^. 5.
and supplications, with strong crying and tears, he was once heard in that
which he feared. For now he always appears for us in the presence of God.
Al our matters are manifest in his sight, and the father beeholdeth the face of
his Christ, for whose sake he is pleased with all his members, hearing them,
and giving them whatsoever healthful things they require, according to that
saying of our savior: Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father John. 16.
in my name, he shall give it you. Therefore here we must imagine no turmoyles,
no molestation, no labor wherewith he should be wearied, which is the
intercessour, advocate, and priest of al, before God the father in heaven.
Whereof also I put you in mind in my last sermon, where I entreated of
invocation, and intercession. Wherefore our priest executing his office before
God in heaven, has need of no altar of ince^se, no censer, no holy
vessels, or garments: much less has he need of ye altar of burnt
offerings. For on the cross, which was his altar, he offered up him self but
once for all. Neither was there any mortal man worthy to offer to ye living god
the living son of God. And that only sacrifice is always effectual to make
satisfaction for all the sins of all men in the whole world.

And though in the discourse of the ceremonial laws I have alleged many
testimonies touching these things, yet I ca^ not stay my self here, but must
cite unto you some that be notable. For this matter wherein the fruit of
Christ's divinity and humanity, to be short, al our salvation consists,
cannot worthily and diligently enough be printed in men's hearts. Paul unto the
Hebrews speaking of the priests of the old Testamente, and comparing Christ
our high priest with them, yea by all means preferring him, says, And among
them many were made priests, because they were not suffered to endure by reason
of death. But Christ because he indureth for ever, has an everlasting (or
unchangeable) priesthod, for that it does not palle over to another by
succession. Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them, that come unto God
by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. For such an high
priest it became us to have, (which is) holy, harmless, undefiled, separate
from sins, and made higher than the Heavens: which needed not daily, as those
high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for
the peoples: for that did he once, when he offered up himself. And Heb. 9.
again he says, Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands
which are the similitudes of the true sanctuary, but into heaven it self, to
appear now in the sight of God for us. Not that he should offer himself
often, as the high priests entered into the holy places every year in
strange (or with other) blood. For the^ mu^t he have often suffered since the
foundation of the world. But now in the end of the world has he appeared
once, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And as it is appointed
unto men that they shall once die, and after that comes the judgment: Even
so Christ once offered to take away the sins of many, the second time shall be
seen without sin of them, which wait for him unto salvation. Heb. 10.


And again the same Paul says, Every priest appears daily ministering, and
oftentimes offers one manner of offering, which can never take away sins:
but this ma after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at
the right hand of God, and from henceforth tarrieth til his enemies be made
his footstool. For with one offering has he made perfect (or consecrated) for
ever, the^ that are sanctified. All these sayings hitherto are the Apostle
Paul's. And I think that these testimonies are not to be made manifest and
agreeable to our purpose by a larger interpretation. For they are all even
without any exposition of ours most evident, and very aptly agree to the
matter which we have in hand. For they do plainly set forth and lay before
our eyes to behold, the whole priesthood of Christ, specially that which
belongs to the intercession and the only and everlasting sacrifice or
satisfaction for sins. It belongs also to the same priesthood to
consecrate priests unto God, all the faithful: not that we should offer for
the satisfaction of sins, but that we should offer our prayers,
thankesgiuinges, and our selves, and the duties of Godliness, as it were
every momente. For Saint John the Apostle and Euangeliste says, Jesus Apoc.
1.
Christ, prince of the Kings of the earth loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood, and made us kings and priests unto God and his
father. We may find the same sentence also in the Epistle of Saint Peter. So
that in these we may 1. Pet. 2.
see what fruit rises and flows unto us, from the divinity and humanity
of Christ our king and high priest. For he could not be prince of kings and
high priest, unless he were God and man.

Here this place requires to speak Of the name of a Christian.
somewhat of the name of a Christian, and of the duties of a Christian man. We
have the name of Christians of Christ, to whom being unseparably knitte, we
are the members of that body, whereof he is head. And Christ is not his
proper name, (for he is called Jesus) but a name of office, derived from the
Greek word (...), which signifies annoynting, so Christ signifies as much as
anointed. Therefore Tertullian says, it is not a proper name, but a name
attributed. And he adds, Anointed is no more a name, than clothed, or
apparelled, a thing accident to the name. But the kings and high priests were
anointed with oil, therefore Christ signifies unto us him that is king, high
priest, or Bishop. And because we are named Christians, of Christ, who has
anointed us with the holy ghost, truly Christians are king and priests
we also are kings and priests. Where you may see how great a benefit we have
received of Christ God and man, for he has made us kings and priests.

We see what the duty of christians is, namely to maintain this dignity even
to the last gasp, lest it be taken from us again by satan. Furthermore, if
we be kings, we are Lords over things and are free, ruling, not Christians
are king
ruled or in subjection. Free I say from sin and everlasting death, and from
all uncleanness: Lords over satan, prince of this world, and over the world
it self. For we rule the world and the flesh: we are not ruled by them.
Hereunto belong those words Romans 6.
of the Apostle: Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that ye should
thereunto obey by the lusts of it. Neither give ye your members as instruments
(or weapons) of unrighteousness unto sin: but give your selves unto God, as
they that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments (or
weapons) of righteousness unto god. For sin shall not have power (or dominion)
over you. And therefore when ye prince of this world yea and the world it self
and the flesh, and sin, the wicked affection thereof, do what they can to
draw us again out of freedom and bondage, we must (because we are kings)
valiantly resist them, and continuing in conflict vanquishe and over come the^
by the virtue of Christ reigning in us. For Saint John the Apostle says, All
that is borne of God overcomes the world. And this is the victory I. John. 5.
which has overcome the world even our faith. Hitherto belongs the doctrine
of freedom and bondage, whereof I entreated in the former Decade.

By all these we gather that the principal duty of Christians is always to
stand in battle array, and to keep their place, to watch and endeavor by all
force and means, least at any time being overcome of their enemy satan,
they, be spoiled of their royal or kingly dignity, and be hailed down into
the bondage of hell. Truly if we overcome in Christ, and with Christ, we shall
reign together with him, that is, we shall live with him and all the saints in
glory for ever and ever. And thus are we kings in Christ. Thus are we
Christians.

Again, because we are christians, that is to say, anointed, surely we
Christians are priests.
are priests also, and therefore according to our priestly office, we teach,
we admonish, we exhort, and comfort all our brethren, and al men that are
^o^mitted to our charge. Where notwithstanding we do necessarily make a
difference between ye christian priesthood, and the Ecclesiastical
ministry. All Christians truly as well men as women are priests, but we are
not al ministers of the church. For we can not all one with another preach
publicly, administer the sacraments, and execute other duties of pastors,
unless we be lawfully called and ordained thereunto. This our priesthood common
to all, is spiritual, and is occupied in common duties of godliness not in
public and lawful ministeries of the church. Whereupon one may and ought to
instruct and admonish another privately, and while he so does, he executes a
priestly office: as when the goodman of the house instructs his children at
home in godliness: when the goodwife of the house teaches and corrects her
daughters: to be short, when every one of us exhort every neighbor of ours
to the desire and study of godliness. For the Apostle Paul says, Exhort
ye one another daily, while it is called, to day: least any of you be Heb. 3.
hardened through the deceit fullness of sin. Moreover since we be priests,
we must offer sacrifices worthy of our God. And we have sufficiently testified
that after Christ our high and only priest or bishop in all ages and in all
the whole world, none does offer a satisfactorie sacrifice to take a way
sin. For when he offered up himself, he offered a sacrifice but once, howbeit
always effectual to cleanse the sins of all. Therefore we offer unto him
thanksgiving and praise, celebrating the memory of that one only sacrifice:
we offer prayers: we offer our selves, that is to say our bodies, a lively and
a reasonable sacrifice to God, together with all kind of godliness, and well
doing. For Paul says, By Christ we offer the Heb. 13.
sacrifice of praise always unto God, that is, the fruit of lips confessing
his name. To do good, and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifice God
is well pleased. But touching these sacrifices, I have spoken more in my former
sermon, wherein I entreated what the true service of God is. But since all
sanctification is and rises from one high priest Christ Jesus, we can
sanctify our selves no otherwise, than with honest and pure conversation of
life, which thing is required at our hands, namely that we be holy, and that
we sanctify the name of our God with an innocent life, that it be not evil
spoken off through us by men, but that they may see the good works of the
faithful, and glorify the Father which is in heaven. There is none but may
see, that all the duties of a Christian man are comprehended in these points,
wherein unless we exercise ourselves earnestly, I do not see yt we are worthy
of so excellent a name. That this most holy name was The name of a Christian
most ancient.
first given to the faithful at Antioch in Syria, Luke is witness: which yet
let no man so understand, as if that name before had been altogether unknown
to all men. For now it is become most common, in time past it was the name
only of most excellent and holy men, and of such as rather were so in deed,
than so ac^ounted, though also by name they were in some manner so
acknowledged. For Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history makes mention, ye y^
ancient fathers Adam, Seth, Noe, Abraham and other like unto these were all
Christians, and therefore Christian religion to be the very purest perfectest
and the auncientest. The words of Eusebius if any require are these. The
nation of the Hebrews is not new, but unto all men in antiquity famous, and
known to all. Their books and writings do co^teine ancient fathers, of whom
they make report before the floude, rare indeed and few in number, howbeit in
godliness and righteousness, and in all kind of virtues most excellent: and
after the flood of other of the sons and nephues of Noe, as of Tharam and
AAbraham, of who^ as their captain and progenitour, the posterity of the
Hebrews do boast. So that if any man shall say that all these from Abraham him
self even to the first man being beutified with the testimony of righteousness,
through their works, though not in name, were Christians, truly he should not
stray far from the truth. For a Christian signifies a man, which excels
other in the knowledge and doctrine of Christ, with moderation of mind, and
righteousness and continency of life, and through fortitude of virtue and
confession of Godliness, toward the one and only God of all creatures. And
this name those ancient fathers did no less esteem than we do.

Neither had they care of the corporal circumcision, as we also have not:
neither of keeping the Sabbath day, as we also have not: nor of absteining
from meats, nor other differences: which things afterward Moses first of
al ordained, and figuratively delivered them to be performed: as such things
also even at this day perteine not to Christians. But they saw plainly the
Christ or anointed of God. As also it is declared already before, that he
both appeared unto Abraham, and gave answer unto Isaac, and Israel, and spoke
to Moses, and after him to the prophets. Whereby thou shall find that these
godly men also obtained the name of Christ, according to that saying spoken of
them: to wit, Touch not my Christ's (or mine anointed) and do my prophets no
harm. Therefore it is manifest that this godly invention of those men who lived
holily in the time of Abraham, which of late by the doctrine of Christ is
preached to all nations, is the first, most ancient and eldest of a^. Thus
much Eusebius. Furthermore if we behold our selves in this looking-glass of a
Christian There are but few Christians
name, we shall see that very few at this day are worthy of this name. Truly
all of us are commonly so called, and we will be all named christians, but few
of us live a life worthy of our profession. We are named christians of holy
anointing. The holy anointing is the holy ghost himself. Upon whom shall my
spirit rest, says the Lord? Even upon him that is poor and of a lowly
troubled spirit, Esa. 66.
and stands in awe of my words. But we set light by the word of God, we have
very troublesome heads, we are corrupt with evil affections, and lewd lusts,
we swel with pride, and therefore we want the ointment of holy oil, or are
void of ye holy ghost. Who therefore can say that we be Christians? We are
all of us in manner ruled by wicked desires, by the flesh, the world, and the
prince of this world, few of us rule the world, and the flesh, and those
things which are in them. Therefore not the spirit of God, but the spirit of
the world and the flesh bears rule in us. The devil, the world, and the
flesh have dominion over us, for in them we live and them we do obey,
whereupon being estranged and let loose from all righteousness and holiness,
we are beecome flaues, serving a most vile and filthy slavery. For we not
desiring to be delivered, do neither seek a redeemer, nor being impatient of
their tyranny, rise and rebel against them: but like faint-harted cowardes
we yield our selves to be brought in subjection, and to be kept under their
tyranny: nay it repents and yrcketh us of our labors, watchinges, prayers,
and of all duties of Godliness, and being careless, we lie lurking as in a
place of volu^tuousnesse. But who would (...) ^uch swine the most holy name of
a Christian, but he that is both exceeding foolish and wicked? No marvel the^
i^ such be thrust down into hell there eternally to burn, and there eternally
to be yoked unto him whom they have most wickedly chosen to themselves to
follow. And now what one of us is there y^ does teach, admonish, and exhort
those that boast and brag of this Christian name? I speak nothing here
concerning the Doctors, or teachers of ye Church, but my talk does touch the
office and duty of a christian man. Truly the most part of us are slow in
instructing our families and felowe-brethren. For either it grieueth us to take
the pain, or else we fear danger. Therefore we turn the office of
admonishing and instructing upon the public ministers of the church, as
though nothing at all of this matter were required of us. For this cause
speeches in a manner unseemly to be spoken, are heard uttered of men: I have not
the office of a minister, I am no (P^aff) priest, why therefore should I (...)*
why should I admonish? And these care not how blasphemous and filthy things
be spoken either at home or abroad. For they live to themselves, and think
that the glory of God and the soules-healthe of their neighbor belongs
nothing unto them. But what sacrifices offer we worthy of God and our name?
where are prayers and thanksgiuings? where is the mortification of our flesh,
and the denying of this world? where is compassion, or well-doing? where is an
holy and harmless life? The contrary (if need so required) I could reckon
up in a long bead-rowe: but to what end were it, to make a large discourse
of those things that are manifest unto all men? For who I pray you does deny,
that the life of this present age (of men, I mean, which brag and boaste
of their Christian name) is filthy, stinking, and pestilent? Which things
since they be too too true and evident, I have nothing done amiss in saying a
little before, that at this day there are few Christians. They that are wise,
and desire to be according to their name, let them hear our Savior speaking
in the Gospel of Matthew, Strive to enter in at the straight Matthew. 7.
gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction
and many there be which go in thereat. Because straight is the gate, and
narrow is the way, which leads unto life, and few there be A gainste false
Christians.
that find it. Furthermore they (which thing ought first of al to have been
spoken) do very greatly offend against religion, and Christian profession,
which as they do not sincerely acknowledge the priesthood, and kingdom of
Christ so they boast themselves to be chiefly praise worthy, commendable and
catholic, because they commit those things, which by all means obscure and
darken the kingdom and priest hood of Christ. Christians being content with
this only title and name, do not ambitiously seek after or admit another
name: But these men, as though ye name of a christian were but a light and
trifling name, never rest, until they be also called by other names, as though
they were babtised into ye name of Brio^, Benet, Robert or Frau^cis. Christians
cleaving only to their lawgiuer, master, and teacher Christ, do not acknowledge
the voice of strangers, neither go a strawes breadth from the divine
scriptures.

But these men charge thee with heresy, unless thou receive and woorship for
heavenly Oracles al kind of constitutions of the Romish Church, though they be
flat contrary to the words and teaching of Christ. Christians acknowledge
themselves to have one king, one deliverer, one savior, and one head in
heaven: These men worship his vicar in earth, and attribute salvation not only
to tri^^ing things, but to very stinking and loathsome things. Christians put
all their trust in God, to whom they offer all their vows and prayers by
Jesus Christ, whom they believe to be the only high priest, and most
faithful patron and advocate of all that believe: They make their prayers to
creatures, and men's imaginations, and choose to themselves so many patrones and
intercessours, as there do live saints in heaven. Christians know that the
sacrifice of Christ once offered is always effectual to make satisfaction for
all the sins of al men in the whole world, and of all men of al ages: But
these men with often outcries, say, that it is flat heresy, not to confess
that Christ is daily offered of sacrificeing priests, consecrated to ye
purpose. Therefore the name of a christian is common to al, but ye thing
signified and meant by the name is common to the faithful only, who cleave unto
one Christ.

Now I conclude my whole discourse of Christ, a king and a priest, with these
words of saint Augustine. The conclusion.
The son of God which made us, is made among us, and being our king rules
us: and therefore we are Christians, because he is Christ. He is called Christ
a Chrismate, that is to say, of anointing. Kings also and priests were
anointed, and he was anointed king and priest. Being a king, he fought for
us. Being a priest he offered himself for us.: When he fought for us, he was
as it were overcome, yet by right he has overcome in very deed. For he was
crucified, and on his cross whereon he was nailed he slew the devil, and
then was he our king. But wherefore is he a priest? because he has offered
himself for us. Let a priest have somewhat to offer. What could man find to
give? A clean sacrifice? what sacifice? what clean thing can a sinner offer?
O wicked sinner! O ungodly wretch! What so ever thou shall bring it is
unclean. Seek within thy self what to offer, thou shall find nothing. Seek
out of thy self what to offer, he is not delighted in rams, or goats, or
bullockes. They are all his, though thou offer them not. He found nothing
clean among men, which he might offer for men: therefore he offered himself a
clean offering, an undefiled sacrifice. Therefore he did not offer that which
we gave unto him, but that which he took of us, and that he offered pure and
clean. He took flesh in the womb of the virgin, that he might offer pure
and clean flesh for us that were unclean. He is a king, he is a priest. In
him let us rejoice. To him be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

Of the holy Ghost, the third person in Trinity to be worshipped, and of his
divine power.
The eighth Sermon.
IT remains that after we have expounded ye mysteries of the son of God
our Lord Jesus Christ, we consequently speak of the holy Ghost, and of his
divine power, and operation. For unless he inspire our minds, and rule our
tongue, we shall never be able worthily or profitably either to speak or
hear any thing concerning him. For as no man knows those things which are of
God, but the spirit of God: so men fetch the understanding of heavenly
things, and the knowledge of the holy ghost from no where else, than from the
same spirit of God. Let us therefore pray and beseech God the father, that by
his son Jesus Christ he would vouchsafe to inlighte^ our dark and mystie
minds, by sending this his holy spirit into our hearts, and to direct us in
the sincere way of truth according to the holy Scriptures.

And first of all it seems not unprofitable to expound the word, spirit,
because in the scripture it is diversely taken, and very often used, so that
not seeldome times he shall greatly err, which is ignorant of the force of
that word. Spirit properly is the signification The word Spirit is ^^pounded.
of an element signifying air, wind, breath. In that signification we read
this spoken of our Savior. The wind blows where it lusts, Spirit is ^ayer
or (...) John. 3.
and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and
whither it goes: And Paul says: If I pray with an unknown tongue, 1. Cor.
14.
my spirit prays, but my understanding is made unfruitful. Lo the Apostle
uses spirit, for the breath or voice. For he joins it to the tongue, and
sets it against the mind. By a Metaphore it is translated to every
bodilesse substance, and is set against the body. Spirit therefore signifies
an Angel either good or badd. For the Spirit signifies an Angel.
Prophet, (whose words Paul has also rehearsed) says: Which makes his
Angels spirits, and his ministers a Psalm. 104.
flaming fire. And again, Are they not all ministering spirits? These
testimonies Hebr. 1.
are understood of good Angels: when the scripture speaks of evil Angels
commonly it adds somewhat, as an evil spirit, or an unclean spirit.

We call also spirits or ghostes, which have taken some shape that cannot
well be discerned, spirits. So the Apostles not believing that the Lord was
risen again with his true body, when they saw him, they thought they had
seen a spirit. To whom showing his feet and his hands, he says, A
spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have.

Again, spirit is taken for the breath of life, as with the Latins to Spirit
signifies life
breath is to live, to leave breathing is to die. David says: When thou Psalm.
145. 104.
give it them, they gather it, when thou openest thy hand they are filled
with good. When thou hydest thy face they are troubled, when thou take away
their breath, they die, and are turned again to their dust.

And the Lord in Moses says, I will destroy all flesh, wherein there is Gene.
6.
breath of life. The reasonable soul also of man is peculiarly called spirit,
Spirit signifies the soul of man.
in so much that spirit is very often taken in the holy scripture for the
reasonable soul of man. For in the Gospel thou do read, Jesus when he
Luke. 23.
had bowed down his head, gave up the ghost, (or the spirit.) And thou John.
19.
do read of the holy martyr Stephan, They stoned Stephan calling on and
saying, Lord Jesus receive my Acts. 7.
spirit. For Solomon said before, The dust shall be turned again unto earth
from whence it came, and the spirit Eccle. 12.
shall return unto GOD who gave it.

And sometimes spirit signifies Spirit signifies affection of mind
the affection and motion, readiness and provocation of the mind. For Solomon
says, A man that refraineth not his appetite (or spirit) is like a city
which is broken down. Thou may oftentimes find in the Scriptures, the
spirit of pride, anger, lust or envy, taken for a proud, angry, lustful,
or envious affection. Also in Luke the 13. the very sore disease, or force of
sickness, is called the spirit of infirmity. The spirit also signifies
those spiritual motions, Spirit signifies spiritual motions.
which the holy Ghost stirs up in the hearts of the Saints, yea and the
very gifts powered into the hearts of men by the spirit. Which in every place
in Paul is to be seen.

Elsewhere spirit is opposed against the letter, the body, the figure, the
type or shadow, and is used for a more high or mystical meaning, and for the
very pithe of the thing: as when Paul says, The circumcision Romans 2.
of the heart, is the circumcision which consists in the spirit, not in the
letter. And again, The lord has made us able ministers of the new testament,
2. Cor. 3.
not of the letter, but of the spirit. For the letter kills, but the spirit
gives life.

Therefore thou may find spirit to be taken for inspiration, revelation
Spirit ^ignifieth revelation. 1. John. 4.
and doctrine. For John says, Believe not every spirit, but prove the
spirits whether they be of God or not. And again, Quench not the spirit,
despise not prophecies. Last of John. 4.
all, God is called that unmeasurable and unspeakable power of the spirit.
God, says our Lord, is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him
in spirit and in truth. By this means the word spirit is common to all the
persons of the reverend Trinity: howbeit it is peculiarly applied to the
third person in Trinity, of whom we make this sermon.

And albeit the holy Ghost, for so much as he is God, can be compassed What
the holy ghos^ is.
wtin no limits: for by his own nature he is unspeakable, unmeasurable,
incomprehensible, everlasting: yet notwithstanding that I may say somewhat in a
certain order concerning him, if it will be no otherwise, I will at the last
shadow out that which the scripture, the inspiration of the holy Ghost
himself, very largely declares of him. The holy Ghost is the third person
in Trinity to be worshipped, very God, proceeding from the father and the
son, which inlighteneth, regenerateth, sanctifies, and fulfilleth the
faithful with all good graces. But that the holy Ghost is the third person in
the holy Trinity, I think it is sufficiently at large declared in the third
Sermon of this Decade.

Surely this only sentence of our Savior, Baptize them in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost, does abundantly confirm to
godly minds, that the holy Ghost is the third person in Trinity. Moreover
that he is very God, That the ^olyghost (...) very God.
of the same power, glory, majesty, and Being with the father and the son,
that especially proves, because he is the third person in the holy
Trinity. Neither must we think that he is lesser than they, because he is
reckoned in the third place. For though ye blessed Trinity be remembered of us
in order, yet notwithstanding there is no degree, no time, no place or number
in the blessed Trinity. For blessed Athanasius made his confession according
to the Scripture and said, The catholic faith is this, that we worshipp one
God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons, nor
dividing the substance. For there is one person of the father, another of the
son, and another of the holy ghost. But the Godhead of the father, of the
son, and of the holy Ghost is one: the glory equal the majesty
coeternall. Such as the father is, such is the son, and such is the holy
Ghost. The father uncreate, the son uncreate, and the holy Ghost uncreate.
The father inco^prehensible, the son incomprehensible, and the holy Ghost
incomprehe^sible. That father eternal, the son eternal, and the holy Ghost
eternal: and yet are they not three eternalls, but one eternal, etc.

And Augustine also in his 15. book De Trinitate, cap. 26. says: In that high
Trinity which is God, there are no distances of times, whereby it may be
showed or at least demanded, whether the son were first borne of the father,
and afterward the holy Ghost to proceed from them both, etc.

Truly we confess that the father, ye son, and the holy Ghost is one God,
and that the same is eternal. Therefore let it trouble no man, that the spirit
is put in ye last place. For when the Apostle in his epistle to the Corinth.
framed his blessing he said, The grace 1. Cor. 13.
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy
Ghost be with you all, he makes mention of the holy Ghost in the last place:
but the same Paul says, There are diversities of gifts, but it is the self
same spirit. And there are 1. Cor. 12.
differences of administrations, but it is the self same Lord: and there are
diverse manners of operations, but it is the self same God, which woorketh all
in all: setting the spirit in the first place, teaching that ye order of names
does not make difference of dignities. After this manner also in the former
testimony, he placed the son before the father, not overthrowing the order
which the Lord has set down in Matthew. but showing ye equality of the
Trinity in honor. For what can Matthew. 28.
thou more plainly say, tha^ that which the scripture says, that the holy
ghost does sanctify, renew, regenerate, give life, and save? and these are
operations agreeable to God only. By operations therefore we manifestly
acknowledge, that the holy Ghost is God, of the same Essence and power with
the father and the son. For the holy Ghost from the beginning before all
creatures visible and invisible, is a creator, not a creature, as Job
witnesses, His spirit has garnished the heavens. Again, The spirit ob. 25.
of GOD has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has given me life.

Zacharias the priest and father of S. John Baptist says, Blessed be the
Luke. 1.
Lord God of Israel for he has redeemed his people: as he spoke by the mouth
of his holy Prophets which have been since the world began. And S. Peter
says, For the Prophecy, 2. Pet. 1.
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of GOD spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost. By this, I pray you, who cannot gather, that the
holy Ghost is God? For God spoke by the mouth of the Prophets: and the holy
Ghost spoke by the mouth of the Prophets. Therefore the holy Ghost is God.

The same Peter also in express words has called the holy Ghost God, Acts. 5.
when he accused Ananias of theft, yea and also of sacrilege: for when he had
said, How is it that Satan has filled thy heart to lie unto the holy Ghost?
by and by he adds, Thou have not lied unto me^ but unto God. To the doctrine
of Saint Peter agree those things in all poinctes, which S. Paul the doctor
of the Gentiles has taught. For he called the believers the temples of God:
Know ye not (says he) that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of
GOD 1. Cor. 3.
dwells in you. And again, Know ye not that your bodies are the temple 1.
Cor. 6
of the holy ghost which is in you, whom ye have of God, and year not your
own? To be ye temple of God, and to be the temple of ye holy Ghost, Paul
takes to be one and the self same thing: it follows therefore that the holy
Ghost is God. For in his Epistle to the Corinthians, he expressly names the
holy Ghost God. For after he had said, There are diversities of gifts, but it
is the self same spirit, and had reckoned up the kinds of gifts, by and by
he adds: And all these things woorketh even one and the self same spirit,
distributing to 1. Cor. 12.
every man severally even as he will. And he himself had said a little before,
There are diverse manners of operations, but it is the self same GOD, which
works all in all. But Didymus Alexandrinus, a man of excellent learning,
does knit up a most evident argument of the Godhead of the holy Ghost,
declaring also that his nature does altogether differ from the nature of
Angels. For in his 1. lib. de Spiritu Sancto, he has left this written, S.
Hierome so interpreting it: If the holy Ghost were a creature, he should have
at the least a limitable substance, as have all things which are made. For
although invisible creatures are not limited within place and bounds: yet in
property of substance, they are limited: but the holy Ghost, since he is in
many places, has not a limitable substance. For Jesus sending forth ye
preachers of his Gospel, he filled them with ye holy Ghost. But neither did all
ye Apostles go to all nations together, but some into Asia, some into Scythia,
and other dispersed into other nations, according to the dispensation of the
holy Ghost, which they had with them, even as they also heard the Lord
saying: I am with you always even unto the end of the world. Hereunto does
that also agree, Ye shall be witnesses unto me even unto the uttermost parts
of the world. If therefore they being sent into the furthest parts of the earth
to bear witness of the Lord, were severed one from another with a very great
distaunce of place, and yet had present with them the holy Ghost dwelling
within them, whose substance is not limitable, it is manifest yt the power of
Angels does far differ from this power of the spirit. For, to use an
example, the angel which was present with the Apostle when he prayed in Asia,
could not together at the self same time be present with other, which were
abiding in other parts of the world. But the holy Ghost is not only present
with men being severed one from another, but is also a continual dweller in
every Angel, principality, throne and dominion, etc.

Now, who cannot hereby gather, that the holy Ghost is true and very God? The
self same author has gathered very many arguments of the true godhead of
the holy ghost, and next him the holy father Cyrill, and holy Athanasius has
absolutely discoursed upon that matter, Lib. de Trinitate. 11. to Theophilus.
These few testimonies thus far rehearsed, we think shall suffice those that
obey and love the truth.

They that steadfastly believe these things are not moved with any straung The
holy ghost is neither minister ^or instrument.
opinions, and questions, curiouslye, yea wickedly brought in about this matter
by ill occupied persons. For some are reported to have denied the holy Ghost to
be Lord. For they have taught that he is a minister, and as it were a certain
instrument of the father and the son. But Christ our Lord joined the holy
ghost to himself and to the father, when he delivered the form of baptism.
For he says, Baptising them in the name of the father, and of the son, and
of the holy Ghost. And yet it is manifest that a creature is not joined to the
creator in baptism, neither that there is any servile condition in the
Godhead. Therefore the counsel of Constantinople in their creed give to the
holy Ghost certain terms, whereby they might destroy certain errors,
calling him lord, and giver of life: for when he calls him Lord, he makes
him equal to the son, and excludes the condition of a servant or minister:
beside that, he denies that he is their instrument. For there is one Lord:
there are not many Lords. And the son is not Lord of the holy Ghost: but the
Lordshipp is common to the three persons, which are only one Lord. And
seeing the holy Ghost is the Lord, surely he is not appointed to a servile
ministry, but endued with Lordly authority, nether is he an vnderseruaunt to
do the work, but is a joint worker with the father and the son, yea and he
himself does work as Lord.

Again certain other are reported to have taught that the holy ghost The
holy ghost is a substance not an accident.
is not a substance or a person, but as it were an accident, that is to say, a
stirring up, a provocation, or a motion of a Godly and renewed mind. And in
very deed our mind being illuminated with the holy Ghost is oftentimes called
spirit, but we must wisely distinguishe the creature from the creator, and the
accident from the substance. The blessed Apostle distinguished our spirit from
the holy spirit of God, when he said, As many as are ledd by the spirit of
God, they are the Romans 8.
sons of god. The spirit it self bears witness to our spirit, that we
are the sons of God. And the same Apostle says, The flesh lusts contrary
to the spirit and the spirit contrary Gal. 5.
to the flesh. And who understands not that ye mind of man instructed of ye
holy Ghost, is here called the spirit, not the third person himself in the
reverend Trinity? And that mind, as touching illumination, is not of it
self, but proceeds from the holy Ghost illuminating it, neither comes it
from any other, tha^ from him which is the third person in Trinity, but that
mind is not the very person of the holy Ghost: as imagination proceeds from
the soul, and yet it is not the soul it self. That stirring of the spirit
in us is an accident, but GOD is not an accident, neither is mingled with the
accident.

We must therefore confess according to the Scriptures, that the holy Ghost is
a person subsisting, coequall in nature or essence with the father and the
son, and therefore to be worshipped and glorified of us, as very God and
creator: again that a godly and holy motion stirred up in the minds of holy
men by the spirit, is the effect and woorking of this holy spirit, and is
called a holy spirit, but after a certain manner proper to it. Otherwise we
deny not that the holy Ghost him self being promised, is communicated unto
us, but after our capacity, and as he will. For what is he amongst men that
is able to comprehend the fulness of the eeuerlastinge and incomprehensible
GOD?

Furthermore touching the proceeding Of the proceeding of the holy ghost.
of the holy Ghost from the father and the son, ye Divines have curiously,
subtily, and busily disputed. For the question is asked whether he proceed from
the father alone, or from the son also? In which question the Latinistes
seem to disagree very much from the Grecians. The question is also asked what
manner of proceeding this is? We, omitting many curious questions, will briefly
declare those things unto you, which are wholesome and agreeable with the holy
Scriptures. For who shall be able to canuasse out all the questions of curious
men, and all the bold and unclean thoughts of idle heads, without offense to
good men, and especially of the simple hearers? That the The holy ghost
proceeds from the father and the son.
holy Ghost proceeds from the father and the son, the scripture manifestly
teaches, which most plainly shows that he is the spirit of either, or both
of them. For he it is of whom the Apostle says, Because ye are Gal. 4.
sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into your hearts. And the
Matthew. 10.
son speaking of the same spirit says, For it is not you that speak, but
the spirit of your father, he it is which speaks in you. Again the same
son says of the holy Ghost, Whom I will send unto you from John. 15.
the father. And again he says else where, Whom the father will send John.
14.
in my name. Therefore he proceeds from both, as well from the father as
from the son. For although this be read elsewhere to be spoken of the holy
Ghost, Which proceeded John. 15.
from the father, yet it is not denied that he proceeds from the substance of
the son also.

But that more is, Cyrill a Greek writer, expounding the Gospel of S. John,
and interpreting this self same place, Lib. 10. Cap. 33. says: When he had
called the comforter the spirit of truth, that is to say, his spirit (for he
is the truth) he adds that he proceeds from the father. For as he is the
spirit of the son naturally in his abiding, and through him proceeding, so
also surely is he the spirit of the father. But unto whom the spirit is
common, surely they cannot by any means be disseuered in substance. Again S.
Augustine in his fifteenth book De Trinitate, Cap. 26. says: Who may
understand by this that the son says (as the father John. 5.
has life in himself) that he gave life unto ye son as being then without
life, but that he so begatt him without time, that the life which the father
gave to the son in begetting him, is coeternall with the life of the father,
which gave it him. Let him understand as the father has power in himself,
that the holy Ghost might proceed from him, so has he given to the son
that the same holy Ghost may proceed from him, and both without beginning,
and so it is said that the holy Ghost proceeds from the father, that that
which proceeds from the son, might be understood to be of the father and
the son. For if the son have ought, he has it of ye father: surely he
has it of the father that the holy Ghost proceeds from him. Thus far he.
By all this we gather that the holy Ghost proceeds, as well from the father,
as from the son.

Now as concerning the manner The proceeding of the holy ghost is two-fouldor
of twoe sorts.
of proceeding, we say that the proceeding of the holy Ghost is two-fouldor
of two sorts, temporal, and eternal. Temporal proceeding is that, whereby
the holy Ghost proceeds to sanctify men. The eternal proceeding is that,
whereby from everlasting he proceeds from God. The spirit proceeds from
both parts, from both of them, as well from the father as the son. Neither
does he proceed from the father into the son severally, and from the son
into creatures. For I say the nature and substance of the father, and the
son, is one and the self same, inseparable, and coeuerlasting too.

Temporal proceeding commonly is called a sending and gift. For Temporal
proceeding.
the holy Ghost is sent two manner of ways unto men, visiblie, that is to
say, under some visible form, as of a Dove, and of fiery tongues: as he is
read in the Gospel, and in the Acts of the Apostles to have been given to
Christ, and the Apostles: inuisibly, he is daily and as it were every moment
given to the faithful, the spirit of Christ wateringe us with his grace, and
giving faith, hope, and charity unto us.

Moreover, the eternal proceeding Eternal proceeding.
of the holy Ghost, whereby he proceeds out of the substance of the
father and the son, is unspeakable, as the begetting of the son by the
father. Whereupon it is not said in the Gospel, has proceeded, or, shall
proceed, but, Proceeds: for so the Lord declares his eternity of
proceeding, and that the substance of the father, and of the son, and of the
holy Ghost is coeternall, and inseperable, and nothing at all differing.

Saint Augustine in his fifteenthe book De Trinitate, and 26. Chapter
says, He that is able to understand the beegetting of the son by the
father without time, let him also understand the proceeding of the holy Ghost
from them both without time. And if any ask this question, Since the holy
Ghost proceeds from the substance of the father and the son, how comes
it to pass that he is not called the son?

I aunsweare, that the Scripture calls the second person the son, and
testifyeth that he is the only begotten of the father: and that the same no
where makes any mention that the holy Ghost is begotten, or that he is
called the son. Neither have the ancient fathers made any other answer to
this question. And I like the similitude which wh^ere expressed. If one
stream should flow from two springs, it might well be said to flow from
them both, yet it could be said to be the son of neither of them. Hereunto I
shall not seem unfruitfully nor beside the purpose, to add the disputations of
Didymus concerning sending, least any should understand that peruersly, and
according to the flesh, which is spiritually to be interpreted by faith. The
holy Ghost the comforter, is sent of the son (says he) not according to the
ministry of Angels, or Prophets, or Apostles, but as it becomes the spirit
of God to be sent of the wisdom and truth of God, having an inseperable
nature, with the self same wisdom and truth. For the son being sent of the
father, abiding in the father, and having the father in himself, is not
separated nor sundered from the father. And the spirit of truth also being
sent of the son after the manner aforesaid, proceeds from the father, not
from elsewhere removing unto other things. For Look in the. 3. Sermon of this
decade about the beginning
this is impossible and blasphemous likewise. For if this spirit of truth,
be limited within a certain space according to the natures of bodies,
leaving one place he goes to another: but even as the father not consisting in
place, is far above and beyond ye nature of all bodies: so also the spirit
of truth is not limited within space of place, seeing he is bodilesse, and as
I may more truly say, excelling all and every reasonable creature. Because
therefore it is impossible and wicked, to believe these things which I have
said, in bodily creatures, we must understand that so the holy: Ghost went out
and came from the father, as our Savior does bear witness that he himself
went out and came from the father, saying: I went out and came from God. And as
we separate places and chaunginges of places from bodilesse things, so also we
do separate these speeches, inwardly (I mean) and outwardly from the nature of
things intellectual. For these two words perteine to bodies that may be
touched and have biganes. Therefore we must believe the unspeakable word
which faith only and alone makes known unto us, that our Savior is said to
come out from GOD, and the spirit of truth to proceed from the father, etc.

Other questions both scrupulous and very many, I pass over untouched: in
these things I require a mind religious, and not a curious, a faithful mind
and not a subtle.

Now there is but one holy Ghost, because he is always one and the self
same God. It is the same spirit therefore, which spoke unto the Patriarchs,
prophets and Apostles, and which at this day speaks to us in ye Church. For
therefore the counsel of Constantinople, is thus read to have confessed their
faith: I believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord. And anon after, Who spoke by the
prophets. And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church. These sayings
are taken out of the holy Scripture. For S. Peter testifies in express words,
1 Pet. 1.
that the spirit of Christ was in the Prophets, and there was none other
spirit in the Apostles than the spirit of Christ. And Paul the Apostle
says, Seeing then we have the 2. Cor. 4.
same spirit, as it is written (I believed and therefore have I spoken) we
also believe and therefore speak.

Upon which testimony Tertullian infers, and (no doubt) soundly: It is
one and the self same spispirite therefore which was in the Prophets and the
Apostles. He promises that the self same spirit shall be always in the
Church. They erred therefore, yea foulye they erred, who so ever among them of
old, feigned one God and spirit of the old Testament, and an other of the
new Testament. Didymus Alexandrinus the bright light in his age of all the
Grecian Churches, in his first book entitled, De Spiritu sancto, says,
Neither ought we to think that the holy Ghost is divided according to
substaunces, because he is called the multitude of good graces. For he can not
suffer, he can not be divided, neither yet be changed, but according to his
diverse manners of workings and understandings, he is called by mny names of good
graces, because he does not indue his partakers with his communion, after one
and the self same power, etc. Furthermore, ye holy ghost has increasing, or
fullness, and diminishing ^ncreasinges of the spirit.
and want in man: not that in God (who, as it is commonly and truly said,
neither receives more or less) there is any change to be found: but because
man, according to his capacity, receives the spirit plentifully and
liberally, or measurably and sparingly, even as it pleases the holy ghost.
The portion of the spirit of Helias was given double 4. Reg. 2.
from heaven to Heliseus. And it is said of our Savior, that the father John.
^.
gave him the spirit, not by measure. For the Lord himself elsewhere says,
Whosoever has, to him shall be given, Matthew. 13.
and he shall have more abundance: but whosoever has not, from him shall be
taken away, even that he has. Saul had received excellent graces, but because
he did not use and exercise 1. Sam. 16.
them, the good spirit of God departed from him, and the evil spirit
succeeded and tormented him. And the spirit of God departs, even as it
comes also, at one instant. For when we are forsaken of the Lord, the
spirit of God departs from us. Whereupon we read that David prayed, Cast
me not away from thy Psalm. 51.
presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. And again, Stablishe me with
thy principal spirit.

Next after these things, it seems y^ we must diligently search out what Of
the effect and power of the holy ghost.
ye effect and what the power of the holy Ghost is. The power of the Almighty
and everlasting God is unspeakable, therefore no man can fully declare, what
the power of the holy ghost is. Yet somewhat I will say, making those things
manifest, which he works chiefly in men. For otherwise the father by the
spirit works all things, by him he creates, susteyneth, moves, gives life,
strengthens and prescrueth al things: by the self same he regenerateth his
faithful people, sanctifies and indueth them with diverse kinds of graces.
Whereupon in the description above mentioned of him, co^prising in four members
his principal powers and effects, which show them selves by their working in
men, I said that he does illuminate, regenerate, sanctify, and fulfill the
faithful with all good graces. Which things that they may the better be
understood, it shall be good first of all to declare (as well as we can) the
appellatio^s or names of the holy ghost, which the holy scripture gives him:
and then to recite one or two places of the old and new Testament, to set
forth and declare the power of the holy Ghost. First he is called the holy
spirit of God, because The holy ghost.
all creatures as many as are sanctified, are sanctified by him.

The heavenly father sanctifies with his grace, but through the blood of his
beloved son, and sanctification is derived into us and sealed by the spirit.
Therefore the holy trinity being one God does sanctiu^e us. It is a wicked
thing therefore to attribute sanctification to strange and foreign things. It
is a wicked thing to translate purification and justification, from the
Creator, unto the Creature. Moreover, he is called holy, to make a difference
of him from other spirits. For we read in the Scriptures, that there was and
is a spirit of the world, a spirit of infirmity, a spirit of fornication
and uncleanness, and a spirit of pride. From all these the holy ghost is
separated, which inspireth into us the contempt of this world, which opens
unto us the Scriptures, and confirms us in truth: which purifieth our
hearts, and makes our mynds chaste, and so preserves them: finally, which
makes us lowly and gentle, and drives away from us all maliciousness.

The same holy Ghost is called the The holy ghost is the Spirit of God and of
the son.
spirit of God, and of the son. Of God, to make a difference between it,
and the spirit of satan. And it is called the spirit of the son, because
it is the proper and natural spirit of the son, which he also communicates
unto us, that we also might be the sons of GOD. For Paul says, Ye are the
temple of God, and 1. Cor. 3.
the spirit of God dwells in you.

Again, If any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his.
And again, Because ye are sonns, Romans 8.
God has sent the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying, Abba father.
Moreover, our Lord him self in the The hol^e ghost is the comforter. John. 14.
history of the Gospel calls the holy Ghost a comforter, saying, I will
pray the father, and he shall give you an other co^forter, that he may abide
with you for ever, even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because the world sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know him for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you. For (...), signifies a comforter, a
stirrer up or a prouoker, an exhorter, an advocate, or patron, which pleads
the cause of his client. For the holy Ghost is the mouth, the eye, the heart,
the counsel, the hand, and the foot of all the faithful. Didymus in his
work entitled De spiritu The holi^ ghost is a comforter and gives joy and
gladness.
sancto, says, (Christ) Giving the holy ghost a name answerable to his
working, calls him the comforter. Because he does not only comfort those
who^ he finds worthy of him, and sets them free from all heaviness and
trouble of mind, but gives unto them a certain incredible joy and gladness,
in so much that a man giving God thanks, because he is counted worthy of
such a guest, may say, Thou have given me gladness in my heart. For
everlasting joy and gladness is in the heart of them in whom the holy Ghost
dwells. The holy ghost verily alone makes the consciences of men void of
care, quiet, and at peace before God in the matter of justification and in all
temptations of the world. Paul says, This only I desire to learn of you,
whether ye have received the spirit, by the works of the law, or by the
preaching of faith. The Apostles being beaten with rods, when they were
endued with ye holy Ghost, and had y^ comforter present in their minds, went
rejoicing from the presence of ye counsel, because they were counted worthy to
suffer reproach for the name of Christ. So we read in the Ecclesiastical
history, that the martyrs of Christ being full of the holy Ghost, even in
extreme torments, and most bitter deaths, were most patient, and sange
praises, and gave thanks unto GOD.

Furthermore, we have heard that the holy Ghost is called of the Lord The
holy ghost is the Spirit of truth.
the spirit of truth. For in an other place also he beautifieth him with
that name, for he says, When the co^forter shall come, whom I will send John.
16.
unto you from the father, even the spirit of truth, which proceeds from
the father, he shall bear witness of me. And he is called the spirit of
truth, because there is an other hypocritical spirit, an erroneous and lying
spirit in the mouth of all false Prophets. This our spirit works in his
worshippers, sincerity, gentleness of mind, and integrity. Those he
teaches all truth. For our Lord elsewhere in the gospel, says, That
comforter, which is John. 14.
the holy Ghost, whom the father will send in my name, he shall teach you
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, what so ever I have
said unto you. Therefore the spirit of truth has taught the Apostles all
truth that is to be believed, and all godliness: and they have delivered the
same fully to the Church. For the holy Ghost drives away all errors,
destroys all heresies, confounds all Idolatry and ungodliness, and
pours true faith into our hearts, and establishes true religion in the
Church.

The Acts of the Apostles affoorde us very many of examples. By this spirit
of God the Apostles foretold things to come, shadowing out among other things
Antichrist, and the corruption of this our last age, and admonishing the
Church, least the elect should be entangled in errors, and blasphemous
wickednesses.

Now, he is called the spirit of promise, The Spirit of promise
for yt he was promised of god by the Prophets through Christ to the Fathers,
to the apostles, and to all that believe the apostles doctrine, and was at length
also through ye same Christ fully given and performed. This word puts the
godly in mind, that they should not ascribe the having of this so great and
healthful a gift to their merits, but to the mere grace of God. And the
holy Ghost is granted, yea given unto us by Gal. 3.
the promise of God. Whereupon it follows, that all the gifts of God are
freely given, which thing the Apostle Paul principally proves, and earnestly
beats into our heads in his epistles, specially to the Romans and the
Galathians.

In Luke the Lord says, If I with the finger of God cast out devils, no The
holy ghost the singer of God. Luke. 11.
doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you. Saint Matthewe rehearsing the same
words, says: If I by the spirit of God cast out devils, the^ is the kingdom
of God come upon you. Therefore the holy Ghost is called the finger of god, to
wit, the might and power of God. Men of occupations work with their fingers:
God works his works by his divine power, I mean by his spirit: whose power
is so great, that even his little finger (give me leave so to speak)
surpasses all the power and strength in the world. That appeared in those
Sorcerers of Egypt. Didymus Exodus 8.
rehearses a parable touching the unity of the divine substance, and
admonishes diligently and conveniently that we should not for corporal things
forge and feign unto our selves Look in the. 3. Sermon of this decad what
things are spoken against the heretics called the Anthropomorphites
a corporal meaning of spiritual things. For he says: But beware, lest thou
being cast down unto base things, do imagine in thy mind diversities of
corporal actions, and begin to forge to thy self magnitudes, and
inequalities, and other members of the body greater and lesser, saying, that
the finger from the hand, and the hand from him whose hand it is, does differ
by many inequalities, because the scripture does now speak of bodylesse
things, purposing to show the unity only, and not the measure of substance
also. For as the hand is not divided from the body, by the which it works
and brings all things to an end, and is in him whose hand it is: so also the
finger is not separated from the hand, whose finger it is. Therefore away with
inequalities and mesurings, when thou think of God, and understand the
unity of the finger, of the hand, and of the whole substance, by which
finger the law was written in tables of stone. Thus far he. Now the holy
Ghost is read as well in the writings of ye Prophets The spirit is called water
and a lively founteine.
as also of the apostles to be shadowed out by water, and a lively or
continual running founteine. I will pour out (says the Lord by Esaie) waters
upon the thirsty, and rivers upon the dry ground. And anon by interpretation
he adds, I will Esai. 44.
pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy stock. And in the
Gospel the Lord says: If any man John. 7.
thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He that believes in me, as says
the scripture, out of his bellye shall flow rivers of water of life. To which
in way of exposition the holy Euangeliste adds: But this he spoke of the
spirit, which they that believe in him should receive. Surely water makes
barren grounds fruitful, cleanses things defiled, gives drink to them that
be thirsty, and cools them that are in a heat: so the grace of the holy
spirit makes barren minds fruitful, to bring forth fruit to the living
God. By the self same grace our hearts are cleansed from all uncleanness, the
same quenches the thirst of the soul, and comfort it when it is afflicted,
and fulfilleth all the desires thereof.

Fire is simple and pure, and some The holy ghost is fire.
bodies it consumes, and othersome it purges, making them more fine and
clean: It warmeth also, and has many profitable and necessary operations in
man. Therefore the holy Ghost is rightly shadowed out unto us by fire. For he
is pure and simple, he consumes the ungodly, cleanses the faithful from the
filthiness of sins, and makes them to burn with the love of God and their
neighbor, setting them on fire doubt less with the fire of his love. When he
was given to the Apostles in the day of Pentecoste, there was heard a sound as
it had been with the force of The holy ghost a mighty wind.
a mighty wind coming: by which thing was signified, yt the doctrine of
godliness should be spread throughout the whole world, by the power of GOD
and wonderful success, maugre the might of the whole world setting shoulder
against the same all in vain. For the wind (no man staying it) blows through
the whole world, pearceth all places, and no man can keep it out, it has also
wonderful effects in bodies to change the^. And the holy Ghost pearceth al
things, softneth men's hearts, and of froward, stubborn, and rebellious, he
makes most lowly, modest, and obedient men. Fiery toungs appear upon the
heads of the Apostles and disciples endued with the holy ghost, The holy
ghost a fi^ie tongue
signifying doubtless the operation, or working of ye holy ghost, of which
they were signs and assuraunces. For he instructs, exhorts, and comforts
the faithful: neither does he arm his faithful Apostles with cold tongues,
but fiery tongues. The Apostles, when they preached the gospel, seemed not to
speak, but to lighten and to thunder, whereupon also certain of them were
called of our Savior, the sons of thunder.

Furthermore, the holy ghost appears in the likeness of a Dove upon the
son of God, even then when he was baptized of John Baptiste. For a Dove is
mild and gentle, without malice or harm. Whereof sprung the proverb, Manners
like a Dove, The holy ghost a love.
Doue-like simplicity. And, More gentle than a Dove. For a Dove is among
birds, as a sheep among four footed beasts, which thinks no hurt to any
living creature: Whereupon Christ is also called a Sheep or a Matthew. 3. ^sai.
53. ^ohn. ^. Acts. 8. ^api. 7.
Lamb. Of the spirit of God therefore the wise man says very well. The
spirit of wisdom is holy, one only, manifold, subtle, quick, moving,
clear, undefiled, plain, sweet, loving the thing that is good, sharp, which
cannot be let, doing good, kind to man, steadfast, sure, free from care,
having all power, circumspecte in all things, and passing through al
understanding and clean, yea most subtle spirits.

Again, they that are endued with the holy ghost, are called the anointed The
holy ghost oil and a^noyning.
of the Lord. For the holy Ghost is called both oil and annoynting: for
unless we be watered of the holy Ghost, we wax barren and waste away. For we
are void of lively and heavenly moisture, and of our own nature always
wyther and wax dry. And of this annoynting there went a notable figure
before, in the ceremonial annoynting of Kings and priests. S. John says,
And the annoynting which ye have received 1. John. 2.
of him, dwells in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the
same annoynting teaches you of all things, and it is true, and not lying: and
as it taught you, abide in it. For the Lord also says in Jeremy, This Iere.
31.
shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those
Hebr. 8.
days, I will plant my law in the inward parts of them, and write it in
their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And from
henceforth shall no man teach his neighbor or his brother, saying: Know the
Lord, for they shall all know me, from the lowest unto the highest, says the
Lord. For I will forgive their misdeedes, and will never remember their sins
any more. But we showed a little before, that the holy Ghost is the universal
teacher of all truth. Hitherto that seems to belong which S. Paul says, It
is God which has anointed us, 2. Cor. 1.
which has also sealed us, and has given the earnest of the spirit in our
hearts. For now the holy Ghost is not only called annoynting, but also the
sealing up or earnest of our salvation. For (...), or, (...), is a part The
holy ghost is the earnest of our inheritance.
of payment, which makes assurance of the whole sum to be paid, to wit, a
pledge. And surely, the holy Ghost does now testify, yea, it does seal and
assure us, that we are the sons of god, and that when time is we shall be
received into the everlasting inheritance. Paul again says, Ye are sealed
with the holy spirit Ephe. 1.
of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, unto the redemption of
the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory. Ephesians. 1. That
assurance does maruellously confirm and comfort the minds of the faithful
in temptations, encourages them besides that to patience in adversity, and to
holiness of life. For hereupon said S. John, Little 1. John. 4.
children ye are of God, and have overcome them: for greater is he that is in
you, than he that is in the world. And again, Now are we the sons of God,
and yet it does not appear 1. John. 3.
what he shall be: but we know, that when we shall appear, we shall be like
unto him, for we shall see him, as he is. And every man that has this hope in
him, purges him self, even as he also is pure. And as ye holy ghost is an
unspeakable knitting together, The holy ghost, love or charity.
whereby the three persons are inseparably coupled one with an other in
everlasting love and concord: even so the same coupleth the spouse of Christ with
his spouse, with a knot y^ can not be loosed, and joins together between them
selves all the members of his mystical body in an everlasting covenant. For as
the members of our body are joined together whole and sound by the benefit
and enjoying of life: so the mystical body of Christ is united together by
the holy Ghost. Therefore it is no marvel, that he is called or noted with
the name of love Romans 5.
which pours love into our hearts.

And albeit by these names of the holy Ghost, his operation may be
understood, The operations of the holy ghost.
yet will I add certain testimonies of Scripture, out of which his power or
effect, especially in us, may be more fully understood. Esaie almost in the
beginning of his prophecy, describing the person of Isai. 1^.
the King our Messiah, among other things says: The spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel
and strength, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, and
shall make him of deep judgment in the fear of GOD. Though he declared
many, yet has he not reckoned up all the powers of the spirit. Therefore it
is not for us to bring into a straight, and with the common sort to comprise
in a narrow number of seven, the powers of the spirit. For we have heard
hitherto, that there is the spirit of promise, of doctrine, of humility, and
gentleness, etc. To which beside these, there are reckoned up very many
together. For he is the spirit of wisdom. But how great this is, and how
far it reaches, it is manifest even in the words of Solomon. To wisdom is
joined understanding, which is said to be the action Wisdom Understanding.
and applying of wisdom ordered or framed to things, places, times, and
persons. Counsel is required and given in doutfull matters, and shows
Counsel.
what we may most conveniently do. Strength ministers sufficient Strength.
force and constancy to execute and perform, yea and patiently to bear,
what so ever by counsel we have learned either to be done or to be suffered.
And now knowledge Knowledge
is an experience obtained and gotten by long time and use. Unto these is fear
added, that is to say, godliness Fear.
and true religion, whereunto unless we refer all our sayings and doings,
wisdom, understanding, counsel, strength and knowledge shall nothing profit
us.

To be short, who so ever is endued with the spirit of God, whatsoever he shall
either do or say, will savor of the fear of god, finally, he shall say and do
al things unto the glory of god, and al these things truly are freely and fully
drawn out of the only founteine of the holy ghost. Paul ye apostle in his
epistle to the Romans describing the wonderful force of the holy Ghost
working in us being newborn, says: They that are in the flesh can not
please God. But ye are not in the flesh, but Romans 8. The spirit does mor^fie
and quicken.
in the spirit, if so be the spirit of God dwell in you. If any man have not
the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. And if Christ be in you, the
body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life for righteousness
sake. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in
you, even he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your
mortal bodies, because that his spirit dwells in you.

The same Apostle in his Epistle to the Corinthians teaches, that by The
spirit ^r holy ghost reuealeth ^he mysteries of the ^ingdome of God. 1. Cor. 2.
the revelation of the holy Ghost, the mystery of the kingdom of God is
very manifestly opened unto us. God, says he, has revealed them unto us by
his spirit. For the spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of
God. For what man knows the things of man, save the spirit of man which is
in him? Even so the things of God knows no man but the spirit of God. And we
have not received the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God,
that we might know the things which are given to us of Christ. Hitherto
perteyne these words of our John. 16.
Lord and Savior, out of the holy Gospel, I tell you the truth, it is
expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away, that comforter will not
come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come,
he will rebuke the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Of
sin, because they believe not on him. Of righteousness, because I go to the
Father, and ye see me no more. Of judgment, because the prince of this world
is judged already. And it is evident yt in all these clauses the whole sum of
religion is contained, which the holy Ghost most plentifully has delivered
unto the Church. Which we also touched in the exposition of the names of the
holy Ghost. It follows in the Gospel, I have yet many things to say unto
you, but ye can not bear them away now. Howbeit when he is come, which is the
spirit of truth, he will lead you into all truth. He shall not speak of him
self: but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show
you things to come. The spirit foresheweth things to come.
And since it is certain that the holy Ghost is come, it is evident, that he
led the Apostles into all truth: in so much that what so ever agrees not
with their writings, is worthily suspected of a lie. Otherwise I doubt not but
he at this day speaks in the Church by those which are his: but it is without
controversy, that the holy Ghost does not gainesay him self. And that things
to come were revealed to the Apostles by the spirit, we have touched in the
exposition of the names of the holy ghost. Neither is it doubtful, but at this
day he reuealeth many things to the Saints in the Church, even those things
which perteine Acts. 11.
to the preservation of the Gospel of Christ and the Saints.

Again we read in the Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, The manifestation,
says he, of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal: The diverse
gifts of the holy ghost.
for to one is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom, to an other the
word of knowledge by the same spirit: to an other is given faith by the same
spirit, to an other the gifts of healing by the same spirit, to an other
power to do miracles, to an other prophecy, to an other discerning of
spirits, to an other diverse kinds of toungs, to an other the interpretation
of toungs. But all these works that one and the self same spirit, dividing
to every man severally, even as he will. All these things are manifest, neither
need they any further exposition. These are great and evident gifts of the
holy spirit, unto which also if we add those words which the same Apostle
has set down concerning the same spirit of God, we will make an end. The
fruit of the spirit, says he, is love, joy, peace, Gal. 5.
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperaunce. These I
say, and all other virtues, the holy Ghost, which works all good things in
all men, graffeth, planteth, preserves, defends, and brings unto full
ripeness in the minds of the faithful. To all these we will now add in
stead of a conclusion, the most notable Tertullians notatable treatise of the
holy ghost
treatise of Tertullian, touching the holy Ghost. The same is this: Because
ye Lord was departing into heaven, he did necessarily give to his disciples a
comforter, least he should leave them in a manner orphans, which was not
convenient, and forsake them without a certain advocate and tutour. For it is
he that strengthened their minds and understandings, which distinguished the
sacraments of the gospel, which was in them the giver of light in heavenly
things, by whom doing st^e^gthe^ed and established, they neyth^^ ^ear^d
imprisonments nor chains, for the name of the Lord: but ^ath^r set at naught
the very powers and torments of this world, being now armed and emboldened
through him, having in them the gifts, which this self same spirit does
distribute and direct, as it were certain ornaments to the Church, which is
the spouse of Christ. For it is he that appoints prophets in the church,
instructs the teachers guides toungs, works miracles, and gives health,
brings to pass wonderful works, shows the discerning of spirits,
establishes gouernements, indueth with counsel, ministers and orders and
disposes all other spiritual gifts: and therefore makes the Church of God
on all sides, and in all things perfect, and absolute. It is he which in the
likeness of a Dove, after the Lord was baptized, descended and remayued upon
him, dwelling only in Christ fully and wholly, not maimed or minished in any
measure or portion, but plentifully received into him with his whole
abundance, that others might obtain from him a certain distribution of
gifts, the founteine of the fullness of the holy Ghost wholly remaining in
Christ, that from him might be derived veins of gifts and miracles, the holy
Ghost most abundantly dwelling in Christ. For Isaie prophesying the same,
said: And the spirit of wisdom and understanding, Isai. 11.
the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge and godliness
rests upon him. And the spirit of the fear of the Lord filled him. The
like and selfsame Isai. 6^.
saying he has also in an other place in the person of the Lord him self.
(...): to ^re^che the Gospel to the poor has he sent me. Likewise David,
Wherefore thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above Psalm. 54.
thy fellows. Of this spirit the Apostle Paul speaks, For he that has
Romans 8.
not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. And where the spirit of
the Lord is, there is liberty. This is ^. Cor. 3.
he which by water woorketh the second birth or regeneration, being a certain
seed of heavenly generation, and he that consecrateth the heavenly nativity,
being a pledge of the promised inheritance, and as it were a certain hand
writing of everlasting salvation, who makes us the temple of God, and brings
to pass that we be his dwelling house, who perfourmeth the office of an
Advocate, makes intercession for us in the hearing of God with sighs that can
not be uttered. And pouring forth his gifts of defense, is given to be a
dweller in our hearts, and a worker of holiness, who exercising that in us,
brings our bodies unto euerlastingnesse, and unto the resurrection of
immortality, while he accustometh them to be partakers in him of his
heavenly power, and to be coupled with the heavenly eternity of the holy
Ghost. For our bodies are trained up in him and by him, to proceed to
immortality, whilst they learn to behave them selves moderately according to
his ordinances. For it is he that lusts contrary to the flesh, because the
flesh fights against him. It is he which bridleth insatiable lusts, which
tameth immoderate co^cupiscences, which quenches unlawful desires, which
va^quisheth flaming affections, which abhors dr^nkennesse, which banisheth
(...), which abandoneth (...) b^nkettings, which knitteth the knot of love and
charity, which subdueth the affections, drives away sects, shows the rule
of truth, conuinceth heretics, casts out the wicked and is a d^fence to the
gospel. Of him the apostle also says, For we have not received the spirit of
the Romans 8.
world, but the spirit which is of god. Of this spirit he triumphs and says,
And I think verily that I have the 1. Cor. 7.
spirit of God. Of him he says, And the spirit of the prophets is subject 1.
Cor. 14.
to the prophets. Of him he says again, Now the spirit speaks evidently,
1. Tim. 4.
that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving head unto
spirits of error, and doctrines of devils, which speak false in hypocrisy,
having their conscience scared with an hot iron. No man being guided by this
spirit, calls Jesus execrable, 1. Cor. 12.
no man denies that Christ is the son of God, or forsakes god the Creator,
no man utters any of his own words against the scriptures, neither does any
man establish other wicked decrees, no man commands contrary laws.
Whosoever blasphemeth Mark. 3.
against this spirit, shall never have forgiunes, neither in this world nor in
the world to come. It is he that in the Apostles bears witness to Christ,
that shows constant faith of religion in martirs, that planteth marvelous
continency of assured love in virgins, that keeps the laws of the Lords
doctrine uncorrupted and undefiled in others, that confounds heretics,
reformeth the froward, reproves the unfaithful, reuealeth dissemblers, and
punishes the wicked, and preserves the church chaste and unstained in
pureness of perpetual virginity, and holiness of truth. Thus far Tertul.
Thus far, not A sum of the unity and Trinity of God.
without trembling we have intreted of the most holy mystery of the reverend
Trinity, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, which we have learned
out of the scriptures: and here now we will stay, humbly worshipping this
unity in trinity, and trinity in unity. And let us keep in mind and
acknowledge this distinction or division most manifestly declared in the
scriptures, and the unity also commended unto us with exceeding great
diligence. For in the scripture, the beginning of doing, and the flowing
founteine and welspring of al things is attributed to the father: wisdom,
counsel, and the very dispensatio^ in doing things is ascribed to the son:
and y^ force and effectual power of working is assigned to the holy ghost.
Howbeit let us take heed, least through the distinction we separate the unity
of the substance of God. For there is but one God in whom those properties
are. It is but one fire, though there be three things seen in it, light,
brightness, and heat, For these rise together, and cease all at once. The
light goes not before the brightness, (...) that the (...) before the heat.
And though on^ thing ^e ^^^^^buted to ^he light, an other thing to the
brightness, and a third thing to the heat: yet they work unseparably.
Therefore when we read that God created the world, we understand, that the
father from whom are all things, by the son by whom are all things, in the
holy ghost in whom are all things, created the worlds. And when we read that
the son became flesh, suffered, died, and rose again for our salvation, we
believe that the father and the holy ghost (though they were not partakers of
his incarnation and passion) yet notwithstanding that they wrought that our
salvation by the son whom we believe never to have been separated from them.
And when sins are said to be forgiven in the holy ghost, we believe that
this benefit, and all other benefits of our blessedness are unseparably
given and bestowed upon us, from one, only, true, living, and everlasting God,
who is the father, the son, and the holy ghost. To whom be peayse and
thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen.

Of good and evil spirits, that is, of the holy Angels of God, and of devils
or evil spirits, and of their operations.
The ninth Sermon.
NExt unto this sermon of the holy Ghost, I will add a treatise of good and
evil spirits, that is, of the holy Angels of god, and of devils, or wicked
spirits, and of their operations. Of whom since the holy scripture delivers
us an assured doctrine, and in all points profitable, it seems that we ought
not lightly to regard it, but with as much faith and diligence as we can to
bring it unto light. It were a foul fault in him that studieth after
godliness, to be ignorant of the dispositions of good and evil angels: of
whom so often mention is made in the holy scriptures: yea it were a thing most
dangerous, not to know what manner of creatures the devils are, which under that
(...) spoil us* But fir^^ we will speak of holy angels, and then (...).

The word Angel some s^y to ^e a name of office, not of (...) common to the
(...) and Greeks, A^ angel.
of whom it is borrowed, and it signifies an ambassador or legate, and
therefore it has a larger signification. For the preachers of the truth are
^al. 2 and. 3.
called Angels, as in Malachie, and in the Apostle Paul. For they are the 1.
Cor. 11.
ambassadors or messingers of the ^. Pet. 2.
Lord of hoastes. S. Peter also calls 1. Cor. 6.
evil spirits Angels: as Paul also does, saying that the faithful shall one
day judge the Angels, and that the Angel or messinger of Satan was sent unto
him: howbeit the scripture ^. Cor. 12.
peculiarly calls Angels the blessed spirits of God, Ministers, and
messingers, and heavenly armies. But the Saduceis denied that there be angels.
For Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, says, The Saduceis say, that That there
are angels.
there is no resurrection, neither Angel, nor spirit, but the Pharistis
confess both. And in deed the whole scripture does testify that there are
Angels, making mention in many places that they have appeared unto men, and
have reveled unto them the will of God, or otherwise accomplished Acts. 23.
his work. Truly the Lord Jesus reasoning against ye Saduceis in the Gospel,
says, Ye err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. For in the
resurrection they Matthew. 22.
neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in
heaven. Let us therefore believe that there are Angels. For the authority of
the son of God, and the irreuocable truth of the holy scriptures ought
worthily to win more ^r^dite with us, than the toys of all Saduceis and
wicked men. What? have not the heathenish Poets, and phil^sophers, confessed
that there are A. Steuchus in his 6. and. 8. book, de perenni philosophia.
Angels, whom they call Gods? for they (...) that Gods in the likeness (...),
were lodged and interteyned of righteous men, seemed to al learned men to have
meant nothing else, than that which the holy scriptures make mention of, how
Abraham and Loathe received Angels into their houses resembling strangers. But
howsoever the case stands, most certain it is, both by the holy scripture,
and by manifold experience, that there are blessed spirits of God, that is to
say, good angels. Now what the nature of Angels is, it can not thoroughly be
declared of any man. What Angels are.
For there are many things in the order of creatures, whose nature can not
directly and perfectly be expounded: they may nevertheless after a sort,
according to our capacity be shadowed out. Some therefore there are which say
that Angels are good spirits, ministers, of a fiery nature, created for the
ministry, or service of god and good men. Othersome say, Angels are heavenly
spirits, whose ministry and service God uses to execute all things which
he has determined. Wherefore we shall not seem to miss much of the mark, if
we say that Angels are good spirits, heavenly, substaunces I mean
incorruptible, created for the ministry or service of God and men.

That Angels are created of God, the writings of the Prophets and That Angels
are created.
Apostles do witness. For Paul cites that saying of David, Which makes
his Angels spirits, and his Heb 1.
ministers a flame of fire. Coloss. 1.


The same Apostle says: By Christ all things are created, that are in heaven,
and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be majesty's or
lordships, either rules or powers. Wherefore heretics have set forth toys,
saying that Angels are workers in the creation of al things, and coeternall
with God. For God in time by the son as well created angels as all other
creatures. Now touching the time when angels were When Angels were created.
created, whether with the light before man, or after man, and all the works of
God, let him tell that can, the holy scripture passing it over with silence,
and pronou^cing no certeintie thereof. Epiphanius and Augustinus ancient
interpreters of ye scriptures, learnedly and truly confess, that there is
nothing delivered in the scriptures of y^ matter. And that which is not
delivered in the scriptures, can not without danger be inquired after, but
without danger we may be ignorant thereof. It is sufficient to acknowledge
that angels were created, at what time soever it seems they were created. Let
us rather give god thanks, that he has created for mankind so excellent
ministers. Let us live an holy and an angelike life in the sight of Gods holy
angels. Let us watch, least he which transfigureth and turns him self into
an angel of light, under a good show and likeness, deceive us. Now we must
further see, Angels are Substances
what manner of creatures angels are: They are heavenly spirits, and
incorruptible and most swift substaunces. We say expressly that angels are
substances, that is to say, creatures having essence or being. For some deny
that they are substa^ces, subsisting in their proper essence or being. For they
imagine that angels are nothing else tha^ qualities, motions, or inspirations
of good mynds. But the canonical scripture calloth them ministers. Oursauiour
Heb. 1.
says, that they which rise again shall be like unto the angels of Matthew. 22.
God. Saint Paul declares that the son of God is more excellent them the
angels, for that they worship him as God their creator. The self same apostle
says, For ye shall read in no Hebr. 2.
place, that the son takes on him the angels, but the seed of Abraham
takes he on him. Which testimonies most manifestly teach, that angels are
substances, not qualities or motions in men's minds, that I say nothing now
how they have oftentimes appeared unto men in likeness or shape of men. Let us
therefore hold and confess that angels are substances. Furthermore, what
substaunces angels are, other peradventure have What manner of Substances
angels are.
better declared: for the which I bear no man grudge. I confess that there
are good spirits, to make difference of them that are evil. Whereof shall be
spoken hereafter. I confess that they are good, not so much for the goodness
of their nature in which they continued, as for their operation or working.
For they always stir up and further us to that which is good. I confess
also that angels are spirits, that is to say, spiritual, heavenly,
incorruptible, and exceeding swift substaunces. For the Scripture witnesses
and says: Which makes Psalm. 104*
his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. The scripture, I say,
names Angels spirits and a flame of fire, not that angels of their own
nature and substance are corporal fire: but because fire after a sort
resembles them which in clearness, beauty, and incorruptiblenesse, and also
in swiftness, quickness, and brightness, are y^ most beautiful and excellent
creatures. The (...) definitions gro^^ely enoughe ^ay, that the angels are
bodily substances, but Bodily Substa^ces.
of their own kind. For God only is without body. In th^se words therefore
thus they have ^etdowne: Every creature is bodily, Angels and all heavenly
powers are bodily: though they consist not of flesh. Now hereby we believe
that they are bodily, because they are limited in place as the soul also is
enclosed with flesh. (Angels peradventure at this day are more aptly said to
be local or in place, not circumscriptiuely; but definitiuely.) We must
believe that nothing by nature is bodilesse and invisible, but God only, that
is to say, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost: who therefore is rightly
believed to be bodilesse, because he is in every place, and fulfilleth, and
conserueth all things: and therefore he is invisible to all creatures, because
he is without body. Thus much from the^.

But those bodies either of young What bodies are taken of Angels.
men or old men, in which Angels oftentimes appeared unto the fathers, were
not their proper or natural bodies, but taken upon them, and as it were
borrowed from elsewhere, for a time, and for the weakness of our capacity.
And what manner bodies those same very bodies were which they took, or from
whence they were taken, or where they were bestowed when they had ended their
business, it is very hard to declare. S. Augustine in his Encheridion ad
Laurent. cap. 59. says. Who can declare, with what manner bodies they have
appeared unto men, that they might not only be seen but be touched, and again
convey, not with sound substance of flesh, but by spiritual power, certain
visions not to the bodily eyes, but to the eyes of the spirit or mind, or
telsomthing not in the ear outwardly, but inwardly in the mind of man, even
they them selves being therein: as it is written in the book of the prophets,
And the angel said unto me, which spoke in me. For he says not, which spoke
unto me, but in me. Or that appear even in ones fleepe, and talk together
after the manner of dreams. For we have in the gospel, Behold the angel of the
Lord appeared unto him in his sleep, saying, etc. For by these means, angels
do as it were declare that they have not bodies which can be handled: and they
make a very hard question, how the fathers did wash their feet? how Jacob by
taking so fast hold wrestled with the angel? When these things come in
question, and every one gives his conjecture as he is able, their heads are
not unfruitfully occupied: if a moderate disputation be taken in hand, and the
error of them which think they know that which in deed they know not, be
removed: for what needs it that these and such like things be affirmed or
denied, or defined with danger, since we may be ignorant of them without
blame. Thus far he. In these and such like causes let us acknowledge his
omnipotency and wonderful dispensatio^, who does what he will, to whom truly it
is not hard to create substaunces fit and agreeable for his purpose and
appointment: since of nothing he made al visible and invisible creatures.
Moreover we affirm that angels through the grace and power Angels are
incorruptible.
of God are incorruptible substa^ces, yea and unchangeable in their felicity,
without burden and hindrances. For S. August. also Ad Pet. Diac. de fide cap.
23. says, That unchangeableness was not by nature graffed in Angels, but
freely given by the grace of God. The same August. De vera religione Cap. 13.
says: We must confess that angels by nature are chaungeable (if God only be
unchangeable) but in that will wherewith they love God rather than them selves,
they remain steadfast and stable in him, and enjoy his majesty, being subject
most willingly to him alone. With these words agree those which are read in
Definit. Ecclesiast. cap. 61. in this wise. The Angelical powers which
continued steadfast in the love of God, when ye proud angels fell, received this
in way of recompense, that henceforth they should never feel the fretting bit
of ye tooth of sin to seize upon them, and that they should continually enjoy
ye sight of their creator without end of felicity. And in him so created
should continue in everlasting steadfastness. Thus far he. Truly the
scripture she wing the Matthew. 22.
incorruptiblenesse of Angels, affirms that we in the resurrection shall be
like the angels. For we shall rise incorruptible. Therefore Angels are 1. Cor.
15.
incorruptible. For thus says our savior: The children of this world Luke.
20.
marry wives, and are married, but they that shall be counted worthy to enjoy
that world, and the resurrection from the dead, do not marry wives, neither
are married, neither can they die any more, for they are equal with the
Angels, and are the sons of God, in so much as they are the children of the
resurrection. Whereupon Theodorctus In diuinis decretis, has thus inferred: We
do not therefore reckon the angels in the number of Gods, as the Poets and
Philosophers of the Grecians do, neither do we divide natures y^ are without
bodies* into the male and female ^inde. For to a nature immortal or that can
not di^, division of kind is superfluous: For they have, no need of
incresing, since they feel no diminishing, etc. But that the Angels are most
free and swift, and without impediment, Angels are most free. swifte and
speedy.
burden and let, the scripture in many places declares. In the Acts of the
Apostles thus we read. The priests put the apostles in the common prison,
Acts. 5.
but the angel of the Lord by night opened the prison doors, and brought them
forth and said, Go and stand and speak in the temple unto the people, all
the words of this life. But when the officers came, and found them not in the
prison, they returned and told, saying, The prison truly found we shut with all diligence, and the keepers standing without before the doors. In the same
book thus again we read written, Herod put Peter in prison, and Peter
sleapt between Acts. 1^.
two soldiers bound with two chains, and the keepers before the door kept
the prison. And behold the angel of the Lord was there present (or stood by
him) and a light shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side and
stirred him up, saying, arise up quickly, and his chains fell off from his
hands. And anon when they were past the first and second watch, they came unto
the iron gate that leads unto the city, which opened unto the^ by the own
accord. Behold no impediments or lets, how strong and mighty soever they were,
hindered or stayed y^ angel of y^ Lord, that he might not execute most speedily
the commission which he had from God. All things give place and make way to the
Lords ambassador. The iron chains fell from Peter's hands of their own
accord. He walks safe, through the (...) soldiers, the Angel going before
him. The lock of the pris^nd^r^ no man opening it, is unlocked, and when the
servant of God were gone out, it is shut again. These angels, that is to
say, these heavenly ambassadors, being of their own nature most swift and
speedy spirits are now conuersaunt in heaven, the power of God so willing and
working: but so soon as it shall please the Lord of all, by and by they are
present with me^ in earth, unto whom they are sent of God from heaven. And they
are present in earth sometime with one, and sometime with an other. Not that
they are not contained in their proper place. For when the angel told the
women of Christ's resurrection, he was not at the same instant in heaven, and
by the grave or sepulcher at once. For God only is not contained in place. For
he is present in every place. But angels go not forward fair and softely,
neither are they moved with labor or toyling, after ye manner of corruptible
bodies. Yet in the Scriptures they are expressly said to ascend into heaven,
and from thence to descend unto us. We verily rightly believe, that our souls
as soon as they depart out of the bodies, do forthwith enter into the
kingdom of heaven. For the John. 5.
Lord has said in the Gospel, But has escaped from death unto life. And,
to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And thou do read of Lazarus the
beggar, And it came to Luke 23. 16.
pass that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom. To this also now seems that saying of Daniel to belong. As I was yet
a speaking, making supplication, Dan. 9.
and confessing mine own find, and the sin of my people Israel, and pouring
forth my prayers before the Lord my God, for the holy hill of my God. Yea,
while I was yet speaking in my prayer, the man Gabriel (whom I had seen before
in the vision) came flying hastily unto me. Lo, our souls are carried up into
heaven by the Angels, which notwtstanding are elsewhere said at an instant to
be taken up into heaven.

Afterward, as soon as Daniel had prayed unto the Lord, the Angel without
any longer delay, flying speedily (for so the Scripture speaks for our
capacity) is present with him that prays, and shows him that he is heard
of God. Angels therefore are swift, and passing speedy, being kept down with
no weight, neither hindered or stayed from perfourming those things for which
they are sense from heaven, albeit they are contained in place as creatures
(though not limited) and art moved with a certain order and manner agreeable
to that spiritual nature. This treatise requires peradventure that something
also be spoken of the might, The strength of Angels.
power, and strength of Angels. But what need many words in a manifest
matter? For since the Lord, who sends forth his Angels, is Almighty, there
is nothing but that angels can do it in those their embassages and
ministeries. There is nothing in the whole course of nature that is able to
withstand the ministers of the Almighty God. For Angels are not called powers
and virtues for naught.

I will show one example among many, and yet not the chiefest. One Angel in
one night, without any furniture, or much ado, sl^e in the ten^es of the
Assyri^ns at the walls of Hi^r^salem a hundred fourscore, and five thousand of
the valiantest soldiers.

In Daniel we have such a description of an angel, whereby both the power and
excellency of angels may be gathered. His body, says he, was like the
Turkishe or Jasper stone, his face Dan. 10.
to look upon was like lightening, his eyes as lamps of fire, his arms and
feet were like in color to polished brass, and the voice of his words was
like the voice of a multitude. So that it is not needful to make a long
discourse of the knowledge and wisdom of angels. For this is not a thing that
passes capacity, seeing Angels are The knowledge of Angels.
creatures. But in so much as perteyneth to their embassages and ministeries,
surely they are most wise, in all points furnished, and in no part diminished.
For he that sends them is everlasting wisdom it self, and he furnishes
his Ambassadors most perfectly. Furthermore, touching the multitude and order
of angels, Of the multitude and order of Angels.
certain Divines have wittily and wisely enough disputed. The Scripture simply
affirms that angels are innumerable. For Daniel says, A thousand thousands
ministered unto Dan. 7.
him, and ten thousand thousands stood before him. It is also read that
Christ said to Peter, Think thou that I can not pray unto my father, and
he shall send unto me more than Matthew. 26
twelve legions of Angels? Paul^ also says, Ye are come into the city of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, Hebr. 12.
and to an innumerable company of Angels. Many distinguishe that innumerable
multitude into nine companies, and these again they bring into three
hi^ra^chies or holy principalities, of which, they affirm that each of them
have three orders: the first Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones: the second,
Lordshippes, Virtues, Powers: the third Principalities, Archangels, and Angels.
They add in what they differ between them selves, and what is proper to
every one of them. But S. August. in his Encheir. cap. 58. says, Wherein
lordships, principalities, and powers do differ between them selves, let them
tell that can: if yet they are able to prove that they say. I confess my self
to be ignorant of these matters. And the same Augustine, Ad Orosiu^ co^tra
Luscillianistas, says: Truly the Apostle says, Whether seats, (threnes)
whether lordships, whether principalities, whether powers. And therefore that
there are seats, Lordships, principalities and powers in the hoastes of
heaven, I steadfastly believe, and that they differ somewhat between them
selves, I hold it for an undoubted truth: but what they are and what they
differ between them selves I know not. Neither truly do I think my self for
the ignorance thereof to be indaungered, as I am for disobedience if I neglect
the Lords commandments. And anon in the same place he shows, that we must
not busily and curiously search after these things. Whose counsel we do
willingly obey, perceiving that the scriptures, which minister unto us al
things necessary and healthful, have set down nothing concerning them. Yet
this we can not deny, that those names (or if you will so call them orders of
Angels,) are expressed in the holy Scriptures: whereupon for our weakness, it
is meet after a forte to expound them as we may. These The exposition of
names given to Angels.
blesse^ spirits of heaven seem generally and simply to be called Angels,
because they be the messingers and ambassadors of the most high GOD, Angels.
who, it appears are called Archangels, when they besent in message in
Archangels.
Gods greatest matters, to show or do things altogether hard and heavenly.
For so we read in Paul, that The Lord himself shall deseend from heaven in a
shout, and in the voice of 1. These. 4.
an Archangel, and in the trumpe of God. For that we may compare small things
with great, we see that kings and princes in weighty affairs, appoint none to
be their ambassadors but noble me^. It appears that they are called Thrones
because they stand Thrones or Seats.
always at the throne of God, or else because God is read in the Prophets to
have made and placed his own seat in Angels, and to be carried of them, as
it were in the coche of a king, as David says: He bowed the heavens Psalm. 18.
and came down, and there was dar^knes under his feet. He rode upon the
Cherubims, or was carried upon the Cherubims, and did fly, he came flying
upon the wings of the wind. Furthermore the description of the chariot and
throne of God in Ezechiel is known. They seem to be called Lordshipps,
principalities, and powers, because God executes his government and
exercises his Lordships. Principalities.
own power in the world by the ministry of Angels. For so also they are
called powers and armies, or the Powers.
host of heaven. For they incompasse the Lord round as his guard, and he who
is called the God of Sabbath, or of hoastes, the Lord I say of all Angels,
spirits, and creatures, whose ministry he uses, when, where, how, and as
much as it pleases him, uses them also as his soldiers. S. Hierome thinks
they are called Cherubims of their exceeding knowledge. Cherubim
Other expound them swift. Seraphims have their name of feruentnesse: Or
Seraphim.
else because they are compared to most pure and clear fire: Or for that they
are burning in the love of God. By these names in the mean while are shadowed
out y^ manifold offices, God uses the ministry of Angels.
and diverse operations of Angels, which we being desirous to comprehend in
few words, have said that Angels are created of God for the ministry of God
himself and men. For David said, Which makes his Angels spirits and his
ministers a flame of fire. And again in another place, O praise the Lord all
ye angels of his, ye that excel in strength, ye that fulfill Psalm. 103.
his commandment, and hearken unto the voice of his words. O praise ye the
Lord all his hoasts, ye servants of his that do his pleasure. And of Angels
Paul also says, Are not all ministering spirits, which are sent out into the
ministry for their sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation? But God uses the
ministry of Angels upon no necessity, but of his own goodwill. For he
might be without them, since by his word he brings to pass what he will.
For he spoke and they were made, he commanded and they were created, not one
of all the angels i^yntly working with him: so at this day also, he is able
without the help of Angels, to bring to pass what he will. But because of his
special goodness he created them to the partaking of everlasting life and
salvation, he uses their ministry to us ward, as he also does the service
of other creatures to whom they declare their faith and obedience to God ward,
and God exercises his unspeakable goodwill both toward them, whom by grace he
has made partakers of ever lasting joy, and also toward us, whom he has
vouchsafed to honor with the service of so excellent a company. For among
other innumerable and the greatest benefits of God, whereat not without cause
we are astonished, this is not to be accounted the least, that he has given us
angels to be our servants. Truly this is an exceeding great token of his
fatherly care and regard to us ward, first of all because he frames himself
so sweetly to our capacities and dispositions. In time past the Lord himself
spoke with his own mouth in mount Sina with the church or congregation of ye
Israelites, but when he understood that they had rather he should speak by
their interpretour Moses, he took their wish and offer, and afterward he spoke
by Moses, Exodus 19. D^u^. 5.
using his ministry toward them. Truly God is able to pour most perfect
faith into our minds by his holy spirit, without any ioynt-working of men, but
because he knew it was profitable for us that it should so be, he instituted
the ministry of his word, and planteth the faith of the Apostles by the
preaching of the Gospel. And that ordinance once made he does so precisely
observe, that when he might have done the same by angels, yet by the Angels
themselves he sends them that are to be instructed in the faith to the
Apostles. For it is manifest what the angels of the Lord in the Acts of the
Apostles did with Cornelius, whom he sends unto the preaching of Peter.
Therefore when God Acts. 10.
sees the ministry of angels convenient for us, then of good will, upon no
necessity he uses their ministry toward me^. And doubtless angels love men
exceedingly, and that which they do, they do of their own accord, not of
constraint, nor unwillingly. For they cannot but exceedingly love them whom
they see to be so dear to their creator, that for their sakes he spared not
his only begotten son, but for them delivered him up into most bitter
death. That I make no mention here of ye most ready obedience which they
perform to their God, who wills and commands them to serve him, and men.
The Lord in the Gospel witnesses, That the Angels Luke. 15.
in heaven rejoice at the conversion and turning of men that be sinners. In
Zachary the angel of the Zacha* 1.
Lord is brought in very sorrowful for the myserie of the captives in Babylon,
and careful for their deliverance from captivity. All which things commend
unto us the love and affection of Angels toward mankind. For otherwise those
blessed spirits, are not moved with affections, carfulness or sorrow, as
we are in the flesh. But they be glad, and rejoice, as blessed spirits can
rejoice, in whom there is no humane affection. Which affections
nevertheless, are not only attributed to them, but to GOD himself tropically
or by a figure, and as they say, (...), yt is, after the affection of man, to
the end our minds may the better understand, and more easily conceive
spiritual and heavenly things as it were by parables: howbeit let us think
that parables do not always contain all things, therefore our minds must be
lifted up to higher things, and spiritual things must spiritually be judged.

The ministry of Angels extends very far, which I will declare What the
ministeries of angels are.
by rehearsing certain kinds of them as briefly and as plainly as I can.
First they do service unto God himself in all things, which I think is
sufficiently declared in that which went before. The same God they all magnify
together, with everlasting praises, worshipping, glorifying, and rejoicing in
him. For Theodoret reciting certain testimonies of scriptures concerning this
matter, says, The ministry or service of angels, is the praising of god,
and singing of hymns or songs. For ye holy prophet Esaie says of the
Seraphim, yt they cried and Esai. ^.
said, Holy, holy, holy, is the lord god of Sabbath, heaven and earth are
full of his glory. And of ye Cherubim, ye heavenly prophet Ezechiel says,
that he heard them saying, Blessed be the Ezech. 3.
glory of the Lord out of his place.

The whole host of heaven also sings a birthe song to Christ their Prince
when he was borne, as is to be seen in S. Luke, saying: Glory Luke. 2.
be to God on high, and in earth peace, and among men good will. So they go
before with an example for men to follow, teaching what they also should do,
that is, offer praise and thank sgiuing to God on high, whom the Angels also
reverence and worship with us.

Moreover the angels love ye truth, and are desirous to have ye same spread
abroad, and the glory of God by all means furthered, and therefore they lay
blocks in the way of false prophets hating them with their accursed doctrine
and Antichriste. For S. Peter testifyeth that the Angels desire 1. Pet. 1.
to behold the Gospel of the son of God. In the revelation of Jesus Christ
made to John the Apostle, the Angel of the Lord binds Satan: and the angels
furthering the Gospel of Christ, set themselves every where against false
Christians, and false teachers. For even in y^ end of the world, The son of
man shall send forth Matthew. 13.
his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom, all things that
offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of
fire.

They themselves stand in the presence of the Almighty God waiting his
commandment, who so soon as he shall command them to go forth, and to
execute his comaundements, by and by they make speed. They come therefore unto
men to declare the will and commandments of God. So the Angel Gabriel came
first to Zachary the father of John Baptiste, afterward he came to the blessed
Luke. 1.
virgin to show unto her the incarnation of the son of God. Innumerable
examples of this kind are every where found in the holy scriptures.

They watch for our safety, being careful for us, yet without molestation,
whereof I told you before. They advertise the faithful in time convenient,
foreshewing dangers to come, and they also do comfort the afflicted. For the
wisemen being warned by ye Angel, that they should not return unto Jerusalem
to Herod, avoid Matthew. 2.
great peril. Joseph also being commanded by the Angel slieth into Egypt,
delivering the Christ or anointed of the Lord out of the bloody hands of
Herod. Christ also at the Luke. 22.
mount of Oliuet being in a bloody sweat, is comforted by the angel. And
Hagar the handmaide of Sara being in extreme danger, is recreated Genesis 16.
by the consolation of an angel. As also the Apostle S. Paul being very near
shippwracke, hears this Acts. 17.
voice of the Angel of the Lord: Fear not Paul, thou must be brought before
Csar, and lo God has given thee all them that sail with thee. Again, angels
are sent for reuengement of mischiefous persons, to take punishment, I mean,
of those that be wicked and impenitent.

For the fir^^ borne of the A^gyptians (...) of the Angel. In the Acts Exodus 12.
of the Apostles the Angel of the Lord siniteth Herod Agrippa. It is said
Acts. 12.
that in the camp of the A^^yrians many were sinitten and slain of one Angel.
4. Reg. 19.
And David saw an Angel with a sword drawn, houering between heaven and
earth, afflicting the people 2. Reg. 24.
with a most grievous plague. So we believe that the holy Angels shall come
with ye son of man unto judgment, as Paul witnesses and says. Our Lord
Jesus Christ shall be revealed 2 Thessalonians. 1.
from heaven, with the Angels of his power, in flaming fire, rendering
vengeance unto them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. For in the Revelation of Jesus Christ also the Apoc. 16.
Angels power out vialls full of the wrath of God upon the heads of false
Christians.

Moreover, they take upon them the charge and defense of us, God so
commanding: they are our keepers, ready at hand watching over us that no
adversity happen unto us, and do guide our ways. For hitherto belong the
testimonies of the Psalms, and very many examples of the scripture. David
says, This poor (or afflicted) man cried, and the Lord heard him: Psalm. 34.
and saved him out of all his troubles. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his
tents round about them that fear him, and delivers them. And in another
Psalm he says: There shall no evil come unto thee, neither shall any
plague come near thy tabernacle (or dwelling.) For he shall give his Psalm. 91.
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee
in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone. Thou shall go
(or walk) upon the Lion and Add^r (or aspe,) the young non and the dragon
shall thou (...) under thy ^eete. And the Lord in the Gospel Matthew. 18.
plainly says, that little children have angels without doubt to be their
keepers. Jacob ^he (...) greatly Genesis 32.
fearing his brother Esau* (...) Angels coming to meet him, and understands
that Angels were given unto him as guides and keepers of him in his way,
against the ^^ercenesse of his brothe. In the affairs of Heliseus, 4. Reg. 6.
we read that the king of Syria beseeged the city Dothan with a great host,
wherein Helisus at that time ledd his life, whom he had purposed to take: when
the servant of Helisaeus perceived that, and was troubled in mind, and
lamented his masters case, Helisaeus said, Fear not, for they that be with
us, are more than they that be with them: the Prophet also prayed and said,
Lord I beseech thee open his Servants
eyes that he may see, and the lord opened the eyes of the servant, and he
looked and behold the mounteine was full of horses, and fiery chariots, that is
to say, he was armed and defended with the guard of an host of Angels.

Abraham also says to his servant, The Lord God of heaven which said unto me,
Unto thy seed will I give Gene. 24.
this land, he shall send his Angel before thee, namely, to direct thy way, to
defend thee, and bring to pass that thou may obtain thy desire. For the
Lord himself said to Moses in Exodus, Behold I will send my Angel Exodus 34.
before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to lead thee to the place that I
have prepared.

In the Acts of the Apostles thou do often read, that Angels served the
Apostles, furthered their purpose, and defended them against their adversaries.
In Daniel Ang^ls are brought in for princes, and presidents or (...). 10.
governors of kingdom^, as Michael with Gabriel princes of the Israelitishe
kingdom^^ and (...) other of the Persian (...) of y^ Gr^cian kingd^^^, and
each of them debate the matt^r touching his own kingdom, and fight for the
same. Not that there is any variaunce or disagreement in heau^n, where
doubtless there is plentiful peace, everlasting concord and quietness,
neither that there are conflictes or battles fought between the Angels, as
between those Gods whom the Poet Homere describes: but by a parable and
allusion heaven is compared to the Court of some puissaunt and renowned prince,
where Ambassadors of sundry countries debate their diverse causes: which is
done in consideration of our weak wit and slender capacity. For thus we
ought to conceive in our mind, that God, who is the only Lord of all
kingdoms, hears all men's suites, and takes in hand all men's matters, and
that Angels at the word and will of God minister and do service unto God, when
it pleases him to use their ministry and service. For so Nabuchodonosor also
saw in a vision a watchman coming ^an. 4.
down from heaven: and foretelling the destiny of the tree that was to be
hewn down.

Nevertheless we must here take We must ^ot attribute too much unto Angels.
heed least contrary to the nature of true religion we attribute too much to
Angels, that we worship them not, that we call not upon them nor serve them. In
deed when men he are that Angels are given unto them of God for ministers, and
that God by them does good unto us, by and by they think that some honor is
to be ascri^^ed (...) given unto them. But ^^ncere religion does teach us to
acknowl^d^^* GOD the author of all (...) thing^^* that the Angels are ^he
minister^ (...) God, and as it were instruments by whom he works, as we see
the son, the moon, the stars, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and ye
Apostles, to be and to have been. But who being well in his wits, has
worshipped, called upon, or served ye Sun, or the stars, though they be
creatures very excellent and beneficial unto men? And what partaker I pray you
of true faith and belief, has worshipped, called upon, or served the
Patriarchs, the Prophets, and y^ Apostles, though they were endued with most
precious gifts, and wonderful in working of miracles. We do all worship, call
upon and serve God, and we confess y^ God works by his saints: who together
with the holy angels of God, require nothing less than to be worshipped,
called upon and served of us. For truly said Lactantius, lib. Institut. 2.
cap. 18. Angels, since they Saints will not be worshipped of us.
be immortal, neither suffer, nor yet are vnlling to be called Gods: whose
only office it is alone to attend upon God with their service, to be at his
beck, and to do nothing at all but at his commandment. For we say that God
so governs the world, as a king rules his kingdom, whose officers no man
will say are fellows with him in ruling his kingdom, albeit affairs be
dispatched by their ministry and service. And therefore we read that s.
Augustine also said, When the Angels of God hear, he himself hears in
them, as in his true temple, not made with hands. Verily if we look more
narrowly into and weighe the holy scripture, we shall find not in one or two
places, that the name of God and Angels (...). For angels ar^ (...), and
isntrumental as (they (...) theme) but God is the (...) principal cause. For
in the Acts of the Apostles we read th^^ (...) And when forty yea^^s w^r^
(...). there appeared into him in the Acts. 7.
wilderness of mount Sin^ an Angel. And by and by he adds* And the voice of
the Lord came unto (...) saying, I am the God of thy fath^^, (...) He calls
the self same Lord, whom a little before he had called an angel, to wit,
because he believed that an angel both says and does all things at Gods
commandment: that ye word and the work is proper to God, and the angels are
as instruments. Likewise in the book of Judges, cap. 6. he (...) called Lord,
which even now was called an angel. Hagar the handmaid of Sara received a great
benefit in the desert Genesis 16.
by the angel of the Lord, yet she accompteth not the same received of ye
angel, but of the Lord. She gives not thanks to the angel, neither does she
consecrate the memory thereof to the angel, much less does she worship and
call upon the angel, nay rather she refers her speech also unto God. For so
the holy scripture witnesses* And she called the name of the lord which spoke
unto her, Thou god look on me, etc. The children of Israel, before whom
the angel of the Lord went in the wilderness, never offered sacrifice to their
guide or captain, never worshipped or served him. Even so the servant of
Abraham being committed to the angel, does not make supplication unto him,
desiring him well to prosper his purpose, but he prays unto God, and
requires of him to show and give trial of his mercy toward his master
Abraham. In Daniel the (...) God ^n^ly. For they (...), Blessess^^ thou O Lord
god of (...) fathers, ^ight worthy to be (...) and honored in that (...). So
in like manner (...) in express words ^^nfe^^^th that (...) god, whose he is,
and whom he worshippeth* though in ye mean^ while he had made mention also of
an angel. For so he^ says in the Acts, There stood by me Acts. 27.
their night, the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve, that is to say.
God. For in another place John being willing to worshipp at the angels feet,
the angel cries: See thou do it not for I am thy follow servant, and Apoc.
22.
of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the words of this
book. These plain and manifest testimonies of holy scripture, evidently
(...) us, that although God use the ministry of angels toward us, yet y^ they
are to be acknowledged and confessed of us, to be ministers of God, and fellow
servant, and therefore not to be worshipped nor called upon, but that God
only must be worshipped, called upon, and served. From this holy doctrine of
scripture, certain ministers and ecclestastical writers of ye ancient Church
have nothing swarued. For Lactantius in that book which we cited a little
before says: Angels will have no honor given unto them, whose honor is in
God. But they which revolted and fell from the ministry of God, because they
are enemies of the truth and offenders, they go about to challenge to
themselves the (...) I go unto (...) what prayer, (...) devouring to (...)
unto thee, ^^d being not able of themselves have assayed (as I hear) these
ways, and have fallen into ^ desire and (...) aft^r curious visions, (...) to
be deceived. These things are extant, Lib. 11. Confess. cap. 42. (...) which
he shows at large, that Jesus Christ is the only (...) ^^^tercessour for all
the faithful* The same Augustine in his (...). De Ciuitate Dei, cap. 16. (...)
words that the good angel^ of God require sacrifices, not for themselves, but
for God. In his last chapter of his book. De ver a Religione, he says: Let
us believe that ye best angel (...) that God be served with the (...) and most
excellent ministry, that to^^ther with them we should (...) God, in the (...)
of whom they are blessed. For we are not blessed by seeing ye angels, but by
seeing the truth, whereby we also love the very angels, and (...) together
with them. Wher^fore we honor them for lou^, not of (...). Neither The
wor^hippinge ^f Angels greatly condemned.
do we build temples unto them. For they are unwilling in such sort to be
honored of us. Because they know yt we our selves, if we he good, are the
temples of the most high God. It is well written therefore y^ an angel for^ad a
man to worship him, but willed him to worship on^ only God, under whom he also
was a fellow servant with him. The same August therefore in his catalogue of
heretics, (...) of Christ, and his church. (...) of ye author, if any require
(...) th^se* If we should make a temple ((...)) of wood and stone to the hol^^
Mark what he thinks of the temple builte to S. Michael in Mount Garganu^.
ang^^ that is most excellent; should (...) ^ee cursed of the ^rueth of Christ,
and of the church of God? because we do that service to a creature, (...) only
is due to one god. If therefore by building a ^^ple to any kind (...) we should
^ob God of his (...) not he the true God (...) we build not a temple, but
(...) his temple* Th^^ (...)

These (...) have I hither to (...) of the holy o^ good (...) Of evil
spirits.
(...), of wicked angels (...), that is to say, (...) devils. Hereof I will
(...) plainly speak that which the holy scriptures minister unto me^. That
there are devils y^ Saduce^s in That there are devils.
times p^st ^e^ied, and at this day also (...) religious; nay rather Epicures
deny the same. Who unless they ^^pent, shall one day feel to their exceeding
great pain and smart, both that there are devils, and that they are tormenters
and executioners of all wicked men and Epicures. For the whole scripture and
all Godly and wise men, as many as have lived from the beginning of the world,
even unto this day, have confessed that there are evil spirits or devils.

Now what thing devils are, it is What the devil is.
no less hard and doubtful exactly to define (...), than I (...) difficult
to d^scribe fully the nature of Angels: howbeit I will shadow them out by one
or other kind of description, to the end I may entreat of them in a certain
order. Evil angels are corrupt and wicked spirits, and for their reuolting or
falling away, everlastingly condemned: subject in deed they are to God, but
yet nevertheless adversaries to God and men, for that they turn all their
traueile^ and studies to the contempt and despi^ing of God, and to ye deceyuing
and destruction of men. First, that the devil is a creature, hereby it is
manifest, because there is but one creator only, That the devil is a
creature.
to wit that God in Triniti^ and Unity. He created all spirits: but the diued
also falls in the reckoning of sp^rites. We said before that the time of
their creation is not set down in the s^ripture, when as we shew^d that it was
no where expressed, at what (...), whether before man or after man Ang^ls were
created. Hereunto we (...) add, that evil angels became evil, not by creation,
but by their own reu^lting The devil was not created evil.
and falling away. For all things which God created, were and are exceeding
good: all angels therefore, as men in like manner, were naturally created good.
But they continued not steadfast in this goodness, granted given and graffed in
them of God, but they being corrupt with their own malice, as men also are,
fell, and were by the most just god, thrown out of heaven, as out of the
felicity or happiness which was given them. Now, when or at what time this was
done, ye scripture Of the fall of Angels from heaven.
does not again express: howbeit, it seems to have been done before the
fall of man. For the devil by the serpent egged our parents to sin, and
drew them into misery and death. (...) particularly show y^ (...) how (...)
were (...) out of (...). I^ ^^yth g^^^rally y^ there (...) ^^lly or (...) ^ound
in the angels, and that therefore they were thrown down headlong into h^ll.
For we read in the book of Job, Behold he found no truth in his Job. 4.
servant, and in his angels there was folly (or wickedness.) S. Peter nothing
disagreeing from this, said, That God spared not the angels which sinn^d but
cast them down into hell, and 2. Pet. 2.
delivered them into chains of darkness, to be kept unto judgment. But (...)
also ye brother of James, ye Apostle of the Lord, syrnamed Thaddus, rehear^^ng
ye same sentence in a man^r, said, The angels which kept not their first
estate, (to wit, the nature wherein they were created) but left their own
habitation, (to wit, their (...) their offic^, and their faith) the Lord has
reserved in everlasting chains unto darcknes, unto the judgment of the great
day* What, does not our lord and ^^uiour Christ speaking of y^ devil say thus?
He was a murderer John. ^.
from the beginning, and abode not in the truth. For herevppon we may gather,
that the devil sometime abode or was in the truth, but shruncke and forsook it
by faithless falling away. Those testimonies which witness that an angel
sinned by reuolting, and was thrown down headlong into hell, are sufficient
for godly minds, and such as are not curious. Furthermore out of Esaie and
Ezechiel, there are recited of others testimonies making for the Isai. 14.
same matter: which as we reject not, so we doubt not but that by an Allegory
they are applied unto these of ours. That which is alleged out of Luke, I
Ezech. 2^
fawe (...) property expounded of the ^^rst full of Angels, for there is
another fall of the devil, tow^tt, wh^reby thy he fell by his own ^y (...)
(whereby he ha^ possessed the minds of men, and (...) them with wickedness and
sin) thorough ye coming of Christ into the world, and through the sincere
preching of the gospel. Now thereis no d^ubt that all Angels were created
good, and that the evil fell through the^^ own and not thorough Gods faulte^
and fo^lie, whereof I spoke somewhat also in the 10. Ser. of the. 3. Decade,
where I entreated of the beginning of (...). To which I will now (...) and
evident declaration of (...) bishop of Cyrus taken out (...) of the scriptures,
who in his (...). decret. says. Let us consider whether the devils justly
s^^er punishment, since they received of him that made the a nature like his.
(...) can he which is good be called the creator of wickedness? And how^ is he
(...) righteous and just, that punish^ (...) which can do nothing y^ (...), but
is tied and bound with fetters o^ w^ckednes and vice? But we know yt the God of
al things, and ye (...) of justice and righteousness is righ^^ous and just.
Therefore he will not punish the devils unjustly. And we know that god was
their guide and captein, and yt the good angels are his workmanship, and that
he is called good of all such as are rightly minded. He therefore made not ye
nature which could do no thing yt is good, traueling and bringing forth
wickedness only, and doing things contrary to his will and mind. If God
therefore did neither make the evil nature (for he is the maker and worker of
all good things, as he him self is good,) then does he not so much as (...)
or (...), and he will punish y^ (...) and ^uch also as serve and are under him.
Therefore ^he devil of his own will and accord is evil, and they y^ take his
part. For as god made man good in y^ beginning, and with free will of mind,
these (...), to wit, good angels kept their nature which they received, pure
and vncorrupt: but those (to wit men) declined and sell into the worse, and
corrupted their heavenly shapes, and they that were like unto God, made the^
selves br^tish: so also y^ devil and rout of devils which were with other
bodilesse crea^^^^s, (...) not follow ye goodwil of them (...) ^he Lord God: but
being pu^t up with y^ disease of hautines and pride, (...) them selves unto y^
which was the (...), and fell from their former state (...). Thus far he. With
Theodo^^^ ^o^h S. Augustine agree (...) De vera rel^. ca 13 (...), The devil
in as much as he is (...) not evil, but in as much as he (...) wicked of his
will, for set^^^g more by him self than by god, he wo^ld not be in subjection
unto him, but swelling through pride, he fell from his chief essence and
excellent being. And again, in his tretise upon Ioh. 42 (...) demand from
whence the (...) from thence doutles from whence also th^other angels are: but
the other angels constantly continued in their obedience, he by disobedience and
pride sell from an angel and became a devil. Now yt which I affirmed touching
those wicked spirits, The devil is everlastingly condemned
who for their reuolting and falling away are adjudged to damnation. I see it
denied of some, who promise to condemned spirits redemption from their
punishments, a little before the judgment day. But against these, very many
doctors of ye church have disputed, all and every one of the^ condemning with
one voice, an opinion which the (...) long ago condemned. For the judge in the
end of the world (...) definitive sentence against (...) than and all the
wicked, shall say, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, Ma^th. 25.
which is prepared for the devil and his ^ngels. And by and by the Apostle and
holy Evangelist a witness of the truth does ^dde, And these shall go into
everlasting ^unishment, but the righteous into life everlasting. For in Mark
the lord also Mark: 9.
said, In hell their worm dies not, and ^he fire is not quenched. And in John
in more plain and pithie words he says, They that have done good shall come
forth John. 5.
unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the
^esurrection of condemnation. He does not ^ay, they shall go either into life or
into condemnation, but into the resurrection either of life or condemnation,
that is, to remain everlastingly in life or death. For Daniel, of whom the
Lord borrowed these words, has said, And many of them that sleep in the dust
of Da^. ^2.
the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
perpetual contempt. For John the Apostle says, that the smoke of those that
are condemned and thrown headlong in Apoc. 20.
to hell, for evermore shall ascend up. It is certain therefore, that the
condemnation of the wicked shall be altogether without end and everlasting.
Furthermore Devils are spirits and substa^ces.
in calling the reuolting. Angels, spirits, we do not understand by spirit
the wicked affection of the heart, or the quality or passion of the mind, or
corruption and sin. For the world is not without some, which think the the
devil is nothing else, but a mischefous man, or a mischiefous and sinful
^o^motion or outrage of the mind. By spirits therefore we understand
spiri^uall substances, endued with feeling and ^nderstanding For in the first
chapter of (...), satan came and showed him self among the children, (or
serua^t^ of god Job. 1.
speaking with the lord. The gospel (...) reports unto us, that devils bee^^
cast out of a man, entered into the herd Matthew. 8
of swine, ^ drowned them i^ the (...) of the sea or lake of Gaderen. Moreover
the gospel records, that the devil sinned John. 8.
from the beginning, that he coltinued not in the truth, that he is a lier and
a murderer. Judas makes mention that the angel fought with the devil In
Mark the devils cry out and say, What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus
Mark. 1.
of Nazareth, art thou come to destroy us? but yet for all that our savior
being already appointed and made judge, shall say to the devils, Go into the
everlasting fire. Al which testimonies agree Matthew. 25.
to substances by them selves subsistine and not to qualities. Devils therefore
ar^ spiritual substances. But what bodie^ What manner of bodies they be which
the devils tak^.
they be which they often times take, and in which they appear unto men, n^
man I think can perfectly tell: which also we told you a little before, when
we entreated of the bodies which good angels took: For truly that devils pu^ on
bodies and shapes differing from their own, the history of Samuel raised up
by a witch manifestly proves. It was not Samuel that was raised from the 1.
Sa. 28.
dead, but the capteine-coyner of lies. counterfeiting Samuel deceived king
Saul. And Paul witnesses that sath^ ^. Cor. 1^
does transform himself into an angel of light. Histories also declare, yt
the devil is a marvelous iugling deceiuer, in taking on him diverse forms and
shapes And as I said of good angels, that they The diu^^^ quick^^ crafty, and
^ightie.
are speedy in their ministry, without burden or lets, so there is no doubt
that devils in their kind and work, are well prepared. For the scriptures
declare that they have a thousand shifts, wonderful craftiness and
subtlety, and that their know^edge is (...) reaches very far. Finally that
they are very ready and never weary to attempt and perform althings. They
pass through the whole world with exceeding swiftness, they handle all their
matters very craftily, and therefore are marvelous names shadowing out their
force and power allotted unto them. For he is called Satan the old serpent, a
deceiuer, the prince of this world, the prince of darkness, which has power
over the air, a roaring Lion. Of which, and of other not unlike, I will speak
anon more at large, when I have first told you this, that there are an
infinite route of devils. For vij. devils are cast An infinite route of devils.
Mark. 16. Matthew. 12.
out of Marie Magdalen. That devil of whom Matthew speaks, being no sooner
cast out, museth and consulteth how he may be wholly restored again, taking to
him vij. other spirits worse than himself. Moreover in Marks gospel there is
mention made of a legion. For the unclean spirit being asked of Mark. 3
the lord, what his name was, answered, My name is legion, because we are
^any. Therefore, when there is mention made of satan also where in ho^ie
scripture, it is not so to be taken, as though there were either but one
sub^^ance or person of y^ devil* For they ar^ comprehended as the members under
^he head, and as particularities under ge^eralities. The scripture truly
elsewhere makes mention of the prince of the devils. For the enemies of
Christ do often cry out, He casts out devils Mark. 3.
by the prince of devils, but yet that saying does not express what manner of
principality that is, and whether orderly among them selves those evil
spirits be distinguished. And it is certain yt all the ungodly are under one
head, as all the godly are under one Christ the lord. It is certain yt all the
devils are o^ (...) corrupt (...) their force only to this end, to (...)
adversaries unto god, and hurtful enemies to men. But of y^ operations, works,
or effects of devils, I will speak where I shall by ye way exposid their names or
attributes. Corrupt and wicked spirits generally are called devils, which is
asmu^^ as if you should say, slaunderers or false accusers. For (...) with the
Greeks signifies slander. etc. And the word devil is fetched from the
Grecians. For Devil.
he sows slanders in accusing men unto god, and in setting men at variance
between themselves: yt now I say nothing, how he goes about to bring god and
his works into suspicio^ among men. Therefore he is elsewhere called a lier, and
the author of lies, and the father of al A liar.
hypocrites, and therefore the spring of all (...), heresies and wickednesses.
And because Judas was an hypocrite, a liar, Ioh. 6.
a (...) and traitor, the lord rightly gave him the name of a devil. The
Apostle Peter called the devil an adversary. Satan o^ an adversary. 1. Pet.
5. Matthew. 13.
For the lord also himself called him. The envious man, which sowed tar^^ in
the lords field. For he is the (...) of God and men, setting himself against
the will of God, whose glory also he labors to take away, and hinders the
salvation of men, and sows infinite (...) in ye church of god. And truly
Matthew. 4
the Hebrews call him satan, whom we call an adversary. That word is
translated unto men. For in that Peter set himself against the counsel and
purpose of God, he hears this voice of the lord, Get thee behind me satan.
And David also said to his nephue Abisai, the son of Zeruia, What have I to
do with you ye sons of Zeruia, that this day ye should be adversaries unto
me? For Abisai gai^e said the counsel and decree of David.

The devil is called Demon, t^ Matthew. ^
wit, knowing, crafty, and cunning in many things, (...) which signifies, I
know. For Plato truly in Cra^ylo, according to the opinion of Hesiodus, does
think that devils, whom we commonly call by this word Daemones, are called
and as it were named (...), that is, wise, prudent, and knowing. Hereunto the
word serpent must be referred. The serpent, says the Scripture, was subtiler
than all the beasts of the field, Therefore did the devil choose the Genesis 3.
serpent to be his dwelling place, by whom he might put his guileful devises
in practice and deceive our first parents. For he is called the deceiuer the
beguiler, and seducer of the world, ^ serpent^ and d^agon
the old serpent and dragon. For what seducing soever there is in y^ world,
what wicked devises and deceitful practices, they flow from this one fou^tein
of all his mischief. In profane writers this word is used in a far contrary
signification. For Socrates in Plato says. I affirm yt every man is Daemo^,
that is to say, wise whosoever is good, and that he is Daemoniacus yt is to
say, wise and happy both alive and dead. Wherefore it is a thing very much and
often used of Homer to adorn noble personages with this name. But in the
history of the gospel, Demoniaci are such as are possessed with a devil. Paul
in his first epistle to Tuno. reduces and draws 1. Tim. 4.
the whole body of deceits, and doctrins colored with a show of false wisedo^e,
unto this head. S Peter says, Be sober and watch, for your adversary the 1.
Pet. 5.
devil as a roaring lion walks about, seking whom he may devour, whom A
roaring lion.
resist steadfastly in faith. By ye Lion he shadoweth out unto us the nature or
disposition of the devil. For the devil has exceeding great strength, he is
full of greedy raueny, and most cruel fierceness: whereupon he is also called of
some a cruel beast. The Lord calls him a A murderer.
murderer. For he inspired into Cain and all mans^ears horrible murders, and
at this day also he sounds the alarm to all wars, to all broyling battles,
to al slaughters and seditions, to be short, he kindles wrath, he sows
hatred, and nourishes envy. He is named a tempter. A tempt^^
For he is always egging men to mischief, sparing nothing whatsoever he
thinks can entice and draw us to things most wicked.

In the history of the gospel, and in An evil and unclean spirit.
the writings of the Apostles, the devil has well nigh the name of an unclean,
of a mischiefous or malignant, of a filthy and wicked spirit. For he fell not
from his pureness only through his own fault, in which he was first created
of yt most pure god, but even now also he is delighted with vnpurenesse, and
allureth al men to uncleanness. From this master of mischief proceed al filthy
lusts al whoredo^es, adulteries, al excess, drunkenness and surfeting, all
beastlines and vanity, pride and arrogancy. etc. Now the devil also in the
gospel is called Beelzebub, because that sometime they of Accaron in Palestine
thinking they worshipped God, worshipped in very deed the devil. S. Paul
says, What agreement has Christ with Belial? he sets Belial against
Christ, to wit, the devil against god. But Moses put y^ cogitatio^ of Belial
for a wicked and evil thought. Therefore the devil is wicked and ungodly,
rebellious and obstinate against God. For they say that Belial signifies
altogether as much, as if a man would say, lawless, without yoke and without
discipline. There are some also which think that in the book of Job, the devil
is figured or signified by Behemoth and Leuiathan. Job. 40. and 41. chapter.

S. Paul gives the devils diverse names, saying that the godly have battle,
against principalities and powers, against worldly governors of th darcknesse
of this world, against spierituall wickedness in heavenly (places,) against
the governor that rules in the air, against the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience: whom also in an other place he calls The God
of this world.

And as God exercises his power in the world, and in the good, for the most
part, by good angels, who for that cause I said are called principalities and
powers: so because the same GOD of his just judgment does suffer the devil
to have rule over the wicked, they are rightly called principalities and
powers. Not that GOD delivers unto him the mere and chiefest rule: for all
power belongs to God only: but because he suffers him to execute his
tyranny. For he plainly says, that he is the Prince of the world, to wit,
of the wicked. For by interpretation it follows, He is the Prince of the
darcknesse of this world. And who knows not that in the Scriptures
darcknesse does signify ignorance, blindenesie, unbelief, ungodliness, and
wickedness, and to be short, ungodly men which are drowned in these vices?
And again, there is added that which declares the true meaning, Which
works in the children of disobedience. Therefore the faithful and obediente,
who are in the kingdom of Christ, and not in the kingdom of the devil, are
exempted from this rule and government.

Neither is satan called God upon (...) God (...).
any other consideration, for there is added, of this world. For in very deed
the devil is not a God, but because there are found in the world certain mad
me^, who take him for god, he has the name of God, The (...) father Augustine
expounded this no otherwise. For in his treatise upon John 25. he says: God
forbid we should think the devil were so called the prince of the world, that
we should believe that he is able to rule over heaven and earth: but the world
(for he is called the prince of this world) is said to be in wicked men, which
are dispearsed throughout the whole compass of the earth. And again the same
August. in his first chap. De agone christiano, says. The prince of this
world is cast The prince of this world cast out.
out, not that he is cast out of y^ world, but out of their minds, which
cleave to the word of god, and love not the world whereof he is Prince,
because he has dominion over them which love temporal goods, which are
contained in this visible world, not for that he is Lord of this world, but
prince of those concupiscences, whereby every thing is coueted that is
transitory. By this concupiscence the devil reigns in man and holds his
heart in possession.

The same Doctor in his treatise upon John. 52. asks the question, Whether
satan were not cast out of the minds of the prophets and patriarchs, since
it is reported in ye gospel, that he is cast out by Christ. And he makes
answer, Verily, he is cast out quite. How therefore is it said, He shall now
be cast out? How think we, but because that which came to pass in very few
men, is even now foretold, yt it shall come to pass shortly in many and
mighty people. As that saying: but the holy ghost was not yet given, Because
Jesus was not yet glorified: may have the like question, and the like answer.
For yt abundance of spiritual grace, was not given as yet, which afterward
was given. Thus far he.

Furthermore when the Apostle says, That we sight against spiritual Princes o^
the world
wickednesses in heavenly places, by heavenly he means not heavenly joys,
placeing the devils in heaven again, but the air, that is the lower part of
the world, yea, and the world it self. For he says elsewhere, According to
the spirit that rules in the air. And truly the Princes of this world are
in the air, above, beneath, and about us, assaulting us on every side.
Otherwise neither heaven nor the lower region of the air, is subject to the
rule of devils, that therein they may do what they will, or abuse it as they
list, but so far forth as God of his just judgment shall permit. For in
this disputation we must always hold for a confessed and undoubted truth,
that our Lord God is King and governor of all creatures, and that he keeps
still his dominion over all creatures, and exercises the same after a most
just and equal manner. And although out of all these things might be
gathered, how The operations of the devil.
great and what manner of operation the devils is, yet thereunto will I ad
somewhat more, least any thing should seem to be wanting in this matter. In
the description of the devil, I drew into two heads all his effects, work or
operations. For devils are adversaries to God and enemies to men, whose whole
endeavors and driftes tend to the despising of God, and to the deceiving and
destruction of men. The su^me therefore is this, They bend all their force to
ye contempt of God and destruction of men And that their power to hurt is not
small, and their understanding also quick to bring all their purposes to
effect, we have heard once or twice already. That they have a will to do hurt,
there is no cause why any man should dout. For yt Lord said to his disciples in
ye gospel, Behold satan has Luke. 22.
earnestly desired to sift you, as it were wheat. And again, Watch and pray,
lest Matthew. 26.
ye enter into tentation. And S. Peter says, Your adversary, as a roaring lion
1. Pet. 5.
rangeth up and down, seeking whom he may devour. And yt he withstandeth God,
and with continual labor gaine-sayeth God, and stirs up all creatures to
the hating and despising of God, yt scripture does every where testify. He did
wickedly instill into the minds of our first parents, an opinion altogether
unworthy of God, as though maliciously he did envy at their blessed state.
For he said by the serpent, Has God said ye shall not eat of that tree? And
anon, Genesis 3.
Ye shall not dye the death. For God does know, that the same day that ye eat
thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and
evil. Unto which deceiptfull words when they gave credit, they them selves
perished, and drew with them the whole world into ruin and destruction. Neither
at this day verily ceasseth he so slander and speak evil, as well of God him
self, as also of his works, to the intent yt he might draw us together with him
into y^ hating of God, into distrust and desperation, and to everlasting
destruction. For he enuyeth us our salvation, where unto we are ordained by
Christ. But it is better to speak somewhat more distinctly of this thing.
Satan hurtes men in their minds, in their bodies, and in their goods. For he
enticeth and provoke our minds to sin. Furthermore, he also troubles y^
minds of men, and drives them into an outrage, and being out of quiet in
this their outrage he miserably vexes, tormen^eth, (...) them. ^^^^vpon thou
may read yt some physicians call this madness or outrage an evil spirit or
wicked devil. But he diversely plagueth their bodies, chiefly with diseases. We
have yt most holy man Job for an example. In the gospel after S. Luke it is
said, that that woman which was bowed together, Luke. ^3.
was bound by Satan xviij. years. Again in the gospel according to S. Mark,
we read of a child which had a dumb spirit, And when soever he takes him he
teareth him, and he someth, Mark. 9.
and gnasheth with his teeth and pineth away, and casting him self on the
ground lies groueling. This self same evil spirit takes away from men their
goods, wastes and diminishes their substance and wordly wealth. Which thing
again is manifest in the history of Job and of the gospel. For Job is spoiled
of all his substance, satan so ordering y^ matter by soldiers and robbers.
The herd of swine also being drowned and strangled in the sea, wrought great
loss to ye Gergesites, and being violently carried away of yt devils, were
tumbled headlong, into ye sea. Furthermore, this mischefous miscrea^t in
acco^plishing these things, does so^ewhat by him self, and by wicked angels his
fellows, and somewhat by other creatures. By him self he works outwardly and
inwardly, by te^pting and provoking me^. For he casts before our eyes
counterfeit and deceiptfull shapes, changing him self into an angel of light,
he windeth him self into the minds of men. He speaks unto us, setting before
us gay promises and most grievous threatenings, howbeit all of them colored with
deceiptes and lies. For oftentimes he brings reasons probable indeed and
apparent, yea and places of Scripture, at a blushe very agreeable, but yet
maliciously wre^^ed to his own purpose. And by this means he either hinders
and maimeth true faith in the minds of men, or else he takes it away and
vterlie overthrows it, and by and by he possesses the^ wholly, and drives
them into most certain perdition. So it is said, that when he had entered into
Judas John. 13.
heart, he cast him wholly headlong into everlasting destruction. The heart of man
is open unto God only, for he only is the searcher of the heart and reins. But
the devil by circumuenting men with his guileful practices, and by putting
wicked persuasions into their hearts, is said to enter into men's hearts. And he
works against man by other creatures also, as by elements, when he raises
fire, winds, waters, hail, and such like calamities against us. Furthermore
he stirs up me^ against us, our friends to vex and betray us, and our
enemies to consume and bring us to our end wc persecutions, battles and
bloudsheds. The history of Job yet again bears witness of these things.
Whereunto you may reckon persecutions laid upon ye worshipers of God. Now also
he eggeth false prophets and incha^ters against us. Whereunto belong deceitful
inglings, and all kinds of sorcerie and witchcraft, which the works of the
sorcerers of Egypt, and of Simo^, and the place of Moses in Deuteronomy. 13. testify
to be most effectual. Hereunto chiefly belong false miracles, and corrupt
answers or Oracles. By these truly in times past he did very much hurt to yt
church of god, as histories testify, nether cease he at this day to do hurt:
which thing experience it self does teach and verify. For though it be
certain y^ satan is not Matthew. 12
cast out by yt power of satan, yet one gives place to another for a time, to
this end, yt they may yt more dsilie deceive men, and obtain a kingdom.

Christ truly and the Apostle Paul foretoulde, that even the last times
should be wonderfully bewitched with deceiptful signs and powers. Most
evident places touching y^ thing are extant in Mat. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2. cha. More
might be spoken (dearly beloved) and that at large, concerning the operations
or workings of the devil. But I trust these things being gathered together in
brevity, are sufficient, and give occasion to muse of higher things. But let
no man so understand these things, as The power of the devil is definite or
limited.
if ye devil were able to do all things, and that what he will he can also do
by and by. For his power is definite, or limited and restrained, so y^ he
cannot do so much as he would. Otherwise all things had been over throwe^ and
perished long ago. Therefore not without consideration I added in the
describing of the devil, y^ he is subject to god, for he can do nothing with
out Gods permission. Now God permits him, either to exercise and try the
patience of those that are his, and to hasten their salvation, as it is
manifest in the history of Job, and in the words of Paul to the Corin saying,
Least I should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of the
revelations, 1. Cor. 12.
there was given unto me a prick to the flesh, the messenger of satan to
buffet me. Neither is it doubful, that in most grievous torments of
persecutions he exalts many notable martyrs, yea and at this day does and in
times past has exalted such unto glory and everlasting rest. Or else he
gives the devil leave to execute violence and cruelty upon men, by that
means to chastise their wickedness, or to punish their unbelief. For verily
the devils are the instruments of Gods wrath, to execute his vengeance. For
Paul says, The coming of Antichriste, is after the 2 Thessalonians. 2.
working of satan, in all power and signs and wonders of lying, and in all
deceiuablenes of unrighteousness in them that perish: because they received
not the love of truth, that they might be saved. And therefore GOD shall send
them strong delusion, that they should believe lies, that all they might be
damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. And
this in a manner is the strength and power of sorcerie or inchaunting, which
is feeble in the faithful.

Wherefore, there is no cause We must^ fight manfully against the ^iuel, bu^
we must^ not fear him.
why any man should miserably fear the Devil: But rather sanctify ye (says
Esaie) the Lord of hosts, let him be your fear and your reverence.

Some say that certain nations of the East worshipped the devil, for this
cause, that he should not hurt them. But these are stark staring mad. For
if it be not Gods will, which even now I began to tell you, or if he give no
leave, Satan cannot touch so much as a hair of thine. For he could not enter
into the heard of swine, which were feeding nighe the lake Genezaret at
Gadara, and destroy them, but by the Lords permission.

Saint Augustine also expounding the 32. psalm, alleges in these words,
the history of Job, What could the devil himself do? durst he take away
one seely sheep from the holy man Job, before he said, Lay thy hand on him,
that is to say, give me power? He was willing, but GOD did not suffer him.
When God gave him leave, then he was able: therefore the devil was not able,
but GOD which gave him leave.

Therefore Job being well instructed, did not say, as we now are wont to say,
The Lord gave, and the devil has taken away: but, The Lord gave, and the
Lord has taken away. And these things do exceedingly comfort the godly in
temptations, who understand that nothing can happen to the^ without Gods
permission, and that he permits nothing but that which makes for our
amendment and salvation, and therefore that we are always preserved by the
providence and bountifulness of God. For whatsoever has hitherto been spoken
concerning the power and workinges of the diuelles, perteined not hitherto, to
dashe us out of courage, and cast us down: but to make us more vigilant or
watchful. The Lord that overcame the devil, ^latth. 4.
and shows us the way to overcome him, commands us to watch. For therefore
he encountered with satan the first, second, and third time to instruct us
how we should fight against the enemy of mankind. He overcame him for us,
that we should not despair of ability and nower easily to overcome him since
he is already weakened and wounded.

By faith doubtless we shall overcome him. For by faith we are knit ^. John. 5.
unto Christ, and by faith we draw the spirit of Christ, by the force and
virtue whereof we shall triumph. Truly for that cause Saint Peter wills us
To resist by faith. Saint Paul exborting us unto this conflict, 1. Pet. 5.
and furnishing us with excellent complete armor says: Take unto Ephe. 6.
you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist in the evil day,
and having finished all things to stand fast. Stand therefore, having your
loins gyrt about with the truth and having on the breaste plate of
righteousness, and your feet shodde that you may be prepared to the gospel of
peace. Above all things taking the shield of faith, wherewith you may quench
all the fiery darts of that wicked. And take the helmet of ^aluation, and the
sword of the spirit which is the word of God, praying always in all prayers and
supplication in the spirit, etc.

Whereunto that also beelongeth, which the same Apostle witnesses God does
not suffer us to be 1. Cor. 10.
tempted above that we are able to bear, but shall with the temptation make
away to escape. Let us therefore reverence this God, let us beeseech him, that
through his power and might we may overcome, Amen.

Of the reasonable Soul of man, and of his most certain salvation after the
death of his body.
The tenth Sermon.
ALl men do confess that the reasonable soul of man has affinity or
likeness with spirits, neither is there any wiseman, as I think, which does
deny that the knowledge of the reasonable soul of man, whereof the Scripture
teaches so many things, and that too so diligently, is most wholesome and
necessary to all the godly: the order therefore, the profit and the very
necessity also of things do require, that I speak somewhat likewise of the
reasonable soul of man: wherein I will follow the plainness of the
scripture, and of the interpretours thereof, leaving physical or natural
points unto them to be expounded, unto whom it belongs by duty and
profession: saving that we will so far deal in them as we cannot want them
in this discourse of ours. The holy scripture and the interpretours thereof,
neither move curious questions of the soul of man, neither do they satisfy
curious heads, when they desire to know those things, which cannot be
declared, or if they could, yet it would always seem unto the^ that nothing
were unto them more aptly spoken, for they always stagger, they are always
learning and yet doubt, they neuor come to the knowledge of the truth with a
quiet mind, they never abide in the plain truth when it is found, they
search after other and many more and subtiler matters than they understand.
But we know yt all things which are necessary and for our salvation are
simply and plainly delivered in the holy scripturs, and that we must simply
godlily, and religiously rest in them: therefore those things that are not
delivered in the^ (touching yt matter of our salvation) we know yt they are not
to be sought after of us, and that they hinder not our salvation if we be
ignorant of them. The word Anima (which we call soul) is diversely taken in
The word Anima, (which we call soul) is diversely taken.
ye holy scripture. First of all (Anima) yt soul is taken for every living
thing For Moses brings in the lord speaking, Let the earth bring forth living
creature after his kind, catel, worm, and beast of the earth after his kind.
For who knows not that there are reckoned three kinds or parts (give me
leave so to speak for instruction sake) or three principal powers of the
souls? for there is y^ soul vegetative which works in plants. There is the
soul sensitive which is not without the soul vegetative, and it gives life
to brute beasts, and other creaturs endued with life and feeling. There is also
the reasonable soul wherewith men are endued, which is furnished with many
powers or abilities, and comprehends both y^ other. Hereof The soul is
breath and life.
(Anima) the soul is taken in ye scripture for breath which men draw in and
let go again, and also for the life of man, or of a living creature. Thus we
read (Anima eius, etc.) His life is in him. And, I will do thee no more harm
(says Saul to David) because (Anima mea) my life was precious in thine eyes
this day. The Grecians call Acts. 20.
(Anima) the soul (...), as it were (...), because by drawing breath it
refreshes. The Hebricians call it Naephaeseh, of comforting. Again (Anima) the
soul is taken in the scriptures Soul is taken for man.
for the thing it self yt has life, yea even for any, or rather for the whole
man. For it is said in the law, The soul that works with a spirit, Leuit. 20.
or that is a southsayer, shall die. Likewise in Paul we read, Let every Romans
13.
soul be subject to the higher power. And again in Genesis the king of Sodom
says to Abraham, Give me the souls, and take the substance or goods Genesis 14.
to thy self. For the scripture is wont to name the whole by a part. For as by
the soul he means yt whole man, rehearsing the nobler part, so by flesh also
he signifies the whole baser part. Moreover since man, and also other living
creatures have an appetitiue or desiring soul is used in the scripture for
affection, will desire, or lust. For Soul a ^esire.
Ezechiel says, They shall not satisfy their souls (In Dutch, Sy werdend iren
(...). 7.
glust not buffen) Noither shall their bellies be filled. Lastly (Anima) y^
soul signifies y^ reasonable soul of man. Soul is the spirit of man.
Whereof we will entreat (God assisting) at this present. Yet here I cannot
dissemble, that among very famous writers there is controversy (De anima, and
animo) about the soul and the mind, whether they are one and the self same,
or diverse, and that there are reasons on both sides. They that make a
difference The soul and mind
between them, say, that by the soul we live, and that with the mind we
understand: which thing Lactantius says in his eighteenth cha. De opisi^^o
Dei. I know that all the best and most approved writers use them both
indifferently, and take the one for the other. For we must not think that
there are two souls in man. For very That there is but one soul.
well have the schoose definitions defined uttering these words in y^ 15. cha.
We do not say that there are two souls in one ma, as Iacobus and certain of
the Syrians write, one natural, whereby the body has life, and is mingled with
blood: the other spiritual which ministers reason: But we say there is one and
the self same soul in man, which both quickneth the body with his fellowship,
and orders him self by his own reason. Therefore we do not think that there
is any consideration to be had of them, which altogether That there ^s a soul.
deny that there is a soul. For these are as mad as they, which deny that
the sun shines. For all of us do see and feel the sun: as also we live by
the benefit of ye soul. Furthermore, what the reasonable soul of man is,
What the soul is.
the wise heads of this world could not as yet with one agreement define. For
they so differ, y^ a man shall hardly find two which say one thing. And there
are ^pinions not a few contrary between themselves. What, do not the old
interpretours ^f the scriptures doubtingly proceed in de^ining the soul
Lactantius in his book. De opificio Dei, denies that man can atteine to the
reason and nature of the soul. Therefore nothing at al did they err from the
truth, which thought the soul could be comprehended in no absolute
definition, wherein his nature might be expressed thoroughly and at the full: yet
that the nature or disposition of the same might after a sort b^ shadowed out,
and that by the works or actions thereof, and by such qualities as the
scripture does attribute. There are some therefore which have said that the
soul is the spirit of life, created after the image of god, and breathed into
ye body of man. One there is which describes it thus, The soul is a spirit,
whereby the body, to which it is coupled does live, made apt to the knowledge
of God through love, and hereby meet to be joined within, unto everlasting
blessedness. Another defines it after this sort, A reasonable soul is an
understanding spirit, one part of the substance of man, neither dies it when
it is departed from the body, but is immortal. Cassiodore defines it, The
soul of man is created of God, a spiritual and peculiar substance, which
quickens the body whose own it is, reasonable in deed and immortal. We will
setdown a description fetched from the scripture, to be weyed and considered
upon of the godly, and to direct and rule this our whole discourse.

The soul is a spiritual substance, powered of God into man's body, that being
joined thereunto, it might ^uicken and direct the same: but being diffeuered
from the body, it should not die, but live immortal forever.

Some deny that the soul is a substance. That souls are substa^tes.
For they contend that it is nothing else than the power of life in man, and in
deed a certain quality. But the holy scripture acknowledges that the soul
is a substan^^ce subsisting. For the Lord in the Gospel witnesses that a
soul may be formented in hell. Which forthwith by the self same authority
of the Gospel is showed, as it were to be viewed withour eyes, in the soul of
the rich glutton. The same Lord which cannot lie said to the thief: To day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luke. 16. Luke. 32.
Which words can not be expounded of any other part in the thief, than of
the soul. For his body was nailed and did hang on the cross. Whereupon also
the Apostle and Evangelist John saw Under the Altar the souls of them that
were slain for the word of God. He heard them Apoc. 6.
crying with a loud voice, and saying. How long tariest thou Lord which art
holy, and true, to judge and to avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth? The same John saw long white garments given to every one of the souls,
these words b^ing there withal spoken of the Lord, Rest yet for a little
season, until your fellow feruantes, and your brethren that shall be killed as
ye are, shall be fulfilled. All which verily agree not to qualities, but to
substances, which have their being: therefore the souls of men are
substances. Which thing, yt they might most plainly and pithily express,
certain Ecclesiastical writers I think have set down, that the souls of men
are bodily, that is, substaunces of their kind, haueing the^ proper being.
Neither do I think (dearly beloned) I shall be tedious unto you if I recite
word for word that which saint Augustine has reasoned of this matter on
both parts, in his Epistle to Saint Hi^rome, which is in order the 28, saying
That the soul is bodilesse, though it be hard to persuade it to the duller
sort, yet I confess that I am so persuaded. But that I may not move
controversy about a word to no purpose, I will willingly be silent: because
where there is no doubt of the thing, there is no need to strive about the
name. If every substance or essence be a body, or if that which after some
sort is in it self is more aptly called something, then the soul is a body.
But if you will call that only a bodilesse nature, which is altogether
unchangeable, and is wholly every where, the^ the soul is a body, because the
soul is no some such thing. Furthermore, if nothing be a body but that
which with some length, breadth, and height, rests or is moved in space of
place, that the greater part thereof takes the greater room, and the lesser
part the lesser room, and be less in part than in the whole, then the soul
is not a body.

For that which gives the power of life unto the body, is streatched through
the whole body, not by local spreading of it self, but by a certain lively
extending of it self. For the whole soul is present in all and every part of
the body at once, and not lesser in the lesser parts, nor greater in the
greater parts, but in some places more vehement and quick, in some more
remiss and faint, and in all it is the whole, and in every part the whole. For
that whole soul which in some parts of the body feels not, in some other
parts where it feels, it does wholly feel in it self, and not only in some
part of it self. For where any part of the quick flesh is pricked with a
sharp thing, although that place be not only not of the whole body, no not so
much almost as seen in the body, yet the whole ^oule feels that pricking,
and yet is not that pain that is felt dispersed over all the parts of the
body, but is only ^est where it is. How then comes that by and by to the
whole soul, which is not felt, but in one place of the body* but because
that the whole soul is there, where the smarte is felt, and yet leaves not
the other parts of the body that it might be there wholly and all in all. For
those parts of the body live also by the presence of the soul, where no
such thing is done. If it were so that the grief were in more places than one
at once, it should be felt by the whole soul in each place. Therefore the
whole soul could not be both in all and in every part of the body whose
own it is all at once, if it were so spread through those parts ^s we see
bodies are by spaces of places, their lesser parts taking the lesser room,
and their greater parts the greater room. Wherefore if the soul be to be
termed a body, surely it is not such a body, as is in substance like the
earth, or like the water, or the ^^er, or the caelestial bodies. For all such
bodies are greater in greater places, and lesser in lesser places, and nothing
of them is wholly in any some part of theirs; but as the parts of the places
be, so are they filled with the parts of the bodies. Where-vppon the soul is
perceived, whether it be a body, or whether it is to be called bodilesse, to
have a certain proper nature created of a more excellent substance than all the
elements of earthly mould: which cannot be conceived by any fantasy or
imagination of bodily shapes, which we atteine unto by the senses of our
flesh, but is understood in the mind and felt in the life. (...) I ^ehearsed
Augustines words.

The Scripture also aymeth chiefly (...) teach that the The soul is
bodilesse or a spirit.
(...). For advisedly (...) the same a spirit. For the Lord in the Gospel
after John says, I will put my life from me, and I will take it again. No man
takes it from me, but I put it away of my self. And in the John. 10.
same Evangelist you read, And Jesus John. 19.
said it is (...), and when he had bowed his head, he gave up the ghost. For he
(...) out in another Evangelist, ^ather into thy hands I commit my Luke. 23.
spirit. And Matthe we says, And Jesus when he had cried Matthew. 27.
again with a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost. Wher-vnto doubtless may be
referred that which we read in the Acts of the Apostles of the first martyr
Stephan, And they Acts. 7.
storied Stephan calling on and saying, Lord (...) receive my spirit. But by
these things I cannot more plainly and (...) express what manner What manner
of substance the soul of man is.
of substance the soul of man is, which I believe to be a spirit, having in
deed a substance created of God proper and peculiar to it self. For
Augustine, whose words I alleged a little before, says yet again, 1. Cap. de
Q^^ntitate Animae: I can not name the substance of the soul: For I do not
think the same to be of these usual and known natures, which we touch
with the senses of our body. For I think that the soul consists not of
earth, nor of water, nor of a^^e, nor of the, neit^^r yet of all (...) joined
together, nor of any one of them. The nature of the soul may be called simple,
because it consists not of other natures. Which words of Augustine,
Cassidore willing to rehe^rse and express by imitation, says, The soul^ of
man created of God, is a spiritual and peculiar substance. Therefore I simpli^
offirme that the soul hashe a singular, yea, a certain more excellent (...)
and differing from other spirit, having his true being and working always
from his creator, but such as we in our speech cannot ^^^pass^, ^ither are
able to utter.

In the mean (...) allow The soul^ ^s neithe^ God nor part of God.
if the^ (...) to (...), what maker of substa^ie* she so^^e is, say that the
soul is God, or else surely a part or p^rtion of God. For the scripture
reproves them do the. For truly y^ soul is a creature and is drowned in
variablenes and sin^s: but a creator, and clean of it self it is not. And
because God the creator is immutable a indivisible, the soul cannot be a
portion of God. Therefore elegantly and truly An^chus Prudentius in his (...),
after he had in many words (...) these filthy errors, gathering at length all the meaning of the truth, says: To say the soul is GOD, or part of him
It Is folly great, and too absurd a thing:
Since chief and (...) joys it (...) which swim
From always f^eshe, and euer-lasting spring.
Now it (...) falls to s^nne,
One while (...), another while in pain:
For due (...) it (...) win:
Now (...) it is free again.
To y^ end that we might overthrow this error, and discern the soul from
other spirits and spiritual substances, we added in our description, That the
soul of man is powered into the body of man by God: Whereby every man
understands without any ado that it is created, and also is a spirit, not
angeli^al but humane, that is breathed into man's body by God, of his own
essence and nature.

Where again, a new question touching the original of souls does offer Of the
original of the soul
it self to us to be expounded. For it is wont to be asked, from whence souls
come? when or how they enter into their bodies?

Saint Hierome is the Author that in time past there were very many opinions
and those same most contrary between them selves, touching the original of
souls. For he writ^^g to Marcellinus, and (...), faith, I remember your
question, nay rather (...), the quest^^n of the church touching the state of
the soul: whether it ^el from heaven, as Pythagoras the Philospher, and al
Platoniste^ and Origin do think. Or whether it be of ye proper substance of
God, as the Stoikes, Manichcus, and the heresies of Priscilianus of Spain do
suppose. Whether they be counted in Gods treasury long since laid up there, as
certain churchmen foolishly persuaded, think. Whether they be daily made of
God and sent into bodies, according to yt which is written in the gospel, My
father works hitherto, and I work. Or whether E^traduce, that is, by the
generation of the parents, as Tertullian, Apolinarius t^ the (...) of the West
C^^rches (...), that as a body is borne ^f a body, so a soul^ is borne of a
soul, and has his being after the like (...) as b^^ite beasts have. But all
those ^pinions ar^ (...) o^ Ecclesiastical writers with found arguments. That
opinion is receiue^ and avouched for the truest, which holdrth; That the soul
is cr^^ted of nothing, and powered of God unto the body, when the child is
(...) in shape and in every part of hi^ body in the womb of hi^ mother. For
thus the Ecclesiastical definition^ do declare.

We say that the creator of al things does only know the creation of the
soul, and that the bodi^ only is sowed by (carnal) (...) in marriage, that by
the true appointment of God, it thickeneth in the matrice, becomes a
substance and receiu^th shape, and that when the body is fashioned, the soul
is created and powered into it. Where upon (...) H^erome also to (...) di^puting
against the t^rors of (...) bishop of Jerusalem, after he (...) diverse
opinions touching the origi^al of the soul he says: Whether truly God
creates soule^ d^ily in whom his will i^ his work, (...) con^seth to be a
(...) of them? which is an Ecclesrastical opinion, according to the opinion of
our Savior. The father works hitherto and I work. And according to that of
^sai, Which forms the spirit of man (...) him. And in the Psalms. Which
(...) their hearts in every one of the^. Th^s far he. The scripture truly in
express words does tea^he, that the soul has not original ^ut of earth,
neither that it is created before the body, but that it proc^^deth out of the
mo^the (...) the creator, to wit, from the secret power of God and that it is
powered into the b^die when it is fashioned.

For Moses describing the (...) of God our Father, d^eth first (...) that the
body of Adam was fashioned and made, and that afterward the spirit of life
was breathed unto his body being perfectly made (...) The Lord God ((...)
he) (...) of the clay of the (...) upon his face or i^to his (...) the breath
of life and (...) living soul. For the b^eath of life does signify the living
and reasonable soul, that is to say, the (...), which thou see breathed o^
powered into the body when it is ^^shioned. And when the same Lord created the
woman of Adams (...) he took not life from Adam or out of his so^le and put it
into Eve, but of hi^ g^^dn^sse and power he powr^d the (...) into her body
when it was p^^fectly (...). And that we are (...) created of the Lord at this
(...) that the soul may be po^red into the body when it is fashioned, Job is
a witness sufficient, saying* Thy hands (O God) have Job. 10.
(...), and fashioned me round abo^^. (...) powered me as it (...) me to (...)
like (...)* T^ou have ^ouered me* with (...) and (...), and joined, me
together with bones and sinews* Lo, thou have he^e i^ these words both the
concepti^^ and also the fashio^^ng of (...) body in his mothers womb most
excellently described. And touching the soul, it follows in Job immediately,
Thou have given me life, and grace, and thy (...) ha^he preserved my spirit.
B^hold, life, yt is, the soul, is by God (...) and grace. (...) (...) mercy
to life. For it is a (...) in so many (...) benefit of the (...) shows it
self in this. But it (...) by way of (...) thy visitation, that (...) and
preferuation, (...) served My spirit. For (...) that, spirit, which (...)
life, that is to sayth^ (...) we rightly (...) to the Scriptures, that (...)
men are created of God, (...) into the bodies when they (...) fashioned in the
womb^, (...) touch not every p^int (...) matter of this cause, (...) saying is)
hit the nayl^ (...)

Now it re^^eth to (...) works my body of (...) The operations and powers of
the soul.
that briefly in the (...) saying that being (...) it gives life to man, (...)

For the reasonable (...) hendeth the powers (...) sensitive, and thereby it
gives (...) to the body. Moreover the ^oul^ has two parts distinguished in
(...) not in substance, namely Understanding and Will, and the reby it (...)
man. For by the understanding, which is called both the mind and reason, it
conceiueth, judges and knows things that are to be understood, and
discerns what to follow and what to avoid. But by will or appetite he
chooses that which he knows, following one thing, and refusing another. Which
things again stretch very far. Therefore I will handle every part more
largely. First of all (...) Out of the (...). cap. of A^gust. de^^antitate
^^imae.
(...) and the (...) sufficient, (...) and (...) But in these things (...) to
man: For we see and (...) that they also live, and that (...) in his kind,
(...), increased and ingendered, (...) the soul is (...), and what it worke^h
in the (...)* where a more pe^fecte (...) derived. The (...) in the sense of
(...) and (...) and discerit^ (...), by the (...) things, which are (...) to y^
(...) of the body (...) it is ioyn^d, and refuses and (...), and also
consents not only do y^ pr^^^eation of children, but to the ch^rishing,
defending nourishing, and preserving of them. But all these things again no
man denies but ye li^e which is in beasts may do also. Let us therefore
consider what is the proper force of ye soul of man. And here w^y with me ye
wonderful power of understanding and reasoning, and not a common memorieas is
in brute beasts, but a remembrance of i^^^merable things commended unto us and
kept in mind by signs and deep (...) in gesture, in sound, in (...) seigned
shows: so (...) of nations, so many things or dein^^ so many new things, so
many (...) reformed, such a number of (...), and of such like (...) for the
maintenance of memory, (...) a care of them which come (...) orders of
offices, powers, (...), and dignities, either in (...) in the common we^le
(...) war, either in (...) matters. Weigh with me (...) force and virtue of
(...) rivers of eloquence, the (...) verses in Poetry (...) and (...) sure and
(...) ^n instrument^^ (...) in measuri^^ (...) b^ring, (...) things to come,
(...) These verily are (...) or ^^perations in ye (...) are common to the god
(...). Therefore the true (...) which rises from the powers of the soul unto
man, and which are found in the godly only d^ follow. The soul is bold to
prefer it self before the whole body, and to think that the goods of the
body are not his, but rather to despise them, and thereby how much, the more
he delights himself, so much y^ more he withdraws himself from filthiness,
and cle^seth himself wholly by faith and ye holy ghost, and strengthens
himself against al things, which go about to put him by from his good
intent, and makes (...) and (...) nothing to ^^other which ^e would (...) to
himself. For he (...) or doctrine of God, (...) that by this. God (...)
joined by the holy (...) and ^aith with God himself, in (...) delights and
lives in true (...) forth all kind of (...) so excellent a studi^^^ the soul,
there is ^et great labo^r. For the soul fights starcely with the worlds the
flesh, and is (...) from the assaults or (...). But being (...) Lord, he
g^eth (...) ^ictories and triumph^^* (...) therefore (I mean of (...) holy
men) work all (...) of holy works, for the souls of the (...) heinous sins
of all (...) are many other (...), which I cease to (...) I should be longer
than (...) I have entreated of (...) as yet joined to (...) discourse the (...)
of God appears, the (...) creator of the soul, ye^ of the whole man, from
whose (...) account it receiu^^, whatsoever praise is given to the soul^. Now
I will speak of the soul separated from the body.

The soul being separated from the Of the soul separated from the body.
body, cease not to be that which it wa^, but the body being dead, ye
soul abides alive in his own Essence, altogether immortal, and void of all
corruption. For the death of man is not the extinguishing or destruction of the
soul: but only a separation or departure from the body. Thou take a candle
out of a lantern, thou have taken the light from the lantern, but thou have
not put out the candle: the lantern tri^ely because the candle is taken away
remains full of darckenesse, but the candle feels so little hurt by
removing of it, that being taken away from the lanerne, it then shines more
clearly, and casts forth the beams of his light more at large. So truly
the soul, being separated from his earthly or slimie body, does so little
feel any discommoditie, that being delivered from the trouble and burden of
the body, it lives more at liberty, and woorketh more effectually. But the
common sort understand not this, they see the body only among the The soul
is immortal.
dead spoiled of the soul: and because this wants all feeling and moving,
yea and rotteth away, they think that the whole man perishes. Neither is ye
world without some shameless, and ungodly wretches, who have in their mouth,
that no man ever returned from death or from below, who by his return proved
that the souls remain alive, when the body is dead. But maliciously they lie,
dissembling that they know not that, which certeinely they know. For who
knows not that Christ the son of God died and was buried, and the third day
was raised again from the dead, the very self same soul returning into his
body, whithe before death gave his body life and ruled it? Who knows not
that Christ with his true body and with his reasonable and natural soul
ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of the father, that he
layinge down there as it were a most assured pledge, might testify unto the
whole world, that both our own proper souls, and our own proper bodies shall
one day be translated thither? Who knows not that so many which were dead
being raised from death to life, received, not new souls, but those their
old souls? which should not have come to pass, if by the death of the body,
the souls of men wete extinguished.

They obiecte that the Scripture it Of the death of souls.
self makes mention of the death of the soul. I confess no le^^e in deed.
For the soul of man is both mortal and immortal after a certain manner of
his own. For the soul is not all manner of ways immortal, as God is, of
whom it is said, that he only has immortality. And truly 1. Tim. 1. and.
6.
the death of the soul in the holy scripture is to be remembered, but the same
is referred to the state and condition, not to the substance of the soul. For
if God be the life of the soul, surely to be forsaken of God, and to be left
unto thy self, is the death of the soul. But nevertheless y^ reasonable some
lives in his proper Essence or being, so that when it lives miserably, a
miserable life is in very deed called death: but desperation also is the very
death of the soul. For by hope we live. And Paul says, I live, yet not
Gal. 1.
I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I
live by the faith of the son of God: therefore they that are destitute of
faith are dead, and they that have faith live. S. Augustine Cap. 10. De fide
and Symbolo says: The soul, as it may be called corruptible by reason of
finne and wickedness, so it may be called mortal. For the death of the soul is
the reuolting or falling from God, which first sin of the soul was
committed in Paradise, as is declared in the holy Scriptures.

And the same Augustine again, Lib. de Trinitate 14. Cap. 4. says, The soul
also has his death, when it lacks a blessed life, which is to be named the
true life of the soul. But for this cause it is called immortal, for that
whatsoever life it lives, yea though it be most miserable, yet it never
cease to live. We therefore freely confess that the souls of men separated
or taken out of their bodies do not die, but live immortal for ever, the
faithful in everlasting joy and felicity, but the vnbeleeners in eternal
damnation.

Which thing I will now go on to confirm by some substantial testimonies
Testimo^ies of the ^^morta^^^e of ^oules.
of Scripture. But first take this with you, that testimonies of scripture in
this case are far more lively, than man's reasons framed out of Philosophy.
For these testimonies are fetched from the very mouth of the living God
himself, which preserves us in life who since he is true cannot lie, and
who, since he gives life, and is life it self, is able to witness most
certainly above all other touching life. Neither is it doubtful that the
spirit of God works jointly with the word of GOD, of whom unless the hearts
of men be touched, the reasons of Philosophy, how manifest soever they be,
shall prevail nothing, especially in the danger of death, and in other
temptations. They are fleshly therefore, and brutishe altogether, which are
not ashamed to say, That they cannot be persuaded or brought to believe the
immortality of souls by the Scriptures only.

Nay, which is more, that shall never be steadfast and stable in temptations,
which shall proceed from flesh and blood. We will therefore add some
certain testimonies, and those too most manifest. David the most (...)
nuissaunt, and happiest king in the world, comprising in one verse both the
immortality of souls, and the resurrection of bodies, says: Thou O Psalm. 61.
Lord shall not leave my soul in hell: neither shall thou suffer thine holy
one to see corruption.

Man consists of body and soul. The body rotteth away when it is dead,
and is turned into dust: but it shall not therefore perish. For as the body of
Christ which was buried did not rat, but rose again the third day, so in the
day of judgment shall our bodies be raised up, and by Christ ^e delivered
from corruption. And our soul goes not into hell there to remain. But as the
soul of Christ returned from the nether parts unto his body, and ascended
into heaven in his body which he had taken again: even so shall our souls
also live by Christ* they shall not dit.

Solomon the son of David excelling all kings and mortal men in wisdom,
in one verse likewise expounding the providence of GOD touching the soul and
the body says: The dust shall be turned again unto Eccle. 12.
earth from whence it came, and the spirit shall return unto God, who gave
it. Solomon calls man's body Dust, because it is said in Moses that GOD made
it of the dust of the earth. Therefore the body turns again unto dust, for
it putrifieth and is resolved into that which first it was even until the
Judgment day, as the Lord says: For dust thou art, Genesis 3.
and into dust shall thou be turned again. But the spirit, that is to say, ye
reasonable soul, dies not with the body, it is not resolved into dust,
because it is not taken out of ye dust, neither is it scattered into ye air,
because it do not consist of air, but returns alive from death unto God.
And therefore it returns unto GOD, because God gave the soul, and after a
singular manner made man after his own likeness and image, breathing into his
face the spirit of life, of life I say, that is of lively power, not the
spirit of death. Therefore the soul cannot perish, because it receives
immortality from God, who, since he is life, is able to preserve that breath
of life which he has made.

The Lord Jesus the true and very son of God, the life and resurrection of
the faithful, says plainly in the Gospel: Fear (ye) not them which kill
the body, but are not able to Matthew. 10.
kill the soul, but rather fear him, which is able to destroy both body
and soul in hell. If when the body being slain by tyrauntes, the soul is
not killed, then it remains alive after the body is destroyed, and so
assuredly it remains, that having put off the body, it should be cast of
the most just God into hell, there everlastingly to burn for his
vn^aithfulnes. For in the same Gospel the Lord says again: Whosoever will save
his life, shall loose it: again whosoever will Matthew. 16.
loose his life for my sake, shall find it. For not he only loses his life or
soul which bridleth it from the pleasures of the world, and lives most
temperately, but he also, who offers himself into the bloody hands of
tyrants to be slain, for the confession of Christian faith. And he finds
his life or soul which he lost. Therefore the souls of men, even after the
death of the body, remain alive and immortal. In the Gospel according to S.
John the Lord says: Verily, verily, I John. 8.
say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me,
has everlasting life, and shall not come into judgment* but is e^caped from
death unto me.

Thou have in these words of the Lord the death of the body. But forthwith
afterward, he witnesses that we Escape unto life: therefore men's ^oules
remain alive after death. For now he speaks nothing of the raising again
or of the salvation of the body, but of the life of the soul after death. In
the same Gospel the Lord says again: Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a
man keep my saying, he shall never John. 8.
see death. But it is evident, that all men are ordained once to die, Heb. 9.
namely with bodily death: therefore the soul lives after the death of the
body. For it must needs be that a faithful man shall never see or ^eele
death: unless he told a lie, who affirmed with an oath that which he spoke.
For in every other place he adds an o^he saying: Verily I say unto you, that
we should not doubt of the unmortalitie of souls. There are very many
testimonies and those most evident of Christ the son of God in the same
Gospel; as in the sixte and eleventh Chapiters: to which we will join one
or two out of the writings of ye blessed Apostles of Christ Saint Peter
speaking of the souls of the fathers which were dead a great while ago,
says, that The Gospel was preached also to the dead, that they 1. Pet. 4.
should be judged like other men in the flesh, but should live before God in
the spirit.

Spirits or souls of the blessed fathers, whose bodies being buried a great
while ago, do wait for the universal sentence of that general and last
judgment: that is, that their flesh may be raised up again and be judged with
other men in ye last day: but in the mean while their souls live with God: so
that men's souls are alive, though their bodies were rotten a great while ago.

S. Paul in his epistle to Timothy says, that life and immortality 1. Tim.
1.
is made manifest and brought by Christ. The same Paul every where does so
plainly auouche the immortality of souls, that he must needs be blind
which sees it not. S. John the Apostle and Evangelist saw under Apoc. 6.
the altar in heaven (that is, under the protection of Christ who is the
sacrifice and propitiation for the sins of the world,) living souls lying
and crying: How long tariest thou Lord to revenge our blood? He saw them
clothed with white garments, and enjoying everlasting rest. But these souls
were the souls of the martyrs of Christ, whose bodies died, being murdered
on the earth under tyrauntes and persecuters of the Christian faith. Therefore
the souls of men are immortal. Most true therefore, yea and undoubted are
those words, which are read in the book of Wisdom, uttered in this Wisd.
3.
manner: The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no
torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they appeared to die, and their
end is taken for a misery, and their departing from us to be utter
destruction, but they are in rest. For though they suffer pain before men,
yet is their hopeful of immortality. They are punished but in few things,
nevertheless in many things shall they be well rewarded. For God proves them
and finds them meet for himself. As gold in the furnace does he try them,
and receives them as a burnte offering: and when the time comes they shall be
looked upon. They shall shine and run thoroughe, as the sparckles among the
stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and
their Lord shall reign for ever.

Wherefore, most truly and according to the Canonical Scripture do the
Ecclestasticall definitions pronounce, Cap. 16. We believe that man only has
a substantial soul, which having put off the body lives, and keeps his
senses and disposition lively. It does not die with the body, as Aratus
affirms, nor a little while after as Zenon says: because it lives
substantiallie. But the souls of beasts and other mortal creatures, are not
substantial, but are borne with their flesh, thorough the life of their
flesh, and with the death of their flesh are at an end and do die.

Furthermore, that truth touching the immortality of souls, as it were All
wise men have thought that souls are immortal.
by the law of nature, is written and imprinted in the minds of all men.
Whereupon it is no marvel that all the wise men among the Gentiles, could
never abide that the soul should be called mortal. For the consent of all,
which is thought the voice of nature, (specially of the chiefest) declares y^
souls are immortal. And M. Tullie also affirms that, saying, As by nature
we think there are Gods, and by reason we know what they be, so we hold
opinion with the consent of all nations, that souls do still continue. All y^
ancient writers therefore, and all that followed them, have said that souls
are everlasting or immortal, as Trismegistus, Musus, Orphus, Homerus, Pindarus,
and Pherecydes the Sy^ian the master of Pythagoras, and his scholar Socrates.
Plato himself, who, to learn the opinions of Pythagoras, sailed into Italy,
was not only of the same opinion that Pythagoras was of, touching the
immortality of souls, but brought reasons also to confirm the same. These
reasons (as Tullie witnesses) are many, that he which reads his book,
cannot seem to desire any thing further. Seneca so plainly affirms and
proves the immortality of souls, that nothing can be more plain. And
Epictetus a famous Philosopher, who lived in the time of Seneca, has done no
less. If as yet there be any light headed men, to whom the immortality of ye
soul seems doubtful, or which utterly deny the same, these truly are
unworthy to have the name of men. For they are plagues of the common wealth and
very beasts, worthy to be hissed and driven out of ye company of men. For he
lacks a bridle to restrain him, and has cast away all honesty and shame,
and is prepared in all points to committ any mischief, whosoever believes
that the soul of man is mortal.

I showed that souls by death being separated from their bodies, do In what
place souls live when they are separated from their bodies.
not die, but remain alive: it rests now behind that I teach you, where the
souls when they are destitute of the dwelling place their bodies, leads their
life and are conuersaunt. While they were coupled to the bodies, they used them
as their dwelling houses, so that though they be said, not to be limited in
place, yet they do not wander out of their bodies, but they are as it were
shut up in them as in prisons, until the time they be dissolved and set at
liberty. Those same souls therefore being now disseuered from their bodies,
since they retain their sound senses, their nature or disposition, and their
whole substance in lively manner, albeit they are said no not even now to be
limited in place not are they not let loose and run aftraye, having their
abiding in no place, but being compacte and set fast in their own Essence or
being, are in some place again, having no new bodies, (for the souls are
free even till the Judgment day, when they shall be joined again to their
bodies) how beit certain abiding places are prepared for them of God wherein
they may live. Although other, by my leiue, very subtily and wittily do
reason, how spirits are contained in place or not contained: I simply
affirm with the scripture, that souls separated from bodies, are taken up
either into heaven it self, or else are drowned in the depthe of hell, and
that their being and abiding is even so there, that when they are here they
are not else where. For the Lord most plainly and pithilie says in the
Gospel, that the soul of beggarly Lazarus Luke. 16.
was carried into Abraham's bosom, and the soul of the rich glutton was cast
down into hell. But that more is, it forthwith follows in the history,
Between us and you, (for the blessed and cursed souls talk together) there
is a great goulfe steadfastly set, so that they which would go from hence to
you, cannot, neither can they that would, come from thence to us. And Paul also
desires to Phil. 1.
be dissolved and to be with Christ. We are dissolved by death, for when the
soul departs, the body is dissolved, and dies: the soul flies unto
Christ. But the Scripture shows us that Christ is in heaven at the right hand
of the father.

Now where heaven is, there is none but can tell. And we elsewhere have
largely (...) of that (...). In the Gospel after Samuel John, the Lord
himself calls the conversation of souls which is prepared for the souls
after they are separated from the bodies, both a place and mansion, an
habitation or dwelling: adding these words the r^^ppon, I will receive you
(even) unto John. 14.
my self, that where I am, there may ye be also.

And therefore Saint John saw souls in heaven, abiding and taking Apoc. 6.
their rest under the altar or protection of Christ. For thither when they
departed from their bodies he had gathered them unto himself. Hereunto
belongs that notable place of the Apostle Paul merueylous fit for this
purpose, written in the second to the Corinthians in these words, We know
that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were destroyed, we have a
building of God, even an habitation not made with hands, but eternal in
heaven, etc.

Lo, while our souls were joined to our bodies, they inhabited and dwelt in
them as in their houses, but after our corruptible house is destroyed, God
has builded another better, and of longer continuance, Heaven I mean it
self, into the which he lovingly receives our souls departing out of our
bodies. For that manner body which we now have, he calls The house of this
tent or tabernacle. For as tents for a time are made of light stuff, and
pitched without any strong foundation, and a while after are pulled down, or
do fall of their own accord: so a mortal body is given to men as a ruinous
cottage wherein they inhabit a few days, and immediately pack away again.
S. Peter used the like Allegory. Against ^. Pet. 1.
this (ten^) he opposes a (...) of everlasting continuance, heaven, I mean^,
it self. For ^hen he had said that we have a Building of God, he adds by
interpretation, (even) an habitation not made with hands. And yet more
plainly, eternal in heaven. Neither does that which by and by follows,
hinder th^^, impor^ another meaning. For therefore (...) we desiring (upon
our deathing) to be further clothed with our house, which is from heaven. For
From heaven, signifies as much as if thou would say, heavenly. Therefore
the house of the soul is heavenly or heaven it self, a place, I say,
appointed for blessed spirits. For verily the faithful soul shall dwell in
heaven, even unto that day, wherein the Lord shall judge the The soul
returns to the body, but not before judgment.
world with that his General judgment: then at the length the soul shall
return to the body again, being raises up, that after Judgment the whole
man, both soul and body, may live for ever with God.

For thus wittnesseth the Apostle Saint Paul, The Lord himself shall descend
from heaven in a shout, 1 Thessalonians. 4
and in the voice of the Archangel, and in the trumpet of GOD, and the dead in
Christ shall rise first: then we which live which remain shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall
we ever be with the Lord, namely, in the heavens which are above us, where
the clouds are seen.

Therefore, omitting vain speculations, and curious disputations, let us
believe that there is a house prepared by ye Lord in heaven for souls being
separated from their bodies, into the which the faithful may be received: and
again that ther^ is (...) are prepared, (...) all the souls of all in^dels or
(...) may be cast.

We have taught that heaven is How Souls should be translated to their
appointed place.
the sease or habitation prepared of God to receive souls being separated
from their bodies. It remains behind that we show after what manner and what
time they should be translated thither after death. Touching the manner I can
say nothing else, but that it is fully known unto God, and that so far
forth as seems sufficient for us, it is shadowed out in the Scriptures,
namely that it is brought to pass by Angels carrying up our souls with a
most swift flight or moving. For the Lord says in ye Gospel that the soul of
Lazarus was carried by angels into Abraham's b^some. Of which thing we spoke
and before when we preached of Good Angels. But what manner of moving this is,
whether natural or supernatural, I mean not to make search: I believe that
what God promises the same he performs and accomplisheth. And he promising
says, He is passed from death to life. Again he said to John. 5.
the thief, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise, comprehending that Iuke.
23.
his passage, as it were in a moment. Hereunto we also necessarily ad this,
that it must be attributed to the merits of Christ, that we are taken up
into heaven. For he is the ^oore and the way. But at what time souls should
be carried up into heaven, or cast down At what time souls be carried up into
heaven.
into hell, seems to be a question at this present not only profitable, but
by all means necessary to be discussed. For in this our age there are evil
disposed persons, who have corrupted the pure simplicity of this matter. For
you shall find some will say, that the (...) departing from the (...) not by
and by the right (...) ways to heaven, but that (...) it were taken with a
(...) tha^gie, they sleep until the last days ^f Judgment. You shalfind
othersome contending that souls cannot come into heaven, unless they be
perfectly purified with clensing fire, which they call Purgatory, as though
they were intercepted by pirates and robbers in the midst of their journey,
and cast into torments, until either they themselves make satisfaction, or
other for them have paid as it were the debt which they had elsewhere
borrowed. But both of these things do I deny and utterly deny: and I
affirm that souls do not sleep, neither are they purged by any torments
after the death of the body, but are waking and alive, and are forthwith after
the death of the body, and even in a moment either carried into heaven, being
freed from all kind of torments, or otherwise cast down into hell. These
sleepi^ heads have nothing to allege for this their lethargy or imagination
Souls separated from their bodies do^^ not sleep.
of the sleep of the soul, but that the scripture oftentimes describing the
death of the Saints, makes mention of sleeping and laying to sleep^, as, He
fell a sleep and was gathered unto (or laid by) his fathers. And Paul says,
speaking of those that die: I would not have you ignorant concerning them which
are a sleep. But even as souls when they were joined to these frail^ bodies,
never slept, neither could sleep: so being delivered from the burden of the
body, they are much less to be thought to sleep. To the body therefore is
sleep to be referred. For whosoever dies in a true faith, he sleeps in
the Lord. And as they that sleep when their (...) the body is not altogether
e^tinguished by death, that it should not live again any more, but now
verily (...) into rest, and at the day of judgment it rises again and
lives: and for this cause holy me^ are said in ye scriptures, to sleep, not
to die, that thereby the mystery of ye resurrection of our flesh may be
signified. Which thing these gross headed men understand not: whereupon they
attribute that to the soul which is proper to the body. Other arguments which
they bring to confirm their madness, are unworthy to be rehearsed. For either
they violently wrest the scripture from the natural sense: or else by their
corrupt reasoning, they gather falshoode out of those things that are false.
But they do err, and are no less de^eiued than Souls (...) from the bodies
are not carried into Purgatory.
these sleeping doctors, which think that souls departing from their bodies,
go not by and by the right and ready way into heaven, but are ^a^ght in the
midst of their journey, and carried into that purgatory fir^ wherein they
may be purged from the filthy spots of sins, which they have gotten in the
flesh, and that after they be purged, they are carried by Angels into the
presence of the most holy god. For either the souls are purged with that
purgatory fire from the filthe of their sins, or else they are washed and
cleansed through the pain and grief of torments which there they do suffer.
If sins be purged by virtue of that fire, then it follows, that sinners are
not sanctified by the only blood of the son of God. But by what scriptures
have they proved un to us that this power of purging is given to the fire? Has
God altered (...) and purpose, and s^t (...) fire instead of Christ to work^
our sanctifi^ation? (...) for shame! But if for our sufferings and torments
sake sins are forgiven, then it follows that we are not purged by the
cross and passion of Christ only. Let them teach us out of the scripture,
that such worthiness is attributed by God to our sufferings. But by the only
blood and passion of Christ all those are sanctified that be sanctified,
whosoever they be: therefore purgatori^ is a wicked devise of the devil,
which darkeneth, yea, and makes void the cross and merits of Christ. For
what other thing do they account purgatory, but a satisfaction for sins made
by the souls separated from their bodies? In the Gospel of John there is a
question moved by the disciples of John the Baptist, touching Souls are purged
by the only blood of Christ. John. 3.
the purifying of souls. And John Baptist declares that the faithful are
through Christ purified by faith, which thing he is believed to have testified
also by holy baptism. Moreover, the most excellent apostles do expressly
witnosse, that all the faithful are cleansed by the only blood of Christ,
and by his only passion, and most sufficient merits. For Peter, who says in
the Acts: Neither is there salvation in any other: for among Acts. 4.
men there is given no other name under heaven whereby we must be saved, He I
say has written in his first canonical Epistle, Ye know 1 Pet. 1.
that you were not redeemed with corruptible things, as with silver and gold,
but with the precious blood of the immaculate lamb. John the Apostle also
says, The blood of Christ Jesus the son of God cleanses 1. Ioh. 1.
us from all sin. And he again, Christ loved us, and washed us from Apoc. 10.
our ^innes by his own blood. And Paul ^ath to the Ephesians (...) to Titus
shows that we are purified Ephe. 5. Tit. 3.
by the only blood of the son of god. Unto the He brues he says. By him
self has he purged our sins, and Heb. 5.
s^tt^^h on the right hand of God in the highest places. It was not without
signification that he said, By him self, yt he might thereby exclude all other
means. For elsewhere he says thus, If righteousness come by the law, Gal. 2.
then Christ dyed in vain. For after the same manner we also do reason. If
we be cleansed by purgatory fire, then in vain did Christ shed his blood to
purg^ us. For what needed he to have suffered most grievous punishment, if we
could have been cleansed by Purgatory fire? Moreover, the whole scripture
teaches us, that Christ is our only satisfaction and propitiation. Which
thing we have at large showed in other places. And therefore souls make no
satisfaction in purgatory, unless we will confess that men have no need of
Christ.

These men do further feine that the power to purge is given to the fire of
purgatory by grace, or by the blood and merits of Christ and that this fire
purges not by his own virtue, but by the power of the son of God. But they
have also forged this most wickedly. For the scripture in every place, (as we
also said even now) sends us back to the son of God, and the price of his
blood and cleansing, whereof it teaches that we are made partakers while we
live in this world by faith and ye holy ghost: but of Purgatory it speaks
not a word in any place: neither says it in any place that we by the grace of
god are purged in an other world. Therefore they steal away the glory (...)
proper unto the (...) God and give it to a fire which is altogether forged and
(...) Furthermore, then appoint an other time of grace out of this world, which
is altogether strange unto the scriptures. For our Lord cries in the Gospel,
I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day, the night
comes, when no man can work. And Saint Paul says, Let Gal. 6.
us do good, that is to ^ay, let us ^e bountiful and liberal toward the
poor, while we have time. Which saying he seems to have taken out of
Solomon's book of the Preacher, saying: When the clouds are full, Eccles. 11.
they pour out rain upon the earth: and when the tree falls, whether it be
toward the South or North, in what place so ever it fall, there it remains.
He uses two Allegories or dark speeches, by the which he teaches the rich to
be liberal. The first is taken from the clouds. The clouds from the earth do
gather up vapors, which being thickened, are immediately as out of a sponge
pressed out and p^^^ed upon the earth to water it. Let rich men do the like,
distributing again among men such riches as they have gotten among men. The
second is taken of trees, which being feld lie in the same places in the
whithey fall. The wise man therefore warns us to do that in due season,
which we ought to do, for when we are departed from hence, there is no place
of repentance. And in the Gospel, a tree is oftentimes put for a man, where
also the right hand is put for heaven or the place of blessedness, as the left
hand for hell or the place of damnation. Therefore this is his meaning, When
thou art dead, thou shall remain for ever either (...) agreeable to the
heavenly. For S. Cypri^ against Demetrian^s, says: When we shall be departed
hence, there is then no place of repetance, (...) value. Here life is either
lost or gotten. Here is provision made for eternal salvation, by the serving
of god, and the fruit of faith. They object again, That souls when they
depart That souls a^ fully purged by the blood of Christ.
from the body, are purged in deed by the blood of the son of God, but not
fully, for there remains some filth to be washed away in Purgatori^. For they
depart out of this world not having a full and perfect says, and therefore
they be not altogether good: and again, since they have some faith they be not
altogether evil: and because they are not perfectly good they cannot enter
into heaven: again since they are not altogether evil, they cannot be damned,
and therefore there remains a middle place, wherein they may be fully tried,
and at the length being purified, may be presented ^^to the sight of God. But
these m^n after their manner (...) what they (...). But we have showed by the
holy scriptures, that the souls of the faithful are purged by the only blood
^^ the son of God through (...), and not by purgatory. Now will I also
show in that which follows, that the sins of all men are puri^^edfully,
that is to say, most absolutely, by the only sacrifice of Christ, and
further, that by the grace of God in the blood of Christ is forgiven in the
very instant of death whatsoever infirmity and remnants of sin are behind
in the souls of the faithful departing from the body. For the Lord says in
the gospel, He that is washed, John. 13.
needs not save to wash his feet, (...) every wh^^. Behold he (...) that
(...) washed by the grace of Christ, so that the (...) of the feet, that is to
say, the infirmit^e and imperfection which remains after regeneration,
cannot bring him again into the number of those that are unclean. For the
Lord says again in the Gospel, And for their sakes sanctify I my self John.
17.
that they also might be sanctified through the truth. The Lord gave up
himself to be a sacrifice for our sins, to the end that we might be
sanctified, that is, purged from our sins truly, that is to say, fully and
(...) perfectly. For Paul says, For with one offering has he made perf^st
Heb. 10.
for ever them that are sanctified* Mark (I pray you) y^ apostles words. Christ
with one oblatio^ (Lo he says, with one) has perfectly sanctified, all that
are sanctified, and are made heirs of eternal life. Hereupon we gather: If by
the one sacrifice of Christ, once offered for us, al souls are purified, and
that in deed perfectly purified, so that there is nothing wanting to their
pu^^fying, what I pray you finds Purgatory to purify? Therefore it is a
shameless forgerie and horrible blasphe^^ie against the merit of the
purifying of JESUS CHRIST the some of GOD. If there seem any thing to be
diminished or wanting unto the soul now departing, Christ by his grace
performs and makes it up whilst it is yet in the world. It is a wicked
speech and unworthy to be heard among christian people, that by our sufferings
in Purgatory, that is fulfilled which was not as yet fully satisfied with the
blood and passion of Christ. As if our sufferings were better and more effectual
than the passion of yt son of God.

Th^se men obie^te unto us the weakness of faith in them that dye: and we ^n
the other side object unto them the mercy of God fully pardoning his faithful
people. The father of the Lunatique mentioned in the Gospel, requiring help
of the Lord, hears: If thou can believe, (to wit, that I am able to heal
thy son:) al Mark. 9.
things are possible to him that believes. And albeit he felt his faith not
altogether perfect, but that therein remained much weakness, yet the help of
God was not hindered by the weakness thereof. For because he humbly submitted
him self wholly unto the mercy of the Lord, beseeching and saying: Lord I
believe, help my unbelief: the Lord by and by succored him, and without
delay healed his son. So there is no dout that the most merciful Lord will
fail his faithful people, to whom he has promised most full forgiveness,
acknowledging their weakness in the hour of death, and therefore also
calling for the mercy of God: but that upon the instant of the going out of
the soul, he forth with perfectly ^anctifieth it with his spirtie for Christ's
sake, and beautifieth it with all kind of graces, that being truly purged from
all filthe of sins, it may flee up, and deserve to appear in the presence
of God. And this should be beaten into the heads of them that are a dying.
For there are extant most large promises of god, there are extant examples of
many holy men dying and calling upon God. Furthermore, it is certain by those
things which we have already alleged, that the death of Christ has made full
satisfaction for sins: so that now there remains nothing further to ^e
(...) with the fire of purgatory. Souls after the death of the ^^dy, (...) the
right (...) heaven, taking nothing (...) them which ^^ it does purging.
Therefore that fire of purgatory is nothing else in very dee^e, than a
tra^^^que or merchandise of most couet^^s me^, whereby craftily and cunningly
they purge the pursses, not the souls, both of rich and poor.

These men by and by underprop Of prayers for the dead.
their purgatory building, which is a falling, with two posts. The first is
this, They of old (say they) prayed for the salvation of souls separated from
the body, therefore there is a purgatory. For since in heaven they have no need
of prayers, surely in hell prayers do no good, since in hell is no redemption:
truly there is a middle place left wherein souls are kept, unto whom the
prayers of the living do good, that place is Purgatory. Thus in deed they
reason, howbeit imagining all things of their own heads, without the
authority of the scriptures. But this is that they have to say, That they of
old prayed for the dead. I know what Augustine that famous doctor of the
Church, what Chrysostom that golden-mouthed man, and other ancient and
notable men have l^^t written touching this matter. But I ask ye question,
Whether that which they did, were well done? For not all things which the
holy fathers said and did, (who oftentimes have suffered something of ma^s
invention) are absolutely to be allowed or followed. Those things are not to be
allowed and followed, which are set down by them against the decrees of the
scripture, (which thing they the^ selves unfeignedly confess:) but those things
only which are uttered and confirmed by the authority of holy scriptures,
which (...) of godliness. But thou (...) nothing in them of prayer for the
^eade. For that whichsome albedge out of ^he second book of Mach^bei^, proves
thing. For that book is not canonical. Which thing it behooued them to have
learned long since even out of Hierome. They add, that prayer for the dead is
an unwritten tradition of the Apostles: I hear them. But I know well enough,
that the unwritten traditions of the apostles are not contrary to their
writt^n doctrines. I know well enoughe that the written doctrines of the
apostls no where command prayers for the dead, and in no place allow them.
When Paul the Apostle exhorted the Thessalonians to moderation in lame^ting 1 Thessalonians. 4.
for the dead, the time being then very fit and most (...) to give
commandment concerning offering of prayers for the souls of the dead, if he
had thought them any whit profitable and necessary, yet notwithstanding he
makes no manner mention of them, yea rather he simply teaches what they ought
to believe touching the fou^es of the faithful, being separated from their
bodies, namely that they live in everlasting blessedness with Christ, waiting
and looking for the re^urrection of their bodies. But who can not see that this
certeintie and plainness of the Apostles doctrine, is entangled and perilously
shaken with this feigned Apostolic tradition? For if we believe in Christ,
let us believe his words and promises. He him self said, that he is the
resurrection and life of the faithful, and that the souls of the believing,
even immediately (...) death of the body, (...) escape and (...) into li^^. ^f
(I say) we (...) of the Lord, why then do we a^ yet being (...) for the
salvation of the (...) of the dead, prays and make supplication for them, as
though they had not yet obtained salvation* By these our prayers truly we give
a manifest proof that we dout of our faith, and hope not after that, as
concerning the salvation of our fouls, which wedge ^^th profess with t^ung,
and which also the words of Christ and the Apostles command us to hope
after.

The steadfast faith truly and assured hope of those that believe and stay them
selves upon the promises of Christ, d^ forbid us here to take and wear
black mourning garments in offerings for the dead, whose souls we believe to
have already put on white garments: they forbid us to give occasion either to
unbelievers, or to weaklinges in faith, of reprehe^^ing us worthily, because we
(...) and lament for them (who (...) say do live with God) as if they were ^ast
into hell fire, and busily set our selves a work with making humble prayers
unto God to deliver the miserable souls out of torments, that is to say,
because the faith which we profess with tongue and voice, we condemn by the
testimony of ^ure heart and mind, yea and of our outward works. If we go on
after this sort, truly we are double dealers in our hope and in our faith.
The things which we speak seem to be dissembled, false, and feigned. For it
avails nothing in words to ^^^nt of virtue, and with deeds to destroy
truth.

Therefore let him that will, receive this (...) (as they ca^^ it) of the
Apo^^les, touching the offering of prayers for the faithful departe^, as for
me, I mean to receive nothing repugnant to true ^ayth and (...) from the
apo^^les doctri^e, (...) do I persuade any man to rece^^^ such ^anitie. This
also I can not choose but tell you, that that which they call the tradition of
the apostles, S. Augustine calls the tradition of the fathers re^^iued of the
Church. For in his (...) (...) apost^li 32. he says. This which the fathers
delivered, the whole Church observes, to wit, that prayers should be made for
them in the communion of of the body and blood of Christ when they in their own
place are rehe^^^ed at the very sacrifice, and the same is mentioned to be
offered for them also. And again, (...) gerend^, Cap. 4. he says,
Supplications or prayers for the souls of the dead are not to be neglected,
which the church has received to be made for all that be departed in the
Christian brotherhod, not rehearsing them by name, but in a general remembrance
of them altogether. Thus sa^e he* Who though in some place he (...) the
traditions of the apostles very say, yet by these words this seemethmore
expressly to be his meaning, y^ this (...) or order of praying for the dead was
delivered to the church by ye fathers, and doubtless many years after the
Apostles time was received of the church. The same August defends in more
places than one, that the receiving of the Eucharist or sacrament of the Lords
supper, is as necessary for infants being new come forth of their mothers
womb, to y^ attaining of salvation, as the sacrament of baptism. The chief
and notable places wherein ^e hand ^^th (...) in his first book against (...)
his. (...), against y^ Pelagians. Nether does he (...) that opinion with less
(...) than the tradition* because that (...) and very usual in the church in y^
age. But who at this day receives y^ ceremony, as Apostolical? Who sees not
that those good fathers otherwise most faithful pastors in that thing
suffered some invention of man? The written doctrine of S. Paul deserves at
this day more to be esteemed, than that ancient tradition of the church Paul
writes, Let every man 1. Cor. 11.
(...) himself, and so let him eat^ of this ^^eade and drink of this cap.
Wh^reby al men understand, that y^ Eucharist or sacrament of the Lords supper,
is for them to receive that are of perfect age and not (...) For y^ cau^^ it
(...) for our elder and to forsake y^ tradition, and to draw more near to the
scripture. Let the^ therefore in this m^tter give us (...) also to depart from
the uncertain tradition of the fathers, and to clean to the most (...) faith
and doctrine of ye apostles. But (...) (say they) was condemned for this cause,
for yt he believed prayers Aeriani condemned.
were unprofitable for the dead. I (...) in (...) y^ Aerius was condemned,
neither do I take upon me to defend him, whom ^hylastrius, Epiphanius, and
Augustine, do make mention to have (...) Arian, and a man polluted with other
^oule errors. But touching prayers for the dead, whether they be profitable or
unprofitable, there is no doubt yt they are catholics and notheretiques, who
believe yt which is delivered and ^et down in ye apostles creed. For according
to ye tradition of this creed we believe the forgiveness of sins, (...)
life everlasting. They which believe these things ^^tein undoubtedly what so^^er
they believe. For the Lord said to the Cont^^ion, Go thy way, and as tho^
(...), so be it done unto Matthew. 8.
th^^. Therefore who so ever believes forgiveness of sin^, and life
everlasting, has obtained forgiveness of sins, and surly he shall live in
everlasting life. Which thing, if y^ be true, as it cannot be false, whith is
delivered unto us in the apostles creed, what place I pray you shall prayers
have for the dead? for ye dead have their sins forgiven them, therefore al
lets and delays unto life are taken away, and so they live with God. But they
which have not believed, have retained and kept their sins still, and being
east down into ye bottomless lake, stick fast in ye my^e of hell. Which
things since they are (...) cert^ntie, truly the^ is a (...) of praying for y^
dead, (...) before go^^ nor among the faithful. Hereunto are annexed so many
examples of ye ^aintes in both the Testaments, which are to be preferred both
before us (...) conde^nations of men. Which I pray you of ye holy fathers ever
prayed (...) their dead? Did Adam pray for his Abel? did ye sons pray for
their father Adam? What prayers did Abraham offer to God for the soul of his
father Their, or for ye soul of his most dear wife Sara? What prayers poured
Esau and Jacob forth for their father Isaac when he died: the ^^. sons of
Israel for Jacob? Solomon for David? In ye new Testament John baptist is
beheaded of Herod, Stephan stoned of the Jews, James his head is cut off by
ye shoulders at ye commandment of Agrippa, their disciples bury their bodies,
and do all things religiously belonging to their burials, but in somany (...)
made of pray^r for the souls of ye dea^^. For they believed they forthwith
after death were carried into everlasting life. Who the^ after so many notable
examples, and after so clear profession of the catholic and sinnere faith,
(...) ye us to the necessity of praying for the souls of the dead? Who can
say hereafter, that we are here^iques, who fulfill that in work, which we
profess in profession of faith, or confession of the mouth, yea, which do no
other thing, tha^ the most excellent worshippers of God of both Testaments have
done before us. Appearing of Spirits.
The last p^st wherewith they underprop their purgatory, least it should fall,
is the appearing of spirits. For Rabanus a bishop shows out of the
testimonies of Pope Gregory, and reuer^nd Beda, that the souls of dead men
have very often appeared, and taught that oblations and prayers do profit them
very much. But I wonder that men of learning would ground their work upon so
rotten and ruinous foundations. For the Lord in the Deuteronomy. 18.
law forbids to ask the truth of the spirits or souls of the dead. In
the Prophets we are sent from Isa. 8.
such (...) to the law and the testimony. In Luke the rich glutton cries in
torments, and says, I pray the father Luke. 16.
Abraham that thou would send Lazarus to my fathers house, for I have five
brethren, that he may witness unto them, least they also come into this place
of torment. But he hears: They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear
them. But when the rich glutton had answered, No father Abraham, but if one
come unto the^ from the dead, they will believe and repent: He hears again,
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe if one
rise from death. Therefore it is most certain and confirmed by the authority
of the gospel, that blessed souls are not sent of God unto us to teach us any
thing. Who I pray your would give ear to wicked and condemned souls? The
Gospel of Christ sends us all to the canonical scripture.

Whereupon it follows that the testimonies which are fetched from Oracles or
appearings of the spirits of the dead are of no weight, but most deceiuable
and full of lying.

Man's testimonies are agreeable with Gods, which also teach us, that That
souls separated from their bodies do not wa^de^ in these regions.
souls being separated from their bodies, can not wander or stray in these
regions. The words are too long to rehearse which Tertullian learnedly
disputes of this matter in the end almost of his book De Anima, yet they
are all leuelled to this (...), to show that souls separated from their bodies,
and appointed to their places, do not return again into this world. To the
objection of some that boast of art Magic, and also that by the power of God
many have returned from the dead into this life, he answers: But although
the power of God has called back again some souls into their bodies, to
give us instruction of his might and right, yet therefore that shall not be
communicated with the credit and boldness of Magicians, and the
deceitfulness of dreams, and licentiousness of Poets: but in the examples of
the resurrection, when Gods power either by Prophets, or by Christ, or by
Apostles, brings souls into bodies, it is manifestly declared by sound,
evident and full truth that it is the shape of a true body: that thou might
judge all appearings of (...) men (...). Therefore (...) in his 29. Homely
upon M^^demau^ding: What then shall we answer to those speeches? I am such a
soul. He answers. It is not the soul of that dead body which speaks
these things, but the devil, who deuiseth these things to deceive the^ that
hear him. And anon he says, Wherefore these are to be counted the words of
old wives and of dotards, and childrens toys and fantasies. And again, A
soul separated from the body can not wander in these regions. For the souls
of the righteous are in the hands of God, and the souls of infants likewise:
for they have not sinned. And the souls of the wicked after this life are by
and by carried away. Which is made apparent by (...) and the rich glutton. But
in an (...) place the Lord also says, Th^^ (...) they shall require thy
Luke. 12.
soul again from thee. Therefore the soul when it departs from the body can
not wander here with us: and that not without cause. For if they which go a
journey chauncing into unknown countries, know not whether they are like to
go, except they have a guide: how much more shall the soul be ignorant
whether it shall go, after it has left the body, and enters altogether into
a new life and strange way, unless it have a guide. Out of many places of
the scripture it may be proved, that the souls of just and righteous men do
not go astray after death. For Stephan Acts. 7.
says, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And Paul desired to be losed and to be
Phil. 1.
with Christ. Of the Patriarch the Genesis 25.
scripture also says, He dyed in a quied (or good) age, and was gathered unto
(or laid by) his fathers. And that Luke. 16.
the souls of the wicked can not t^rrie or have their abiding here, give ear
what the rich glutton says, and consider what he craves and obteyneth not.
For if the souls of me^ might be conversant here, he had come him self, as he
desired, and had certified his brethren of the torments of hell. Out of which
place of scripture, this also plainly appears, that fowls after their going
out of the body, are carried into some certain appointed place, from whence they
ca^ not return of their own accord when they will return, but wait and look
for that terrible day of judgment. Thus much hitherto out of Chrysostom.

Against these things they oppose the appering of Samuel fetched (...) Samuel
(...) his ^ath ap^eared not (...) S^ule.
the holy Scriptures, (...) go about to prove that (...) again after death,
and instru^t men touching things which they shall demand. We answer in few
woods, that that disguised masker which seemed to be Samuel was called Samuel
by a trope or figure, but in very deed he was not Samuel. For of a certeintie
it was a spirit, a iugling Sam. 28.
and delusion of satan. For sorcerie is straightly forbidden in the law of the
Lord: therefore blessed spirits obey not forbidden ways and unlawful
practices, which when they were as yet joined with their fleshy bodies by all
means abhorred and resisted them in their assaults: as for damned spirits
they exercise them selves therein. But who would believe their oracles? Samuel
(say they) foretold what happened the morrow after. And what of that? That
was no hard matter for the devil, since that the true and living Samuel
foretold many things a little while before: but this crafty fox might
foreknowe the judgment of GOD which was to come, even by things present, and
by the (...) and quaking of the hoastes. (...) in his book De Anima, says:
God forbid we should believe, that the soul of any Saint, much less the soul
of a Prophet can be fetched up by the devil, since we have learned that
satan is transfourmed into an Angel of light, much more into a man of light,
yea, that he will pretend that he is God, and will show wonderful signs, to
overthrow, if it (...), even the elect, etc. S. Augustine is of the same
iudgeme^^ ^oncerning that appearing, (...) Simplicianum 2. quaest. 3. And (...)
quaest. etc.

(...) testimonies it is aboundantle (...) and trust, that souls of (...):
from bodies, do not wander or appear after death in these regions. For they
remain until judgment in the places appointed for them by the determination
and prouiden^e of God. Wherefore they are neither sent by God, neither can they
enter in unto men to instruct and warn them, either of things present, or of
things to come. Whereupon it follows, that appearings of souls, that
revelations and oracles, are mere delusions of Satan, ordained contrary to
the sincerity and pureness of true religion. And because they which do what
they can to prove unto us that there is purgatory, use the defense and
safeguard of these vanities, it is undoubtedly true that they prove a falsehood
by deceit, and an uncertain thing, by a thing of much more uncertainty.
Furthermore it remains undoubtedly true, that purgatory, wherein souls
having put off their bodies, should be purged unto life everlasting, can not be
showed out of the Scriptures.

And because we have removed and put by the lets which were cast Souls,
certainly and immediately after the death of the body are blessed
in the way to hinder the most speedy journey, we return to our purpose,
wherein we intended to declare, that the souls of the faithful separated by
death from the body, do immediately after the death of the body pass the
right and ready way into heaven, and so most certainly and upon the souden be
saved. Likewise we understand that the souls of the unfaithful are thrust
down the right and ready way into hell, and that by and by after the death of
the body they perish with most certain and souden damnation. For the Lord
expressly says in the Gospel, He that believes in John. 3.
the son of God is not condemned, (or judged) but he that believes not, is
condemned (or judged) already, because he has not believed in the name of the
only begotten son of God. Again, He that believes in the son of God,
has eternal life, but he that believes not the son, shall not see life, but
the wrath of god abides in him. And yet again, This is the will of him that
sent me, that every one which sees the son and believes on him, has
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Now the last day of
man, is the point of death: in it Christ saves The last day of man.
us by his power, least our soul should either perish, or feel any
torments, but that it might live, and enjoy everlasting blessedness. Moreover
the last days is that last day of judgment, wherein Christ shall raise again,
and judge al flesh, glorifying the bodies of his faithful people unto life
everlasting.

Again the Lord says in the Gospel, Verily verily I say unto you, he that
hears my word and believes John. 5.
on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into judgment,
(or damnation:) but is escaped from death unto life. These only words of our
Lord are able enough (without any gainesaying) to set forth, declare, prove,
and confirm sufficiently, our opinion concerning the most certain and souden
salvation of souls. For first of all lest any man should doubt of the most
assured truth, touching the matter which he was setting forth immediately
upon the beginning most holily he swears that is to say, he confirms the
truth by giving witness thereunto with an oath. Afterward he annexeth the
whole manner of our salvation, which consists in hearing the word of god, and
in true faith which receives the truth of Gods word. For it is not enough to
have heard the word of the gospel, unless we ^lea^e unto y^ same by true
faith. But now mark with what assurance Christ promises life and salvation
to them that believe in him, He has life everlasting, says he, he said, He
has, not, He shall have. Therefore he left no space either to doubting, or to
space of time. Yea, yet more plainly, by interpretation expounding when and
how the faithful have or obtain life, he says, He shall not come into
judgment (or damnation) but is escaped from death unto life. They come into
judgment, which have their cause to be examined and discussed before the judge.
They come also into judgment, which by the sentence of the judge are punished
for their evil cause. But the faithful have no cause to be tried and disenssed
before the judge. For their sins are fully forgiven them. It is God which
justifies and forgiueth, Who is he that condemns? Therefore they are not
subject to any punishments, for Christ bare ye punishment of ye cross, ye his
faithful people might be delivered and saved harmeles, from all torments. But
rather least any man should think there were a stay or space of time
between ye death of the body, and the life of the world to come, he says,
But is escaped from death unto life. Lo he says, He is escaped, not, He
shall escape, that by the Verb of the Pretertence he might signify the
certeintie of the time past, and might show that the souls of them that
believe, are by and by after the death of the body caught up into life
everlasting. And I know well enough that the adversaries here have no so^nd
argument, to set against so manifest and invincible a truth. In deed with
their wrangling words and their Sophist^ie they may wrestle with the truth,
but to overthrow the truth they are never able. For the souls of the
faithful even out of the very mouth (as is commonly said: Von mund vss zu
himmel faren) upon a sodeine enter into their blessed seats, and by faith
enjoy everlasting felicity. Again, we read in the Revelation of our Lord
Jesus Christ made to John the Apostle, that it was said: And I heard a voice
from heaven saying Apoc. 14.
unto me, write, Blessed are the dead which hereafter die in the Lord, even so
says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works
follow them. In these words an heavenly and undoubted oracle touching the
blessedness of all such as die in faith is knitt up: and S. John is commanded
to write the oracle from heaven, that it may remain to all times, and be read
of all people. The sum of the oracle is this, Blessed are the dead, which
hereafter die in the Lord. But they die in the Lord, whosoever depart out of
this life in the faith of Jesus Christ. For so the Apostle uses this kind of
speech in the 1. Cor. 15. and 1 Thessalonians. 4. Furthermore they which depart out
of this life in the faith of Jesus Christ, are simply and truly pronounced
blessed, to wit, happy and free from all misery. Yea, a note of the time
when they shall obtain this blessedness is added, namely, Hereafter ((...)) that
is to say, presently, at an instant, by and by, out of hand, to wit, as the
Lord says in the Gospel, forthwith after ye death of the body.

There is added also another testimony whereby again the certainetie of
felicity is expressed, and perfection too not delayed till the morrow, Even so
says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors. The spirit, I mean
of truth, which cannot lie, says, (...), that is to say, Amen, so it is:
truly the faithful are blessed in deed, and even at an instant they are
blessed, and so blessed, that They rest from their labors. The labors of the
faith full are miseries, calamities, afflictions, sorrow, fear or dread, and
other evils of this sort, wherewith in this world they are vexed, yea rather
exercised in faith. From these things the souls of the faithful departing
from their bodies, are delivered, therefore they are not purged by torments and
vexations, they are not scortched in yt midst of their journey, but being
happy and blessed, are forthwith delivered from all anguish and trouble. And
if so be that they suffered any thing whiles they were yet living in the
body, if they did any good works in faith, they do follow them. Let no man
think that those works, because they now cease, were and are vain. For
they receive their reward in that blessed life. For that it is, that Their
works do follow them. And let us mark that he says not, The works of other
follow them, to deliver them forsooth out of purgatory, but, Their own works
follow them. For in the Gospel also, the wise virgins which had oil ready in
their lamps, went in with the bridegroom to the marriage: the folish virgins
which had prepared themselves no oil, but did hope to have from elsewhere to
serve their turn, are excluded and shut out from joy.

To the omnipotent God therefore, our most merciful father, and
continuall-running founteine of all good Graces and which is never drawn
dry, who fashioned our body in our mothers womb, and breathed or powered into
it a reasonable soul, which might whiles it is joined to ye body quicken and
direct us, and when it is separated from the body, might forthwith after the
death of the body be translated into heaven, there to live in joy and
happiness, until it return again unto the body being raised from the dead
in the last judgment, with the which it may rejoice and be glad for ever, and
without end, to that God, I say, thoroughe Jesus Christ, for whose sake we are
made partakers of so great a benefit, be glory, praise, and thanks giving
for evermore. Amen.

The end of the second Tome.
THE FIFTH AND LAST DECADE OF Sermons, WRITTEN BY Henry Bullinger.

The third Tome.

JESUS.

This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: Hear him.

Matthew. 17. THE FIFTE DECADE OF Sermons, written by Henry Bullinger.
Of the holy catholic Church, what it is, how far it extends, by what
marks it is known, from whence it springs, how it is mainteyned and
preserved, whether it may err. Also of the power and studies of the Church.
The first Sermon.
THE order and course of things so leading us, next after God the workman and
author of all things, we come to speak of his most excellent work, to
wit, the Church. For so great is the goodness of our good God, and most
loving father, that not he himself is desirous to live happily and blessedly
alone, but moreover to bestow and power upon us men, his beloved creatures,
all kind of blessedness: and that we should enjoy his goods by all means
possible. And for that intent he choseth men to him self who live in this world
that he may once translate unto him self: in whom also (even while they live
here) he may dwell, whom he may enriche with all his goods, in whom he may
reign, and that they should be called by his name, to wit, a people, a house,
a kingdom, an inheritance, a flock, a congregation or Church of the living
God. Of which Church I will speak (being aided with your prayers) such things,
as the Lord of the Church shall grant unto me to utter.

This word Ecclesia which signifies Ecclesia, a church or congregation.
a Church or Congregation, is a Greek word, used and received among the
Latins, signifying, as I said, a congregation, communion or assembly, (in the
Dutche tongue, Ein Gemeind) or a people called together to hear of matters of
ye common wealth. For so it is found that S. Luke used this word in the 19.
Chap. of the Acts of the Apostles. But it was translated to an holy use, and
began to be called a congregation, assembly, or company of the faithful,
calling upon the name of ye Lord. S. Paul says, that he persecuted ye
congregation or Church of 1. Cor. 15.
God: who in another place, says, I received authority from the high Acts.
22.
priests, to bind all those that call upon the name of christ. For now does
he term them such as call upon the name of Christ, or Christians, whom
before he named the Church. Or else this word Ecclesia, ye church or
congregation, is so called of caling forth together: for in ye Greek tongue
(...) signifies to call forth. For God calls forth from al parts of the wide
world, and from the whole congregation of men, all believers together with
their seed, that they may be his peculiar people, and he again may be their
God, (that is to say,) that they may be the Church of the living God. In times
paste, the congregation or assemblye of the Iewishe people being God his
flock, was called a Synagogue. For this word Synagogue, signifies as
Synagogue.
much as Ecclesia, the Congregation. But because of the stubbornness of the
Jews, and the unappeasable hatred which they bare toward Christian religion,
this word Synagogue, is not esteemed, but is almost quite grown out of use.
But we will not dispute by due and right order of the Churches, either of the
Jews or the Turks, or of other strange Churches of the Gentiles, whereof we
know there are many sorts and kinds. We will speak of the Christian Church
and congregation of the faithful: which the Germans do call Die kirch,
alluding peradventure to the Greek word (...). For they call (...), any thing
belonging to the Lord, to wit, a house or a people, as the Germans do call
Die kirchen, both the people of God themselves, and also the place wherein they
assemble together to worship GOD. But first of all we will describe a little
plainelier what the Church or congregation is.

The Church is the whole company and multitude of the faithful, partly What
the church is.
being now in heaven, and partly remaining yet here upon earth: where it does
agree plainly in unity of faith or true doctrine, and in the lawefull
partaking of the Sacraments: neither is it divided, but joined and united
together, as it were in one house and fellowship.

This Church was usually called Catholic, that is to say universal. The
catholic church.
For she brings forth her branches in all places of the wide world, in all
times of all ages: and generally does comprehend all the faithful of the whole
world. For the Church of God is not tied to any one region, nation, or kindred,
to condition, age, sex or kind: all the faithful generally and each one
specially where ever they or he be, are citizens and members of this Church.
Saint Paul the Apostle Galathi. 3.
says: There is neither Jew nor Greek, neither bondsman nor free, neither
man or woman, for ye be all one in Christ Jesus.

The Church is distinguished into The distinction of the church
the Triumphant, and the Militant. The Triumphant is that great company of
holy spirits in heaven triumphing The triumphant church.
for the victory gotten against the world, sin, and the devil, still
enjoying the sight of God, wherein consists all fullness of all kind of joy
and pleasure. Whereupon they set forth Gods glory, and praise his goodness
for ever. This Church does S. John Reuela. 7.
the Apostle set forth very notably in his Revelations, saying: After this I
saw, and behold a great company which no man was able to number of all
nations, peoples and tongues, standing before the Throne, and in the sight of
the Lamb clothed in white garments, and Palms in their hands: and they cried
out with a loud voice, saying: Salvation belongs to him that sits upon
the throne of our God, and to the Lamb. And a little after that he says: And
one of the Elders aunsweared and said unto me. These which are clothed in white
garments, who are they? or from whence come they? And I said unto him. Thou
know Lord. And he Whence perfect holiness proceeds
said unto me. These are they, that have come out of great affliction, and
have spread abroad their garments, and have made them white in the blood of the
Lamb: therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve day and night in
his holy temple. And he that sits on the Throne shall dwell over them. They
shall neyneither hunger nor thirst henceforth any more: neither shall the Sun
shine on them or any heat: because the Lamb who sits in the midst of
the Throne shall govern them, and bring them to the springes of the water of
life. And the Lord shall wype away all tears from their eyes.

Brethren, ye have heard a notable description of the triumphant Church in
heaven, and that too, triumphinge truly thoroughe the blood of Jesus Christ,
by whom they conquered, and do now reign. For Christ is that Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world: By whom all which be sanctified are
sanctified: and shall be sanctified, and do live from the first creation of the
world unto the end of all times. Saint Paul in a certain place giving unto
us also a notable (...). 12.
description of this Church, tells that we which as yet are busied in the
Militant Church, shall sometime be translated to the same, and be made
fellows with the Angels of GOD, received among the orders of the Patriarchs,
and placed in the company of the blessed spirits with the most high God
himself, and the Mediator our Lord Jesus Christ. For he preaching the
greatness of Gods grace, brought unto us by the Gospel, and exhorting us to
receive the same with a true faith, Ye came not (says he) unto mount Sina, to
a fire, to a whirlewinde, a stormy tempest and darckenes, but unto mount Sion,
to the city of the living God, to heavenly Jerusalem, and to the innumerable
company of Angels, and to the Church or Congregation of the first begotten,
which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits
of the perfect just, and to the mediator of the new testament Jesus Christ,
speaking better things than the blood of Abel spoke. And therefore all the
Saints in heaven do belong unto our company, or rather, we belong unto
their fellowship. For we are companions and fellow heirs with the Saints
from Adam, unto the end of all worlds, and Gods householde. Which conteyneth
the greatest comfort of all man's life, and moves most of all to the study of
virtue. For what more worthy thing is there, tha^ to be of Gods househould? Or
what may be thought more sweet to us, than to think our selves fellows with
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, of all Angels and blessed
spirits? This benefit, I say, Christ has bestowed on us. To him therefore be
praise, glory, and thanks for ever and ever. Amen.

The Militant Church is a congregation The militant church.
of men upon earth, professing the name and religion of Christ, continually
fightinge in the world, against the devil, sin, flesh, and the world, in the
camp and tents, and under the banner of our Lord Christ. This Church is to
be considered two ways. The holy church.
For either it is to be taken strictly, comprehending them only which be not
only called, but are in very deed the Church, the faithful and elect of
God, lively members knit unto Christ, not with bands and other outward marks
and signs, but in spirit and faith: and often times by these means without
the other. Of which matter we will speak hereafter. This inward and invisible
Church of GOD, may be well named the elect spouse of Christ, only known unto
God, who alone knows who are his. When we be first taught to know this
Church, we confess her with the Apostles creed, saying: I believe the holy
Catholic Church, the communion of Saints. And in these few beeleue ^he
holy catholic church.
words, we conclude, that there is a Church, also what is the Church, and
what manner one it is. For first we confess that there has been, and is a
Church of God, and that it shall continue for ever. Then professing what it is,
we add this, The communion of Saints. That is to say: We believe the Church
to be nothing else, but the company of all those Saints that are, have
been, and shall be as well in this present age, as in the age to come, who enjoy
all good things in common, granted unto them by God. Also we declare what
manner one it is in calling it holy, I say the spouse of Christ cleansed and
blessed. For S. Paul calls them holy which are cleansed with the spirit and
blood of ^. Cor. 6.
our God, of which a great part have received crowns of glory: the residue
labor here upon earth hoping to receive them in heaven. And truly, in
consideration of the Church, the chiefest matter is, that thoroughe the Grace
of God, we be made the members of Christ's body, and partakers of all heavenly
gifts with the Angels. For we confess none to be more holy than our own
selves.

Or else it may be taken more largly, and then it does comprehend not The
church does comprehend the wicked.
only them that are the very faithful and holy in deed, but also them, who
although they believe not truly or unfeignedly, neither be clean or holy in
the conversation of their life, yet do they acknowledge and profess true
religion with the true believers, and the holy men of God: yea, they speak
well and allow of virtues and reprove evil, neither do seauer themselves
from the unity of this Militant Church. In which consideration, not so much
as the wicked and hypocrites, such as we read to have been in the Church in
the time of Christ and the Apostles, as Judas, Ananias and Saphira, Simon
Magus, also Demas, Hymenus, Alexander, and many other are excluded and put from
the church, which Church may well be called the outward and visible Church.
But this Church whereof we speak, is to be accounted off either by reason of
some part thereof, or else of the whole. For it is to be considered generally
and particularly. And the particular Church is that which is comprised in a
certain The particular church.
number, and is known by some sure and certain place. For it is named of the
place, being called after the names of cities, as the Churches of Zuericke and
Bernes, etc.

The Greeks called those particular Churches (...), which we commonly call
Parishes. And we call that a parish which has dwelling houses and streates
joined together in neighborhood. But in cities and towns unto certain
portions, are usually ascribed both Churches and parish priests to serve them,
and the whole circuit is called a parish: In the Dutche tongue, Ein Barchi,
oder pfarkirch, oder ein kirchhory. And Parish and parish priest.
in the old time the parish priest was a prouider. For he provided and gave
necessaries to strangers, and chiefly salt and wood. Some called him the maker
of the feast, other call him a preparer of Virgins. Therefore, because the
pastors of Churches were preparers of Virgins for the redeemer and head of the
Church which is Christ, bringing unto him a chaste and undefiled virgin: and
to be short, because they themselves provided things most necessary for the
people of God, and also prepared heavenly meats and banquets, the pastors of
the Lords flock are very well called parish priests, or the curates of
souls. The Lord speaking in the Gospel of the particular Church, said: If he
that offends the Church will not regard when he is Matthew. 18.
warned, complain unto the Church. But it is not possible that the universal
Church through the whole world, should assemble and come together, that the
rebellious and obstinate should be brought before it: wherefore judgment is
referred to be given on yt stubborn by the particular Churches. To conclude,
the universal Church consists of all the particular Churches through out the
whole world, and of all the visible parts and members thereof. This is the
same which we drue forth even now when we spoke more at large thereof.

But the catholic Church of God does abide with us (as we began to The
church of God has been and ^halbe forever.
tell a little before) continually from age to age from the beginning, and is at
this time dispersed thorough out the whole world, both visiblye and inuisiblye,
and the Lords people and God his house shall continue upon earth, unto the
worlds end. For there was never yet any world, neither shall be any age, wherein
God has not or will not sanctify some unto himself, wherein he will dwell,
and that they shall be his flock and holy house. For the testimonies of
ancient Prophets do record that the Church is perpetual. For thus we find
it written in the 132. Psalm. The Lord has chosen Sion, he has chosen her
for an habitation for him self. This is my resting place for ever and ever,
here will I dwell, because I have chosen her. And again, I have sworn unto
David in my holiness, his seed shall remain for ever, and his seat shall
continue before me as the Sun. But who knows not that all this is to be
understood of Christ the son of David, and of his seat and spiritual Sion,
which is the Church? He also, signifying the continuance of the Church, says
in the Gospel: I will remain Matthew. 28.
with you continually unto the end of the world. And again, I will ask John.
14.
of my father, and he shall give you an other co^forter, the spirit of truth,
that he may abide with you for ever. To this belongs also that saying in the
Gospel: And the gates of hell shall Matthew. 16.
not prevail against the Church. Which saying truly is a great comfort to
the faithful, in so many and so great persecutions intended to the utter
destruction and overthrow of the Church.

As Christ had always his Church The church of the devil and Antichrist.
here upon earth, has now, and for ever shall have: So likewise the devil as
long as the world shall continue, shall never want his people in whom he may
reign. This Church of the devil took her first beginning of Cain, and shall
continue to the last wicked person, comprehending also all those evil peoples
that have been in the mean time and shall be betwixt the beginning and the
ending. But they living here on earth, have society and common with them that
are tormented in hell. For as all that be Godly being under one head Christ
do make one body, so all the wicked under one head satan are one incorporate
body. This may right worthily be called yt wicked Church, Sodom and Gomor,
Babylon, ye congregation of Chora, Dathan, and Abyron, a synagogue, a schole
and a stews of the devil, the kingdom of antichriste, or any other of like
sort. In this Church are reckoned up all such as are wicked, and and infidels,
separating themselves from the society of our holy mother the Church, or
forsaking the communion thereof: and specially such as are mockers of God, and
his holy word, blasphemers, and persecutours of Christ and his Church. Such in
these days are the heathen, Turks, Jews, heretics, scismatikes, and
generally all such as are professed enemies to Christian religion. And to these
also we may add hypocrites. For it is no small offense that the Lord him self
in every Math. 5. 6. and. 23. Math. 24.
part of the Gospel does so earnestly persecute and blame. Among other
things he says: The Lord of that servant shall come in the day wherein he
looks not for him, and in an hour that he shall not know off, and shall
divide him, and shall give him his portion with hypocrites, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Out of all doubt he signified the greatness of
the offense by the sharpness of the punishment. This Church does follow the
motions of the devil, and the devises, or imaginations of her own heart, and
is busied and exercised in all kind of blasphemy and wickedness, wherein
she excels her self, and at last sincketh down to hell, that she be not
in any place separated from that head whereunto she has so diligently or rather
obstinately joined her self.

I know right-well that ye will obiecte against me, for that I have How
hycrites are, or may be accounted in the church of God.
reckoned the hypocrites to be in the outward communion and fellowship of the
Militant Church, and now again to account them of the company of the devils
Church. Moreover you will say, That it is impossible that the same hypocrites
may take part of both Churches differing betwixt themselves, for that the
Lord says: Either make the tree good and the fruit good, or else the tree
Matthew. 12.
naught and the fruit naught. And Saint Paul also says, that there 2. Cor.
6.
is no fellowship betwixt Christ and Belial, twixt light and darckenesse,
twixt truth and lying, and that hypocrisy is lying and darckenesse. Here
therefore I perceive a fit place to show, by what means, and how far I
may account hypocrites to be of the congregation of the Church. First we make
a distinction or difference of hypocrites. For there are certain hypocrites
that put their confidence Hypocrites
in their humane justice and equity, doing all their works openly that
they may be seen of men, firmly trusting, and stiffely standing to men's
traditions.

To these it is a custom and property Matthew. 13
not only to fly from ye Church which teaches the righteousness of Christ,
but also to curse, detest, and to persecute it, with all cruelty. Such kind
of people were the Jews and Iewishe Phariseis, with whom our Lord Jesus
Christ had much contention, and with whom even at this day, the Church
contendeth and makes wars. These be the plain and visible members of the
devils Church, and they are not to be counted of the outward Church, yea, they
are not once worthy to be named in ye Church of Christ.

Again, there are some kind of hypocrites that are dissemblers, which
neither give any confidence to their own righteousness and justice, neither yet
do greatly regard the traditions of men. These kinds of people neither hate
the Church, nor fly from it, nor persecute it: but outwardly they agree with
it, professing the same faith, and participating the self same Sacraments:
but inwardly and in mind they neither believe unfeignedly and sincerely,
neither do they live holilie. Of this sort, some of them for a season will
cleave to the fellowship and company of the Church: and having any occasion
given, they will fall from it as heretics and scismatikes are wont to do, and
such as of friends are become enemies. Other there be again that never fall
from the Church, but keep them selves in the fellowship of the Church all
their life time, outwardly pretending and feigning Religion: but inwardly
giving them selves up to their own errors, faults and wickedness: unto whom
without doubt the outward behavior and fellowship profits nothing at all.
For we ought to live for ever, and to participate all heavenly gifts with them
that desire them, to join in fellowshippe with the Church of God, not only by
outward and visible society, but by inward communion and fellowship, wherein
consists life and salvation. Of which matter we will speak in convenient
place. Such Hypocrites or dissemblers hanging on the ecclesiastical body, are
called members of the body, and are said to be of ye church. Which matter that
it may the better be understood of you all, we will set it forth by certain
parables.

We say that the wicked or hypocrites, be in like sort in the Church, as
chafe is in the corn: which indeed is of an other nature, and is no corn.
Like as therefore often times their hang members unto men's bodies, either dry or
rotten, or feeble, which members although they have no society nor take part
with the lively members in the vital spirit, yet by coupling together and
certain stringes they clean fast unto the lively members, by means whereof
they are also called by men members and parts of the body, who, lest they
should in^ect the other, they cut them off: often times they let them alone, lest
by cutting them off the whole body should be in danger of life: Even so in like
sort, we say that hypocrites are in the church of Christ, though they be not
united to the Church, either by the bond of the spirit, or offaith and love:
neither are they to be taken for lively members: yet are they suffered, lest
some worse mischief happen to the whole body of the church and ofttimes they
are cut off, whereby the better health may come to the ecclesiastical body. But
let us hear what the Evangelical and Apostolical testimony says. The Lord
says plainly Matthew. 13.
in ye Gospel, that in the lords field cockell grows up being soawen by a
wicked man, which he forbids to be plucked up, least that therewith the
corn be plucked up also. Behold cockel soawen by an evil man (I say) by the
Devil him self, which is no corn, yet does it increase and is in the Lords
field. Again, the lord says in the Gospel, The kingdom of heaven is like
unto a nett, which being cast into the sea, draws al manner of things up with
it, and when it is filled it is brought to the shore, and there men sitting
reserve that which is good in a vessel, and that which is evil they cast away.
Again, behold how ye may see both good and bad to be drawn in the self
same nett: and therefore in the selfsame kingdom, both good and evil to be
reckoned. Also Matthew. 22.
in an other parable, there enters one in among the guestes, which has not
on his wedding garment, who is suffered for a season, but yet at last is cast
out of doors by the Lord of the feast. In an other place, it is said that
Matthew. 3.
he has a fan in his hand, and cleanses the flower, and burns the chafe
with unquenchable fire. S. Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthes, puts a 1.
Cor. 5.
difference, betwixt the professed and open enemies of Christ's Church, and the
impure sort of men, who as yet are not quite repugnaunte and adversaries to
the Church, and the name of Christ: If any man (says he) that is called a
brother, be a thief, or a whoremonger, or a covetous person etc. with such an
one see that ye eat no meat. For what does it belong unto me to judge of
the^ that be without? For God judges them that are without. Without, that is
to say, he places them y^ are not called brethren, wthout the bonds and
compass of the Church, to wit, such as do not acknowledge the name of
Christ, or of the church. Within, that is to say, in the society of the
Church (I mean of the outward church) he reckons up them that as yet do
acknowledge the Christian name, neither yet do withstand ecclesiastical
discipline, though they the^ selves in mean time be defiled and spotted with
much mischief. Of all men, S. John the Apostle spoke plainliest saying, They
1. John. 2.
went out from us, but they were none of us. For if they had been of us, they
had tarried still with us. This seems to be a strange kind of speech. For if
they which go out of the church had not been in the society of the church, how
could they go out of the Church? Can a man come forth of a place, in-the which
he never came, or in which he never was? Therefore if hypocrites and evil men
are gone out of the Church, surely they were sometime in the Church, then to
wit, when they had not as yet gone out of it, and did plainly show what manner
ones they were indeed. Again, for that they went out of the Church, they
manifestly show that they were never indeed the true and lively members of
Christ and the Church, yet for a while they were numbered among the members
of the Church. The Apostle gives the reason, it is the disposition of Christ's
true members never to forsake Christ and his church, but to continue, and also
to prosper and increase daily more and more.

The Saints and holy men truly do offend or fall, but yet they do not
forsake Christ utterly. David having committed adultery and manslaughter,
cries out saying, Psalm. 5^.
Make me a clean heart (O lord) and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not
away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. O give me the
comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free spirit,

Saint Peter denied the Lord, and the weak flesh overcame a good spirit,
Luke. 22.
but immediately (the Lord stirring up his heart) he repented, and departing
from evil company, he adjoined himself to the good fellowship of the Lord,
who foretold him of this great fall, and thereto added these words, I prayed
for thee that thy faith should not fail, and thou when thou art converted,
confirm thy brethren. The same Peter also in an other place, what time many
fell John 16.
from Christ, being demanded whether he also provided to depart? answered,
Lord to whom shall we go? Thou haste the word of eternal life. And we
believe and know that thou art Christ the Son of the liueing GOD.

Wherefore S. John said very truly, They went out from us, but they were none
of us. He adds the reason, If they had been of us, they had still tarried with
us. Therefore because they continued not still with us in the society of
Christ and the Church, they showed by their defectio^ and falling away, what
manner ones hitherto they have been: we accounted them to be members of the
Church, but they by their fallinge away, did declare, that they were chafe in
the Lords corn. For as chafe being not stirred nor fanned, does seem to
be heavy with a grain of Wheat in it, but beeinge once moved it appears
empty and light, and by fanning is put aparte from the corn: so hypocrites
beeinge light by reason of their defection, do manifestly prove that they were
never heavy with the seed of Gods word, and that they were never the true
corn of Christ.

From hence a general and ancient All that be in the Church be ^ot the Church
opinion is gathered, that all that are said to be the Church, and beautify
themselves with the title of the church, are not by and by the Church. For
Saint John plainly adds, But that it may be evident, that all be not of us.
We read how that S. Paul to the Romans says: They are not all Israelites
which came of Israel, neither are they all children straight Romans 9.
way because they are the seed of Abraham, but in Isaac shall thy seed be
called. Therefore the faithful are the true and lively members of Christ and
of the Saints. In mean season truly, so long as hypocrites or wicked
persons, not yet putting off their visours shall by their sayings and doings
declare what they are, that they may lawfully be cut from the church, who not
yet breaking away by their own accord, do forsake Christ in the open field,
and fly to the tents of antichrist or the devil, are known and taken to be
the true inhabitants of the church, and are called the thurch and the members
of the church, although God who beholds the hearts of al men, do well
enough discern them. I will again make this matter plain by an example. As
long as Judas the John. 13.
betrayer of Christ and mansleyer, did not utter his crafty or rather most
wicked devise, either by open deed or word, neither forsook the company of
Christ and the Apostles, but did preach and provide necessary things of
house should for Christ, he was accounted for an Apostle and the stuwarde of
Christ, yea and for a member of the Apostolic church. Yet the self same
Judas was called by the John. 6.
Lord, a Devil, and when he spoke of the elect, and of his true and liuelye
members, he was most plainly shut out, so that there is no occasion of dout to
think that Judas was no member John. 13.
of the inward and holy Church of God, though he were a member of the the
outward Church being reckoned in the number of the holy men. And therefore
they speak not without great advise that said: That of The visible and
invisible, the outward and inward Church.
Gods Church there was one visible and outward, an other invisible and inward.

The visible and outward Church is that which is outwardely known by men for
a Church, by hearing Gods word, and partaking of his Sacraments, and by
public confession of their faith. The invisible and inward is so called, not
that men are invisible, but because it is not to be seen with man's eye, and
yet does appear before Gods eyes, who believe truly, and who feignedly.

For the true believers, are the true and lively members of this inward
Church: which before I called the militant Church more strictly considered:
but the other visible Church comprehending both good and bad is more largely
considered.

Now forasmuch as we have said, that the Church militant upon earth is marked
by GOD with certain Of the outward marks of the church of God.
tokens and marks, whereby it may be known in this world: it follows next,
that we should speak of those outward marks of the church of God. And there are
two special and principal marks. The sincere preaching of the word of GOD,
and the lawful partaking of the sacraments of Christ. Whereas some add unto
these, the study of godliness and unity, patience in affliction, and the
calling on the name of God by Christ: but we include them in the setwaine that
we have set down.

S. Paul writing to the Ephestians, says: Christ gave him self for the
congregation, that he might sanctify it and cleanse it in the founteine of
water through the word. Ye have in this testimony of the Apostle, the marks
of the Church, to wit, the Word and the Sacrament, by the which Christ
makes to him self a church. For, with his grace he calls, with the blood of
Christ he purifieth, that which he shows by his word to be received by
faith, and seals with sacraments, that the faithful should doubt of nothing
touching their salvation obtained through Christ. And these things truly do
properly belong unto the faithful, and the holy members. Whereas hypocrites are
not purified, the fault lies in themselves, and not in God or his holy
ministry: They are surely sanctified visibly, whereupon they are counted
holy amongst men: and these things do improperly belong unto them. S. Peter
in this point differs not a whitt from S. Paul, who when he preached the
word of God to the people of Jerusalem, and they demanding what they should
do, Peter answered, Repent, Acts. ^.
and be ye every one baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins. S. Peter therefore joined baptism with doctrine, the sacrament with
the word. Which thing he had learned of our savior him self in the gospel
written by S. Matthew. saying. Matthew. 28.
Teach ye all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. So that ye read in the Acts no other mysteries
of the Word and Sacraments of the Church, than are recited in these words,
They continued in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in doing alms deeds, and
in breaking of bread, Acts. 2.
and prayer, where ye may see the supper of the Lord, an other sacrament
adjoined to the sacrament of baptism, also the desire and study of unity and
love, and the calling upon the name of God.

These things being thus sufficient plain and firm enough, yet
notwithstanding I will add other testimonies out of the holy Scriptures.
Concerning the token of Gods word, or the preaching of his Gospel, the Lord
him self speaks by Esaie ye Prophet, saying: Esai. 59.
I will make this covenant with them, My spirit that is come upon thee (the
church) and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall never go out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy childers children, says the Lord, from
this time forth for evermore. For in ye gospel also the Lord Jesus says: He
that is of God does hear the word of God. Again, John. 8. John, 10.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give to
them everlasting life: and they shall not perish for ever. And again, He that
loves me John. 14.
will keep my commandments, he that loves me not, will not keep my
commandments. Again, Who so is of the truth, will hear my voice. John. 18.


Now as touching the marks and tokens of the Sacraments, Saint Paul,
speaking of holy Baptism, 1 Cor. 12.
says, Through one spirit we are all baptized in one body. And he also
speaking of the Lords supper, says: Though we be many, yet are we one bread
and one body, for we are all partakers 1. Cor. 10.
of the same bread. Is not the cup of blessing which we bless, partaking of
the blood of Christ?

It is most certain therefore, for that it is approved by testimonies of
holy Scriptures, that the outward marks and tokens of the church are, the
word and the Sacrament. For these bring us into the society of one
ecclesiastical body, and keep us in the same.

All these testimonies properly (as I said a little before) do belong unto How
these marks declare the church.
the elect members of GOD, being endued with faith and true obedience: but
unto the hypocrites, which are void of faith and due obedience, they nothing
at all beelong: notwithstanding because these also do hear the voice of the
shepherd outwardly, and ensue virtue, and openly or outwardly are annexed to
the elect and true believers in the partaking of the sacraments, yea unto ye
true body of christ, for those outward signs sake, they are accounted to be
in ye church so long as they depart not from it. In which point, for
perspicuitie sake, having treated of the marks of the Church, we must add this
thereunto: that by common order these marks do declare and note, the members
of the Church. For there are certain special members, who although they want
these marks, yet are they not excluded from the society and communion of the
true church of Christ. For it is most evident, that there are many in the
world which do not hear the ordinary preaching of Gods word, neither do
come into the congregation and company of them that call upon God, or that
receive the Sacraments: not for that they despise them, or that it is a delight
unto them to be from Sermons and the preaching of Gods word, but because
through necessity, as imprisonment, sickness, or being let by so^e other urgent
cause, they cannot attain unto that which they earnestly desire, and yet for
all that, they are the true and lively members of Christ and of the Catholic
church. In times past the Lord instituted or appointed to the people of Israel
a visible Church, which he established by a certain law, and set it forth
by visible signs. If any man had despised this Church, or refused when he
might, to hear the doctrine of the Church, and to enter in among the holy
company, and to do sacrifice, or else had railed at it, or in sted of the
order of worshipping GOD that was appointed, had embraced any other kind,
truly he was not accounted at al to be of the order and number of the people of
God. And yet it is certain, that there were an innumerable company of men
dispearsed throughout the whole world among the Gentiles, who never did, nor
could, communicate with this visible company and congregation of Gods people:
and yet notwithstanding, they were holy members of this society and communion,
and the friends of the almighty God. There were a great many of the children
of God, with Ioachim and Iechonias, taken prisoners by Nabugodonosor, and
brought captive into Babylon, to whom it was no prejudice, neither did it hurt
them, that they were separated from the people of God, the Church, and
worshipping of God, being then visibly vpholden by Zedechias at Jerusalem: even
as in very deed it did little avail a great many, to be in the visible
assemblies and congregations, with the people of GOD in Gods temple, when their
minds and hearts were not sound and perfect. We may in these days, find out
a great many of the faithful dispersed on the seas, condemned to the galleys
for the confession of the true faith: we may find many that be holden in
captivity under Antichrist, of the which we will speak in the next Sermon
following: we may find also a wonderful many in Graecia, Natolia, Persia,
Arabia, or in Africa, being ye servants of Jesus Christ, and worthy members of
the catholic church of Christ, being shut out and debarred from the holy
mysteries of the christians, through impiety and cruelty of Machomet,
nevertheless, we shall find them almost nearely joined together in one spirit,
and one faith, with all the true members of the Church, and marked also with
visible signs. Therefore, the word and the Sacraments by common decree, are
the marks of the Church, not putting apart or disseuering the faithful from
the communion and society of other faithful, being by some necessity shut
out from the visible company of those that are faithful.

But to the perfect understanding What manner of Gods word it ought to be that
is the mark of the church
of the marks of the Church, this belongs also, and that most principally,
that it is not enough to brag of the word of God or of the scripture, unless
also we embrace, retain, and defend the true sense, and that which is
agreeing with the articles of faith. For if ye corrupt the sense of the
scripture, and urge the same in the church, then do thou not bring forth
the sincere scripture it self, but thine own opinion, and thy fancies, which
thou have devised of thine own mind. The Church of the Arrians did not refuse
the word of the Lord, but rather labored both to beautify and defend their
own blasphemous errors, by the testimonies of holy scripture. That Church
denied our Lord Jesus Christ, to be of one substance with God the father:
which thing, since that the sense of the scriptures, and of the ancient faith
among the chiefest points of our faith does both affirm and urge, truly it
alleged not the sincere and pure word of God, how so ever it boasted of it,
but an adulterate word, yea, and thrust in and defended her heretical opinion,
for the true and perfect meaning of the holy scripture: and therefore it had not
the true mark of the Church, neither was it the true Church of God. By this one
unhappy example, we may judge of al other Churches of heretics: who though
they seem not to be void of the testimony of Gods word, yet for all that in
very deed, they have no purity of Gods word in them.

That which we have said concerning After what sort the Sacraments ought to
be used.
the word of God, is also necessarily to be understood of the use of the
Sacraments: for except they be orderly and lawfully used, I say, in that order,
in the which the Lord him self instituted them, they are no marks or signs
of the Church of God.

Jeroboam truly sacrificed, yea, he sacrificed unto God: but because ^. Reg.
12.
he sacrificed not lawfully, he was accounted a stranger, and a faller off
from the true Church of God. Yea, David him self brought with great ^. Reg. 6.
devotion and much joy and melody, the Ark of the Lord of hosts: but
because he carried it not lawfully upon the shoulders of the priests, by and
by, in stead of great joy, the exceeding sorrow which followed declared, that
it is not enoughe to use the Sacraments and ordinances of God, unless ye use
them lawfully, which if you do, God will acknowledge you for his.

Moreover, those which of old were ^aptised of Here^^ques (...) not re^aptised,
baptized of heretics, were not for that cause rebaptised again by the
ancient catholics: because the heretics baptized not into the name of any
man, or into ye society of their errors or heresies, but baptized In the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: neither did they
invoke their own name, or the name of Archheretiques, but of Jesus Christ.
Wherefore, not the baptism of heretics, but the baptism of the Church, yet
ministered by heretics, they not refusing, they allowed not the Churches of
heretics, as known to be true by true signs: but they acknowledged that
heretics use things properly belonging unto the true Church: neither that it
does any thing at all derogate or take from a good thing, if any wicked or
evil man do administer it.

We do not acknowledge at this day, the vpstart Romish Church of the Pope
(we speak not now of that old Apostolic Church) to be the true Church of
Christ, yet we do not rebaptise those which were baptized of the priests,
embrued with Popish corruption. For we know that they are baptized with the
baptism of Christ's church, and not of the Pope, in the name of the holy
Trinity, to the articles of the Catholic faith, not to errors, not to
superstitions, and papisticall impieties. Finally we confess, that not at this
day the unworthiness of the minister can derogate any thing from the service
of God. In like sort also we refuse not the Lords prayer, or the Apostles
Creed, or finally the canonical Scriptures themselves: because the Romish
church does also use them: for she has them not of her self, but received
them from the true church of God. Wherefore we use them in common with her, not
for the Romish churches sake, but because they came from the true church of
Christ, do we use them.

Beside those outward marks of the church, which the true beleuers Of the
inward marks of the church of God.
have common with hypocrites, there are certain inward marks specially
belonging only to the godly: or else if you will, rather call them bonds or
proper gifts. These do make the outward marks to be fruitful, and without
the outward marks, being by some necessity absent, do make men worthy or
acceptable in the sight of God. For without these no man can please God: in
these therefore is the true mark of Gods children. And those be the fellowship
of Gods spirit, a sincere faith, and double charity.

For by these the faithful, being the true and lively members of Christ, are
united and knit together, first unto their head Christ, then to all the
members of the ecclesiastical body. And the consideration hereof does
chiefly belong to the knowledge of the true Church of GOD, which though she
should suffer rotten members, yet is she not defiled of them thorough their
outward coniunctio^. For with continual study she labors by all means to
keep her self vndefield to God. And first of all the Evangelical and
Apostolical doctrine does teach us, that Christ is joined to us by his
spirit, and that we are tied to him in mind or spirit, by faith, that he may
live in us, and we in him. For the Lord cries out in the Gospel, saying: If
any man thirst, let him come John. 7.
to me and drink. He that believes in me (as the Scripture says) shall have
streams of liueing water flowing out of his belly. To which saying by and by
the Evangelist adds this: But this he spoke concerning the spirit which they
should receive that believed in him. Again he promising in his Gospel, his
spirit unto his Disciples, yea even unto all his faithful, which should
abide with them for ever, says: In that day ye shall know that I am in my
father, John* 14.
and you in me, and I in you, to wit, by the holy Ghost. John the Apostle
expounding it, and saying, By this we know that he dwells in us, by the
spirit that he gave unto us. And again, 1. John. 2.
By this we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he 1. John. 4.
has given of his spirit unto us. S. Paul, the vessel of election,
differs not from Saint John, writing and saying to the Romans, If any man
has not the spirit of Christ, Romans 8.
the same is none of his. And whosoever are led by the spirit of God, they are
the children of God. Now as touching true faith, which tyeth us unto, Galath. 2.
the Lord, S. Paul says: I live now, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. But
the life which I now live in the flesh, I live yet thorough the faith of the
son of God, who loved me, and gave up him self for me. And again Ephe. 3.
he says, Christ dwells in our hearts thorough faith. With which sayings,
2. John. 4.
Saint John the Apostle agreeing again, says: Whosoever confesses that
Jesus Christ is the son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God. For the
Lord him self before John. 6.
that, said in the Gospel, He that eats my flesh and drincketh my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him. And he eats Christ's flesh and drinks
Christ's blood, that believes.

Therefore Christ our Lord is joined unto us in spirit, and we are tied to
him in mind and faith, as the body unto the head: they therefore that lack
this knotte and bond, that is, that have not the spirit of Christ, nor true
faith in Christ, are not the true and lively members of Christ: the Lord him
self in the gospel, witnessing and saying: If a man abide not in me: he is
cast forth as a branch and withers, and men gather them, and cast them into
the fire and they burn. Which words of our savior the Apostle imitating,
John. 15.
(as we said even now) said, He that has not the spirit of Christ, is none of
his. But they that are not destitute of the spirit of Christ, are inflamed
with the love of God. Neither do we separate love from faith, the same S. John
so teaching us and saying, God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells
in God, and GOD in him. 1. John 4.
For the Lord says in the gospel, If a man love me, he will keep my word, and
my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and will dwell with him. But
although properly faith join us to our head Christ, yet the same also does
knit us to all Christ's members upon earth. For whereas there is but one faith
of them al, and therefore the same spirit, there can not but be the same mouth,
the same mind, and the same sentence amongst them all: although faith be not
now taken only for a confidence in the mercy of God through Jesus Christ, but
also for an outward confession of faith. For we all confessing one faith, and
one and the self same head, with one spirit and mouth, we also together
profess that we all are members of one and the self same body. Neither is
there any thing else in the world, that more vnappeaseably disseuereth the
minds of men, than the diversity of faith or religion: and therefore there is
nothing that may more nearely join us together, than unity of faith. We come
now to speak of love, which I said, joins together the members of the
ecclesiastical body, mutually amongst them selves. The Lord says in the
gospel, A new commandment John. 1. 13.
give I unto you, that ye love one an other: as I have loved you, that ye also
love one an other. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
have love one to an other. It is therefore out of doubt, that the only mark of
the church next after faith, is love, a bond most firmly knitting together all
the members. This grows from the communion of Christ, and unity of the
spirit. For insomuch as Christ the king, the head, and high Bishop of the
catholic church, enduing us all with one and the same spirit, has made us
all his members, the sonns of God, brethren and fellow heirs, whom undoubtedly
he loves tenderly: every faithful man can not choose, but with fervent love
embrace the members and fellow heirs of their king, their head, and their
high Bishop. For John the Apostle says, Every one that loves 1. John, 4.
him that begatte, does love him also that is borne of him. If any man say, I
love God and hates his brother, he is a liar. For how can he that loves not
his brother whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen? Paul to the
end that he might most properly express before our eyes, and as it were set
to view and behold this unity and agreement of the members, uses a parable
taken from the members of a man's body, and says: For as we have many members
in one body, and all members Romans 12.
have not one office, so we being many are one body in Christ, and every one,
one an others members. The same in the twelfth chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, more largely and plainly expounding, joining together of the
head and the members, and that chiefly by the said parable of the members of a
man's body, and publishing it very eloquently, witnesses, that between the
highest members of the church and the lowest members of the same, there is a
very great and apt consent, and moreover, a diligent care, and a help both
continual and most faithful. Of all which it appears, that the marks of
the true and lively church of Christ, are the communion of the spirit of
Christ, sincere faith, and christian charity: without the which things, no
man is partaker of this spiritual body. By these things also it shall be
easy to judge whether thou art in the fellowship of the church, or thou art
not. Moreover, we gather out of those Of the original o^ the church
things which we have hitherto disputed touching the marks of Christ's
church, from whence is her original, and also how the church is planted, spread
abroad and preserved. Her original is heavenly, for S. Paul speaking of ye
church, says: Jerusalem which is above, Gala. 4.
is free, which is the mother of us all. Therefore he calls the church
heavenly, not that it dwells altogether in heaven, but that she being here on
earth, has a heavenly beginning. For, ye children of God are not borne of
flesh and blood, but from heaven, by ye renewing of ye holy spirit, who through
the preaching of Gods word, planteth faith in our hearts, by which faith we are
made the true members of Christ and his church. For Peter says, Ye are borne a
new, not of mortal seed, but 1. Pet. 1.
of immortal, by the word of God, which lives and lasts for ever. And
Paul says, I begat you in Christ 1. Cor. 4.
Jesus through the gospel. And ye same apostle says in an other place, Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing comes Romans 10.
by the word of god. Since there fore faith comes by hering, and hearing by
the word of God, and that specially The church is not builte by the doctrine
of men.
by the word of God, the church truly can by no means spring or be builded by
the decrees and doctrines of men. Therefore we affirm, that only the word of
god is apt for the building up of the church of God. Men's doctrines set up
men's churches, but Christ's word builds the Christian church. For the
doctrines of men proceed of flesh and blood. But Peter confessing Christ with
a pure faith, and therefore grounded upon Christ, who is ye foundation of ye
church, heard these words of Christ him self, Flesh and blood Matthew. 16.
has not revealed these things unto thee, but my father which is in heaven.
And therefore Paul says, When it pleased God that I should preach his Galath.
1.
son among the Gentiles, I conferred not of the matter with flesh and blood.
etc. He also most manifestly abolishing all doctrines of men, from ye setting
up and building of faith and the church, and only commending the word of God,
says to the Corinthians, My word and preaching stood not in the 1. Cor. 2.
enticing spech of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit and of
power, that your faith should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of
God. To this now pertains these testimonies of Christ. He that is of God,
hears Gods word. Again, John. ^.
He that is of the truth, will hear my John. 1^.
voice. And again, more plainly he John. 10.
says. The sheep will follow the shepherd, because they know his voice. They
will not follow a stranger, but will run away from him, because they know not
the voice of strangers. But under the voice of strangers, we include all
traditions and decrees of me^, differing from the doctrine of Christ: to which
traditions ye apostle S. Paul does attribute the shape of wisdom, Colo. 2.
but the truth he denies them, and caleth Titus. 1.
them superstitious. For our lord him self in the gospel, brings forth of
ye prophet Esaie ye immutable saying. They worship me in vain, teaching
Matthew. 15.
for doctrines men's precepts. Let us therefore hold, that the true church is
not built by man's decrees, but y^ she is founded, planted, gathered together,
and builded only by the word of Christ. We do add that it is out of doubt,
y^ The church is preserved by the word of God.
the church of God is preserved by the same word of God, least at any time it
should be seduced, or least it should slip and perish, and y^ neither can it at
any time be preserved by any other means. Paul again witnessing and saying,
Christ has given some to be apostles, and some prophets, and some Eua^gelists
Ep^^ 4.
some pastors, and techers for the gathering together of the Saints for the
work of the ministry (that is to say, to teach and preach the word, (and for
the edification of the body of Christ, till we al meet together in the unity
of faith, and knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, that we he^ceforth be no more
children, wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the deceit
of me^, (mark, I pray, how men's doctrines are condemned again with great
and inviolable authority) and with craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to
deceive. But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up into him
which is the head, that is, Christ: by whom all the body being coupled and
knit together by every joint, for the furniture thereof, (according to the
effectual power which is in the mesure of every part) receives increase of the
body, unto the edifying of it self in love, increases the body unto the
edifying of it self through love. These words of the apostle are so plain, yt
they need no better exposition tha^ they have of the^ selves. In this place
also ye order and manner of the church by ye preaching of Gods word, should of
right be set down, which many do term and call ye ministry of the word, or
of ye church: but we will speak of ye (God willing) in the third sermon. It
shall be sufficient in this place to defend, yt our Lord God, having given
doctors unto the church, does found, build, maintain, and enlarge the church
by his word, yea, by his word only.

There come two things now to be considered. First that the church of good for
y^ continual and constant study of ye word The prophetical Apostolical, and
Or thodoxicall Church
of God, is called prophetical, and apostolical, ye, and also orthodoxical.
For it is called prophetical or apostolical, because by y^ travel of ye
prophets and apostles it was first builded, and by their doctrine is preserved
even at this time, and shall by it be spread abroad, eue^ unto ye end of ye
world. It is called Orthodoxical, because it is sound of judgment, opinion,
and faith. For without ye church there is no true faith, neither any perfect
doctrine touching true virtue and felicity. The faith and doctrine of the
church, was revealed from God him self, by Ada^ and the patriarchs, by Moses
and the prophets, by Christ and the apostles. Whereby she elsewhere is named a
mother, whereof we will speak in the next sermon. Secondarily, yt the
succession of Of the continual succession of Bishops.
doctor or pastors of ye church, does prove nothing of it self, without ye word
of God. The cha^pions and defenders of ye papisticall church do boast, yt they
have a most certain mark of the apostolic church, to wit, in y^ continual
succession of bishops, coming from S. Peter by Clement ye first, and so to
Clement y^ 7. and to Paul y^ 3. who died of late, and so continuing to Julius
y^ 3. not long ago created. Moreover, they add, yt al such members are cut
off, as do separate themselves from ye church, in yt which only that
apostolical succession is found. And we do not deny, but that the right
succession of pastors in ye primitive church, was of great weit. For they which
then were call pastors, were pastors in deed, and executed the office of
pastors. But what manner of pastors they have been a great many years, which of
the rout of Cardinals, mitred bishops, and sophisters, have been caled pastors,
none is ignorant, but he which is altogether without any understanding. The
Prophet Zachary heard these words spoken to him from yt lord: take to thee
yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd, for lo, I will raise Zacha. 11.
up a shepherd in the land, which shall not look for the thing that is
lost, nor seek the tender lambs, nor heal that that is hurt, nor feed that
that stands up: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their hoofes
in pieces. Woe be to the idle shepeheard, that forsakes the flock. etc.
Therefore never a whit more do these men prove by their continual succession of
Bishops, who teach not the word of God sincerely, nor execute the office and
duty of Pastors, than if they should set before the eyes of the world a
company of Idols. For who dare deny, but that a great part, yea, the most
part of the bishops of Rome since Gregory the great, were such manner of
Idols, such kind of woolues and deuourers, as are described by the Prophet
Zachary? What than I pray you can the continual succession of such false
pastors prove? Yea, and they which were of the later time, did they not fill
almost the universal church, with the traditions of men, and partly oppressed
the word of God, and partly persecuted it? In the ancient church of the
Israelites, there was a continual order of succession of bishops, without any
interruption thereof, even from Aaron to Vrias, who lived under Achas, and to
other wicked bishops also, falling from the word of god, to the traditions of
men, yea, and also idolatry. But for all that, that succession did not prove
the idolatrous bishops, with the church that claue unto them, to be the true
bishops of God, and the true church of God. Truly the true Prophets of God,
the sound and catholic fathers, preaching only the word of God without men's
traditions, yea, clean against all traditions, were not able to reckon up any
continual succession of priests their predecessors, to whom they them selves
should succeed, and yet notwithstanding, they were most excellent lights, and
worthy members of ye church of God: and they which believed their doctrine,
were neither Scismatiques, nor heretics, but eue^ to this day are
acknowledged to be the true church of Christ. When Christ our Lord the blessed
son of God, did teach here on earth, and gathered together his church, the
succession of bishops was on his adversaries part. But they for that cause were
not rulers of the true church of God, and Christ of the heretical church. The
apostles of our lord could not allege for the^ selves and their doctrine, a
succession of bishops not interrupted: for they were ordained of the Lord, who
was also him self created of God the high priest for ever, after ye new order
of Melchisedech, without ye succession of the order of Levy, and yet the
church y^ was gathered by them, is acknowledged of al men to be the true and
holy church. The Apostles themselves would have none other to be accounted for
their true fellows and successors, but those who walked upright in ye doctrine
and way of Christ. For notable and manifest is ye saying of Paul, Be ye the
followers of me, even as I am of Christ. 1. Cor. 11.
And though he speaks these words to all the faithful, and not only to ye
ministers of Gods word, yet those would he chiefly have such followers of him,
as ye residue of common christians, yt is to say, every man in his vocation and
calling. The same Apostle speaking at Miletu^ with ye bishops of Asia, among
other things says. I know this, that after my departing shall grievous Acts.
2^
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Moreover, of your own
selves shall men arise, speaking peruers things to draw disciples after the^.
Paul y^ apostle not from any other place, than out of the apostolic church
it self, yea, out of the company or assembly of Apostolic Bishops and
Pastors, fetches out of the woolues and deuourers of the Church.

But could not these (think you) allege the Apostolic succession for them
selves and their most corrupt cause, that is to say, that they be descended
from Apostolic Pastors? But for so much as forsaking the truth, they be
fal^e from the faith and doctrine of the Apostles: the offspring and
Apostolical succession, does nothing at all make for them. Therefore we
conclude, that the continual succession of Bishops by it self proves
nothing, yea rather, that that is no lawful succession which wants the
purity of the doctrine of the Scriptures and Apostles. And therefore
Tertullian greatly esteeming (and that worthily) Tertullia^ of the continual
succession of Pastors.
the continual succession of Pastors in the Church, yet requires the same
to be approved by the sincerity of Apostolic doctrine: yea, he
acknowledges those Churches which are instructed with pure doctrine, and yet
not able to make any reckoning of succession of Bishops, to be Apostolic
Churches. If any man require the words of the author, they be these. But if
there be any churches that dare presume to plant them selves in the very age of
the apostles, that therefore they may seem to have been planted by the
apostles, because they were under the Apostles, we may say thus: Let them
bring forth the first beginning of their churches, let them turn over the
order of succession of their Bishops, so by succes^ions going from the first
beginning, that that first Bishop of theirs may be found to have for his
author and predecessor, some one of the Apostles and apostolical sort of men,
and yet such an one as continued with the Apostles. For by this means the
Apostolic churches give their judgment. As the church of Smyrna testifies,
that they had Polycarpus placed there by S. John. And as the church of Rome
shows, that Clemens was appointed by S. Peter. And as in like sort also,
other do show for them selves, who have their offspring of Apostolic seed,
placed in their Byshopricks by the Apostles. Let heretics feign some such
matter. (For after their blasphemies, what is unlawful for them?) But albeit
they do feign, they shall not prevail. For their own doctrine being compared
with the doctrine of the Apostles, by the diversity and contrariety thereof
shall show, that it had neither Apostle, nor Apostolical man for the author:
Because, as the Apostles taught nothing that was contrary among the^ selves:
even so, Apostolical men set forth nothing contrary to the Apostles: but only
such as fell away from the Apostles, and taught other doctrine. In this manner
therefore may those Churches appeal, who albeit they can bring for their
author none of the Apostles or Apostolic men: as those that are of far
later time, and are but now daily erected, yet they agreeing in one faith, are
nevertheless counted Apostolical, for the likeness of the doctrine. The
self same author speaking of the ancient church The doctrine of the ancient
church of Rome.
of Rome, and gathering the sum of that it either taught or learned, says:
Happy is that Church to which the Apostles have uttered all their doctrine,
with their blood: where Peter in suffering is made like to the Lord: where Paul
is crowned with the like end that John had: where the Apostle John after that
he was plunged in hot scalding oil, felt no pain, and was banished into the
Isle. Let us see what it learned, and what it taught, and how it does agree with
the churches of Africa: it acknowlegeth one god the maker of all things, and
Jesus Christ the son of God the creator, borne of the virgin Marie: and the
resurrection of the flesh: it joins the law and the Prophets with the
doctrine of the Eua^gelists and Apostles, and from the^ drinks that faith:
baptiseth with water, clotheth with the holy ghost, feeds with the lords
supper, exhorts with martyrdom, and contrary to this institution receives
no man. This is the institution. Thus far Tertullian in his book which he
entitled, Of the prescription of heretics. The last thing that is to be
noted is this: that the lord God not only of old and unto this The church is
not builte by war or deceipte.
time, but in these days also, gives doctors and pastors to the church:
doctors I say, and not leaders, and captains of hosts and armies of men, not
princes, not soldiers, not crafty men, using deceitful means which in these
days they call practices. For by no other means or manner, nor by no other
instrument, than by the doctrine of truth and found and simple godliness, is
that holy and catholic church of God, built up, fenced, and preserved, whereof
at the beginning simple men and Christ's Apostles, by ye preaching of the
gospel laid the foundation. Paul therefore remoueth all worldly wisdom, and
says: I was among you (Corinths) in weakness and in fear, and in much
trembling, neither stood my 1. Cor. 2.
word and my preaching in the enticing speech of man's wisdom, but in plain
evidence of the spirit and of power, that your faith should not be in the
wisdom of men, but in the power of god. The same apostle also banisheth al
crafty counsel, with all sorts of deceit, when writing to ye Thessalonians, he
says. Our exhortation was not by deceit 1. These. 2.
nor by uncleanness, nor by guile. But as we were allowed of God, that the
gospel should be committed unto us: euenso we spoke not as they that please
men, but god, which tries our hearts. Neither yet did we ever use flattering
words, as ye know, nor colored covetousness, God is record, neither sought
we praise of men. etc. Wherefore he is greatly deceived and mad, ye thinks
ye church can either be gathered together, or being gathered, can be maintained
and preserved with practices, yt is to say, with crafty counsels, and subtle
deceits of men. It is truly said of the common people, That, the same is
overthrown again by man's wisdom, which was first built by man's wisdom.
Besides this, the Lord him self does remove force and arms from ye building
of the church, since he forbids his disciples the use of sword, and unto Peter
ready pressed to fight, says, Put Matthew. 26. Luke. 22.
up thy sword into the scabberd. Neido we ever read yt any were sent of ye
Lord as soldiers, which with armed force should bring the world in subjection.
But rather ye scripture witnesses, 2. These. 2
the great enemy of God, Antichrist, shall be destroyed with ye breath of Gods
mouth. Wherefore there is no doubt, that all those things which are read in
diverse places of the prophets, and chiefly in ye 12. of Zachary, concerning
wars to be made against all nations, by ye apostles and apostolical men, ought
to be figuratively expounded. For the Apostles according to their manner, fight
as apostles: not with spear, sword, and bow of carnal warfare, but of
spiritual. The apostolical sword is ye word of god. Yet in the mean time no
man denies, but yt the wepons of carnal or corporal warfare, have been
profitable sometime to apostolical men, and to the church, and do good eue^ at
this day. No man denies ye God does ofttimes use ye help of soldiers and
magistrates, in defe^ding ye church against the wicked, and tyrants. Yea,
rather al men will confess, yt a good and godly magistrate owes a duty toward
ye church of God. For not without great cause ye worthy prophet of God, Isaie,
calls kings noursing fathers, and Queens noursing mothers. Paul being ^sai.
49.
oppressed of ye Jews in the temple of Jerusalem for preaching of ye gospel
Acts. 21.
amongst ye gentiles, by ye army of Claudius Lysias ye Roman tribune is taken
away, and rescued. And not long after Acts. 23.
there was sent with the Apostle by the same Tribune, no small company of
soldiers, to wit, a troop of horsemen, and certain companies of footme^, by
whom he was brought safely to Antipatris and Caesarea, before Foelix the
Proconsul of Judea.

Which thing is not rashly with so great diligence, and at large remembered by
Luke in ye Acts of the Apostles. The Ecclesiastical history recites many
examples of holy princes, which have defended and succored the church. But
these things in another place in some measure I have entreated of, in the. 7.
and 8. sermons (as I remember) of the second decade. And thus far of the
original of the church of God, and of the increase and preservation of the
same have we spoken.

In this place, it seems unto me, not unfitly may ye famous question be hand
Whether the church of God ^ay err.
led or briefly expounded, whether the church of god may err? which, yt it may
more plainly be understood, I will briefly discuss the parts of this
question. I have taught that the catholic church of God does comprehend,
first, the blessed spirits in heaven, then all faithful Christians here on
earth, unto whom I say did clean the wicked, or hypocrites, feyning faith for a
season. Now therefore, if we understand by ye church the blessed spirits in
heaven, ye church can never err. But if we understand the wicked or hypocrites
joined and mingled with the good, and the wicked alone by them selves, they do
nothing else but err: but as they are joined unto ye good and faithful, and do
follow the^, they either err, or they err not. For ye church of ye good and
faithful hereupon earth does err, and does not err. Which thing we will
declare when we have weyed the diversities of errors, and gathered ye number of
them together wholly in a bundle. Errors, some be of doctrine and faith, and
some be of life and manners. And what manner of ones either of them be, I think
there is no man but knows. Let us see then, whether ye church of the faithful
upon earth do err or no, and if it err, in what point, or how far it
erreth. As concerning the manners and life of the church, it can not wholly and
clearly acquit it self of errors: that is to say, from sin. For always
so long as it is living here on earth, it prays heartily, And forgive us our
trespasses, as we do forgive John. 13. 15
them that trespass against us. And GOD for his mercies sake does always Romans
7.
purge in his Saints, all dregs and infirmities, as long as they live in this
world, continually renewing and defiling the elect. I am not ignorant what may
here hinder thee (faithful hearer). If the church (say thou) be not holy,
and pure, how is it How the holy church is without spotte and wrinkle.
called of the apostle holy without spot and wrinkle? I answer, if thou will
acknowledge no church upon earth, but that which is altogether without
blemishe, thou shalt be forced to acknowledge none at all.

For there shall never be any such kind of Church remaining on earth, where
The most righteous God, as the Scripture witnesses, has shut up all
things under sin, that he might take mercy on all men.

S. Paul therefore does call the church, pure, without spot or wrinkle,
through the benefit of Christ's sanctification: not that by her self, while
she is in the flesh, she is without spot, but for that those spots in deed
otherwise cleaving unto her, through the innocence of Christ, to those that
embrace Christ by faith, are not imputed: sinally, for that ye self same
church in the world to come shall be without spot or wrinckle. For having put
off the flesh, and cast off all miseries, it shall at length be brought to
pass, that she shall want nothing. Besides this, it is said, that the church
is without spot, because of the continual study of the church, whereby she
labors and traueileth by all means, that as far as it is possible, she
may have as few spots as may be. And by that means, and chiefly by the
benefit of imputation, the church erreth not, but is most pure and without
sin.

Moreover, as touching doctrine and faith, ye church of Christ does not err.
For it hears the voice of the shepeherd only, but the voice of strangers she
knows not: for she follows her only shepherd Christ, saying: I am the
light of the world: he that follows John. ^.
me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. Paul also
to Timothy says. These things hitherto have I written unto thee, that 1.
Tim. 3.
thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of God,
which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of The Church is
the pillar and the ground of the truth.
truth. But the Church is the pillar and ground of truth, for that being
stablished upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ him
self, which is the everlasting truth of God, and the only strength of the
church, receives this by fellowship, which it has with him, that she also
might be the pillar and foundation of the truth. For the truth of God is in
the church, and the same through the ministry of the church, is spread
abroad: and being assaulted and warred against by the enemies, abiding sure,
is not overcome: so farfoorth, as being made one body with Christ, she does
persevere in the fellowship of Christ, without whom she can do nothing.
Again, the same church does err in doctrine and faith, as ofte^n as she
turning from Christ and his word, goes after men and the counsels and decrees
of the flesh. For she forsakes that thing that has hitherto stayed that she
erred not, which is the word of God and Christ. I think no man will deny,
that the great congregation of the people of Exodus 32.
Israel in the desert, was an excellent Church of God: with the which the
Lord made a covenant, and bound him self unto it, by Sacraments and
ordinances. And yet how shamefully she erred, whilst neglecting Gods word,
and Aaron ye high priest of religion not constantly and earnestly resisting,
she both made a molten calfe, and worshipped it as a God: no man is ignorant.
Where also surely it shall be necessary more diligently to look into, and mark
the whole number of the church. For many in the church erring, it follows not
that none at all is free from error. For as in the church of Israel, the Lord
reserved a re^nant to him self, I mean Moses, Joshua, and undoubtedly many
more, as well in ye congregation, as elsewhere without, which did never worship
the calfe: so there is no doubt, although there do many err in the Church,
but that the Lord through his mercy does preserve to himself a certain
number, who both understand a-right, and by whose faithful diligence errors
are destroyed, and the wandering flock of the Lord brought back again into
the holy fould.

The Church therefore is said to err, when a part of it having lost Gods word
does err: and the same erreth not wholly and altogether: forasmuch as
certain remnauntes (through the grace of God) are reserved, by whom the
truth may flourishe again, and may again be spread abroad in every place. S.
Paul called the Churches of the Corinthians and Galathians, The holy churches
of God: yet these erred greatly, in doctrine, in faith, and in manners. And yet
who doubts that there were many among them, who were most sincere followers
of the pure doctrine preached by Saint Paul? That holy Church therefore erred
so far forth as it continued not steadfastly in true doctrine: and it erred
not, so far forth as it departed not from the truth delivered by the
Apostles. From hence it plainly appears to the whole world, that those are
most vain liars, which commend unto us Churches, not builded upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, but upon the decrees of men, which
they shame not to commend unto us for most true Churches, and such as cannot
err. David cries out, Only God is true, and every man a liar. Jeremy also
cries: They have Ierem. 8.
rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Therefore those
Churches do err, neither be they the true Churches of God. The true Church
groundeth upon Christ Jesus, and is governed by his word only.

Unto this treatise of the word of God, which is the only rule whereby Of the
power of the church
all things are done in the Church, the disputation of the power of the church
of God in earth, and of the studies thereof, which also are directed according
to the word of God is very like. But before I will bring forth my judgment,
that is to say, the judgment delivered by the Scriptures, I will briefly
rehearse the sum of those things which the Papists have left in writing
concerning this matter, and do undoubtedly maintain for sound doctrine. John
Gerson (not much amiss unless he have an ill interpreter) has defined
Ecclesiastical authority to be a power supernaturally and spiritually given
of the Lord to his disciples and to their lawefull successors unto the end of
the world, for the edification of the Church Militant, according to the laws
of the Gospel, for the obteyning of eternal felicity. But Peter de Aliaco
the Cardinal, says, that this authority is sixe-fould, to wit, of
consecration: of administering the sacraments: of appointing ministers of the
Church: of preaching: of judicial correction: and receiving things necessary
unto this life.

They call that the power of consecration, Power of consecration.
whereby a priest being rightly ordered may consecrate the body and blood of
Christ on the altar. This power they say was given to the disciples of the
Lord, by these words: Do this in the remembrance of me. But unto the
priests in these days they think it to be given of ye bishop, giving with
the bread, the chalice, and saying: Receive ye power to offer up and to
consecrate Christ's body both for the quick and the dead. This moreover they
call the power of orders, and a mark or character that cannot be wyped out.
The power of administering The power of the keys.
the sacraments, and chiefly of the sacrament of Penance they call the power of
the keys. The keys they make of two sorts. The keys of knowledge, that is
to say, the authority of knowledge in the cause of a sinner making his
confession: and the keys of giving of sentence and judgment, or of opening
and shutting up of heaven, of forgiving or reteyning of sins. They say that
this power was promised to Peter in Matthew, the Lord saying, Unto thee will I
give the keys of the kingdom of heaven: but that it was given to all the
disciples in John Christ saying: Whose sins soever ye forgive, they are
forgiven to the^. And in these days is given to the priests by the bishop in
their consecration, laying their hands on ye priests at ye giving of them their
orders, saying: Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins soever ye forgive, they
are forgiven them. They call the Power of inrisdictio^.
power of placing ministers of the Church, Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and to
consist in a certain prelacie, and the fullness of it to rest only in the
Pope, having respect to the whole universal Church. For it belongs only
to the Pope to appoint rulers and prelates in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy:
because it was said to him: Feed my sheep. Moreover they say, that all
jurisdiction ecclesiastical does come from the Pope to inferior rulers,
either mediatlie or immediately: in which things authority is limited at his
pleasure that has the fullness of power. For a bishop has authority only
in his di^cese, and a curate in his parish, etc. Power of Apostleship or
preaching the word of God Power of preaching
they call the authority of preaching, which the Lord had given to his
disciples, saying: Go ye into all the world preaching the gospel to all
creatures. But doctors in these days affirm, y^ none ought to be sent out to
preach, but only by Peter, that is, his successor, mediatly or immediately.
etc. They say that the power of judicial Power of judgment, or judicial
correction.
correction was given to Peter by God, to whom he said: If thy brother shall
offend or trespass against thee, etc. For the words of ye Lord are known well
enough in S. Matthew. cap. 18. They say therefore that God gave authority unto
priests, not only of exco^municating, but also of determining judging, and
establishing commandments, laws, and canons: because in that place it is
said, Whatsoever ye bind upon earth, it shall be bound in heaven. To conclude,
they say that the power and authority to receive Power to receive.
things necessary for this life, in reward of their spiritual labors, was
given by these words of the Lord, Eatinge and drincking such as they have.

These things do these men teach concerning Ecclesiastical power, not only
foolishlie but also falsely. Of the power of consecration and sacrificing, how
vain and foolish it is, we have oftentimes said in other places, and perhaps
will say more, (if God grant life) in convenient place and time. Of the power
of the keys, we will dispute (God willing) about the end of ye next sermon. And
something we brought, when we disputed of penance and auricular confession. But
they are foolish and shameless trifles, which they babble of ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, of the fullness of the high power, (that is to say) of the
bishop of Rome, which I doubt not are known well enough to the whole world,
long ago: and of that matter there shall follow hereafter some arguments for
the confutation thereof in these our sermons. Whereas they usurp unto themselves
ye office of teaching: and cry out that no man can lawfully preach, but such
as are ordained by them, they thereby seek the overthrow of Gods word, and
the defense and assertion of their own errors: which shall also be entreated
of in his due place. The power of excommunicating they have so filthilie and
shamefullie abused, that the Church (through their negligence and wicked
presu^ption) has not only lost true discipline, but also excommunication it
self has been a great many years naught else with the bishops of Rome but
fire and sword, wherewith they first raged against the true professors of Gods
word, and persecuted the innocent worshippers of Christ. Moreover that there is
no power given of God to the ministers of the Church, to make new laws, we will
show in place convenient. The authority and power to receive wherewith to
live, have they put in execution to the uttermost: but in recompense of their
temporal harvest they have not soawen spiritual things, but rather being a
sleep, they have suffered him yt is our enemy, to soaw cockle in the lords
field, and that not by any other, but by their own means. For have not they,
not being contented with things necessary for this life, under that color
subtilely invaded kingdoms, and most shamefully and cruelly possessed them?
Wherefore, he that sees not that ecclesiastical authority, as it is by these
men affirmed and also by them put in practice, is but a mere tyranny over
simple souls, it is plain he sees nothing at all. We will now hereunto
join a true, simple, plain, and manifest doctrine concerning ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. Power is defined to be a right which men have to do some thing
by. What power is.
It is called in Greek, (...), and (...), whereof the first word signifies
right and power, the second ability to execute power, or authority. For
oftentimes it comes to pass yt a man shall have authority to do a thing,
but is destitute of ability to perform it. But God can do both, and has
given them both unto the Apostles against those ye were possessed with devils,
as Luke witnesses, saying: (...), He gave them power and authority over Luke
9.
all devils, etc. And there is also one 2. kinds of power.
sort of power which is free and absolute, and an other sort of power which
is limited, which is also called ministerial. Absolute power is that which
is altogether free, and is neither governed or restreyned by the law or will
of any other. Of which sort is the power of Christ which he speaks of in the
Gospel saying: All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: Matthew. 28.
go therefore and teach all nations, baptising them, etc. He speaking again
of this power in the Revelation showed unto S. John the Apostle says: Fear
not, I am the first and the Reuela. 1.
last, and I am alive but was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore. And I
have the keys of hell and of death. And again, These things says he that
is holy and true, which has the keye of David, which opens and Reave. 3.
no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens.

The power which is limited is not free, but subject to an absolute or
greater power of another, which cannot of it self do every thing, but that
only, that the absolute absolute power or greater authority does suffer to
be done, and suffers it under certain conditions. Of which sort surely is
the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and which may rightly be called the
ministerial power. For the Church of God uses her authority committed unto
her, for this purpose, by her ministers. S. Augustine acknowledging this
distinction, and speaking of Baptism in his fifte treatise upon John, says:
Paul baptized as a minister, and not as one that had power of himself: but
the Lord baptized as he that had power of himself. Behold, if it had pleased
him, he could have given this power to his servants, but he would not. For if
he should have given this power unto his servant, that it should also have
been theirs which was the lords, then there should have been as many sundry
baptismes as servant, etc. In the Church, Christ reserueth that absolute
power to himself. For he continues the head, king, and bishop of the Church
for ever: neither is that head which gives life separated from his body at
any time. But that limited power he has given unto the Church. Which thing
it ought to acknowledge: to wit an Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, hemmed in with
certain laws which proceeds from God, and for that cause it is effectual,
and therefore in all things ought to have chief regard unto God: and that
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is for that purpose given unto the church, that it
might be put in practice for the profit of the Church. For S. Paul 2. Cor. 12.
says: The Lord has given us power to the intent we should edify, and not
for the destruction of the Church. And therefore that power which tends to
the hinderance and destruction of the Church, is a devilish tyranny, and not
an ecclesiastical power proceeding from God. And it behooves us diligently to
mark and retain this end of Ecclesiastical power.

But ye limited power of the church In what points ecclesiastical power
consists.
consists very near in these points, to wit, in ordeyning of ye ministers
of the Church, in doctrine, and in the discerning between doctrines, and
finally, in the ordering of Ecclesiastical matters. Of every one of which
points in their order, we will speak a little: declaring what manner of
authority the Church has, and how far it is limited in every part thereof.

The Lord himself appointed the To ordeine ministers of the church*
chief doctors of the Church which were the Apostles, that all men might
understand that the Ecclesiastical ministry is the divine institution of God
himself, and not a tradition devised by men. And therefore after that the Lord
was ascended into heaven, S. Peter calling the Church together, speaks out of
the scriptures, of placing Acts. 1.
an other Apostle, in ye steed of the traitor Judas, by that very fact
showing that power was given unto the Church by God to elect ministers or
teachers. The same Church also not long after, by the persuasion of Peter, and
the Apostles so persuading undoubtedly by the inspiration of the holy Ghost,
choose seven deacons. The Church of Antioche, being manifestly instructed by
the holy Ghost, does ordeine and send Paul and Barnabas, although they
were long before that Acts. 6.
time assigned to the ministry. It is read also in the Acts of the Apostles,
Acts. 13.
that the churches, by the commandment of the Apostles, did ordeine doctors
for the holy ministry, as often as need required. And yet notwithstanding
they did not ordeine every one without choice, but such only as were fit for
that office, that is to say, such as afterward by express laws they
themselves did describe, to wit: If any man were faultles, the husband 1. Tim.
3.
of one wife, watchful, sober, etc. The rule set down by the Apostle is
sufficiently known, as appears in the 1. to Tim. 3. Cap. But as touching the
ordeyning of ministers (God willing) we will speak in the third sermon of
this Decade. But if ye Church have received power to appoint fit ministers for
the Church, I think no man will deny that the Church has authority to
depose the unworthy and wicked deceivers: and also to correct and amend those
things which being lacking, may seem necessary for this order.

And forasmuch as ministers are chosen chiefly to teach, it must follow, Power
to teach.
that the Church has power to teach, to exhort, to comfort, and such like, by
her lawful ministers: and yet no power to teach every thing, but that only
which she received being delivered unto her from the Lord by ye doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles. Teach them (says the Lord) that which I commanded
you. Go ye, and preach Matthew. 28.
the Gospel to all creatures. And S. Mark. 16.
Paul says: I am put a part to preach Romans 1.
the Gospel of God, which he promised before by his Prophets in the holy
Scriptures. But this ministry and office of preaching, is nothing else but
the power of the keys which the The power of the keys. Matthew. 10.
Church has received. The office (I say) of binding and loosing, of opening
and shutting heaven. In another place also the apostles received power from the
Lord over all: over all, I say, not absolutely, but over all devils, and not
over all Angels and men: and yet that authority and power they received over
devils, they received it not absolutely: for it is added unto it, that they
should expel and cast them out. And therefore they could not deal with devils
after their own fancy, but that only, and so far forth as he would have
them to d^e, who has absolute power over all devils: and that they might cast
devils out of men, but not to send them into men, though they would have
desired it never so much. And so also as touching diseases, they could not do
what they would: else would not S. Paul have left Trophimos sick at Miletum,
who might 2. Tim. 4
so greatly have been profitable unto him in the holy ministry. The two
Luke. 9.
disciples if they had been able to have done what they would, would have
commanded fire from heaven, to have fallen down upon Samaria, and so would
have taken vengeance of the discourteous and barbarous people of Samaria, for
that they denied to harbor the Lord Christ. In like manner those same Apostles
received keys, that is to say, power to bind and to lose, to open and shutt
heaven, to forgive and to retain sins, but perfectly limited. For they
could not lose y^ which was bound in hell: neither bind them that were living
in heaven. For he said not: What soever ye bind in heaven: but whatsoever ye
bind upon earth. Neither said he, Whatsoever ye lose in hell, but what soever
ye lose upon earth.

Again, they were not able either to bind or lose whom they would not so much
as upon earth. For they were not able to lose (that is to say) to pronounce a
man free from sin, that was without faith. Again, they could not bind (that
is say) pronounce condemned, him yt was lightened with faith, and was truly
penitent. And surely such as teach other doctrine than this, touching the power
of the keys, deceive the whole world: of which we will more largly entreat
in place convenient. Likewise, the Church has received Power to administer the
Sacraments.
power from Christ to administer the sacraments by ministers, but not according
to her own will and pleasure, but according to Gods will, and the form and
manner set down by the Lord himself. The Church cannot institute sacraments,
neither yet alter the ends and use of the sacraments.

Finally, that the Church has power to give judgment of doctrines, even
Power to judge of doctrines.
by this one sentence of the Apostle Paul appears: Let the Prophets (says
he) speak two or three at once, 1. Cor. ^4.
and let the other judge. And in an other 1. These. 3.
place he says: Prove all things, and keep that which is good. And S. 1.
John. 4.
John said, Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they are of God. But of this kind of power to judge, there is also a
certain order. For the Church does not judge at her own pleasure, but after
the sentence of the holy Ghost, and according to the order and rule of the holy
scriptures. And here also order, moderation, and charity is observed.
Therefore if at any time the church of To call a counsel.
god according to ye authority which she has received from ye Lord, do call a
counsel together for some weighty matter, as we read that the Apostles of ye
lord Acts. 15.
did in the Acts of the Apostles, it leans not here to her own fleshly
judgment, but gives over her self to be guided by the spirit, and examineth
all her doings by the rule of the word of God, and of the two-fould charity.
Wherefore, ye Church makes no new laws, as the church of Jerusalem or rather
the Apostolic church says, yt it seems good both to the holy Ghost and to
the Church, that no other burden should be laid upon the faithful Christians,
but only a few, and those very necessary things, and neither beside nor
contrary to the holy scriptures. Now Ecclesiastical matters, Power to dispose
the affairs of the church.
are of diverse sorts, the good ordering and well disposing whereof, for the
commodity of men is in the power of the Church: of which sort those things
are which concern outward worship, in place and in time, as is prophesying, or
interpretation of tongues, and schools. Also the Church has to judge in causes
of matrimony, and chiefly it has correction of manners, admonitions,
punishments, and also excommunicating or cutting off from the body of the
Church. For the Apostle ^. Cor. 13.
also says, that this power is given him, and yet to the intent he should
therewith edify and not destroy. For all these things which we have
remembered, and such like, are limited with the rule of the word, and of love,
also with holy examples and reasons deduced out of the holy scriptures. Of all
which we will perchaun^e more largelye speak, in their place.

Thus much have I hitherto said concerning Ecclesiastical power, the contrary
whereof I have declared with how open a mouth our adversaries do publish, but
yet they handle these matters so grossly, that it may appear even unto
children what they seek, or what they would defend, to wit, not the
Ecclesiastical power, but their own covetousness, lust, and tyranny. The
Canonical truth teaches us, that Christ himself does hold and exercise
absolute or full power in the Church, and that he has given the ministerial
power to ye Church, who executes it, for the most part, by ministers, and
religiously executes it according to the rule of Gods word.

These things being in this sort considered, it shall not be greatly
laboursome to know the studies of the holy Church of GOD. For it executes (as
I said even now) that power which it has received of GOD most carefully and
faithfullye: to the end that it may serve God, that it may be holy, and that
it may please him.

And that I may reckon up some of her studies specially: first of all it
worshippeth, Of the ^^udies of the church
calls upon, loves and serves one God in Trinity: and takes nothing in
hand not having first consulted with the word of this true God. For she
orders all her doings according to the rule of Gods word: she judges by the
word of God, and by the same, she frames all her buildinges, and being built
mainteyneth them, and being fallen down she repaireth, or restores them
again. The assemblies and congregations of Saints upon earth she fervently
furthereth and loves. In these things it harkeneth diligently to the preaching
of the word of God: she is partaker of the sacraments de^outly and with great joy
and desire of heavenly things. It prays to God by the intercession of our
only mediator Christ, with a strong faith, ferue^tly, continually, and most
attentively. It praises the mai^stie of God for ever, and with great joy
gives thanks for all his heavenly benefits. It highly esteems all and every
the institutions of Christ, neither does it neglect any of them. But chiefly
it acknowledges, that it receives all things belonging either to life,
salvation, righteousness, or felicity, of the only son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ, as he who only chose her, and then by his spirit and blood sanctified
her, and made her a Church (yt is) a chosen people, whose only king, redeemer,
high priest, and defender he is, and without whom there is no salvation.
Therefore in God alone by our Lord Jesus Christ, she only rests, him she
only desires and loves, and for his sake she rejoices to loose all things
that apperteine to this world, yea, and to spend her blood and her life. And
therefore it cleaves unto Christ by faith inseparably: neither does it hate
any thing more bitterly, than falling away from Christ, and desperation. For
without Christ there seems nothing in all this whole life, to be pleasant.
With Satan as with a deadly enemy she has unappeasable enimitie. Against
heresies and errors it strives both constantly and wisely. The simplicity of
the Christian faith, and the sincerity of the doctrine of the Apostles it most
diligently keeps. She keeps her self as much as lies in her unspotted of
the world and of the flesh, and from all carnal and spiritual infection. And
therefore she flees from, and by all means detesteth all unlawful
congregations, and profane religions with all wicked men, and willingly and
openly confesses Christ both by word and deed, even with the damage of her
life. It is exercised with afflictions, but yet never overcome. It keeps
unity and concord carefully. All and every the members of her body she most
tenderly loves. It does good unto all men as much as power and ability will
suffer. It hurts no man. It forgiueth willingly. It bears with the weak,
brotherlye, till they be brought forth forward to perfection. She is not
puffed up with pride, but thoroughe humility is kept in obedience, in
modesty, and in all the duties of godliness. But who (I pray you) is able
to recite all and every one of the studies of the church, in a very large
discourse, much less in this short recital? And who would not desire to be a
member of so divine and heavenly a congregation?

I would by and by join hereunto that which remains touching the unity of
the catholic Church, of the division thereof, and of other things belonging
to the consideration hereof, but that I do perceive you being already weary
of hearing, do earnestly look for an end of this sermon. Therefore we will put
off the residue till to morrow. And now lifting up our minds into heaven, let
us give thanckes to the Lord our God, who through his beloved son has
purified us and gathered us together, to be a chosen people to himself, and
to be heirs of all his heavenly treasures. To him therefore be all praise and
glory world without end. Amen.

That there is one Catholic Church, that without the Church there is no
light or salvation. Against scismatiques. Wherefore we depart from the vpstart
Church of Rome. That the Church of God is the house, vineyard, and kingdom of
God: and the body, sheepe-foulde, and spouse of Christ, a mother and a virgin.
The second Sermon.
I See you are assembled, brethren, with There is one holy Church of God.
attentive minds, to the exposition of those things which rest to be spoken
of the Catholic Church of God, which we affirm to be one and inseperable,
according to the holy oracles of the sacred scripture. Solomon in his
Canticles, says: One is my dove and my beloved. Whereunto doubtless the
doctor of the Gentiles Cant. 4.
had respect when he said: There is one body and one spirit: even as Ephe 4.
ye are called in one hope of your vocation. There is one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one God and father of all, which is above all, and through all, and
in you all. To these heavenly testimonies, agree the testimonies of men. For
Cyprian the bishop and martyr in his book De simplicitate Clericorum, says:
The Church is one which is spread further and further abroad by fertile
increase: even as there are many beams of the Sun and but one light, and
many boughs of a tree, yet but one oak grounded upon a steadfast root: and
whereas many brooks issue out of one spring though the number seem to be
increased by the abundance of stoare, yet is it but one at the head. Pluck a
beam of the Sun from the globe, that one once separated is void of light.
Break a boughe from the tree, it can bring forth no fruit, Cut a brook
from the spring, and being cut off it dries up. Even so the Church lightened
with Gods light, spreads abroad the beams of her light through all the
world, yet is it but one light, which is spread every where, neither is the
unity of the body separated: she extends her branches with plentious
increse through out all the earth, she sends out her plentiful rivers all
abroad. Yet is there but one head, and one spring, and one mother plentiful
with fertile succession. And so forth.

Moreover, where we read that diverse names are given to the church, we must
not imagine that there are many churches in the world, neither is that body
to be separated, which can bear or suffer no kind of division. Writers call
the Church Catholic, which undoubtedly signifies universal, because it is
but one, neither can there be any more. For albeit this be distinguished into
the Church triumphant and Militant, into the Church of the old fathers, and
the congregation of people of later time, yet do all these members remain,
perpetually knit together in one body, under one head Christ.

And even as the several conditions of bond and free men, separateth not a
kingdom or common wealth into parts: so neither does the quiet rest or
felicity of the blessed spirits triumphing in heaven, and the labors and
sorrows wherewith we warring as yet in this world under Christ's ensigns are
exercised, make two Churches.

The holy Angel says to Saint John in the Apocalypse, I am thy Apoc. 22.
fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets. He therefore acknowledges
both the Prophets and Apostles, to be the sons and servants of one God.
Whereof we read in the Gospel, that one only vineyarde, not two or diverse
was let Matthew. 22.
out to husband men, though they were diverse.

For even so there is but one church of the old Fathers, which were before
the coming of Christ, and ours or the new people since* Christ's coming,
taken out of the Gentiles. But what they differ from us, or we from them, has
been said in the eight Sermon of our third Decade.

Again, there are mingled with the holy Church evil men and hypocrites, but
the Church is not separated for evil men. For even as traitors mingled with
citizens, and not yet discovered, make not two common wealths: so although
evil men cleave to good, yet are they both gathered into one Church. And when
hypocrites depart from the unity of the Church, the Church is not rent in
pieces, but becomes purer.

For excellently says Saint Augustine, That evil men or hypocrites are that
in the Church, that chafe is amongst wheat, cockle in standing corn,
traitors in a ci*tie, and runnagates amongst soldiers. But it is plain,
that wheat is the cleaner, standing corn the lustier, citizens safer, and
soldiers the stronger, when runnagates, traitors, cockle and chafe, are
separated from them.

Yea, and except sometimes rotten members of the Church be cut off from the
Ecclesiastical body, the Church can not be in safety. And particular or
several Churches, are as towns or cities in a kingdom. The multitude of
cities, divides not the kingdom.

Of particular Churches dispersed throughout all the world, as a body of many
members, is gathered and compacted together the Catholic and universal
Church, which is the fellowshippe of all the Saints.

Therefore most certain it is, that there is but one only church of God,
Without the church is no light or salvation
not many, whereof the only Monarche is Jesus Christ, to whom be glory. The
unity and united society of this Church of God is so great, that out of her
fellowshippe is there no people found acceptable unto GOD, any true salvation
or safety, any light or truth. For without the pale of Gods Church, are no
wholesome pastures found, all are infected with poison. No religion pleases
GOD out of the Church of GOD.

If of old time any man had sacrificed to GOD him self, without the
tabernacle or temple, in the high places, he was accounted to have sacrificed
to diuelles, and esteemed to have shead innocent blood. Rightly therefore the
blessed martyr and Bishop of Carthage, Cyprian, has left in writing: Who so
ever De simplicitate Praelatorum.
separated from the Church, is joined to an adulterous Church, the same man
is separated from the promises of the Church: neither pertains he to
Christ's merits, which has left the Church of Christ. He is a stranger,
he is unclean, he is an enemy. He can not now have GOD his father, who
has not the Church his mother. If he might escape that was out of the arc of
Noah, he may also escape that is abroad out of the Church. He must needs
be a most wicked man, who so ever he be, that leaves his own country, and
the fellowship of very good men, and falls away to the enemies.

Lactantius therefore most truly Institut. li. 5. ca. 30.
said, It is only the Catholic church which reteyneth true religion. Here
is the founteine of truth: this is the household of faith: this is the temple
of GOD: into which if one enter not, or out of which if any depart, he is
excluded from the hope of salvation and life everlasting. For our Savior
first said, that out of the sheepefolde life is not found.

Wherefore I can not marvel enough Against certain Scismatiques.
at the corrupt and Scismaticall manners of certain men, who separate them
selves for every light cause, from the most wholesome and pleasant company
or society of the Church.

For you shall find in these days, captious and fantastical men, not a
few, which of many years have had fellowshippe with no Church, nor as yet
have fellowship with any. For in every man that is, they find some kind of
fault, in them selves only they find nothing worthy reprehension. Therefore
they conceive with them selves a wonderful fashion of the Church, which
except they see somewhere established after that fashion which they them
selves have devised, they contend (with shame enough) that there is as yet no
true Church of Christ in the world.

They are worthy surely to be master builders in Vtopia, or Cyribiria, where
they might set up a building fit for them selves. But it seems unto them,
they have just cause of Scisme. For they will not communicate with our Church,
for that it seems the doctrine of the ministers in the Church, is not yet
sufficiently cleansed and polished, neither yet lofty (as they them selves
term it, Hoch gnug gericht) subtle and spiritual enough. Elsewhere they
complain that in our Churches are diverse customs used. Furthermore, they
desire the rigor and severity of discipline, and finally an exact pureness
of life. For they fear they shall be defiled with the unclean company of
certain men. Many for the faults and vices of certain ministers, either
forsake or flee the congregation of the Church: of which sort at this day
are the Anabaptists. But there is as yet no sufficient cause alleged by these
men, for which of right they ought not either to be joined unto us, or for the
which they may be separated from us.

We acknowledge that there be just causes, for the which the godly both
may, and ought to separate them selves from wicked congregations: in which
not only the lawful use of the Sacraments is altogether corrupted and turned
into Idolatry, but also the sound doctrine is altogether adulterated, the
preachers or pastors are not now Prophets, but false Prophets, which
persecute Gods truth, and finally to them that sit to receive the food of
life, they minister poison.

But none of these things (GOD be thanked) can they object against us.

For as concerning doctrine, it For the diversity of doctrine Scisme must not
be made.
consists partly in sure opinions, and those as it were numbered, firm and
immutable: of which kind are the Articles of faith, and those without
addition and corruption, lawfully and sincerely understood: and of that sort
are also those principles. That al men are sinners, conceived and borne in
sin.

That none but those that are regenerate, can enter into the kingdom of GOD.
That men not by their own desartes, but through the grace of GOD, by the only
merits of Christ, are justified by faith. That Christ once sacrificed for
sin is no more sacrificed, that he is the only and perpetual Priest. That
good works are done of those that are justified: and those are in deed good
works, which the Lord has prepared for us to walk in. That the Sacraments
of the Lord and of the Church, are to be received, and not to be despised.
That we must pray continually, and that in that manner which ye Lord has
appointed us. And if there be any more of the same sort. But it suffices if
these and other like grounds be uniformly, purely, and simply taught in the
Church according to the Scriptures, though there be added no Rhetorical
figures, nor no painted eloquence be heard. For aptly the blessed Martyr
Irenaeus, after the rule of faith, set out in his first book against
heresies, Since there is but one only faith (says he) neither he which
can say much of it, says more than he ought: nor he which says little
thereby, diminishes it.

Therefore when the doctrine of ministers expounds those things in the
Church, which are agreeable to the true and sincere faith, which it also
corrupts not, what have these captious smatterers of Rhetorique, and
selfe-learned to require, though eloquence and plentiful learning be wanting
in ye teachers. Was not the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets most simple
and most free from all subtlety? that rightly it might be said, how much more
simple it seemed to be, so much the safer it was? But in the mean season, I
despise not true eloquence (as that which is a singular gift of God) as I have
elsewhere often witnessed. And partly doctrine consists in the daily
expounding of the Scriptures, and in the applying of them to our time, place,
and affairs.

In that kind was ever great variety and diversity, for which
notwithstanding, no wise man ever yet separated him self from the fellowshippe
of the Church. For it comes to pass very often, that two or three, or else
more, may expound one place not after one manner, but after most diverse sorts.
There may be one that expounds very darkely, and an other expounds more
plainly: this man hitteth the mark, he comes not near it. And this man
applies the place, which he handles very fitly: some other uses not like
simplicity of application: in the mean season notwithstanding, he says
nothing contrary to the soundness of faith, and the love of GOD and our
neighbor, and uses all things to edification. I say that of this diversity,
no man takes just occasion to depart from the Church. For all godly men prove
all things, and keep that which is good: and in all sermons and holy
exercises, referr their whole study only unto edifying.

And moreover, the preachers agree well among themselves, and hereunto direct
all things, that both them selves and their hearers may become better: not that
they may seem better learned, or to have uttered that, which no man saw
heretofore.

And the best learned loathe not their Sermons which are not so learned. For
albeit they may seem not altogether to have hit the mark, yet for as much as
they have taught wholesome things, they are praised and not condemned: albeit
in fit time and place, they be somewhiles admonished.

Again, they that are unskillful do not envy the gifts of the learned, nor
refuse to labor for more perfection, neither loath they or condemn they
learned Sermons of those that be better learned: but they praise GOD, and being
warned, strive to more perfection. For wisely said S. Aurelius Augustine, in
his first book of Christian doctrine, the six and twenty Chapter. Who so
ever says he seems to him self to have understood the holy Scriptures, or
any part of the^, so as of that understanding, he gather not the two fold
charity of God and his neighbor, he yet understands nothing. But who so
ever gathers such a sense thereof, as may be profitable to him for the
increase of charity, and yet gathers not that sense, that it may probably
seem he whom he reads meant in that place, he is not perniciously deceived,
neither lies he at all.

The same anon after, He is notwithstanding to be corrected, and must have it
showed him, how much more profitable it were for him not to leave the
highway, lest by accustomable straying, he be forced either to go cross or
crooked. Thus far he.

Therefore where an Ecclesiastical interpreter does err grossly, it is
lawful to a better learned, brotherly to admonish him, but to make a Scisme
it is not lawful.

The authors of Scisme lightly are somewhat proud and arrogant, and swell
with envy, and therefore are void of al charity and modesty, they allow
nothing but what they them selves bring forth, neither will they have any
thing common with others, they are always musing some high matter, and nothing
that is common or simple. Unto these men very well agrees yt saying of the
Apostle Paul, Knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth. Therefore godly teachers
in the 1. Cor. 8.
church and also godly hearers, for doctrine which is not altogether foolish,
and though it be somewhat gross, yet being godly and tending to edification,
they neither leave or forsake the fellowship of the church, neither strive
they or contend, but rather use charity in all things. And if the ministers
lives be attached with grievous vices, For the vices of the ministers, Scisme
must not be made.
and yet in the mean season, they be faithful in teaching, admonishing,
exhorting, rebuking and comforting, if they lawfully distribute the lawful
sacraments, no man has just occasion to forsake the church. The Lord expressly
says in the gospel, The Scribes and the Phariseis sit in Moses seat. Al
therefore what so ever they bid you ^latth. 23.
observe, that observe and do: but after their works do not: for they say and
do not. Behold the Lord says they say and do not: therefore the teachers
lives were not agreeable to their doctrine: yet for that they stood in Moses
seat, that is to say, because they taught the word of God lawfully and
sincerely, he bids to receive their sincere doctrine, but their life not
being agreeable to their doctrine, that he bids to refuse: and therefore to
make a scisme for the preachers evil lives sake, the Lord does forbid. Surely
he commaundes to ^^ee from false Propetes. But not an evil life but false
doctrine makes a false prophet. A great con^lict about this matter had the
holy father S. Augustine with the Donati^tes, who contended that the ministry
was of smaller power, through the imperfection of the ministers. Which case is
to be considered in an other sort. But now what For the diversity of
Ceremonies, scisme must not be made.
cause have they to leave and forsake our churches for the vnlikelinesse or
variety of ceremonies? In the baptism of children, say they, you observe not
one order: and so also in the celebration of the supper. Some take the bread
of the Lord in their hands sitting: some do come and take it at the hands of
the minister, who also put it in the mouths of the receivers. Some celebrate
the Communion often: some sildome, and that but upon set days. And you use not
one form of prayer. Neither have all your assemblies one manner, neither meet
they at one time. But how shall we believe that the spirit of unity and
peace is in you, in whom is found so great diversity? For just causes
therefore we do not communicate with you. But of these customs we shall
speak more fitly in their proper place.

But it is marvel, that men not altogether rude and ignorant of
Ecclesiastical matters, bring no other arguments for defense of their wicked
scisme. Are the poor wretches ignorant how great diversity there has been
always in ceremonies, unity notwithstanding always remaining undivided in
the catholic Church? Socrates the famous writer of the ecclesiastical
history, in the fifth book of his histories, the 22. chapter, sets out at
large the diversity of ceremonies in the church of God. Amongst other things
he says, No religion, says he, keeps all one kind of ceremonies: albeit it
agree in doctrine about them. For they which agree in faith, differ in
ceremonies. And again, It shall be both laboursome and troublesome, yea, and
impossible to describe all the ceremonies of all the churches in each city and
regio^. The blessed martyr Irenaeus, writing to Victor bishop of Rome,
reherseth a great diversity of ye churches in their fastings, and keeping the
feast of Easter: and then adds, And yet not withstanding all these, even when
they varied in their observations, were both peaceable among themselves and
with us, and yet are, neither does the disagreement about fasting, break the
agreement of faith. And again, Blessed Polycarpus (says he) when he came to
Rome under Anicete and having some small controversy about certain other
matters, were by and by reconciled: But of this kind of matter, they co^tended
not awhit. For neither could Anicetus persuade Polycarpus, that he should not
observe those things which with John the disciple of our Lord, and the rest of
the Apostles, with whom he had been conversant, he had always observed: Neither
did Polycarpus persuade Anicetus, not to keep that custom, which by the
tradition of those elders to whom he succeeded, he said he was to keep. And
these matters thus standing, they had fellowship one with an other. Thus far he.
Moreover, ye ancient church used great liberty in observation of ceremonies,
yet so always as it brake not ye bond of unity. Yea, and S. Austine
prescribing unto Ianuarius, what in this diversity of ceremonies he should
either do or follow, bids not him to make ascisme, but judging moderately
and wisely. No rule (says he) in these things is better, tha^ a grave and wise
christian, who will do in such sort, as he shall se every church do, unto which
by chance he comes. For that which neither contrary to faith nor good
manners is commanded, is to be counted indifferent, and according to their
society, amongst whom we live to be observed. Again, least under pretense of
this rule and counsel, any might force upon every man what ceremonies they
would, he adds, The church of God placed amidst much chafe and cockle,
suffers many things: and yet whatsoever is either contrary to faith or good
life, she allows not, neither holds she her peace, neither does she it. Last
of al, whereas these men think that there is no true For the impure life of
men conversant in the church scisme must not be made.
church, where as yet faulty manners are to be seen in men conversant in ye
church, by whose conversation they fear to be polluted, unless either they
come not at ye church, or else quickly forsake it, they fall into ye madness of
ye heretics called Catharoi, who deceived with ye false imagination of exact
holiness, and using sharp cruelty, fled from those churches, in which ye
fruits of ye doctrine of the gospel plainly appeared not. Against these we set
both ye prophetical and apostolical, to wit, the most holy churches. For Esaie
and Jeremy rebuking ye manners of their time, do greatly inueigh against
corruption of doctrine and manners. Neither charge they them with light and
common faults, but heinous. Esaie cries, That from the crown of the head to
the soale of the foot, there is no whole place, and yet he departed not from ye
church, nor planted him self a new, albeit from al ungodliness and
corruption, he kept him self very diligently. How many faults, nay, how many
errors I pray you were there amongst the Apostles of Christ them selves? what
did our lord depart from them? The church of Corynth was corrupted, not only in
manners, but also in doctrine. There was in it conte^tions, factio^s, and
brawlings. Whordome and breaking of wedlock, undoubtedly was common among them.
What think you of that, ye many of them were present at profane sacrifices?
Surely it was no small error, yt they esteemed baptism according to ye
worthiness of the minister. They had defiled the Lords Supper, with their
private and prodigal banquets: yea, and of the resurrection of the dead, they
thought not aright. But did ye apostle for ye cause either depart from them him
self, or command others to depart? yea, rather he calls the^ a holy church,
and greatly rebuking their co^tentions, he exhorts al me^ to observe ye
unity of the church, in the sincerity of truth. It is not to be douted
therefore, ye they greatly sin, which abstein from the fellowship of our, or
rather the catholic church, in which albeit there be great corruption of
life, yet ye doctrine is sincere, and the sacraments are purely ministered. But
these men object: ye For the unworthy partakers of the Lords supper, Scisme
must not be made.
admit al men without exception, to ye receiving of the Lords supper, wicked
men, drunkards, covetous men, soldiers, and such like kinds of men, with
whom the holy apostle forbids us to eat common bread: so far off is it yt he
grants us to be partakers at the lords table with such. Except therefore we
like to be defiled with the fellowship of the wicked, it is needful either not
to join with this society, or else altogether to flee from it. But of the
Lords supper, and the receiving thereof, if I live, I will speak in an other
place apt for it. At this time, this only we bring against them, yt Paul the
most faithful servant of Jesus Christ, was not sharper than his master. But
it is manifest, yt he admitted Judas to ye holy table, who^ he knew as it is
wont to be said, Intus and in cute, yt is to say, thoroughly, within and
without, and yet he did not put him by. But he would have rejected him, if he
had known, ye rest of his disciples would have been polluted with his company.
Judas him self was polluted, for his mind and conscience were corrupt: but
the rest of the apostls, whose minds were pure through perfect faith, could not
be defiled by another man's treachery. Therefore says Paul ye apostle, Let a
man prove him self, and so let him eat of that 2. Cor. 11.
bread, and drink of that cup. He bids every man to prove him self, not to
judge an other man's servant, who stands to his Lord or falls. If thou
be endued with faith, and do lawfully participate at the Lords table, thou
art not defiled with an other man's wickedness. Therefore to avoid pollution,
there is no cause why thou should be separated from the church, in which you
see the bad mingled with the good, to be partakers of ye Lords supper. But if
so be thou be separated you plainly declarest thy self, being hardened with
arrogancy, to be partaker with those whom S. Aug. in his 3. book against
Parmenian, the first chapter, painteth forth with these proper and lively
colors. They are ^uil children, who not for the hatred of other men's
iniquities, but through the study of their own contentions, go about either
wholly to alure, or at lest to divide the simple people provoked with the
bragging titles of their names, puffed up with pride, folish with frowardnes,
subtle with slanders, troublesome with seditions: who least they should be
detected to want the light of truth, pretend the shadow of sharp severity:
and those things which in the holy scriptures the sincerity of love being
saved, and the unity of peace being kept, are commanded for the correction
of the faults of their brethren, wherein moderation also should be used, they
usurp to the sacrilege of scisme, and occasion of cutting off.

The same author amongst other things godlily and wisely disputed in ye two
chapters following, gives this counsel to modest wits, That quietly they should
correct what they may, and what they can not mende, they should patiently
suffer, and lovingly mourn, till God him self either amend it, or in the day
of judgment fan away the chafe. Furthermore, Unity. must be kept and scisme
eschued.
concluding this place, I will recite unto you the words of the blessed martyr
Cypria^. He in his 3. book and 3. epistle, has thus left it written. If
cockle appear to be in the church, yet ought neither our faith nor our
charity be let, that because we see cockle in the church: we our selves
depart from the church: we must rather labor to be good corn, that when the
corn shall be laid up in the lords barn, we may receive the fruit of our
labor and travel. The Apostle says in his Epistle, but in a great house are
not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and of earth: and some
vessels of honor, some of dishonor. Let us endeavor and labor what we may, that
we may be a vessel either of gold or of silver. But the Lord only has
liberty to break in pieces the earthe^ vessels, to who^ also is given an iron
rod. The servant can not be greater tha^ his Lord. Neither let any man think it
lawful for him to challenge that to him self, which the father has given only
to his son, that he might now be able to purge the ^^owre, or fan the
chafe, or by all the wit man has, to separate all the chaff from the corn.
This is a proud obstinacy, and wicked presumption, which lewd fury takes to
him self. And whiles some men always take to the^ selves a further dominion,
tha^ peaceable justice requires, they perish from the church: and whiles they
proudly lift up the^ selves, blinded with their own presumption, they are
bereft of the light of truth. The Lord Jesus reduce the wandering sheep into
the unity of ye catholic church, and living in unity, keep and uphold
them. Amen. These adversaries of ours being overcome, Of the departing from the
church o^ Rome.
there arise up new and cruel enimes, yt is to say, ye defenders of the Roman
Monarchy, and of the apostolic sea, as they call it, and the most ancient
church: for they cry eue^ while they be whorse that we are guilty of ye same
crime, whereof we condemned the Anabaptists, and certain other fantastical
fellows. For they say, that we with a wicked scisme, and forced by no
necessity, have forsaken the old Romish church, and have set up for our
selves new^ and heretical Synagogues. And they allege, yt the holy scripture
has as yet her authority in the church of Rome, yt it is read as yet in all
their churches, yt they fetch their disputations out of it in all their
schools, yea, and also yt the sacraments have their right place and use: and
therefore that we are wicked scismatiques, who without any necessary cause to go
away, are departed from the catholic church, most of all for the faults of
some of the clergy and of the bishops. I must needs therefore digress a
little and contend with these defenders of the Pop^she church, and show that
we never departed from the catholic church of Christ. And because in this
matter it chiefly ^ho is an (...) who a (...).
beehoueth ^s to know who is truly said to b^ an heretic or who^ is a
scismatique, of these matters I will first of all speak these few words. S.
Augustine thinks yt this difference there is between an heretic, and a
scismatique, yt an heretic does corrupt the sincerity of faith and doctrine
of the apostles, with his wicked doctrine: and a scismatique although he sin
not at all against the pure doctrine and sincere faith, yet he rashly separates
himself from the Church, breaking the bond of unity. And surely he properly
is an heretic, whosoever he be that contrary to the scripture which is
the word of God, against the Articles of faith, or against the sound opinions
of the Church grounded on the word of God, through hope of any temporal
commodity, of his own brain, and fleshly choice, chooses, receives,
teaches, follows strange things, and stiffely reteyning does both defend
them and spread them abroad. By the Imperial edicte of Augustus Caesar,
Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, they are defined to be Catholics or
Christians, who continue in that religion which S. Peter taught the church of
Rome, and which blessed Damasus and S. Peter bishop of Alexandria did teach,
that is to say confessing according to the teaching of the Apostles and
doctrine of the Gospel the only Godhead of the father, and of the son, and of
the holy Ghost in equal majesty and in an holy Trinity. And again they are
by them declared to be heretics, who follow contrary opinions, whom they
account both madd and infamous, and worthy of punishment. And he is a
scismatique, whosoever he be that separateth himself from the unity of ye
true Church of God, and either himself gathers together new assemblies, or
joins himself to congregations gathered by others, albeit in doctrine he
err little or nothing. And I think no man can either (...) or gainesaye any
thing in these descriptions. And therefore the defenders of the Romish
monarchy do greatly offend against us, evermore having in their mouths
against us the most heyndus crimes of heresy and scisme. For we teach nothing
against the sincerity and truth of the holy scriptures; or against the
articles of faith, or against the opinions of the Catholic Church which be
sound and established by the Canonical scriptures. If it had liked us to have
sought earthly commodity, we would surely have continued in ye Popish
doctrine, in which all things are gainefull. But because we have received the
doctrine of Christ, we are open to every man's reproach. Whereof we were not
ignorant when we departed from the doctrine of ye Pope. For no hope therefore
of temporal commodity do we embrace the doctrine of Christ, neither do we
presumptuously affirm any thing. For if any man can teach us any better out of
Gods word, we will not refuse to embrace that which is better. And moreover
with open voice and with all our hearts we condemn all heresies and
heretics, whosoever they be which the ancient Church either in general
counsels or without Counsels has killed with the sword of Gods word. But we
strive against the false doctrine of the Pope, his new decrees which fight
against the word of God, and most filthy abuses and corruptions in the Church.
The bishops of Rome have taken to themselves with their conspiratours, a tyranny
over the Church, playing the part of very Antichrists in the temple of GOD:
their tyranny therefore and Antichristianisme we fly and refuse, Christ and
his yoke we refuse not, the fellowship of saints we fly not: yea, rather to
that end we may remain in that society and become the true members of Christ
and of his saints, flying out of the Popish church, we are gathered together
again into one holy catholic and Apostolic Church. And this Church we
do acknowledge to be the very house of GOD and the proper sheepe-fould of
Christ our Lord, whereof he is the sheepeheard.

For freely we confess, and with great joy giving thanckes to God that has A
free confession of departing from the Romish Church.
delivered us we publish abroad that we are departed from the Romish Church,
and that we do at this day also abhor the same. But first of all we
distinguishe and put a diversity between the old church of Rome, and the late
vpstart church. For there was sometime at Rome a holy and a faithful Church,
which Apostolic men and the Apostles of Christ themselves did establishe and
preserve by the word of GOD: which ancient Church was not only without the
Ceremonies there used and received at this day, but if she had but seen
them, she would surely have accursed them. That ancient Church wanted the
decrees whereupon the Church of Rome at this day altogether stays her
self. She was ignorant of that Monarchy and all that stately court. Therefore
from that ancient and Apostolic Church of Rome we never departed, neither
will we ever depart. We ack^owledge moreover all that are at Rome, who at this
day do worshipp Christ, and keep themselves from all Popish pollution, to be
our beloved brethren, of which sort we doubt not but Rome has a great many.
Finally we do not acknowledge that vpstart church of Rome to be ye true
church of Christ, which does acknowledge and worshipp the Pope as Christ his
vicar in earth, and is obedient to his laws. Wherefore, we cannot be
scismatiques, who leaving ye Church of Rome, have not departed from ye true
church of God.

For the holy catholic church cleaves unto her only sheepeheard The
vpstarte church of Rome is not the Church.
Christ, believes his word, and lives holily: But you shall find all things
quite contrary in the church of Rome, so as it cannot come within the compass
neither of the outward and visible, neither of the inward and invisible church
of God. The godly bear with many things in the church, that is to say, in the
members of the church and in the ministers (as I showed of late when I
entreated against scismatiques) but in that vppstart church of Rome thou shall
not find small and tolerable faults either of doctrine or of life, or of
errors: all these faults in her are heinous, desperate and abominable. What
manner of charity should it be therefore that could hope for better of these
most untoward and lamentable things? Hypocrites and evil men are accounted to
be parcel of the outward and visible church of God, and are suffered in the
same: but these Romanistes, are neither evil men nor hypocrites, but the very
worste and the most cruel enemies of Christ his truth, openly blaspheming
the Gospel, and persecuting those that believe in Christ. And therefore they
neither have the outward nor yet the inward marks of ye Church. The Spirit of
the Lord rests upon The Church of ^ome ^^th not be inward ^^rkes of (...)
church ^f God.
those that tremble at the word of God: these men fret and fume if any man
unfeignedly reverence the word of God.

True faith attributes only unto Christ all the means whereby it comes
unto everlasting life: these men do persecute the faithful, because they
attribute unto Christ Jesus alone, all the means whereby they atteine unto
everlasting life, and will not part stakes in the means of salvation with
Popish fancies. In steed of charity they exercise cruelty against their
brethren, and against their neighbors. What shall a man say of them who abuse
the public goods of the Church, and spend them according to their own
private lusts? For that which of old time the faithful have of charity
given to the use of the church, and for the sustentation of the poor, that do
these men waste, living most lecherouflie and filthilie. Which thing the
elect Apostles of the Lord ^. Pet. 2. (...) in the ^^^stle of (...).
Peter and Thaddeus did foretell the Church of GOD of, concerning them.

And as touching the outward marks of the Church, what shall I The Church
of ^ome (...) not (...) out^arde ^^rkes of (...) church ^f God.
say? These men say that the Canonical Scripture has her authority in the
Church of Rome, and that the same word is read both in their Churches and
in their Schools, and that the Sacraments have their force, and are effectual
amoungest them. But I can show the contrary. First of all they will make
subject the interpretation of the holy and sacred scriptures unto their Sea,
and the right of judgment in all cases they give unto their idol the Pope of
Rome. For that canon every man knows: Whatsoever he decrees, what soever
he establishes, is of all men to be observed for ever inuiolably. And
again, The whole Church thoroughout the universal world, knows that the
holy Church of Rome, has authority to give judgment of all things,
neither is it lawefull for any to give judgment of her judgments. Therefore
she also judges the Scriptures and expounds them, and turns and windeth
them which way she lists.

I will not now remember how by manifest words the Standard-bearers of that
Sen do write, that the canonical Scripture takes her authority of the
Church, abusinge this sentence of the ancient father Saint Augustine, I
would not have believed the Gospel, if the authority of the holy Church had
not moved me, etc. This will I affirm, which cannot but be manifest unto
all men, that the Romish Church or the rulers of the same Church, do take
away the natural sense and true meaning of the holy Scriptures, and have set
down a strange sense in steed of it, which sense to the end it may the
better be liked of men, they call the sense of the holy mother the Church,
which sense also they urge with so great wickedness, as if you oppose against
if the native sense, you shall receive for your labor, the reprochefull name
of an heretic.

In few words, except you bring out the whole Scripture wrested after their
mind and gain, that is to say, tempered with their diuellishe decrees as
with poison, it will be said that you have not brought out the holy
Scriptures, but that that you have taught heresy. By examples the matter will
be made the plainer. The Scripture teaches that Jesus Christ is the only
head of the Church: but unless you also join the Pope to be the head of the
Church militant in earth, you will be called an heretic. The Scripture teaches
that Jesus Christ is the only intercessour or mediator, Priest and only
sacrifice propitiatory of the faithful: but unless you join hereunto that
Christ is in deed the mediator of Redemption, but that the saints together
with Christ are ye mediators of intercession, and that the priests do daily
offer an unbloody sacrifice, so as the Saints may be acknowledged to be
intercessours together with Christ in heaven, and that the priests in earth do
daily offer in their mass a sacrifice for the quick, and for the dead, you
will else be called an heretic. The Scripture teaches that Jesus Christ is
the righteousness of the faithful, which righteousness we receive by faith:
but unless you will part stakes between this righteousness of Christ, and
works or men's merits, you will be called an heretic. The Scripture teaches
that Christ ascended into heaven, and has established a Vicegerent power, to
wit, the holy Ghost, and that also he will not come again into ye world
bodily, but only at the day of Judgment: but unless you do acknowledge the
same Christ to be also corporally present in the bread of the Sacrament, and
do also worship him there, thou will else be called an heretic. Christ
our Lord said at his last supper, reaching the cup to his disciples, Drink
you all of this: but and if thou will contend that both the kinds of the
sacrament ought to be given to all the faithful, thou will be called an
heretic. God said in his law: Thou shall not make an Image, thou shall not
worship it thou shall not serve it: But unless thou understand by an Image the
Idols of the Gentiles, as of Saturn or Mercury, but not of the true God, or
any saint, thou will be called an heretic. Many m^^e things of this sort I
could bring forth, if I spoke to them that were ignorant. What authority
therefore or what place shall we say the word of God had in that sea? Who sees
not that these filthy beasts do tread underfoot as a captive the most holy
word of God, that they establishe and reestablishe laws of God according to
their own giantlike boldness? It is therefore as clear as any thing may be
clear, that the Romish Church is destitute of the holy word of God. I have
showed plainly in the first Sermon of this Decade that it is not enough to
boast out the words of the holy Scripture unless therewithal the natural
sense be retained uncorrupted. The Church of Rome has corrupted the sense and
meaning of yt holy Scriptures, and thrust upon the simple people opinions
contrary to yt scriptures: and therefore the Church of Rome is not yt true
Church of Christ. The sacrament of baptism ministered by Popish priests,
albeit we do not reiterate, for that they baptized in the name of the father,
and of the son, and of the holy Ghost (as in the first Sermon of this Decade
I have showed) yet the breaking of bread or distribution of the Lords supper,
they so defiled and also corrupted the same with doctrines contrary to the sound
faith, and turned the same into such a filthy merchaundize, as no man that is
of a sound judgment can with a safe conscience, and without corruption of his
religion communicate with them. Of the most filthy life, and wicked manners of
the priests of the Romish Church, I will at this time say nothing. For
already it appears, I doubt not, to them that are not wilfully blind, that
that sea of Rome has not the outward marks of the true Church of God, joined
with the pure word of God, and sound preaching of the Gospel. It wants (I
say) a heavenly ministry, and lawefull ministers of the Church, and also the
wholesome use of the Lords Supper: and therefore it is not the true Church of
God from which no man may depart without being guilty of scisme.

By this means some man will say, Christ shall have no Church left him in The
Lord ^eserueth to himself a Church though the gouernoures of ^t err.
the earth. For they that be the governors of the Church, if they err and
corrupt and forsake the word of God, what hope (I pray you) remains of the
Church? Or where the marks of the Church appear not, where (I pray you) is
the Church? I answer, that almighty God in such calamities of the Church, in
the which the governors fall away from the word and true worship of God, and
do embrace and bring in new laws, and new ordinances into the Church, the
true outward marks of the Church being for a time either darckened or worn
out of use, does yet notwtstanding reserve unto himself a Church in the
earth, which Church also he furnishes and repaireth with true teachers, whom
he sends into the same, albeit they be not acknowledged for true ministers
and teachers of Gods Church, by those who will seem to be the true and the
ordinary governors of the Church: but are rather condemned as seditious
disturbers of the Church and execrable heretics. By examples taken out of
the Scriptures, the matter will be made more manifest. In the time of Achas
king of Judah (Vrias the high 4. Reg. 16. 2. Par. 28.
priest wincking at it, and the princes of the land and priests not
resisting,) the king shutt up the temple of the Lord, and took away the holy
altar: which thing the Scripture expressly witnesses, and therefore both the
ministry of the word, and the lawefull or ordinary ministration of the
Sacraments ceased: but yet notwithstanding there was a holy Church in the
kingdom of Judah: in the which (as I may say) extraordinarily no man doubts
the prophet Esaie with certain other did preach. Under Manasses 4. Reg. 21.
and. 22. 2. Par. 33. and. 34.
the nephue of king Achas, true doctrine and administration of the sacraments
was banished, except only circumcision: and that falling away continued
until the Church was reformed by that most Godly king Josias: and yet in the
mean season prophets were sent and God had his Church in Judah, albeit the most
part of the people with their governors did both follow and defend the
wickedness and defection of Manasses. In ye kingdom of Israel king Jeroboam
thrust 3. Reg. 12. 2. Par. ^1.
out of their offices the teachers and preachers of the law of the Lord and of
the sound truth, and in steed of them gave unto the people profane, and
unlearned priests and rulers. And moreover built new temples, yea, and those
were cathedral churches, and set up new idols or calves, a new religion,
new altars, and new feasts, and by this means abrogated the true religion of
GOD, to that end yt there might no outward marks at all of the Church of God
appear in Israel, and yet there is no doubt but God had a notable Church in
Israel, for the preservation and repairing whereof from time to time God sent
his Prophets, albeit they were not acknowledged to be the true Prophets of God
at the hands of the false church and of the false prophets. Under Jeroboam the
second of that name, Amos the Prophet a sheepeheard or Amos. 2.
neateherd of Tecoa, taught and preached ye true word of God: but he heard at
the hands of Amasias the high priest of the kingdom, Get thee quickly hence
and go into the land of Judah, Amos. 7.
and prophecy or preach there: But prophecy no more at Bethel, for it is the
kings chapel, and it is the kings court. Furthermore, when Achab passed all
the kings before him in wickedness, and added moreover to the ungodliness and
falling away of Jeroboam y^ abominable religion of Baal, and had filled all
the kingdom of Israel with superstitions, idolatries, enchauntments, and
sacrileges, yea and moreover persecuted the pure word of God in his prophets
most cruely, there was yet found in Israel a most famous church of God. Helias
that great and most excellent prophet of God, because of that horrible falling
away from God and loathsomeness of that most miserable people, in whom there
appeared no one token of the true Church of God, flying into the wilderness
hid himself in corne^rs, and being asked of the Lord, what he did there, he
aunsweared: I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts, 3. Reg. 19.
for that the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, cast down thine
altars and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I only am left, and they
seek my life to take it away. But straight ways he is sent back into the
land of Israel from whence he was fled, and heard moreover these words: I have
left unto my self seven Romans 11.
thousand me^ in Israel, who have neither bowed their knees to Baal, neither
kissed him. Behold this mighty prophet thought that only he himself had been
left of all the number of the faithful in Israel: but he heard ye God had
reserved seven thousand holy me^, who had not bowed their knees, that is to
say, had never served Baal so much as with outward reverence. But who knows
not that the prophet understood by the number of seven an exceeding great
number of ye true servants of God: who undoubtedly were circumcised, not into
the covenant of Baal, but into the covenant of the eternal God? The same men
lacked not faith, and therefore they were not without doctrine, though the same
were not so common, neither seemed unto the Baalits to be either ordinary or
catholic. But undoubtedly they wanted ye use of the sacrifices: for seeing
they were not lawfully offered, they would not be partakers of those yt were
unlawful: but in the mean season they were not destitute of the things which
were signified by the outward signs or sacraments, being partakers through
faith of all the gifts of God.

After the self same sort since the Though the Romish church be no^ the
church yet God has a Church in Earth.
bishop of Rome after ye manner of king Jeroboam, having forsaken the sound
preaching of the Gospel, and having corrupted the first and simple institution
of the Lords supper, and depraved and wrested to his own profit other
commandments of God, and placed himself in ye throne or temple of God, Dan.
9. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
or in the church of God, bragging that he is a God in earth, surely the church
of God oppressed with grievous tyra^nie, could very hardly hitherto be discerned
by outward marks. For in steed of the sincere preaching of the Gospel, a
certain kind of doctrine mixed and corrupted with men's decrees was set forth,
and in steed of ye Lords supper, Popish mass was celebrated: and in steed of
other ordinances of god came in a high heap of foolish and superstitious
Ceremonies, whereunto a great number of men yelding, made themselves subject to
the sea of Rome. In ye mean space notwtstanding the church of God was not
utterly extinguished throughout all the world, neither the holy ministry of
the word of God and the true worship of God utterly decayed amongst all men.
For there were found spread abroad in every place not a few men, who neither
allowed the Pope and his conspirators, nether his corruption in matters of the
church. But they worshipped the lord Christ, whom they acknowledged to be the
only author of salvation, and therefore they kept them selves free from Popish
filthiness. And god also sent almost in every age since the beginning of
Popedom men that were grave, godly, and learned, who grievously accused ye
Popes kingdom and tyranny, (even as the Prophets did of old time in the days
of Jeroboam the idolatrous corruption) constantly requiring ye reformation of
ye church from Popish corruptions and also teaching the true doctrine of
salvation, and the true use of the sacraments. And whereas a pure reformation
by reason of Antichrists tyranny could not be obtained, there was
notwithstanding found a continual study of purity, and a godly desire of the
lawful use of the sacraments: even as I said there was in the elect members of
the true church of God, in the days of Ieroboa^, Achab, Manasses, and in the
time of the captivity of Babylon. But even as in those times the true prophets
of God were not acknowleged for true prophets of the priests of Baal, but were
condemned for scismatiques and heretics: eue^ so in certain ages past, ye
bishops of Rome with their conspiratours, did excommunicate and persecute godly
and learned men, who preached the word of God, and called for the reformation
of ye church, and many of them did they put to death with fire and sword: which
thing our Lord and master himself, with the prophets and Apostles, did
foreshewe should come to pass. Moreover God could undoubtedly reserve to
himself a mighty church even under the Papisme: even as we doubt not but he
has done a very great under Mahometanisme: for who will think yt no members of
the church of God are remaining in all Asia and Africa? Could not our merciful
god with his mighty power in ye last calamity and ruin of gods church,
reserve again (as sometime he did) 7000. me^ of whom never a one had
worshipped the beast or received his mark? What has been don in Turkey, or
what at this day is don, let them declare yt can do it best and most rightly.
What has been done amongst us in these last ages, no man can deny. Through
the great goodness of God we see it is come to pass, yt even as circumcision,
the sign of gods covenant of old, was given unto the people of god even in ye
midst of the falling from god, so also at this day in ye greatest darcknesse
of Antichrist, most holy baptism was given to the Christians to be as a seal
of the forgiveness of sins and inheritance of the children of God. Surely
the pureness of doctrine was profaned with infinite most gross traditions by ye
Popes sworn friends, yet in the mean time it was not altogether abolished. For
yt I repeat not again any thing of yt which I have said of godly and learned
men sent of God crying for reformation of the Church, and greatly profiting
with all the children of God, was it not with a certain universal consent
received for most certain and undoubted, that in the decalogue or ten
commandments, there was set down a short and most absolute sum of all the
commandments of God? and that in ye Lords prayer was taught us a most ample
form of prayer unto God? And that in the Apostles creed was contained a most
perfect rule of faith, or of y^ which was to be believed? Surely the custom
was to recite the creed almost unto every one that was departinge out of this
world, and to those that lay even at the last gasp, as a most perfect rule of
that faith which brings salvation. Neither do we doubt that the merciful
God and father of mercies, (who vouchsafed to save the thief upon the cross
even at the giving up of his life) had mercy upon those that were oppressed
with the tyranny of Antichrist, and through his unmeasurable grace touched the
hearts of men both living and ready to die, and taught them by his holy
spirit, and that they confessing one God the father and maker of all things,
and one Jesus Christ the son of God redeemer of the world, to have suffered
and risen again, and one holy Ghost, and finally the holy catholic
Church, that he has sanctified them, forgiving them all their sins, and has
translated the souls of such faithful men into life everlasting (according as
they believed) into which place also we believe our flesh (being raised
again) shall be carried in the end of the world. They have here therefore their
answer also who ask: whether all our elders who died before these last
times wherein the Gospel is revealed be damned? Let therefore those that be
alive rather look, least for their contempt of the word of God, and
cont^ntions raised against the word of God, they come to worse end tha^ their
forefathers came. Therefore though we acknowledge not the Popish Church to be
the true Church, yet it follows not thereof that there neither is or was any
Church of God in the earth. For we say that is ye true Church of GOD, which
believes in Christ, and forsakes not his word, which Church also we have
plentifully enough described. We know moreover that we our selves which at
this day believe in Christ, are the true Church of Christ our Lord. For we
clean by faith to our only head Christ, and to all the members of the
catholic church, so as we are not destitute of the true marks of the true
Church of God.

But we read not (say they) that under the bishops, priests, and kings of the
Church of the Jews, either the prophets (that is to say) the guides of the
faithful, or else the faithful themselves, did depart away from the high
priest, from the king, or from their universal Church, and ordained unto
themselves new particular sacrifices as you at this day do. For you departing
from the bishopp of Rome, from kings and governors, and from the universal
Church, do congregate unto your selves a Church far unlike the universal
Church, both in preaching and ministering of the Sacraments? Whereunto I
answer, that the old fathers before the coming of our master Christ, for
a certain prescribed cause did not seek places to offer new sacrifices in,
the temple being abused and defiled with idolatry. For it was unlawful to
offer sacrifice without the bounds of the temple. As is to be seen in the 3. of
Leuit. and the 12. of Deuteronomy. Neither was there any other cause why y^ the people
being kept in bondage by ye space of lxx. years in the captivity of Babylon,
offered no sacrifices: yet most certain it is notwtstanding, y^ both the
prophets of God, and the holy and true worshippers of God, separated themselves
both from the worship and sacrifices which were used, being contrary to the
word of God. Surely we read in all the sermons of the prophets, that both those
sacrifices and also that Church are condemned. For which cause they
themselves also were condemned of the high priest and other priests of Baal,
as most abominable heretics and scismatiques: even as now a days also we
are thrust through with the darts of your curses, for that we will not
communicate with the Popish church and her holy service, and do reiecte their
holy service itself. To this may be added yt the sacrifices of the law being
now fulfilled and abrogated by the lord, the Apostles with manifest defection,
departed not only from the high priests and church of Jerusalem, but moreover
gathered unto Christ a new church by the preaching of the Gospel, and badge
of the sacraments: which church in the Acts of the Apostles we have
described: and according to whose pattern all churches ought of right to be
reformed, even as many as would be called Apostolic churches. What have we
therefore offended Apostolic churches.
now adays refourming churches after the likeness of the Apostolic church,
which churches were of old profaned by that sea of Rome, and the members
thereof? We read that ye church of God before the coming of Christin the flesh,
was oftentimes defiled with filthy pollutions of corrupt men, and that the
same was purged again and renewed after the likeness of the old church,
according to ye word of God. And why should not we take the same course in our
age in the very same cause?

There remain moreover prophecies of our savior Christ, and of the Departure
from the Romish Church is commanded.
holy Apostles and Prophets, lively painting out this grievous oppression of
the church of Christ under the fury of Antichrists tyranny in this our last
age: there remain most weighty commandments, commanding to fly from
Antichriste, from idolatry and false prophets. For the Lord says in S.
Matthewes Gospel: There shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, Matthew. 24.
and shall show great signs and wonders, so that if it were possible they
should deceive the very elect. Beehold I have told you before. Wherefore if
they shall say unto you: Behold he is in the desert, Go not forth: Behold he is
in the secret places, believe it not. And again, Beware of false Prophets,
which come to you in sheep Matthew. 9.
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Also, Can the blind Luke. 6.
lead the blind? shall they not both fall into the ditch? S. Peter also says
very gravely: Save your selves from this froward generation. And also in his
second and third chapiters of his Acts. 2.
second epistle he entreates very largly of this matter. And also S. Paul
agreeing in all things with the holy Gospel and with S. Peter, and painting
forth Antichrist, and those last times of Antichrist, and corrupt men, not
lights, but firebrandes of the church, commands the saints to depart
from them, and togather themselves together unto Christ, and his sincere
truth. If any man ask for the places he shall find them 2. These. 2. 1. Tim. 4.
2. Tim. 3. and 4. The same Apostle in another place even the Apostle John does
also say, Fly from idolatry. And 1. Cor. 10. 1. John. 5. 2. Cor. 6.
in the 6. cap. of the 2. epist. to the Cor. by express words, and most
manifest opposition he shows, That there can be no agreement between Christ
and Belial, light and darckenesse, and between idols and the temple of God.
And therefore he adds by and by after: Wherefore come out from among them, and
separate your selves (says the Lord) and touch none unclean thing, and I
will receive you. To this apperteyneth that which the blessed Apostle John in
his revelation showed him by the lord Christ, seeing the works of Babylon,
hears also therewt a voice coming from heaven, and commanding after this
manner: Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues. The same Apostle very often threateneth
everlasting destruction to those y^ worship ye beast: but life and glory to
those that forsake and flee from the beast, so as they cleave only to the only
savior of the world Jesus Christ. Therefore that departure of ours from the
sea or church of Rome, is not only lawful, but also necessary as yt which is
commanded us of the Lord himself, and by his holy Apostles, unto whom
unless we^ obey, we cannot be saved.

Otherwise we are not ignorant, that fallings away are altogether abominable
The kinds of falling away.
and to be blamed, amongst the which notwithstanding except we distinguishe, it
will not plainly appear, what we either allow or disprove, either else what
we follow or flee from. There is a defection of apostacy, in the which
thorough hatred of faith or religion, Atheistes or godless men of mere
ungodliness and contempt of God with their wicked ringleaders Lucian and Julian
the Apostata, fall away from the scunde and catholic faith, and finally from
the fellowshipp of the faithful and moreover do blaspheme and rail upon the
Christian verity, and either laugh to scorn or persecute the very Church of
God. There is also an heretical defection, that is to say; wherein with
Valentine, Marcion, Arrius, Manicheus, Artemones, and other such monsters,
certain proud, arrogant, and malapert wicked persons, either refusing the
very Scripture, or wresting the same, despise and tread it under their feet,
or else do deny, overthrow and resist certain articles of faith, and the
sound and ancient opinions of the church of God, and affirm the contrary,
and so frame to themselves heretical churches, and depart from the true,
ancient, and catholic church. There is moreover a scismaticall defection,
such as was the Donatists, who separated themselves from the true church of
God, under the pretense of obteyning a more absolute kind of holiness. Whereof
I have spoken very largly but a little before. And the above remembered two
kinds of defection, are altogether abominable and wicked, even as also the
third kind can by no means be defended. But none of all these kinds can be
imputed unto us now a days, departing from the church of Rome. For y^
departure is void of all crime, which is made, not from ye true, but from the
false church: not from the people of God, but from ye persecuters of gods
people: not from the articles of faith, and sound opinions of the church: but
from errors which obscure the articles of faith, and from the wicked
traditions, and corruptions of men: which moreover is made not through any
lightness, but of necessity: not for invocation, but for true religions sake,
that leauinge the fellowshipp of darckenesse, we may be gathered together
again with Christ the true light and all his members. And in this sort now a
days have we forsaken that sea of Rome, flowing with false doctrine,
idolatry, and the blood of innocent martyrs: and have embraced the doctrine of
the Gospel and of the Apostles, and therefore Christ himself the head of the
church, which is the fellowshipp of all saints believing in Christ. And this
hitherto have I spoken by digression, I now return to the treatise of the
catholic church, that I may make an end of those things which remain to be
spoken. And to that end that greater light and force may be added to those
things which I have hitherto spoken of the church, I will now bring out
certain parables out of the holy scriptures, whereby those things are as it
were painted out before our eyes. And so shall it be easy for every man to put
a difference between the inward and the outward church, and to know what
either apperteyneth properly to every one, or else what is not proper. First of
all the church is set forth unto us under the shape and fashion of a The Church
is the house of God.
house. A house is builded to this end, that men may dwell in it: and it is
builded by workmen, of matter of all sorts, of wood, of stones, and mortar,
the foundation being first laid: upon which are set walls which are joined
together with a corner stone: last of all is added or placed alofte the roof,
without which the whole building, by little and little rotting, would fall
down and decay. I said that the church is the house of God, the chief
master builder whereof is God himself, who in the figure thereof, that is to
say, in ye tabernacle made by Moses, and temple builded by Solomon, did deliver
both unto Moses and David, the fashion of the temple, according to which
pattern they should build it. For god from the beginning kept the Angels that
they should not fall, but repaired man being fallen into sin, and death, even
streighte ways after the beginning of the world, sanctifying a church unto
himself, which he also severed out, co^passing it about with his word. And
this fashion of the church it is altogether needful yt we keep, and that we
receive not any other fashion, either of Emperor or Pope, or delivered by any
other man. The true master builder of this house of God, says in ye Gospel:
Upon this rock I will build my church. Matthew. 16.
For the same son of God is he, that makes us worthy of his kingdom, he
gives us faith, by which we are made true members of the church of God. But
albeit the Lord himself be the only and principal builder of his church,
yet he refuses not the labors of men in the building, yea rather he joins
men with him in building of the church, whom also he vouchsafes to call
master builders. For Paul says: As a skillful master builder I have laid
the foundation. And again, 1. Cor. 3.
Who is Paul, and who is Apollos, but the ministers by whom ye believed, and
as the Lord gave to every man. I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave
the increase. So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters, but God that gives the increase. Again, We together are Gods
laborers: ye are Gods husbandry and Gods building. We will make the matter
plain by an example.

What time God would raise up a house unto himself among the Gentiles, Acts.
10.
first of all he endued with his grace Cornelius the governor of the Italian
band placed by Csar. or the capiteine and Centurion by and by after sending
the Apostle Peter, he prepared and made ready that house for himself. For
Peter teaches and baptiseth, Cornelius with his household hearkeneth,
believes, is baptized, and becomes the house of god, the true church, which
church the Lord dwelles in by his spirit. For even as a house is dwelt in by
men, so GOD dwells in the church. As Paul witnesses saying: The temple of
God is 1. Cor. 3.
holy which ye are. Again, Know you not that your body is the temple 1.
Cor. 6.
of the holy Ghost which is in you, etc. The foundation of this house is
Christ. For God says by Esaie: Behold I put or lay in Sion (that is to Esai.
28.
say in the Church) a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation. He that believes shall not make have. Which prophecy the Lord
expou^ding in S. Matthewes Gospel, and applying it to himself as the
foundation of the church, says unto Peter confessing Jesus to be the true
son of the living God, the Messiah that was looked-for, And upon Matthew. 16.
this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not overcome
it. There is moreover to be added hereunto the exposition of S. Peter ye
Apostle, who reciting the very same words of the prophet Esaie, and alluding
to that saying of David, The Psalm. 118.
stone which the builders refused, is the head of the corner, says exprefly,
that Christ is that living stone, refused of men but chosen of God, a sure 1.
Pet. 2. Acte^. 4.
foundation, upon whom whosoever stays, shall not be confounded. And also
Paul the Apostle agrees with Peter, for he says: And the rock was Christ.
And again, An other 1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 3.
foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Ephe. ^.
Therefore whereas he in another place names the self same foundation, the
foundation of the prophets and Apostles, it is not so to be taken as if the
Apostles and prophets were the foundation of the church, but yt they laid
Jesus Christ for the foundation of the Church, and builded the whole building
upon this foundation, yea, even themselves also. For mortal men cannot be the
object of faith, and foundation of ye church, whereupon the faithful may
stay. David cries: The way of God is vncorrupt: the word of the Lord is Psalm.
18
tried in the fire: he is ashield to all that trust in him. For who is God
besides the Lord? And who is mighty (or a rock) save our God? And Jeremy
says, Thus says the Lord, cursed be I^rem. 17.
the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his
heart from the Lord. Blessed be the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose
hope the Lord is. So the writings of the prophets and Apostles with one consent
show us the rock, yt is to say, the foundation of the church to be Christ,
and that it is he only and alone.

Greatly do they err therefore, whosoever they be, that do attribute to the
Peter or the Bishop of Rome is not the foundation of the Church.
bishop of Rome this divine praise, power and prerogative which is due only to
the son of God. And if so be it that they obiecte that many interpretours,
both Greek and Latin, have understood by the rock, Peter himself, we
refuse man's authority, and do affirm and bring forth heavenly authority.
Christ said not, I will build my church upon thee, but upon a rock, and
Matthew. 16.
that self same rock that thou have confessed. Yea, and Peter takes his name
of Petra, which signifies a rock, even as a Christian of Christ. And Peter
also himself by ye rock understood Christ. Hereunto makes the authority of
Paul, saying: The rock was Christ. ^. Cor. 10.
And, Other foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which ^.
Cor. 3.
is Jesus Christ. For David before said: Who is God besides the Lord, or who
is a rock save our God? These testimonies I repeat not unadvisedly: for all
those that are not beside their wits, will confess there is more credit to be
given to these most manifest testimonies, witnessing Christ only to be the
rock, and placing him for the foundation of the Church, than unto those that
teach both Peter and the bishop of Rome together with Christ to be rocks and
foundations of the Church. I will use no sharper speech at this time against
them, for as much as it is most manifest unto all men what manner of men they be,
most unworthy to be reckoned with Peter, but most worthy to be counted
amongst Symoniackes. Peter foresawe what manner of men they would be, and
therefore least any man should be deceived by them, he painted them out in
their colors in the 2. Chapter of his 2. Epistle. But leaving them we will
return to the exposition of the parable we had in hand.

The matter of the house, as the walls and other parts, are faithful men Who
be Gods House.
builded upon the foundation Christ. Which thing those famous and principal
workmen of this building Peter and Paul witness and explain in these
words. Peter says: To Christ ye come as unto a living stone disalowed of
men, but chosen of God ^. Pet. 2.
and precious. And ye as lively stones be made a spiritual house, and holy
priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to GOD by Jesus Christ.
And Paul says: Now therefore Ephe. 2.
ye are no more strangers and forreyners: but citizens with the saints, and
of the household of God. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. In whom all the
building coupled together grows unto an holy temple in the Lord. In who^ ye
are also built together to be the habitation of God by the spirit. By the
authority therefore of the Apostles, we learn that Christ the corner stoane.
Christ is the corner stone in the house of God, who least the walls should
fall down coupleth them together and up houldeth the whole building. He is
also the roof of the church, that is to say, the defender and ruler, under
whose defense the church lives safe, happy, and blessed. Hereunto
apperteyneth the consideration of the tabernacle of Moses, and of the temple of
Solomon: The Tabernacle and Temple, figures of the Church.
for either of them is called the house of God. The tabernacle was
distinguished into The holiest of all, the holy place, and the court: and
albeit these several parts be named, yet is it called one house of ye Lord,
because there is but only one universal church, which nevertheless has, as
it were, her parts. The holiest of all is a figure of the triu^phant church in
heaven, where are our fellow servants and brethren, the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all the blessed spirits. There does Christ
our Lord appear always in the sight of god, who is our arcke wherein is
contained the treasures of the church, which is the fulfilling of the law, the
certeintie of the covenant, and our propitiation. Thence have we our Oracles.
In this part of the temple all things are sumptuous gold and precious stones.
For in heaven perfect joy is atteyned. In ye temple are forms of Angels,
palms and flowers, for because in the life to come the elect shall be as the
Angels of God. Here they y^ do overcome are green Apoc. 2.
for evermore. To him that overcomes, says the Lord, will I give to eat of
the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Here all
things shine: for in Christ and in the life to come we shall be made bright.
The holy place represents unto us the militant and inward church, sanctified
with the blood of Christ, which has not a show of godliness only, but
godliness it self. For by faith they cleave fast unto God, and with mutual
charity they are knitt together amongst themselves, they serve god in
spirit, hearing gods word, and being partakers of the sacraments. In the holy
place therefore Solomon placed 10. candlestickes, 10. tables, and ten
cauldrons. For in the church y^ saints are daily lightened, nourished and
purged, through repentance. Finally the Court received the whole assembly of
the people. For the Church is the assembly of all those that profess faith,
having also hypocrites mingled with them. Between the holy place and the Court
or porch, are two pillars in Solomon's temple dedicated to the posterity of
David. For it is Christ that bears up the church, by whom yt way is open into
the church. Through the benefit and power of Christ, the church has obtained,
that if she continue in Christ, she should also be the pillar and ground of
the truth. But besides the tabernacle and temple of God, there is no place but
in the Church wherein God receives the service done unto him. God is only
favorable in the church of his saints. Let the Jews, Turks, and Sarracens
therefore do works which in outward show are never so excellent, yet without
Christ and his fellowship no man pleases god. Again, the church of god is
compared The Church is Gods Vine. Esa. 5.
by Esaie to a most excellent vine, who says by plain words: The vineyard of
the Lord of hosts, is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah are his
pleasant plant. And also in the Gospel our lord in the parable of the vine,
plainly expounds that me^ are the branches of this vine. Yea, and in John he
says: John. 15.
I am that true vine, and my father is an husbandman. Every branch that bears
not fruit in me he takes away: and every one that bears fruit, he purges
it, that it may bring forth more fruit. As the branch cannot bear fruit
of it self except it abide in the vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me.
I am the vine you are the branches, he that abides in me and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing. If a man
bide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and withers, and men gather
them and cast them into the fire, and they burn. There is one church therefore,
for it is one vine. Out of her come branches partly fruitful, and partly
unfruitful. For both the good or godly, and true worshippers of God, and evil
men or hypocrites, are counted to be in the church. But hypocrites in their time
are cut off, and thrown into everlasting fire. That ye good remain in the
vine and are not cut off, but bring forth fruit, that are they indebted for
to Christ the foundation of the church, and also the head and preserver of the
same: who by his spiritual and lively juice makes them fruitful in good works.
Herein most evidently appears the knitting together of the head and the
members, Christ and the faithful: whereof we spoke at first, and of the which
the Lord adds in ye gospel, If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you,
ask what you will and it shall be done to you.

Moreover, this church of the faithful is called the kingdom of God. For The
Church is ^he kingdom of God.
the son of God himself Christ Jesus is the king of the church, that is to
say of all the faithful: who by his spirit and word governs the church,
and she again willingly submits herself to his government. Neither are
there found many kingdoms in the world: because there is one only king of
glory Christ. Of this king and kingdom I have entreated in the 7. sermon of
my fourth Decade. Now we The Church is ^hadowed but by man's body.
have also said oftentimes yt the church is likened to man's body. In the body
the head is the chief, which is never absent from the body. And being stricken
off, leaves a dead body void of sense. And albeit this have very many
members, yet is there a most pleasant agreement of them all amongst
themselves. Every one agrees and consents together amongst themselves, they
are soarie one with another, and help each one another. The same thing likewise
do al faithful people perform one toward another, that one member does to
another member. They are united to their head Christ by faith, the head it
self is joined to the members, thorough grace and the spirit. Christ is never
separated from ye church: neither has she life elsewhere but from Christ: who
although he be absent in body from the militant church, yet is he continually
present in spirit, in operation, and in government: so as he needs no vicar
in earth, since he governs alone, and continues for ever the only head, the
only king, the only priest, and savior of his church. For the Lord says in
Ezechiel: I will raise up over my sheep a sheepherd, Ezech. 34.
who shall feed them, to wit, my servant David: he shall feed them and he
shall be their sheepeheard. And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David
shall be their prince among them. I the Lord have spoken it. This last thing he
added, least any should doubt of the faith and certeinty of those things which
are spoken. God is the eternal truth, and he has spoken it: therefore that
which he has spoken cannot be but most true. But what has he spoken? That
there shall be and is one Pastor and Prince of ye Church. Behold that he said
one is not without signification. But who is that one? He expounds that and
says, My servant David, to wit, Christ Jesus (that branch of David's
posterity) whom the authority of the Gospel calls every where the son of
David. He shall be a shepherd not in name and title only, but in deed. For he
shall feed his sheep, and therefore shall be in the midst of them. For in ye
Gospel he says expressly: Wheresoever Matthew. 18.
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. And again, Behold I am with you always even to the Matthew. 28.
end of the world. Now, if he be present The Church of God has no Vicar.
with his church, she has no need of a vicar. For a vicar supplieth the place
of him that is absent. Wheresoever therefore Christ his vicar is acknowledged,
there is no Christ, and therefore there reigns Antichriste. This will be made
as yet much more clear and sure, if we weigh what it means that Christ is
said to be the head of the church. The head is the life, salvation and light,
or that which The head of the Church.
gives light to the Church, the supreme governor of the faithful, who both
can and will always be present to the whole Congregation of Saints, of all
ages, and dispersed throughout the whole world, hear her prayers and requests,
and moreover send her succor in all things: and briefly, who is able
perfectly to govern the whole church, and both provide for and bring to pass
al her matters, and that in all things. But this privilege, as I think, thou
can give to no creature, without blasphemy and sacrilege: only therefore
Christ, perfect God and man, is and remains the only head of the Church.
Those The Pope is not the head of the Church.
that acknowledge the Pope of Rome to be the head of the church militant,
either know not what they do and say, or willingly and wittingly do
blaspheme the Son of God, whom they will not have to reign over his Church
alone. But let us now hear the testimonies of S. Paul the Apostle of this
matter. God, says he, has raised up Christ from the dead, Ephe. 1.
and set him at his right hand in the heavenly places. Far above all
principalities and powers, and might and domination, and every name that is
named not in this world only, but also in that that is to come. And has made
all things subject under his feet, and has appointed him over all things,
to be head to the church: which is his body even the fullness of him that
fills all in all things. Behold Christ is the head, for he rules all things
in heaven and in earth, he governs all things, he has all things
subject unto himself, and makes the Church his body, ministering unto her
those things whereof she has need, and fulfilling all her desires. Again,
the same Apostle says: Christ is the head of the Church, and Ephe. 5.
the same is the savior of the body. It is the part of the head to preserve
and govern the body: But that no man performs but only Christ, he remains
therefore the only head of his Church: specially since the church is the
spiritual body of Christ, and therefore cannot have a carnal head, without
you will make of the Church a Poetical monster. For Christ is the head of the
Church, not because he is man, but because he is God and man. But and if the
defendours of the Romish idol and champions of the monarchy of Rome, by the
head do understand the Prince or governor in earth, as Saul in the Scripture
is called the head over Israel, and so do understand the chief bishop ruling
in the chief sea, let them again hear the Scripture it self confuting their
silthie error, and saying: And there Luke. 2^.
arose also a strife among the Apostles which of the^ should seem to be the
greatest. But Jesus said unto them: The kings of the Gentiles reign over
them, and they that bear rule over them are called Gracious Lords. But ye shall
not be so, but let the greatest among you be as the least, and the chiefest
as he that serves. For who is greater, he that sits at table or he that
serves? Is not he that sits at table? And I am among you as he that
ministers.

That Primacie therefore of ye church of Rome is of men, it is not of the
doctrine or institution of Christ, yea rather quite contrary it is and
repugnant unto the institution, doctrine, and example of Christ: who will not
have the Apostles or apostolic men to reign like unto the Princes of this
world. He instituted ministers of the church, who should serve the Church.
She sits at the table, the ministers set that food before her which they
receive of the Lord, and rightly divide the word of the Lord. Did not Christ
him self refuse a Crown upon earth, and did not he that is Lord of all,
minister? does not he him self disallowe, that any minister should seek any
prerogative, no, not in respect of eldership? He that is greatest among you
(says he) let him be as the younger. He therefore commands an equality
amongst them all. And therefore S. Jerome judges rightly, Hierom in his
commentaries upon Titus, and in his epistle to Euagrius.
saying, that by the custom of man, and not by the authority of God, some one
of the elders should be placed over the rest, and called a Bishop, whereas of
old time, an elder or minister and a Bishop, were of equal honor, power, and
dignity. And it is to be observed, that S. Jerome speaks not of the Romish
Monarchy, but of every bishop placed in every city above the rest of the
ministers. Which thing I bring not out, to that end we should stay upon the
authority of man, but to that end I might show that even by the witness of
man it may be proved, that that maioritie, as they call it, has not the
original from the Son of GOD, and from Gods word, but out of man's brain:
and that therefore both Christ remains the only head of his Church, and
the bishop of Rome is nothing less, than the head of the Church militant. And
there withal we cleave most steadfastly to the sacred and holy Gospel, and to
the undoubted doctrine of the Apostles, which doctrine takes away all pride of
Supremacy, and commends unto us a faithful ministry, and the equal
authority and humbleness of the ministers: The Apostle again witnessing and
saying, Let a man so think of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and
disposers of the secrets of God.

Hereunto belongs almost the whole tenth chapter of John, wherein The Church
is the sheep foulde of Christ.
the Lord named him self the true, and also the only shephearde of the
universal Church. The only shepefolde of this shephearde, is the catholic
Church, gathered together by the word, out of the Jews and Gentiles. And
sheep of this fold, are all the faithful people in the world, hearing, and
giving them selves over, wholly to be governed by this chief shepherd Christ:
who albeit he also communicate this name of Pastor or shephearde, unto the
ministers appointed to the ministry of the church, yet notwitstanding, he
reteyneth unto him self the charge of the chief shephearde, and also the
chief power and dignity. Men that are Pastors of churches are all ministers,
and are all equal: Christ our Lord is the universal pastor, and chief and
Lord of Pastors. The more worthy diligence and trust is in the Pastors, the
more worthy it makes them. Therefore, when the Lord said unto Peter, Feed
my sheep: he committed John. 21.
not unto Peter any Empire, either over the world or over the church, but a
ministry to the behalf of his redeemed. Teach, says he, and govern with my
word my sheep, my sheep I say, whom I have redeemed with my blood. For
Paul says, Take Acts. 20.
heed unto your selves, and to the whole flock, whereof the holy ghost has
made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he has purchased with
his own blood. The bishop of Rome therefore is deceived, who by the Lords
words spoken unto Peter, thinks that full power is given unto him over all in
the church. Let the Apostle Peter him self be heard, talking with his fellow
^lders, and as it were opening those words of the Lord spoken unto him, The
elders that are among you, says he, I beseech which am also an elder, and 1.
Pet. 5.
a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that
shall be revealed. Feed the flock of God, which depends upon you, caring
for it not by constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind. Not as though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be
ensamples to the flock.

Peter speaks not of any Empire and Lordship, yea, by express words The
office of a pastor is not a Lordly dignity.
he forbiddes Lordly dignity. For even as he is appointed of the Lord a
minister and an elder, not a Prince and a Pope: so also he appointed no Princes
in the Church, but ministers and Elders, who with the word of Christ should
feed Christ's flock, and that willingly and lawfully, al wicked devises at
once set apart. Hereto belongs the whole 34. chapter of Ezechiel, which a
little before we alleged. But had not the heart been hardened, and the eyes
blinded of the bishop of Rome and his, they should long ago have seen, that
they could in no part nor by no means have been numbered amongst the
shepeheardes of the Church, and disciples of Peter. They would at least have
marked that sentence of their own Gregory, which sentence he recites unto
Maurice the Emperor, almost in these words.

I affirm boldly, that who so ever he be that calls him self the
universal Priest, is a forerunner of Antichriste. And anon after, But for as
much as the truth it self says, Every one that exalts him self, shall
be brought low, thereby I know, that every puffing up is so much the
sooner broken, how much the greater it is swollen. These are his sayings.

Last of all, the estate of Christ and the Church, is shadowed out by the The
Church is the spouse of Christ. John. 3.
similitude of marriage, between the husband and the wife. For Christ is
called the husband of the Church: and the Church is called the spouse of
Christ. Saint John says to his disciples, Ye your selves are my John. 3.
witnesses that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him.
He that has the bride, is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom,
which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly, because of the bridegromes
voice. This my joy therefore is fulfilled. He must increase, but I must
decrease. And in the Prophets, this Allegory is very Ezech. 16.
common.

In a certain place is feigned a damsel despised and polluted to lie in her
filthiness, and a certain noble man comes by, who plucking her out of the
mire, and making her clean from her filthiness, and also sumptuously
apparelling her, chose her unto his wife. And albeit this Allegory declares
that heavenly benefit which GOD showed unto his people being in bondage in
Egypt, by the wonderful deliverance and adopting them into his peculiar
people: who notwithstanding, sees not that all mankind from his first
original, is defiled with sin and wickedness, and sticks fast in the mire
of hell? who knows not that the son of GOD came down from heaven, and
washed all mankind in his blood, and having purged her, has joined to him
self a glorious Church, having neither spot nor wrinckle, nor any such
thing? Surely by marriage is made a mutual participation in common between
those that are contracted of all their goods, and as it were a certain
knitting together into one body, not to be dissolved. Therefore when Christ
took upon him our flesh, both Ephe. 5.
he became ours in all things, and we also are members of the same body, of
his flesh, and of his bones. In us there is infirmity, sin, and death: the
same things has our husband also taken unto himself, that he might make them
hurtlesse unto us. In Christ our husband is justification, sanctification,
and life, the same things does he communicate unto us his spouse, that in him
we might be just and holy, and might live through him.

Of that lawful joining together of the Lord and the Church, are borne The
Church or Mother begets Children.
lawful children unto God. Whereupon the Church is called a mother, and a
free woman, that is to say, a matrone and a mistress. For the Apostle Paul
says, Jerusalem which is above is free: which is the mother Gala. 4.
of us all. For even as through the joining of man and woman together by
propagation of seed, are borne children: so Christ has coupled the Church
unto him self, wherein he has left the seed of his word. By the word, our
mother the Church begets children (whereof before I admonished you when I
spoke of the original of the Church) that is to say, whiles she reteyning the
seed of the word, by the preaching of the word, does fashion and nourishe us
in her womb, and after brings us forth into light, whom afterward she
^. Cor. 3. Ephe. 4.
nourishes with milk, and brings up with stronger meat, until we grow
up into a perfect man. But even as without a husband, without true faith
plighted, and without seed, there is no other: even so the Church without
Christ, without true faith and the seed of Gods word, is not that our mother,
that is a free woman, and our mistress. We have by these things by the way
learned, why the Church of God is called a mother. The same notwithstanding is
also called a virgin. For of this holy mother the Church, the Lord before
all The Church a a virgin.
things requires faith and integrity. For the Apostle Paul says, I have
coupled you to one man, to present 2. Cor. 11.
you a chaste virgin unto Christ. Therefore it is the part of ye spouse to
bring unto her husband for her dowry her virginity, and to keep the same
undefiled. But what manner of virginity is that? sincere faith in Christ,
which wholly or with all her mind cleaves for ever unto one: which comes
to pass when we give ear only to our spouse, and love none but him alone, to
be short, when we persevere in the simplicity of the Gospel.

For it follows in the words of the Apostle, But I fear lest it come to
pass, that even as the serpent deceived Eve with his subtlety, so your minds
should be corrupt from the simplicity that is in Christ. That simplicity
acknowledges Christ to be the means of salvation, the recovery of life and
all heavenly treasures: without whom there is no salvation nor no good thing.

But who will call her a chaste matrone, who gives ear to bawdes, and sets
her heart also upon the love of othe^rs, neither contenteth her self with
her husband only? will not all men cry out that she is a naughtipack, and an
adultresse, lying with others, and bringing forth children Adultery and
Fornication.
of strange seed? And in the holy Scriptures spiritual adultery and
fornication is much spoken of. All the sermons of the Prophets are full of
such Allegories. They call those men or Churches adulterers, whoremongers, and
fornicatours, which receive strange seed, that is to say, doctrine differing
from the word of god. For such as they, going a whoreing from God, cleave not
unto God only, they love not alone him with all their heart, they do not
worship, serve, and call upon him only, yea rather, they choose unto them
selves others, whom they may worship and call upon, either instead of God, or
together with God. Hereunto perteyneth a good part of the fifth chapter of
Jeremy, and all the second chapter of Osee. Amongst other things the Lord
says, I will not have compassion upon her children, because they are children
of fornications, for their mother has played the harlot, for she has said, I
will go after my lovers. etc. Since these things are thus brethren, there The
Church of Rome is not the holy mother church.
is no cause why any man should reverence the Church of Rome, decking her self
with the title and beauty of the holy mother the church. For she is not the
holy mother church, she is not an uncorrupted matrone and virgin. For where
is the husband, who is the only husband of this chaste matrone? where is the
faith and integrity kept with her husband? has she not defiled her self with
strange seed? has not she received and taught a new and strange doctrine
from the word of God? and by that means, begets many children, not to
Christ, but to antichrist? Saint John beautifying this church with her apt
title, calls her Great Babylon, the mother of whoredoms and abominations of
the earth: and a woman drunken Apoc. 17.
with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus
Christ. Our holy mother ye church is an undefiled virgin, hearing only the
voice or doctrine of her only well-beloved husband, placing all the means of
life and salvation in him alone, and depending only upon him in all things.
With many other Allegories does the Scripture paint out the mystery of Christ
and the Church: but thereof it suffices to have spoken thus much. The Lord
Jesus, the true and only shepherd of his Church, bring hoame again lovingly
the wandering sheep into his fould, and being gathered together, in his
Church, preserve the^ for ever. Amen.

Of the ministry, and the ministers of Gods word, wherefore, and for what
end they are instituted of God. That the orders given by Christ unto the
church, in times past were equal. Whence and how the prerogative of ministers
sprang, and of the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome.
The third Sermon.
THE exposition touching the Church of God shall be trulyer understood,
(brethren) by those things which remain to be spoken out of the word of the
Lord, concerning the ministry, and ministers of the Church. For I said, the
Church of God is builded and preserved by the word of God, and that through
ministers appointed for that purpose by the Lord, so that now it follows,
to speak of the ministers of the Church, and of their ministry, that is, of
that order, wherewith God governs his church.

And truly the Ecclesiastical ministry is extended, both to stir up, and
also to maintain public prayers, and the administration of the sacraments,
and especially it is occupied in preaching of the word of God. Of the two
former, I will speak in place and time convenient. Of the ministry of the
word, I will entreat at this present. In consideration whereof, first it is
expedient to view, wherefore God in instructing men, uses the aid or
ministry of men, and what men perfect or work in the ministry it self,
and what God. He verily for his exceeding goodness and mercy toward us,
coueteth Where^^re God (...) the (...) ^f men in (...) ^is Chur^^e.
to pour him self wholly into us (which I think good to repeat often, that it
may be the deeper rooted in our hearts, and that we also may bethink our
selves what we owe unto God) that we may both be strengthened and blessed in
him, and may perfectly understand his will to vswarde, and finally our duty,
whereby we be bound unto him. As he therefore furthereth our salvation very
diligently in all things, so least there should be any thing wanting to true
doctrine, he him self comes forth to instruct men. But such is our
weakness and corruption through sin, we can not abide the meeting of his
eternal and wonderful majesty. Which is apparent by much communication of
God had with our fathers, but especially at his meting with the whole Church
of Israel in mount Sina.

For when he came down on the mount, not without glory and heavenly majesty,
and uttered with his own mouth, a brief sum of his whole religion, and of
all the laws, (which sum we call the decalogue or ten commandments) the
people being astonnyed with his divine majesty, said unto Moses, Talk thou
with us, and we will hear: but let Exodus 19. and. 20.
not God talk with us least we dye. And God receiving this offer, said, Deuteronomy.
5.
I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken
unto thee: they have well said all that they have spoken. Oh that there were
such a heart in them, that they would fear me. etc. In so much that this manner
of teaching by men, which men them selves have chosen for them selves, God
will have to be perpetual, and never to be broken: so as when he sent his
son into the world, he clothed him with flesh, that he might after that
manner speak unto us by him.

God in deed might by the secret By the ministry of the word, God works
salvation in his Church.
illumination of his spirit, without man's ministry (as his power is tied to
no creature) regenerate the whole world, and govern the church it self: but
as he despises not his creatures, nor destroys the work of his own hands,
and does all things in order: even so from the first beginning he forthwith
spoke to the world by patriarchs, then by Prophets, afterward by Apostles,
neither at this day cease he, to give unto the world doctors and pastors,
So that it becomes us, not to tempt God, that is, not to look for a secret
inspiration with the heretics Enthusiastae, but to acknowledge a just order,
and that God him self speaks unto us by men, of whom he would have us to
learn religion. The Eunuch of Candace, Queen of Aethiopia, did read the holy
Scriptures, and the Lord could have taught Acts. 8
him by secret inspiration the mystery of faith, but he gives him Philip to
be a teacher and an interpreter.

Likewise, Paul the doctor of the Gentiles, taken up into the third Gala.
1.
heaven, and instructed by Christ him self, not by men, of all the principles
of our religion, is nevertheless referred over unto a man called Ananias. The
Angel of God is sent to Cornelius captain of the Italian band being Acts. 10.
at Caesarea, which might have instructed him in all points of true religion,
but he wills him to call for Peter the Apostle, He (says the Angel) will
tell thee what thou must do. Acts. 9.
For this cause ministers are called Saviors: they are said to convert men:
their word is called, not the word of man, but the word of God: he which
despises them, seems to despise God him self. It is also said, that they
them selves do bind and loose, and retain and forgive sins. For Abdias the
Prophet says, that Saviors shall ascend into the mount Sion, which many
interpret of the Apostles, Paul pleading before king Agrippa, and rehearsing
the words Acts. 26.
of God whic^^ came unto him in a vision, says, ^ send thee unto the Gentiles
to open their eyes, that they may be turned from darkness to light. etc. And
Gabriel the Archangel said before that speaking of John, He shall go before
the Lord with Luke. 1.
the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just men. Moreover, the
Apostle to the Thessal, We thank 1 Thessalonians. 2.
God (says he) because when ye had received of us the word of the preaching
of God, ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is in deed the word
of God, which works also in you that believe. Again, He therefore that
despises these things, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
despises not man, but God, who has even given you his holy spirit. For the
Lord says in the Gospel. Luke. 10.
He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you, despises me. And
again, What so ever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: Matthew.
16.
and what so ever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. And
again, Whose sins so ever ye remit, they are remitted unto the^, John. 20.
and whose sins so ever you do retain they are retained.

But some wresting these places of the holy scripture against the natural Let
every thing be given to him that it belongs: I mean both to God and the
minister.
sense, do give the ministers an equal power in a manner with Christ, and that
which only pertains unto him they communicate also unto them. But they say,
that by such means the ministry must be set out, lest it wax vile and of no
estimation among profane men. Othersome again so speak of the inward
drawing of the spirit, that they seem as it were to make superfluous, or to
take clean away the outward ministry, and to attribute nothing at all unto
it. Therefore the ministry must be limited with his bounds, least it be
drawn hither and thither, with the affections and lusts of men, and either
too much or too little be attributed unto it. Let the ministry in deed be
beautified, and kept in authority, but let it be done without the dishonouring
of God. Neither in deed becomes it us, under the pretense of the ministry,
to attribute that to man's labor, which is only Gods office, on whom all men
ought to depend, and unto whom, as the only welspring and giver of all
goodness, they ought to have respect. Therefore, the faithful ministers of the
Lord Jesus ought only to have regard hereunto, that they may keep the glory
and authority of Christ unblemished, and his priesthood sound unto him self
in every point. For the Lord Jesus him self sitting at the right hand of
the father, in the true taber^acle, which God pight and not man, remains a
priest, yea, the only high priest of his church for ever, executing as yet all
the duties of a priest in the Church. For he as the only teacher and master
in the Church, teaches his disciples, that is, the Church or congregation of
the faithful: induing them with the holy ghost, regenerating and drawing them,
sanctifying and making them free from their sins. Which thing the scripture
in every place plainly teaches. This unto the (...) of (...) minis^^rie
(...) the (...) of (...) Cor. (...).
glory, this power, he has given unto none, neither does any minister, unless
he be blinded with devilish pride, take that unto him self, as though he did
work those works that are proper unto Christ, either for Christ, or in
Christ's stead, or together with Christ. The Apostles being Christ his most
faithful ministers and most chosen instruments of God, did not give the holy
ghost, did not draw men's hearts, did not inwardly anoint men's minds, did not
regenerate souls, they them selves did not deliver from sin, death, the
devil, and hell. For all these things be the works of God, which he has not
communicated to any. Wherefore the most holy Baptist in plain words, denied
that he was Christ, he denied that he him self baptized with the holy Ghost,
I (says he) baptize with water, but he baptiseth with the holy Ghost. I am
John. 1.
the voice of a crier in the wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord. And Paul
pleading his cause before Agrippa, wishes of God, that king Agrippa were such
a one as Paul him Acts. 26.
self was, except his bonds. But such a wish had not needed, if he him self
could draw, sanctify, and absolve. There are infinite other of this kind to
be seen in the scriptures.

Yet nevertheless, the ministry The minnisterie is not appointed in vain.
of ye church is not needles. The kings counselors, and officers, have not
equal power with the king, neither are they kings with the king, or for the
king, but for all that their service is not in vain. Therefore that thing
which Christ the son of God, who is the greatest, the best, and the chief
high priest of his Church, works in his catholic church inwardly and in
their minds, as the only searcher of of the hearts, the very same outwardly
he declares and testifies by his ministers, whom the Scripture for that
cause calls witnesses, ambassadors, or messingers. You, says the Lord to
his Apostles, shall bear witness, John. 15. Acts. 1.
because ye have been with me from the beginning. And Paul says, I 1. Tim. 1.
am ordained a precher and an apostle, and a teacher of the gentiles. Therefore
the same apostle in another place calls the same Gospel, both a testimony
and preaching of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Ihon the Apostle affirms, that
he was banished into the Isle of Pathmos, For the word of Apoc. 1.
God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ. And therefore when ministers
bear witness of the Son of God, and out of his word promise life
everlasting, their word is not called man's word, but the word of God, and they
are said to save, and to release from sin. For they are the true messingers
and harroldes of the king, who is the deliverer, who has sent them to publishe
remission of sins: whereupon also they attribute all the means of life
salvation, and delivery, to the only deliverer Christ. Paul in an other
place, calls ministers Fellow laborers with God: and afterward again,
Disopsers of the secrets of God. For the salvation 1. Cor. 3. 4.
which the son of God has only wrought, and which he also only gives,
the ministers preach or dispose, and so they are fellow laborers. The same
Apostle out of the doctrine of the Gospel, which resembles the teacher in the
Church, to one that sows Matthew. 13.
seed, compares the ministers to gardeners, and planters of trees, to whom he
commits the outward manuring, reserving the inward working to Christ our
Lord, saying: Who is Paul then? and who is Apollos? but ministers by whom ye
1. Cor. 3.
believed, and as the Lord gave to every man? I have planted, Apollos
watered, but god gave the increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase. With which
testimony of the Scripture, Augustine being instructed, learned so to speak
and write of the ministry of the Church, as nothing should be diminished
from the glory of God, which inwardly moves and teaches us, and yet in the
mean time, the office of the ministry should not be taken away, or despised
as unprofitable. For in his Epistle Ad Circenses, which in order is accounted
the 130. speaking of the secret drawing of God, and the outward ministry of
men, These are not (says he) our works, but Gods, I would not at al
attribute these things unto man's working, no, not if when we were with you,
so great a conversion of the multitude, through our speaking and exhortations
should happen. That thing he works and brings to pass, who by his
ministers outwardly warns by tokens or signs of things, but by the things
them selves, he inwardly teaches by him self. Thus far he. But least it
might seem to any man, that he spoke too briefly and sparingly, and not
worthily enoughe of the ministry of the Church, even he him self immediately
adds, and says, Neither therefore ought we to be more flow to come unto you,
because whatsoever is done praise worthy among you, comes not of us, but of
him which alone does wonderful things. For we ought more carefully to run
to behold the works of God, than our own works. Because even we our selves,
if we have any goodness in us, we are his work and not man's. Therefore the
Apostle said, Neither is he that pla^teth any thing, nor he that waters, but
God that gives the increase.

The same writer speaking of the very same thing, in his 26. treatise upon
John, All the men of that kingdom (says he) shall be such as are taught of
God, they shall not hear by men: and though they hear by men, yet that which
they understand is inwardly given, it shines inwardly, it is inwardly
revealed. What do men in preaching outwardly? what do I, now when I speak?
make you to hear a noise of words with your ears: But unless he reveal it,
which it within, what say I? or what speak I? The outward workman is the
pla^ter of the tree, and the inward is the creator. He that planteth, and
he that waters, works outwardly: that do we. But neither is he that
planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase.
This is the meaning of, They shall be all taught of God. Thus far Augustine.

Wherefore when in another place S. Paul says, Ye are the Epistle of Christ,
ministered by us, written not ^. Cor. 3.
with ynke, but with the spirit of the living God, not in stony tables, but in
fleshie tables of the heart, we must diligently put a difference between the
work of the spirit, and the work of man or of the minister. The minister does
not take on him the honor of God, and the work of the spirit, but his own
work, that is to say, the ministry. Paul preaches, and writes with ynke,
but the spirit of God moves the heart, and with his grace or annoynting, he
writes in the very heart: so he works together with GOD, Paul working his
proper work, and the spirit working his work. The Apostles are preachers
and ministers of the Gospel, not of the letter, but of the spirit: not that
they give the holy Ghost, but because they are preachers of the Gospel, that
is, of that which gives the spirit of Christ, yea, which pours it into the
believers: but they are not preachers of the letter of the law, which does not
give grace, and remission of sins, but works wrath, and brings sin to
light. Touching the keys and the power of the keys, there will be elsewhere a
more fit place to speak. And moreover, it seems that here is a meet place,
for those things which I have disputed of, in the first sermon of this Decade,
touching the power and ministry of the Church.

Again, whereas the Lord uses in teaching his Church, man's help, and us as
laborers together, in finishing the salvation of mankind, he shows most
evidently how greatly he loves us, and how much he esteems of us, who
has laid up so great a treasure in earthen vessels, and even in us our
selves, works what so ever is most excellent, and overcomes all the high
excellency of the world. Whereby we learn again to attribute all the glory
unto Christ, Paul again teaching us and saying, We preach not our selves, but
Jesus Christ the Lord, and our 2. Cor. 4.
selves your servant for Jesus sake. For it is God that commanded the light
to shine out of darkness, who has shined in our hearts, for to give the light
of knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. But we have
this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power, may be of
God, and not of us. We are afflicted on every side, yet are we not in
distress, etc.

Moreover, all the members of the Ecclesiastical body, are wonderfully glued
together by the Ecclesiastical ministry. For this chiefly helps to make
concord, and continue unity, because we want mutual instruction, and unto
every Church is one peculiar pastor appointed as a governor, as it were
some faithful householder, governing, and keeping in order his whole family.
Truly it can not be denied, that in time past that most exquisite order of
the tabernacle, and temple, and the tribe of Levy consecrated to the
priesthood, were to this end ordained of God: which as soon as that ungodly
king Jeroboam through wicked presumption forsook, he rent the kingdom in
pieces, and at the length utterly ouerthrewe both his own house and the whole
kingdom. S. Paul also speaking of the ends of the holy ministry instituted
The end of the ministry.
of God, does not forget the unity of the Ecclesiastical body: whereunto also
he joins other notable good things. If any man desire his words, they are
these, He instituted Ephe. 4.
ministers, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, till we all meet
together in the unity of faith: and knowledge of the son of god unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age, of the fullness of Christ: that
we henceforth be no more children, wavering and carried about with every wind
of doctrine, by the deceit of men, and with eraftinesse, whereby they lay in
wait to deceive. But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow
up into him, which is the head, that is Christ. etc.

These ends of the Ecclesiastical ministry are manifest in the preaching of
the word of God. GOD has instituted a ministry in the Church, that all the
members may be brought into the unity of the body, and that they may be
subject and cleave to Christ their head, that thereby we may grow to be of
full age, and become perfect men, that we be not always children, and that we
lie not open to the deceites and bewitchings of all heretics, but being
joined together in true faith and charity, let us hold fast the pure and
simple truth of Christ, and serving Christ unfeignedly in this world, we may
after death reign with him in heaven.

Out of these things let us also derive this, that the Ecclesiastical
ministry, though it be executed by men, yet is it not of man, that is to The
beginning of the ministry, and the worthiness thereof.
say, invented by man. For the beginning thereof is from heaven, and the
author or institutour thereof is God him self, and therefore the worthiness
of it does greatly excel.

The first preacher in paradise was God him self, yea, the son of God him
self, who by the ministry of the holy ghost always spoke to the Fathers,
even as afterward, being incarnate, he was given of the father to be a
master and teacher to the whole world. He preached unto our parents, Adam
and Eve, remission of sins, and repentance. He ordeyued and revealed a
sacrifice insteade of a sacrament, wherein might be represented and ratified
unto them y^ price of the redemption promised by ye seed in time couenient to
be paid, etc. There succeeded in ye ministry, Ada^ with his sons and
nephues, Seth, Enos, Enoch, No^, Sem, Abraham, with their sons and nephues,
even unto Moses, in whose time while he governed the Church: and after him,
there are given Prophets and Priests, even unto the time of John Baptist, and
Jesus the promised seed, I mean Christ, our king and high Priest. He in
likewise sent into the world his disciples, that is to say, the Apostles, who
ordained for their successors, Bishops and Doctors. Of which thing I have
spoken more largely in an other place. God him self therefore is heard in the
voice or doctrine of his ministers. So that we are commanded to give ear to
the ministers, preaching the Gospel, as to the very Angels of God, yea, as to
the Lord him self. For this cause Paul prayseth the Galathians, saying, Gala.
4.
Ye despised not, neither abhorred my trial which was in the flesh, but
received me as an angel of God, yea, as Christ Jesus.

Whereupon S. Augustine also in his third treatise upon John, Let us hear
(says he) the Gospel, as if the How mi^isters are to be ^earde.
Lord were present, and let us not say, Oh happy are they who could hear him:
because there were many of them which saw him, and yet consented to kill him,
and many among us who have not seen, and yet believed. For that also which
sounded precious out of the mouth of the Lord, is both written for our sakes,
and kept for us, and is also read for our sakes, and for our posterities sake
shall be read unto the end of the world. The Lord is above, yea, and the Lord
which is the truth, is here also. For the body of the Lord wherewith he rose,
may be in one place, but his truth is spread abroad every where. Let us
therefore hear the Lord, and that also which he shall give us of his words.
Thus much he. The Lord our high priest speaks unto us, even at this day, by
the ministers preaching his word. And we have all things what so ever the Lord
spoke by the patriarchs, prophets, and apostles, set out in the scriptures,
which the ministers of the church do read, and declare Romans 15. Heb. 3.
before us. Who therefore hereafter can despise the ministry, and the
faithful ministers of Christ, especially since our Lord and savior took
upon him the ministry, and was made the Apostle and minister of the church
of the Jews. What and if those first ministers were such, as no age, in any
doctrine of religion, in holiness and excellency, had their fellows, much
less their betters? At this day, in so much as they are the last times,
wherein scoffers and Epicures have their full range, the ministry of Gods
word is of no value. But if you run over and weigh all the ages, even unto
the beginning of the world, you shall find that the wisest, iustest, and best
men in the whole world had nothing in more reverence than the word of God, and
the prophets, and the holy apostles of God.

But before we proceed any further That the ministry of the word of God
remains in the Church. Iere. 31.
in other things belonging to this matter, we will make answer to some, which
eue^ under the pretense of the holy scriptures, endeavor to pervert the
ministry of the word. For they allege this text of Jeremy, No man shall
teach his neighbor, for all shall know me. As we deny not that Jeremy has so
written, so we say, by that kind of speech, and figurative saying, that he
meant nothing else, tha^ that the knowledge of God, and heavenly things should
be very common in the whole world. Which Joel also foretold would come to
pass, and which Peter alleges in the Acts, 2. chapter. In the mean while,
those two Prophets, as also all other very often, do make mention of the
teachers of the Church, whom the Lord should send unto his people: which
they would not have done, if they had understood, that all preachers should
be clean taken away. Whereas other object, that al have the office of teaching
committed How all may teach
alike unto them, to wit, parents to teach their children, and every one to
admonish his neighbor: therefore that there is no need of the ministry of
the word of God in the church, it is sophistical. For all of us can and ought
privately, to teach and admonish our children and our neighbors: but
therefore the public ministry of the word of God is not superfluous.

For the same God which commanded parents, and us all, that they should
instruct their children Deuteronomy. 6.
in godliness, and that every one of us also should teach, and admonish our
neighbors, has given public ministers unto the Church. It is their office
to teach openly or publicly in the Church, neither is this permitted to
whom so ever will, but only to them that be lawfully ordained: least happily
if other teach, they should not go forward in the right pathe. For then it
were lawefull for every one, being inspired with the spirit of God, at what
time and place so ever both soberly to gainesay, and to affirm the truth.
Therefore the public ministry of the word remains nevertheless, and
that perpetually in the Church.

Thus much have we spoken in general, of the ministry and the ministers of
the word of God. Now that which remains of this matter, we will discuss by
their kinds and parts, and first we will show what orders, or what offices,
the Lord has instituted from ye beginning, or who^ he has put in authority
in the holy ministry of the church: then what manner men, and after what
sort it is meet for us to ordeine ministers. Last of all, what manner of
office it is that they have that are ordained in the church. And that we be not
troublesome unto you, beginning a long discourse from the Patriarchs, we will
begin at our Lord Christ him self, What orders the Lord has instituted in
the Church.
of whom Paul the Apostle speaking, He that descended (says he) is even the
same which ascended up far above all heavens, to fulfill all things. And he
gave some Apostls and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Doctors, to the gathering together of the Saints into the work of
ministration, into the edifying of the body of Christ. And so forth, as is
read in the 4. chapter to the Ephesians. Therefore our Lord ordained Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, by whose labor he meant to
build, preserve, and govern the Church.

Let us now see, what the scripture teaches us of them. Apostle is Apostles.
a new name given of the Lord him self, to those twelve, which he chose
peculiarly, and ordained teachers and masters to (all) nations. For thus we
read in the 6. of Luke. The Lord called his disciples, and of them he chose
Luke. 6.
twelve, whom also he called Apostles. For Apostle signifies one that is
sent, a messinger, ambassador, or orator.

For in the Gospel after Saint John, we read, The Apostle (or messinger)
John. 13.
is not greater than he that sent him. And truly, there is very often mention
made of sending, in the Prophets and in the old Testament: from whence it
seems the Lord borrowed that name.

We read of no certain bounds appointed to the Apostles. For the Lord says
in the Gospel, Go ye into the whole world, and preach Mark. 16.
the Gospel to all creatures. These are the master builders of the first
Church of God, from whom among ancient writers, they took the name of
Apostolic Churches, those I mean, which the Apostles first founded: as was
the Church at Antioch, Ephesus, Corinthe, and many other, mentioned in the Acts
of the apostles.

The name of a Minister and Prophet is exceeding large. Whereof is Prophets.
spoken in an other place. Prophets in this place are they, which excel in
singular revelation, and by whom the Lord foretells, things that shall
come to the Church: such a one as we read Agabus was, which both foretold to
S. Paul, the famine which was to come, and his bonds. Act. 11. 21.


Wise and godly men, endued with a singular gift of interpreting the
scripture, in times past were called Prophets: as it may appear by the
words of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 14. chapter. An Evangelist is a preacher of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, Evangelists.
sent with Apostolic authority. Such we read were Philip and Timothy.
etc. Pastors watch over Pastors.
the Lords flock, having care of the Lords people, feeding the Church with
the word of truth, and keeping the woolues from the sheepefouldes. The chief
of these is that good shepehearde Christ, which says unto Peter, John. 10.
and. 21.
Feed my sheep. Whereby he also joins him self to shepeheards. Doctors or
Teachers have their names of teaching. Neither do I Doctors or Teachers.
see what they differ from shepherds, but that they did only teach, and in
the mean while were not burdened with the care that belongs to the Pastor:
of which sort, in a manner are the interpreters of scriptures and governors
of Christian schools.

There are also found other names of the overseers of the Church in the
scriptures. The Apostle Paul says unto the shepeheards gathered together
Bishops. Acts. 20.
in the counsel at Miletum, Take heed therefore unto your selves and to all
the flock, over the which the holy ghost has made you overseers, to feed
the Church of God. But bishops are called Superintendents, seers, keepers,
watchme^, and rulers. The people of Athens called them whom they sent to their
tributarie cities, subject unto them, diligently to see and mark what they
did in every city, (...), and (...), that is to say, spies and watchmen. The
Apostles called bishops, watchmen, and keepers of the Lords flock, and the
stewardes of Christ, or disposers of the secrets of God in the Church. And
Presbyter, an Elder, has his name Elders.
of age and ancient years. In times past, the care of the common wealth was
committed unto the elders, as to those that were exercised with manifold
experience, and long use of things. For governors of cities are both called
Seniors and Senators. And as commonweals have their Senators: so has the
church her elders, as it appears in the Acts. 14. 15. 20. and 21. chap. It
seems that the ordeining of elders, came into the church, out of the
synagogue. For thus we read in the book of Numbers, Gather unto Nume. 11.
me (says he) three score and ten men of the elders of Israel, whom thou
know to be the elders of the people, and officers over them, and I will take
of the spirit which is upon thee and put upon them, and they shall bear the
burden of the people, with thee, least thou be constrained to bear it alone.
Wherefore the elders in the church of Christ, are either bishops, or
otherwise prudent and learned men, added to bishops, that they may the more
easily bear the burden laid upon them, and that the church of God may the
better and more conveniently be governed.

For Paul says, The elders that rule well, let them be counted worthy of
double honor, most specially 1. Tim. 6.
they which labor in the word, and doctrine. There were therefore certain
other, in the Ecclesiastical function, who albeit they did not teach by and
by, as did the bishops, yet were they present with them that taught in all all
businesses. Perhaps they are called of the same Apostle elsewhere, 1. Cor. 12.
Governors, that is is to say, which are set in authority concerning
discipline, and other affairs of the church.

And because we are come thus far in this present treatise, we will also
declare other names of offices in the church. There is much speech in the
scriptures of Deacons, and among Deacons.
Ecclesiastical writers, of Priests. In the primitive Church the care of the
poor was committed to Deacons: as it is plainly gathered out of the sixth
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. There are also laws to be seen, which
are prescribed unto them by the Apostle, in the first to Timothy the third
chapter. The office of Deacons was separated from the function of Pastors: and
therefore we do not reckon them in the order of Pastors. The ancient fathers
referred them to the ministry, but not to the Priesthood.

We read also, that women not Women Deacons.
wedded, but widows ministered in the primitive church. And among other Phebe
of the church of Cenc^ea Romans 16.
highly praised of the Apostle, is very famous. But he forbids women 1.
Cor. 14.
to teach in the church, and to take upon them public offices. How therefore,
1. Tim. 2.
or in what thing did women minister in the church? undoubtedly, they
ministered unto the poor in duties apperteyning to women. They ministered unto
the sick, and with Martha Christ's hostess, they did with great care and
diligence chearish the members of Christ: For what other offices could they
have?

Moreover, the name of Priest seems Priests
to be brought into the church, out of the synagogue. For otherwise ye shall
not find in the new Testament, the ministers of the word of GOD, and of
churches to be called priests, but after that sort, that all Christians are
called priests by the 1. Pet. 2.
Apostle Peter. But it appears that the ministers of the new Testament for a
certain likeness which they have with the ministers of the old Testament,
of ecclesiastical writers are called Priests. For as they did their service
in the tabernacle: so these also, after their manner, and their fashion,
minister to the church of God. For otherwise the Latin word is derived of
holy things: and signifies a minister of holy things, a man, I say, dedicated
and consecrated unto God to do holy things. And holy things are not only
sacrifices, but what things so ever come under the name of religion, from
which we dee not exclude the laws them selves, and holy doctrine.

In the old testament we read that 2. Sam. 8.
David's sons were called priests, not that they were ministers of holy
things, (for it was not lawful for the^ which came of the tribe of Judah to
serve in the tabernacle: but only to the Levites) but because, they living
under the government and discipline of priests, did learn good sciences and
holy divinity.

Here it seems it must not be dissembled, that those names which we There is
an interchanging between those names.
have entreated of, are in the Scriptures one used for an other. For Peter the
Apostle of Christ our Lord calls him self an Elder. And in the Acts of the
Apostles, he calls the Apostleship, a Byshopricke. For Saint Paul also
calling the Elders together at Miletum, and talking with them, he calls them
Bishops.

And in his Epistle unto Titus, he commands to ordeine Elders, town by
town, whom immediately after he calls Bishops. And that they also are
called both Doctors and Pastors, there is none so gross headed to deny.

Now by all these things we think it is manifest to all men, what orders What
manner of order remains in the church.
the Lord him self ordained from the beginning, and whom he has consecrated
to the holy ministry of the Church, to govern his own church. He laid the
foundation of the church at the beginning, by Apostles, Evangelists, and
Prophets: he enlarged and mainteyned the same, by Pastors and Doctors. To
these Elders and Deacons were helpers: The Deacons, in seeing to the poor, and
the Elders in doctrine, in discipline, and in governing, and susteyning other
weightier affairs of the Church. Nevertheless, it appears that the order
of the Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets, was ordained at the beginning by
the Lord unto his Church, for a time, according to the matter, persons, and
places. For many ages since, and immediately after, the foundation of Christ's
kingdom in earth, the Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets ceased, and there
came, in their place, Bishops, Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, which order has
continued most steadfastly in the Church: that now we can not doubt, that the
order of the Church is perfect, and the government absolute, if at this day
also there remain in the Church of God, bishops or pastors, doctors also, or
Elders. Yet we deny not, that after the death of the Apostles, there were
oftentimes Apostles raised up of GOD, which might preach the Gospel to
barbarous and ungodly nations. We confess also, that God even at this day is
able to raise up Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, whose labor he may use
to work the salvation of mankind. For we acknowledge, that holy and faithful
men, which first preach the truth of the Gospel to any unbelieving people,
may be called Apostles, and Evangelists. We acknowledge y^ men inspired with
singular grace of the spirit, which foresee and foreshew things to come, and be
excellent interpreters of the scriptures, or Divines illuminated, may be called
Prophets, as we have showed elsewhere more at large. But in the order of
bishops and elders, from the Equali^ic between Bishops and Elders.
beginning, there was singular humility, charity, and concord, no contention
or strife for prerogative, or titles or dignity. For all acknowledged
themselves to be the ministers of one master, coequall in all things,
touching office or charge. He made them unequal, not in office, but in gifts,
by the excellency of gifts. Yet they that had obtained the excellenter gifts,
did not despise the meaner sort, neither did they envy them for their gifts.
S. Paul says, Let a man so 1. Cor. 4.
esteem of us as the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of
God.

The same Paul in more than one place, caleth the preaching of ye gospel, ye
ministry. For that took deep root in the ancient bishops hearts, which the
Lord when his disciples striued for dignity, and (as they say) for the
maioritie, that is, which of them should be the greatest, setting a child in
the midst of them, said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye turn,
and ^atth. 18.
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Truly the martyr of God Saint Cyprian, standing in the counsel of the bishops
at Carthage, wisely said: Neither has any of us, appointed him self to be a
bishop of bishops, or by tyrannous fear compelled his fellows in office to
necessity of obeying: since every bishop has according to the license and
liberty of his power, his own free choice, as if he might not be judged of
an other, since neither he him self can judge an other: but let us all look
for the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who only and alone has power, both
to prefer us in the government of his Church, and to give sentence of our
doing. Thus far he.

At that time therefore bishops contended not for I know not what primacie
or patrimony of Peter, but that one might excel the other in pureness of
doctrine, and holiness of life, and mutually to help one an other. And then
undoubtedly the affairs of the Church went forward prosperously, in so much,
that though the most puisant princes of the world, should have persecuted the
Church of Christ with fire and sword, yet nevertheless, against all the
assaults of the devil and the world, she had stood immovable, having won
the victory, and had daily been more enlarged and also renoumed. Oh happy had
we been, if this order of Pastors had not been changed, but that that
ancient simplicity of ministers, that faith, humility, and diligence, had
remained uncorrupted!

But in process of time all things When the prerogative of Bishops be ganne
and in what sort.
of ancient soundness, humility, and simplicity vanished away, whiles
somethings are turned vpside down, somethinges either of their own accord
were out of use, or else are taken away by deceit, somethings are added too.
Verily not many ages after the death of the Apostles, there was seen a far
other Hierarchy (or government) of the Church, than was from the beginning,
although those beginninges seem to be more tolerable, than at this day all
of this same order are. Saint Hierome says: In times past churches were
governed, with the common counsel and advise of the elders, afterward it was
decreed, that one of the elders being chosen, should be set over the other,
unto whom the whole care of the church should perteine, and that the seeds of
scismes should be taken away. Thus much he. In every city and country
therefore, he that was most excellent, was placed above the rest. His office
was to be superintendent, and to have the oversight of the ministers, and the
whole flock. He had not (as we understood even now out of Cyprians words)
dominion over his fellows in office or other elders: but as the Consul in the
Senate house was placed to demand and gather together the voices of ye
Senators, and to defend the laws and privileges, and to be careful least
there should arise factions among the Senators: even so no other was the
office of a bishop in the church: in all other things he was but equal with
the other ministers. But had not the arrogancy of the ministers, and ambition
of bishops in the times that followed further increased, we would not speak a
word against them. And S. Hierome affirms, that That preferrment of bishops,
sprange not by Gods ordinance, but by the ordinance of man. These things have
we remembered, says he, to the end we might show that among the old
fathers, bishops and ministers were all one: but by little and little, that the
plants of dissentions might be plucked up, all the care was committed unto
one. Therefore as ministers know that they by the custom of the church, are
subject to him which is set over them: so let bishops know, that rather by
custom, than by the truth of the Lords disposition, they are greater than the
other ministers, and that they ought to govern the churches together in
common, following the example of Moses, who when it was in his power alone to
govern the people of Israel, chose out threescore and ten other, with whom
he might judge the people. Thus he writes in his commentary upon the 3. cap.
of the Epist. of Paul unto Titus.

But the ancient fathers kept not themselves within these bounds. The (...)
and ^^erogatiue of Bishops increased.
There were also ordained Patriarchs at Antioche, Alexandria, Constantinople
and Rome. There are appointed Archbishops or Metropolitanes, that is to ^aye,
such as have government over the bishops, throughout provinces. And to bishops
of cities or inferior bishops, there are added such as were called
Chorepiscopi, (or bishops of the multitude) that is to say, at such time as
the country or region was larger, than that the care and ouersighte of ye
bishop placed over the city would suffice. For these were added as vicars and
suffraganes, who might execute the office of the bishop throughout that part of
the country. But we know that ye functions of suffraganes or vicars general,
in these last times, are of a far other manner in bishops courts and
diocesses. And also under deacons, were placed subdeacons: and when wealth
increased, there were archdeacons also created, that is to say, overseers of
all the goods of the church. They as yet were not mingled with the order of
ministers or bishops, and of those yt taught, but they remained as stewards or
factours of the goods of the church. As neither the monks at the beginning
executed the office of a priest or minister in the church. For they were
counted as laye-men, not as clearkes, and were under the charge of the pastors.
But these unfortunate birds never left soaring, until in these last times,
they have clymed into the topp of the temple, and have set themselves upon
bishops and pastors heads. For monks have been and are both Popes,
archbishops, and bishops, and what are they not? It is rehearsed out of the
Registre of Gregory, that he (who nevertheless was very favorable to the
monks) himself would put him out of the clergy, who being a monk, would
take the degree of an abbat, for as much as the one dignity would hinder the
other.

Clearkes (who are the Lords inheritance, or whose lot the Lord is) in times
past such were called as were Clearkes.
students or professors of divinity, that is to say, the very seed of
pastors of the church, and such as were even as it were consecrated to
succeed in the ministry of the church: that is, such as lived under
government, and were trained up by the doctors and elders, in the study of
the liberal sciences, and holy scriptures. This institution is ancient, not
new, neither inverted by man. For in time past among the old people of the
Jews, they were called Nazarites. And that the most excellent churches have
continually had famous schools, even from the time of ye Apostles, Eusebius
does often witness. But unto those students, the affairs of the church somewhat
increasing, it seems that the charge of opening and shutting the temple, or
church, was committed, and to prepare al things in the church, and further to
read openly before the people, such places of scripture, as the bishop
appointed them. Whereupon perhaps the names of dorekepers, and readers sprang,
which are at this day reckoned amongst ecclesiastical orders. But they which
were more familiarly present with the bishops, and accompanied them, and were
esteemed as those who after the decease of ye bishops might succeed in their
places were called Acoluthi, as if you would say, folowers. For it is a greek
word. And as in time for ye most part all things become worse, even so these
things ye further off from their first institution, ye more filthilie were they
wrested. In some things you shall see nothing left but ye bare name: some things
utterly lost, some things are turned altogether to another use. And here for
witness I alledg Isidorus, Rabanus, Innocentius, Durandus, and other writers of
this kind. They make 2. sorts of ecclesiastical persons, one of dignity,
another of order. Of dignity, as Pope, patriarche, primate, archbishop,
archpriest, archdeacon, and provost. Of order, as the minister or priest, the
deacon etc. But some account 6. orders other some 8. All with one accord do
recko^, dorekeepers, or porters, readers or singers, exorcists, acoluthes,
subdeacous, deaco^s, elders, or priests. Those again they divide into greater
and lesser orders. Among the greater orders, are the priest or elder, the
deacon and the subdeacon. The rest are called ye lesser orders. Of which orders
there remains nothing in a manner beside y^ bare name. The office of
dore-keepers is turned over to the sextens, which they call Holy water clearks.
There are no readers: for that ancient reading is worn out of use. The
Psalmistes or singers, do understand nothing less than that they rehearse or
singe. Touching the exorcists, this they say. Josephus writes yt king Solomon
found out the manner of exorcisme, yt is, of coniuring, whereby unclean spirits
were driven out of a man that was possessed by Eleazar the exorcist, so yt they
durst no more come again. To this office they that are named exorcistes are
called. Of whom it is read in the Gospel, If I through Beelzebub cast out
devils, by whom do your children, (to wit Matthew. 12
your exorcists or coniurers) cast them out? Thus much they say: which I
rehearse to this end, that it may appear to all men, yt these men are the very
same, of whom ye Apostle foretold that 2. Tim. 4
it should come to pass, that they shall not suffer wholesome doctrine, but
shall be turned unto fables. For who knows not, that it is most fabulous, which
is reported of Solomon? Who knows not that the Apostles of the Lord, were not
exorcists, neither used at any time any manner of enchantments or coniurations?
For with a word they cast out unclean spirits, yt is by calling upon and by
ye power of the name of Christ. Those gifts ceased long ago in ye church of
God. Those sons of Scua the priest in the Acts ^ctes. 19.
of ye Apostles were said to be exorcists, whom the evil spirit, though they
called on the names of Jesus and Paul, ran upon, and tare the clothes from
their backs, and so, by Gods appointment, made known unto all men, how much ye
eternal God is delighted with exorcistes. And yet these fellows thrust them
upon us as yet. Touching the Acoluthes or followers, thus they write: hear I
pray you how trimly they reason. The Acoluthes, say they, are waxe-bearers,
because they carry wax candles. For when the Gospel must be read, or mass
is to be said, wax candles are lighted, to signify the joy of the mind. Who
hearing these things, will say that these men do^ unlearnedly handle no
mysteries? Subdeacons and deacons, are no longer prouiders for the poor, but
being made ministers of superstition, they attend on the Popish mass. The
deacons office is to singe the Gospel: the subdeacons, to singe the epistle.
In few words I cannot express, what foolish men do fondly chatter cocerning
these masters. Over these they have set an archdeacon, which is a name of
dignity, and preeminence. Sacrificers, who are also called priests, are
diversely distinguished. For there are regular priests, and secular ^^pishe
^egular ^riestes.
priests. By regular priests they understand monks: whereas they are
nothinglesse, than those they are said to be. Truly they resemble those that of
^ld were called monks in no point of their doings. A great part of them are a
rule and law unto them selves. Of these men some are doctors appointed to the
office of preaching, but yet rather occupied in saying of their hours, and in
singing and saying of masses. And these men sow superstition, and most
obstinately defend it, and most bitterly do persecute true religion. Another
sort and ye greatest part of these monkish priests, do nothing else but singe
in the church, and mumble mass, and that for a very slender price. But you may
sooner number ye Popish Secular priests.
sands of the coast of Libya, than the whole rabble of these, But they are
unprofitable both unto God, and to the church, and also even to themselves, men
utterly unlearned, and slow bellies, and yet in the mean season sworn enemies
to the truth of ye Gospel. Among the secular priests, the chief are canons,
which for the most part are idle persons, given over to voluptuousnes,
gluttons, and in very deed secular, that is to say, worldly. They think they
have gaily discharged their duty, if they make an end of the hours, which
they call canonical, and be present gazers on at ye mass, and if they honor
and beautify with their presence, gods service as they call it. They seem to
be more streit, and not to be secular priests* who say mass both for ye quick
and for ye dead. There are reckoned also in ye number of secular priests,
parish priests, whom they call Plebani, that is priests appointed for ye
people, who only represent some shadow of ye old institution, in this, yt they
preach and administer the Sacraments: which nevertheless you cannot allow,
because they minister them after Popish traditions and not after the doctrine
of the Apostles. And many other things they do by reason of their office,
which godliness by all means does dissallowe. There are added unto these
hirelings, helpers or vicars. There are also joined unto these Sacellani, whom
they call chaplains, of whom there is an exceeding number. These even as the
monkish priests, do account the chief parts of their duty to be saying over
their hours, but especially in massing, as for doctrine they attribute nothing
to it. For of this company, you shall find some, who never in all their life
made one sermon. For the charge of preaching they committ only to their
parish priests, and their vicars, they serve those Gods, to whom their altar
or their chapel is consecrated, etc.

By all which things, even unto blind men it plainly appears, how
shamefully the first institution of ministers or pastors, is corrupted and
turned vpside down. They set over the priests, archpriestes. I have used
Archepriestes.
that word in my preface or epistle, in the beginning of the first Decade: and
I hear that some brethren are offended at it, as though there stuck some
piece of Popish leven still about us, or as though we thought to bring in
again some unworthy dignity into the church. But I would not have those
brethren to fear. With us there are no Popish archpriests: neither understood
I any Popish dignity by that word, but the office of ouerseeinge, which
others call visiting. For they have the charge of all degrees in our country,
in admonishing and correcting: they have no prelacie or superiority, they
reap no rewards thereby, etc.

But we return to our purpose. They derive priests or sacrificers, from the
seventy disciples, whom it Kinds (...) Bishops.
is read in ye Gospel that the Lord did choose: The order of bishops, from
Peter himself, and the residue of the Apostles. And immediately they divide the
order of bishops into three parts, namelye, patriarchs, archbishoppes and
bishops. They account the patriarchs the fathers of princes or highest fathers.
And them also they call Primates.

And Primates, say they, have authority over three archbishops, as a king also
has authority over three dukes. Here I think, Cardinals have their place,
in whom the church of Rome is turned as a gate upon ye hindges. For in the
Decretals of Gregory, De officio Archip. it is thus read: Cardinals have their
name, a Cardine, that is, of the hindg of a gate: for as by the hindg, the gate
is ruled, so by Cardinals, the universal church is governed. Archbishops are,
as it were, the princes of bishops: they are also syrnamed Metropolitanes,
because they have their government in the chiefest cities. In very deed
Metropolis, with the Greeks, is as it were a mother city, from whence
Colonies are deducted, that is, people are sent out to inhabit some new
place. Whereupon he is called the Metropolitan bishop, who governs some
one Province, and has other bishops under him. And these are called both
bishops, chief priests, and presuls. But if you compare all these things,
with that which I said before of the bishops and governors of the primitive
church, you will say, there is very great difference between them. But that
The Pop^ or chiefe^ Bishop.
which they write touching the Pope or chief bishop, is far from the
writings of the Apostles and Eua^gelists, and from the first ordeyning of
ministers, made by our savior Christ. All those bishops, say they, our most
holy Lord the Pope does excel in dignity and power: who is called Pope, that
is, the father of fathers: he is also called universal, because he is chief
of the universal church: and he is also called Apostolical, and the chief
bishop, because he supplieth the room of the chief of the Apostles. For he is
Melchizedec^ whose priesthood other are not to be compared unto: because he is
the head of all bishops, from whom they descend as members from the head: and
of whose power they all do receive, whom he calls to be partakers of his
care and burden, but not to be partakers of the fullness of power. They
therefore define the Pope, to be the supreme head of the church in earth, and
the only universal sheepeheard of the whole world, who cannot err, nether
ought to be judged of any man. For, they say, he is the judge of all men,
having absolute power. For thus says Innocent the 9. Pope, in his third
Quest. Neither of the Emperor, neither of all the Clergy, neither of kings,
nor of the people, ought the judge to be judged. Upon which place he that
wrote the gloss writes thus: A general counsel cannot judge the Pope, As
appears in the Extrauagants in the title of Election. cap. Significasti.
Therefore if the whole world should pronounce sentence in any matter against
the Pope, it seems that we must stand to the Popes judgment. Hereunto
perteine those common grounds of ye clawbacke flattering laweyers of the Popes
Court, very plausible and authentical: That all the laws of the Pope, are to
be received of all men as if they proceeded from the very mouth of Peter. That
the authority of the Pope is greater than the authority of the Saints. That
the Pope is all, and above all. That God and the Pope have one consistory.
Which thing also Hostien. affirms In C. Quanto de Transl. prael. That the
Pope cannot be brought into order by any man, though he be accounted an
heretic. That he has supreme power, neither has he any fellow. That he
has all laws within his breast, That there is a general counsel, where the
Pope is. That he has all laws in his breast. That he has both swords,
whereby he may rightly be called an Emperor, yea, that he is above the
Emperor. That he only can depose the Emperor, and pronounce the sentence of
the Emperor to be of no effect. That he only may spare whom Read Anton. de
Rosellis in his treatise of the power of the Pope and the Emperor.
he will, and may also take away the right of one man and give it to another.
And finally may take away privileges. To be short, they say, he is Lord of
Lords, and has the right of the king of kings over his subjects, yea, and
also has fulness of power over the temporal things in earth. Yea and also the
whole world is the Popes diocese, wherein he is the Ordinary of all men: and
it stands upon the necessity of salvation, that every man be subject to
the bishop of Rome. Hereunto for conclusion, I will add the words of the
Glosser, who says In Ca. Quanto de Transl. Episcopi. Tit. 7. The Pope (says
he) is said to have a heavenly power: and therefore he alters the very nature
of things, by applying the things that are of the substance of one thing, unto
another. And of nothing he can make something: and that sentence which is of
no force, he can make to be of force. Because in those things with him what
he wills his will is in steed of reason. Neither is there any may say unto
him, why do thou so? For he can dispense above the law, and of
unrighteousness make righteousness, correcting and changing laws. For he has
the fulness of power. Thus far he. But who hears these thigs without horror
both of body and mind? Who under stands Dan. 7. 8.
not that ye saying of Daniel is fulfilled: He shall think that he may change
times and laws? Who understands not yt y^ saying of Paul is fulfilled, who
says: I know this, that after Acts. 20.
my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not spareing the flock:
also of your own selves shall me^ arise, speaking peruers things, to draw away
disciples after them. For from bishops, and from them ye advance bishops, came
forth this man of sin, who places himself in ye throne of the lamb, and
challenges those things to him self, which are proper only to the lamb:
of which sort are the supreme government, priesthood, lordship, and full power
in the church. Whereof I have spoken enough in the former sermons. Whom does
it now not move to think that that saying of Paul is fulfilled: The
adversary or enemy of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Christ shall be revealed, and shall be exalted above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped: so that he as God sits in the temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. But ye Popes Whether it be profitable and necessary
that some one should have preeminence over the Bishops?
cha^pions dispute yt it is for the profit and salvation, yea necessary for ye
church to have some one bishop, to have preemine^ce over ye other both
indignity and power. But let the^ dispute and set forth this their idol as
they please: they which will simply confess the truth, must needs freely
acknowledge that ye Pope is antichriste. For that which these men babble of
the supremacy of the (...) is flatly (...) to the doctrine of the Gospel, and
of the Apostles. For what more evident thing can be alleged against their
disputations, than that which the Lord said to his disciples, when they
striued for souercigntie? The kings of the Gentiles Luke. 22.
reign over them, and they that bear rule over them, are called Gracious
Lords. But ye shall not be so, but let the greatest among you, be as the
least: and the chiefest, as he that serves. For who is greater, he that
sits at table or he that serves? is not he that sits at table? And I am
among you as he that serves. This place I alleged and discussed briefly also
in my former Sermon. This simple and plain truth shall continue invincible
against all the disputations of these A bird that defiles all things she
touches. 2. Cor. 1. 1. Peter. 5.
Harpyes. The most holy Apostles of our Lord Christ, will not be Lords over any
man under pretense of religion, yea S. Peter in plain words forbids
lordship over Gods heretage, and commands bishops to be examples to the
flock. Whereas they object y^ Christ said to Peter: thou art Peter, and upon
this rock I will build my church: and I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven. etc. And, Feed my sheep, And thereupon that S. Peter was
appointed over all the Peter chief of the Apostles.
Apostles, and in them over all priests, ministers and bishops, the chief and
prince, yea and the monarche of the whole world, it makes nothing at all to
establishe their dominion or Lordship. We willingly grant, that S. Peter is
the chief of the Apostles, and we also our selves do willingly call S.
Peter, the prince of the Apostles, but in that sense that we call Moses, David,
Helias, or Esaie, the chief or Princes of ye prophets, that is to say, such as
have obtained far more excellent gifts than the rest. But that Peter was the
chief or prince after that sort, that these men will have him, we deny, and
deny again most constantly. And therewithal we defend S. Peter, and clear
him from those spotts, wherewithal these men strive to defile him even being
dead. He had not remained faithful toward his master, if he had taken to
himself rule or dominion. In all places we read that Peter was equal with the
other disciples, but in no place in the scripture, that he was their master.
And S. Paul in the beginning of his epistle to the Galathians, shows in many
words, that he in Apostleship is nothing inferior to Peter. Neither when he
came to Jerusalem, came he to that end he might kiss his feet, or to
profess subjection, but that by their meeting and friendly conference
together, every one throughout all churches might understand there was perfect
consent in opinions between Peter and Paul, and that as touching Apostleshipp
their authority was equal. In the same place Paul calls James, Peter, and
John, pillars. He does not attribute that prerogative to Peter alone, which
notwithstanding he had rightly done, if he had received supremacy atthe hands
of the Lord as these men do affirm. How comes it that Peter does nothing
of his own head, but refers ecclesiastical matters to ye rest of ye
disciples, as to his fellows in authority? which thing we may see in the
Acts. In another place he calls himself a fellow elder, not the prince of
priests. When he was sent by the Apostles with John into Samaria, he requires
not another to be sent, least his supremacy should seem to be diminished, but
willingly obeys. But if we should grant that Peter was chief of the Apostles
after ye sort, as these men do affirm: would it thereupon follow that ye pope
is the prince of ye whole church, yea, of the whole world? For as ye pope is
not Peter: so the 12. or 11. apostles are not ye whole world. Moreover Peter
could not give that he had not: he had not an empire over ye whole world,
therefore he gave it not. But Constantine gave it to Syluester, say they. But
if we never Of the donation of Constantine.
so perfectly agreed that ye donation of Constantine were true, and not feigned
or forged (which yet the best learned me^ do affirm) yet would not Syluester
himself have received an imperie or dominion though it had bin offered him. For
the voice of ye high and heavenly prince Christ had been of more authority with
him: (The kings of the nations bear rule over the^, but it shall not be so
with you) tha^ ye foolish affection of an earthly emperor. Shall we believe ye
Peter would have received secular power with imperial government if the emperor
Nero had proffered it him? No, in no wise. For this word of the Lord took deep
root in his inward bowels, But it shall not be so with you. Before he had
received the holy ghost, wa^dring in blindness with the rest of ye multitude of
Jews, he imagined yt the kingdom of Christ in earth should be an earthly
kingdom. But after he received the holy ghost, he understood yt the throne of
Christ the chief king and emperor, was not on the earth, but situated in
heaven. He knew that Christ our Lord fled into the wilderness, when the people
thought to make him a king. He knew ye Helisus, by most wholesome counsel
refused ye reward of Naama^ 4. Reg. 5.
ye prince. And ye Giesi his servant, to his everlasting reproach, and
overthrow of his own health, required it afterward at his hand. S. Peter
would not take upon him the charge of the poor, least he should thereby with
less diligence attend upon prayer and preaching of the word of God, which
thing the Acts of the Apostles do witness: who therefore thincketh it
likelye, that he casting aside the office of Apostleship, would have received
the Empire even of the whole world? He denies that one man can both happily
execute the charge of the ministry of the word, and also minister unto the
necessity of the poor. But what Pope will they give unto us, that has the
spirit more fully than Peter had? Which can perform that which Peter could
not? Which cannot only now both serve at tables, but also can govern the
whole world? Therefore they are trifles, which they rehearse to us touching the
donation of Constantine. Constantine was more sound than that he would frame
such a donation, which he knew was repugnant to ye doctrine of Christ.
Syluester was more vppright than to receive that, which he knew could not be
received without the utter overthrow of the ministry of the word. But if
Constantine gave that altogether which he is said to have given, and that
Syluester did not refuse his donation, both of them offended. Because both dealt
against the word of God.

I saw what of late years, Augustine Steuchus, a man otherwise Augustine
Steuchus of the donation of Constantine.
well learned and of much reading, has written touching Constantines donation
against Laurentius Valla: but he brings no sound arguments, though he
wonderfully rage and put all the force of his eloquence in ure, and finally,
do buisily heap together from all places, whatsoever by any manner means
may seem to further this cause. And truly that book seems better worthy
to be trodden under foot, than to be occupied in good menns hands. For that I
make no words, that he calls that ecclesiastical kingdom of Rome
oftentimes, eternal: whereas the kingdom of Christ and the saints is only
eternal, does he not most manifestly place ye Pope in the seat of Christ
our Lord? For after he had recited the testimony of one Pope Nicholas, he
forthwith adds: Thou hear that the high bishop, of Constantine, is called
God, and counted for God. This verily was done when he adorned him with that
famous edicte, he worshipped him as God, as the successor of Christ and
Peter. As much as he could he gave divine honors unto him, he worshipped him
as the lively Image of Christ. Thus far he in the 67. section of his book.

Neither has he written that which is unlike unto this, 28. section. For he
remembering certain imaginations of his own, conceived of ye Pope, he
feigneth, I cannot tell what fruit would come thereof, if it were made known
among the furthest Indians, that all the kingdoms of the world are governed by
the Popes beck, that kings worship him, as being a thing very well known to
them that he is the successor of Christ, and therefore that they receive him,
not so much a mortal man, as God himself in him, who has substituted him in
his room in earth, and therefore we ought to abstain from reproachful
words, if he sin in any thing, as a man, because in him they worshipp the
Son of God.

These wicked reioycinges, and these flattering, or rather sacrilegious voices,
would Peter have suffered, think you? who lifted up Cornelius, when he fell
down before him and would have worshipped him, and said: Arise, Acts. 10.
I my self also am a man. We read also that the Angel himself said unto John
which fell down and would have worshipped at the Angels feet, See thou do
it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Apoc. 2^.
Prophets. It is also written of Herodes Acts. 12.
Agrippa, because he repressed not the flattering voices of the people, which
cried when he had ended his oration, It is the voice of a God and not of a man,
that therefore he was stricken of the Angel of God, and he rotted away, being
eaten of worms. Therefore we, since we know that Christ himself the son
of God, does reign as yet in the church, as to whom only all glory and
power is given, and has not substituted any man on the earth, in whom he
wilbee worshipped and served, we worship and serve Christ Jesus the son of
God only, and utterly abhore the Pope as antichriste, and a dounghill God, or
if you will a God of the iakeshouse, together with his sacrilegious clawbackes
and blasphemous flatterers.

The Lord in very deed said to S. Peter, Thou art Peter: and upon this rock
I will build my Church, and Thou art Peter. etc.
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, etc. But what make these
sayings to establish the monarchy, prerogative, and dignity of the Pope?
Peter is commended of the Lord for the constancy of his faith: where upon also
he received his name, being called Peter, A, petra, that is of the rock,
wherein he settled himself by a true faith. Christ is that rock whereunto
Peter stayed. He hears that this shall be the perpetual foundation of the
church, that all shall be received into the fellowshippe of the church, who with
a true faith confess with Peter, that Jesus Christ is the very son of God,
and rest upon him as the only rock, and salvation. Moreover, the keys of
the kingdom of God are promised unto Peter: but when they are delivered, they
are not given to Peter alone, but to all ye Apostles. For The keys, are not
(as these men imagine) a certain dominion and jurisdiction, but the ministry
of opening and shutting the kingdom of heaven, to let into the church, and to
shutt out, which is wrought by the preaching of the Gospel: as it shall anon
be said more abundantly. After the same manner when Christ said to Peter Feed
my sheep, he did not give unto Peter the monarchy of ye whole world, and
dominion over all creatures, but committed unto him a pastoral cure. Of which
thing I have spoken in my last sermon: as also else where both often and
largely against the supremacy of ye bishop of Rome. Unto the ancient writers
of the church which they obiecte unto us, testifying, I know not what of the
supremacy of Peter, we will answer in one word, that we care not so much what
the old writers thought herein, as what Christ the son of God instituted,
and what ye Apostles (whose authority does far excel the judgment of the
old writers) practiced, and what they have left both in their writing and
examples for us to judge and sollowe. Whereof I have also spoken in the 2.
Sermon of this Decade.

We have almost gone further than we determined: therefore that we may draw
to an end, we have spoken of the order or office, which the Lord instituted in
his church, and whom he has placed over it, by whose labor he will
establishe, govern, further, and preserve his church. Those things which
remain to be spoken, we will put off until to morrow. For they are longer
than at this time can be finished, but more worthy and more excellent, than
that they ought to be restreined into few words. etc.

Of calling unto the ministry of the word of God. What manner of men, and
after what fashion ministers of the word must be ordained in the church. Of the
keys of the Church. What the office of them is that be ordained. Of the manner
of teaching the Church, and of the holy life of the Pastors.
The fourth Sermon.
IN this present sermon, by Gods assistaunce, we will as briefly and plainly as
we can, set forth unto you (dearly beloved) what manner of men ministers should
be, and after what sort at this day, it behooves us to ordeine ministers, not
speaking again of ye office, but of persons meet for the office. For neither
do I think it necessary or profitable, to show at large, that that order or
function instituted by Christ in the church, suffices, even at this day, to
gather, govern and preserve the church of god on earth, yea, without these
orders which in these last ages new invention has instituted. For that does
ye thing it self witness, and the absolute perfection of the primitive church
a^oucheth it. But that it may be plainly understood of all men, whom it
behoues the church at this day to ordeine ministers, we will speak a little more
amply of the calling of the ministers of the church.

Calling, is no other thing, than a lawful appointing of a meet minister. Of
the calling unto the minis^^^ie, and the kind of calling
The same also may be called, both ordination, and election, though one word
be more large in signification than the other. Election goes before by
nature. For whom we choose, those we call. Ordination comprehends either of
them. But there are numbered almost of all men, four kinds of calling. The two
former are lawefull, the two latter, are unlawful. And the first kind is
whereby ministers are called, neither of me^, nor by man, but by God. As it is
read, that Esaie the prophet, and the Apostle Paul were called. This kind for
the most part is confirmed with signs or miracles, and is called a heavenly
and secret calling. The second kind of calling is made of God in deed, but by
the ordination of men. After which sort it is read that S. Matthew, Luke, and
Timothy were created ministers of the church. This kind is ordinary,
public, used of men, and at this day common, wherein in deed God calls,
bestowing necessary gifts upon his ministers, and appointing laws to those y^
do elect: and they following those laws, do ordinarily elect him, whom they by
signs conjecture to be first called of God. I mean by signs, gifts
necessary for ministers.

Now the third kind of calling, which Calling by fauou^ and gyft^
of the unlawful callinges is the first, comes in deed from men; but not
from God: when as for favor, and rewards, some unworthy person is ordained.
And here is sin committed as well of those that are ordained, as of those
that bear rule in the ordination. Of those that are ordained, when they desire
to be placed in the ministry, for which, either they do not understand, or
they will not understand, that they be very unfit, being destitute of necessary
gifts. Or else, when they are sufficiently furnished with knowledge of the
scriptures and other things, yet they take not the right path to this function,
that is to say, when they respect not the glory of God, but their own
gain. For there is required of them that are to be ordained, a testimony of
their own conscience, and a secret calling, to wit, whereby we are well
known to our selves to be moved to take upon us this office, not through
ambition, not for covetousness, not for desire to feed the belly, nor of any
other lewd affection, but through the sincere fear, and love of God, and of a
desire to edify the church of God. Of which thing very eloquently and
holily has S. Paul written in 1. These. 2. Beside this, the testimony of
other, of sound learning and skilfulnes in things, is also required. For all
of us please our selves, and esteem our selves to be worthy, to whom ye
government of the church may be committed, whereas we fowlie deceive our selves.
And they that have the authority of ordination, do offend, when as in
ordeyning of ministers, they regard not what GOD by laws ^ett down, has
willed herein to be done, and what the state and safety of the church
requires, but what is for the commodity of him that is to be ordained.
Oftentimes therefore, unworthy persons are ordained. Or such as are unlearned,
and not very sound. Or else such as are sufficiently learned, but not of good
conversation. Or such as are simple and are good Christians, but unfit and
unskillful pastors. And unto this they are allured, thorough favor or bri^es.
Wherefore they provoke the most heavy wrath of almighty God upon
themselves, and make them selves partakers of all those sins, whereof they are
the authors, in yt they do not uprightly execute the charge which is committed
unto them. Our elders Symonie.
called this sin Symonie, an offense punishable with no less punishment than
shameful reproach and death everlasting. Anth^mius the Emperor writing to
Armasius, among other things says: Let no man make merchaundise of the
degree of priesthood, by the greatness of price. But let every man be
esteemed after his defe^tes, not according to that he is able to give. Let that
profane thirst of covetousness cease to bear rule in the church, and let that
horrible fault be banished far off from holy congregations. After this manner
in our time let the bishop be chosen, being chaste and lowly, so as in what
place soever he come, he may purge all things, with the uprightness of his
own life: let a bishop be ordained not with price, but with prayers. He ought
to be so far from desire of promotion that he must be sought for by
compulsion: and being desired, he ought to shun it: and if he be
entreated, he ought to sly away* let this only be his furtherance, that he
is importune by excuses to avoid from it. For truly he is unworthy of the
ministry that is not ordained against his will. Thus much he, who if he should
at this day come to Rome, he would think without doubt he were come into a
strange world, yea into the mart of Simon, not of Peter, but both of Magus the
Samaritane, and Gresi the Israelite. The fourth kind of calling is that,
whereby any man thrusts himself into the ministry, of his own private
affection, being neither ordained of God, neither yet by man.

Of these kind of men the Lord says in Jeremy, I have not sent them and yet
they ran. Cyprian writing Iere. 23.
unto Antonianus, calls such scismatiques, who usurp unto them the office of
a bishop, no man giving it them. And this kind of calling is improperly
called a calling. Wherefore it is evident that in the church, A calling
necessary in the Church.
there must needs be a calling, and that public and lawful, as well for
many other causes, as especially for these, that the ordinance of God be not
neglected, and that the discipline of the church be retained, and that all men
in the church may know who are preferred to the ecclesiastical ministry.
Albeit therefore Paul the Apostle, and doctor of the Gentiles in the
beginning were not sent of me^, neither by men, but of God only, yet the same
Paul, at the commandment of the holy Ghost, is separated by the church of
Antioch, together with Barnabas, to ye ministry of the Gentiles. Acts. 13.
After the same manner many other were sent, or called of god, whom
nevertheless it behooved to be ordained also by men. For Paul in another place,
says: And no man takes this Heb. 5.
honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. And again,
How shall they hear without Romans 10.
a preacher, And how shall they preach except they be sent? etc. As concerning
that second kind of calling which is common, and at this day received in the
church, and yet appointed by the Lord, there are three things to be
considered. First, who they be that call, that is, who have right and authority
to call, or to ordeine ministers. Secondly who, or what manner of men are to be
ordained. Lastly after what manner they that be called, are to be ordained.

And first of all that the Lord has given to his church, power and authority
to elect and ordeine fit ministers, Who may chose ministers in the church
we have declared before, in the second sermon of this Decade, by the example
of ye ancient churches in ye world, Jerusalem and Antioch: of which two, the
church of Jerusalem did not only ordeine 7. deacons, but also Matthias the
Apostle: and the church of Antioche separated into the ministry ye famous
Apostles of Christ Paul and Barnabas. Whereunto apperteineth that the churches
of the Gentiles, being Acts. 14.
instructed of Paul and Barnabas, ordained them elders or governors of their
churches by election had by voices. The chiefest in this election were ye
pastors themselves. For Peter governing the action, Matthias was created
Apostle by the Church. This form or order the ancient church diligently
observed many years. For Cyprian Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 4. The common people
(says he) has especially power, either to choose worthy priests, or to
refuse them that be unworthy, Which thing also we see to descend from the
authority of God, that the priest be chosen in the presence of the common
people, before all men's eyes, and be allowed worthy and meet by public
judgment and witness. As in Number. the Lord commanded Moses and said, Take
Aaron thy brother, and Nume. 20.
Eleazar his son, and bring them up into the mount, before all the
congregation. God commands the priest to be ordained before the whole
congregation. That is, he teaches and shows, that the ordeini^g of priests
ought not to be done, without the knowledge of the people, being present, that
in their presence, either the vices of the evil might be discovered, or the
deserts of the good commended, and that, that is a just and lawefull ordeyning,
which shall be examined by the election and judgment of all. Thus far he.
This custom and manner endured to ye time of S. Augustine. For it is to be
seen in his 110. epist. which witnesses that ye people giving a shoute,
Augustine ordained Eradius for his successor. In these latter times because ye
people made often tumults in the elections of pastors, ye ordination was
committed to chosen men of the pastors, magistrates, and people. These three
kinds of men propounded or named notable me^, out of whom he which was thought
the best was chosen. There is somewhat of this In Iustiniani Imperat. Nouel.
Constitut. 123. They which think that all power of ordeyning That Bishops
alone have not power to make ministers.
ministers, is in the bishops, diocesans, or archbishops hands, do use these
places of the scripture. For this cause I left thee in Creta (says Paul to
Titus) that thou should ordeine elders in every city. And again, Lay Time.
1.
hands soudeinly on no man. But we say that the Apostles did not exercise 1.
Tim. 5.
tyranny in ye churches, and that they themselves alone, did not execute all
things about election or ordination, other men in the church being excluded.
For ye Apostles of Christ ordained bishops or elders in the church, but not
without communicating their counsel with the churches, yea, and not without
having the consent, and approbation of ye people. Which may appear by the
election or ordination of Matthias, which we have now once or twice recited.
Truly the Lord in the Law said to Moses: Thou shall appoint thee Judges. But
in another Deuteronomy. 16.
place he says: Thou shall seek out among all the people, whom thou may
Exodus 18.
make rulers. And again, Moses unto ye same people, Bring you men of wisdom
and understanding, and I will Deuteronomy. 1.
make the^ rulers over you, etc. Therefore as Moses does nothing of his own
will in the election of the magistrate, though it were said to him, Thou shall
appoint thee Judges, but does althinges communicating his counsel with the
people: So undoubtedly Titus, though it were said unto him, Ordeine elders in
every city, yet he understood that hereby nothing was permitted to him which
he might do privately as he thought good, not having ye advise and consent of
the churches. Wherefore they sin not at all, that shaking off ye yoke and
tyra^nie of the bishops of Rome, for good and reasonable causes, do recover
that ancient right granted by Christ to ye churches. Neither makes it any
great matter, whether discrete men chosen of the church, or the whole church it
self do ordeine fit ministers, and that either by voices, either by lotts, or
after some certain necessary and holy manner. For in these things godly men
will not move contention, so yt all things be done holily and in order. But I
will not here rip up the crafts, deceipts, practices and grievous wars taken in
hand for this right of ordeining, with sheading of much blood, spoylings and
lamentable burnings of countries. The histories of the Acts of He^rie the 4.
and 5. and also of the affairs of the Frederiches, do most evidently witness,
how impude^tly and abhominably the Popes of Rome, with their sworn friends
the bishops have behaved themselves. Peradventure I shall have occasion to
speak of this matter elsewhere more at large. Now we will declare what manner
of What manner o^ men are to be ordained Ministers.
me^ it behooves to ordeine ministers, truly not whose lust, but the most
choicest, men of sound religion, furnished with all kind of sciences,
exercised in the scriptures, cunning in the mystery of faith and religion,
strong and constant, earnest, painful, diligent, faithful, watchful,
modest, of a holy and approved conversation, least thorough their corruption of
life, and skant good name and fame, the whole ministry beecome vile, and that
which with wholesome doctrine they build up, their wicked life do pull down
again. We will rehearse the rule of the Apostle, fully comprehending all
things perteyning to this matter. Thou shall ordein elders, or bishops, says
he, if any be blameless, the husband Tit. ^.
of one wife, having faithful children, which are not slandered of riot,
neither are disobedient. For if a man cannot rule his own house, how shall 1.
Tim. 3.
he care for the church of God? For a bishop must be blameless as the steward
of God: (for it is required in the disposers that a man be found faithful) not
froward, not angry, no striker, 1. Cor. 4.
but gentle, not given to wine, not covetous, not given to filthy lucre, but
harborous, one that loves goodness, watchful, sober, righteous, godly,
te^perate, modest, apt to teach, holding fast the faithful word, which is
according to doctrine, that he may be able both to exhort in wholesome doctrine,
and to improve them that say against it, and to stop their mouths. No young
scholar, least he being puffed up, fall into the condemnation of the devil.
He must also have a good report of them that are without, least he fall into
the rebuke and snare of the devil. All these are the words of ye Apostle,
recited out of the 1. Epist. to Timothy, and in his epist. to Titus. Wherefore
exact Censure and examination.
judgment, and great diligence shall be very needful in this case, to discuss all the points of doctrine and life. I say there shall be needful of a straight trial
of life, and perfect examination of learning: for this is not a matter of small
weight, ye whole safety of the church hangs hereupon. If any unworthy and
unlearned be ordained, ye whole church for ye most part is neglected, lead
astray, and overthrown. But we do not mean a childlike and scholerlike
examination, but a grave and streicte examination of knowledge in the
scripture, and the true interpretation thereof, of ye charge of a pastor, of
ye mysteries of sound faith and of other such like points. And that the elders
in times past, were very diligent in these things, it may appear by that which
Aelius Lampridius, in ye life of Alex. Seuerus rehearses, that it was ye manner
among the Christians, to offer the names of their bishops to the whole church,
before they were received, if happily any among ye people would show a reason yt
he were unworthy of such an office. Whereupon Justinian the Emperor, Constable.
123. Ifin What manner of examination the old Bishops used.
ye time of ordination (says he) any accuser stand up and say, he is
unworthy to be ordained, let all things be defferred, and let examination and
judgment first be had. And here I will at this present recite ye deeree of the
4. counsel of Carthage The fourth Counsel of Carthage.
upon this matter, which is after this sort. When a bishop is to be ordained,
let him be first examined whether he be by nature wise, if he be able to
teach, if he be temperat in behavior, if chaste in life, if he be sober, if
careful about his own business, if lowly, if courteous, if merciful, if
learned, if in structed in ye law of the lord, if wary and careful in the
sense and meaning of the scriptures, if exercised in the opinions of the
church: and above all things if he teach ye grounds of faith with substantial
words (or perhaps of less moment) that is to say, confirming yt the father,
and the son, and the holy ghost, are one God, and auouching ye whole godhead
of the Trinity to be coessentiall, and consubstantiall, and coeternall, and
coomnipotent, if he acknowledge every person by himself in the Trinity, to
be perfect God, and the whole three persons, one God, if he believe the
incarnation of god, not wrought in the father, neither in the holy ghost, but
in the son only: so that he who was the son in god the father, y^ same
should be made the son of man in the manhood of his mother, very God of the
father, and very man of his mother, having flesh in the womb of his mother, and
having in him a humane and reasonable soul together of either nature, that is
to say, God and man, one person, one son, one Christ, one Lord, creator of
all things, and ye author, Lord and governor of all creatures, with the father
and the holy ghost: who suffered a true suffering of his flesh, died with the
true death of his body, rose again with the true taking again of his flesh,
and a true taking again of his soul, wherein he shall come to judge the quick
and the dead. He must also be asked if he believe one, and the self same
author and Lord of the new and old testament, that is to say, of the law, the
prophets, and Apostles, if the devil became evil not by creation, but by
choice. He must also be asked if he believe the resurrection of this flesh
which we bear, and none other, if he believe the judgment to come, and that
every one shall receive according to yt they have done in the flesh, either
punishments, or rewards: if he forbid not marriage, if he condemn not Bigamie
or second marriage, if he condemn not the eating of flesh, if he have
fellowshipp with penitent persons that are reconciled, if he believe yt all
sins in baptism are forgiven, as well original sin wherein we are borne, as
also those which we commit willingly: if he believe that none which are without
the catholic church can be saved. etc. When he shall be examined upon all
these points, and found fully instructed, the^ let him be ordained a bishop,
with the consent of the clergy and laity, and by the assembly of the
bishops of the whole province, and especially of the Metropolitan. This
counsel is said to be celebrated in the year of the Lord 400.

But I do not rehearse these things to that end, as if I stayed my self
upon the decrees of counsels and men, or as if I thought all things which
perteine to true salvation and perfection, were not contained in the holy
scriptures, but to admonish our adversaries, that their manners and doings at
this day, do not only not agree with the examples and doctrines of ye Apostles,
but not so much as with the decrees of the ancient writers, if happily they may
enter into themselves, and leaving the diverse doctrine of men, they may
receive the most ancient tradition, and the most infallible doctrine of the
holy Apostles.

I come now to the declaration of ye How they that are called are to be
ordained.
last point, yt is to say, after what manner they y^ be called are to be
ordained. The apostles in their ordinations, exhorted ye church to fasting and
prayer: and they that were called, they placed and set in the sight of the
church, and laying their hands upon the heads of them that were ordained,
they committed the churches unto them. Of ye laying on of hands I have spoken
elsewhere. It was a signification of the charge committed unto them. Neither is
it read that among the old fathers Acts. 13. Acts. 1. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Tim. 1.
there was any other consecrating of pastors. As also all other things were
simple and not sumptuous in the primitive and Apostolic church. In the ages
following ceremonies increased, but yet so, that at the beginning to some they
seemed not altogether to have exceeded measure. But to me ye seems to be over
much, which at man's pleasure is added to Gods institution. And, I pray you,
what need is there to patche men's fancies and customs unto the institutions
of the Apostles? Why does not the laying on of hands suffice thee, since it
sufficed the blessed Apostles, who were far holier than thou, and more
skillful in heavenly matters? There was afterward added oil, there was also
added the book of the Gospels. For after this manner the 4. counsel of
Carthage decrees. When a bishop is ordained, let two bishops place, and hold
over his head and shoulders the book of the Gospels, and one pouring upon him
the blessing, let all the other bishops that are present touch his head with
their hands. They of later time have added here unto a pall. But at this A
pall.
day there is no end of ceremonies, nay rather of follies. If any man do
diligently compare their ceremonies, with the attire of Aaron and the Iewishe
priests, he will swear the whole Aaronisme is brought again by them into
the church, yea, that this is more sumptuous and burdensome, yea and that
contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel. That at this time I affirm not their
consecration, to be both infamous, and fully stuffed with excess, pride, and
offense, and by ye means to be intolerable. There is another thing to be
noted, which is, that albeit among the old fathers, consecration increased by
the multiplying of ceremonies, yet was it freely bestowed, neither was there
any thing either in it, or in the whole Church of Christ set to sale. But at
this day how dear palls are sold, by that Romish Chanaanite, and with how
great costs consecrations are made, it is a shame even to speak. Gregory in
the counsel at Rome celebrated in the time of Mauricius and Theodosius, among
other things thus decrees: Following The pall was in old time frelie given.
(says he) the ancient rule of the fathers, I ordeine that there be
nothing at any time taken of ordinations neither for the giving of the pall,
nor for the delivery of the Bulls. For seeing that in ordeyning of a bishop
the high bishop lays his hand upon him, and the minister reads the lesson
of the Gospel, and the Notarie writes the epistle of his confirmation: As it
becomes not the bishop to sell the hand he lays on: so neither the minister
nor the notarie ought in the ordination, either the one to sell his voice, or
the other his pen. But if any man shall presume to take any gain thereby,
he shall be sure before the judgment seat of Almighty God to undergo the
sharp sentence due to so horrible an offense. Yet forthwt he adds. But if he
that is ordained, not required, but of his own freewill, only for favors
sake, will offer any thing, we grant he may. I have hitherto declared what
manner of men, and after whatsort bishops or Why we (...) not ^^ders at ^he
hands ^f popish ^^shops.
pastors must be ordained in the church of God. And albeit out of those
things it may easily be gathered, why at this day we suffer not our selves to
be ordained of those who are called and seem to them selves to be the only
lawful ordinaries, that is to say, such as in the Romish church, by
continual succession descend from the Apostles, I will yet, if I can, declare
the cause somewhat more plainly. Of the continual succession of Bishops or
pastors, and of the church, I have spoken elsewhere, so that it were
superfluous here to repeat and rip up the same again. I have also proved,
that our churches are the true churches of God, though they agree not with the
late vpstart church of Rome. And it is evident, that true churches have power
to ordeine pastors, whether it be done by the voices of the whole church, or
by the law full judgment of such as are chosen by the church. Whereupon it
consequently follows that they are lawfully ordained, which our, or rather
which the churches of Christ do ordeine. And there are weighty causes, why
the holy churches of God do refuse to have their ministers ordained of Popish
ordinaries. For S. Paul says: Though we, or an angel from heaven, shall
preach any other Gal. 1.
Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. But these men preach an other Gospel beside that which Paul
preached: which thing we will have to be understood as touching the sense
(wherein there is more danger) and not as touching the words. And therefore
from heaven these me^ are stricken with this curse or excommunication. But who
can abide to be ordained of them, that be stricken with a curse or
excommunicate? Moreover, the chief thing in the ordination is the doctrine of
the Gospel. Seeing that to this end, especially, ministers of the church are
ordained, that they preach the pure gospel of Christ unfeignedly unto the
people, and without mingling of man's traditions. But this very thing they do
not only most straightly forbid them that are ordained, but also they compel
them to abjure by a certain kind of oath which they offer unto them. For
they are bound by that wicked oath, not unto Christ, but to the Pope against
Christ. For among other things, thus they which are elected bishops, take
their oath. I. N. elected bishop of N. from this time forth, will be faithful
and obedient The oath of Bishops
to blessed Peter, and to the holy Apostolic church of Rome, and to our Lord
N. the Pope, and to his successors entering canonically. The counsel which they
shall commit unto me, by them selves, or messingers, or by their letters, to
their hinderance, I will not willingly disclose to any man. I will be a helper
unto the^, to retain and defend against al men, the Popedom of Rome, and the
royalties of S. Peter. I will do my endeavor, to keep, defend, increase, and
enlarge the rightes, honors, privileges, and authority of the church of
Rome, of our Lord the Pope, and of his foresaid successors. Neither will I be
in counsel, practice, or treaty, wherein shall be imagined against our Lord
the Pope him self, or the same church of Rome, any sinister or prejudicial
matter to their persons, right, honor, state, or power. And if I shall
understand such things to be imagined or procured by any, I will hinder the
same as much as lies in me, and with as much speed as conveniently I may, I
will signify the same to our said Lord, or to some other, by whom it may
come to his knowledge. The rules of the holy fathers, the decrees, ordinances,
sentences, dispositions, reseruations, provisions, and commandments
Apostolical, I will observe with my whole might, and cause them to be observed
of other. Heretics, Scismatiques, and rebels against our lord the Pope. I
will persecute, and to my ability fight against. Since these men are sworn
thus after this manner, who I pray you that is a faithful lover of Jesus
Christ, of his church, of true faith, yea, and add thereunto of the common
wealth, can abide to be ordained by such? There is no talk in their oath of ye
gospel, neither of our Lord Jesus Christ him self. There is no mention of the
holy scriptures: but of the rules and ordinances of the fathers there is most
diligent mention. Peter is named, but not that Apostle of Christ, saying,
Silver and gold have I none, but an other, I know not who, having kingly
dignity. In deed the Apostolic church is named, but by and by, by
interpretation they add, what manner of church they would have understood,
and call it the Papaltie. This Papaltie, not the church of God, I say the
Papaltie, and the honors, privileges, and rightes of the Popedom, against all
men, behold, they promise they will defend this against al men. For they
acknowledge the Pope to be their Lord, against whom they will have nothing to be
imagined, yea, if they may know that other do devise any thing against the
pope, and popedom, they promise discovery thereof, and faithful help. But I
think not that any man can bind him self more straightly to one. Neither is
it unknown, that those whom they call Heretics, are not enemies to the
Christian faith, nor teachers of opinions contrary to the Scriptures, but
rebels to the Pope: they are, I say, they who as they neglect the decrees and
laws of the Pope, and preach the Scriptures only, so they give all the
glory unto Christ, as to the only head, and high priest of the Church, and
therefore they teach that the Pope is neither the head, neither the high
priest of the Church. But who loving true godliness, can bind him self with
such an oath? Who will renounce and forsake the friendship of Christ, and
humble him self to become the bondslaue, and footestoole of the Pope of Rome?
To be short, who will desire to be ordained a minister of Christ and of his
church, at the hands of those that have done after this manner? Here may be
added that in the consistory of Rome, all things as touching holy orders,
are most corrupt, in so much, as scarce any small tokens of Christ's
institution do appear. I will not rehearse at this present, that there are
many new constitutions of men, joined unto them, that in a manner there
remains no voice of the Church in the ordination of pastors, that there is
no choice made of such as the church deputeth there aboutes. For the right of
presentation, collation, and confirmation, being dispersed among many, with
some is become even an heritage, so as both dawes and half fools may be made
ministers or bishops: and neither can I let this thing pass, that with them
is lost that true examination, and sharp pastoral discipline. In deed there
remains examination, but altogether childish, in the which lightly they that
are ordained, are asked that which scholars in common schools are wont to be
demanded, whether one can read well, construe well, sing, and be cunning in
their numbers? They can not deny this thing, neither also this, that Priests
are ordained more to read, to sing, and say mass, than to govern the
Church with the word of God. Whereby the more regard is had of the voice,
that it be apt for singing, than of skilfulnes or experience in the holy
scriptures.

But they think the matter is cunningly handled, if some skillful lawyer be
preferred to the office of a Pastor. For it seems for the most part to be
more profitable to plead cunningly in the court, for the increase and
maintenance of riches, than to preach well in the Church for the winning of
souls. What? do not we see men sent from the law, and out of the courts of
Kings and Princes to possess Churches, fitter for any thing else, than to
govern the Churches of GOD? for ecclesiastical offices are begun to be
counted as Princes Donatiues: whereupon they are also called Benefices.

The Bishops of Rome them selves, have bestowed Priesthoodes upon their cooks,
ravenous soldiers, barbars, and muletors: and this was far more honestly,
than when they bestowed them upon bawdes. A great many of Priests thrust
them selves into the holy ministry, by violence and symonie, which office
nevertheless, he neither could nor would execute well. And they that are
received by an honester title, are received through commendation and favor.

Herein avails much, either affinity or kindred, and consanguinitie. In all
these, there is a greater regard had of the belly, than of the ministry:
they provide better for those which are accounted Priests, and are no
Priests, than for the Church of God, and salvation of souls. But by this
means, all things go to wrack in the Church, and the flock of God is
oppressed with the weight and ruin of the shepeheards.

Hereunto perteyneth the plurality (as they call it) of benefices. Some
Plurality of Benefices.
one, either soldier or curtisan oftentimes rakes to him self, the Pope
offering it to him, half a dozen benefices or more, of which benefices they
take no further care, but to receive the gain. For he never teaches, nay, he
is very sildome at his flock, unless it be when he sheareth them. In the
mean time the Lords flock is neglected, and perishes. For the vicars
Unlearned ministers and many benefices the spoil of the Church.
which are set over the flock by them, for the most part are unlearned and
hirelings. He that is content with least wages, is placed over the flock, what
manner of one so ever he be. And he seems to have learning enough if he can
read, sing, say mass, hear confessions, annoint, and read the Gospel out of
the book upon the Sunday. That which remains moreover to be done, seems
to them to be small matters. I am ashamed and sorry to rehearse, what a censure
for reformation of manners remains in the Church. The thing it self cries,
and experience witnesses, that unworthy persons are not shut out from this
holy ministry. For without difference al are admitted, and as yet
whoremongers, drunkards, diceplayers, and men defiled, yea, overwhelmed with
diverse heinous crimes, are suffered in the ministry. But least they should
seem to do nothing herein, the bishop asks at giving of orders, Who are
worthy of honor? and his Chancellor or the Archdeacon forthwith answers
the bishop, who before that time never saw or heard, what manner of men they
are of whom he bears witness, They are worthy. Moreover, they use so many,
and such kinds of ceremonies in their consecration, that he that is studious
of the truth of the Gospel, can not receive them with a safe conscience. These
causes, and other not unlike, make us that we can so much less abide to be
ordained of the ordinaries or bishops of the Romish church.

The last point remains, which I purposed to declare in the beginning What
the office is of those that are ordained in the Church.
of this treatise, what is the office of the ministers that are ordained in the
church. I can show you in one word, to govern the church of God, or to feed
the flock of Christ. For Paul the Apostle speaking unto the Acts. 20.
pastors of Asia, says: Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock
over the which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to rule (or feed) the
church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. And the pastors
do govern the church of God with God his word, or with wholesome doctrine,
and with holy example of life. For S. Paul says again unto Timothy, Be
thou unto 2. Tim. 4.
the^ that believe an ensample in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in
faith, and in pureness. He writes also the same unto Tit. 2. chap. But for so
much as the Papists do forge far other things of the office or function of
bishops, and do confirm the same, as they also do their other trifles, by ye
authority or power of the keys, as I said when I entreated of the power of
the church, I will therefore first of all speak somewhat (and that as much as I
shall think to be sufficient for this matter) as touching the keys.

A keye is an instrument very well known to all men, wherewith gates, Of the
keys of the church
doors, and chestes, are either shut or opened. It is transferred from bodily
things unto spiritual things, and it is called the key of knowledge, and of
the kingdom of heaven. For the Lord says in the Gospel of Luke, Woe unto
you interpreters of the Luke 11.
law: for ye have taken away the keye of knowledge, ye enter not in your
selves, and them that came in ye forbad. The same sentence S. Matthew. brings
forth after this sort. Woe unto you Scribes and Phariseis hypocrites, Matthew.
23.
because ye shut up the kingdom of heaven before men: for ye your selves go
not in, neither suffer ye them that would enter to come in. Behold that which
Luke calls, to Take away the keye of knowledge, that Matthewe expounds, To
shut heaven. The key therefore of knowledge is the instruction it self as
concerning a blessed life, by what means we are made partakers thereof. He
takes away the keye, which instructs not the people of true blessedness, or
else is a hinderance, that other can not instruct them. Therefore the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, are nothing else, but the ministry of preaching the
Gospel, or word of God, committed by god unto his ministers, to that end
that every one may be taught which way leads unto heaven, and which way
carries down unto hell. These keys the Lord promised to Peter, and in him to
all ye other apostles, when he said, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom
of heaven. Matthew. 16.
And whatso ever thou shall bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatso
ever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Let us inquire
therefore, when the keys were delivered to Peter and to the rest. And the
agreeable consent of all men is, that they were given in the day of the
resurrection. But it is evident the same day, the ministry or function of
preaching the Gospel, was committed to the Apostles: whereby it follows,
that the keys are nothing else, but the ministry of preaching ye gospel
amongst al nations. For this thing is declared unto the world, that salvation
purchased by Christ, is communicated to them that believe, and that hell is
open for the unbelievers. But now let us hear the testimonies of the holy
Evangelists. John ye Apostle and Evangelist says. The Lord came unto his
disciples, and ^ohn. 20.
said, Peace be unto you, As my father has sent me, so send I you. And when
he had said that, he breathed on them, and said unto them, Receive the holy
Ghost, Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosoeuers
sins ye retain, they are retained. These sayings agree with the words,
whereby he promised the keys, for there he said* Whatsoever ye shall bind in
earth, shall be bound in heaven. Here he says, Whosoeuers sins ye retain,
they are retained. There he said, And whatsoever ye shall loose in earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. Here he says, Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them. Wherefore to bind, is, to retain sins, to loose, is, to
remit sins. You will say, how do men remitte sins, since it is written,
that only God forgiueth sins? Let other testimonies therefore of the other
Eua^gelistes be adjoined, expressing that the same history was done in the day
of his resurrection. Luke says, Then Luke. 24.
the Lord opened their understanding, that they might understand the
scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ
to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day, And that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
nations. And Mark says, Mark. 16.
He appeared unto them, as they sat together, and reproved them of their
unbelief, and hardness of heart, and he said unto them, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, He that shall believe and be
baptized shall be saved, but he that will not believe, shall be damned.
Therefore God only forgiueth sins, to them that believe in the name of
Christ, that is to say, through the merits and propitiation of Christ: but
that sins are forgiven, the ministers do assuredly declare by the preaching
of the Gospel, and by that preaching, do bind and loose, remitte and retain
sins. The matter will be made playner by an example or two. S. Peter speaking
unto the citizens of Jerusalem, Repent ye, says he, and let every one of you
be baptized, Acts. 2.
in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive
the gift of the holy Ghost. And so S. Peter used the keys committed unto him
after this manner: How the Apostles did bind and loo^e.
he loses in earth, and remitteth sins unto men, that is, promising to them
that believe assured remission of sins, through Christ. Which message God
has confirmed, giving remission of sins unto the faithful, as they
believed. Moreover, the keeper of the prisonat Philippos, being amazed, says
to Silas and Paul, Act. 16.
S^^s, what must I do to be saved? The Apostles answered, Believe on the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy whole household. The Apostles loosed him
that was bound, and forgave him his sins, by the keys, that is, by the
preaching of the Gospel: which Gospel since he believed in earth, the Lord
judged him to be loosed in heaven. These things are taken out of the Acts of
the Apostles. In the same Acts we read examples of the contrary in this
manner. The Jews being filled with indignation, Acts. 13.
spoke against those things, which were spoken of Paul, and rayled. But Paul
and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the word of God
should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and think
your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.

Again, when the same Paul at Corinthe had preached Christ to Acts. 18.
the Jews, and they resisted and reviled, The Apostle shook his raiment, and
said, Your blood be upon your own heads: I am clean: from henceforth I
will go unto the Gentiles. And so he did ^^nd the unbelievers, And God
confirmed the preaching of Paul: because it proceeded from God him self. And
unless you put the proper and true keye into the lock, you shall never open
it.

The true and right keye, is the pure word of God: the counterfeit and
theeuishe key, is a doctrine and tradition of man, estraunged from the word of
God. I think I have sufficiently proved by evident testimonies of the
scripture, that the keys given to the Apostles and Pastors of the Church, and
so to the Church it self, are nothing else, than the ministry of teaching
the Church. For by the doctrine of the Gospel, as it were with certain keys,
the gate of the kingdom of heaven is opened, when a sure and ready mean and
way is showed, to come to atteine unto the participation of Christ, and the
joys of everlasting life by true faith.

To the testimony of God, man's record agrees. For Saint John Chrysostom
upon Matthewe, chapter. 23. The keye (says he) is the word of the knowledge
of the scriptures, by which the gate of truth is opened to men. And the
key-bearers are the Priests, to whom is committed the word of teaching and
interpreting the scriptures. Other testimonies of old interpreters of the
Scriptures, differing nothing from these of ours, for that I am desirous to be
brief, I do not bring.

Since these things are thus (brethren) and are delivered unto us in the
express Scriptures, we will not therefore greatly pass, what the Papists
babble, touching the power of the keys, and what offices, dignities,
preferments, and I know not what other thing, and what authority of Priests,
they derive from thence. We have learned, not out of the words or opinions of
men, but out of the manifest word of GOD, that the keys are the ministry of
the preaching of the word of GOD, and that the keys are given to the
Apostles, and to their successors, that is to say, the office of preaching
remission of sins, repentance, and life everlasting is committed to them.
Whereupon we now conclude this, that the chief office of a Pastor of Whence
doctrine ^s to be (...).
the church, is, to use those very keys which the Lord has delivered to his
Apostles, and no other: that is, to preach the only and pureworde of GOD, and
not to fetch any doctrine from any other place, than out of the very word of
GOD. For there is a perpetual and inviolable law at this day also laid upon
our Pastors, which we read was laid upon the most ancient governors of the
Church, the Lord him self witnessing in Malachie, and saying: My covenant
was with Levy of life and peace, and I gave him fear, and (...). 2.
he feared me, and was afraid before my name. The law of truth was in his
mouth, and there was no iniquity found in his lips, he walked with me in
peace, and equity, and turned many from their iniquity. For the Priests
lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at his
mouth: for he is the messinger of the Lord of hoastes. Ezech. 3.


Again, the Lord says to Ezechiel, Thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and
give them warning from me. In Jeremy the Lord says: ^ere. 23.
The Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream, and he that has my
word, let him speak my word faithfully. He expressly puts a difference
between heavenly things and earthly things, between those things which are
of the word of GOD, and those that are feigned and chosen by man, which he
wills to let pass as uncertain things, and as dreams. For he immediately
adds, Is not my word as fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer that
breaks the hard stone?

And again, Hear not the words of the Prophets that preach unto you and
deceive you: truly they teach you vanity, for they speak the meaning of
their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the lord. Therefore all the true
Prophets of GOD, have this continually in their mouth, Thus says the Lord,
The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And therefore they delivered unto the
people, nothing contrary unto the word of GOD. The old people had also the
Scripture. And the Prophets were nothing else, but interpreters of the Law,
applying the same to the place, time, matters, and persons.

Also our Lord Jesus Christ says oftentimes, that his doctrine is not his
own, but the fathers. Which thing, if you understand literally and according
to his words, I know not whether any thing can be spoken more absurd.
Therefore the Lord means that his doctrine is not of man, but of GOD. Does
not he send us continually to the writings of the Law and the Prophets, and
confirms his own sayings by them? But Christ is the only teacher of
religion, and master of life appointed unto the universal Church by GOD the
father.

To this Church he himself also sending teachers, and showing them what they
should deliver, faith: Teach them to observe those things which I have
commanded you. Also, Matthew. 28.
Go into the whole world and preach the Gospel to all creatures. Mark. 16.
But the Apostle Paul witnesses, that the Gospel was promised by the Romans ^.
Prophets of God in the holy Scriptures. And this doctrine received of
Christ, the Apostles delivered to the nations, adding nothing unto it, taking
nothing from it: and there withal also they expounding the ancient writings
of the Prophets: yet neither in this matter trusting any thing to their own
wit, nor being ruled by their own judgment. For the Apostle Peter says, As
every man has received the gift, even so minister the 1 ^et. 4.
same one to an other, as good stewardes of the manifold graces of God. If any
man speak, let him talk as the words of God. Tertullian also in his book
entitled, De Praescript. haeret. (which I have also elsewhere rehearsed)
expressly says: It is not lawful for us in any thing to rest upon our own
fancy or judgment, neither yet to be negligent markers, what any other man
brings forth of his own brain. We have the Apostles of the Lord for
authors: for not they them selves, did choose any thing which they might
establish after their own fancy, and the doctrine which they received of
Christ, they faithfully delivered to the nations. And therefore if even an
Angel from heaven should preach any otherwise, he shall be accurssed at our
hands. Thus far he. We have moreover showed in our sermons of faith and of
the church, that faith depends upon the only word of God, and that it wholly
stays upon the only word of God: and also that the churches of god are
builded and preserved by the word of God, and not by man's doctrine: all which
seem to apperteine to this matter. Neither is it le^t to the bishops of the
church of Christ, as the The Bishops are not permitted t^ make new laws.
Popish pastors do falsely boast, to ordeine new laws, and to broach new
opinions. For the doctrine which was delivered to the apostls of Christ is
simply to be received of the church, and simply and purely to be delivered of
the pastors to the church, which is the congregation of such as believe the
word of Christ. And who knows not that it is said by the Prophet, All men
are liars, God only is true? And the church is the pillar and ground of truth,
because as it stays upon the truth of the Scriptures, even so it publishes
none other doctrine than is delivered in the scriptures, neither receives it
being published. And who is he that will challenge to him self the glory due
unto God only? God is the only lawegiuer to all mankind, especially in those
things which perteine to religion, and a blessed life. For Esaie says: The
Lord is our judge, the Esai. 33.
Lord is our lawegiuer, the Lord is our king, and he him self shall be our
Savior. And S. James also says: There is one lawgiuer which is able James. 4.
to save, and to destroy.

God challenges this thing as proper to him self, to rule those that are his,
with the laws of his word, over whom he only has authority of life and
death. Moreover, those laws can not be godly, which presume to prescribe and
teach faith and the service of God after their own fancy. The doctrine
concerning faith, and the worship of God, unless it be heavenly, is nothing
less, than that which it is said to be. God only teaches us what is true
faith, and what worship he delights in. And therefore in Matthewe, the son
of God pronounces out of Esaie, In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of Matthew. 15.
men. Join hereunto also, that from the new constitutions of men, there
springs always up a wonderful neglecting, yea, and contempt of the word of
God, and of heavenly laws. For through our own traditions, as the Lord also
says in the Gospel, we go astraye, and despise the commandments of God.

Now since it is manifest, from whence the Pastor or doctor must fetch his
doctrine, to wit, from no other place, than out of the Scripture of the old and
new Testament, which is the infallible, and undoubted word of God, and that
therefore this doctrine is certain and immutable: There remains now also
something to be spoken of the manner of teaching, which the teacher or pastor
of the Church ought to follow. And here I will only briefly touch the
short sum or effect of matters. The scope ^^ drifte whereunto the pastors in
the church should ^yme.
Before all other things therefore, it is required of Pastors that continually
they account that to be spoken unto them, which the Apostle commanded to be
often told to Archippus. Take heed to the ministry that Coloss. 4.
thou haste received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

And moreover, (...) they never turn away their eyes from that lively picture
of a good and evil shepehearde, which Ezechiel that famous Prophet sets
out after this manner. Thus says the Lord God, woe be unto the shepeheardes
of Israel Ezech. 34.
that feed them selves: should not the shepeheards feed the flocks? ye eat
the fat: ye cloth you with the wool: ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed
not the sheep: the weak have ye not strengthened, the sick have ye not healed,
neither have ye bound up the broken, nor brought again that which was driven
away, neither have ye sought that which was lost: but with cruelty and with
rigor have ye ruled them. And again, I will feed my sheep says the Lord
God, I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven
away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen the weak,
but I will destroy the fat and the strong, and I will feed them with
judgment. Hereby we gather, that it is the duty of a good Pastor or
shepeheard, to feed, and not to devour the flock, to minister, not to exercise
dominion, to seek the safety of his sheep, not his private gain: and also
to seek out again the lost sheep, that is to say, to bring again such as can
not abide the truth, and wander in the darkness of errous, home to the church
and unto the light of the truth: and to restore and bring back again the
sheep that is driven or chased away, to wit, such as are separated from the
fellowship of the Saints or godly, for some private affections sake: to heal
or bind up such as are broken: For he means the wounds of sins, which
Iere. ^. 30.
Jeremy also commands to heal: and to be short, to strengthen the weak
and feeble sheep, and not altogether to tread them under foot: and to bridle
such sheep as be strong, that is to say, men flourishing in virtues, Esai. 42.
8. Mat. 12. 19.
least they be proud, and puffed up with the gifts of God, and so fall away.
But let him think that these things can not be performed, but through sound
and continual teaching derived out of GOD his word.

The manner of teaching extends it self to public and private Of the
manner of teachinge the Church.
doctrines. By public doctrine the Pastor either catechiseth, that is to
say, instructs them that be younglings in religion, or other which are
grounded therein. To the younglings or ignorant sort he opens the
principles of true religion. For Catechesis, or the form of Catechizing,
comprehends the grounds or principles of faith and Christian doctrine, to
wit, the chief points of the covenant, the ten commandments, the
Articles of faith or Apostles Creed, the Lords prayer, and a brief
exposition of the Sacraments.

The ancient churches had Catechisers appointed properly to this charge. And
the Lord commends unto us both in the old Testament and in the new, with
great earnestness, the charge of the youth, commanding us to instruct them,
both betimes, and also diligently in true religion.

Moreover, he sets out great rewards, and grievous punishments The benefit
of Catechisinge.
in that behalf. Assuredly no profit or fruit is to be looked for in the
Church of those hearers, that are not perfectly instructed in the principles
of religion by Catechizing: for they know not of what thing the Pastor in the
Church speaks, when they hear the covenant, the commandment, the law,
grace, faith, prayer, and the sacraments to be named. Therefore if in any
thing, then in this ought greatest diligence to be used.

The doctrine which apperteyneth The interpretation of the scripture.
to the perfecter sort, is specially occupied in the exposition of holy
Scripture. It may appear out of the writings of the old bishops, that it was
the custom in that happy and most holy primitive church, to expound unto
the Churches, not certain parcels of the Canonical books, neither some
chosen places out of them, but the whole books as well of the new Testament
as the old. And in so doing, there came no small fruit unto the Churches. As
at this day also we see by experience, that Churches can not be better
instructed, nor more vehemently stirred up, than with the words of GOD him
self, and with the faithful interpretation of the books of the Gospel, the
law, the Prophets and Apostles. Where, by the way, we give warning, that the
interpretation of the Scriptures, is not a liberty to feine what one lust, and
to wrest the Scriptures which way one will, but a careful comparing of the
Scriptures, and a special gift of the holy Ghost.

For Saint Peter says, No prophecy 2. Pet. 1.
in the Scripture, is of any private interpretation. Wherefore no man has
power to interpret the Scriptures after his own fantasy. Neither is that the
best exposition which has most favorers, as if that were the best
interpretation, which has the consent of the greater multitude. For Arianisme
and Turcisme would, by many degrees, excel Christianisme. That exposition is
best, which is not repugnaunt to faith and love, neither is wrested to defend
and spread abroad the glory and covetousness of men. But I have spoken of
interpretation of the scriptures in the second sermon of the first Decade.

But unless the Scripture be aptly applied, respect being had of place,
Application of scripture.
time, matter, and persons of every Church, and to this end (which I also
taught in the third Sermon of this Decade) that the Church may be edifyed,
not that the teacher in the Church may seem better learned or more eloquent,
his exposition of the Canonical books of the Scripture shall be fruitless,
to the people. The Lord commends unto us the wise steward, and says, Who is
a faithful and wise steward, whom Luke. 12.
his Lord has made ruler over his household to give them their portion of
meat in due season? And as follows in the twelfth of Luke.

Saint Paul also writing to Timothy the Bishop, says, Study 2. Tim. 2.
to show thy self approved unto God, a woorkeman not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth. Meat is unprofitable, unless it be divided and
cut into parts. But here the householder knows what portions he should
give to every one in his family, not having regard what delights every
one, but what is most profitable for every one.

The same Apostle teaching that all the actions of a preacher in the Church
ought to be directed to edification, says, He that prophecieth speaks unto
men, to edifying, and to exhortation, and to comfort. Therefore to the
teaching of the perfecter sort, perteyneth not only the exposition of the
holy Scripture, but also a plain demonstration and manifest as may be of ye
principles and grounds of Christianity, and chieflye an evident doctrine of
repentance and remission of sins in the name of Christ: and also a sharp
rebuking to be used in due time, or a grave, but yet a wise, reproving of their
faults.

For the Lord speaking to his Apostles, says: Ye are the salt of the earth,
if the salt become unsavory, Matthew. 5.
wherewith shall it be salted? Hereunto also perteyneth the confuting of
errors, and repressing of heresies, and the defense of sound doctrine.

Paul says: That the mouths of vain talkers, and seducers of Titus. 1.
minds must be stopped, and sharply rebuked. Neither is it enough simply to
teach true religion, unless the teacher in the Church by often teaching,
constantly urge, defend, and maynteine the same. Hereunto chieflye belong
these words of Paul, I charge (or adjure) thee therefore before GOD, and
before 2. Tim. 4.
the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and dead, at his
appearing and in his kingdom, preach the word, be instant in season and out
of season, improve, rebuke, exhort with long suffering, and doctrine. For the
time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having their
ears ytching, shall after their own lusts, get them an heap of teachers,
and shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto fables.
But watch thou in all things, suffer adversity, do the work of an
E^angeliste, make thy ministry fully known.

Therefore there need very often exhortations, that what the church by often
and plain teaching understands, either to be followed or to be anoyded, the
same she may, being stirred up and compelled by a fervent exhortation, either
constantly follow or refuse. And here it shall be needful for a preacher to use
long sufferaunce, least forthwith he cast away all hope, if he see not by and
by, such happy success as he wishes for: and that some mighty and impudent
adversaries, obstinately strive against him. For Paul says, The servants
of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle 1. Tim. 2,
unto all men, apt to teach, suffering evil with meekness, instructing them
that are contrary minded, if God at any time will give them repentance to the
knowledge of the truth, and that they may come unto them selves again out of
the snares of the devil, which are taken captive of him at his will. There
needs moreover, mild and quickening comfort. For many are troubled, being
tried with diverse temptations, whom unless you faithfully comfort, they are
overcome of Satan. These and such other like, do perteine to the teaching of
the perfecter sort.

Here I may also make mention of the care of the poor. For this especially
Care of the poor.
pertains to a minister, and to their public preaching, whereby, he may
continually provoke the richer sort to mercy, that they may be ready to
distribute. The apostle Paul has left us notable examples of this matter,
almost in all his Epistles, but specially in the sixtenth chapter to the
Romans, and in the first to the Corinthians, and also in the eight and ninth
chapter of the latter Epistle to the Corinthians.

Saint Peter, James, and John, commended very diligently to saint Paul the
care of the poor, as Paul him self rehearses in the second chapter to the
Galathians. And albeit Peter in some place refuse the office of distribution,
yet herein he is altogether careful, that godly and faithful disposers may be
appointed for the poor. Therefore the Acts. 6.
care of the poor perteyneth chiefly to the Pastors, that they be not
neglected, but tenderly cherished as the members of Christ.

The private kind of teaching Private kind of teaching.
differs nothing in the thing it self from that public kind, but it is
called private in respect of the learners. For some one comes to the Pastor,
after the manner of Nicodemus, and desires very familiarly to be instructed
of him in things properly concerning him self. Besides that, this shepehearde
goes privately, and instructs those, whom by evident tokens he has learned
by private conference may be more easily won unto Christ, than by public
preachings.

Moreover, he privately admonishes and takes heed in time, least they that
are more unadvised be deepelyer plunged in evil. Hitherto perteyneth the
visitation both of sick persons, and prisoners, none of whom a faithful
Pastor neglects, but visits them so much the more diligently, as he
perceyueth the^ more grievously tempted. For a good Pastor is always
watchful over the whole flock of Christ, for whom satan lays snares,
raungeing about, seeking whom he may devour.

Him the Pastoure resists by prayer, admonitions, teaching and exhortations.
If so be that every church had such a pastor, which would not easily forsake
the flock, how great fruit (I pray you) should we hope for? Wherefore not
without cause are we commanded, incessantly Prayer for faithful Pastors.
and earnestly to pray unto God, that he would give faithful, wise, godly
and diligent Pastors unto his Church.

Thus have I hitherto spoken of the doctrine of bishops in the church What
things are joined to teachinge.
of God. And unless a bishop teach after this manner, and do those things,
which are joined to teaching, he is unworthy either of the name of a Bishop,
Pastor, or Doctor, how so ever he pretend an Apostolic title. For certain
things are joined to the doctrine of the Church, which also are required of a
preacher of the Gospel, and belong to his office, as are these, to gather
together an holy assembly, wherein he may preach, conceive prayer, and
minister the sacraments. But of these things shall be spoken in their place.

Now there rests to be considered, how bishops may govern the Of the holy
and unblameable life of Bishops.
Church of Christ, with holy example of their life. The Lord in the Gospel
says to his Apostles. Ye are the light of the world, A city that is set on an
high hill, can not be hid, Matthew. 5.
neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick, and it gives light unto all that are in the house. Let your
light so shine before men, that they may ^ee your good works, and glorify
your father which is in heaven. Wherefore Pastors, not only in doctrine but
in holy life, do give light unto the Church: which beholding their life
agreeable to their doctrine, is her self also moved to practice innocence of
life. For ye example of a good man much prevails to ye furthering of ye love
of virtues. And contrariwise ye Scripture witnesses, that the corrupt example
of the sons of Helie, the chief rulers in religion, was very 1. Sam. 3.
analyeable to corrupt the people. For the Scripture says. And the sin of
the children of Helie was to abominable before the face of the Lord, so that
the people began to abhor the sacrifices of the Lord. For men seeing the
corrupt life of the ministers of ye church, begin somewhat to dout of the whole
doctrine, crying, If ye pastor thought those things true, which he teaches
unto us, he him self would not live so dissolutely. Therefore such teachers,
are said to overthrow that with their naughty life, which they have builded
with wholesome doctrine. Wherefore Paul requires a bishop or pastor of the
people, which should be blameless, that is to say, which can not rightly and
worthily be reprehended of the ^aythfull. For otherwise, by how much every
Bishop shall be more sincere and upright, by so much more shall he be subject
to slanders and reproaches of the wicked, the Lord him self foretelling the
same in the Gospel. If they have called (says he) the Lord of the house
Beelzebub, Matthew. 10.
how much more shall they call them of his household? And, If they have John.
25.
persecuted me, they will also persecute you.

And again, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute Matthew. 5.
you, and lying, shall say all manner of evil saying against you for my sake.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Therefore, a pastor
ought very carefully and as much as in him is, to take heed, that both at
home and abroad, he live a life worthy of him self and his calling.

Let him live chastely, as well being single, as married. Let temperaunce,
soberness, thriftinesse or good husbandry, hospitality, and other virtues
which I have before rehearsed out of the Apostle, flourish in a bishop.

Let him govern his own household wisely, and godlily instruct the^, and so
bridle them, that he give not occasion of offense to the Church, through
riotousnesse or other misdeedes. For so also the Apostle Paul has commanded,
(who frameing again the exercises of a bishop) says, Till I come, give
attendaunce to reading, to exhortation and doctrine. He 1. Tim. 4.
requires of Timothy a diligent reading, that is to say, a continual study,
whereby he may more perfectly exhort and teach. But Paul requires of him that
has been brought up in the knowledge of the Scriptures from a child, as
elsewhere he writes, a continual study of the Scriptures. How great
diligence then does the Apostle require of them, who as they have not obtained
so plentiful gifts of the spirit, as Timothy had, so they are not exercised
in the Scriptures from their infancy? Let a sort of them therefore be ashamed
of their unskillfulness: let them be ashamed of leisure not bestowed in study,
and of their trauelsome idleness. For as many read not any thing at all, but
continually live idly, and as it were rot away in idleness: so a number of
innumerable others are busied in those things, which nothing become Bishops.
Therefore the Apostle says: No man which goes a warrefare, intangleth 2.
Tim. 2.
him self with the affairs of this life, that he may please him, which has
chosen him to be a soldier. Here were a fit place to speak of stipendes due
unto Pastors: but we will defer it to an other place. But if Bishops come
abroad among the people, at any time for business sake, and be present in
assemblies of honest men, with no less care ought they to endeavor, least
either by deed or word, or by apparel, or company keeping, or finally in
the whole course of their life, they give any just occasion of offense to the
Church.

Let there appear in Pastoures, in all places and at all times holy
uprightness, meet ripeness of judgment, honest behavior, wisdom,
modesty, humanity, humility, and authority worthy of Gods ministers. But
let the contrary vices and wicked misdeedes be far from them.

In these few words I think are contained those things, which other have
handled at large, entreating of the discipline and behavior of the Clergy.
For all ages understood, that a dissolute and loose life was evil in all
degrees and kinds of men: but in the ministers of the Church worsse, and
most intolerable.

For what can a minister of the Church do in the Church, whose authority is
altogether lost? Authority therefore is requisite in Pastors. Of the want
hereof many do complain, and seeing it under foot, go about to rear it
up again with I can not tell what kind of proppes of titles and ceremonies.

But authority is not gotten with Authority of pastors
such light and vain things. It is rather obtained by the Grace of God,
through the love of truth and uprightness of life: if happily God touch men's
hearts: so as they understand that GOD works his work in the Church, by
his ministers, as by his instruments, if they perceive that ministers do the
work of the Lord with feruentnesse of spirit, and not coldly, not fearing
any thing in a good cause, no, not the wicked and mighty men of this world,
but do resist them: and yet that they do nothing of hatred or malice, but do
all things of a fatherly affection, with a good courage, constancy, and
wisdom. Whereunto if there be joined, not an hypocritical, but a holy and
upright life in deed, together with honest, modest, and comely behavior, all
wise men shall perceive, that there is sufficient authority thereby proved to
a godly minister. I would not yet the Donatistes or Anabaptists should
hereby claim any kind of defense or protection, were it never so small.

They contend that the ministry of the word and Sacraments, For the scarce
good life of minis^^rs good doctrine must not be rejected.
executed by a minister whose life is unclean, becomes thereby of no value.
But albeit a holy life be requisite in a minister, yet their ministry
becomes not of no value through the ministers dishonest life, so his doctrine
be sound and perfect. For the Lord in the Gospel commands to hear them
that teach in Moses chair, but he forbids to follow Matthew. 22.
their doings, for they teach good things, but do them not. Of this matter
I have spoken in the second Sermon of this Decade.

Nazianzen very properly says, The printe of a seal is all one, whether it be
graven in iron or in gold. And it is one and the same Gospel, it is one and
the self same heavenly treasure sent of the father, whether it be brought by a
good messinger or a bad. But in the mean space, the dishonest life of the
ministers of the church ought not to be winked at, but to be chastened, and
such as are past cure, ought to be put out of the ministry, least through
their continual offense they make the holy ministry infamous.

But many will say, Why handle you these things in public preaching? These
things were to be told the ministers privately. I answer that the very
laws which properly perteyned to the Priests, were in times past
communicated to the magistrates and governors of the people, and read before
the people them selves.

Moreover, it is manifest that Christ our Lord handled those things in
public Sermons, which properly perteyned to the Doctors and Pastors of the
people. Hereunto may be added that Saint Paul speaking of Elders or Ministers,
says: Them that sin, rebuke openly, 1. Tim. 5.
that the rest also may fear. The holy Scripture with great diligence
describing good and faithful shepeheardes and teachers, with no less
faythfulnesse and diligence does painte out the false teachers and Hyrelings
false shepherds or wolves, to the end all men may know them, and take heed
of them. These things are every where to be seen in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles. Yet singular places, if any man would know, are to be
seen Deuteronomy. 13. and and 18. Isaic. 56. Iere. 23. Ezech. 34 Dan. 11. Math. 7.
and 23. The Epistles of Paul in describing and confuting of them are very
plentiful. And Saint Peter in overthrowing of such men, spends a great
part of his latter Epistle.

The testimonies and examples of the same Prophets and Apostles do show, that
godly ministers and faithful Pastors shall be vexed with all kynds of
afflictions and persecutions. Yet the very same nevertheless do witness
evidently, that the ministry shall never be utterly oppressed, but that the
ministers shall continually have the victory, yea, even when they are slain.
For the Lord always gives ministers unto his Church, who though they be
tried as gold is in the fire, yet they overcome through him which has
overcome the world, and the Prince of the world. The last times shall be very
wicked, as we read the times of Noe and Loath were: but as then also in that
uttermost corruption those two most excellent men with a few other singular
men in all godliness, and true worshippers of God are read to have flourished,
and done their duty: even so unto the very end of the world, the
ministry of the word shall also endure, and worthy doctors and pastors
shall flourish, striving against, and persecuting all ungodliness and
looseness of life. Let the enemies of the truth cease to hope for the
overthrow of the ministry, and ministers of the word of God. I will, says
the Lord in the Gospel, be with you always, even unto the end of the world.
He can not lie who has 2. These. 2.
spoken this. He shall consume Antichriste, says the Apostle, with the spirit
of his mouth, and shall abolishe him with the brightness of his coming unto
judgment. There shall be therefore ministers in the Church and preachers,
yea, in despite of the gates of hell, rage they never so horribly, even unto
the end of the world.

These things hitherto have I comprehended as briefly as I could, touching
the ministry of the word, and the ministers of the Churches of Christ. But
it is not in our power to frame or give such Pastors. By the grace and
goodness of God, good Pastors are given, and the wicked are taken away.

Let us all therefore call upon God, praying him to give us faithful and
godly ministers, whereby his name may be always sanctified, and the Church of
God may be happily governed, to the salvation of all those ye believe.

Of the form and manner how to pray to GOD, that is, Of the calling on the
name of the Lord, where also the Lords prayer is expounded, and also singing,
thanksgiving, and the force of prayer is entreated.
The fifth Sermon.
AFter the ministry of the word of God in the church of Christ handled, me
thincketh I have convenient place to entreat of the prayer of the faithful,
whereunto godly ministers never leave to stir up the church.

The word prayer is very largely taken among writers, and in daily use: What
^^^yer is.
At this present we use it after ye same manner y^ David the Prophet used it,
saying: Hear my prayer, O God, and let my cry come unto thee. For prayer is
an humble and earnest The defi^ition of ^^ayer and that be (...) parts ^^ereof.
laying forth of a faithful mind, whereby we either ask good things at gods
hands, or else give him thanckes, for those things which we have received. And
of prayer chieflye there are two parts, invocation or asking, and thanks
giving. By petition we lay open unto God the requests and desires of dure
heart, beseeching him to give us good things, and that he will turn from us
evil things, as may be to his glory and good pleasure, and according to our
necessity. In invocation or petition we comprehend obsecration, which is a
more vehement prayer, and also intercession, whereby we commend other men's
matters to the Lord. For we offer prayers to ye Lord our God, not only for our
selves, but also for our brethren, and for their manifold necessities, for them
that are distressed with perils, for those that ve sick, for them which
suffer persecution, or are in a manner oppressed with other calamities and
afflictions. Neither do we exclude beseechinges, whereby we earnestly desire
evils to be turned away from our selves or from others. There are also
complaints, whereby the Saints in their prayers do holily expostulate with God.

Thanckesgiuing comprehends both dunne praises, and also celebrateth with a
joyful spirit God his noble power, and the benefits received at his hand.
Hereunto is referred a great part of the psalms, whereof part perteine to
invocation or calling upon God, and some ferue to teach or instruct, and some
to declare or expound, whereof at this present there is no place to speak.
Paul the blessed Apostle of Christ acknowledging these parts of prayer,
writing to the Colos. Col. 4.
says: Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving. And to
the Philippians: Let your requests Philip. 4.
be showed unto God, in prayer and supplication with giving of thanks. And
again unto Timothy: I exhort therefore (says Paul) that first of all 1. Tim.
2.
prayers, supplicatio^s, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men.

Kinds of prayers are these. There Kinds of prayers.
is a private prayer of every faithful man, and there is also a public
prayer of the whole church. Private prayer is made unto God by every faithful
man, in what place soever, either in the house or without doors, in the closet
of his heart, and temple of his own body. For S. Peter went up into the
Acts. 9.
uppermost part of the house, and prayed. S. Pans says: I will therefore that
the me pray every where, lifting ^. Tim. 2.
up pure hands. And Christ our Lord himself very often departed even out of
the temple into the mount to pray. And in the Gospel he says: When thou
prayest, enter into thy Matthew. 6.
chamber, and when thou have shutt thy door, pray to thy father which is in
secret.

Public prayer is that which is used of ye church; which is made unto God in
the holy assembly, according to the accustomed order of every church. Now
the pastors duty is as Paul also admonishes in the 1. Tim. 2. and we in
the last Sermon before this have rehearsed, to gather together, instruct and
preserve the assemblies, in which, supplications or common prayers are made.
And they are greatly to be blamed, who are more negligent in this behalf,
than becomes them, neither are they in deed to be suffered, which seeldome
or never teach diligently, and are cold in stirring up a desire in men to
pray. Men by nature are slow and slack in the study of religion: and
therefore we have need of a sharp spur. And the charge and office of
stirring up, and provoking, is committed to the pastors of churches. The
prophets somewhere cry: Blow out the trumpet in Sion, assemble a
congregation. For in a holy congregation three things are chiefly used, the
teaching of the Of holy assemblies
Gospel, faithful prayers, and religious celebration or administration of ye
Sacraments. And sometimes there is a collection made, for the releeuing of the
poor and of the church. The holy Scripture wittnesseth that these things are
not instituted at the will and pleasure of man, but by the authority of God,
yea, and immediately after the first beginning of things, and that they were
also used of ye most holy worshippers of God. Of those most ancient patriarchs
both which were first before the flood, and which followed immediately after,
there is no doubt, since the scripture plainly witnesses of Jacob himself the
nephue of Abraham, that he exected an altar Gene. 35.
in Bethel, whereunto he assembled his whole household, though it were exceeding
great, and there offered sacrifice unto God. In Moses time by the law, in most
evident commandments, he instituted holy assemblies. Yea in the 10.
commandments, he diligently Exodus 20.
commands to sanctify the sabbath day: which also comprehe^deth holy
assemblies. The holy prophets of God do every where praise and commend the
ecclesiastical assemblies of Gods people. Neither did Christ our Lord disallow
them when he came in ye flesh. For as in the most notable assemblies and
feasts he taught with great diligence, even so he gathered and assembled
together, both the people and also his disciples, whom he specially commanded
that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for ye promise Luke. 24.
of the father: which thing when they were gathered together into an Acts. 2.
assembly and in prayer, we read in ye Acts to have been performed. There
also the assembly of the faithful is commended to us, as appears both in ye
11. and 14. cap. of the 1. epist. of Paul to the Corin. Those supplications
which the same Paul commands to be made for all them that are set in
authority, are made chiefly in holy asse^blies. Truly Pliny an heathen
author writing to Traianus the Emperor, does make very manifest mention of
holy assemblies. Holy assemblies had of old time very excellent promises, as
we may see in the prayer of Solomon, which is described unto you in 1. Reg. ^.
the first book of the Kings the 8. cap. And at this day ye church of Christ
has promises nothing inferior to them, Christ our Lord, saying: I say unto
Matthew. 18*
you, that if two of you shall agree in earth as touching any thing that they
shall ask, it shall be done for them of my father which is in heaven. For where
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. Behold, ye Lord him self is in the middst of the assemblies of saints.
And where ye Lord is, there is both plenty and the treasure of all good
things. And therefore experience it self which we have of matters teaches,
that the supplications of the church are effectual. For the Lord hears the
prayers of the church, and delivers from evil, those whose safety the church
commends unto him. We have oftentimes had experience, yt they which were in
extreme danger have found very present help, even at the same instant
wherein the congregation has offered their prayers to the Lord.

Moreover the example moves very many, otherwise hard hearted and barbarous.
For they see ye devout godliness of the holy congregation, and the feruencie of
the faithful in assemblies, and are thereby moved, so that entering into
themselves, they acknowledge yt they are miserable, and desire to be partakers
of this fellowship, according to the saying of S. Paul. If therefore when the
whole church is come together in ^. Cor. 14.
one, and all speak strange tongues, there come in they that are unlearned or
they which believe not, will they not say that ye are out of your wits? But
if all prophecy, and there come in one which believes not, or one unlearned,
he is rebuked of all men, and is judged of all. And so are the ^ecrets of his
heart made manifest, and so he will fall down on his face, and worship God, and
say plainly that God is in you in deed. With what confidence therefore, and
how shamefully dare some set light by holy assemblies, and not only set light
by them, but also scorn at them, as if they were assembled together without
any profit at all? David in his banishment makes complaint of nothing so
much, as that he was compelled to wander in the wilderness, and was shutt out
from holy assemblies. For he promises the Lord, he will enter into his holy
congregation if ever he be restored again. Verily when the Lord says in the
Gospel, He which is of God, hears Gods word, it follows, that they which
love the congregation wherein the word of God is preached, have the natural
mark of the sons of God.

But because many do not only We must pray.
loathe holy assemblies, but also say that prayers are altogether superfluous,
vain, and unprofitable, Before we proceed any further, we will show that the
godly must pray, and that the prayers of the faithful are both effectual,
profitable, and necessary. They say all things are done by the providence of
God, and therefore prayers are unprofitable. For that which God has
fore-knowen, that verily will he bring to pass after the manner of his fore
knowledge, neither can it be hindered by prayers. But these men abuse the
providence of God, for that cut of it they gather that thing, which the holy
Scriptures do not teach them to gather. For in Deuteronomy. in express words Moses
has left written, The Lord had determined to destroy you, Deuteronomy. 9.
therefore, I made intercession unto the Lord, and I found favor. Jonas Ion.
3. 4.
threatens so certain destruction unto the Ninevites from the Lord, that he
even foretold the number of days. But when the men of Niniue believed the
Lord, and repented, the Lord beecame favorable to them again, neither did he
destroy them when they repented.

Moreover Esaie had spoken to Ezechias out of ye mouth of ye Lord, Thou Esai.
3^.
shall die, and not live. But when the king powered forth his prayers, even
from the bottom of his ha^t unto the Lord, God changed his sentence that he
had pronounced. For the Lord himself says in Jeremy: I will speak
soudeinly against a nation or a kingdom for to pluck it up, and to root it
out, and to destroy Iere. 18.
it: But if this nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
wickedness, I will repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon them,
etc.

Wherefore, the prayers of the faithful are effectual, stayinge the wrathful
judgments of God, yea, and taking them clean away. For whereas they object
again, That prayer is a declaration of things, which Objection
we require of the Lord, and that God fore-knoweth all things, therefore that
those things are unprofitably and supers^uouslie declared unto him, which he
already knows, and so for that cause that prayer is unprofitable: it is
confuted of Christ our Lord himself, who when he had plainly said, Your
heavenly father knows what things ye have need of before ye ask of him,
Yet nevertheless adding Matthew. 6.
a form of prayer he teaches us to pray. In an other place he commands
us and stirs us up to pray often, Watch, and pray, says he, least you
enter into temptation. And Paul says, Rejoice always, pray continually. In
every place there are many precepts of this kind. 2. These. 5.


Neither do we declare our matters to him, as to one that knows them not,
but we utter them to him that understands the desires of our heart, and do
humble our selves at the feet of his majesty. We ask that of him, which
we know we want, but yet of him certeinely to be received, who is the author
of all goodness. For we believe his sure and infallible promises: In y^ mean
time prayers are not super^^uons, for that the Lord would assuredly give that
which we asked.

The Lord promised the delivery Ierem. 2^
of his people, whereof the godly doubted nothing at all, yet with incessant
supplications they prayed unto the Lord, crying: Deliver us O Lord our God:
neither did they think they labored in vain. To the Anabaptists
Anabaptists.
pretending absolute pureness, and therefore being pure, neither can nor ought
to pray, Forgive us our debtes, since there remain no debtes, the most holy
Evangelist and Apostle John answers, and says: If we say 1. John. (...)
we have no sin, we deceive our s^lues, and the truth is not in us. If we
acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say that we have not sinned, we
make him a lier, and his word is not in us. For as long as we live in this
world, there remain remnaunts of sin, to be washed away every moment by the
grace of Christ.

Moreover, where as they object, It is written, We know that GOD does not
hear sinners, But we are John. 9.
all sinners, therefore God d^eth hear none of us, and so men's prayers are
found to be unprofitable. We answer, that of sinners some are altogether
ungodly and despisers of GOD, those God hears not. There are again
repentaunt men, and such as fear God, which nevertheless are sinners, and
rightly so called, because of the remnaunts of sin: those God hears. Which
might he showed by the examples of David, Manasses, Peter, the thief erucified
with Christ, and many other which were both sinners, and when they pray^d were
heard.

Therefore we say that the prayers of the faithful are not only profitable
Prayers (...) necessary.
and effectual, but also necessary unto men. For we are men, defiled with
sin, destitute and void of all goodness, Every good giving and every
perfect gift is from above, and ^ames. 1.
comes down from the father of lights, He commands us to pray, and
offers to them that pray very large promises. Wherefore our fathers were
both very often exercised, and very ^eruent in prayer, by their example
teaching us that prayers are necessary. The Scripture also diligently and at
large rehearses how great things by their prayers in very weighty affairs
and dangers, yea, in matters most necessary, they obtained of our most true
and most bountiful Lord and God. The Apostles pray for the holy Ghost, faith,
and the increase of faith, and they receive their requests, not spareingly, but
liberally, being made partakers of all manner graces of Christ. In the Gospel
the Publican prays in the temple, and says, God be merciful to me a
sinner: and he forthwith found ^ake. 18.
the Lord merciful unto him. What and how great things Helias by his prayers
obtained of the Lord, the holy history records. And the blessed Apostle
James applies his example unto us also, that we also in faith should call
upon God. Which I rehearse least any man should think that that pertains
nothing unto us. Again, how much the faithful prayers of Moses, David,
Iosaphat, Ezechias, and other valiant men prevailed in wars, in famines, in
sickenesses, and in other exceeding great dangers, it were long to recite.
These examples prove that prayer is both always necessary unto men, and very
effectual. For we plainly see that God is moved with the prayers of his
faithful. For he is good and God is moved with prayers.
merciful, he loves us, he took flesh, that he might be touched with feeling
of our infirmities, least we should be dismayed at him: he is true and
faithful, perfourming those things faithfully which he promises. What? does
he not freely, liberally, and bountifully call all men unto him, offering
himself wholly to them that call upon him in faith? But in that they which
pray do not always receive that which Why they that pray do not always
receive that they ask.
they ask, it does not prove that prayer is altogether unprofitable: for it
is oftentimes profitable for him that prays, not to receive his requests.
There are moreover many causes, for the which God either puts off the
things that are asked, or does not grant them. There is a kind of men which
pray, of whom we read written: He that stops his ^are at the Prou. 21.
cry of the poor, shall cry himself, and not be heard. Again, Though ye
make many prayers, yet will I hear Isai. 1.
nothing at all, seeing your hands are full of blood. So again in Solomon
Wisdom cries, testifying that she Prou. 1.
will not hear them that call on her, because they would not first hear her
giving them warning in time. All these things in a manner are gathered from ye
person of them that pray: from the thing it self which they pray for, that
which follows is derived. S. James says: Ye ask and receive not, because
ye ask amiss, even to James. 4.
consume it upon your lusts. For the Matthew. 20.
Lord also aunswering two even of his chosen disciples which required the
highest rooms in the kingdom of Christ, says: Ye know not what ye ask.
Furthermore, holy men when they ask holy and necessary things, or at the
least not unjust or evil, which nevertheless they receive not of the Lord,
they forthwith think that God is a God of judgment and justice, and
therefore that he will not immediately deliver out of afflictions: yet desire
they deliverance with continual prayers. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth,
whom he chasteneth, he does not to this end, to destroy ^rou 3. Hebr. 12.
them, but that they should not be condemned with the wicked world. For it is
lawefull in such distresses to pray with David, Rebuke me not in thine anger, O
Lord, neither chasten Psalm. 38.
me in thy displeasure, And with Jeremy, Lord ^orrecte me in judgment, not in
fury. And with Abacuch, When thou art angry remember thy mercy. The godly
doubt nothing of ye power and goodness of God to men ward. That which God will,
and which is profitable for the children of God, god can do. Innumerable
examples of this thing, the old and new testament does affoard us. Wherefore
when we are not delivered, when we obtain not our desires, it is most sure
that God will have it so, and that it is profitable for us it should so be. By
this means he hears our prayers when he hears us. For our prayers tend to
this end only, that it might go well with us. God since he is only wise,
knows what can profit and what can hurt us, and does not give us y^ we ask,
yet by not giving, he in very deed grau^teth that which is good for us.
Therefore the lawful prayer of ye faithful is always effectual, and evermore
obteineth his purpose, the Lord gaunting to his that which he knows to be
good.

Furthermore, the Lord deferreth to Why God ^eferreth ^o give that which ^e
means to given
perform that which is asked, yea and at sometime seems altogether to
neglecte our prayers: but he does that by prolonging to try his: that he may
make their faith ye more fervent, and his gifts also more acceptable, which
are so much the more joyfully received, by how much they are looked for by an
ardent desire. In this temptation let that saying of the prophet comfort us.
Can a woman forgett her Isai. 49.
child, and not have compassion on the son of her own womb? Though they
should forget, yet will not I forget thee. For ye church had said, God has
forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Let us now consider what manner Who
is to be called upon of them that pray.
of prayer that should be, which he y^ calls on God uses. That question
cannot be better resolved, than by weighing the chiefest circumstances. First
therefore let us consider, who must be called upon of them that pray. None
verily but ye one and only God. For three things are required of him which is
prayed unto. First, that he hear ye prayers of all the men in the whole world,
that he pierce and exactly know their hearts, yea that he know more rightly and
better all the desires of men than men themselves can utter them. Secondly that
he be present every where, and have power over all things in heaven, in
earth, and in hell, which has in his power all the ways, and all the means
to help. Thirdly that his will be exceeding good, and ready prepared, that
that which he can, he may also be willing to do. But these properties are found
in God only. For God only searches the reins and the hearts: he only sees
and hears all things: he only knows more perfectly those things which are
within and without man, than man himself: he only is present in all places:
he only is Almighty: he only is wise: the will of God only imbraceth man
with most perfect goodness, and is always ready, and only procures
faithfully that which is profitable for man: therefore ought God only to be
called upon. But who can attribute these properties, were it to ye most chosen
souls in heaven without blasphemy and sacrilege? Therefore the souls in heaven
living with God are not to be called upon. Especially since ye scripture in
plain words testifies, ye Abraham and Jacob know us not, and commands us
to call on ^sai. 63.
God, and forbids to communicate those things which are Gods to creatures.
And that we say nothing else, to whom I pray you, of all the saints or angels
in heaven can we say without blushing, O our father which art in heaven, and
that which follows in the Lords prayer? Let us therefore call upon God only
that heavenly father, whom alone all the saints, or godly men as many as
have bin in ye church, have called upon. But since no mortal man, how good
soever he seem to ^y whom God the Father is called upon.
be, is worthy to come forth into the sight of ye eternal and most holy God:
which thing all men with one voice confess, many in deed and diverse
patrones, intercessours, and advocates, are chosen and received of them that
pray, by whose intercession either they themselves might be brought to God, or
their prayers presented unto God. Wherefore some have chosen to themselves
angels, other apostles, other ye most holy, and among all other women, that
blessed virgin ye mother of Christ: other some have chosen other, as they have
put confidence in this man or ye man: but they have forged these things unto
themselves out of the imagination of their own heart, and have not learned them
at the mouth of ye Lord. The scripture y^ only rule of truth sets forth to
us one mediator, intercessour, patron, and advocate, by whom we may come unto
God, and by whom we may present our prayers unto the Lord. All ye prayers of
all men are unpleasant and abominable, which are not made by Christ Jesus.
Neither does true faith suffer us to forge and imagine another advocate for
Christ, or some other with Christ in the sight of God, nor our selves alone
without our advocate Christ to rushe into the presence of God ye father. Here
true Christians are separated from Jews, from Turks, yea and Papists also.
For they despising the son of God, call upon the father only, without the
mediation of Christ Jesus. But the voice of God by the Gospel and his Apostles
pronounces against them. In the Gospel we read ye Lord said: The father has
committed all judgment John. 5.
unto the son, because that all men should honor the son, even as they
honor the father. He that honors not the son, the same honoreth not the
father, which has sent him. And again, I am the way, and the truth, and the
life. No man comes to the father, John. 14.
but by me. And John the Apostle and Evangelist says, Who soever denies the
son, the same has not the father. 1. John. 2.
But these men do not acknowledge Christ to be ye only intercessour, but teach
ye saints in his steed or with him ought to be called upon as patrones
before God. But ye same John showing an advocate unto Christians, did not
appoint him self, did not lay before us saints in steed of Christ, or them
with Christ, But, says he, we have an advocate with GOD the father Jesus
Christ the righteous. Neither does Paul show us any other in 1. Tim. 2. cap.
and Heb. 7. cap. To ye Ephesi. By Christ (says he) we have Ephe. 3.
boldness and entrance with confidence by faith in him. Christ is sufficient
for them that believe, as in whom alone the father has stoared up all good
things, commanding us to ask those things in him, and by him thorough
prayer. These things are sufficient for minds not desirous of contention. They
that will, let them search further in the third Sermon of the fourth Decade.

I have told you who is to be prayed unto, or called upon of the godly What
things provoke man to call upon God.
worshipers of God, and by whom: to wit, God alone, by the only son of God
our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us now see what should stir up man to call upon
God: surely the spirit of our God principally. For prayer is rightly counted
among the gifts of grace. For neither could we earnestly nor heartily call
upon our God, unless we be stirred up and provoked thereunto by the spirit of
God. For albeit the commandment of God will us to pray, and present
necessity and danger drive us, and the example of other allure us to pray,
yet all these things would do nothing, unless the spirit enforce our minds
unto his will, and guide and keep us in prayer. Therefore though there be many
causes concurring, which move men to prayer: yet the chief original of prayer
is the holy Ghost, to whose motion and government in the entrance of all
prayers, whosoever pray with any fruit, do beg with an holy preface. To this
perteine these words of ye holy Apostle: The spirit also (says he) helps
our infirmities. For we know Romans 8.
not what to pray as we ought: but the spirit it self makes requests for us,
with sighs which cannot be expressed. But he which searches the hearts,
knows what is the meaning of the spirit, for he makes requests for the
saints according to the will of God. In deed the spirit of God is said to
make intercession, not that he in very deed prays, and groaneth, but because
he stirs up our minds to pray and to sighe, and brings to pass, that
according to the pleasure of GOD we should make intercession or pray for the
Saints, that is to say for our selves. But let us consider with what
abilities he must be furnished, which With wha^ abilities ^he must b^
furnished which comes to pray unto God.
comes of purpose to pray unto God. First it is necessary that he lay aside
all opinion of his own worthiness and righteousness, that he acknowledge
himself to be a sinner, and to stand in need of all good things: and so let
him yield himself unto ye mere mercy of God, desiring of the same to be
filled with all things that are good. For that great prophet of God Daniel
says: We do not present our Dan. 9.
prayers before thee, in our own righteousness, but in thy manifold mercies.
Also you read the like prayers offered unto God Psalm. 79. For the people of the
Lord cry: Help us O Lord of our salvation, for the glory of thy name,
deliver us, and be merciful unto our sins, for thy names sake. Remember not
our sins of old, make have and let thy mercy deliver us. In the new
Testament the Phariseie in Luke, trusting in his own righteousness, Luke. 18.
is put by, and cast off from the Lord, but the Publican freely confessing his
sins, and craving mercy of God, is heard and justified. For unless we
acknowledge our nakedness, weakness, and poverty, who, I pray you, will pray
unto God? For not they that bestrong, but they that be sick have need of the
Physician. And the Lord in the Gospel says, Ask and ye shall receive, knock
and it shall be opened unto you, seek and ye shall find. He therefore that is
commanded to ask that he may receive, has not as yet that he asks: he that
knocks, by knocking signifies that he stands without doors: and he which
seeks, has lost that which yet he seeks for. We therefore being shut out
from the joys of Paradise, by prayer do seek and ask for that which we have
lost and have not. Therefore where as David and Ezechias and other saints of
God in prayer do allege their own righteousness, for which they seem worthily
to require to be heard, truly they regard not their own worthiness, but
rather the truth of God. He has promised that he will hear them that worship
him, therefore the Godly say: Behold we are thy worshippers, therefore it is
meet thou should not neglect us, but deliver us. In the mean while in
other places they speak in such sort of their righteousness, that we cannot
doubt, that in their prayers they made mention of their righteousness, with a
certain measure and limitation. Enter not into judgment with thy servant
(says David) for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. etc.

Furthermore, and that which is the chief of all, it is needful that Faith
is (...) that (...).
they which pray, must have a true and fervent faith. Let the doctrine of faith
therefore in the matter of prayer, show us light as the morning starr, and
with an assured hope to obtein of God the thing which is asked, let him that
prays make his petition. Let him ask in faith, says saint James, nothing
wavering: for he that ^^mes. 1.
wauereth is like a wave of the Sea, tossed of the wind, and carried with
violence. Neither let that man think, that he shall receive any thing of the
Lord.

And Paul also says, How shall they call upon him, on whom they have not
believed? I have spoken of faith in the fourth sermon of the first Decade. But
to the end that faith may increase in just measure, and flourish and continue
stable, we must labor in the promises and examples from every place gathered
together. We will recite a few. In the book of Psalms we read, Offer unto
God Psalm. 50.
thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most highest. And, Call upon me in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Again,
The Lord is nigh unto all that Psalm. 145.
call upon him, unto all such as call upon him in truth (or faithfully.) He will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he will also hear their cry, and
will save them. Again in Esaie, the Esa. 65.
Lord says, And it shall come to pass that before they call, I will answer
them, and while they are but yet thinking how to speak, I will hear them. In
Matthew. the Lord says, Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find,
knock and it shall be opened vnyou. For whosouer asks receives, and whosoever
seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened, etc. In the same
Gospel the Lord says, And Matthew. 21.
al things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive. In
the 11. of Mark the same sentence is Mark. 11.
thus alleged. Whatsoever, says he, ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye
shall have it, and it shall be done unto you. Again, in the gospel according to
Saint John the Lord says, Whatsoever John. 14.
ye shall ask in my name, that will I do. Again, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Whatsoever ye shall ask John. 16.
the father in my name, he will give it you. Ask and ye shall receive. David
frames an argument of the example of the Fathers, and says, Our Fathers hoped
in thee, they trusted in Psalm. 22.
thee, and thou did deliver them, they called upon thee, and they were
helped, they did put their trust in the, and were not confounded. For therevpo^
he gathers that he also shall not be forsaken of the Lord. In the history of
the Gospel are very many examples to be seen which exceedingly confirm and
establish the faith of the Godly. But since faith is not a vain imagination,
but an effectual power Let the life of him that prays be answearable to his
faith.
working by the holy Ghost all kind of good works (though they neither
trust unto these, neither think in consideration of them to be heard) yet
nevertheless such sinners as are faithful do not impudently and without
repentance trust to their own wits, dealing only in words with the Lord,
but they join a holy life with prayers. For Solomon says, He that turns
his Prou. 2^.
ear from hearing the Law, his prayer shall be abominable. And the Lord
says in Esaie, Though ye make many prayers, yet will I hear Isaie. 1
nothing at all, seeing your hands are full of blood. Of such impenitent
persons we understand that in the Gospel, God hears not sinners. But that
more is, the Saints shall obtain nothing if they continue John. 9.
prayer for such. For Jeremy praying earnestly for his people, otherwise
being obstinately wicked, hears, Thou shall not not pray for this people,
thou shalt neither give Iere. 7. 11.
thanks nor bid prayer for them, make thou no intercession for them, for, in
no wise will I hear thee. See thou not what they do in the cities of Judah?
The children gather sticks, the Fathers kindle the fire, the women kneade the
doughe to make cakes for the Que^ne of heaven. They power out drink offeringes
unto strange Gods, to provoke me unto wrath. After the same manner, says
the Lord in Ezechiel, If I send a pestilence into this Land, and if Noe, Job,
and Daniel Ezech. 14.
were therein, (or in the midst of it,) as truly as I live, says the Lord
God, they shall deliver neither son nor daughter, but save their own souls
in their righteousness.

Wherefore it follows, that the supplications of unrepentant men, and
impudently perseuearing in their sins, though they cry without ceassing,
Help us O God our Savior, Deliver us O Lord, We beeseeche thee to hear us,
are altogether fruitelesse. For they desire to be preserved that they might
take their further pleasure, and commit wickedness. And though God give us
freely those things which we ask, yet it is necessary that an affection or
desire to live well do accompany so great benefits received at the hands of God.
For here we ought most diligently to take heed, that we think not we shall be
heard for our virtues sake, but for the mere mercy of God in Christ Jesus.

Moreover whosoever desires to Our mind^ must be ^fted up ^o heavenly things.
have his prayers to be acceptable unto God, let him lift up his mind from
earthly things unto heavenly things Touching that thing ye blessed Martyr of
Christ Cyprian eloquently and holily entreating, says: When we stand occupied
in prayer, we must with our whole heart watch and be diligent in prayer. Let
all worldly and fleshly thoughts depart, neither let the mind think upon any
thing else, at that time, than only that which it prays. Let thy breast be
shut against the adversary, and let it be open to God only, neither let it
suffer the enemy of god to enter into it in the time of prayer. For he
oftentimes steals upon us and enters in, and subtily deceiving us turns
away our prayers from God* that we may have one thing in our heart, and another
thing in our mouth: but not the sound of the voice, but the mind and sense
ought to pray unto God with an unfeigned affection. Thus far he.

But that the mind of him ye prays may be lifted up from earthly things
unto heavenly things, y^ is chiefly the work of the spirit, of true faith,
the stedfastnes of hope, and the fervent love of god: if also we have in
remembrance the dreadful majesty of God, before whose eyes we stand praying.
Him all the creatures in heaven and in earth do worship and reverence: thousand
thousands of Angels serve him. Let us think with our selves how profitable
and necessary things we ask of God: without which we can not be happy. Let
us moreover remove from us al those things which either deteine and keep us
in this world, or pull us back unto earthly things, of which sort are these,
slouthfulnes, covetousness, and surfeiting, and to be short, al other sins
like unto these. And contrariwise let us apply our selves to watchfulnes,
sobernes, gentleness, and liberality. Surely the Scripture, almost every
where, joins unto prayer, fasting and mercy.

For these virtues make us more cheerful and ready to pray through faith.

Daniel says, I turned my face unto the Lord God, and sought him D^niel. 9.
by prayer and supplication, with fasting, sackcloath, and ashes. Neither
unlike to this do Jonas and Joel teach. Yea in the Gospel and writings of
the Apostles, we every where hear, Watch, be fervent in prayer, be sober.
For the belly being full, either no prayers at all, or else fat and vnweildie
prayers are made. Whereof we read that saint Augustine said, Will thou have
thy prayer fly up unto God, make it two wings, Fasting, and Alms deeds.
For in the Acts of the Apostles the Angel of the Lord says to Cornelius the
Centurion, Thyprayers, and thine alms deeds are had in remembrance in the
Acts. 10
sight of God.

And surely God requires of us fervent prayer: but it can not choose Let
prayer proceed from love.
but be cold, which is not inflamed with charity. Therefore they that be
cruel, and unwilling to forgive their brethren their trespasses, and do still
retein hatred toward their brethren, cannot pray before God, who says, And
when ye stand praying, forgive if ye have ought against any man, that Mark. 11.
your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses. And
again, If ye forgive men their trespasses, Matthew. 6.
your heavenly father shall also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, no more shall your Heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses.

And in another place he says, Matthew. 5.
Therefore if thou bring thy gift vnthe Altar, and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar, and
go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift. For otherwise all thy gifts shall not be acceptable unto God.

Let us therefore willingly forgive, and let us love and do good unto our
neighbors, so our prayers shall pearce ye heavens. Agreeable unto this is y^ we
pray We must not pray with the mouth ^nely but with the ^a^t.
not only with the mouth or voice, but with the mind and inward affection of
the heart, and with the spirit and feruencie. There was no voice heard of
Moses, neither of Anna the mother of Samuel, when they prayed, but most
earnestly in spirit they cried unto God, who also heard: and l^dd him safely
with all the people of Israel through the red Sea out of the most bloody
hands of the Egyptians, and her which before was barren he made fruitful. And
contrariwise, we read that the Lord in the Gospel, out of Esaias alleged these
words against the Phariseis. This people, draws nighe unto me with their
Matthew. 15
mouth, and honors me with their lips, howbeit their heart is far from
me, but in vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines precepts of men.
Therefore aptly said Paul, I will pray with the spirit, and will pray 1. Cor.
14.
with the understanding also, where he calls the lively breath and voice of
man, Spirit. By these heavenly testimonies, their prayers are condemned, who
with a marvelous rouling and swiftness of the tongue, in a short space
babble many words, and those maimed and curtayled, uttering words without
sense. For their mind in the mean while is otherwise occupied. No other
desire is there felt of them, unless happily this seem a desire, in that
they pant and blow, hasting to make an end of praying. Among which kind of
men Monks and priests are chief, who pray for money and for their hire: that
is, sell a thing of naught for a great price unto the mad people: not that
prayers are vain of them selves, but because being used after that manner, they
become vain. Of these men the Lord pronounces in the Gospel, Woe be unto you
Scribes and Phariseis, Hypocrites, for ye devour Matthew. 23.
widows houses, and that under a pretense of long prayer, therefore ye shall
receive the greater damnation. I know what these Sophisters do here bring
forth and allege for the defense of prayers said for reward or stipend: but
in few words I give them this knotte to loose. These men that pray in this
sort, either have faith and charity, or else they have not: if they have,
they pray without reward, for charities sake: if they have not, their prayers
ar of no effect, and therefore with a false show they deceive the ignorant
people, paying their money for lawful prayers, whereas they requite them with
unlawful: and if they were lawful, yet were they neither to be sold or boght.

This is also required of him that prays, that he desire not things unworthy
for God to grant, nor require We must require nothing that ^s vnwor^hy for God
to grant and contrary to his laws.
those things that are contrary to the laws of God. For S. John the Apostle
says, If we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us: therefore when
we ask things unworthy for God to grant, he hears us not. Moreover
always and in all 1. John. 53.
our prayers, our will and our desires ought to be obedient to God and his will.
Therefore let no man go about wickedly to tie God to certain circu^sta^ces:
let no man prescribe unto God at what time, in what place, or after what manner
he shall bring to pass any thing, that he will do. God who is only wise
knows when it is time to help. He is also both faithful and omnipotent, and
able in deed to do greater things, than either we can ask or understand.
Which thing we also read that Paul has said. Therefore not without cause is
that most honest widow Judith very angry with Osias the Priest, because he
appointed Judith. 8.
a set number of days unto God, which being ended he should deliver, or
otherwise they would give up the city. For Judith says What manner of sentence
is this, whereunto Osias has consented, to deliver the City unto the
Assyrians, if within five days there come not succor for us? And who are ye
that tempt the Lord? This is not a sentence like to obtain mercy, but rather
to provoke wrath and kindle displeasure. You have set the mercy of God a time,
and have appointed him a day after your own fantasy. But for as much as the
Lord is patient, let us so much the rather repent and crave pardon at his
hands by pouring out of tears. Therefore David is read to have spoken most
godly being in extreme danger, If I shall find favor in the eyes of the
Lord, he will ^. Samu. 15
bring me again: but if he say to me, I have no lust to thee, behold here am
I, let him do with me, what seems good in his eyes.

And now also long continuance is very needful in prayers. Ask We must
continue ^n prayer.
says the Lord in the Gospel, and it shall be given you: seek and ye shall
find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. And by this heaping together of
words, he often remembers us of continuance in prayer. Ask, says he,
earnestly and constantly, as they do which require things whereof they stand
in need: Seek, as they are wont that search for things that are hidden and
precious: Knock, as they are wont, who with earnest desire covet to come in to
their friend. For all these sayings do not only signify a desire, but also
a continual study, to obtain things required. In the Gospel according to
saint Luke the Lord put forth a parable tending to this end, that we ought
always to pray and never to be weried. For Paul also says, Rejoice always,
pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
in all things give thanks. Yet let no man think that by these words of the
Lord, and the Apostle, the error of ye heretics Psallini or Euchitae is
confirmed. They did nothing else but pray. The Lord commands to pray
always, that is to say as often as we conveniently may, at al times and in
all places, to be of an upright heart toward God in all things, which should
always wait for good things at Gods hand, and give him thanks for benefits
received: which should also continually ask favor of him. Such an endeavor
is commended unto us in Anna the daughter of Phanuel, of whom Luke makes
mention: That she departed Luke. 1.
not from the temple, but night and day served the Lord with fastings and
prayers: not that she did nothing else, having no regard to her body, nor did
at any time eat, drink, or sleep, but because that was her continual and
chiefest business. For at this day, speaking after the same manner, we say that
the husbandman does labor without ceassing, and the student read night and
day: when as yet all men understand, that by this kind of speech is signified
a continual, and an exceeding great diligence in work and reading. The woman
of Syrophoenissa in Matthew. Chapter 15. shows unto us a notable example of
unwearied continuance in prayer or invocation. But if so be GOD seem to neglect
us, or to defer our requests longer then is meet, let us always remember what
the Prophet has said, Yet a little while and he that Ab^c 2. Heb. 10.
shall come will come and will not tarry, and the just shall live by faith; etc.

Here it shall be very easy to show the time of prayer, whereof inquiry is
made, to wit, When we ought to pray. We ought therefore privately When we must
pray.
to pray always. For continually while we live there is diverse and manifold
matter offered unto us to pray. Pray therefore as often as ye spirit moves
thee, and as often as necessity it self, or matter provoke thee to pray. Yet
let nothing here be of constraint: let all things proceed from a willing and
free spirit. But public prayers are ^estrained to time. For there are set
and foreappointed hours to pray, set hours are those certain times received
of ye Church, wherein in the morning or evening ye whole congregation
assembleth together to hear the word of God, to pray, and to receive the
Sacraments. That the ancient Churches which were in times past did not meet
together in an holy assembly, all at one time, and the self same hours,
Socrates in his History bears witness. And in this diversity there is no
danger.

Let it be left to the discretion of the Churches to come together unto the
service of God when it shall seem most necessary, comely, meet, and
profitable unto them selves. Moreover foreappointed hours of prayer, are those
which are set or forewarned for a certain time by the Church for present
necessities sake. In dangerous times and in weighty affairs the holy
Apostles appointed prayers and fastinges. Which thing also at this day is
lawful without superstition, and with just moderation. And that this is a
most ancient ordinance, it appears out of these words of the Prophet
Joel. Blow, the trumpet Joel. 2.
in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the people
together, etc. Does not the Apostle command man and wife privately 1. Cor. 7.
to separate themselves for a time, and to abstain from their lawful
delights, that prayer in necessity may be the more fervent? And now also it
will not be hard to judge of ye place Of the place of prayer.
of prayer. For as at al times privately, so also in all places, I have said in
ye beginning of this sermon, y^ holy men may pray. For the true prayer of holy
men is not tied to any place, neither is it judged better in one place, than in
another. For the goodness or worthiness of the prayer is not esteemed by the
place, but by the mind of him that prays. For the Lord in the Gospel says,
The hour will come, and now is, when the true worshippers John. 4.
shall worship the father in spirit and in truth, etc. But they are in no
wise to be passed over, in To praye^ in the chamber.
this place, who are persuaded that the godly may pray in no other place, but
at home in their chamber. To the confirmation whereof, they wrest these words of
our savior. But thou Matthew. 6.
when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and when thou haste shut thy door,
pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which seeeth in secret
shall reward thee openly. But these words have an Antithesis or contrary
sentence to that which goes before. For there went before, And when thou
prayest thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are, for they love to stand praying
in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of
men. Against this immediately he opposes, But thou when thou prayest enter
into thy chamber. And as in reproving ye abuse of prayer, he did not properly
condemn the place, but rather spoke figuratively after this manner: The
Phariseis with their prayers which they make in the streets do hunt after
praise and commendation of the people. So on the contrary part making mention
of a chamber, he meant not that the place, of it self, makes the prayer
either better or worse: but he taught by a figurative speech, that we ought
to pray with an upright mind, and most free from hunting after the praise of
men. For he that prays with a mind not troubled with affections, having
regard only unto God, he prays in his chamber, whether he pray in the
Church or in the street. For otherwise the Lord prayed with his Disciples in
the temple, in the city, in the field, and wheresoever occasion was offered.
Also it follows, And the Father which sees thee in secret, shall reward thee
openly, that is to say, The Father, who allows the mind that is not proud,
but humble and free from ambition, will reward thee openly. But public
prayers are used in the Church, or assembly of Saints: which if any man
despise, saying that prayer ought not to be tied to any place, I can not think
him worthy the name of a Christian, since he shamefully abuses Christian
liberty. Finally, of assemblies I have spoken before, we will peradventure
speak more in the last Sermon of this Decade.

Here comes also to be handeled The gesture of the^ that pray.
ye gesture of those that pray, But let all riot, all pride, all immoderate
trimming of the body, be far from the^ y^ shall come into the Church of Christ
to pray. He should seem filthily to have scorned the Godly magistrate,
whosoever he were, that in coming to crave pardon for his fault, would lay
aside his mourning weeds, and putting on white apparel, proudely appear
before the assembly of grave and godly Senators. Such a one might be judged
worthy, not only to be denied of his request, but also to be cast into
prison. And who will deny that they more shamefully mock God, who coming into
the Church to ask pardon, being oppressed with the burden of their sins,
and yet in that place to be so far off from being humble, that they rather
appear before the presence of God and his Saints having their bodies so
attyred, as they thereby both provoke ye wrath of God a new against them, and
do grievously offend the most godly y^ are in ye church. Wherefore Paul at
large teaches that modesty, comely, and humble behavior is to be used in the
church. The place is to be seen in the 11. cha. of the first Epistle to ye
Cor. That which remains of this matter the blessed martyr of Christ Cyprian,
co^prehendeth in these words. Let the words and prayers of such as pray, be
orderly governed, keeping modesty and shamfastnesse. Let us think we stand
in the sight of God. God his eyes must be delighted, both in the gesture of
our body, and manner of our words: for as it is the part of an impudent
person to use clamorous shoutes in praying, so contrariwise it besemes a
shamfast person to pray with modest prayers. Some foolishly imagine y^ prayer
is made either better or worse, by ye gesture of our bodies. Therefore let them
hear S. August. lib. 2. ad Simplicianum Quaest. 4. saying, It skilleth not
after what sort our bodies be placed* so that the mind being present with
God, do bring her purpose to pass. For we both pray standing, as it is
written, The Publicane stood a far off: and kneeling, as we read in the
Acts of the Apostles: and sitting, as did David and Helias. And unless we
might pray lying, it should not have bin written in the Psalms, Every night
wash I my bed. For when any man seeks to pray, he places the members of
his body after such a manner as it shall seem most meet to him for the time to
stir up his devotion.

But when prayer is not sought, but an appetite or desire to pray is offered,
when any thing comes on the soudeine into our mind, whereby we are devoutly
moved to pray with sighs that can not be uttered, after what manner soever it
finds a man, doubtless prayer is not to be deferred, until we have sought
in what place we may sit, or where we may stand or kneel down. Tertullian,
making mention of the behavior of the Christians of his time when they prayed,
in his Apology against the Gentiles says: We Christians are al of us evermore
praying for all men, looking up into heaven, with our hands spread abroad,
because we are harmless: we are bare headed, because we are not ashamed: to
be short, we need none to put us in remembrance, because we pray from the
heart.

Where notwithstanding we must chefely have in our remembrance the doctrine of
our Savior in the Gospel saying, When thou prayest, thou shall not be as the
hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the
corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men, verily I say unto you
they have their reward. For above all things we must beware that we neither
pray privately nor publicly to this end, neither yet fashion the gesture of
our body, to get the vain praise of the people, that we may seem to be
renowned and accounted holy before men. It suffices that we please GOD, and
be allowed by his judgment.

In the discourse of prayer, no man will say, that it is the smallest thing to
know what you ought to What we must ask or pray for of God.
pray, what thing you should ask of God, or for whom you should pray. Here
are to be considered the persons and things: persons are either public or
private. Public persons, are Bishops, Teachers, Magistrates and all set in
authority. For these men, the writings of the Prophets, Evangelists, and
Apostles give commandment to pray. Paul more than once requires
intercessions to be made by the Church unto the Lord for him, that he might
be delivered from disordered and froward men, and that he might freely preach
the Gospel as it becamme him to preach it. The same Paul commands us to
pray for all those that Ephe. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Tim. 2.
be set in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty.

Private persons are, our parents, wife, children, kinsfolk, allies,
neighbors, citizens, friends, enemies, sick persons, captives, such as ar
afflicted, and to be short, all that are nigh about us, whose health and
safety, nature and Christian charity wills by prayers to commend unto God,
and whereof there are also testimonies and examples in the Scripture. But the
things we should pray for, are those good things that are to be desired,
whereof some are heavenly, spiritual, or eternal: and other earthly,
corporal, or temporal. Moreover some things verily are common, othersome
again are private: those things that are common pertain to the whole church
and common wealth, neither belong they to a few, as do private things. And
spiritual things are chiefly reckoned to be these, faith, hope, charity,
perseuera^ce, and that whole company of all manner virtues, the profit and
safety of the Church, forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting. Among the
which not unfitly are reckoned the gifts of understanding the liberal
Sciences, well ordered Schools, faithful teachers, godly Magistrates, and
upright laws. Corporal things are, a peaceable common wealth, strong and
valiant armies for war, health, strength, and comeliness of body, abundance
or sufficient wealth, the safe prosperity of wife and children, the protection
and defense of friends and Citizens, peace, a good name, and otherthings which
are of this kind.

But no man is ignorant that we ought to have a greater care of spiritual
things, than corporal things, and principally to desire heavenly things. And
in corporal things, there is also a choice to be used, that the profit of the
common wealth be preferred before our own private gain. For the common wealth
continuing in safety, the Citizens may also be safe. And so long as schools
and Universities, or places of learning, be mainteyned, there is hope that the
common wealth shall never be destitute of wise and upright governors.

There are also in temporal goods, some better than other some: those things
that are best therefore, the Saints or godly men do chiefly require of the
Lord, and nevertheless those which are of less value they understand to come
from him, and therefore they ask them also of the Lord. They that are but
meanly It is lawful to ask corporal goods of the Lord.
exercised in the Scriptures, affirm that it is not lawful in prayer to ask
corporal goods of the Lord. But they are confuted by many examples of the
Scripture. For not only the Patriarchs and Prophets, but also the Apostles of
Christ asked temporal goods of the Lord, as defense against their enemies, a
good report, and other things necessary for the body. Which thing we shall
learn anon by the form of prayer, which the lord him self has taught us,
diligently showing us what we should ask.

This also comes in question, in what tongue prayer must be made? They that
affirm, that privately and In what tongue we must pray.
publicly we must pray in Latin, seem in my judgment to be out of their
wits, unless they speak of such as are skillful in the Latin tongue. For
since we must pray, not only with mouth and voice, but also with heart and
mind, how I pray you shall he pray with heart and mind, who uses a
language he understands not? Indeed he utters godly words, but he
knows not what he says. For it comes all to one reckoning, to pray never
a whit or not at all, and to babble out words which are not understood.

Let every nation therefore pray in that language which it understands best,
and most familiarly. And no less madness is it in public assemblies to use
a strange language: which thing also has been the root of the greatest
euilles in the church. Whatsoever the priests that were ordained of God, and
the Prophets which were sent from him, spoke or rehearsed to the people of
old time in the church, they did not speak or recite them in the Chaldean,
Indian, or Persian, but in the Hebrew tongue, that is, in their vulgar and
mother tongue.

They wrote also books in their vulgar tongue. Christ our Lord together with
his Apostles used the vulgar tongue. He furnished the Apostles with the gift of
tongues, that they might speak to every nation. And for so much as in that age
the Greek tongue of all other was most plentiful and common, the Apostles
wrote not in the Hebrew tongue, but in the vulgar Greek tongue. Truly it
behooves that those things that are done in the public church for the holy
assemblies sake, should be understood of all men. For otherwise in vain
should so many men be assembled together. Whereby it is cleerer than the day
light, that they that have brought in strange tongues into the church of God,
have troubled all things, have quenched the feruentnesse of men's minds,
yea, and have banished out of the church, both prayer it self, and the use of
prayer, and all the fruit and profit that should come of things done in the
church. And truly the Roman and Latin Prince has brought this Latin
abomination into the church of God. He cries out that it is wickedly done, if
Germany, England, France, Polande, and Hungary, do use both in prayer and
all other kind of service in ye church, not the Roman or Latin tongue, but
Dutch or Germane speech, English, French, Polonish, or the Hungarian language.

S. Paul once handling this controversy, says in plain words: If I pray in
a strange tongue, my spirit or voice prays, but my understanding is without
fruit. What is it 1. Cor. 14
then? I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray with the understanding
also. I will sing with the spirit, but I will singe with the understanding
also. Else when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that occupies
the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
knows not what thou say? Thou verily give thanks well, but the other is
not edified. I thank my God I speak languages more tha^ you all, yet had I
rather in the church to speak five words with mine understanding, that I
might also instruct others, than ten thousand words in a strange tongue. And
truly this very place does Justinian the Emperor cite In Novel. Constable. 123.
where he straightly commands Bishops and Ministers not secreatly, but with a
loud voice which might be heard of the people, to recite the holy oblation and
prayers used in holy baptism, to the intent that thereby the minds of the
hearers might be stirred up, with greater devotion to set forth the praises of
God.

Moreover it is evident that Gregory him self who is called the great, spoke
to his Citizens in the City of Rome in their country language: which thing
he him self witnesses in ye preface of his Commentary upon Ezechiel, to
Marianus the bishop.

Of the Greek bishops, no man is ignorant, that they had their whole service
in their Churches, in their own native language, and have left their
writings unto us in the same tongue. We might therefore worthily be judged mad
and void of understanding, if we also in the administration of divine service
in ye church use not our own language, since so many and so excellent
examples, both of most famous churches, and of most singular Bishops and
governors of the church have gone before us, that I speak not again of the
most express and manifest doctrine of S. Paul the Apostle.

This place now requires that I speak somewhat of singinge in the Of Sing^^ge
in (...) church
church, and of canonical hours. But let no man think that prayers sung with
ma^s voice are more acceptable unto God, than if they were plainly spoken or
uttered. For God is neither allured with the sweetness of man's voice, neither
is he offended though prayers be uttered in a hoarse or base sound. Prayer is
commended for faith and godliness of mind, and not for any outward show.
Those outward things are rather used as means to stir us up, albeeit even
they also take little effect, unless the spirit of God do inflame our hearts.
Neither can any man deny but that the custom of singing is very ancient. For
the holy scripture witnesses that the Levites in the ancient church long
before the coming of ^. Paral. 29
Christ did singe, yea, and that they did singe at the commandment of God.
And again, I think no man can deny, that the same cunning kind of music
brought into the church of God by David, was both accounted among the
ceremonies, and that the same was abolished together with the temple and the
ceremonies. We read not of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the true Messiah, and
full perfection of the law, that he soung in any place, either in ye temple or
without the temple, or that any where he taught his disciples to singe, or
commanded them to ordain singing in the Churches. For that which is read in
Matthew and Mark, ((...), Matthew. 26 Mark. 14.
which may be englished, And when they had soung an Hymn or psalm, they went
out into the mount of Olives,) is such a kind of saying, as does not
necessarily force us to understand that the Lord sang with his disciples. For a
Hymn, which is the praise due unto God, may be humbly uttered without
quauering of ye voice. Truly the old translation in both places, as well in
Matthew, as in Mark, constantly interprets it, Et hymno dicto exierunt in
montem Oliuarum, that is to say, When they had said an Hymn, they went out
into the mount of Olives. Erasmus in Matthew has trauslated it, Et cum hymnum
cecinissent, when they had sung an Hymn: but translating Mark, he says, Et
cum hymnum dixissent, when they had said an hymn: but in either place is red
(...). And (...) signifies to praise, or to set forth ones praise, which both
by singing, and also without singinge has been accustomed to be done. And
albeeit we neither read that the lord himself commanded singing to his
Apostles, neither that they ordained singing in ye Church, neither yet do read
in the Acts of the Apostles that they them selves did singe in holy
assemblies, yet Paul did not rebuke the church at Corinth, which began to
singe either Paul rebuked not them that sounge.
of her own accord, or by a certain imitation of the old Church, because he
saw their manner of singing differed much from the old. He therefore suffered
singing of Psalms, but in the mean time he preferred before it prophecy or
the office of preaching: and he also required of them that did sing, both a
mesure to be kept, and also that it should be done with understanding, without
which doutlesse both prayer and singing is not only unprofitable, but also
hurtful. I will pray with the spirit, (says the Apostle) and will pray with 1.
Cor. 14.
the understanding also: I will singe with the spirit, and will sing with the
understanding also. Neither do I know, that in any place else the Apostle
makes mention of singing in holy assemblyes, unless we list to apply that
hither which Paul has left written in the 3. to the Colossians, though that
may seem to be a private institution. For that which he has left written in
his Epistle to the Ephesians in these words: Be not drunken with wine, wherein
is excess, Ephe. 5.
but be fulfilled with the spirit, speaking unto your selves in psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord in your
hearts: Giving thanks always for all things unto God even the Father, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, What manner of saying it is, it is easily judged
by the occasion and order of the words. For he speaks nothing of the public
singing accustomed to be used in the Church, but of the private manner of
singing. For he had respect unto riotous banquets, where, for the most part
were used to be sung of such as were well tippled, songs which were not very
honest. Be ye not therefore drunk with wine, says the Apostle, lest ye sing
songs that are scarce honest, but rather if ye list to sing, sing Psalms and
spiritual songs.

Whereunto this also may be added, that even in those kinds of songs he
requires rather the song of the heart, than the warbling of the voice, so far
off is it that he at any time allows uncomely shrikings, either public or
private: albeit the sense and meaning shall be more simple and plain, if we
understand, In cord, which signifies in the heart, to be spoken in that place
in sted of, joyfully or from the heart. Wherefore no man can or ought to
disallowe moderate and godly singing of Psalms, whethere it be publicly used
in holy assemblies, or at home in private houses. And truly you shall find
many testimonies in the ecclesiastical history written by Eusebius and
Sozomenus, The manner of the a^ncient singi^g in the Church.
declaring that the Esterne Churches even immediately after the time of the
Apostles did use to singe Psalms and Hymns unto Christ our Lord. Ye shall
also find this, that by certain decrees of counsels it was ordained, that no
other thing should either be read or sou^g in holy assemblies, but only the
canonical Scripture. For even betimes there began neither a mean to be kept
in the Church, neither the canonical scripture only to be used, for that
certain men intermedled their own songs.

Yet here (deerly beloved) I thought good to put you in mind of two excellent
What ma^^ of singing was in old time used.
things concerning this matter. The first of them is, that the singing of the
ancient Church was a far other kind of singing, than that which at this day is
used. For Erasmus Roter. does rightly judge, that the singing used in the
ancient churches was no other than a distinct and measured pronou^tiation,
such as at this day in some places is used in pronou^cing of ye psalms, the
gospel, and the Lords prayer. Truly Pliny the Lieftenant in Asia, by dilligent
search or examination of matters found out, yt ye christians at certain
appointed times met together before day, and sou^g a Psalm together among
them selves unto Christ their God. The place of Pliny is to be seen in the
10. book of his Epistles to Traianus the Emperor. Also Rabanus Maurus, lib.
insti. Cler. 2 cap. 48. says. The primitive church did so sing, that with a
little altering of the voice, it made him that sange to be heard the further,
so that the singing was more like loud reading than song. These things he
borrowed out of the 33. chap. of S. Austines 10. book of confessions, who in
that place plainly confesses, that he does sin, when he is more delighted
with the sweetness of the voices, than with the sense of the words, and therefore
desires that all the melodious tunes of sweet songs, wherewith the psalter of
David is replenished, might be removed from his ears, and the hearing of the
Church. For it seemed to be more safe, which he remembered he had often heard
concerning Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, who with so little strayning of the
voice, made the Reader of the Psalm to utter it, that he rather seemed to read
than to sing. The last of the things I said I would put you in mind of, is,
that singing, howsoever Song was always fre but not ^niuersally used.
it be an ancient institution, nevertheless was never universal, and of
necessiti thrust upon ye churches, but it was free, neither was it always used
in all churches. Whereunto may be added that which Sozomenus witnesses, that
those Churches which did sing, used not the very same kinds of prayers, or
Psalms, or readings, or the very same time. Socrates also in the 5. book of
his history cha. 22. says. To be short, in all Countries every where, you
shall not find two churches which in all points agree together in prayer. And
that it was long yer the Western Churches received melody or the custom of
singing, it appears even by the testimony of Augustine, who in his 9. book
of Confess. Chap. 7. rehearses that Ambrose being oppressed with the snares
and persecutions of Iustina the Arian Empress, ordained that hymns and
psalms should be soung, according to the custom of the East parts, since
which time the custom of singing has been retained and also received of
other parts of the world. Nevertheless before the Western churches received
the order of singing, they were esteemed of all them of the East to be true
Churches, neither came it into any man's brain, that therefore they were
heretical and schismatic Churches, or not rightly governed, because they
were destitute of song or melody. No man gathered, The Eastern Churches sing,
the Western do not so: therefore they are no churches. If this vprightnes and
Agreement in singing in the Church.
liberty had remained safe and unaltered, that is to say, If according to
that ancient use of singing, nothing had been soung but canonical
scriptures, if it had been still in the liberty of the churches, to sing or not
to sing, truly at this day there should be no controversy in the Church,
about singing in the church. For those churches which should use singing
after the ancient manner practiced in singing would sing the word of God, and
the praises of God only, neither would they think yt in this point they
surpassed other Churches, neither would they condemn those Churches that sang
not at all: where as also these would not despise them that used soberly and
godlily to sing.

For if godly men persevere in the study of godliness, and in daily prayers,
though they sing not, yet remain they nevertheless the sons of GOD. Neither
yet does all singing, and in every place edify: neither are all Churches fit
to singe. Does not Rabanus say, in the same place that I even now cited? For
fleshly minded men's sake, and not for such as are guided by the spirit, the
custom of singing is instituted in the Church, that they that are not moved by
words, may be allured with the sweetness of the melody, etc.

But the singing about which there is controversy at this day, is not that
ancient singing, but that more is, both in matter and tune, for the most
part, it is clean contrary to the old. The common sort call it Gregory's
singing, doubtless not of that great Gregory, who seems not to have been
very friendly to singing, Gregory's singing.
as it appears by his constitution, which is read in the Registre, in the
fifte part thereof, Cap. 44.

We shall therefore seem to judge more truly, if we refer it to Gregory
the fifte, which is said to have been enthronized about the year of our
Lord 995. and moreover to have used the healpe of, I know not who, one
Robertus Carnotensis. Yet there are some which ascribe it to Vitalianus, some
to Gelasius. It yrc^eth me to rehearse what Durandus has patcht together of
this matter, in his Rat. Divine. lib. 5. For I little weigh it.

There are many things in this kind of singing to be discommended. what
things are to ^e disco^mended in the use of singing in the church
For first of all many things, yea the most are soung contrary to true
godliness, neither are all things that are sounge taken out of the holy
Scriptures, but out of I know not what kind of Legendes, and out of the
traditions of men. And those things which are soung out of the Scriptures are,
for the most part, so wrested and corrupted, that there remains no part of
the heavenly sense or meaning. Creatures and dead men are called upon.
Moreover, this kind of singinge is commanded, and they singe not of their
own accord or good will, but upon constrainte: yea they singe for money, and
to the end that they may get an Ecclesiastical benefice, as they term it.
Only Clearkes, hired for that purpose, do now a days singe: not the whole
Church of Christ, as in time paste has been accustomed. Neither is there
any end or measure in their singinge. They singe day and night. And to this
foolish and ungodly kind of singinge, as to a heavenly or meritorious work,
there is more attributed than true faith does allow. A man may well say that
it is that much babbling, which the Lord in Matthewe forbids and condemns
as an Heathenish superstition. They singe moreover in a strange tongue, which
few do understand, and therefore without any profit at all to the church.

There is heard a long sound, quauered and streyned to and fro, backewarde
and forewarde, whereof a man can not understand one word. Often times the
Singers strive among themselves for the excellency of voices, whereby it
comes to pass that the whole Church ringeth with an hoarse kind of
yellinge, and through the strife that rises about their voices, the hearers
little understand what is sounge. I say nothing at this present of their
music which they call Figurative, and of their musical instruments, all
which are contained in a manner in their Organes, as they term them. I say
nothing of their Diriges, or prayers for the dead. Of which I have also
entreated in an other place.

But these, and such other like, so occupied the whole time of divine service
in the Church, that very little or none was left for true prayers, and for
the holy and heavenly preaching of the word of God. Therefore for most
just causes, they that believe the Gospel, do neither use such singing,
neither suffer it in the Church of God. And they seem to deal very devoutly,
and in like manner most wisely, which bestow the best part of the time, or
even the very whole time of ecclestasticall assemblies in fervent and quiet
prayers, and in the wholesome preachinge of the word of God, omitting that
singinge: especially since it is a hard thing, so to limitte or restrain
singinge, which otherwise is tolerable, least at some time it exceed and go
beyond the appointed bounds.

Furthermore, that our ancient Of canonical hou^es.
predecessors had certain and appointed hours, wherein they prayed both
privately in their houses, and publicly in assemblies, all the holy
Scripture witnesses in many places.

David more than once in his Psalms says, that he will go unto the Lord in
the Morning and Eueninge. Daniel prayed unto Dan. 6.
the Lord at three several hours or times of the day. Again, David says,
Seven times in a day do I praise thee. But by seven times he understands
many times.

For so elsewhere we read written, I will smite you for your sins seven
times. And again, Leuit. 26. Pro. 24.
The just man falls seven times, and rises up again. And also, If thy
brother sin seven times Luke. 17.
in a day, and turn seven times in a day unto thee, etc.

Seven times therefore in diverse places, as also in this of David, is put for
many times. And Christ our Lord, has tied the private prayers of the
faithful, (as we have also told you before) neither to place, nor yete to
time: he has not taken away public prayers. For he is the Lord, not of
confusion but of order. But his Disciples when they were in the land of Jury,
did them selves also observe the accustomed hours of praying which that
nation kept, at liberty, not of necessity, and specially for the assemblies
sake. For Peter and John Acts. 3.
go up into the temple at the ninth hour of prayer. In the day of pentecost,
all the Saints with one accord Acts. 2.
were gathered together and received the holy Ghost at the third hour of the
day. And it is also read that Peter privately went up into the upper part of
the house, about the sixth hour.

The Temple being destroyed, and the Jews scattered abroad, the Churches
gathered out of the Gentiles did not observe like hours of gatheringes
together, or of assemblies, but at their own liberty, as to every church it
seemed most meet and convenient.

Of which diversity truly, the Ecclesiastical history also makethe Trip.
li. 9. Cap. 39.
mention, yet for the most part there were hours in the morning and evening
used for assemblies. S. Hierome (in his Epitaph upon Paula) expounding not the
rite or order of the universal church, what it should do in holy assemblies,
but what the companyes of solitary virgins are wont to do of their own
accord, says:

In the morning, at three, six, and nine of the clock, at evening, at
midnight, they did sing the Psalter by order. Only upon the Sunday they went
unto the Church near unto the which they dwelt, etc.

So it pertains to private institution, which of the same sort is read
written to Laeta, touching the institution of her daughter, and to Demetriades,
De custodienda virginitate.

And truly the greater or more famous, and solemn Churches (which at this
day they call Cathedral, to wit, of Cathedra a Chair, or of the order of
Prophets teaching or professing there, as some time the Church of Antioche,
Corinth, Alexandria, and such like seemed to have been) at certain houeres,
to wit, in the morning, at noone, yea, at Evening also assembled to expound or
discuss the holy canonical Scriptures.

The foundations of that observation seem to be laid in the Church of the
Corinthians. Of which the Apostle abundantly witnesses 1. Corint. 14.
Chapter.

Eusebius in the fifte Book of his ecclesiastical history, and 9. Chapter,
making mention of an ecclesiastical School at Alexandria, says: From a long
time the doctrine and exercise of the holy Scriptures flourished among them:
which custom also continues even to our time, which we have heard also to
be instituted by men mighty in Eloquence, and in the study of the holy
Scriptures, to wit, after the example of the Corinthian Church.

Some marks of this most wholesome rite or custom, appeared sometime in the
Occidentall or Weste Church, as it is to be gathered out of the writings of
Saint Ambrose and Augustine.

But truly in these very times, and in the times immediately following, when
all nations in a manner were together by the ears with perpetual wars, and
when the Roman Empire in reuengement of the blood of Christ, of his holy
Apostles and Martyrs, according to the Prophecy of Daniel, and Saint John
the Apostle and Euangeliste, was torn in pieces, and made a pray for all
people: The Goths or Germans rushing upon them on this side, the Hunnes and
other barbarous Soldiers on the other side assaulting Rome sharply, the best
Schools were spoiled, goodly Libraries were burned, honest and good studies
perished, whereupon were given unto ye churches Doctors or teachers most unlike
unto ye ancient doctors and teachers, who were not furnished with that
ability, that they could deal in the holy Scriptures with such dexterity and
fruitefulnesse, as their predecessors. In this disorder and downfall, least
nothing should remain of ye canonical scriptures untouched, it is evident
that there rose up men not altogether negligent of the canonical doctrine, who
divided the whole canonical scripture, after such a sort into parts, and for
the whole course of the year, that they might once in a year read over the
whole Bible, and the Psalter oftener, yea, even every seuenight. They used the
psalms in steed of prayers, to which as times increased, many other prayers
also were joined. And least the very reading of the scripturs should seem to
want al exposition, the readinges, lectures, or homilies of the fathers were
thereunto added at the length: not that ye priests should read them secretly
to themselves (as at this day in a manner they are wont to do:) or that they
should with a post-hast reading mumble them up in steed of mattins, but that
they should thoroughly handle them in the open church, as an exercise before the
people, to the edification of the church. That I may not now rehearse that
this rite was not received of all men, so far off is it from being streictly
commanded. Of which thing there remain some tokens or proofs In Distinct.
15. Sancta Romans Furthermore, of reading the canonical Scriptures, those hours
wherein they were read, seemed to be named Canonical: as also Canons are so
called of studying and reading the Canonical Scriptures. But at what time this
was done, and who were the doers thereof, it is not certeinely known. Some do
attribute some part hereof to Hierome, other some to Damasus, and some to
Pelagius the second of that name, othersome also to Gelasius and Gregory.

And because homilies and lectures not a few are said to be Bedaes, and other
doctors of later time, finally, for that many other things are read in those
hourly prayers, which savor never a whit of antiquity: truly as it is an
institution patched up diuersely and at sundry times, so is it far more new
than the papists think or take it to be. Neither are there some wanting
which affirm, that at the request of Carolus Magnus, Paulus Diaconus, or monk
of Cassina, and monk Isuarde, ordained and delivered to the Church selected
or chosen lessons, those especially which concern the Saints, and are
accustomed to be read in these hours. But howsoever the matter stands, most
certain it is, that those hours at this day commanded, and called
Canonical, are the invention of man, and not of God, and ragged and rotten
relics or shadows of the old Law. Whereunto, beside, that there are many
fables, toys, and follies annexed, it cannot be denied. Truly at this day
there appears such a mingle mangle or hotchpotch, that it seems utterly
unworthy, either to be used or suffered any longer in the church of Christ,
unless we had rather that care were taken for the bellies of some, than for
the good state and welfare of the whole Church. Of which thus much thus
far.

It remains in the last place to discuss how we must pray, what How we
must pray.
words, or what form of prayer we must use. Truly there are many fourmes of
prayer, but none better than that which our Lord, the only beloved son of
God the father has delivered. Neither is there a more certain form, as
comprehending in few words all in all. In this summarie he has prescribed,
what is worthy of him, what is acceptable to him, what is necessary for us,
and to be short, what he is willing to grant. Whereupon S. Cyprian
expounding the Lords prayer, among other things says: He that made us to
live, the same has taught us also to pray even of the same his bountifulness,
whereby he has vouchsafed both to give and to bestow all other things
whatsoever, that when we speak with the father in that prayer and supplicaton
which the son has taught us, we may be the more easlie or readily heard,
and may truly and spiritually worshipp him. For what prayer can be more
spiritual, than that which is given unto us of Christ, from whom also the
holy Ghost is sent unto us? What prayer before the father more true, than that
of the son, proceeding out of his mouth, who is truth it self? So that to
pray otherwise tha^ he has taught, is not only ignorance, but also offense:
since he him self has set down, and said: Ye cast aside the
commandment of God to stablish your own tradition. Therefore (dearly
beloved brethrene) let us pray, as God our master has taught us. It is a
friendly and familiar prayer to call upon God in such manner as he has
taught us: and when that the prayer of Christ comes to his ears, let the
father acknowledge the words of his son, when we pray. He that dwells
within the heart, let him also be in the tongue. And since we have him our
advocate with the father for our sins, when we being sinners ask pardon
for our offenses, let us utter the words of our Advocate. For since he
says, Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you,
how much more effectually do we obtain that, which we ask in the name of
Christ, if we ask it in his prayer? Thus far he.

From hence arises a question, Whether we be so tied to the words Whether we
be tied to the words of the Lords prayer.
of the Lords prayer, that we may not pray in other words at all? I
answer, That the Lord would not so tie us to his words, set down and
conceived, as though it were not lawefull to use other words, or another
form: but he set forth unto us certain universal things, unto the which
we might refer all our prayers. For Augustine also to Proba De orando Deo,
Of praying unto god, shows that there is nothing in any place in the holy
Scriptures prayed for, which is not comprehended in the Lords prayer. For,
says he, if you runue over and through all the words of all holy prayers,
you shall find nothing, which this prayer of the Lord does not comprehend
and contain. To which words he adds immediately: So that it is free to use
such and such words in praying, howbeit to say the same things: but to
speak other things it is not free. Most warelie therefore and wisely do they,
who refer all their prayers unto the Lords prayer, unto the which they
attribute the chief and principal place, and keeping it continually in their
mind, do meditate therevppon, and exercise themselves therein.

There is wont also another question to be asked, What need there is What it
needs ^o express (...) d^sires unto God (...) words.
to express and op^n our desires in words unto God, since he already
knows all things? We told you anon after the beginning of this Sermon,
that our prayer is an humbling of our selves before the majesty of God, where
unto moreover we add this: We do not express and open our desires unto
God, as though he knew them not, or that we would teach him being
ignorant, or that we would entreat and get gods favor with our curious,
laboursome, and eloquent prayer, but for our own sakes we use words,
wherewith to stir up our selves. And to this end all the most holy men of
God are read in the Psalms and holy histories, to have declared their desires
largly unto the Lord.

We are not, (says S. Hierome) declarers, but crauers. For it is one thing
to declare a thing to him that is ignorant, and another thing to crave a
thing of him that knows. In that, it is a declaration, in this: a duty.
There we faithfully declare, here we lamentably beseech. And Saint Augustine
says, Words are needful for us, wherewith we may be moved, and
diligently consider what we should ask, not wherewith we should believe that
the Lord is either taught or entreated.

Wherefore when the Lord forbad much babbling or vain lipplabour in How
liplabour or much babbling is forbidden.
prayer, he did not simply tie the prayer of the faithful, unto a few and
short sum of words, but he forbids us after the manner of Ethnickes to
power out many words without wit, reason, meaning and understanding, and so
finally to think that we shall be heard for our much babbling sake, and
often repeating of prayers: as at this day they do falslye think, which say a
certain number of prayers, which they call Rosaries of prayers. For the Lord
adds: They think they shall be heard for their much babbling sake. S.
Augustine makes difference between babbling much, and praying much. To babble
much, says he, is in praying to make many superfluous words in a necessary
matter. But to pray much, is, to call unto him, whom we pray unto, with a
long and godly stirring up of the heart. For this business for the most
part, is accomplished more with sighinges, than with speakings. And anon, It is
not wicked and fruitless, when we have leisure, to pray the longer. For it is
written of our Lord himself, that he spent the whole night in prayer, and
prayed a long time. Wherein what did he else, but give us an example? Thus
far he. And if it be a hard matter for any man to pray long and continually,
he may break off his prayer: howbeit he must to it again, and oftentimes
renew the same a fresh. For such short speaking in prayer, is praise-worthie.
And that we may make an end of this place, let no man think, that in praying
he declares our affairs unto God, as not knowing them: Let no man think
that he is heard, for his setting forth, and even for his laboursome and exact
setting forth and that oftentimes repeated, and with most earne^t outcries
instilled or powered into the ears of God: Let no man think that his prayer
must stand upon a certain number, that is to fay, that Pater nosters must be
numbered up to our God, as not having a good memory, and to a Lord ill to be
trusted, upon corrals and beads, put together upon a lace, serving (as it
were) to make a reckoning or account.

And because I have said, which all godly men also throughout the whole world
confess, that a most perfect platform of praying is delivered unto us in ye
Lords prayer, by our Lord Jesus Christ him self, it remains that we cite
word for word that most holy form of praying, orderly made with most divine
words, even by the mouth of the Lord, as Matthewe the Apostle has left it
recorded unto us, and then to expound ye same as briefly and plainly as may
be, to the intent that every one may the better understand what he prays, and
^eele a more effectual working inwardly. Of that most Heavenly prayer, this
is the form.

O Our father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come.
Thy will be done as well in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our
daily bread. And forgive us our Or, debtes.
trespasses, as we forgive Or, our debtors.
them that trespase against us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us
from evil. A men. This most holy prayer of our lord Jesus Christ our savior,
our doctor The lords Prayer divided.
or teacher and highest priest, delivered to ye catholic church to be a
catholic form or rule to pray unto God, is wont to be divided into a little
preface, and six petitions, some reckon seven. Some say that the three former
petitions serve chiefly to the spreading abroad of Gods glory, the three
latter concern the care of our selves, and ask those things that are
needful for us. But they seem in manner all to contain both. The little
preface is this, O our father which art in heaven. By this we call upon GOD,
and dedicating our selves unto him, we committ our selves wholly unto his
protection and mercy. And every word has his high mysteries. For our Lord
would have us rather pray with understanding than with words. These therefore
do admonish us, and suffice to be thought upon: but the mind being
instructed with the holy Ghost, which I told you is needful before all
things, to them that pray, and being lifted up to the beholding of God, and
of heavenly things, does devoutly and ardently meditate these things.

And truly the word Father puts us in mind of many things together.
Father.
For first it teaches us, that all our prayers are to be offered to none
other, than to him, which is a father, that is to say, that only God is to be
called upon, and not another for him, or another with him. For our God and
father is one, the fullness and sufficiency of all good things, in whom only
the faithful are acquieted and do rest, and without whom they seek nothing
that is truly good. And verily this prayer can be offered to no creature. For
to which of the Angels or the Saints can thou say without sacrilege? O our
father which art in heaven, etc.

Furthermore this word Father teaches us, through whom we should The Lords
prayer offered to the Father by Christ.
call upon this father, not by the mediation or by the mouths of saints,
but by Jesus Christ our lord: through whom only we are made the sons of God,
who were otherwise by birth, and by nature the children of wrath. Who (I pray
you) durst come for the before the presence of the most high and everlasting
God, and call him Father, and himself Son, unless the father, in his
beloved and natural son, had adopted us the sons of grace? Therefore when
we say Father, we speak from the mouth of ye son, who has taught us so to
pray, and by whom we be promoted into this dignity, that it needs nothing
at all to add the name of Christ, and to say: We pray thee (O heavenly
father) for Christ's sake, since in the first word Father, we comprehend the
whole mystery of the son of God, and our redemption. For in so much as he is
our father, we are his sons, and that by the merit of Christ: therefore we
call upon the father, and so call him through Christ: that I may not now
repeat, that we pray so from the mouth of Christ.

Moreover, this sweet and favorable word Father, disburtheneth us clean of
all distrust of heart. For we call him Father, not so much in consideration of
his creating of all things, as for his singular and fatherly goodwill toward
us. Whereupon, though he be Lord God, and in deed a great Lord, and an
Almighty God: yet when we pray we attribute none of these names unto him,
but call him father, because in deed he wishes us well, loves us, takes care
and charge over us, and having pity upon us, is desirous, yea, of his own
accord and good will toward us, to stoare and heap upon us all good things
whatsoever. Hitherto appertain the testimonies of the Prophets, especially
that of David. The Lord is full of Psalm. 103.
compassion and mercy, slow to anger and of great kindness. He will not
always chide, neither keep his anger for ever. He has not dealt with us after
our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. For as high as the
heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him.
As far as the East is from the west, so far has he removed our sins
from us. As a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord
compassion on them that fear him. For he knows whereof we be made, he
remembers that we are but dust. A very excellent example of this thing is
to be seen in the Gospel after S. Luke, Luke. 15.
where the loving father is painted out with wonderful affections receiving
into favor again that prodigal son and waster of his wealth. Hereunto is
added this word Our, which Our.
puts us in mind of two things. For first it is a small matter to
acknowledge God to be the God and father of all, or to be the God and father of
others, unless we also believe that he is our father, unless we dedicate and
yield our selves wholly into his faith and protection, as of our father, who
wishes well unto us, loves us, has a care over us, at no time and place
neglects us: for unless we do so believe, neither with faith, nor with the
love of GOD is our prayer commended, and therefore not a whit acceptable unto
God. But that that best and greatest God is our God, we do understand as well
by his manifold benefits, as also specially by the mystery of our redemption
through Christ. Of which thing we have spoken elsewhere.

Furthermore since he bad us pray Our father, and not, My father, straight way
upon the very beginning he requires love of us. For his will is that we
should not only have care of our own salvation, but of the salvation of all
other men. For we are all the members of one body: whereupon, each several
one prays not severally for themselves, but every one for the safety of all
the members, and also the whole body. Touching that matter I spoke before,
when I entreated of the manner of prayeing unto God.

There is by and by added, Which art in heaven, not that God is shut up Which
art in heaven.
in heaven, as in a prison. Solomon the happiest and wisest king of all,
co^futing that error long agone, said: If the heavens of heavens are not able
to contain thee, how much less this 3. Reg. ^.
house? To which words, I think, that may be annexed which Stephan alleged
in the Acts of the Apostles, out of Esaie, concerning the same Acts. 7.
thing. He is therefore said to be in heaven, because his divine majesty,
and power, and glory, shines most of all in the heavens. For in ye whole
course of nature, there is nothing more glorious, nothing more beautiful, than
the heavens.

Moreover the father exhibiteth and gives him self unto us to be enjoyed in
the heavens. Heaven is the country common to us all, where we believe that
GOD and our father does dwell, and where we worshipp GOD and our father:
albeit we believe that he is in every place, and always present with all.
For as heaven compasses and covers all things, and is every where distant
from the earthby even spaces: so the presence of his majesty also does fail
us in no place. We have heaven every where in our sight: we are every where
in the sight of God. But beside this, by mention made of heaven, we are put
in mind of our duty, and our wretchedness.

It is our duty, to be lifted up in our minds by praying into heaven, and
to forgett earthly things, and more to be delighted with that heavenly father
and country, than with this earthly prison and exile. It is our wretchedness,
that being banished out of that country for our sins, and wandering in
this earth, we are subject to diverse calamities, and therefore being
constreined by necessity we never cease crying unto the father. But first of
all saying, Which art in heaven, we make a difference between the father
whom we call upon, saying, Our, and our earthly father, attributing
allmightinesse unto him. He surely that is called upon and ought to hear,
must know all, see all, and hear all, yea and more too, will and be able to
do all. Therefore to his goodwill to us ward, which in these words, Our
father, we have expressed, we do now join knowledge of all things, and
power to do althings, adding, Which art in heaven. By these words the faith of
them that pray is stirred up and confirmed.

Now there do follow, in order, Hallowed be thy name.
six petitions. The first is, Hallowed be thy name. We have called God our
father, and our selves his sons. But it is the part of sons to honor or
glorify their father, and therefore immediately upon the beginning, we desire
that the name of the Lord God and our father might be sanctified or hallowed.
That truly is holy and undefiled always in it self: neither is it made any
whitt the better or the worse by us. Whereupon we pray that that which is and
remains holy in it self, should be acknowledged of us to be such, and
always sanctified of us.

A name, is the definition of any thing whatsoever, and names are invented to
make a difference of one thing from another, whereby they might be known
among themselves. But GOD is infinite and unmeasurable: The name of God.
moreover, he is one, therefore he has not a name whereby to be defined,
he needs not a name whereby to be discerned from other Gods. Therefore those
names that are attributed unto him in the Scriptures, are attributed for our
infirmity, to the end that by some reason and comparison, we might
understand somethinges that are spoken of him that is unmeasurable and
infinite. Therefore the name of GOD in very deed, is GOD him self with all
his Majesty and glory.

To Sanctify or Hallowe, otherwhiles To sanctify or hallowe.
signifies to separate things from a profane unto an holy use. In this place
it signifies, to magnify, to praise, and to glorify. We desire therefore
that GOD himself, who of his own nature is a good, holy, and for ever
blessed, gentle, bountiful, and a merciful father, might as he is in
himself, be acknowledged and magnified of all us, that all nations leaving
their error and heresies, might consecrate them selves in truth, to this one
only father and God: that all things which defile the name of the Lord, of
which sort are wicked deceiptes, or practices, ungodliness, Epicurisme, an
unclean life, and especially corrupt and antichristian doctrine, may be
taken away, that being enlightened, we might sanctify or hallowe the name
of the Lord.

Wherefore, in this petition we desire the holy ghost, the very only author
it self of all true sanctification. We pray for true faith in GOD by Christ
thoroughout the whole world. We pray for holy thoughts, and a pure life,
wherewith we might glorify the name of the Lord: which is done while every
one does his own duty, while Satan the author of al uncleanness is cast
out, while corrupt doctrine is taken away, and deceit ceasseth, while the
filthiness of the world is banished. This petition the most excellent king and
Prophet David sets forth in these words, GOD be merciful unto us and
bless us, show us the light of his countenance, and be merciful unto us,
that thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations.
Let the people praise thee, O God, yea let all the people praise thee. And as
follows in the threescore and seventh Psalm. To this belongs the whole
prayer of our Savior described by S. John in the 17. Chapter of his Gospel.

The second petition, is, Thy Thy kingdom come.
kingdom come. For ye name of God and our father cannot be sanctified or
hallowed, unless he reign in us. There is one kingdom of GOD, another of
the devil. Furthermore, one kingdom of God is said to be of glory, and
another rightly of grace. The kingdom of glory is not of this world but of
another world.

The kingdom of Grace is the kingdom of Christ in this world, wherein Christ
reigns by the holy spirit in his faithful ones, which of their own accord
submit themselves unto him to be governed, saying and doing those things,
which beautify and beseem christians. The devil also reigns in the
children of unbelief, which yield themselves unto him to be governed according
to his ungodliness and wickedness, doeinge those things which are not only
delightful to the flesh, but which turn to ye reproach of Gods majesty: whom
after this life by the just judgment of God, the devil, the king of the
ungodly catches unto hell, into the kingdom of death and judgment, there
continually to burn.

Moreover the earthly kingdom, which princes of this world govern, is called
either the kingdom of God, or the kingdom of the devil even as it shall
fashion and frame it self to one of the twain. All these things we do knit
up in few words, because we have more plentifully entreated of them in
another place. Wherefore we pray in this second petition, that Christ might
reign and live in us, and we in him, that the kingdom of Christ might be
spread abroad and enlarged, and prevail thoroughe the whole world: that
Doctors or teachers, and ecclesiastical magistrates, finally, that princes
also, yea and schools too, and whosoever may further the kingdom of Christ,
being anointed and watered with his graces may flourish, overcome and
triumph: furthermore, we pray that the kingdom of the devil and antichriste
may be broken and vanquished, least it hurt and annoye the Saints, that
with with the kingdom of the devil, all ungodliness may be dashed and trodden
under foot: to be short, that all the weapons and armor of Antichristianisme
may be broken into shiuers and come to naught. Lastly, we pray in this second
petition, that after we have sailed out of the tempestuous gulf of this
world, we might be received and gathered unto Christ, and all the Saints,
into the everlasting kingdom of glory. For as we desire the kingdom of God to
come unto us, and God to reign in us, so we pray to come, or to be received
into his kingdom, and to live for ever with him most holily.

The third petition is, Thy will Thy will be done.
be done, as well in earth, as it is in heaven. God reigns not in us, unless
we be obedient unto him: therefore after his kingdom, we desire the grace of
perfect obedience. For we desire not that God do what he will. For continually
Gods will is done, albeit we never pray for it, and though we wrestle and
strive against it with all our might. For the Prophet says, Our God is in
heaven, he has Psalm. 113.
done whatsoever pleased him in heaven and in earth. We ask therefore that
what he will, the same he may make us both to will, and to do. For his will is
always good: but our will through the corruption of sin, is evil. Therefore
we pray him to be present with us with his grace, that our will may be
regenerated and framed to the good will of God, that of it own accord it yealde
it self to the holy Ghost to be framed: that his grace will that, which he
inspireth: that he finish in us that which he has well begone, give us moreover
strength and patience hereunto: yt as well in prosperity as in adversity, we
may acknowledge ye will of God, least we will any thing of our selves, and swel
and be puffed up in prosperity, in adversity also faint and perish: but that
we may apply our selves in all things, and through all things, to be governed
by his will, to wit, after this manner to submit our will to his will.
Furthermore, if we ask any thing contrary to his will, that he would not
grant it, but rather pardon our foolishness, and weaken our will, which is
not good for us: to instruct and teach us in his good will, to the end we may
doubt nothing, that this is always to be followed, that this is always good,
and that this works all things for our commodity and benefit.

In this point, the faithful feel a very great battle in them selves, As
well in earth, as it is in heaven.
Paul witnessing and saying, The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh. And these two are at mutual enimitie between them
selves, that what things ye would, that ye can not do. Therefore we desire not
any kind of framing our will to Gods will, but we add, As well in earth as it
is in heaven, that is, Grant, O father, that thy will may be done in us earthly
men, as it is done in thy Saints, the blessed spirits. These do not strive
against thy most holy will in heaven, but being of one mind they only will
that, which thou will, yea rather, in this one thing they are blessed and
happy, that they agree and acquiet themselves in thy will. Truly it is not
the least part of felicity or happiness in To will that which God wills is
a good part of happiness.
earth, to will that God wills: it is the greatest unhappiness not to will
that which God wills. And this truly by infinite examples might be
declared. I will allege only one and that common too. Some one is grievously
sick, and feels pains and torments scarce tolerable: but he in the mean
time acknowledges that he suffers these things by the commandment and
will of God, his most good, bountiful, and just father, who wishes him well,
and has sent this grievous calamity for his salvation, and for his own
glory: does not he in the midst of his torments by submitting him self to
the will of God, feel refreshing? and that which seemed most sharp and most
bitter to man, by this voluntary and free submission, he makes it delightful
and most sweet? Again, another is sick, vexed not with a very great disease,
but this man does not acknowledge this sickness to be laid upon him by the
good will of GOD, yea rather thinks that God knows not the disease, that
God does not care for the disease, therefore he refers it unto diverse and
sundry causes, and imagines and seeks diverse means to heal it, and in
these things he is wonderfully vexed and afflicted, and yet by striving so
against the will of god, he feels no refreshing or comfort at all. What
therefore does he else, nilling that which God wills, than, (which they are
wont to do) by ill means avoiding evil, double the same. Wherefore the
foundation of all happiness, is faithful obedience, whereby we fully submit
our selves and what so ever else unto us belongs to the good will of God: and
therefore in this greatest petition, we pray unto the father, that he would
give us regeneration or newenesse of heart, true obedience, perseuering
patience, and a mind always and in all things agreeing with and obeying God.

The fourth petition is such, Give us this day our daily bread. For the Bread.
will of God can not be done in us, unless we be nourished and strengthened
with the bread of God. Bread among the Hebricians, signifies all kind of
meats, and the preserving or sustenaunce of the substance of man. Whereupon
we read it said in the prophet, I will break the staff of bread. But man
consists of two substances, the soul and body. The soul is the spirit: the
body is made of earth and other elements. Therefore it is preserved with two
kinds of bread, spiritual and corporal. The spiritual meat of the soul,
whereby it is preserved in life, is ye very word of God, proceeding out of the
mouth of God: the Lord out of the law repeating and saying, Man lives not by
bread only, but by every word that Matthew. 4. Deuteronomy. 8.
comes out of the mouth of God. And for because this only sets forth unto
the faithful the eternal and incarnate word of God, I mean the very son of
God, we rightly acknowledge him to be the meat of the soul, yea the meat of a
whole faithful man. For he him self witnesses that he is the bread that came
down from heaven, of which they that eat shall not die, but have life
everlasting. Corporal bread consists of elements, and is earthly, and
comprehends meat, drink, raiment, prosperous health of body, maintenance,
to be short, the safety and good estate of ma^s life. And this bread truly we
call Ours: not yt it is not the gift and benefit Ours.
of God, but because it is appointed for us, and perteneth to our preservation
and is necessary for us: yet in ye mean seson when we call it Daily, or, (...),
yt is to say, for the morrow, we signify Daily.
that it is ye most excellentest of all, which only can sustain and preserve
our substance, as much as is sufficient and as long as it is meet, and
altogether after ye same manner and order which is needful. For we said before yt
it is not our part to prescribe unto God a manner of doing or giving. To this
also perteine those words following, Give us this day: For it belongs only
unto Give.
god to give: neither agrees this petition to any creature. David says, Al
things wait upon thee, that thou may give the^ meat in due season, when thou
give them, they gather it, when thou openest thy hand, all things are filled
with good. Again, The eyes of al things do look upon thee, O Lord, and thou
give the^ meat in due season, thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy
blessing every living creature. Now we pray, Give us, not Give me, Us.
which puts us in mind again both of brotherly love, and unity. For we
ought not only to seek our own, but also to pray for the safety and
preservation of all other men. The word, This day, appoints us a measure.
This day.
For this we say, Suffice thou us, O Lord, daily, and every moment, with as
much as is needful and enough for us: which thou thy self only know best of
all. For we are admonished by the way, that we should not burn with
immoderate desire of transitory things, and that we should not lavish them out
riotously when we have them, loosing both our goods, and our souls. And
therefore that wise man is read to have said: Two things have I required of
thee, deny me the^ Pro. 30.
not before I die. Remove far from me vanity and lies, give me neither
poverty nor riches, only feed me with food convenient for me: least
peradventure being full I should deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or being
oppressed with poverty, fall to stealing, and forswear the name of my God.
Therefore in this fourth petition, we yeald our selves wholly into the care and
tuition of God the father, and commit our selves to his providence, that he
which only is able to save us, might feed, defend, and save us. For unless he
pour his blessing upon us, unless he give us strength by those things that
are means perteyning to our sustentation and maintenance, all things are of
no force. We pray for the happy course of the word of God, for the Pastors of
the Church them selves, for the mainteyners of the common weal, for the
safety of the Church and common weal. We crave that the bountiful father
would supply all wants, and give what so ever things are necessary for the
sustentation, both of the body and the soul.

Furthermore, least any should think him self unworthy of the daily And
forgive us.
bread, because it is due to children and not to dogs, and therefore should
pray the slowlier and with a more slender courage, the Lord preventing this
carfulness of the godly, adds the fifte petition, which is this, And
forgive us our debtes, as we forgive our debtors. In these words we ask
forgiveness of our sins. And that we may obtain forgiveness of our
sins, it is needful that we confess our selves to be sinners. For unless
we do this, how shall we pray that our sins should be forgiven us? Truly,
all the Saints use this order of praying. Therefore all of them acknowledge
the^ selves to be sinners. For there remain relics, yea eue^ in the
regenerate, and most holy men, which daily burst out into evil thoughts, evil
sayings and doings, yea and oftentimes into heinous offenses. But whatsoever
faults and sins ours be, first truly we confess the^ humbly to god the
father, and afterward pray him to forgive them. We call our sins debtes, God
him self so teaching, because Our debtes.
we are indebted for the punishment (as the price) of them unto God. And he
forgiueth our debtes, when he takes not deserved punishment of us, so iudgeing
of us, as if we were nothing indebted unto him.

For the allusion is made to corporal debtes: which if the creditour forgive
the debtor, he has no further power to cast in prison, or to punish him which
was his debtor. Therefore not only the fault is forgiven unto us, but the
punishment also. Neither do we make any words of our merits unto the father,
but we say, Remit or forgive us our debtes. By the word remission, is meant a
free forgiveness of sins.

For he forgiueth us, because we are not able to pay. Whereupon we read in
the Gospel, When the debtors were not able to pay, he forgave Luke. 7.
them both their debtes. The like are set down in the 18. chapter of Matthew.
Therefore by no merit of ours, by no satisfaction of ours, but by the
bountifulness of God, through Christ, we pray that all our sins may be
forgiven us. Neither do the Saints here doubt of the certeintie of
forgiveness. For the Lord says in the gospel, Whatsoever ye ask in my name,
believing, ye shall receive it: they therefore that pray in faith, doubt not
that their sins are forgiven the^ for Christ's sake. For so also we confess
in our Creed, I believe the forgiveness of sins.

We add forthwith her^vnto, As As we forgive our debtors.
we forgive our debtors: not that we should think through our forgiveness,
that we deserve or obtain forgiveness of our sins: for otherwise the
reason of remission were not certain. For he that either brings, or does any
thing, for which things sake sin is taken away, or he that satisfies for
sin, to him nothing is forgiven, but rather recompensed as a desert.
Therefore for other causes these things seem to be added. First for so much
as we be careful for forgiveness, of which many doubt, the Lords will is to
comfort our infirmity, by adding this as it were a sign, whereby we might
understand, that so surely our sins are forgiven us of God, as we are sure we
have remitted and forgiven other their offenses, wherewith they have offended
us. Furthermore, his will was to drive out of us all old grudge, hatred, and
malice, and to drive into us the study and desire of love and charity, and to
admonish us of our duty, that if as yet there did stick in our minds any
part of old enmities, we may know that it ought altogether to be laid aside,
and cast out of our stomach, yea, and that even now we must call upon the
Lord to move our hearts, that we may be able to do it. Surely, we do hardly
lay down old injuries and offenses. But it is meet that we forgive our
brethren lesser faults, which have obtained pardon of very great sins of our
most gracious father: unless happily we list to take trial of his fortune,
who in the parable of the Gospel had him self proof of the great
bountifulness and liberality of the Lord in forgiving him, he in the mean
while being fierce and cruel toward his brother, in exacting of him a very
small and trifling debt. The parable is very well known in the 18. chapter of
S. Matthew.

The sixth and last petition is, And And lead^ us not into, etc.
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For sin is never so
forgiven, that there remains not concupiscence in the flesh, which
temptations stir up, and lead into diverse kinds of sins. And these are
of diverse sorts. For first God tempts us, when he bids us do any thing
whereby to prove us, as when he bad Abraham to offer up his son: or else when
he sends adversity upon us, that with the fire of temptation he may both
fine our faith, and cleanse away the dross of our misdeedes. These temptations
of God tend to the salvation of the faithful.

Wherefore we do not simply pray, not to be tempted. For ye temptation of
God is profitable. For that man is said to be blessed, which suffers
temptation, For when he is tried, James. 1.
he shall receive the crown of life. We pray also that we be not ledd into
temptation. For the devil likewise tempts, we are tempted of ye world, and of
our flesh. There are temptations on our righthand and on our left, tending to
this end to overthrow us, to drown us in the bottomless pit of our sins,
and thereby to destroy us: when that is done, we are not only tempted, but we
are ledd into and also intrapped in temptation. Such a petition therefore we
do make, If it please thee, O heavenly father, to exercise us with thy
wholesome temptations, we beseech thee grant that we may be found tried: and
suffer us not to be ledd by a diuelishe and wicked temptation, that leaving
thee, and being made bondsiaues to our enemy, and drowned in the gulf of
wickednesses, we be caught and kept of him in evil, sin, and in our own
destruction. For now we add the contrary clause, which also expounds the
former, which as other say, is the seventh petition. But deliver us from evil,
But deliver us from evil.
(...), I say, from that evil, to wit, from satan, who elsewhere is called a
tempter. Deliver us from satan and from all evils which he sends: deliver us
from snares, crafty practices, deceyuings, from war, famine, captivity,
plague, from all those things which are evil, hurtful, and dangerous. Those
things that are such, our heavenly father knows very well, to whom we say
here, Give us healthful and good things, take away from us those things which
thou know to be hurtful and evil, And so briefly we conclude the Lords
prayer, adding moreover, Amen. That confirmation and giving Amen.
of assent, is read to have been common and usual of old, as it is to see in
Deuteronomy. 27. Nehem. 8. 1. Cor. 14. The same in the beginning does express our
desire. For we confess that we desire those things heartily which we pray for.
Besides that, it declares the certeintie of our faith. As if we should say, I
believe assuredly, that these things are granted unto me of God. For Amen, is
as much as if one should say, So be it. And the lord in the Gospel
oftentimes, says: Which ^s commonly transla^ed, Veri^y, Verily.
Amen Amen, I say unto you, that is, of a certeintie I tell you the truth: Or,
I utter and pronounce unto you the undoubted truth. And so the faithful after
they have offered prayers unto God, having their minds pacified, do now
joyfully wait for the gifts of the Lord.

Furthermore, some do place before the word Amen, immediately after the
rehearsal of these words, But deliver us from evil (for thine is For thine
is the kingdom, power, and glory for ever.
the kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever) Amen.

But Erasmus Roterod, in his Annotations upon the new Testament, witnesses,
that those words are not found in any old latin copy: but are found added in all Greek copies, how be it not expounded of any of the interpreters, but of
Chrysostom only and his follower Theophilacte. And that therefore they seemed
unto him to be added unto the Lords prayer, as some have added these unto the
Psalms, Glory be to the father, to the son, etc. The same Erasmus
immediately adioyneth, Wherefore there is no cause why Laurentius Valla should
stomache the matter, that a good part of the Lords prayer was curtayled. Their
rashness was rather to be reproved, who feared not to so heavenly a prayer to
patch their own toys. For I may call them toys, in comparison of that
which God has taught, what so ever has proceeded from men, especially if
that which men have added and put to, be compared with Christ the author of
prayer. Neither did Erasmus only doubt of this addition. For the Spanishe
copy, which they call Codex Co^plutensis, has, That it seems more credible,
that these words are not a part of the Lords prayer, as a member of the whole,
but put in through the fault of some certain Writers, or Printers. In the
same book is by and by added, And albeit S. Chrysostom in his commentaries
upon Matthew. homil. 20. do expound these words, as if they were of the text,
yet it is coniectured to be more true, that even in his time the first
originals in this treatise were corrupted: whereupon none of the Latins, no
not of the ancient interpreters or entreaters thereof is read to have made any
mention of these words. And surely this is truly said. For the most diligent
interpreters, which have taken in hand singularly word for word to expound the
Lords prayer, as were S. Cyprian, Hierome, and Augustine, of this addition have
not spoken so much as one word. Thus much have I spoken hitherto of the lords
prayer, and of calling upon Gods name, of which Solomon the wisest that ever
was, most truly pronounces, The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, ^ro. 18.
the righteous runs unto it and is exalted, that is, he stands and is
preserved in a safe, or in a high place, out of the reach of any weapon. We
will say somewhat (as we have done of this) of thanks giving an other kind of
prayer. And though the same also be comprehended in ye Lords prayer, Of thanks
giuinge
(for it comprehends all things belonging to true prayer, therefore it
contains thanksgiving also:) yet after the expou^ding of that I also would
entreat of this by it self, least by mingling of things there rise a
confusion or disorder in our minds. And truly the Lord requires
thanksgiving of us: of which thing there are extant in the holy Scriptures
arguments not a few. For how many praises, reioycings, and thanksgiuings, are
read in the Psalms, written and left both of David, and of other Prophets? And
in the law also the Lord instituted a peculiar kind of oblation and
sacrifice, which we have said is called the Eucharist or the sacrifice of
thanksgiving. What thing else was the supper of the Passover, but a
thanksgiving, for the deliverance out of the Egyptian captivity?

Surely, our Lord Jesus Christ, both instituting a remembrance of all his
benefits, and especially of the redemption purchased by his death, and knitting
up all sacrifices in brevity, delivered the Eucharist or sacrament of
thankesgiuinge to his church. As we will declare in place convenient, and have
partly showed in our former sermons. Mankind in prosperity is all upon
lustiness and iollitie, and seeldome times thinks with himself from whence
prosperity comes: so he does not set by those spiritual mysteries and
benefits so much as otherwise he ought. But they seem to be swine and not
men, which do not only not set by the benefits of God as they ought, but do
moreover contemn them, and tread them under feet. The heavy judgment of God
does tarry for them. Furthermore the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving is
due to God only. We owe thanks giving only to God
For he is the only giver and author of all good things, though in the mean
while he use the means and ministry of men and other creatures. Some prince
sends unto thee a most royal gift, and that by a courtier not of the lowest
degree, but a most chosen man: yet to him nevertheless though he be a noble
man, thou give not thanks, but to the prince, from whom the gift came:
howbeit in the mean while thou do honestly confess that the Courtier
herein bestowed his labor for thy sake. But he had not bestowed it unless his
prince had so commanded, and so the whole benefit at the Thanks are to be
given to God thrughe Christ.
length redoundeth unto ye prince him self, even unto him alone. And as all
our invocation or calling upon God is acceptable unto GOD the father, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord: so no thanksgiving of ours, is acceptable unto God,
unless it be offered through Jesus Christ. For hitherto perteyneth the
mystery of the altar of incense, whereof mention is made in the ceremonies of
the law. But the Apostle also says, Give thanks Ephe. 5.
always for all things unto God and the father, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And again he says, By Hebr. 13.
him we offer sacrifice of praise always to God, that is, the fruit of
lips confessing his name.

But that we may be thankful The bene^^tes of God must be acknow^edged.
for all the benefits of God, and offer continual thanksgiving unto God, it
is needful first to acknowledge and well to weigh with our selves the
benefits of God. For these being not yet known or rightly weyed, our mind is
not set on fire to give God thanks for his benefits. And these are indeed
diverse, yea they are infinite. For they are private and public, general and
special, spiritual and corporal, temporal and eternal, ecclesiastical and
political, singular and excellent. But who can reckon up all their kinds and
parts? God created, beautified, garnished, and made this world fruitful for
man. To the ministry of this he severally appoints angelical spirits,
whom he had created ministers for him self. He gives us souls and bodies,
which he furnishes and storeth with infinite gifts and abilities, and that,
which far passes all other benefits, he loosed man being entangled in sin,
he delivered him being a bondslaue to the devil. For the son of GOD sets
us free into the liberty of the sons of God: by dying, he quickens: by
sheading his blood, he purges and cleanses: he gives us with his spirit,
whereby we may be guided and preserved in this banishement, until we be
received into that our everlasting and true country. They that consider these
things with a true faith, can not choose but be rapte into the praise and
setting forth of Gods* goodness, and into a wondering at a thing doubtless
to be marvelled at, that the gracious and mighty God has such a special care
of men, than whom this earth has nothing either more wretched or miserable.
Here the Saints of God are destitute of words. Neither have they How the godly
give thanks unto God.
words meet enough for this so great a matter. David cries, O Lord our God
how wonderful is thy name in all the world, for that thou have Psalm. 8.
set thy glory above the heavens, and as follows in the eight Psalm. And
again the same, Who am I O Lord God? and what is the house of my father, that
thou have brought me hitherto? (or so advanced me?) And what can David say
further unto 2. Sam. 7.
thee? for thou Lord God know thy servant, and so forth as follows in the
2. book of Samuel, cha. 7. The same David has set down a most notable form
of blessing or praising, or giving thanks unto God, in ye 103 Psalm. which
begins thus, Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me bless
his holy name. Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits,
who forgiueth al thy wickedness. And so forth. But what need any more words?
The Lords prayer may be a most perfect form of praising God, and giving
thanks to God, for all his benefits, and serve in stead of many. For as the
preface and all the petitions do call unto our remembrance, and absolutely set
forth unto us Gods greatest benefits, most liberally bestowed upon us, and
also upon al other: so if we consider yt it is our duty ^o give thanks to God
for every one of these, and by and by begin, even at the beginning of the
Lords prayer, to weighe this chiefly with our selves, that God the father, of
his unspeakable mercy to us ward, has adopted us miserable sinners into the
number of sons, by whom he will be sanctified, and in whom he will reign and
at the last also translate unto his everlasting kingdom: that I may speak
nothing of other petitions, what plentiful matter, of praising God, and giving
thanks unto him, shall be ministered? But these things are better and more
rightly understood by good, godly, and devout exercise, than by precepts
though never so diligent.

And the Lord does so much esteem this thanks giving offered unto him Thanks
giving a sacrifice.
with true humility of mind and also faith, that he receives it, and
counts it for a most acceptable sacrifice. Of this thing there is very often
mention in the old Testament, as when it is said, Who so ever offers me
thanks and praise, he honors Psalm. 50.
me, I will not reprove thee, because of thy sacrifices, I will take no
bullockes out of thy house, nor goats out of thy fouldes. Offer unto God the
sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows unto the most highest. And call upon me
in the day of trouble, I will hear thee (and deliver thee) and thou shall
glorify me. Again, I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving,
Psalm. 116.
and I will call upon the name of the Lord. And Oseas also says, Take these
words with you, Ose. 24.
and turn ye to the Lord, and say unto him, O for give us all our sins, and
receive us graciously (Nim recht fur gut) and then will we offer the calves of
our lips unto thee. After which manner Malachie also has left written, I have
no pleasure in you, says the Lord of hoastes, neither Mala. 1.
will I receive an offering at your hand. For from the rising of the Sun
unto the going down of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles: and in
every place incense and a pure offering shall be offered to my name, for my
name is great among the Gentiles, says the Lord of hoastes,

Furthermore, this Pure offering, al ye old interpreters with great consent,
Irenaeus chiefly and Tertullian, do interpret Eucharistia, that is to say,
praises and thankesgiuinges, and prayer proceeding from a pure heart, and a
good conscience, and an unfeigned faith. Truly for no other cause have the
ancient fathers called the Euchariste or mystical Supper of Christ, a
sacrifice, than for that in it praise and thanksgiving is offered unto God.
For the Apostle Paul shows that Christ was once offered, and that he can
not be offered often or any more.

For great is the worthiness, power, Of the force or virtue of prayer.
and virtue, not only of praise or thanksgiving, but also of prayer wholly, I
mean of invocation also it self. Whereof although I have already spoken
somewhat, where I declared that our prayers are effectual, yet do I add these
few words. The Saints truly had a most ardent desire of praying, because of
the wonderful force of prayer.

For that I may say nothing of those most ancient fathers before and
anonafter the flood, did not Abraham pray when he received the promises? and
as often as he changed his dwelling, did not he call upon God? At his prayer
king Abimelech is delivered from death, and barrennes, which the Lord being
displeased laid upon his house is cured. Jacob powered forth most ardent
prayers unto God, and received of him inestimable benefits. In Exodus Moses
prays, not once, but often, and takes away the plagues from the Aegyptia^s,
which the Lord by his just judgment had brought upon them. At the prayer of
Moses the Amalechites turn their backs: and when he ceased or left off, the
Israelites fledd away. Again, when the fire of the Lord devoured the vttmost
parts of the tents of Israel, they cried unto Moses, and Moses again cried
unto the lord, and soudeinly the fire that devoured them was consumed. Again,
the people murmured against the Lord, and vengeance is prepared, but Moses by
mild and continual prayer quenches the wrath of God. For it is said unto
him, I have let them go according to thy word. Anon after when the people
began a fresh to murmur against Moses and Aaron, and that the vengeance of God
had already consumed fourteen thousand and seven hundred men, Aaron at the
commandment of Moses, burns incense, and standing between the dead and
those that were living, howbeit near and appointed to death, he pleads for
and obteineth pardon by prayers. Innumerable other of this kind are read of
Moses. Iosue, Moses successor, by prayers, made the course of the sun and
moon so long to stay, until he had revenged himself upon his enemies. Anna,
without any voice heard, by prayer puts from her the reproach of barrennes,
and forthwith is made a fruitful mother of very many children. Samuel the
most godly son of godly Anna, by prayer vanquisheth the Philistin^s, and
soudeinely in the time of Harvest raised up a mighty tempest of thunder and
rain. We do also read things not unlike of Helias. Jonas in like manner
prayed in the Whales belly, and was cast on the shore safe. Iosaphat, and
Ezechias, most religious kings, by prayers powered forth unto God by faith,
do triumph over their most puissaunt enemies. Nehemias asked nothing of his
king, before he had first prayed to the Lord of heaven, therefore he obtained
all things. The most valiant and man-like stomacht. Judith, by prayer
overthrew and slew Holophernes, ye most proud enemy of Gods people, and the
terror of all nations. And as Daniel brought all his affairs to pass by
prayers unto God: so Hester took a deed in hand that was necessary for Gods
people, and with three days fasting, and daily prayers brings it to an
happy end. In the most blessed, and most desired birth of our Lord JESUS,
companies of angels are heard singing praises together unto God. What, and did
not our Lord when his life was in extreme danger beetake him self to prayer,
and by and by heard the voice of an angel comforting him?

The Apostles together with the rest of the church pray with one accord, about
the third hour of the day, and anon they receive the holy Ghost. And when the
Apostles were in dangers, the church cries suppliantly for Gods help, and
presently without delay finds succor. They receive much liberty to speak
and work very great signs and miracles among the people. Peter by an Angel
of God, is brought out of a very strong and fenced prison. What should I
speak of Paul and Silas praying and praising the Lord in prison? Is it not
read that ye foundations of the prison were all shaken with an earthquake, and
by that occasion the keeper of the prison was turned unto God? Examples of
which sort truly I could bring innumerable, but that I am persuaded that to
the Godly these are sufficient. And faithful men do not attribute these
forces, effects, or virtues to prayer, as to a work of ours, but as proceeding
from faith, and so to God himself, which promises these things, and
perfourmeth them to the faithful. For the judgment of Paul touching these is
known, in the 11. to the Hebrews, and that all glory is due to one God. Who
vouchsafe so to illuminate all our minds, that our prayer may always please
him. Amen.

Of signs, and the manner of signs, of Sacramental signs, what a Sacrament
is, of whom, for what causes, and how many Sacraments were instituted of
Christ for the Christian Church. Of what things they do consist, how these
are consecrated, how the sign and the thing signified in the Sacraments are
either joined together or distinguished, and of the kind of speeches used in
the Sacraments.
The sixth Sermon.
THE treatise upon the sacraments remains, which we heard is joined to ye
word of God and prayer. But in speking of sacraments delivered by Christ our
king and high priest, and received and lawfully used of his holy and catholic
Church, I will by Gods grace and assistance, observe this order, first to
entreat of them generally, and tha^ particularly, or severally. And here
before hand I will determine upon the certain signification of a sign or
Sacrament, wherein if I shall be somewhat long or tedious, I crave pardon
(deerly beloved) therefore, for I hope it shall not be altogether fruitless.
Signum, a sign, the Latin writers call a token, a representing, a mark, and
show of A sign.
some thing that has signification. So say Tullie and Fabius. Fabius says.
Some call Signum (...), though some term it Indicium, other some Vestigium, a
mark or token whereby a thing is understood, as slaughter by blood. S.
Aurelius Augustine the famous Ecclestastical writer, Cap. 4. De magistro,
says, We generally call all those things signs which signify somewhat, where
also we find words to be. Again, Lib. 2. de doctrina Christiana, cap. 1. he
says, A sign is a thing beside the semblance, which it lays before our
senses, making of it self something to come into our mind or thought, as by
seeing smoke, we believe there is fire. The said Aur. Division of signs out of
S. Augustine.
August. does divide signs into signs natural, and signs given. Natural he
calls those, which without any will or affection to signify, beside
themselves make something else to be known, as is smoke signifying fire. For
smoke has not any will in it self to signify. Signs given are those, which
all living creatures do give one to an other, to declare as well as they ca^
the affections of their mind, or any thing which they conceive, mean, or
understand. And signs given he divides again by the senses. For some belong
to the eyes, as the ensigns or banners of Capteines, moving of the hands, and
all the members. Some again belong to the ears, as the trumpet and other
instruments of music, yea and words themselves, which are chief and
principal among men, when they intend to make their meaning known. Unto
smelling he refers that sweet savor of ointment mentioned in the John. 12.
Gospel, whereby it pleases the Lord to signify somewhat. To the taste he
refers the supper of the Lord, For (says he) by the tasting of the
sacrament of his body and blood, he gave Mark 14.
or made a sign of his will. He adds also an example of touching, And when
the woman by touching the hemme of his vesture is made whole, that is not a
sign of nothing, but signifies Matthew. 9.
somewhat. In this manner has Augustine entreated of the kinds and differences
of signs. Other also whose opinion does not much differ from hi^, Signs
dis^inguished according to their ^imes.
distinguish signs according to the order of times. For of signs (say they)
some are of things present; some of things past; and some of things to come.
They think them signs of things present, which signify those things to be
present which are signified: as ye Iuie garla^d ha^ging for a sign does give
us to understand that there is (...) to be fould, where it is hanged up. The
signs which our master Christ wrought; did signify that the Mess^s, and the
kingdom of god promised by the prophets was come. Matthew. 12.
Under signs part they comprise all tumbes, monuments of the dead, and those
stones pitched of Iosue in the midst of Iordane, signifying to them Iosue. 4.
which came after what was done in times before. The fleece did give to Gedeon,
a sign of things to come, y^ Judge 6.
is to say, a sign of the victory which he should have over his enemies.

But those signs being well considered Of signs, some are given of men, other
some ordained of God.
and not neglected, may more amply and plainly be divided into other signs
whereof some are given of men, and some ordained of God himself. Signs or
tokens are given of men, whereby they show and signify some thing, and by the
which also they keep some thing in memory among men, or do as it were seal
up that, which they would have certain and sure. After this manner is every
description or Signs given of men.
picture demonstratiue called a sign. For in Ezechiel, cap. 4. Jerusalem
Ezech. 4.
which was portrayed in a tyle, is called a sign. They also in ancient time
termed the images of the dead, signs, because by those images they would renew
a fresh the memory of them, whose signs they were called, and keep them in
remembrance, as if they were alive. Yea, and the holy scripture calls idols
signs, as it appears in Esaie, cap. 45. and the 2. Paralip. 33. So stones
being set or laid to mark out any thing, as land marks, and all tumbes or
monumentes are signs. Raha^ of Hiericho said to ye Israelits, Give me a sign
by oath, that you will show mercy to me, and they g^ue her a rope to hang out
of her wi^^owe. Behold the rope was a sign (...) faith and truth, wherewith
the (...) (as ye would say) seal themselves surely and without all
dissimulation, to take diligent heed that Raha^ should not be destroyed.

We Zwicers term such signs given or received in confirmation of faith and
truth, Wortzeichen, because they are added to the words, and do as it were
seal them, and Warzeichen also, because by them we do as it were give
witness that in good faith, and without all fraud or guile we will perform
that in deed, which we promised in word.

Now these kind of signs are of diverse sorts. For some are mute or The
diversity of signs given of man.
dumb, and perteine to the sense of the eyes, of which sort are ye standards
used in war, crosses, banners, flaming fires, whereof mention is made Number. 2.
Psalm. 73. etc. Neither is any man able to reckon up all of this sort: for ever
and anon new come in as pleases men. Judas gave a sign unto his company,
Whomesoeuer (says he) I shall kiss, that same is he, take Matthew. 26.
him. The joining of right hands, which pertayneth to the sense of feeling,
is a sign of faithfulness, help, and fellowshipp, yea, it is a dumb sign,
which sign Paul calls the Right hand of fellowship. Hitherto Gal. 2.
belong diverse mouings and gestures. Some of them are pertaining to the voice,
which are conceived by hearing, and are uttered by man's voice, or by the sound
of things which have no life. By man's voice are uttered words, whistling, and
whatsoever other things are of this kind, whereunto watchwoords uttered by the
voice, may be added, as Schiboleth in the 12. Chap. Judge. 2.
of the Judges.

Moreover, voices without life are they which are made by trumpets, flutes,
horns, gunnes, drumbes, by ringing of bells and sounding instruments, which
also extend very far and largely. Now signs are given of Signs given of God.
God to this end, to teach and admonish us of things to come, or of things
past, either that they may after a sort lay before the eyes of the beholders,
and represent in a certain likeness the things themselves whereof they are
signs: or else that they may (as it were) seal the promises and words of
God with some visible ceremony celebrated of men by Gods institution: to be
short, that they might exercise our faith, and gather together those which
are scattered into one assembly or company. And these are not all of one
sort, but do much differ between themselves. For some have The diuersirie o^
Signs given by God.
their beginning of natural causes, and yet nevertheless are given as signs
of God, to put us in mind of things past, or to renew his promises, and to
teach men things that have been done, of which kind is the rainebowe,
mentioned by Moses Genesis 9. For when the flood ceased, that God made a new
league with Noah, and ordained the rainebowe for a sign of his covenant, he
made it not a new, but being made long before, and appearing by natural causes,
by a new institution he consecrated it, to the intent it might cause us to
call to our remembrance the flood, and as it were renew the promise of God,
that is to say, that it should never come to pass again, that the earth
should be drowned with water. Now this sign has not any ceremony ordained,
whereby it might be celebrated among men, neither does it gather us together
into the society of any body or fellowship. But this sign is referred
chiefly to God, saying: I will set my rainebowe in the clouds, that when I see
it, I may remember the everlasting covenant made between me and you. Not much
unlike to this are signs and Signs and wonders.
wonders, signs and say in the Sun, the moon, and the stars, which do
forewarne men of destruction and calamities Luke. 21.
to come, unless by repentance they amend: but neither have these any
ceremony ordained, to celebrate the remembrance of them, or to gather us
together, etc.

Again, there be other signs altogether myraculous, not natural, Miraculous
^ignes.
though there be natural things in them, of which sort Gedeons fleece is,
and the shadow of the Sun going back in the dial of king Ezechias. Esai.
38.
These signs as we read them to have been once showed, so by no institution
are they commanded to be followed, or for some certain end to be
celebrated. To Ezechias they were given at that time, to signify and witness
the victory which he should have against his enemies, and the recovery of his
health. Altogether and merely marvelous are those things which in the last of
Mark, by our Lord Jesus Christ are called signs, gifts I mean of healing,
and speaking with tongues, given unto and bestowed upon men, not by any power
of man, or virtue of healing in him, but by the power and virtue of Christ
only. Those signs declared unto men, that that was the true and undoubted
preaching of the Gospel whereby Christ is declared to be Lord of all, Lord
of life and death, of Satan, and of hell also it self. For now when through
the name of Christ the dead do rise, and diseases being driven out go their
way, by these very signs it is proved that that is true, which is said, that
Christ is Lord of all things. So the wonders which Moses and Aaron wrought in
Egypt, Exodus 4. are called in the Scripture signs. For they were witnesses
both of Gods lawefull sending, and tokens of his mighty power to be executed
against Egypt, but neither had these any ceremony, nether gathered together
into any society.

Now also we read that some signs are paradigmaticall, that is, used in Signs
pa^adigmatical or for example.
deed of men, but not without Gods commandment, that these also may be said
to be signs from God. Those be altogether free from miracles, and in deed not
only fetched from natural things, but also from things mere common and usual,
as were ye bands, pitcher, and chains of ye holy prophet Jeremy, whereby,
being willed of God so to do, he laid before them Iere. 27. 19. 28.
those things in a certain evident form and figure, I mean, in a visible
sign to be seen with men's eyes, which by his preaching he prophesied should
fall upon them. The like we may see in Ezech. the 17. and 24. cap. These
signs paradigmaticall or for example, are in some things like to those
exercises of Rhetorique, called Chriae Actiu, yea rather they are certain mixed
Chriae, so termed, for that they consist partly in words and partly in deeds.
Aphthonius defines an Active Chri, To be that which declares and plainly
shows a thing by action, deed, or gesture. As when Pythagoras was demanded,
how long man's life lasted? He for a while stood still, yt they might look
upon him, but anon he shrunk away and withdrew himself out of their sight,
after that manner and action signifying, ye man's life is but short and
momentanie. But in the scripture for the most part are set down Chri,
consisting of word and deed, as when Christ took a little child, and set him in
the midst of his disciples, and spoke these words, Verily I say unto you,
Matthew. 18.
except ye shall turn and beecome as little children, ye shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven. But these actions or signs have not the institution
and commandment of God, charging us to renew this very action by solemn
celebrating the same. Nevertheless Sacramental signs are severed from other
signs with which the^ have many things common.
sacramental signs have some affinity with these, namely baptism and the
Lords supper. For they are given unto us from above, and are taken from
natural things, without any miracle, yea, they are instituted under the
form of natural and sensible things, and in such things as are very common,
water, bread, and wine. This they have common with other signs given of God,
in that they renew things past, and shadow out things to come, and by a
sign do represent things signified. They differ peculiarly from other
signs, in that they have ceremonies joined with ye commandment of God, which
ceremonies, he has commanded his church to solemnize. And this also is
peculiar to them, yt being seals of gods promises, they couple us visiblye to
God, and to all the saints, and they are dedicated to ye most holy mysteries
of God in Christ. Of these I will entreat more largly and diligently hereafter.

The sacramental signs of Christ and of Christ his church, namely which
Sacrament
Christ our Lord has delivered to his church, and which his church has
received of him, and do lawfully use, ye same are called of Latin writers by
the name of Sacraments. But ye word is not found in the whole Scripture, saving
that it is read to be used of Interpretours: howbeit, the word Sign is often in
the scriptures, and that which helps for our purpose, is most signicantly set
down in Genesis 17. and Romans 4. In the mean while we do not reiecte the Latin
word Sacramentu^, a sacrament, as lightly regarding it, neither yet rejecting
it do we forge or devise a new. I likewel enough of ye word Sacrament, so it be
used lawfully. S. August. in his. 5. epist. to Marcellinus says, It were too
long to dispute of the diversity of signs, which when they perteine to holy
things, are termed sacraments. From whence doubtless sprange that common
definition or description, A Sacrament is a sign of an holy thing, which as it
cannot be rejected, so there is none but sees, that in it the nature of the
thing is not fully comprehended or expressed, neither is it separated from
those things which also are holy signs. There is another definition therefore
brought forth and used, which is in deed more perfect than the other, A
sacrament is a visible sign of an inuible grace. But because this also does
not in all poinctes express the nature of the thing: this definition following
seems unto many more allowable, which is after this manner: Sacraments are
ceremonies, wherewith god exercises his people, first to stir up, increase,
and maintain their faith: then to the end to testify before men his religion.
This is a true and right definition. But what if you define a What a Sacrament
is.
sacrament somewhat more fully and largely in this manner? Sacraments are holy
actions consisting of words or promises of the Gospel, or of prescripte rites
or Ceremonies, given for this end to the Church of God from heaven, to be
witnesses and seals of the preaching of the Gospel, to exercise and try
faith, and by earthly and visible things to represent and set before our eyes
the deep mysteries of God, to be short, to gather to gether a visible Church
or congregation, and to admonish them of their duty. This definition truly
is far fett, large, and many fold, a definition, I say, gathered of many
parts, but we mean to go to it simply and plainly, and to lay forth the
whole matter before your eyes to be seen, then will we make manifest every part
thereof, and confirm the same with testimonies of scripture. Now yt I may fully
entreat Sacrament taken for ^^orth.
of the names ye are given to this thing, I find that Latin writers call
Sacrament an oath or a religious bond: because it was not done (as I think)
thoroughly and to the proof, without certain ceremonies. M. Varro in his
second book De lingua Latina, declaring what it is to contend with an oath
says, The plaintiff and the defendant, each of them in some things gaged down
at the place appointed for that purpose, five hundred pieces of silver, and
also in other things a set number of ounces, so that he which recovered in
judgment should have his gage again, but he which was cast should forfaite
it to the treasury. Since therefore by intermeddling of holy things through
partaking of the sacraments, we are bound to God and to all the saints, as it
were by obligation, and that God himself also by ye testimony of the
sacraments, has as it were by an oathe bound himself to us, it appears yt
the name of sacrament is very aptly and properly applied to our signs. We read
also in Latin writers of an oath that soldiers Soldiers eath.
used to take. For it was not lawefull for the^ to fight unless they were put
to their oath and sworn. They took a solemn oath, having one to recite the
form of the oathe to them word by word, (as Vegetius says in his book
Deremilitari) yt they would stoutly and readily do whatsoever their capiteine
commanded them, and yt they would never forsake the field in the defense of
the common weal of Rome. They had a donatio^ given unto each of them as it were
a pledge or earnest, they gave up their names to be enrolled, and were marked
that they might be known from other soldiers. Now because we by our
sacraments, specially by baptism, are received and enrolled to be Christ's
soldiers, and by receiving ye sacraments do profess and witness our selves
to be under Christ our captains banner, therefore not amiss, nor without
reason, are the signs of Christ and his church called sacraments. In ye mean
while I will not stoutly stand in contention yt the word Sacrament was for ye
cause chiefly attributed of them in ancient time to these our signs. For
Eras. Rot. a man very well seen in the tongues, and thoroughly tried in old and
ancient writers none better, In Cathec. sua Symb. 5. says, They which speak
most exquisitly call Sacramentu^, an oath or bond, confirmed by the authority of
god and reverence of religion. But our elders used this word to express that
which the Greeks call a mystery, which a man may call a religious secret,
because the common people were excluded from meddling with them. Thus far he.
Therefore the old writers did call those signs sacraments in steed of
mysteries. For ye self-same signs are called of ye Greeks, (...) mysteries,
which What a mystery is.
the Latin writers for the most part interpret holy and religious secrets,
holy secrets, I say, from the celebration of which secrets the profane common
people were excluded and debarred. For Cliusin Lectio. antiquis. supposes yt
they are called mysteries, (...) because it behooved the^ which hid them, or
which ministered them to keep them close, and to show them to no common
person. Whervppon mysteries may be well called separated and holy secrets,
known to them only which were ordained for that purpose, and to be celebrated
only of saints or holy men. Yet it may seem that (...) is derived of
(...), and (...), as (...) of (...) and (...), yt the Etymon thereof with the
Greeks, may be of no more force than Testamentum among the Latins, which is
a witness bearing of the mind. Although I am not ignorant what some also
do reason in this case. Sacraments therefore are called mysteries, because in
a darcke speech they hide other things which are more holy. And Paul
willingly uses this word in his epistles. And why this word was attributed to
ye holy signs of ye christian church, there is a plain reason. For these
things are only known to the faithful, and are hidd from those that are
profane and unholy. And surely the preaching of the Gospel it self is called
The mystery of the kingdom of God, to teach us, Matthew. 13.
that the unclean being shutt out, it is revealed to the only children of
God. Ephe. 3.
For our chief interpretour of mysteries, says: Cast not your pearls before
swine, neither give that which is Matthew. 7.
holy unto dogs. And Paul, If our Gospel lie hidd as yet, (says he) it is
hidd in them which are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the
minds of them that believe not, 2. Cor. 4. Furthermore many of the Greek
doctors of the Church, have What a Simbol is.
called our sacraments (...) Symbola, which word is also received and used
very often of the Latins. It is derived of (...), (that is to say) Confero,
to conferr or compare together. For by comparing one thing with another, symbols
are made apparent and rightly perceived. Symbolum therefore signifies a sign,
which has relation to some other thing, as we said of the standard, etc. And
truly among the Grecians in old time the use of symbols or signs was diverse,
for in their sacrifices they had their symbols, signs (I say) Allegorically
meaning something, as in the sacrifices of Bacchus, a sieve was their symbol or
sign, and the same they carried about when they were well tippled: thereby
signifying y^ such as be dronken are blabbes, and can keep nothing in secret.
What if I can prove that opinions of men co^teyning somewhat of deep
understanding by an allegory or dark speech are called symbols? For Pythagoras
his symbols are well enough known. So mystical divinity began to be called
symbolicall because it was inwrapped in more hidd and secret mysteries. So
that is mystical which is darkely uttered, and in manner of a riddle, having in
it a far contrary meaning than by words it seems to offer. Again, the
gift and token of faith and truth which by mutual consent passes between ye
bride and the bridegroom, whereby it is not lawefull for them to shrincke or go
back from their word, promise, or covenant, is called a symbol. Furthermore
to soldiers also serving under one and the same banner, symbols or badges were
given. Unto certain confederate cities in like manner, and joined together in
league of friendship, to the end that they might go safely to the bordering
cities, and to those which took parts with them, symbols or mutual signs were
given, that is to say, tokens, which being showed and seen, they gave each
other gentle and courteous interteinement, as to their league-fellowes,
companions and singular friends. The ancient writers therefore herevppon have
applied this word symbol to our sacraments, because they represente and show
unto us the exceeding great and deep mysteries of good: they are Allegorical
and Aenigmatical, hard and dark to understand, because the Lord him self by ye
institution of his Sacraments, has bound him self unto us, and we again by
the partaking of them, do bind our selves to him, and to all the Saints,
testifying and openly professing to fight stoutly and valiauntly under the
Lords banner. Moreover these holy symbols or signs, do admonish and put us
in mind of brotherly love and concord, and that we remember to love the^ most
entirely and with al our heart, as Gods children and our brethren, which are
co^municants or partakers with us of the same table, and are washed clean by
the same baptism. Thus much concerning sacraments, what they are, by what
names they are called, and why they are so called, let it be sufficient that we
have briefly noted.

Setting aside all other things, it seems necessary first of all to
declare Only God is the author of Sacraments
and show who was the author of the sacraments, and for what causes they were
instituted. All men in a manner confess that God alone is the author of
sacraments, and not men, nor yet the Church it self. An odd man there is
among the scholemen, which teaches the Church this lesson, to wit, that she
should remember she is no Lady or mistress over the sacraments, but a servant
or minister, and that she has no more power or authority to institute any
form of a sacrament, than she has to abrogate any law of god. Aquinas also
Part. 3. quaest. 46. ariculo. 2. says, He instituteth or is the author of a
thing, which gives it force and virtue: but the virtue and power of the
sacraments comes from God alone, therefore God alone is of power to institute
or make sacraments. And in deed God alone is of power to institute the true
service and worship: but sacraments belong to his service and worship,
therefore God alone does institute sacraments. If any Esai. 66.
one in the old testament had offered sacrifice which God commanded not, or
offered it not after that manner that God willed it to be offered, it was not
only nothing auailable unto him, but also his offense in so doing was rewarded
with most terrible and fearful punishment. Who knows not that the sons
of Aaron, for offering strange fire, were Leuit. 10.
horribly burnt and scortcht up with fire which fell down from heaven? Such
sacrifices therefore displease God, as profane or unholy, neither deserve they
to be called lawful sacraments, which have not God him self for their
author. Hereunto is added, that sacraments are testimonies, and as it were
seals of Gods good will and favor toward us. And who I pray you can better,
more uprightly, or more assuredly bear witness of Gods good will to vs-warde,
than God him self? In no wise deserves that to be called or counted the seal
of God, whereto he neither set his hand, nor printed it with his own mark,
yea, it is a counterfeit seal, because it comes not from God, and yet in the
mean time bears a show outwardly of the name of god. In this behalf is
read that saying of S. Augustine, which is in every man's mouth, The word is
added to the element, and there is made a sacrament. Whereby we gather, that in
the institution of sacraments, the word of God obteyneth principal place, and
has most ado. The word I say of God, not the word of men, nor yet of the
Church: Whereupon it follows, that the sign ought to have his proceeding
even from God him self, and not from any manner of me^, be they never so many,
be they never so clearklike or learned, be they never so harmless and holy of
life: of that now there can be no other author of Sacraments than God him
self alone.

As we do receive the word of Sacraments are to be received as it were at the
hands of Christ.
salvation and grace: so it is needful also that we receive the signs of
grace. Although the word of God be preached unto us by men, yet we receive it
not as the word of man, but as the word of God, according to that saying of
the Apostle, When ye had received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye
received it not as the word of men (but as it is 1 Thessalonians. 2.
in deed) the word of GOD. It is behoneful for us, to have respect to the
first author thereof, who when he sent abroad his disciples, said, Go into
the whole world, and preach the Gospel to all creatures, Mark. 16. Matthew.
28.
teaching them to observe what so ever I have commanded you, and baptising
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. He
that hears you, hears me, and he which despises Luke. 10.
you, despises me. And therefore albeit by the hands of men the Sacraments
are ministered, yet are they not received of the godly and religious, as
proceeding from men, but as it were from the hand of GOD him self, the first
and principal author of the same.

To this belongs the question, which Christ our Lord asked in the Gospel,
saying: The Baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? Matthew. 21.
Truly John, who did baptize, was a man: but in that he baptized, he baptized
according to Gods institution and ordinance: and therefore the baptism of
John was from heaven, though the water (wherewith he baptized) flowed out of
the bottomless depthe into the river Jordan, and John him self conuersaunt
on the earth. To this also notably agrees that which Paul says, That 1. Cor.
11.
which I delivered unto you, I received of the Lord. Therefore although
Saint Paul were a man, yea, and a sinner too, yet that which he delivered to
the Church, he did not deliver it as from him self, or as any invention of
man, but as Christ had delivered the same, so that it is not his, or man's, but
Christ's tradition, a divine and heavenly tradition. Besides this, our high
Priest and everlasting Bishop woorketh, even at this day, in his Church,
whose ministry they execute, that is, at whose commandment they baptize,
and according to whose institution, they which are the stewardes or disposers
of the mysteries of GOD, minister the holy Sacraments of the Lords Supper.
The institution therefore of the Sacraments must be acknowledged of us, to be
the very work of GOD. And thus far touching the author of Sacraments.

Peter Lombard in his sentences Why Sacraments were instituted unto us in
visible things
reckons up three causes why Sacraments were instituted, that is to say, why
spiritual and heavenly things were delivered and committed unto us under
visible signs, fourmes and ceremonies: the first of which is so cold and
weak, that I am loathe to move it to memory. He places merit in that that
by Gods government and direction (as he affirms) man seeks salvation in
things baser and inferioure to him self. Unto the which he adds this
afterward, Although not in them, yet in GOD through them he seeks salvation:
which also unadvisedly enoughe he has uttered, and not sufficiently
considered. The other two causes, to wit, that Sacraments were invented and
ordained under visible signs for our instruction and exercise, seem not
altogether absurd or disagreeing from reason.

The truest and most proper cause why Sacraments be instituted under visible
signs, seems partly to be Gods goodness, and partly also man's weakness.
For very hardly do we reach unto the knowledge of heavenly things, if
without any visible ^ourme, as they be in their own nature pure and
excellent, they be laid before our eyes: but they are better and more easily
understood, if they be represented unto us under the figure of earthly
things, that is to say, under signs familiarly known unto us. As therefore
our bountiful and gracious Lord did covertly and darkely, nay rather
evidently and notably, set before us to view the kingdom of GOD in parables
or dark speeches: even so by signs it pleased him to lay before our eyes
after a sort, the very same thing, and to point out the same unto us as it
were painted in a table, to renew it a fresh, and by lively representation to
maintain the remembrance of the same among us. This cause does John
Chrysostom allow as a chief and proper cause, who in his eighty and three
Homily upon Matthewe, says: The Lord has Chrysosto^e touching the cause
of sacraments.
delivered unto us nothing that is sensible. The things in deed are sensible,
howbeit they have altogether a spiritual understanding or meaning. So Baptism
is ministered under a sensible element, namely water, but that which is wrought
thereby, that is to say, regeneration and John. 3.
the new birth, does spiritually enter into the mind. For if thou were a
bodilesse creature, he would have delivered unto thee all these gifts, bare,
naked, and bodilesse, according to thy nature: but since thou have a reasonable
soul coupled and joined to thy body, therefore has he delivered unto thee in
sensible signs and substa^ces, those things which are perceived with a
spiritual understanding. Which I do not allege to this end, as if I would
take the testimony of man for my stay, but because I see S. John Chrysostom
his speech according to the manner observed and used in the Scripture. For who
knows not that the Scripture is full of parables, similitudes, allegories,
and figurative speeches, which the holy Ghost uses, not for his own, but
for our sakes? The talk which Christ had in the Gospel with Nicodemus,
touching heavenly regeneration, is very well known, where he by hidden and
covert kind of speeches, of air, wind, and water, etc. reasons, saying: If
I have told you John. 3.
of earthly things, and ye believe not, how will you believe if I shall tell
you of heavenly things. He calls Earthly things, yt his doctrine of heavenly
regeneration or new birth, figured to us under earthly signs of water and the
spirit, or of air and the wind. And by heavenly things, he means that self
same doctrine of heavenly regeneration, nakedly delivered to Nicodemus, without
any imagination, without similitude, or se^sible signs. The Lord therefore
signifies hereby, that men do more easily conceive and understand the doctrine
of heavenly things, when it is shadowed out under some dark and covert sign
of earthly things, then when it is nakedly, and spiritually indeed delivered:
that by comparing together of things not much unlike, it may appear, that the
sacraments were for none other cause found out or instituted tha^ for
demonstration sake, to wit, that the heavenly things might become more
familiar and plain unto us. In which thing we have to mark the Analogy, which
is a certain aptness, proportion, or (as Cicero terms it) a conuenience or
fit agreement of things, I say, known by their signs, that if they be
slightly passed over without this analogy, the reason of a sacrament can not
be fully and perfectly understood: but this analogy being diligently
discussed, and observed to the full, offers to the beholder without any labor
at all the very (...), that is to say, the hidden and secret meaning of a
sacrament. We will when we come to entreat of these things, do what we can to
make them manifest by examples.

Whosoever therefore shall thoroughly The lord is to be praised for instituting
sacraments.
weigh the institution of sacraments he can not choose but extol with praises
the exceeding great goodness of the Lord, who does not only open unto us
miserable men the mysteries of his kingdom, but has a singular care of man's
infirmity, whereby he framing him self to our capacity, does after a sort
stutte and stammar with us, whilst he having respect to our dullness and the
weakness of our wit, does as it were cloth and cover heavenly mysteries with
earthly symbols or signs, thereby most plainly and pithily opening them unto
us, and laying them before our eyes evidently to be beheld. In this same
institution The wisdom of God shines in the ^nstitution of the Sacraments.
of the sacraments, we have cause to extol and praise the wisdom of God: if
so be we take in hand to compare great and small things together. For this
custom is received as a law throughout the world, that all the wisest men,
when they had occasion to speak of high mysteries of wisdom, they did not by
words only, but by signs and words together commend them to their hearers, to
the end that the two most noble senses in man, to wit, Hearing, and Seeing,
might be both at once vehemently moved, and forceably provoked to the
consideration of the same. The volumes of heathenish philosophers are full of
examples. What say you to the Jews, Gods old and ancient people, did not God
him self show among them very many such kind of examples? Again as in
making leagues, or in confirming promises in earnest The manner of making
leagues or couenaunts.
and weighty matters, men use signs or tokens of truth to win credit to
their words and promises: even so the Lord doing after the manner of men, has
added signs of his faithfulness and truth to his everlasting covenant and
promises of life, the sacraments I mean, wherewith he seals his promises,
and the very doctrine of his Gospel. Neither is this rare or strange unto
him. Men swear even by the Lord him self, when they would make other believe
certeinely, and in no case to mistrust the truth of their promises: yea, it is
read in the holy Scriptures, that the Lord him self took an oath and swear by
his own self, when he meant Most abundantly to show to the heirs of the
promises (as the Apostle says) the stablenesse of his counsel.

Moreover, it was the accustomed manner among them of old, as they were making
their league or covenant, to take a beast and to divide him in pieces, and each
of them to pass through and between the pieces so divided, testifying by that
ceremony, that they would yeald them selves so to be divided, and cut in
pieces, if they did not steadfastly stand to that which they promised in their
league or covenant. After the same manner the Lord making, or renewing a
league Gene. 15.
with Abraham, which Moses describes at large in the 15. of Genesis, he
commands him to take an heifer, a she goat, and a ram, each of the^ three
years old, and to divide them in the midst, and to lay every piece one over
against an other, which when Abraham had done, the Lord himself in the
likeness of a smoking furnace or firebrand went between the said pieces,
that thereby Abraham might know, that the land of Chanaan should of a
certentie be given to him, and to his seed to possess, and that all things
which he had promised in that league should be brought to pass. Since
therefore the good and true lord is always like unto him self, and frames
himself after the same manner, now to his Church, as we said he did then:
what wonder or strange thing is it (I pray you) that he has left unto us
also at this day under visible things, signs and seals of his grace, and
mysteries of the kingdom of God? And hitherto have we entreated of the chief
causes of Sacraments for the which they were instituted. Touching the kind and
number The number of sacraments.
of Sacraments, which has the next place to that which went before, there are
diverse opinions among the writers, specially of later time. For amoung the old
and ancient this question as an undoubted and well known perfect principle,
drew quickly to an end. But he which shall diligently search the Scriptures,
shall find that they of the old Testament had Sacraments after one kind, and
they of the new Testament Sacraments after an other kind. The Sacraments of
the people under the old Testament, were circumcision and the Paschal lamb, to
which were added sacrifices, whereof I have abundantly spoken in the third
Decade and the sixth Sermon.

In like manner the Sacraments of the people under the new Testament, that is
to say, of Christians, by the writings of the Apostles, are two in number,
Baptism, and The Supper of the Lord. But Peter Lombard reckons 7. Baptism,
Penance, the supper of the Lord, Confirmation, Extreme unction, Orders and
Matrimony. Him follows the whole rablement of interpretours, and route of
scholemen. But all the ancient doctors of the Church for the most part do
reckon up two principal sacraments, among whom Tertullian in his first and
fourth book Contra Marcionem: and in his book De corona militis, very plainly
makes mention but of two only, that is to say, Baptism and the Eucharist or
supper of the Lord. And Augustine also Lib. 3. de doctr. Christiana. cap. 9.
says, The Lord has not ouerburthened us with signs, but the Lord him self
and the doctrine of the Apostles have left unto us certain few things in
stead of many, and those most easy to be done, most reverend to be
understood, most pure to be observed, as is baptism, and the celebration of
the body and blood of the Lord. And again to Ianuarius Epist. 118. he says:
He has knit and tied together the fellowship of a new people, with
sacraments in number very few, in observing very easy, in signification
very excellent: as is baptism consecrated in the name of the Trinity, and
the partaking of Christ's body and blood, and whatsoever thing else is commended
unto us in the canonical scriptures, except those things wherewith the
servitude of the old people was burdened, according to the agreeablnes of
their hearts, and the time of the prophets. Which are read in the five books
of Moses. Where, by ye way, is to be marked that he says not, And whatsoever
things else are commended unto us in the canonical scriptures: but, And what
so ever thing else, etc. which plainly proves that he speaks not of
Sacraments, but of certain observations both used and received of the
Church, as the words of Augustine which follow do declare. Howbeit I
confess without dissimulation that the same Augustine elsewhere makes mention
of the Sacrament of Orders: where nevertheless this seems unto me to be also
considered, that the self same author gives the name of Sacraments to
Annoynting, and to Prophecy, and to Prayer, and to certain other of this
sort, as well as he does to Orders: and now and then among them he reckons
up the Sacraments of the Scripture, so that we may easily see that in his
works the word Sacrament is now used one way and sometimes an other. For he
calls these Sacraments, because being holy, they came from the holy Ghost,
and because they be holy institutions of God observed of all that be holy:
but yet so, that these differ from those Sacraments which are holy actions
consisting of words and ceremonies, and which gather together into one
fellowshippe the partakers thereof. But Rabanus Maurus also Bishop of Mentze
a diligent reader of Augustins works, Lib. 1. de Instit. cleric. cap. 24.
says: Baptism and unction, and the body and blood are Sacraments, which
for this reason are called Sacraments, because under a covert of corporal
things, the power of GOD woorketh more secretly our salvation signified by
those Sacraments: whereupon also for their secret and holy virtues, they
are called Sacraments. This Rabanus Maurus was famous about the year of the
Lord eight hundredth and thirty, so that even by this we may gather that the
ancient Apostolic Church had no more than two Sacraments.

I make no mention here of Ambrose, although he in his books of sacraments,
numbereth not so many as the company of scholemen do, because some of those
works set forth in his name are not received of all learned men, as of his
own doing: so I little force the authority of the works of Dionysius, which
of what price and estimation they be among learned and good men, it is not
needful to declare. But how so ever the case stands, the holy Scripture
the only and infallible rule of life, and of all things which are to be done
in the Church, commends baptism and the Lords Supper unto us, as solemn
institutions and Sacraments of Christ. Those two are therefore sufficient for
us, so that we need not be moved what so ever at any time the subtle
invention of man's busy brain bring against, or beside these twain. For why?
GOD never gave power to any to institute Sacraments. In the means while,
Wholso^e ^^tes of the church are ^ot con^emned.
we do not contemn the wholesome rites and healthful institutions of GOD,
nor yet the religious observations of the Church of Christ. We have declared
elsewhere touching Penance, and Ecclesiastical Order. Of the residue, which
latter writers do authorize for Sacra*mentes, we will speak in their
convenient place. So have we also elsewhere, so far forth as we thought
requisite, entreated of the likeness and difference of Sacraments of the
people of the old and new testament.

Now let us see in what things Sacraments consiste. By the testimony of the
Scripture, and of all the godly men, they consiste in two things, to wit, in
the sign, and the thing signified, in the word and the rite, in the promise
of the Gospel and in the ceremony, in the outward thing and the inward, in
the earthly thing (I say) and the heavenly. And (as Irenaeus the Martyr of
Christ witnesses) in the visible thing and invisible, in the sensible thing
and the intelligible. In his book against (...).


For hereunto belongs that which Saint John Chrysostom upon Matthewe
says: (...): CHRIST delivers nothing unto us that is sensible, but under
visible things, the outward things are sensible, but yet all spiritual. But
he calls those things, (...) sensible, which are perceived by the outward
senses, as by seeing, hearing, tasting and touching, but those things he
calls (...), intelligible or mental, which are perceived by the mind, the
understanding, consideration, discourse or reasoning of the mind, not of the
flesh, but of faith.

By the testimony of the Scriptures, this thing shall be made manifest..
Sacraments consist of the sign and the thing signified.
The Lord says to his disciples in the Gospel, Go into the whole world
and preach the Gospel to all creatures, and he which shall believe and be
baptized, shall be saved. Ye shall baptize in Mark. 1.
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. The same
says of John Baptiste, John baptized in the wilderness, preaching the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. So also Saint Luke
witnesses, that Saint Peter said to the Israelites: Repent ye and be
baptized every one of you in the name Acts. 2.
of JESUS CHRIST for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift
of the holy Ghost.

Therefore in baptism, water, or sprinckling of water in the name of ye
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and all that which is done of
ye church is a sign, rite, ceremony, and outward thing, earthly and
sensible, lying open, and made plain to ye senses: but remission of sins,
partaking of (everlasting) life, fellowshippe with Christ and his members, and
gifts of the holy ghost, which are given unto us by ye grace of God through
faith in Christ Jesus, is the thing signified, the inward and heavenly thing,
and that intelligible thing, which is not perceived but by a faithful mind.
After the same manner the Scripture bearing witness also of the Supper of the
Lord, which is the other sacrament of the Church, says: The Lord Jesus when
he had taken bread, he Matthew. 26 Luke. 22.
gave thanks and brake it, and gave it to his disciples, and said, take ye,
eat ye, this is my body which is given for you. Likewise he took the cup
and gave it to them, saying, drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the
new Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins, do this in
remembrance of me. Now therefore all that action which is done of the Church
after the example of Christ our high Priest, I mean, breaking of bread, the
distribution thereof, yea, and the banquet or receiving of bread and wine, is
the sign, rite, ceremony, and the outward or earthly thing, and also that
self same sensible thing which lies open before the senses: but the
intelligible thing and thing signified, the inward and heavenly thing is the
very body of Christ given for us, and his blood shed for the remission of
sins, and our redemption and fellowship which we have with Christ and all
the Saints, yea, which he chiefly has with us.

By these things it shall be easy to determine certeinely of the names Signs
external and in ward things.
or terms now given to the sacraments. For they are called external or
outward signs, because they are corporal or bodily, entering outwardly into
those senses, whereby they be perceived. Contrariwise we call the thing
signified, inward things, not that the things lie hid included in the
signs, but because they are perceived by the inward faculties, or motions of
the mind, wrought in me^ by the spirit of God. So also those Signs earthly
and visible, things heavenly and invisible.
signs are termed both earthly and visible, because they consist of things
taken from the earth, that is to wit, of water, bread, and wine: and because
they are manifestly seen in these likenesses. To be short, the things
signified are called heavenly, and invisible, because the fruit of them is
heavenly, and because they are discerned with the eyes of the mind, or of
faith, not of the body. For otherwise ye same body and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ which in the supper are represented to the faithful by the form
of bread and wine, are not of their own proper nature heavenly, or invisible.
For the body of our Lord, touching his substance and nature, is
consubstantiall, or of the same substance that our bodies are of? Now the same
is called heavenly, for his deliverance from corruption and infirmity, or
else because it is clarified, not by reason of the bringing to naught or laying
aside of his own nature. The same body of his own nature, is visible, not
invisible, resident in heaven: howbeit it is seen of the godly celebrating the
supper, not with the eyes of the body, but with the eyes of the mind or soul,
therefore in respect of us it is called invisible, which of it self is not
invisible. Now the word in the sacraments is The word and rite.
called, and is indeed, a witnessing of Gods will, and a remembrance and
renewing of the benefits and promises of God, yea and it is the institution and
commandment of God, which shows the author of the sacrament, with the
manner and end of the same. For the word in baptism, is the very same that
even now we have recited. Go ye into all the world etc. In the supper of the
Lord this is the word of God, Jesus took bread etc. And the rite, custom,
and manner, how to celebrate the supper, is to be sought out of the example of
the lord, going before in ye holy action, wherein we comprehend both prayers
and those things which are recited out of the word of Christ. For as he brake
bread and divided it, and in like manner the cup, so likewise with holy
imitation, and sacramental rite, we follow the same in this holy action. As he
gave thanks, so also we do give thanks: we by certain prayers in baptism
do request the assistaunce and grace of the Lord, we recite certain places
out of the gospel, which we know to be requisite in the administration of
baptism, and we are wont to do the same also in the celebration of the
Lords supper. But it is not my intent at this present, to speak largely and
exactly of ye rites of the Sacrament, which notwithstanding we hold to be
best, that are taken out of the holy scripture, and do not exceed, of
which shall be spoken in their place.

Some in stead of the word, do put Promise and ceremony
promise, and in stead of rite, ceremony. And truly in the word ceremony, I
see no danger at all, if by ceremony be understood the outward comelines and
rite, which the Lord him self has commended to us by his example, and left
to be used in the celebration.

And in very deed Sacramental signs are not simple or bare signs, but
ceremonies or religious actions: so also there seems to be no danger in the
word promise: so that by promise, we understand the preaching of the gospel,
and the commemoration or remembrance of Gods promises which we often use in the
preching of the gospel and celebration of the sacraments, that is to say, that
God does receive us into his fellowship, for Christ his sake, through faith,
does wash away our sins, endeweth us with diverse graces, that Christ was
given for our sins, shed his blood to take away the sins of all faithful.
For in celebrating of Baptism, we use these words of the Lord, Suffer little
children to come unto me, for unto such belongs the kingdom of heaven etc.
In the celebration of the banquet of Gods holy children, we use these holy
words of our Lord: And after supper Jesus tooe bread, and after he had given
thanks he brake it and gave it to them saying, take ye, eat ye: this is my
body which is given for you. This is my blood which is shed for you for the
remission of sins, this do in the remembrance of me etc.

For those remembrances and rehersalls, are promises of the Gospel, promising
forgiveness of sins to the believers, showing that the Lords body is given
for them, and his blood shed for them, which faith verily, is the only and
undoubted mean to obtain life and salvation, Christ is the strength and
substance of the Sacraments, by whom only they are effectual, and without
whom they are of no power, virtue or effect. But if any man by promise do
understand covenant, whereby the Lord does singularly bind or as you would
say tie him self to the signs, in which, or with which he would be present
bodily, essentially, and really, therein he says more than he can show or
prove by the Scriptures. For in no place has Christ promised to be present
corporally, that is, with his true body, in the signs or with the signs:
other wise I am not ignorant how God appeared sometimes to our fathers under a
bodily figure, that is, in some visible form or shape, as when he showed him
self to Jacob which was named Israel leaning on a ladder, and to Moses in the
hole of a rock as it were in a glass. But these do not properly perteine to
this purpose where we entreat of the corporal presence of Christ, and of the
sacramental signs. But because many wrest these words of the Lord, This is
my body, This is my blood, to prove a corporal presence of the Lords body in
the Supper, I answer that those words of the Lord are not roughly to be
expounded according to the letter, as though bread and wine were the body and
blood of Christ substantially and corporally, but mystically and
sacramentally: so that the body and blood of Christ, do abide in their
substance and nature, and in their place, I mean, in some certain place of
Heaven, but the bread and wine are a sign or sacrament, a witness or sealing,
and a lively memory of his body given, and his blood shedd for us, but of
this thing in place convenient, we will entreat more at large. By these things
which we have spoken of, it appears sufficiently, how Sacraments consist of
two things, the sign and the thing signified, of the word of God and the
rite or holy Ceremony.

There are some notwithstanding, which think there is such force graffed of
God into the words, that if they be pronounced over the signs, they
sanctify, change, and in a manner bring with them, or make present the
things signified, and plant or include them within the signs, or at the
least join them with the signs. For here-vppon are these kind of speeches
heard, That the water of Baptism by the virtue of the words does
regenerate, and that by the efficacy of the words, the bread it self and
the wine in the Supper are made the natural flesh and blood of the Lord.

But the Sacraments of Christ and his Church do consiste of the What is
understood by the word i^ the sacraments.
word and the sign. But it seems that we must diligently search out what
must be vnderstoods by The word. I said even now that* The word in the
Sacraments was a witnesse-bearing of Gods will and the commandment of God it
self, or institution of God, which declares unto us the author, manner, and
end of a Sacrament.

By this word (I say) and Commandment of GOD, by this will and institution of
God, the Sacraments are sanctified, not that the words are so pronounced of
the ministers, as they are read before to be recited of the Lord him self, or
delivered by his Apostles* but because God so would, so did, and commanded his
Apostles to do. For whatsoever GOD does or commands to do, is sanctified
by the very commandment or deed of God. For all things which he has done
are exceeding good, therefore these things which he commands to do, cannot
choose but be holy, because he is holy, and the only sanctifier.

Wherefore by the nature, will, deed, and commandment of God, and not by the
pronuntiation of any words are the Sacraments sanctified. To which will of
GOD, that it may be applied unto man and do him good, the faithful obedience
of men is necessarily required, which altogether should make us putt our trust
and confidence in the mercy and power of God, who in no wise should despise or
cast behind us the institution of God, although it seem in outward
appearaunce base and contemptible. This will appear ^. Reg. 5.
more plainly in the example of Naaman, the captain of the King of Syria his
band* He heard of the Prophet undoubtedly at the Lords commandment, that he
should wash him self seven times in Iordane. For so it should come to pass
that he should be cleansed from his Leprosye.

Here thou do hear the word, the will, (I say) and commandment of God,
but thou do not hear that any words were rehearsed either over Iordane or
over Naaman, or that any words were prescribed of the prophet to Naama^ that he
should repeat, whereby (forsooth) there might be any force of purifying or
clensing given to the water. Naaman by faith obeys the commandment of God,
and is cleansed from his leprosy, not by his own merit, or by the benefit of
the water of Iordane, but by the power of GOD and faithful obedience.

Lepres also in the Gospel, and that not a few, are cleansed by the power (...).
and will of Christ, and through faith, and not by pronouncing or speaking of
words. The Lord indeed said, I will, be thou clean: but if any man at this
day should have recited the same words a hundred times over any Lepre, he
should have prevailed nothing. Whereby it is manifest, that to words there is
no force given of working health, if they be pronounced

The Apostles indeed said to the sick, feeble, and lame, In the name of In
the name of the lord Jesus Christ the feeble are healed. Acts. 4.
the Lord Jesus, arise and walk, and they rose up and were healed, but they
were not healed by the benefit of the words, but by the name, by the power (I
mean) and virtue of Christ.

For Peter which said unto the lame man in Jerusalem, In the name of Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, arise Acts. 4.
and walk, said in the mids of the counsel of Jerusalem, If we this day
be examined of the deed done to the sick-man, by what means he is made
whole: be it known unto you all, that in the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, this man stands here whole. And to the same people he says, And
his name, through faith in his name, has made this man sound, whom ye see
and know, and the faith which is by him has given to this man health. Beside
these, we read in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts. 19.
that y^ sons of one Scaeua a priest, being exorcists or co^iurers, did call
on the name of the Lord Jesus over the^ that had evil spirits, but these were
so far off from giving place to their exorcismes and coniuringes, that they
ran on them and overcame them, so that they had much a do to escape alive.
Where it is most apparaunt, that those Exorcistes used the same form almost
in their inchantmentes, which the Apostle used (for in the name of the Lord
Jesus they proved to cast out the foul spirit.) But since these were not able
so to do, who cannot see and perceive, that the words pronounced do prevail
nothing at all. Neither is that any let or hinderaunce at all, that those
Exorcistes were without faith. For this is a thing very well known and
received of all men, that Sacraments are no less effectual when they are
ministered by wicked ministers, then when they are ministered by the best
ministers.

But here is objected against us this saying of the Apostle, Christ The
place of Paul in the. 5. to the Ephe. is expounded.
gave him self for the church to sanctify it, cleansing it in the founteine
of water by the word, or in the word. Behold (say they) men are cleansed by
the water of Baptism, which by the word has the force of sanctifying put into
it: therefore it must needs be, that words have force to sanctify. But I will
confute them by an evident demonstration, that the Apostle did not so mean as
they suppose.

The Apostle prescribes unto married Christians their duty: to the more
plain and pithyer settinge forth whereof, he uses the example of Christ and
his Church, commending that exceedinge love which Christ bears toward his
Church, wherewith being inflamed he gave him self for it, to this end to make
it to him self a pure and glorious spouse, where, by the way, he sets
down the manner of purgeing.

For the Lord Jesus him self says, he has cleansed it. For it is only
Christ's office to purge and cleanse. Now the manner of purgeing follows: In
the founteine of water by the word* which because it is briefly spoken, has
in it some obscurity.

He makes mention of two things which the Lord uses to cleanse those that
be his, The founteine of water, And, The word. The Founteine of water, is
Baptism, which is the outward action and witnesse-bearing of the inward
purifying or cleansing, wrought by the grace and spirit of GOD, as the Apostle
says: According to his mercy Tit. 3.
he saved us by the founteine of regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost, which he shed upon us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior. For
he adds, in way of interpretation, And renewing of the holy Ghost, whereof
the founteine of water is a sign.

Moreover, the Word is the very preaching of the Gospel, testifying that by
the grace and mercy of (God) the Father, his only Son was given unto us,
who beeinge given for our sins, makes them that believe in him heyers of
eternal life: so that now these words of Paul to the Ephesians the 5.
Chapter, do very well agree with this Commandment of the Lord mentioned in
Saint Mark, Go into all the whole world and preach the Gospel to all
creatures, he which shall believe and be baptized shall be saved. etc.

For by these words also the Lord shadoweth out unto us the manner and means
of our salvation, that it is he only which purges us by faith: yet in the
mean while he wills the believers to be signed with Baptism, and that it
should be preached openly in the world, that it is he which pardons
sins, yea and which freely gives everlasting life. But, what do all these
things (I pray you) make for their purpose, who will prove by those words of
Paul, that there is force and virtue in the words to sanctify baptism? These
words of the lord spoken to his Apostles, do yet make our matter more
manifest. Now are ye clean, says he, through the word John. 15.
which I have spoken unto you. Shall we say here that through the words which
Christ rehearsed, the disciples of Christ were made clean? what then needed he
the next day to have been crucified and to have died? What, to the end that
he might purchase power unto the words? Therefore all boastinge in the force
of words shall be clean taken away. Does not faith and godlunesse tell us, By
the word of the Lord, we should rather understand this, which is declared by
the preaching of the Lord, that is, the death and redemption of Christ,
whereby, because they believed it they are cleansed. For in an other place he
says, purifying their hearts by faith. Wherefore they err in that, because
they do not rightly judge of ye word or speech. For the Lord speaks of the
word preached and believed, and they understand him of the word pronounced,
as though beeinge pronounced, it had force from the Lord to sanctify. S.
Augustine also makes for us, who in his 80. treatise upon John, says, From
whence comes so great virtue and power unto the water, that it should touch
the body and wash the heart, but through the woorking of the word, not
because it is spoken or pronounced, but because it is believed? For in the word
it self, the sound passing away is one thing and the virtue which remains
is an other thing. This is the word of faith which we preach, says the
Apostle, because if thou shall confess with thy mouth, that Jesus is the lord,
and believe with thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved. For with the heart, man Romans 10.
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. Whereupon we read in the Acts of the Apostles, purifying Acts. 15.
(or cleasing) their heates by faith. And S. Peter in his Epistle says: So
also Baptism saves us, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but in
that a good conscience makes request to God. This is the word of faith which
we preach, wherewith undoubtedly baptism is also consecrated, that it may have
power to cleanse. For Christ with us the Vine, with his father the Husbandman,
has loved his church, and gave him self for it. Read the Apostle, and mark
what he adds, saying: That he might sanctify it, cleansing it by the
founteine of water in the word. In vain therefore should cleansing be
attributed to a frail and vading element, unless this were added. In the
word. And so forth. For thus far I have recited S. Augustines words: not
that I stay my self upon man's testimony, or that I would have any man to urge
the same, or that I am content to be ruled by the witness of man, but because
in these words he has gathered together some testimonies out of the
scripture, bearing witness of the word. Whereby we may understand, that the
word of faith preached, and not the word spoken or pronounced ought to be
received. This word I say does truly cleanse, that is to say, the grace of
Christ only does purify, to the which both the word and faith are directed,
and for yt cause he said ^xpresly, Not because it is spoken, but because it is
believed. Anon after he says, The word of faith which we preach. Fur^hermore
he says, by ye word of faith bap^isme is consecrated yt it might have power to
cleanse. Which what is it else the^ if ^e had said, the very substance of faith
mak^th baptism effectual. For it follows, For clensing in vain should be
attributed to the vading and corruptible element, unless were added, In the
word. Now if a man ^o consider the mysteries of the saints or The ^ordes ^poken
do ^ot form (...) make s^^raments ^ff^ctuall.
holy men in old time, he shall not find in ^he celebration of Circumcision,
the feast of the Passover, and sacrifices, any words to have been spoken or
pronounced, whereby they were formed and as it were created sacraments, and
were made effectual. To which belongs this, that John Baptist did not only
baptize the common people without respect of person, but ye Lord Jesus himself
also in the water of Iordane: no words in the mean while being pronounced,
whereby he called and drew down the heavenly grace over or upon the water of
baptism. Again, whiles Christ our high bishop, did institute his supper in
the gospel, he commanded nothing to be spoken or pronounced, by virtue of
which speech or pronuntiation, the elements might either be changed, or the
things signified being drawn down from heaven should be present with, or
joined to the signs: but what the lord has simply done, and what his will was
we should do, after what manner, and to what end he instituted his supper, ye
Evangelists have declared. We read in no place that ye Lord said, As often as
ye speak or pronounce these my words, This is my body, this is my blood, it
shall come to pass by ye virtue of my words, that ye substance of the sign
shall be made void, and that in the same prick of time wherein the words are
spoken, it sh^l begin to be the true body and the true blood of the lord,
under y^ forms or likenesses of bread and wine, or that the forms or
likenesses and the truth of y^ sign remaining, it shall begin at once with the
bread and wine to be the very body and blood of Christ. Wherefore in the
pronou^cing or speaking of yt words of the lord in the supper, there is no
power or virtue, either to call down the things signified or to change yt things
present. These imaginations do rather seem more to maintain superstition than
religion. As though the words pronounced according to the form conceived, had
power to call down out of heaven, to bring from one place to another, to
restore health, to draw to, to put from or to transform or change. S. Au.
reconeth up among superstitions vanities, those things which for remedies of
diseases are tied or fastened about the body, which also physic makes no
account of, whether it be in charmings or in certain signs called characters,
or in hanging certain things about some part of the body. The place is to be
seen Cap. 20. Li. De doct. Christ. 2. And Chrysostom. being very angry with
them that hang the written gospel about their neck, has these words upon Mat.
23. cha. Wherein consists the force or power of the gospel? in the form and
figure of the letters, or in the understanding of the meaning and sense of the
same? If in the form of letters, thou do well to hang it about thy neck: but
if in the understanding of the meaning, it is better they were laid up in thy
heart. Thus says he. But there is the same reason of the figures, and of the
pronuntiatio^ of the letters, or words of the gospel. For as the figure of the
letters is of power to do nothing: even so is there no force or virtue either
in the pronuntiation or sound of words. Pliny an hethenish writer alleges
many heathenish examples, wherein he declares that words are effectual: but yet
among other things which he brings he has this. It is a que^^io ((...) he)
whether words or enchanting speeches are of any force: but every one that is
wise is so far from believing it, that even man by man they utterly deny it.
The place is to be seen Lib. 28. Cap. 2.

But most worthily is the true word of God it self preferred before al these,
the which by Moses. Deu 18. with great severity forbids and condemns all
kind of superstitions and enchantments. I know what the adversaries will here
object unto me, namely that Whether by blessing the nature of things are
changed.
it is a blessing or consecration, and not a superstition which they use.
Besides this, they bring many examples out of the scripture, set down in their
Canonical decrees, whereby very foolishly and most vnaptlie doutlesse they go
about to prove that by blessing or consecration (as they say) the natures of ye
things are changed, whereupon they also gather that the bread by the words of
blessing or consecrating, is turned into flesh. Their examples are these and of
Number. 20. Exodus 7. John. 2. Exodus 15. Exodus 7.
this sort, The water flowing out of ye rock, after it was smitte^ with Aarons
rod, the river Nilus turned into blood, the water at the marriage in Cana of
Galile turned into wine, the bitter waters of Marath changed into sweet water,
and Moses his rod turned into a serpent. But (I beseech you) what make these to
ye Lords supper, wherewith they have no manner of similitude or likeness, so that
this must needs be a very unapt comparison and a doltish which they make. The
river Nilus was turned into blod, therefore the bread is turned into flesh: the
water at the marriage in Cana was changed into wine, therefore ye wine in the
lords supper is changed into ye blood of Christ. For while yt the water gush^d
out of the rock when it was smitte^, while the river Nilus was turned into
blood, while yt water at ye marriage was chaged into wine, while the bitter
waters of Marath beca^e sweet, while Moses rod was turned into a serpent: ye
water truly, the blood, ye wine, ye sweet water and the serpent so turned and
changed, were not under y^ form or likeness of (...) things which they were
before, (...) were they at once yt which they were before, and that which they
were the^ made: but y^ water of Nilus was very blood, not water and blood
together, nether was there invisible blood under the visible form of water.
And so stands the case also in ye other examples, therefore they do nothing
agree with the sacramental signs, but are so far from being like them, that
they are altogether unlike them. Moreover, who can well tell by what
pronuntiation of words Moses made water brust out of the hard rock? turned ye
river Nilus into blood? changed ye bitter waters into sweet? Who knows what
form also of words ye lord used, when he changed water into wine? Therefore
very unfitly do they apply these examples to their blessing or consecration,
changing the natures of things, since it cannot be showed what manner blessings
y^ saints or holy men used. Likewise we read not that Moses and Iosue
pronounced any words of blessing whereby they divided ye channel of the
Erithean sea, and the river Jordan. Eliseus is read to have uttered no 4. Reg.
6.
words of blessing when he made y^ are to swim, and reached it out of the water
by ye helue. In all these things the power The omnipotenci^ of God.
of God did work. But we must not imagine what we list to proceed from it. For
it is weakness and not power which is repugnant to justice, and takes things
in hand which are contrary to gods truth. But the mighty works of god are of
such sort, that any man may understand and manifestly see, yt they are such as
they are said to be.

The Lord said, Let there be light and there was light. Such a kind of Gen
1.
light I mean which was both called light and according to the nature of
light, gave light: it was not called, or made light, which was light in deed
and yet gave not light: as the Bread is called the body of Christ whi^he
yet has not so much as one iotte of the body of Christ.

Furthermore this word blessing in no place in the scriptures is so used, as Of
the word Blessing.
they woldmake us believe. To bless in the Scriptures, is to thank, to praise,
to salute, to bid farewell, to speak well of any, to wish well, to rejoice,
highly to extol, to give thanks for a good turn, to increase, to enriche, to
multiply, or to make fruitful. I could if need were, bring examples to prove
each of them. But a man shall no where read, that to bless, is as much as to
turn the natures of things by the words of God, or otherwise by good words
and prayers, after a set manner pronounced. We read (say they) in the gospel,
that the Lord took bread and blessed. Yea and Paul also calls the Bread and
cupp by that name, to wit, The bread and Cupp of blessing, the bread and cup
undoubtedly of consecration, ^. Co^. 10.
by which consecration the substance of the signs is miraculously changed. I
answer, That the words both of the Gospel and of the Apostle, are wrongfully
wrested to that sense, which never came into the mind of the Lord or his
apostles. For to declare the meaning of that place in the Gospel: To bless, is
not with the gesture of the hand to make the sign of the cross, or to lay
ones mouth unto the bread and cup, and in a low voice to whisper out the set
syllables of the words of consecration: but to singe praises to God, or to give
him thanks for his benefits bestowed on us.

That which I have said I will confirm by the authority of the Evangelists
and Apostles. For the Apostles and Evangelists use the Thanksgiving and
blessing.
word of blessing or thanksgiving, indifferently. For where Mark has (...),
(that is to say) Blessing, Matthew, Luke and Paul have (...), (that is to say)
Giving thanks, which word Mark also using a little after writes, And when
he had took the cup, (...), that is, When he had given thanks he gave to
them. To bless therefore is as the Apostles them selves do interpret it, to
give thanks, since that they put the one for the other. The diligent Reader
may see the same also in yt place of Paul which is 1. Cor. 10, chap. which
place we will fully and wholly entreat of in that which follows. Our
adversaries therefore have not as yet proved out of the Scriptures, that to
bless is as much as to change the things, or that by words, pronu^tiation,
or reciting of words, the things them selves signified are brought to, or made
present. The aunciente writers truly made mention of a mystical blessing, but
in a far other sense than these consecrators. Of true consecration we will
speak anon, and will confute also in another place whatsoever things they
have brought concerning blessing or consecrating of Baptism: now we will make
an end of that which we began. Words of the^ selves were instituted of god to
this end, to signify, and by signifying to bear witness, and to admonish,
neither have they beside any hiden force to change the natures of things, or
to cause ye things them selves to be corporally present, neither do we read
that holy men ever used them after this manner: therefore they sin and
deceive men which otherwise use them than they were instituted.

Aurel. August. acknowledged the very same thing, who in his Encheiridion For
what ^^pose ^ords are (...) of what (...) they (...).
ad Laurent, Capit. 22. says, And verily words to this purpose are instituted,
not that men should deceive one another by them, but by the which one might
make another to know his meaning: therefore to use words unto deceit, and not
to that end, whereunto they were ordained, is sin. The same Aurelius
Augustinus gathering a sum of his whole book entitled De Magistro, asks
this question: But now I would have thee tell me what thy opinion is of all this that I have spoken unto thee, which by and by he answers: I have
learned being admonished by thy words, that a man is taught no other thing by
words, than to learn, and that it is a very small matter, that by speech or
talk we know partly what he thinks yt speaks: but whether the words
which he spoke were true, that teaches he only who admonished that he dwelt
in the heart when the other spoke with the tongue. Thus much he, in the last
Chapter of his book De Magistro. To this purpose perteine the words of Solomon
the wise in the Book of the Preacher, saying, The words of the wise are like
pricks and nails Eccle. 12. Authors of gathe^inges, he ^^leth wise men
bicase they gather the sayings of the wi^er ^orte of men in their books.
that go through of the authors of gatheringes, which are given of one
sheepherd. Where we willingly acknowledge, that there is great force in
eloquence and prayers of the just, as the Graecians signified by that Hercules
of Gallia, also Cicero very plentifully has declared the same Lib. 1. De
Oratore. But that which they do forge and imagine of Pitho, or Suada, or
Suadela the Lady and mistress of eloquence, that verily do we attribute to
the holy ghost, which does both give grace to the speaker, and prepares and
styrreth up the minds of the hearers. By these things it is manifest unto
all men, I think, that it is a new forgerie of man, and not a doctrine of
Oracle, to say, that in the celebration of the sacraments, there is such force
graffed in the words recited, that they turn and change the things, or make
the things signified to be present, and either put on, or join them with the
signs. But we will show hereafter that the signs are not changed or
mingled with the things signified, but that both of them do remain still in
their own nature and property. It shall be sufficient if we attribute that to
the words which the scripture does attribute, to wit, the office of
signifying and admonishing, of moving and styrring up, which they have from
God. For they do defile and blemishe the words of God, which deck them with
strange and falsified titles.

We acknowledge in deed that all the How the power of almighty God is
attributed to the word
power of almighty God is attributed to the word of God: but who sees not
that yt is spoken and meant of ye ever lasting son of God, wherein yt scripture
is called the word of God? Who is such a dorhead, that cannot rightly
distinguish between the everlasting word of God, which is y^ son of God the
second person in ye reverend Trinity: and the word rehearsed spoken, or
pronounced by man? The everlasting word of god remains in his own substance
and nature a creator, and not a creature: it is not mingled: it is not graffed
or incorporated into man's voice. The word which proceeds from man, is a
creature, not a creator, and remains still a creature. For it is a sound
which passes away. Nevertheless it is a virtue which (still) remains, if it
be sincere and not adulterate, and received by faith. For so it preserves, yet
not of his own proper virtue, or power, or because it is pronounced by man:
but through his power or virtue which revealed the word, who is true, and
therefore preserves those things which by his word he promises to preserve,
so that now in deed God himself does preserve, who said yt by his word he
would preserve those yt believe. The word therefore which God has revealed unto
us by his servants the Prophets, and by his chosen Apostles, is not, neither
is called the word of God, as if the sound of syllables, words, and voices,
are of their own nature the word of God, that very same I mean, which of his
substance is the son of God: But because the revelation of the word was
made from God in the holy ghost through the word or wisdom of god. Wherefore
although the original be of God, and not of man, yet the words which the
prophets and Apostles uttered are man's words, neither can they do any thing
else but give signification, with the which notwithstanding I would not have yt
due force of the external word of God to be lifted up above that which is meet
and comely, and those things imputed to the literal word, which is proper to
God. I acknowledge all those things which with a sound understanding or
judgment are attributed to the word of God. But of this thing I have elsewhere
discoursed more at large. But now some will say, If by reciting the Of true
anctificaion or consecra^ion.
words of God, sacraments are not sanctified or consecrated, from whence then
have they this, yt they be, and are called sacraments or holy signs? Is the
consecration vain and of no force? Surely vain and of no force is that
consecration which the papists have feigned. But of consecration or true
santification I have spoken in the beginning of this chapt. which now I will
set forth a little plainer and more abou^dantly. The holy scriptures when they
make mention of holy things, they use very often this Hebrew word ** which
the Greek interpreters commonly have translated by (...) the latins by
Sanctifico Consecro and Initio. The use of this word reaches very far. For it
signifies to sanctify, to offer unto god, to purify or cleanse, and to
justify, also to sever or to put apart and to separate, to separate (I mean)
from profane use and to dedicate them to holy things, to call a thing by
some name, to apply and to appoint. Therefore we say yt to consecrate in this
place, is no other thing but to sanctify, to dedicate to god, and after a
fashion to separate, or of a thing profane to make an holy thing. But who
does this? or he which does it, by what means or instrument (I pray you) does
he it? who I beseech you co^secrateth, or holieth? is it God? or is it man?
Verily God and not man. For God instituting any thing, and testifying and
declaring by his word, what he has instituted and to what end, of his own
holy just and good will, by his own only institution (I say) without any other
mean, he consecrateth the thing which he himself has already instituted. For
as he is holy, just, and good: so whatsoever he commands is holy just and
good. And man understanding by the word of God, yt God has instituted any
thing to a holy just and good use, accepts, receives, and uses yt
institution for holy good and just. Therefore man does not by uttering certain
words consecrate and make holy the institution. And because he believes yt all
the institutions of God are holy and good, therefore he also celebrateth this
institution of God, even as God has ordained, and gives God thanks,
depending altogether upon God and the rule of his word. Of this manner of
sanctification the Apostle speaking in another certain place says. Now the
spirit speaks evidently ^. Tim. 4
that in the latter times there shall rise deceivers forbidding to marry and
commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with
thanksegiuing of them which believe and know the truth. For every creature of
God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.
For it is sanctified by the word of god and prayer. Lo he says meat is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. But the word of God is in this place
(as Paul the Apostle expounds it) a testimony of ye scripture, and will of
God, whereby we are taught yt all things which God has made are exceeding
good, and yt they are clean and not unclean which God has created for to be
eaten, and for our use. In the Acts S. Peter hears, Arise Peter, slay, and
eat, (for he saw in a Acts. 10.
vision before him al living creatures of the earth and the Air) Peter
answered, Not so Lord. For I have never eaten any thing that is common or
unclean. Therefore he heard again What God has cleansed that call thou not common.

But where (I pray you did he make them clean? When he made and gave them
for the use of man. To the word is annexed prayer, not a charming or an
enchantment, but a faithful thanks giving. For the Apostle more then once or
twice, makes mention of thanks giving, that by the general word, that is to
say, prayer, no other thing might be understood than the special word, I
mean thanks giving. For prayer is (as a man would say) to invocation and
giving of thanks, as the root to the branches. Therefore says he, the meat
is holy, because GOD who is good has made and appointed the same for the use
of man, and also because it is received of man with faith and thanksgiving.
For meat is not holy and good to many men, not through any fault in yt meat
which is always the good creature of God, but in the^ is the fault which
acknowledge not by faith the benefits of God, or which abuse them, and glut
themselves contrary to the word of the^ Lord. Even so stands the case with
the matter of sanctification, which we must also apply to ye sacraments. God
of his own good will, and for the How our Sacraments are confecrated.
commodity of men ordained sacraments. He chose unto him self out of his good
creatures, water, bread, and wine, and appointing them to some certain end,
he laid a platfourme and commanded us to use and celebrate them: now
therefore by the commandment and choice of God, the water bread and wine are
consecrated, and he signeth them with his word, and declares that he will have
them counted for sacraments, and shows the manner how he will have them
celebrated.

So that the consecration of Sacraments is made through the will, institution,
choice, or commandment of God, and seal of his word. Wherefore, water, bread,
and wine, used after a common manner, or not so as they are chosen and
instituted of God, the word of God is as it were slaundered, and they are
altogether common and profane: but being only used according to ye choice or
commandment of God holily, and the word or sign being added, they begin to
be Sacraments which they were not before. The same substance remains in
them still which they had before. But they are instituted to another end and
use, for they are sealed with the word and commandment of God, and therefore
are hallowed, whereunto may also be added their holy use, by a true faith
setting forth the benefit of our redemption, and giving of thanks by faithful
prayers to our bou^tiful redeemer. To this purpose we may fetch examples of
civil government, wherein some things for certain new causes adjoined, having
their substance remaining still, are now made that which before they were not.
For silver or gold being not yet coined with the Magistrates mark is nothing
else but silver and gold. But if by the commandment of the Magistrate a new
form be added by a printe, it is made money, which it was not before,
although it be the very same substance which it was before. Wax, before it
be sealed, is common and usual wax: but when by the kings will and
commandment that which is engraven in the kings seal, is printed in the
wax, and is set to evidences and letters patentes, by and by it is so
esteemed, that who so shall deface the sealed evidence is attached as guilty
of treason.

Whereby I trust you see plainly, that the true sanctification or consecration
of Sacraments does consist in the will and institution of God, in a certain
end and holy use of the same, which are declared unto us in the word. Of the
which peradventure I have spoken more at large than some may think needful.
But the godly Reader will pardon me, this my tediousness, since my desire is
to open all things faithfully, diligently, and at large.

Now that I have defended the lawful use of the word, and declared the virtue
of it, and opened unto you as occasion served, the true sanctification or
consecration of Sacraments, I will return to that where I left: and because I
taught that sacraments consist of two parts, the sign and thing signified, it
remains to show that those two parts retain their natures distinguished, not
communicating properties, by declaration whereof, both to those things which
go before, and to those which follow, yea and to the whole substance of the
sacrament, a wonderful light without doubt shall appear. But of communicating
of the names or terms I will speak in their convenient place. That each part
reteineth The sign and the thing signified do^reteine there several natures
in the sacraments.
their natures distinguished, without communicating or mingling of properties,
it is to be seen hereby, that many be partakers of the sign, and yet are
barred from the thing signified. But if the natures of the parts were united
or naturallye knit together, it must needs be then, that those which be
partakers of the signs must be partakers also of the thing signified. Examples
of Scripture, as they are ready, so are they evident. For Simon Magus in the
Acts of the Apostles received y^ sign and was baptized: but of the thing
signified he had not, neither received so much as one jot. And Judas Iscariot
a cruel and faythelesse traitor of his master, did likewise Eat the bread
of the Lord, but he did not eat bread the Lord. Otherwise he had lived happy,
just, and blessed for The wicked are not partakers of the thing signified in
the sacraments.
ever. For he which eats me (says the Lord himself) shall never die: But
Judas died everlastingly, therefore he did not eat that food of life.

To these evident testimonies of scripture, I will now add also certain of
Saint Augustines perteyning to that purpose, who in his treatise upon John 26.
says. We receive this day visible meat: but the Sacrament is one thing, and
the virtue of the sacrament is another. How many do receive of the things
upon the altar, and when they have received it do die? Whereupon the Apostle
says, He eats and drinks his own damnation. Was not the morsel poison
which the Lord gave unto Judas? and yet he received it, and after he had
received it, the enemy entered into him: not because that was evil which he
received, but because he being evil, did receive yt good thing unworthily. And
immediately after he says, The sacrament of the thing, that is, of the
knitting together of the body and blood of Christ, is received at the Lords
table, of some unto life, of other some to destruction: but the thing it self
whereof it is a Sacrament, is reteiued of all men unto life, of none to
destruction, whosoever shall be partakers thereof. And again he says, He which
dwells not in Christ, nor Christ in him, without doubt he neither eats
his flesh, nor drinks his blood spiritually, although earnally and visibly he
chawe with his teeth the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, but he
does rather eat and drink the Sacrament of so great a thing to his own
damnation. And so forth. He has the like words in his book De Ciuit. Dei. 21.
cap. 25. And in his book De Doctri. Christ. 3. ca. 9. he shows that In the
Conjunction of natures there had need to be a distinction, lest we should stick
too much upon the outward sign.

Now we come to the proofs of the scripture. The Apostle witnesses in the
Cor. 10. chap. that all our fathers were baptized, and did all eat of one
spiritual meat, and did all drink of one manner of spiritual drink, but
the Lord in many of them had no delight. Whereas if they had eaten that
spiritual meat, and drank that spiritual drink spiritually by faith,
undoubtedly the Lord had delighted in them. For without faith, as he himself
says, it is impossible to please God: therefore with them that have faith,
GOD is well pleased. Wherefore our fathers truly were partakers of visible
sacraments, but they were destitut of invisible grace, whereby it follows
that the sign and y^ thing signified do retain their natures not confounded
or mingled, but distinguished and separated. Besides this, the words of the
gospel The affinity of the word of God and sacraments.
have some affinity, or at the leasfe some likeness with Sacramental signs.
Otherwise the words are preferred far before the signs, the Apostle
saying, that he was sent to preach, and not to baptize. But many hear with
their outward ears the word of the Lord, who for all that, because they are
void of faith, are also without the inward fruit of the word, Paul saying
yet again, For to us was the gospel preached, as well as unto the^, but the
word which they Heb. 4.
heard did not profit them, because it was not coupled with faith. For so it
comes to pass that many receive the visible sacraments, and yet are not
partakers of the invisible grace, which by faith only is received. Whereupon
yet again it follows that the sign is not confounded with the thing
signified: but both of them do retain their substance and nature
distinguished. What, and does not the scripture expressly and pithily make a
difference between the outward ministry of man, and God the inward worker
and giver of spiritual gyfts? For John Baptiste says, I baptize you with
water, But he (Christ) shall Matthew. 3.
Baptize you with the holy Ghost.

Wherewith agrees yt saying of Peter, Baptism saves us, not the putting Pet.
3.
away of the filth of the flesh, but in that a good conscience makes request
to God. To this now pertcineth that evident testimony of saint The scripture
makes difference beetweene the ministry of man and the operation of the
spirit.
Augustine which is read 3. Quest. lib. in Leuit. Quest. 83. In these words:
We must diligently consider as often as he says, I the Lord which sanctify
him, that he speaks of the priest: when he also spoke this to Moses, and thou
shall sanctify him. How therefore does both Moses and God also sanctify? for
Moses does not sanctify for the Lord: but Moses does sanctify in the visible
sacraments by his ministry: and the Lord by invisible grace by his holy
spirit, where the whole fruit of visible sacraments also is. For without this
sanctification of invisible grace, what profit have we by visible sacraments?
Thus far August. As John Baptist made distinction between his own
ministry in Baptism, and the power of Christ: even so makes he distinction
between the ministry of preaching, and the drawing of the spiritual teacher,
I am (says he) the voice of a crier in the wilderness, make straight John. 3.
the way of the Lord. And again, He that comes from on high, is above all,
he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaks of the earth, he that comes
from heaven is above all, and what he has seen and heard that he testifies,
etc. Saint Paul also agreeing thereunto 1. Cor. 3.
says, Who is Paul? What is Apollos? but ministers by whom ye believed, even
as the Lord gave to every man. I have planted, Apollos watered but god gave
the increase. So that neither is he that planteth any thing neither he that
waters, but God that gives the increase. Albeit the comparison of ministers
with ye signs agree not altogether and in every part (which I told you
before*) because ministers are fellow laborers with Christ, according to
their office, but the signs which are without life are not so, unless (...), we
translate unto them that which is the ministers, yet by other proofs I
suppose it to be made plain that the sign and thing signified do retain
their natures distinguished in the sacraments. These things do specially
disprove and convince those who The opinion of the Papists touching
transubstantiation is confuted
are persuaded of that papisticall tra^substantiation of bread and wine into
the substance of the body and blood of Christ. For these men utterly deny
that the bread and wine being consecrated in the mysteries, do remain in
their own substances. For they contend that these substa^ces (of bread and
wine) are annihilated and turned into the very body and blood of the Lord, so
yt after the consecration, the accidents of bread and wine do remain, and no
part of the substance thereof at all.

For they say that the Lord in express words pronounced over the bread and
wine, This is my body, This is my blood, and that the Lord can easily bring to
pass, by his own omnipotency, that that which he said may be as he said. For
proof whereof, they allege these and such like places, yt the Lord for soothe
fashioned man out of ye clay of the earth, and by and by of the rib of man made
woman, and also turned Lots wife into a pillar of salt, and therefore y^ he, by
the self same his power can make of bread his body, and of wine his blood.
And these truly are their bulworkes. But we in another place have plentifully
disputed of the meaning of the Lords words, This is my body. So that it is
superfluous to make long repetition of them. I have also told you y^ of the
omnipotency of God, we must not gather and determine whatsoever comes into
our brain: and also that Gods power does nothing against truth, neither
against it self, and that no Godly man ought to take that in hand under
pretense of the power of God, which is repugnant to the plain Scriptures, and
the articles of the catholic faith.

Now it is evident, and plain, that after consecration there remains That
bread an^ wine remain in their substa^ces afte^ consecration.
in the sacrament, ye substance of bread and wine. And herein we need no other
witnesses than our very senses, which perceive, see, taste, and feel, no
other thing than bread and wine: but while clay was turned into a man's body,
the ribb into a woman, and Lots wife into a pillar of salt, they were not, as
the sacrament of the supper, yt which they were before, neither did there
appear unto the senses any iotte of the clay, of the ribbe, of Lots wife.
Very foolishly therefore and unaptly are these examples applied to the
mystery of the Lords supper, wherewith they nothing agree: which thing also
we touched before.

The Gospel very diligently describing the most holy institution of the
Lords supper, and the manner thereof, makes no mention of miraculous
transubstantion: but calls the bread and wine which the Lord took and
distributed to his disciples, and which they also received, by the names of
bread and wine, as well after the words of consecration (as they term it) were
spoken, as also before consecration. Does not the Lord in the 26. cha. of
Mat. call the wine being consecrated not wine only, but the fruit of the vine,
after a more vehement and significatiue kind of speech, lest any should be
ignorant that the wine was wine in deed, and so remained? In Mark we read
this of the Cup: And he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks he gave
to them, And they drank of it, and he said unto them. This is my blood of the
new Testament, etc. Lo they d^anke all (says he) of the Cup, before ye
words of consecration (as they term it) were spoken: therefore they drank
wine. Now if so be they answer that this place of the Evangelist is to be
expounded by the figure Hystero^protero, yt is when any thing is declared out
of order preposterously, the^ admit they tropes and figures in ye celebration
of the supper, which notwithstanding they have contended ought simply to be
understood without the help of tropes or figures. But Paul also the Apostle
in the 1. Cor. cap. 10. calls the bread of the Lord being now in the very
holy use, and (that I may so say) consecrated, by the name of bread. And in the
1. Cor. 11. chap. the third time he calls it bread. To this apperteyneth
that the Acts of the Apostles do testify, how that the Church of the
Apostles do call the whole mystical action The breaking of bread, not The
breaking of his body, or distribution of his blood. It is manifest therefore
that the substance of bread and wine in the Sacrament of the Lords supper do
remain in their own nature, and that transubstantiation is a sophistical
imagination. This also is a sophistical and a notable papisticall forgerie, in
that they Whether the bread and wine for their former substance are so called
after consecration.
say that the bread and wine consecrated in the Supper is therefore called of
the Apostles bread and wine, because they were bread and wine before. For
that is now done which is read in Erod. to have been done in times past,
where Araons rod is said to devour the Inchaunters rods, which
nevertheless then were not rods, but Serpents: but now they are named
rods, because they were rods before they were so changed which now are
serpents and not rods. But again, who does not see this example has no
similitude or likeness with the bread and wine of the Lord? For the rod
truly was called a rod. But in the mean while it was, and seemed plainly to
be, not now a rod, but a serpent: but ye bread is called bread, neither does
it appear to be any thing else but bread: here is no form of flesh seen, as
was seen there the form of a serpent. Beside this the rod is said to be
turned into a serpent, and is showed for a wonder or miracle: but ye shall read
in no place that the bread was turned into flesh, by any miracle: but a
sacrament is instituted, which in deed loses the name and nature of a
sacrament when the substance of the sign being annihilated and made void
nothing remains there, but the thing signified: for ye which they triflingly
say of accidents myraculously subsisting without their subject, and remaining
in sted of the sign, is to no purpose. If we should go about to boast of our
dreams for miracles, there will be nothing so absurd, and foolish which we
shall not color with our fancies, and lies. What if this word
transubstantiation does manifestly prove that this whole trifling toy, is not
fetched from the simple and plain doctrine of the Apostles, but from the
subtle schole of quarelling sophisters?

But the Apostle Paul gives us in charge to beware both of Philosophy
Coloss. 2. 1. Tim. 6.
and strangeness of words, though at this present we do not only entreat of
new words, but also of new matter and new doctrine contrary in all points to
the Apostles. For this doctrine of transubstantiation is clean contrary both
to the doctrine of the Apostles and Evangelists touching the true incarnation
of our Lord, and the true nature and property of his humane body, and also
the true raising up again of our bodies. For they are constrained to forge
many things altogether myraculous, as of the invisible body of Christ, and of
the subtle body of Christ pearcing by his subtility through the gate, and the
stone, I mean that which covered his sepulcher, or the Lords very body
beeinge altogether and at one time in many places, and filling all things, and
other innumerable which are of this stamp absurd and wicked. Now also Joan.
Scotus a subtle doctor in his work Sentent. Distinct. 11. Lib. 4. quaest.
3. says, That the article of Transubstantiation is neither expressed in the
creed of the Apostles, neither in those creedes of the ancient fathers: but
that it was brought in and invented of the Church (so says he, meaning the
Romish Church) under Innocentius the third in the Counsel of Lateran.
Whereby we gather that the doctrine of Transubstantiation is The counsel of
La^eran was in the year of of the lord. 1215.
of late time, and newely start up, the history whereof we have elsewhere more
largely compyled. But by this that I have said, I think it plainly and
effectually enoughe declared, that the signs are not mingled with the things
signified or changed into them, but that each of them remain in their
several natures.

But albeit either of the parts without myxture do retain their own nature,
yet those two agree in one sacrament, and being joined together and not
divided, do make one perfect and lawful Sacrament. For water alone both
privately and ordinarily sprinkled is no sacrament, unless it be applied and
used according to the institution of Christ. Purifying also or washing away of
sins, and the ingraffing or receiving into the league and fellowshippe of God
and all Saints, of it self is no Sacrament, unless there be also a
sprinckling of water, in the name of the blessed Trinity.

In like manner it is no Sacrament, if we eat bread in a common assembly, and
drink wine of the self same cup after the common manner: neither is it a
Sacrament if through a faithful remembrance thou consider that the Lords
body was betrayed for thee, and his blood shed for thee, for the which also
thou give thanks: but so far f^^rth as they are all mysteries of God and
our salvation, they are generally termed sacraments, that is, secret and
spiritual mysteries of GOD and our salvation. For in a perfect and lawful
Sacrament, there must needs go together both the holy action corporal or
sensible, and the spiritual celebration thereof, for the which this
sacramental action was invented and put in practice.

But here some move many and diverse questions touching the sacramental Of the
sacramental union.
union, whether it be personal, real, or rational. I, because I see nothing
of this matter doubtfully delivered of the Apostles, and that the thing being
plain of it self by such manner of sophisticatio^s is made dark, doubtful,
difficult, and obscure: simply and plainly say, that the sign and the thing
signified are joined together in the Sacraments by Gods institution: by
faithful contemplation and use: to be short, in signification and likeness
of the things: but I utterly deny that those two are naturally united
together, so that the sign in the Sacrament begins to be that, which the
thing signified is in his own substance and nature: I deny that the thing
signified is joined corporally with the sign, so that the sign remains
still in his own substance and nature, and yet nevertheless in the mean
time has the thing signified corporally joined unto it, that thereby who so
ever is partaker of the sign, should be also by the sign or with the sign
partaker of the thing it self.

The reason why I do so constantly deny that, appears I think sufficiently
by those examples which I have hitherto declared, and which hereafter shall
be declared. Furthermore, It is declared how in Sacraments the signs and the
things signisied are joined together.
I say that the sign and the thing signified, are coupled together by Gods
institution, because he which instituted the Sacrament of baptism and the
Supper, instituted it not to this end, that with water we might wash away
the filthe of the body, as the custom is to do by daily use of bathes,
neither that we should take our fill of the bread and wine, but that under
visible signs he might commend unto us the mysteries of our redemption and his
grace, and to be short of our salvation by represe^ting them to renew them,
and by sealing them to confirm the^. My saying is, that they are coupled
together in a faithful contemplation, because they which partake the
Sacraments religiously, do not fasten their eyes on sensible things only,
but rather on things insensible, signified, and heavenly, so that the
faithful have in them selves both twain coupled together, which otherwise in
ye sign or with ye sign are knit together with no bond. For corporally and
sensibly they receive the signs, but spiritually they possess, comprehend,
renew, and exercise the things signified.

In signification and likeness of the things, I say, they are coupled
together, because the sign is a token of the thing signified: And unless
signs have likeness with those things whereof they are signs, then could they
be no signs. They have therefore most apt and very near affinity between
them selves.

For as water washes away the filthe of the body: as bread and wine
satisfies and makes merry the heart of man: even so by the grace of God, the
people of God are purified: even so the body and blood of the Lord which was
given for us, being apprehended by faith, does both satisfy and make merry
the whole man, that he may yealde him self wholly unto thanksgiving, and
obedient to Godwarde.

I would speak here more largely of the Analogy or of the sign and thing
signified, but that I see I may do the same hereafter in place more
convenient. But I think I shall not need any more places out of the scripture
to open these things more evidently, since they follow of their own accord
upon that which we have hitherto by testimonies of scriptures confirmed, and
will hereafter more at large confirm.

Moreover, in respect of the likeness Signs borowe the names of things
signified.
of the sign and the thing signified, the name of the one is given to the
other, as I will prove by most evident testimonies of Scripture. In Genesis 17.
the Lord says thus to Abraham, Thou shall keep my covenant therefore, both
thou and thy seed after thee in their generations. This is my covenant which
ye shall keep between me and you. Every man-child among you shall be
circumcised. Ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskinne, and it shall be
a token of the covenant between Circumcision.
me and you. The mouth of the Lord has spoken this. Who will gainesay the
word of GOD? The word of GOD calls Circumcision a covenant, therefore the
name of the thing signified, is given to the sign. For in very deed
Circumcision is not the covenant it self. For the covenant is the bargain
and agreement between GOD and men, which has certain conditions and
articles. Wherefore afterward by interpretation, the same Circumcision is
called A token of the covenant. And who will find fault with this
interpretation of GOD? The signs therefore, yea, GOD being the interpreter,
take the names of the things signified.

So you may read in the twelfth chapter of Exodus. Ye shall eat The
paschallamb.
the lamb in have, for it is the Lords Passover. Again, And the blood shall
be unto you a sign in the houses wherein you are, etc. And again, This day
shall be unto you a remembrance, etc. What can be spoken more plainly, than
that the Lamb is called the Passover? But what is the proper meaning of the
Passover? Let us give ear to the Lord, here again expounding him self, and
saying: I will pasle through the land of Aegypte this same night, and will
smite all the first borne of Egypt, from man to beast, and when I shall see
the blood (of the Lamb) I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be
upon you to destroy you. Behold, the Passover, GOD him self so
interpreting it, is that passing over, whereby the Angel of GOD passing over
the houses of the Israelites which were marked with the blood of the Lamb,
spared their firstborne, and slew ye first borne of ye Egyptians. If thou art
ignorant what, and what manner of Lamb it was, listen again to the Lord
instructing thee, and saying: In the tenth day of this month every man take
unto him a Lamb according to the household, and let your Lamb be without
blemishe, a male of a year old, which ye shall take out from among the
sheep, and from among the goats. And here the Lamb is plainly called the
Passover. And who does not see that the Lamb is not the Passover? yet
because it is a sign or remembrance of the passover, as the mouth of the
Lord says, surely it takes the name of the Passover or passing by.

Again you read in the nintenth of Number. Thus spoke the Lord unto Moses:
Speak unto the children Sacrifices.
of Israel, that they bring thee a red cow without blemishe, And ye shall give
her unto Eleazar the Priest, that he may bring her without the host, and cause
her to be slain before his face, and to be burnt whole, And a man that is
clean shall gather up the ashes of the cow, and lay them without the host in a
clean place, And it shall be kept for the multitude of the children of
Israel, for a water of separation (or sprinckling.) For it is sin. Mark
again the manner of the speaking of the Scripture. A heifer or cow is sin,
that is, a sacrifice for sin, as Christ is said to be made sin for us,
that for (or by) Romans 8.
sin, he might condemn sin, which is, that by the one oblation of his
body, he might cleanse and purge us from sin. Hitherto also belongs that
which the Apostle speaking of sacrifices unto the Hebrews, says: But in these
sacrifices there is mention Hebr. 10.
made of sins every year, for it is not possible that the blood of bulls
and goats should take away sins.

As often therefore as sacrifices, as Heifers, Goats, Bulls, and Lambs, are
called sanctifications, cleansings, or sins, the signs take the names of the
things signi^ied. For these were certain types and figures of the Zacha. 3.
Priest which was to come, and of Christ, upon whom all our sins are
laid. For, He, truly, is the Lamb Isai. 33.
of GOD which takes away the sins of the world.

Now we are come also to the sacraments of the new Testament, John. 1.
whose signs also bear the names of the things signified. For Peter says,
Acts 2. Let every one of you 1. Pet. 1.
be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins. And
Paul also in the Acts of the Baptism. Acts. 22.
Apostles hears, Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins by calling
on the name of the Lord, Therefore truly baptism is called a cleansing, or
washing away of sins.

And Peter also elsewhere saiths, Baptism saves you, not that thereby the
filthe of the flesh is put away, but in that a good conscience makes request
unto God. And Paul also says, Ye are washed, ye are sanctified 1. Cor. 6.
ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our GOD.

Therefore the due and right co^paring of these places between them selves
does manifestly prove, that to the sign of baptism, whithe is water, is given
the name of the thing signified.

After the same manner is it to be seen in the institution of the Lords
Supper or Euchariste. The broad The supper of the lord
is called the body of Christ, and the wine the blood of Christ. But since
the right faith believes, that the true body of Christ ascended out of this
world, lives, and is now in heaven, and that the Lord returns no more into
this world until he come in the clouds of heaven to judge the quick and
dead, every man understands, that to the sign, to wit, bread and wine,
the names of the things them selves, to wit, the body and blood of Christ
are given through the communicating of names.

Many other speeches used in the Scripture and in our daily talk Sacrames^cal
and figuratine speeches.
are not much unlike to the speeches used in the Sacrament. We read that
Christ is, and is called a Lion, a Lamb, a Shepehearde, a Vine, a door, a
way, a Ladder, the Day, the Light, the Sun, the Water, the bread, a Spring,
and a Rock, which if at this day any should roughly urge, contending that
Christ is a Lamb in deed, a door in substance, a natural vine or such
like: who, I pray you, could abide him so reasoning? We would hiss and drive
out from among us such a one as a mad man, and a peruerter of GODS oracles.

We read in deed, And that rock was Christ: In the mean time it is to be
considered, what should follow. For if that rock really and in v^rye deed
had been Christ, none of them that drank of that rock had been reprobates.
For they are acceptable unto GOD which are partakers of Christ: But in many of
them that drank of the rock, the Lord had no delight. For they were stayne
in the wilderness: therefore they which drank of the rock which was
Christ, were not made partakers of Christ.

Therefore the rock was not Christ really and in very deed. We also seeing
The manner of speech which we daily use.
the standards of kings, princes, and cities, we call the signs by the names
of the kings, princes, and cities: for we say, This is the king of France,
This is the prince of Germany, this is Tigure, this is Berne. So if we see the
marriage ring, or the image of any prince, we call it the faith and trothe of
wedlock, or man and wife, yea, and we say by the Image, This is the prince.
For matrones showing their wedding ring, say, this is my husband. When we show
to any man the picture or image of the duke of Saxony, we say, This is the
duke of Saxony. If any should go on obstinately to affirm, that the sign in
very deed is the thing signified, because it bears the name thereof, would
not all men cry out that such a one were without with or reason, and that he
were to be abhorred by all means as an obstinate brawler? Those therefore that
are skillful in the things, understand that that is and has been Catholic,
received of all men, and also sound, which we showed even now at large, to
wit, that the signs do borrowe the names of the things, and not turn into
the things (which they signify). And therefore the ancient fathers moved no
strife nor The ancient fathers moved no contentio^s about the sacraments.
contentions about the Sacraments as are at this day among us. For as they did
beautify the signs with the names of the things (signified) so did they
acknowledge the kind of speech: neither did they roughly urge the words, as
though the very signs were really and corporally that self same thing which
they signified. Therefore this canon or rule is so often repeated and beaten
upon by Aulerius August. That the signs do take or borrowe the names of
things signified. By the same canon or rule he makes plain certain dark
places: of which thing we will now set down some testimonies. In this Epist.
23. ad Bonifacium de paruuloru^ baptismate. he says: If sacraments had not
some likeness with those things whereof they are sacraments, no doubt they were
no sacraments, for of this likeness for the most part they take the names of
the things them selves. As also the Apostle speaking of baptism, says, We
are buried with Christ by baptism into his death. He does not say, We
signify the burial, but he does flatly say, We are buried. Therefore he called
the sacrament of so great a thing, no otherwise but by the name of the self
same thing. And in Tract. super Joan. 63. When the unclean person is gone, all
which remain are clean. Such a like thing shall there be, when the world
being overcome of Christ shall pass away, and there shall no unclean person
remain among the people of God, when the tares being separated from the
wheat, the just shall shine like the sun in the kingdom of their father.
The Lord foreseeing this would come to pass, and now witnessing that it was
signified when Judas fell away, as tares separated, ye holy apostles
remaining as wheat, he says, Now is the son of man glorified, as if he had
said, Behold what shall be, when I am glorified, where there shall be no
wicked person, and where no good man shall perish. For he says not thus, Now
is the glorifying of the son of man signified: but he says, Now is the
son of man glorified: As it It is not said, the rock signifies Christ but
the rock is Christ
is not said, The rock signified Christ: but, The rock was Christ: neither is
it said, the good seed signifies the children of the kingdom, but he says,
the good sede these are the children of the kingdom: and the tares, the
children of the wicked. As the scripture therefore is wont to speak, calling
the things which signify, as the things that are signified: even so spoke
the Lord, saying, Now is the Son of man glorified, after that wicked (Judas)
was separated, and his holy Apostles remaining with him, his glorification was
signified, when the wicked being divided, he shall remain eternally with the
saints. The same Aurelius Agust, in his Epistle to Euodius 102. says, The
sound of the voice, and the bodily shape of a dove, and cloven tongs like unto
fire, which came upon every one of them, as those things in mount Sina,
which were done after a most fearful manner: and as that pillar of the
cloud by day, and that pillar of fire by night, were ordained and set for some
operation which they signified. Herein we must specially take heed of this,
that none be persuaded or believe, that the nature and substance of the
Father, or of the Son, or of the holy Ghost is chaungeable, or may be
turned. Neither let any man be moved, for that sometime the thing which
signifies, takes the name of that thing which it signifies. The holy Ghost
is said to descend and remain upon him in the bodily shape of a dove. For so
also is the rock Christ, because it signifies Christ.

By these examples alleged out of the Scripture, it is plain, that Their
error which will not have sacramental speeches expounded sacramentally.
the signs do borrowe the names of the things, and not their natures and
substaunces. Whereupon it is undoubtedly true that they err as far as heaven
is wide, which are persuaded that the sacramental speeches are not to be
expounded as figurative, and borrowed, but most properly and literally, so that
by that means the water, bread, and wine, are not now signs and tokens only
of regeneration, and of the body of Christ given, and of his blood shed for
us: but regeneration it self, and the very substantial body and blood of
our Lord Jesus. For being of this opinion they are offensive unto the common
manner, both of speaking and interpreting used in all ages: they are also
repugnaunt to true faith, yea and to common sense. Whereby it comes to pass,
that by their confounding of the sign with the thing signified, they bring in
a servile weakness, and (that I may use S. Aug. words) A carnal bondage. For
he Li. 3. de. doct. Chapter ca. 9. entreating of the Sacraments of Christians,
says: The Lord him self and the Apostles in their doctrine have left us few
things in stead of many, and those most easy to be done, most reverend in
understanding, and most pure in observing, as is baptism, and the celebration
of the body and blood of the Lord. Which Sacraments every man when he
receives, being instructed, acknowledges whereunto they are referred, that
we should not worship them with carnal servitude or bondage, but rather
with spiritual freedom or liberty. And as to follow the Carnal bondage and
servile weakness.
letter and to take the signs in stead of the things which are signified by
them, is a point of servile weakness: so to expound the signs unprofitably,
is a point of evil wandering error. And yet he speaks more plainly chapter.
5. First of all you must beware le^t you take a figurative spech according to
the letter. For to this agrees that which the Apostle says: The letter
kills, but the spirit gives life. For when that which is figuratively
spoken, is taken as though it were spoken properly, it is carnally
understood. Neither is there any thing that may more agreably be termed the
death of the soul, then when that wherein we excel beasts, which is
understanding or knowledge, is made subject to the flesh by following the
letter. For he that follows the letter understands words translated or
borrowed as proper or natural, neither does he refer that which is signified
by a proper word to another signification: but if (for an example) he shall
here mention of the Sabbath, he understands it no otherwise but as one day
of the seven, which by continual course come and go. And when he hears
mention made of sacrifice, it will not out of his head but that this is meant of
that which was wont to be done about offering of beasts and fruits of the
earth. To be short, this is the miserable bondage of the soul, to take the
signs for the things them selves, and not to be able to lift up the eyes of
the mind above the bodily creature, for the obteyning of everlasting light.
Thus far August. By these words of Augustine we do gather, that they
reverence the sacraments by spiritual liberty, which neither stick to the
letter, neither worship and reverence the visible things and elements, as,
water, bread, and wine, in stead of the things signified: but being rather
admonished and stirred up by the signs, they are lifted up in their minds to
behold the things signified. How a fig^ratiue speech is to be received and
acknowledged.
The same Augustine in the same book chapter 15. teaching when, and after what
manner a trope or figure is to be received or acknowledged, says: In
figurative speeches this manner of rule shall be kept, that so long you view
with diligent consideration what is read, until the interpretation come unto
the rule of charity. For if it be not repugnaunt to charity, think not that
it is a figurative speech. And yet more plainly he adds in the 16. chapter
following. If it be an imperative speech, either forbidding any heinous
offense or wicked deed, or commanding any profitable or good deed, it is no
figurative speech. But if it command any wicked deed, or forbid any deed of
charity, then it is figurative. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. He seems to command some
horrible offense or wicked deed: therefore it is a figurative speech
commanding us to communicate with the passion of Christ, and comfortably and
profitably to lay up in our remembrance that his flesh was crucified and
wounded for us. The Scripture says, If thine enemy hunger, feed him: Here
no man doubts but he commands well doing, but that which follows: For
in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, A man would think
that a wicked and evil deed were commanded: therefore doubt not but that it
is figuratively spoken. And so forth. All these things do convince their
error which interpret sacramental speeches, as proper, and reject al
figures and tropes, especially in the institution of the supper. Nevertheless
I am not ignorant, what they set against this last testimony The words of
our savior in the 6. of John do make much for the in terpretatio^ of the words
of the supper
of S. Augustine, that the words of our savior in the sixte of John do make
nothing to the interpretation of the ministration of the sacrament, and
therefore that the place of S. Augustine does nothing agree to our purpose. But
it is manifest that in the same book S. Augustine disputes of signs and of
the sacramental speeches. And that is manifest also by many other places out
of S Augustine, that he often alleges these words of our savior out of the
sixte of John, to expound the celebration of the supper. But why do they
nothing perteyne to the celebration of the Supper? Does he speak of one body
in the Supper, and of an other in the 6. chap. of John? shall we believe that the
Lord had and has two bodies? Our Lord Jesus has but one body, the which as
it profits nothing being eaten corporally, according to S. John 6. chapter:
even so that body being corporally eaten, does nothing avail, according to S
Mat. 26. chapter. But this matter we have elsewhere handled. And of as little
force is this unsavory objection of theirs, which is, that the consequence is
false when we argue thus: Circumcision To argue from the sacraments of the old
testament to ours of the new.
is the covenant: the lamb is the Passoeuer: Sacrifices are sins, and
sanctifications or cleansings are sacramental speeches mystical and
figurative: therefore this also, This is my body, is a mystical and figurative
speech. For since in Sacraments there is the like reason, why may we not
frame arguments from the one to the other? And that sacraments have the like
reason, it is received of all them which acknowledge the truth aright, and it
shall be proved hereafter to the full. But if it be not lawful to reason from
the sacraments of the old testament, and by them after a certain comparison
to interpret ours, and by ours to make them plain: truly then the Apostle
did not well, who by a false consequent by comparison we read to have argued
from their sacraments unto ours, in the 1. Cor. 10. and to the Coloss. 2. chap.
But now we return to our purpose. That we may yet at length make an end of
this place, We may use sacramental speeches.
they are sacramental and figurative speeches, when we read and hear that
the bread is the body of Christ, and the wine the blood of Christ, and that
they do eat and drink the body and blood of Christ, which eat and drink
the Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord, also that they are purged
from their sins and regenerated into a new life which are baptized in the
name of Christ, and that baptism is the washing away of all our sins. And
after this manner speaks the scripture, and this form of speech kept the
old doctors of the Church, whom for so doing none that is wise does
dispraise, neither can one discommend any man which speaks after this
manner, so that he also abide in the same sincerity wherein it is manifest
that those holy men of god did walk. For as they did willingly and simply use
those speeches, so did they not roughly and rigorously strain the letter and
speeches: they did interpret them in such sort, that none was so unskillful,
but that he might understand that the signs were not yt thing it self which
they signified, but that the signs do take the names of the things, therefore
they used words significatiuely, sacramentally, mystically, and figuratively.

Now whereas some will not have Sacramental speeches are to be expounded.
the Sacramental speeches to be expounded, as though being not expounded they
were of more authority, majesty and worthiness, this draws after it a soar
danger, and gives a most grievous offense, and is repugnant to the rule of
the Apostles, to sound reason, and to the custom of them of old. For when
these kind of speeches are set forth and uttered to the simple sort being not
expounded, to wit, The bread is the body of Christ. When thou drinckest the
wine of the Lord thou drinckest the very blood of the Lord. Baptism saves
us, etc. what other thing
I pray you, is set forth, than a snare of carnal bondage, and a most
dangerous offense of idolatry? Many words need not in this matter, since
experience does abundantly enoughe set forth in this place, what has been
done, and what at this day is done.

The rule of the Apostles commands the divine oracles to be expounded in the
Church, and to lay forth all ye mysteries of the scripture, that they may be
soundly understood, as we may see, 1. Corinthians. 14. And reason it self
teaches us, that the mind of man is little or nothing moved if the things
themselves be not understood. What fruit therefore shall the simple sort
receive by ye Sacraments, unto whom the meaning of the sacraments has not
been opened. Better therefore did the ancient fathers, not only in
expounding all the mysteries of the kingdom of God, and especially the
sacraments: but in teaching also that they ought to be expounded. Which
although it be made plain enough by those things which go before, yet will
I add two examples out of S. Augustine touching this matter. He, cap. 6. de
chatechisandis rudibus, says: Let the new Christian man be taught
concerning ye sacraments, that they be visible signs of heavenly things,
and that invisible things are to be honored in them, neither that the sign
after it is blessed and sanctified, is so to be taken as it is daily used. It
must also be told him what that speech signifies which he hears: and what
thing is given in the sign, whereof it is a representation. Moreover upon
this occasion he must be taught that if he hear any thing even in the
Scriptures that sounds carnally, although he understand it not, yet to
believe that some spiritual thing is signified thereby, which belongs to
holy manners, and to the life to come. And as follows. The same Augustine,
Lib. 4. de doctr. Chr. cap. 8. does utterly forbid the doctors and teachers of
the church, not to think that they ought therefore to speak obscurely of the
mysteries of the scripture, because they see that these things are delivered
somewhat intricately and darckely in the scripture: but he rather requires
light and plainness in them. If any man desire to hear his words, they are
these: If we fetch examples of the manner of speaking out of the writings of
our canonical authors and doctors which are easily understood, yet we
ought not to think that we should follow them also in those speeches
wherein they have used a profitable and wholesome obscurity, to exercise, and
as it were to quicken the readers minds, and to take away lothsomnes, and to
stir up the studies of the willing learners, and also to make the minds of
the wicked zealous, that they may either be turned to godliness, or else
excluded from the mysteries. For so they spoke that those which came after them
and could understand and rightly expound them, might reveal a second grace
unlike to the former, but yet ensuing in the church of God. Therefore they
which expound them ought not so to speak as if they by the like authority
would offer themselves to be expounded: but in all their kind of speeches,
first let them labor chiefly and first of all to be understood, with as
plain kind of speaking as they can, that he be very dull and slow-witted,
which does not understand, or at the least let not the fault of the hardness
and subtlety of the things which we go about to open and declare, be in our
own speech, whereby that which we speak should be somewhat longer in
understanding. Thus far Augustine. And let this that I have hitherto said of
sacramental speeches be sufficient. The Lord be praised. Amen.

That we must reason reverently of Sacraments, that they do not give grace,
neither have grace included in them. Again, what the virtue and lawefull end
and use of Sacraments is. That they profit not without faith, that they are
not superfluous to the faithful, and that they do not depend upon the
worthiness or unworthiness of the minister.
The seventh Sermon.
YEsterday (dearly beloved) I told A brief rehersall of such poinctes as he
entreated upon in his former sermon.
you what a sacrament was, who was the author of them, and for what causes
sacraments were instituted, of what things they consiste, that is to say, of
the sign, and the thing signified. I told you also what a sign is, and what
the thing signified, and by what names they are termed, how they are
consecrated, that the sign is not mingled with the thing signified, but that
both of them remain in their own nature and property of nature: that the
sign is not taken away or myraculously turned, neither that the thing
signified is so joined with the sign, yt whosoever is partaker of the one, is
partaker also of the other. To be short I declared how and after what manner
the sign and the thing signified, are coupled together to make a full perfect
and lawful sacrament, where also I entreated of sacramental speeches. Now
therefore it remains that I also consequently speak of ye nature, virtue, and
efficacy of sacraments, and of those things which are joined and of
affinity with them: for so the order which I used in my division requires.
Touching ye virtue and nature of sacraments, that is to say, what they work in
man, writers have disputed diversely and plentifully. It seems unto me that
reverence must be used in this disputation, and that heed must be taken that I
do not incline either to the We must^ use reverence in disputing of sacraments.
right hand or to the left, that is, that I do not attribute to much unto them
to the derogating from the doctrine of ye Evangelists and Apostles, neither
that I should diminishe or take from them to mine own damnation that which
the scripture, the word of God, does attribute unto them. But we shall
plentifully give great praise and glory to the ordinances of God, if we shall
say that of them which the spirit of God has set down in the holy
scriptures: to be willing to attribute more unto them, is not only an error
in man, but a great fault, which brings death and horrible destruction. This
is declared unto us in the holy scripture The arc of the co^^nant.
by examples most worthy of remembrance. The arcke of ye covenant given by
Moses to ye people of Israel, was a witness of Gods presence among the
people, and of the league and friendshipp between God and man. For in these
words God made a league we the people, I will make my dwelling place among
them, and walk among them, and I will be their God and they shall be my people.
Of that ordinance and agreement, the arc it self was called, The Lord God of
hosts sittinge between the Cherubims, as we may see 2. Sam. 6. and in ye
book of the Chronicles. It was also called, The arc of the covenant of the
Lord. For when ye prophets of God did attribute these things to the sacrament
of God, they both thought and spoke plentifully and reverently enoughe of the
sacrament of God: but when the ignorant and malicious priests and the people
corrupted by them did attribute far greater things to the arc or Sacrament of
God, what (I pray you) came to pass? Give ear first what they attributed to
the arc, The elders of Israel said, To attribute too ^uch to sa^^aments.
wherefore has the Lord cast us down this day before the Philistines? Let us
fetch the arc of the covenant of the Lord out of Silo unto us, that when it
comes among us, it may save us out of the hands of our enemies. You have
heard what they attributed to ye ark. Now give ear what they did. So the
people sent into Silo, and brought It is a great sin not to attribute so much
unto the sacraments as the scripture does attribute.
from thence the arc of the covenant of the Lord of hoastes which sits
between the Cherubims. And it came to pass, that when the arc of the
covenant of the Lord came into the host, all Israel showted out a mighty
showt, so that the earth rang again. And when the Philistines hard the noise
of the shout, they said, what means the sound of this mighty showt? And they
understood that the ark of the Lord was come into the host. And the
Philistines cried, woe be unto us, God is come into the host. Who shall deliver
us out of the hands of those mighty Gods that smote the Egyptians? But
hearken now what happened, and how God did declare that ye arc was not God,
as it was called and counted of ye unskillful in holy things, and how he
punished the sins of his people, because they attributed too much to the
sacrament. It follows therefore: And the Philistines fought, and Israel was
smitten down, and fledd every man into his tent, and there was an exceeding
great slaughter, for there were ouerthrown of Israel thirty thousand footmen.
Beside that also, the ark of God was taken, and the two sonns of Helie were
slain. All these things are read in the 1. book of Sam. 4. ca. Again, when
the sacrament of God was irreverently handled of the swinish Philistines, they
were smitten with a loathsome and deadly plague. They did boast yt their Gods,
and the religion of the Philistines had overcome the God and the religion of
the Israelits, but the gods of ye Philistines fell down and are broken in
pieces, and their heathenish religion is confounded. What, and did not the
Israelites perish with a more grievous plague, tha^ before, when they lightly
handled, and contrary to the Law of God, Number. 4. looked into the Sacrament
brought back by the Philistines into Bethsames? For the Lord smote fifty
thousand threescore and ten men. 1. Sam. 6. When Moses did negligently
defer the circumcising of his children, he fell into great danger. The
Sichimites for receiving circumcision rashly are destroyed. And Simeon and
Leui, For profaning the sacrament are cursed of their father. Genesis 49. To
this that agrees which the Apostle says of them which celebrate the supper
unworthily. For this cause many are weak and sick among you and many
sleep. Hitherto also belongs the example of Oza, a man not altogether evil,
which touched this same sacrament that was not lawful for him to do.
Wherefore the Lord stroke him with a soudaine death, and that not privately in
the tabernacle, but in the fight of all the people. Of the which deed of God,
David also speaking in the congregation and church of the Israelites, says to
the Leuits: The Lord has chosen the Levites to bear the Arcke of the Lord
(and not that kyne shall draw it in a new cart) therefore see that ye be holy
that ye may bring in the Arcke of the Lord God of Israel unto the place which
I have prepared for it. For because ye did not this at the first, our lord God
has made a rent among us, for that we sought, him not as the fashion ought
to be.

And it follows immediately, The priests and Levites sanctified themselves to
fetch the Arcke of the Lord God of Israel. And the children of the Number. 4.
Levites bare the Arcke of God upon their shoulders with staves as Moses
commanded according to the word of the Lord. All these things are to be seen
in the first of the Chronicles, Cap. 15. Whereby we gather that the Lord will
none of our good meanings or intentes, and pompous celebrations in celebrating
the Sacraments: but that he only requires that we should so judge and
speak of the Sacraments, as he judges and speaks by his word, and that we
should so use and celebrate them, as he himself has instituted and
celebrated them. Therefore he sufficiently sets forth the dignity of
sacraments, who attributes that unto them, which GOD himself in ye holy
Scriptures vouchsafes to give them.

Let us therefore first of all search out, of what dignity Sacraments have
been for the most part in our time, that thereby we may the better understand
what is to be attributed, and what is not to be attributed unto them. The
common sort of priests It is taught that sacraments give grace
and monks have taught, that the sacraments of the new law are not only
signs of Grace, but together also causes of grace, that is, which have power
to give grace. For they say that they are as instruments, pipes, and certain
conduits of Christ's passion, by which the grace of Christ is conveyed and
powered into us: but that the signs of the old testament given to the fathers
were signs only, and not causes of grace also which have force to signify,
but not to give grace. They seem truly to have suckte Augustin^ taught not
that s^cramentes give grace
that error out of Saint Augustines words wrongfully understood: for he
writes upon the 73. Psalm thus: The sacraments of the new law are more
wholesome and happy, than they of the old law, because they promise, these
give. But S. Augustinement to say no other thing, than that which in another
place he speaks after this manner: The sacrament of the old law did foreshew
that Christ should come, but ours do show that he is come. For also against
Faustus, Lib. 19. cap. 14. he calls the Sacraments of the old law, Promises
of things to be performed, but our sacraments tokens of things that are
already performed. Wherefore upon the 73. Psalm he says: The sacraments of
the old law are given to signify the very thing, but ours do witness that
it is given, and signify that it is present. I confess that he says more
than once, that our sacraments are more comfortable and effectual: but he
said that by no other reason, than for that the Messiah being already revealed
and given unto us in the new testament, our sacraments are more perfect, more
lightsome, and more beautiful: for Christ has brought all signs to an end,
wherefore ours have a more full signification, and after a sort are the more
lively. But if Augustine had been altogether of that opinion which these men
do favor and follow, would not godliness it self persuade us to forsake the
authority of men, and clean to the word of truth?

Let us see therefore what may be gathered out of the word of truth, Of the
likeness and difference of the sacraments of the old and new Testament
that is, out of the canonical scriptures, touching the likeness and difference
of the sacraments of the old and new testament. This we hold for a certeintie
out of the scriptures, that there is but one everlasting and unchangeable God
and Lord of either Church, that there is but one faith in him thorough Christ
of either Church, that there is but one way laid down in either Church to
atteine to the promises of salvation: to be short, that there is but one
Church of the only living God, gathered together out of either people both of
the Jews and Gentiles. I think there needs no large confirmation of these
things out of the scripture: because in the 8. Decade and third Sermon, I
have handled them at the full.

Now that I have fortified and confirmed these things before, by the writings
of the Apostles, thus I conclude, not of mine own brain, but by the
authority of God: They which always have one everlasting, and unchangeable
God: one way of salvation set forth for all in Christ from the beginning: one
faith: one church: one baptism: the same spiritual meat and drink: they
cannot choose but have the self same sacraments as touching their substance.
But the Jews and Christians have one God, one faith, one way of salvation
(which is) by Christ, to be short one church: therefore have they also the
self same sacraments, saving that ours are given under other signs, and for
that through the revelation ot the Sun of righteousness (I mean) Christ, are
made more lightsome and manifest. I say further that the scripture witnesses,
that the sacraments of the old testament and ours, are of the same force, in so
much that Paul calls them circumcised which are baptized, and them baptized
which are circumcised. And he also teaches, That our fathers did eat that
spiritual meat which we eat, and drank of that spiritual drink, that
is, the rock. But anon he adds, And that rock was Christ. The words of the
Apostle are well known, and are read in the 1. Cor. 10. The same Apostle in
the sesecond chapter to the Coloss. says, In Christ ye are complete (or made
perfect) in whom also ye are circumcised with circumcision made without
hands, by putting off the body of the flesh, subject to sin by the
circumcision of Christ, buried with him in baptism, etc.

What, I pray you, can be spoken more plainly? Circumcision made without
hands, is the circumcision of Christians, which is baptism. But in ye former
place of Paul to the Corinthians we must mark (as elsewhere I put you in mind)
that to be baptized into Moses, is not ye same, that it is to be baptized into
Christ. For to be baptized into Moses is all one, as if he had said, to be
baptized by Moses or thoroughe the ministry of Moses. For it is manifest that
Moses brought the people to GOD which were only committed to his charge.

In many places in Aurel. August. ye shall read the like, howsoever our
Augustine teac^eth that the Sacraments of the Jews and ours are al one.
adversaries do father upon Augustine, this difference between the sacraments
of the old law and ours, of their own bringing in. For he Lib. 2. cont.
literas Petil. cap. 27. says, The sacraments of the Jews were in out ward
tokens diverse from ours, but in the things signified they were equal and all
one. Also Tract. in Joan. 26. upon this place, He is the bread which came down
from heaven, he says, Manna did fignifie this bread: the altar of God
signified this bread. Those were sacraments. In signs they are diverse, but in
the thing signified equal. The like words thou may read Lib. 19. contra
Faustum Manichum, cap. 13. 16. 17. And again, Tract. in Joan 45. Before the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he came basely in the flesh, there
were just and righteous men, who did so believe in him then that was to come,
as we do believe in him now that is come. The times were changed, but so was
not faith. And so forth.

And anon, In diverse signs is all one faith: so in diverse signs as in diverse
words, because words change their soundes by times, and truly words are
nothing bu^ signs. For in that they signify they are words, take a way the
signification from the word, and it is a vain noise. Therefore all words are
significations. Did not these that ministered those signs in the old law,
believe those things which we no we believe were prophesied before hand by
them? No doubt they did believe them: but they believed they should come: and
we, that they are come.

Also upon the 77. Psalm. The same meat and drink, (says he) had they
in their Sacraments which we have in ours, but in signification the same, not
in likeness. For the self same Christ was figured to them in the rock, but
manifested to us in the flesh. But with them all God was not well pleased. All
verily did eat one spiritual meat, and drank one spiritual drink, that
is, which signified some spiritual thing: but in all of them God had no
delight. And whereas the sacraments were common to all, yet grace was not
common to all, which is the pithe of the sacraments. As even now at this day
faith is revealed, which then was hid, the founteine of regeneration is common
to all which are baptized in the name of the father, and of the son, and of
the holy Ghost, but the inward grace whereof they are sacraments, whereby the
members of Christ with their head are borne a new, is not common to all. Thus
far Augustine, who teaches that their signs or sacraments are not unequal
or bulike, which have the same faith and religion, but that all the difference
that is, rests in the diversity of the time, otherwise they differ not.

Now that I have made an end of the similitude and difference of the
Sacraments of the old and new testament, and that by occasion of a received
opinion, that the sacraments of the new law do confer or give grace of
themselves: let us also consider what manner of thing the same is.

And first touching the word Grace, I will give you these few things to note.
Grace is the favor and good Grace that it is.
will of GOD, wherewith God the father imbraceth us for Christ's sake,
purifyeth, justifies, and endueth us with his good gifts, and saves us. For
the writings of the Apostles do plainly call that (Grace) whereby we are
saved, and justified, or made righteous by faith in Jesus Christ. Of this Grace
it is written, I make not the Grace of God of no effect. For if righteousness
come by the Law, then Christ died in vain.

Of this Grace it is written, Christ unto us is beecome unprofitable, as many
as are justified by the law are fallen from Grace. Of this Grace it is
written, If it come of grace, then is it not of works, for else grace now is
no more grace. What, is not the son of GOD himself called The Grace and gift
of GOD? John 4. Titus 2. Cap.

Now to confer Grace, what is it else, than to give, or franckely and
freelye to bestow some thing on a man which he had not before. Therefore, if
the Sacraments do give Grace to the receyuers of them, then truly they give
those things which they signify, to them which had them not, I mean
Christ with all his gifts, that is to say, they make them pleasant and
acceptable unto GOD, they justify and save, yea, and that of themselves,
insomuche as they are said to have received virtue to sanctify from the
passion of Christ, and not to signify only or to help, to commend or to
further. Yea, and they also attribute the receiving of Grace to our work,
whereby Sacraments do not co^ferre or give grace
we receive the Sacrament. But how contrary this doctrine is to the truth of
the holy Prophets and Apostles, I will now declare.

It was an old error among the Jews, that Sacraments did justify. Hereof
comes it that the holy Prophets of GOD reasoning and rebuking the people of
God committed to their charge, yet sauouring of false opinions, cried, That
their labor which they bestowed upon their Ceremonies and sacrifices was in
vain: And that GOD is delighted with faithful obedience, with faith I say,
charity, innocence, and also with true godliness.

Among whom Jeremy says, Jeremy. 7
Thus says the Lord of hoastes, the GOD of Israel, Heap up your burnte
offeringes with your sacrifices, and eat the flesh: For when I brought your
fathers out of Egypt, I spoke no word unto them of burnt offeringes and
sacrifices: but this I commanded them, saying: Hearken and obey my voice, and
I will be your GOD, and ye shall be my people, so that ye walk in all the
ways which I have commanded you, that ye may prosper. The like place is in
Esaie the first Chapter. The Lord has not despised, neither Esai. 1.
have his holy Prophets contemned all sacrifices in general, since he him
self instituted them by Moses: but they sought to suppress and beat down
that false opinion, and vain confidence which they had in sacrifices. It is a
vain confidence and a false opinion, (to believe and think) that sacrifices
of themselves and for our works sake, do make us acceptable unto God. For
faith makes us acceptable unto God by the Messiah. And the Lord did not
institute sacraments or sacrifices, that being offered they might give grace,
or justify us, but to be witnesses of the grace of God, and that by them his
people might be kept and drawn in due order, from idols, and heathenish
worshippings, and ledd to Christ the high priest and only sacrifice (or
oblation) for the whole world. For they were certain scholinges or exercises,
as Paul proves, saying: The law was our scholemaister unto Christ, that we
should Galath. 3.
be justified through faith: but after that faith is come, we are no longer
under a scholemaister. Therefore the sacrifices of the old law did not give
grace to them that sacrificed, neither wrought they their justification, but
were tokens and testimonies that God does sanctify and justify, by and
through the sacrifice appointed before all worlds, the Messiah, I mean^, to
faith in whom they did, as it were a certain scholemaister by guiding us,
bring us.

And truly, when the Apostles preached the pure and sound doctrine of the The
error in the Apostolic church.
Gospel, that By the only grace of God in Christ the faithful are saved,
this ancient error of their elders had taken such deep root in the minds of
the Jews, that even they which had received Christ, stood nevertheless in
contention, y^ Christ was not able fully to sanctify and justify, without the
help of the Iewishe sacrifices. Against whom the Apostles disputing with
great gravity and inumcible power of y^ spirit, did plainly prove, that a
Christian without any observations of the ceremonial law, or help of any
works, even by the only mere, and free grace and mercy of God in Christ, is
sanctified, purified, justified and saved. Which undoubtedly is the healme (as
commonly is said) and stearne of the Evangelists and Apostles doctrine, which
who so denies, he has no part doubtless in the inheritance of Christ and his
Gospel. Neither is it obscure or doubtful which even now I have set forth in
these few words. For who is ignorant of that memorable dissension between
Acts. 15.
the chief Apostles of Christ Paul and Barnabas, kindled against those which
taught, Except the Christians were circumcised after the manner of Moses, they
could in no wise be saved? Against whom Peter makes this conclusion, That our
hearts are purified by faith, and that we which believe shall be saved by the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

True it is that the adversaries That grace is given freely and received by
faith.
would bring back again that which the Apostles abrogated and took away: but
in the mean while, this is also undoubtedly true, that the Apostles with no
other forceable engine more strongly battered (as it were) and beat down flat
to ground, their adversaries bulworke, in defense of sacraments y^ purify tha^
with this, That we which believe, shall be saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

And whereas in every place almost they add, Not by the law, not by
ceremonies, or other rituall obseruationes, do we think that they will
admit Sacraments to the partaking of such power and virtue, seeing they be
comprehended under rites and ceremonies, and so accounted? Christian faith
does attribute the grace of GOD, remission of sins, sanctification, and
justification, fully and wholely to the free mercy of God, and to the merit
of Christ's passion, yea, in such sort does Christian faith attribute these
spiritual benefits unto it, that beside it nothing at all is admitted to take
part with it.

Therefore whereas Lombard says, That sacraments have received power to
conferr or give grace by the merit of the passion of Christ, it is of his
own foarging. For as Christ gives not his glory to any, either saint, or
mortal man, much less to a creature without life: even so he that believes
to be fully justified by the death and resurrection of ye Lord, seeks no
further grace and righteousness in any other thing, than in Christ only, upon
whom he stays, whom also by faith he feels in his heart or mind already
to exercise his force by the holy Ghost. For hereunto perteyne those sayings
in the Gospel, Go in peace thy faith Luke. 7.
has saved thee. And also, He which John. 4.
drinks of this water shall thirst again, but whosoever shall drink of that
water which I shall give him shall never thirst, etc. To this pertains the
saying of Paul also, Therefore Romans 5.
being justified by faith, we are at peace with God thorough our Lord Jesus
Christ. By whom also we had an entrance by faith unto this grace wherein we
stand and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

I am not ignorant of the crafty Their santasy which feign a general and
special taith is here confuted.
sleightes of some, who imagine there is a certain general and also a
special faith. The general faith they call that whereby we believe that we
are truly justified by the death and resurrection of Christ: but that they
call a special faith, whereby we beeleeue that by the sacraments and by our
own work the gyfts of GOD are applied particularly to every one of us one by
one.

But to what purpose was it, being in a land where they might be fed with
Manna, to look back to the potage pottes, and (unsavory) leekes of Egypt?
What (I pray you) have Christians to do with the distinctio^s of subtle
sophisters? or how will they prove this distinction of theirs unto us? Verily
there is but one faith, and the same is no other in the use of the Sacraments
than it is without the use of them. Without the use of them we believe that we
are sanctified by the death and resurrection of Christ.

In baptism and the Lords supper we practice no other faith than whereby we
believe, that we are purged from our sins by the grace and mercy of Christ,
and that by his body given for us, and his blood shed for us, we are redeemed
from death, and become heirs of eternal life. Not the Sacraments, but faith
through the holy Ghost applies these things unto us: which thing all the
writings of the Apostles do witness, but such feigned gloses do obscure and
darken. To be short, there is one GOD and Savior of all, one Salvation, one
Redemption, and purging, one faith, whereby we receive Salvation offered unto
us of GOD in Christ through the holy Ghost. The same is declared, or
preached unto us in the word by the minister, and is represented, and sealed
by the Sacraments.

And now, who knows not that Paul the Apostle in all his writings only
labors to prove, that those that believe are justified by faith, in the
Lord Jesus, and not by any works?

Again, who is ignorant that the receiving, and celebration of sacraments,
are also counted among our works? Whereunto I will add this, that Sacraments
give not that which they have not themselves: but they have not grace, and
righteousness, and heavenly gifts: therefore they do not give them. But
Whether the grace of God be contained ^n the Sacraments.
hence springs up another disputation for us to handle: whether the grace
of GOD, and a certain heavenly power, be put in, or included in the
Sacraments, and as it were contained in them, so that from them it might be
conveyed into the receyuers.

The whole rabble of Priests and monks, as well in word as in deed have
bewrayed them selves that they think, That in the bare signs there is
heavenly grace included, yea, and that God himself is comprehended in them.

For from no other founteine sprang their careful disputations concerning That
the mouse eats, when it eats the Sacrament of the body of Christ. Pope
Innocent Libro quarto, De Sacramento altaris Capite vnde cimo, says,
Miraculously does the substance of bread return again, not that bread which
was turned into flesh: But it comes to pass, that in sted of it, other bread
is miraculously created, which bread is eaten, etc. Behold here is a certain
witty and miraculous kind of divinity. I pass over of purpose many other
which are of this kind.

And hereunto, that by crossinges, and certain secret words, gestures, and
breathings, they consecrate the water of baptism, all which things they
beautify with the name of blessinge. And among other things These are soung
in the Easter holy days at their co^s^cration of baptism.
they sing thus: God by the secret mixture of his light make fruitful this
water prepared to regenerate men with-all, that being sanctified, and borne
again of the immaculate womb of the heavenly founteine, it may come forth a
new creature. Let this holy and innocent creature be free from all the
assaults of the adversary. Let him not entrap it in his snare. Let it become
a living founteine, a regenerating water, a purifying river, that all that are
dipped in this wholesome lauer, the holy ghost working in the^, may atteine to
the excellency of perfect purificatio^. Wherefore o thou creature of water, I
bless (or conjure) thee, by the living God, by the true God, by the holy god,
by the god which in the beginning feparated thee by his word from the dry
land, etc. Again breathing thrice on the water he forthwith utters these
words. Thou O Lord bless with thy word these waters which make request unto
thee, that beside their natural cleannes which in washing they may give to our
bodies, they may also be effectual to purify our souls. Then the priest
takes a burning wax candle, and puts it thrice in the water consecrated to
baptism, saying: Let the power of the holy Ghost come down into this
plentiful founteine. He adds, And let it make the whole substance of this
water fruitful with the fruit of regeneration. And so forth.

All these things they understand and expound to be spoken simply, and
without tropes or figures: which evidently enough declares what these men
attribute to holy or consecrated water, and how they think that in the signs
the holy things themselves are contained. About this matter Bonauentura has
woonderfully busied himself, who in his writing In 4. Magistri Distinct. 1.
Quest. 3. among other things at the length says, We must not say, by
Bonauentura says that grace is not contained in the Sacra^ents.
any means, that grace is contained substantially in the Sacraments, as water
in a vessel, or as a medicine in a box: yea, to understand it so, it is
erroneous. But they are said to contein grace, in that they signify grace,
and because, unless there be a want on the part of the receiver, grace is
always given in them, so that ye must understand, that grace is in the soul,
and not in the visible signs. For this cause they are called also vessels of
grace. They may be also called vessels after another manner. Because as that
which is in a vessel, is no part of it, neither comes of it, and yet
nevertheless is drawn out of it: so grace comes neither of, nor by the
Sacraments, but springs from the eternal founteine, and is drawn out from
thence by the soul in the sacraments. And as a man when he would have liquor,
goes straight to the vessel: so he that seeks after the liquor of grace,
and has it not, must have recourse to the sacraments. Thus far Bonauentura,
who rightly referred grace unto GOD, the founteine of all good things. I would
he had also more purely and simply set down the rest.

He also said truly, that the soul of man was the seat, and receptacle of
grace, and of the gifts of GOD, and not things without The seat of the grace
of God.
sense. For the holy Scripture teaches every where, that the mind of man,
not any Element, or whatsoever is forged by man's devise, is the mansion place
of the grace of god, and that it is not to be sought for, or worshipped, as
included in any insensible thing. If the heaven of heavens (says Solomon) be
not able to contain 3. Reg. 8.
thee, how should then this house do it that I have builded? Whereunto the
most constant martyr of Christ Stephan alluding, says, He that is highest of
all dwells Acts. 7.
not in Temples made with hands, as says the prophet: Heaven is my seat,
and earth is my footestoole. What house will ye build for me says the
Lord, or which is the place of my rest? Has not my hand made all these
things? Which, that great Apostle of Christ Paul following, says, God that
made the Acts. 17.
world, and all that are in it, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth,
dwells not in temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's
hands, as though he needed of any thing, seeing he himself gives to all
life and breath, and all things, etc.

Whereupon Christ him self in the Gospel speaks more expressly, The hour
comes, when ye shall John. 4.
neither in this mounteine, neither at Jerusalem worship the Father: But the
hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the father in
spirit and truth. The faithful therefore do lift up the eyes of their mind
from earthly and visible things unto heavenly, whereupon our godly
forefathers, when they celebrated the Lords supper heard yt saying repeated or
sou^g unto them most agreeable to such holy mysterics, Lift up your hands,
all the people answearing together, We lift them up unto the Lord. Does not
the very gross absurdity of the thing plainly prove, that grace is not
contained in the signs? For if by grace you understand the favor and good
will of God, if pardon and forgiveness of sin, cleansing I say and
justifying of the believers, if finally the gifts and graces of the spirit,
what I pray you can be imagined more absurd, and senseless, than that such
excellent things should be kept enclosed in water, bread, and wine? The
signs truly have no need of grace, nor aany pardon and forgiveness of
sins.

To what purpose then should grace be contained within Sacraments? What
profit, I pray you, will redound unto men? Or who knows not that all the
institutions GOD were ordained for the commodity of man? Or shall we say that
grace is therefore kept included within the Sacraments, that from thence it
might be conveyed unto us by channels? But the scripture speaks not after that
manner. For grace, as has been often now repeated, is the favor and good
will of GOD: whereby he him self, not by sensible matters, but of his own
accord, and thoroughe his power and might is brought unto us. These things
are spiritual, and therefore are brought to pass by the gift and mediation of
the holy Ghost. GOD is joined unto us by his spirit, and we are coupled to him
by faith, thorough the gift of the holy Ghost, which thing in the writings
of the Evangelists and Apostles is every where to be seen.

Moreover the words of the Canon of the counsel of Nice, are not to be
understood after such a gross The canon of the Nicene counsel touching
baptism.
and rude manner: Our baptism is not to be considered with the bodily eyes,
but with the eyes of the mind. Thou see water, weygh the heavenly force
which lies hid in the water, etc. For it is a Sacramental speech, which
truly every body at that time understood: as also at this day to us it is no
new nor hard kind of speaking, to say, that in the seal there is faith and
truth, in a marriage ring the faith and love of wedlock, in a Scepter and
crown the kings authority. For no man is so foolish that by reason of the
kind of speeches he will affirm that the things them selves are contained
and enclosed in the signs: every man knows this kind and manner of speech.

To this matter also apperteineth The A^ostles b^ptised in water not
consecrated.
that John the Baptist baptized in the river Iordane, and that the Apostles
also themselves baptized with water neither consecrated nor prepared with any
inchauntmentes, breathinges, or crossinges, that it might receive the grace of
God into it, and make them that are baptized partakers thereof. The Ethiopian
in the Acts of the Apostles Acts. 8.
saw a founteine not mingled with Dyle, neither consecrated with any holy
charms, neither moreover prepared with any breathinges, nor putting in of wax
candles, nor pictures of crosses, yet nevertheless he said to Philip the
Apostle, See, here is water, what does let me to be baptized? But Philip
required faith of him in the Lord Jesus, and upon his confession, he forthwith
baptized him, no consecration of the founteine first provided for, by the
which forsoothe he might call down the grace of the holy Ghost, and the
power of regeneration into the water, and forthwith might apply it to the
purifying of the Ethiopian.

And if so be we proceed to include the grace of GOD within the To include
grace in the sacraments causes idolatry.
Elements, and the things themselves within the signs by the which they are
represented, who sees not with how great danger we shall do the same,
especially among the simple sort? For unto those we shall give occasion of
idolatry, and to cleave unto the visible signs: of whom also they will
require and ask that, which ought to be asked of God the author of all
goodness, with minds lifted up into heaven. For where as it is objected that
by a certain heavenly covenant it is so appointed by GOD, that sacraments
should have grace in themselves, and should from themselves as by pypes convey
abroad the water of grace, unto those that are thirsty, that is alleged
without warrant of the Scripture, and is repugnaunt unto true religion. As by
those things which have hitherto been handeled and disputed of, does, as
we think, sufficiently appear, whereunto also we add this.

The holy and elect people of God are not then first of all partakers The
god^y are first justified and received into favor before the^ be made partakers
of the sacraments.
of the first grace of God, and Heavenly gifts, when they receive the
Sacraments. For they enjoy the things before they be partakers of the signs.
For it is plainly declared unto us, that Abraham our father was justified
before he was circumcised. And who gathers thereby yt justification was not
exhibited and given unto him by the sacrament of circumcision: but rather that
that righteousness which he by faith before possessed, was by the Sacrament
sealed and confirmed unto him? And moreover who will not thereof gather that we
which are the sons of Abraham, are after no other manner justified, than it
appears that our father was justified, and that our sacraments work no
further in us than they did in him? especially since the nature of the
sacraments of the people of the old Testamente, and ours is all one. Whereof
I will speak a little afterward more at large, when I expound the place of
the Apostle in the fourth to the Romans. The Eunuche of whom I spoke even now
out of the Acts, as he iournyed and saw water, he said to Philip, See, here
is water, what lets Acts. 2.
me to be baptized? Philip said unto him: If thou beleeuest with all thy heart
thou may, And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the
son of God. Afterward immediately it follows, And they went down both into
the water, and he baptized him. The Eunuche (says the Evangelist) believed
with all his heart that is to to say, truly, and without dissimulation. Now let
us see what the Scripture says, concerning such a faith. S. John the Apostle
and Evangelist says, Who so ever believes 1. John. ^.
that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God. He again says, Whosoever confesses
1. John. 4.
that Jesus is the son of God, in him dwells God, and he in GOD, Also Paul
that elect vessel and doctor of the Gentiles says, If thou shall knowledge
with thy mouth the Romans 10.
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God raised him from the dead,
thou shall be saved. And again, Saint John says in his Epistle, He that
believes on the son 1. John. 5.
of God has the witness in him self. And this is the record, how that God
has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son, He that has
the Son has life, and he that has not the Son, has not life. Briefly
of all these things this we gather.

The Eunuche believed before he received baptism: therefore before he received
baptism, he was borne of God, in whom he dwelled, and God in him, he was
just and acceptable in the sight of God, and moreover he had also life in
himself, and therefore the baptism which followed did not give that to ye
Eunuch which he had before: but it became unto him a testimony of the truth,
and a seal of the righteousness which came by faith, and there withal to
assure unto him the continuance and increase of God his gifts. After the same
manner we read of Cornelius the Centurion Acts. 10.
in the same Acts of the Apostles, that he believing the preaching of the
Apostle Peter received ye holy Ghost also in a visible shape, as the Apostles
did at Jerusalem in the day of Pentecoste. And that Peter when he knew that
thing, said, Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized which
have received the holy Ghost as well as we?

For as much therefore as Cornelius with his household received the holy Ghost
before they were baptized, it is manifest that he did not obtain the holy
Ghost as given first by baptism, or with baptism. Again, we read in the
Acts of the Acts, 2.
Apostles, They that gladly received the word of Peter were baptized.
Therefore before they were baptized of Peter, they had obtained the grace of
God through faith. For why I pray you do we baptize our Infantes? Is it
because they believe with their heart, and confess with their mouth? I think
not. Do we not therefore baptize them, because God has commanded them to be
brought unto him? because he has promised that he will be our GOD, and the GOD
of our seed after us? To be short, because we believe that GOD of his mere
grace, and mercy, in the blood of Jesus Christ, has cleansed, and adopted
them, and appointed them to be heirs of eternal life? We therefore baptising
Infantes for these causes, do abundantly testify that there is not first
given unto the^ in baptism, but that there is sealed and confirmed, which
they had before. Let us also join unto these things, a testimony of the
Supper of the Lord.

The Apostle teaching how the Godly should prepare them selves to come to the
Lords Table, says, Let a man prove him self, and so 1 Cor. 11.
let him eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup.

But to examine or prove signifies to search, as much as lies in man, the
heart, or mind, and thoroughe diligent inquisition to sifte ones conscience.
And GOD is said, ^o prove our nartes. And the same Apostle wills us, To
prove what is the good and acceptable will of God. But this proof cannot be
Romans 12.
without knowledge and judgment: and y^ knowledge and judgment of Christians
is faith: therefore whosoever proves himself before he come to the Supper,
has faith. If he have faith, then he wants not those things yt are coupled
with faith: and therefore in the Supper, those heavenly benefits are not
first received, but thanks are given for those that are received. I have
hereby showed and proved, I suppose, that Sacraments do not confer grace.
They object, I know well enoughe To euacuate the sacraments and convince God of
a lie.
against these things, (who are persuaded that sacraments give grace, and
contain included within them the things signified) that we do euacuate and
make of none effect the Sacraments, and that we teach that the faithful
receive in them, or by them nothing, but bare water, and bare bread, and wine:
and that by that means GOD by us is accused of falshode, and lying. We
briefly answer, If they set void, or empty things (as I may so say,)
against full things, so as they be void, or empty, which have not the
things themselves included in them: truly I had rather confess them to be
void, than full. But if they call them void or empty, and mean profane, or
unholy things, that is to say, which differ nothing from profane signs: if
by bare they understand things of no force, we openly profess that we have
sacraments which are holy, and not profane: effectual, and not without
force: garnished from above not naked: and therefore full, not void or empty.

For they are holy things and not profane, because they are instituted of
GOD, and for godly men, not for profane persons. They are effectual and not
without force: for in the Church with the godly, and faithful, they work the
same effect and end whereunto they were ordained of God. Whereof more
hereafter. They are also worthily said to be beautified, and adorned by God,
and not bare things: which have the word GOD it self, wherewith they are
most beautifully adorned. And therefore also they are full, and not empty
sacraments, because they have those things which make a perfect Sacrament.

We will repeat here the parables, or similitudes, (which above also
entreating of consecration, for Sacraments are holy and not profane things.
the most part we did allege) to the intent to give more clear light unto
this treatise. All the while that wax for confirmation and witness sake is
not hanged on letters patents or other public instruments it is common,
void, and bare wax, that is to say, nothing else but wax, but when it is
sealed and fastened to those public instruments, it is now neither void nor
bare wax. For it is called ye testimony of the truth. The arms of a prince
or of any common wealth, if it be painted in a window, or on a wall, it is a
bare sign: but if the same be fastened to writings, or set to letters, there
is great difference between this and the other. For now it declares and
witnesses the will of the prince, or common wealth: therefore it has this
estimation among all men, that who ^o de^aceth it, or contrary to the will of
the Prince and common weal, does set it to any other charter is reputed
guilty of counterfetting, and of high treason. A stone when as yet it is not
set for a mark, or bound of fields, it is a bare and void, yt is to say a
common stone, which to tread under foot or to remove out of his place, is no
offense: but being set to part the bounds of fields, it is no more a void or
bare stone, but a witness of lawful division and just possession, which to move
out of his place is committed an heinous offense.

And therefore water, bread, and wine, without the institution and use of the
Sacrament, are nothing else but water bread and wine: but being used in the
celebration of the sacrament, they differ very far from yt they were before,
and are sacraments signed of Christ by his word, and ordained for the salvation
of the faithful. Therefore they that are partakers of the sacraments do not
recetue nothing, as these say, unless the institution of god be to be esteemed
as nothing.

He instituted sacraments to be testimonies of his grace, and seals of the
truth of his promises. Which thing I will anon declare more at large.
Therefore as God is true, and cannot lie: so the seals of his promises are
most true. He has promised that he will be ours, and that in Christ he will
communicate himself unto us with all his gifts: He therefore of a certeintie
shows himself such an one, and does communicate him self unto us:
Although he do it not now first of all when we receive the Saramentes, as
it he should power out of himself into us by them as it were by conduite
pypes, and were included in them as in vessels, for immediately upon the
beginning of the world he promised his grace unto us, as soon as we first
believed he began to show him self such an one unto us, and does show him self
more and more through the whole course of our life: we receive him, and
comprehend him spiritually and by faith. Therefore when we are partakers of the
Sacraments, he proceeds to communicate him self unto us after a special
manner, that is to say, proper unto sacraments, and so we, which before were
made partakers of Christ, do continue and strengthen that communion or
fellowship spiritually and by faith, in the celebration of the Sacraments,
outwardly sealing the same unto our selves by the signs

Now, who will hereafter say, that they which think thus of the Sacraments,
and are by this faith partakers of them, have nothing but empty shows, and
receive nothing in them: Albeit we neither include grace in the signs, neither
derive it from them? But if any man have any other opinion of God and his
ordinances, that shall no more be falsehode in GOD, or accuse him of untruth,
than if any one should charge a just man with a lie, because he perfourmeth
not that which he looked for: when in the mean time, this man promised not
the thing which he looked for: but he through his corrupt, and false
opinion, has dreamed that it was promised unto him.

And thus far by occasion I have showed what agreement and difference there is
between the Sacraments of the old and new Testament, and that our Sacraments
do neither confer nor contain grace. Now we return to that which we
began, I mean to the principal ground of this disputation, that forasmuch
as we have taught what they do not work, so now at length we may set down
what they work in very deed, that is to say, expounding what is the power,
end, and lawful use of the Sacrament, whereunto they are ordained of God.
We handled indeed the place of the causes, why they were instituted in the
beginning almost of the 6. Sermon. But now I will ad other things which
perteine to this purpose, and entreat of each thing by it self, more fully
and at large.

The chief end of sacraments is this, that they are testimonies to confirm
Sacraments are witnesses of: the truth.
the truth, by which the Lord in his Church, even visibly does testify that
the things now uttered by preaching of the Gospel, and by the promises assured
to the faithful from the beginning of the world, are in every point so brought
to pass, and are so certainly true, as they are declared and promised in the
word of truth.

Even so Baptism is the heavenly and public witness in the Church of
Christ, whereby the Lord testifies that it is he which receives men
freely into favor, and which cleanses from all blemishes, and to be short,
makes us partakers and heirs of all his goodness. For after the same manner
Circumcision in times past, was a public and heavenly testimony, that it is
God that purges and adopteth us. For therefore Moses says Deu 30. The Lord
thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou may
love the Lord thy GOD with all thy heart etc.

After the self same manner, the Lord him self instituting the holy supper
in his Church, by the present signs does openly bear witness, that his
body was certeinely given for us, and his blood truly shedd for the remission
of our sins: that he also is that living food that feeds us to eternal
life. Wherefore we read in Chrysostom. his 83. Homily upon Matthew in these
words. As in the old law, so in the same manner has he here left with us
a memory of the mysteries, stopping and bridling hereby the mouths of
heretics. For when they say: Whereby appears it that Christ was offered,
and many other mysteries? Then we alleging these things, do thereby stop
their mouths. For if Jesus be not dead, whose representation or sign is this
sacrifice. Thus far he. You perceive, I suppose, how this writer does bring
against heretics the Sacrament of the super for the testimony of truth, that
is to say, of the lords true death.

Wherefore as the Gospel is called The gospel is a witness.
a witness, and the Preachers of the Gospel witnesses, even so we call
sacraments witnesses of the same truth, which though they be dumb, yet
nevertheless are visible, after which name S. August. calls them Visible
words. For the preaching of the Gospel, consisting of words heard with the
ears, is a speaking witness: but sacraments which consist of signs, and are
seen with the eyes, are speechless witnesses, and as it were remnauntes and
remembraunces of the preaching of the gospel Yea, sacraments were instituted by
God, to that end that they might Sacraments do visibly confirm the good will of
god to us ward.
visiblie confirm unto us the ready good will of GOD toward us, and also the
preaching of the Gospel and all the promises of life and salvation, and that
they should be as it were seals, set and fixed to the Gospel and promises
made by God, which might testify and confirm, that faith in Christ is true
righteousness.

That which I have said, I will confirm by the writings of the Apostles.
But I taught a little before that there is allone ground of the sacraments of
the old Testament and of the new, a few things only excepted, so that now by
very good right by the comparing of both together, we may estimate and utter
what the force and use of our Sacraments is. Paul therefore to the Romans 4.
chap. says, We say that faith was imputed Romans 4.
to Abraham for righteousness, how was it then imputed? When he was
circumcised, or when he was uncircumcised? Not when he was circumcised, but
when he was uncircumcised, after he received the sign of circumcision, as
the seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had when he was
uncircumcised, that he should be the father of all the^ that believe, not
being circumcised, that righteousness might de imputed unto them also, and the
father of circumcision, not unto them only which are of the circumcised, but
unto them also that walk in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham,
which he had when he was uncircumcised. All these are Paul's words. Among which
first of all some words are meet to be expounded: then we must seek after the
sense and meaning of the Apostles words: and last of all we must apply them to
our purpose touching the sacrament.

The Apostle here uses two words, Sacraments are seals, and where unto
seals do serve.
that is to say, The Sign and The seal. Signum the word sign is more
general and stretches very far, but a seal is a word yt properly belongs
unto sacraments which are seals and confirmatio^s. For all signs seal not.
For some by fignificatio^ only do accomplish their duty. But (...) properly
is to seal for assurance and confirmation sake of faith or credit, wherefore
(...) is a seal which is set to, to keep and confirm our faith and promise,
and to be without all danger of deceipte. And here, as else where very often,
the Lord does imitate the manner of men. For we men are wont by setting to our
seals, to confirm our writings, couenauntes, and faithful promises, which we
before had made by word. And that this has always been the cause of the
instituting and use of seals, appears plainly by these testimonies of the
Scriptures.

When the children of Israel under Ezra made a covenant with the Lord, by and
by they set down their covenant in writing, and seal the writing to be a
testimony of the truth, as in Nehem. the 9. chap. and Nehe. 9.
Hag. the 2. chapter thou may read. I will take thee to my servant
Zorobabel, Hag 2.
thou son of Salathiel (says the Lord) and will make thee as a sign or
sealing ring, for I have chose^ thee. As if he had said, All me^ shall
certeinlie learn, that in the son of Salathiel y^ continuance of the
posterity of the Messiah does consiste and remain. ^ere. 22.


Thus writes Jeremy chap. 22. As truly as I live says the Lord, if
Chonenias the son of Iohoakim king of Judah wear the signet or seal on my
right hand, yet will I pluck thee thence, which is as much as if he had
said, Though thou were he in whom I will keep my promises, yet shall thou
be ledd captive into Babylon. To this agrees that of Matthew written of the
Jews. So they went and made the Sepulcher sure, and sealed the stone, without
doubt, Matthew. 27.
against deceiptfull practices they appointed a watch. It appears therefore
by these testimonies, where to the use of seals serves.

These things being thus declared, let us now diligently search The place
of Paul Romans 4. is expounded, and he received a sign of the circumcision. etc.
out the counsel and meaning of the Apostles words. Paul shows that
justification happens unto men, by the power and virtue of no works, of no
ceremonies or sacraments, but by the only merit of Christ through faith. To
prove this he brings the example of Abraham of whom the Scripture has
pronounced, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness. Thence he gathers that Abraham was justified by faith: yea,
that that was imputed unto him for righteousness. Where both by the word or
force of imputation, and by the whole sentence of Moses he does most strongly
reason, showing that through grace, righteousness is imputed by faith.
Whereunto he joins also a testimony out of David touching righteousness
by imputatio^. I handled that place in the first Sermon of the fourth Decade.

Then he returns again to the example of Abraham, and applies to his
purpose that place alleged out of Genesis, waying the circumstaunces of the
manner and time of his justification, and says, How was it the^ imputed? When
he was circumcised, or when he was uncircumcised? Not when he was circumcised,
but when he was uncircumcised. Which things verily are playner than that
they require any exposition. But because the Jew might object, Why then the
institution and use of circumcision was of no force, but void, unprofitable,
and vain: For if Abraham were justified before he was circumcised, what could
circumcision profit him further? And if it brought nothing, surely it was
superfluous and unprofitable.

Paul preventing that objection, makes answer, And he received (says he)
the sign of circumcision as the seal of the righteousness of faith. etc.
Circumcision (says he) was neither void nor unprofitable. For albeit it
justify not, neither cleanse, nor apply the gifts of GOD, yet it follows
not therefore that there is no further use of it. For it has an other end. For
he received the sign of circumcision for a certain seal of the
righteousness of faith, that is to say, God instituted circumcision that it
should be a seal to ratify and confirm, yea and also visibly to testify,
that faith is righteousness, and that men are justified through faith, I say
in such sort, as faith is also imputed unto them for righteousness, as it was
imputed unto Abraham. For it follows: That he might be the Father of all
that believe, though they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be
imputed unto them also. And so forth.

And although these things be more, clear than the daylight, yet I will
endeavor further to open the same by a parable. For suppose that a King The
matter is made ^laine by 1 Parable.
of his favor and mere liberality, would entertain some servant into his
court, yea and make him partaker of all his goods, and moreover would extend
this benefit unto the Children and posterity also of him whom he had
adopted, and would immediately command that that couenaunte, privilege, and
favor granted by lively words, should also be put in writing, which he might
confirm by setting to his seal: to the end that might be to his posterity a
sure testimony against all gainsayers, that the same favor and adoption does
perteine to them also, and that the Prince would continue his good and
favorable kindenes unto the posterity of him whom he had adopted, if they
also continue faithful unto their Prince. For even after the same manner
almighty God, the king of Kings, and most bountiful of all Princes, freely
and not by any merit of ours going before, chooses Abraham upon whom he
bestows innumerable benefits, and unto whom he offers a couenaunte and
participation of all goodness, and not unto him only, but to all his
posterity also, saying, I the almighty God will be thy God, and the GOD of thy
seed after thee, I will bless thee and thy seed, and in thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed. He sanctified also this privilege,
confirming it with an oath, and by and by commands to deliver the same unto
their children, as it were from hand to hand instead of writing, and afterward
wills his servants the prophets to set it down in writing, and last of all
he him self (by instituting Circumcision) now as it were setting to his seal
to the letters patents or Charter, would have it confirmed and ratified to
them that should come after, to the end they might certainly know, that that
also perteined unto them.

Where notwithstanding it seems Sacraments have a more effectual force than
any sealed chancers.
this must not be dissembled of us, that Sacraments have a greater and more
effectual force than any sealed Charters can have. For privileges which
princes give, are written in parchmente, and their seals are set to parchement
written: but God imprinteth his seal into ye very bodies of those that are
his. For he caused Circumcision to be on the privy member of man, wherebye
issue is raised, increased, and continued, that as a mark printed in the very
bodies, it might more than seal and witness, that the blessing and partaking
of all good things perteyneth to the circumcised, if they abide faithful to the
Lord God entered into league with men. And therefore very significantly is
Circumcision called of Paul, not, The seal of righteousness, but, The seal of
righteousness of faith, that is, a ratifying and assurance that faith is
righteousness, that it is faith whereby we are justified, that righteousness
is due to them that believe, that God assuredly will bless the faithful, and
impute faith unto them for righteousness, as he also imputed unto Abraham.

Now since Sacraments have the like reason, we may apply these things How
bap^isme seals.
to our Sacraments. Christ therefore the anointed of the Lord, after he had
by his guiltless and undeserved death redeemed the world from the power of
Satan, and being now ready to ascend into heaven to the father, he called
his Disciples about him, and said, Go into the Mark. 16.
whole world, and preach the Gospel to all creatures, he that shall believe
and be baptized, etc.

The preaching of the Gospel does lay open and abroad, the great, the
precious, the healthful, the lively, the bountiful, the royal, and divine
privilege, that of the children of the devil, we are made the children of God,
the heirs (I say) of GOD, and ioynte-heires with Christ, who by the sheding
of his blond has purchased for us this inestimable salvation.

From this grace of God none is excluded: but he which through disobedience, by
his own corruption and fault, does exclude himself. For touching the children
and infants of the believers, the Lord in the gospel pronounces, saying,
Suffer the young Mark. 10
children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of
God. And again, Verily, Matthew. 18.
I say unto you, except ye turn and become as little children, ye shall not
enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Who so shall receive such a little child in
my name, receives me. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones
for I say unto you that in Heaven, their angels do always behold the face of
my Father which is in Heaven. etc.

Neither is it likely, now Christ is come, that God is more unmerciful then he
was before he came into the world. But then he said, I will be thy God and
the GOD of thy seed after thee. That therefore is now of more force, since
the Lord is come to seek and save that which was lost: and to be short, to
power forth most liberallye his grace and good gifts upon all flesh.
Wherefore that royal, ample, and divine privilege, is first by the very
preaching of our Lord Christ, and then by the doctrine of his Apostles
revealed unto the world, and afterward, the Lord so commaundinge, the same
privilege was setdowne of the Apostles and Evangelists in writing. Now the
Lord him self added this sacrament as a sign and seal unto his preaching,
and to the Scripture, ordayning Baptism in the place of Circumcision, the
which, because it was a bloody thing, and to conclude, a sign of the blessed
seed, which was to come, which then was revealed, ought to be abrogated. And
Baptism it self also succeeding circumcision, is also a seal of the
righteousness of faith, an evidence and sealed charter, that God does
assuredly cleanse us, and make us heirs of eternal life, and that the whole
grace of Baptism perteyneth to them that are baptized, if they stand steadfast
in true faith.

But (thou will say) the Infantes of Christians which are to be baptized
believe not. I grant. No Infantes which believe not ^re baptized.
more did the Infants of the Jews believe, which nevertheless were
circumcised, and were in league with God, and made partakers of all good
gifts: so that true godliness bids us attribute the same to our Infantes.
When the ofspringe of the Jews waxed in age, and did wickedlie transgress:
they fell from the covenant of God. So likewise the infantes of the
Christians, when they come to age, and commit wickedness, do fall from the
grace of the Gospel: yet are they received again by faithful repentance
into the same grace from whence they fell.

But to our purpose. Baptism the seal of the righteousness of faith, is not
set to parchmente, or to the writing of the Gospel: but it is applied to the
very bodies of the Children of God, and is as it were marked, and imprinted in
them. For we are who^^e dipped with our bodies, or wholly sprinkled with the
water of Baptism, which truly is a visible sealing, confirming that the true
God is our God which sanctifies and purifieth, and that purification, and
every good gift of God, is due unto us as the heirs of God. And to the
setting forth of this matter pertayneth that euidente place of Paul, which in
the Epistle to the Galathians is thus read. For ye are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus. For all ye that are baptized have put on Christ. And
so forth.

The supper of the Lord has the How the lords supper is a seal of the
righteous^es of faith.
like reason, which also is a seal of the righteousness of faith. For the
son of God dyed, he by his death redeemed the believers, also his body and
blood is our meat and drinck unto eternal life. And truly this singular and
excellent privilege given unto the faithful, is declared and set down in
writing by the Apostles* but it is consecrated and sealed of the Lord him
self by the Sacrament of his body and blood, whereby he seals us an
assurance that we are justified by faith in the death of Christ, and that all
the good gifts of Christ are communicated unto us, and that we are fedd and
strengthened by Christ.

Moreover, that the sealing might be the more lively, he sets not the seal
to written parchmente, but it is brought and also given to be eaten of our
bodies, that we might have a witness within our selves, that Christ with all
his gifts is wholly ours, if we persevere in faith. For the Lord him self in
the Gospel, says, He that eats me shall live, by Ioh. 6.
the means of me. But he eats which believes. For in the same place the
Lord says, I am the bread of life, He that comes to me shall not hunger,
and he that believes in me shall never thirst. Hereby we gather the sum of
the whole matter, that the Sacraments do seal up the promises of God and
the gospel, and that therefore so often mention is made in the Church of
evidences or letters patents, or charters, and seals of the preaching of the
gospel, and the promises of God, and that the whole mystery of our salvation
is renewed and continued as often as those actions instituted of God (I mean
Sacraments) are celebrated in the Church. Hitherto I think does that belong,
which the faithful minister of Christ Zuinglius upon the Sacraments has
delivered in these words. Zuinglius of the Sacraments which certify and
bear witness.
Sacraments bear witness of a thing that has been done. For all laws,
customs, and ordinances, do show their authors and beginnings. Therefore
Baptism since it sets forth in signification the death and resurrection of
Christ, it must needs be that those things were done indeed. These words
are to be found In Expositione sidei ad regem Christianu^. The same Zuinglius,
Ad principes Germaniae contra Eggium, says, When that noble man taking his
journey in to a far country, distributing bread and wine, did far more
lively and peculiarly give him self unto us, when he said, This is my body,
than if he had said, This is a token or sign of my bodide, although he took
away his natural body and carried it into Heaven: Yet nevertheless by these
words, in that apperteyneth to faith and grace, he gives him self wholly, as
if he had said: Now I go to dye for you, and after a while will wholly
depart from hence. But I will not have you doubt of my love and care to you
ward. How much soever I am, I am altogether yours. In witness whereof I
commend unto you a sign of this my betraying and testament, to the intent you
might maintain the memory of me, and of my benefits: that when ye see this
bread and this cupp ministered unto you, in the supper of my remembrance, ye
may be no otherwise mindful of me, that is, that I delivered up my self, for
you, than if you should see me with your eyes face to face, as ye now se me
both to eat with you, and by and by shall see me to be led from you to dye
for you. Hitherto I have recited Zuinglius his words, and anon I will rehearse
other words of his again, not that I stay my self upon them, or upon any
testimonies of man, but that it may be made manifest that this man did not (as
some have falsely thought) contemn the sacraments

In the mean while we acknowledge these testimonies of the holy The holy
ghost does properly s^ale.
Scripture. And God it is which stablisheth us with you in christ, and has
anointed us: which has also sealed us, and has given the earnest of the
spirit in our hearts. 2. Cor. 1. And also, After ye believed ye were sealed
with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance,
unto the redemption of the purchased possession unto the praise of his glory.
Ephesi. 1. verse. 13. And again, Grieve not the holy spirit of GOD, by whom
ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. Ephe. 4.

We acknowledge the truth of God to be sufficiently sound, true, and certain
of it self, neither can we from elsewhere have a better confirmation than
out of it. For if our mind be not confirmed, one every side it wauereth. God
therefore frames him self according to our weakness, and by his Sacraments,
as much as may be, does as it were uphold us, yet so, that we refer all
the benefit of our confirmation to the spirit it self, and to his operation,
rather than to ye element. Wherefore, as we attribute Confirmation to doctrine
and to teachers, even so do we Sealing to the Sacraments.

We read in the Acts of the Apostles, Chapter 14, and 18. The Apostles
returned and strengthened the Disciples souls again, and exhorted them to
continue in the faith. Again in the first to the Thes^a. 3. We have sent
(says Paul) Timotheus our Brother and minister of GOD, to confirm or
stablish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith. Nevertheless,
unless the inward force of the spirit do draw and quicken the hearts of
the hearers, the outward persuasion of the teacher, though it be never so
forceable and vehe^ment shall nothing avail: but if the holy spirit do show
forth his might, and work with the word of the Preacher, the souls of the
hearers are most mightily strengthened. And so it stands with the mystery
of the Sacrament. For if the inward anuoynting and fealing of the holy Ghost
be wanting, the outward action will be counted but a toy to the unbelievers,
neither works the sealing of the Sacraments any thing at all: but when
faith, the gift of the holy Ghost, goes before, the sealing of the
Sacraments is very strong and sure. Some also have said very well, I four
minds be destitute of the holy Ghost, the Sacraments do no more profit
us, then it does a blind man to look upon the bright beams of the Sun.
But if our eyes be opened through the illumination of the spirit, they are
wonderfully delighted with the heavenly sight of the Sacraments. And Zwinglius
in Libello ad principes Germanil says, It does not offend us, though all
those things which the holy Ghost works, be referred to the external
Sacrament, as long as we understand them to be spoken figuratively, as the
fathers spoke. Thus says he.

And although Sacraments seal The sacraments seal nothing to the unbelievers.
not the promises to the unbelievers because they mistrust the^; yet
nevertheless ye Sacraments were instituted of God, that they might seal. The
wicked and ungodly person receives not the doctrine of the Gospel, yet no man
therefore does gather that this doctrine was not instituted of God to teach.
Some one there is that will not give credit to a sealed Charter, yet does it
not therefore follow, that the sealed charter serves not to assure or confirm
ones faith. Therefore since the doctrine of the Gospel works nothing in him
yt is obstinate and rebellious, since the sacraments do nothing move him that
is profane and unholy, neither profit the wicked by any manner means, that
comes not to pass through him that did institute them, or through the word
and sacraments, but through the default of the unbeliever. In the mean time of
them selves they are instituted to profit and to seal, and to have their holy
use and end in the holy. And thus much have I said of yt principal virtue of
sacraments, yt they be testimonies of gods truth, and of his good will toward
us, and are seals of all yt promises of the gospel, sealing and assuring us yt
faith is righteousness, and that all the good gifts of Christ perteine to
them that believe. There Sacraments represente^ things.
is also another end and use of sacramental signs, yt is to say, that they
signify, and in signifying do represent, which were superfluous to prove by
many testimonies, since it is most manifest to all men, at least by that which
we spoke before. Now to signify, is to show, and by signs and tokens to
declare and point out any thing. But to represent, does not signify (as some
dream) to bring, to give, or make that now again corporally present, which
sometime was taken away, but to resemble it in likeness, and by a certain
imitation, and to call it back again to mind, and to set it as it were before
our eyes. For we say that a son does represent or resemble his father, when
after a sort he expresses his father in favor and likeness of manners, so that
he which sees him may verily think that he sees his father as it were present.

And after this manner do sacraments Sacraments do stir up and healpe
faith.
stir up and help our faith, while we see outwardely before our eyes, that
which stirs up the mind, works in us, and warns us of our duty: yea,
that very thing which we a while before comprehended in our mind, is now
after a sort visibly offered to our senses, in a similitude, parable, type or
figure, to be viewed and weighed in our mind, that mutuallie they might help
one another.

The similitude therefore or Analogy of the sign to the thing signified, is
here by the way to be considered.

I told you before that Analogia is an aptnes, proportion and a certain Of the
analogy in baptism.
conuenience of the sign to the thing signified, so that this may be seen
in that as in a loking-glasse. The matter shall be made manifest by examples.
The bountiful and gracious Lord of his mere mercy receives mankind into
the partaking of all his good gifts and graces, and adopteth the faithful that
now they be not only joined in league with God, but also the children of
God, which thing by the holy action of baptism, being in steed of the
sign, or the very sign it self, is most evidently by representation laid
before the eyes of al men. For the minister of GOD stands at the holy font
to whom the infant is offered to be baptized, whom he receives and baptiseth
into the name, or in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
Ghost. For we may find both Into the name, and In the name. So that to be
baptized Into the name of the Lord, is to be sealed into his virtue and power
(for the name of the Lord signifies power) into the favor, mercy, and
protection of God, yea to be graffed, and as it were to be fastened, to be
dedicated, and to be incorporated into God. To be baptized In the name of the
Lord is by ye commandment or authority of God to be baptized, I mean by the
commission or appointment of God ye father, the son, and the holy Ghost, to
be received into the company of the children of God, and to be counted of Gods
household, that they which are baptized, are, and be called Christians, and be
named wc the name of God, being called the children of God the father, etc.
His speech therefore does somewhat resemble that which we read elsewhere that
The name of God was called upon, over some one, which is in a manner as if we
should say, that one is called by the name of God, that is, to be called The
servant and son of God. They therefore which before by grace inuisibly are
received of God into the society of God: those self same are visibly now by
baptism admitted into the self same household of God by the minister of God,
and therefore at that time also receive their name, yt To give and take names
in baptism.
they may always remember, that in baptism they gave up their names to
Christ, and in like manner also received a name. After this manner by a most
apt Analogy, the very sign resembles the thing signified. To be short,
baptism is done by water. And water in men's matters has a double use. For it
cleanses filthe, and as it were renueth man: also it quenches thirst and
cools him that is in a heat. So also it represents the grace of God, when
it cleanses his faithful ones from their sins, regenerateth, and refreshes
us with his spirit. Beside this the minister of Christ sprinckleth or rather
powers in water, or being dipped takes them out of the water: whereby is
signified that God very bountifully bestows his gifts upon his faithful
ones: it signifies also that we are buried with Christ into his death, and
are raised again with him into newness of life. Pharao was drowned in the
gulf of the redd sea, but the people of God passed through it safe. For our
old Adam must be drowned and extinguished: but our new Adam day by day must be
quickened and rise up again (out of the water.) Therefore is the mortification,
and vivification of Christians, very excellently represented by baptism. Now
in the Lords supper, bread and wine represent the very body and Of the
analogy in the supper.
blood of Christ. The reason hereof is this. As bread nourishes and
strengthens man, and gives him ability to labor: so the body of Christ
eaten by faith, feeds and satisfies the soul of man, and furnishes the
whole man to all duties of Godliness. As wine is drink to the thirsty, and
makes merry the hearts of men: so the blood of our Lord Jesus droncken by
faith, does quench the thirst of the burning conscience, and fills the
hearts of the faithful with unspeakable joy. But in the action of the supper
the bread of the Lord is broken: the wine is powered out. For the body of our
Savior was broken, that is, by all means afflicted, and his blood gushed and
flowed plentifully out of his gaping wounds. And we our selves truly do
break with our own hands the bread of the Lord. For we our selves are in
fault, that he was torn and tormented. Our sins wounded him and we our
selves crucified him: that is to say, he was crucified for us, that by his
death he might deliver us from death.

Furthermore, we take the bread into our hands, we likewise take the cupp into
our hands: because he said, Take ye, eat ye, take ye and divide it among you:
neither do we lay them aside, or hide them, neither do we give them forthwith
to others: but when we have received them, we eat and drink them, swallowing
them down into our bodies: then afterward we do communicate and offer them to
other. For they which lawefully celebrate the Lords Supper, do not only
believe that Christ suffered, or that he suffered for other, and not for them:
but they believe that Christ suffered for themselves, they believe yt Christ
does, and as it were has already communicated all his gifts most liberally
unto them. Therefore as the sustenance of bread and wine passing into the
bowels, is changed into the substance of man's body: even so Christ being
eaten of the godly by faith, is united unto the^ by his spirit: so that they
are one with Christ, and he one with them. And as meat plentifully prepared,
deintily dressed, and only seen upon the table, does not assuage hunger: so
if thou hear Christ reverently preached unto thee, and do not believe that
Christ with all his good gifts is thine, neither ye word though reverently
preached, nor yet the board though abundantly stoared, do profit thee any
thing.

And it makes much to the reconciling, renewing, and mainteyning of friendship,
that we are all partakers of one bread, that we offer bread to our brethren,
and that we drink of the cupp which we receive at our brethrens hand. For
upon no other cause the ancient fathers seem to call the Supper Synaxis, A
commmunion. But of that we will speak somewhat Synaxis a communion.
elsewhere. And thus much have I brought for example sake touching ye
Analogy of the sign and thing signified, and would say more, but that I
trust to them that be diligent this is sufficient. For I have ministered
occasion to think upon, and to find out more and greater things.

By this short treatise touching the How the Sacraments do stir up faith.
Analogy, I think it is plain, that sacraments stir up and help the
faith of the Godly. For whiles our mind comprehends and considers the
benefits of God, Christ his blessing, our redemption, and other his good
gifts, while it enjoys them with great pleasure of the spirit, whiles in
them it is glad and rejoices, Sacraments are now also outwardly given, which
do visibly represent those things to our eyes, and as it were make them to
enter into all our senses, which the mind inwardlye comprehends,
considers, and meditateth upon. For because the whole action which consists
of the words, and the rite or ceremony, is counted with the sign, our eyes
see the signs, and all things which are done in ye whole action of the
signs, all which do as it were speak. Our ears hear the words and
institutions of Christ. Yea our very touching and tasting, they also do feel
and perceive how sweet and good the Lord is: so that now the whole man, as it
were both body and soul caught up into heaven, does feel and perceive, that
his faith is stirred up and helped, and to be short that the fruit of faith in
Christ, is passing sweet and comfortable. All these things have place in them
that believe. In them that believe not, the signs remain as they are without
life: therefore these things are brought to pass by the virtue or power of
faith, and of the spirit working in the lawful use of the sacraments: without
faith and the holy Ghost they are not felt or perceived. There is not unlike
efficacy or The efficacy or force in the preaching of Gods word.
force also in the preaching of ye word of God. For when this word by parables,
by examples and by description is set forth to the hearers, if the spirit and
faith shine in their mind, by these they seem not only to hear things
expounded, but to see them with their eyes. In consideration whereof I think
Paul said, O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not
believe the truth, to whom Jesus Christ was described before your eyes, and
among you crucified? for it is certain y^ Christ was no where either
described or crucified among the Galathia^s: he speaks therefore of his
plainness of preaching the word, whereby things in deed are showed, but yet
with such force and efficacy, as if they were in a manner laid before their
eyes. There is the same reason also in sacraments, which for yt cause were
called of them of old, visible words.

Of these things in this manner, entreats Zuinglius in his book Ad
principes Germaniae contra Eggium, saying: Zuinglius of the Sacraments
upholding faith.
Does not a faithful man desire, when he feels his faith like to fall, to
be vpholden and restoared to his place? and where in the whole world shall he
hope to find that more conveniently, tha^ in the very actions of the
Sacraments, so much as belongs to all sensible things? For let it be that
all creatures allure and provoke us to the contemplation or beholding of Gods
majesty, yet all that their allurement or provoking is dum: but in the
Sacraments there is a liuelye provoking and speaking allurement. For the Lord
speaks, and the elements also speak, and they speak and persuade that to
our senses, which the word and spirit speaks to our mind. Howebeit, hitherto
all these visible things are nothing, unless the sanctification of the spirit
go before. These things he handles more at large, first in his annotations
upon the 27. cap. of Jeremy, and afterward In Expositione Fidei ad regem
Christianum.

Furthermore, we read that Saint Augustine disputinge against the Maniches,
Lib. 19. contra. Faustum cap. 11. said: Men cannot be gathered together into
any name of Religion, either true or false, unless they be knitt together in
some fellowship of visible signs or Sacraments, etc. We acknowledging this
opinion of S. Augustine fetchte from the Scriptures, do teach touching the
Sacraments, that we by them are gathered and knitt together into the unity of
ye body of Christ, and are separated from all other religions, fellowships,
and assemblies: and more too, we are bound by them as by an oath, to the true
worship of one God, and unto one sincere religion, to the which we openly
profess that we agree and give our consent with all them that are partakers of
the sacraments. Where this chiefly is to be marked, that the gathering or
knitting together into the unity of the body of Christ, has a double
respect: A conjunction with Christ and with the Church.
for either we are joined with Christ, that he is in us, and we live in
him: or else we are coupled with all the members of Christ, to wit, with
Christ's faithful servants, I mean with the Catholic Church it self.
Furthermore we are knit together with Christ in spirit and faith. But we are
joined to the Church or to the members of Christ by the unity of faith and of
the spirit, and by the bond of charity. All which verily are the inward
gifts of the spirit, which freely are bestowed on us by the Lord only, not
by any creatures, not by any elements. Sacraments therefore do visiblie graffe
us into the fellowship of Christ, and his saints, who were inuisibly graffed
by his grace before we were partakers of the Sacraments: but by receiving of
the sacraments, we do now open and make manifest, of whose body we would
be, and are members, the Lord with his signs or marks by his minister also
visiblie marking us for his own household, and for his own people. Which
thing by the Scriptures, we will more fully open By sacraments we are visibly
gathered together into one religion, and distinguished from others.
and make manifest. They who in time past, by the force of the covenant, by
the grace, mercy, and promise of God were the people of God, were by
Circumcision visibly gathered together into one Church, and knit together into
one body. For the Apostle S. Paul says unto the Ephesians, Wherefore
remember that ye being in time passed Gentiles in the flesh, Ephe. 2.
called vncircumcisio^ of them which are called circumcision in the flesh made
with hands: that at that time (I say) ye were without Christ, and were
aliantes from the common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of
promise, etc.

Whereby it is also easilye understood, how the Jews by circumcision were
distinguished from other religions and fellowships, and that circumcision in
another place, for this cause, is put for them that are circumcised, and why
the name of uncircumcised was reproachful. For those that were uncircumcised
were counted for ungodly and unclean persons, that had no fellowshippe, nor
part or inheritance with God and his Saints. Of baptism which was
ordained in the steed of circumcision, some thing Phil. 3. Romans 15.
is spoken in my former Sermons. And also the apostle sets it out most
plainly: As the body (says he) is one and has many members, and all 1.
Cor. 12.
the members of the body, which is one, though they be many, yet are but
one body: even so is Christ. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one
body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have
been all made to drink into one spirit. We are therefore knitt together by
the Sacrament of baptism into the unity of the body of Christ, so that to
have broken this bond, and to yield our selves into another fellowshipp of
religion and brotherhoode, may worthily be called sacrilege and treason.

Hereunto the Apostle seemed to have respect when he asked the Corinthians: Are
ye not baptized into the name of Christ? declaring thereby that they which
are baptized into the name of Christ, have openly sworn, and bound their faith
before ye church of Christ, so that now they neither can nor ought to rejoice
in any other name than in the name of Christ, into whose household they are
received by baptism. So, I say, we are separated by baptism from all other
religions, and are only consecrated to Christian religion. He has the like
The place of Paul. 1. Cor 18. The bread which we break etc is expounded.
place in all points touching the supper of the Lord, 1. Corinthians. cap. 10. For
when the Apostle would declare to the Corinthians, that it is a thing far
from all godliness, unseemly, yea and sacrilegious, that Christians should eat
in the idols temples, things offered to idols, and be partakers of the
Gentiles sacrifices, reasoning from the manner and nature of the Sacrament of
the Lords supper, he says: Fly from idolatry, I speak as unto them that
have understanding, judge ye what I say: The cupp of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we
break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we that are many
are one bread and one body, because we all are partakers of one bread? Behold
Israel which is after the flesh: are not they which eat of the sacrifices
partakers of the altar? What say I then? that the idol is any thing? or that
that which is sacrificed unto idols is any thing? Nay but rather this I say,
that those things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils and
not to GOD. And I would not that ye should have fellowship with the devils. Ye
cannot drink the cupp of the Lord, and the cupp of the devils. Ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of devils, etc. For all this is
Paul's saying, which since it serves notably to our purpose, and is very
plain, I will but briefly run over it.

First he lays down the state and scope of ye matter, whereunto he immediately
directs his whole discourse. Fly (says he) idolatry. And he means by the
word Idolatry, whatsoever perteyneth to idolatry, especially the eating of
meat offered to idols. But if you know not what Idolothytu^ is, (which word he
there uses) understand that it is a Greek word which Paul uses in this
case, and it signifies a thing sacrificed to an idol, or a thing publicly
in sacrifice consecrated to an idol. And it was the manner of the Corinthians
to sacrifice at the altars of their Gods in idol-houses, yt is to say, in their
idol temples, and to call Christians unto those their sacrifices: and they when
they came, sat and eat of that which was offered unto idols, eating without
difference with ye idolaters, thincking they might have done that without any
fault at all: because by the bright shining of the Gospel it appeared, that
neither ye idol, neither that God whom the idol represented, and therefore
also the things themselves that were offered to idols were nothing else, but
vain names, and things of no price or estimation. But Paul disputing against
these from the 8. Cap. unto the 11. teaches that it is far wide from
Christianity, to be partakers of the Gentiles sacrifices, and says: I will
speak unto you as unto them that have discretion, that after I have shadowed
out unto you which way to walk, you by the sharpenes of your wit, may
understand what is true, and what is false and to be short which way you must
incline.

And then he scatters certain grounds of arguments, which they afterward
discussing, might by their diligence polishe and make perfect. They (says
he) that are partakers of the supper of the Lord (in which the bread of the
Lord is broken, and the cup of the Lord is dronken) are of the same communion,
fellowship, or body with the Lord. For (...), which word Paul uses here, and
which interpreters have translated Communion or partaking (though fellowship is
better than partaking: as in the Dutch translation Gmeind is better than Gmeind
chafe) is not taken actiuely (as I may so say) for the distributing, giving or
reaching out Christ's body by the minister: but passiuely, for the fellowship
and society, for the body, I say, of the Church: as when the church is
called a communion, that is, an assembly a gathering together and society of
saints or godly Christians.

Furthermore, the Church is called (...), or a communion of the body and
blood of Christ, because it is redeemed by the body and blood of Christ, and
being partaker of Christ, lives by him. For he lives in the godly Christians,
communicating unto them all his good gifts of life. And that the partakers of
the supper of yt Lord are the body or communion of Christ, he declares by a
reason which follows saying, Because we that are many, are one bread and one
body. Whereunto by and by he adds another more evident reason, for
interpretations sake, saying, For we are all partakers of one bread. In that we
are partakers of one bread, says he, we do openly testify that we are
partakers of the same body with Christ and all his Saints. In which words
he has a notable respect to the Analogy. For as by uniting together of many
grains, (as Cyprian says) is made one bread or one loaf: as of many
clusters of grapes one wine is pressed out: so out of many members grows up
and is made the body of the Church, which is the body of Christ. Now in the
words of Paul these things offer themselves unto us to be marked.

First, for that now he calls that a multitude or many, by a word
expressing his mind better, which before he named a communion. A communion
therefore is nothing else, but a multitude or congregation. For he said, The
bread is the partaking of the body of Christ: but now he says, We being many
are one bread, one body. We being many, says he, yt is, all we which are a
multitude and a congregation or Church, redeemed by the body of Christ (which
was) given, and by his blood (which was) shedd for us. Afterward he says,
We being many are one body, he does not say, are made one body. For we are
not first graffed into the body of Christ (as we have often repeated
already) by partaking of the sacraments: but we which were before ingraffed
by grace inuisiblye, are now also visibly consecrated. Again, by the like
reason of Sacraments, or by an example of the scripture taken from the
Sacraments of the people of the old Testament, he shows that the partakers
of the sacraments are one body, both with him to whom they offer, and with
them with whom they offer, or with whom they eat of things offered to
idols. Behold (says he) the Israelites which offer sacrifices after the
flesh. Are not they that eat the sacrifices, (...), that is to say,
communicants, fellows or partakers of the things of the temple, or of the
altar. For under the word of the things of the temple or of the altar, ((...)
is his word) he comprehends whatsoever does belong to the worshipp and
religion of the God of the Jews: so that the sense or meaning may be this. Are
not all they one body, one communion, one people, both with the God of Israel
and with his people, which eat of the sacrifices offered to the God of Israel,
by the Israelitish people? As if he had said: There is none that is ignorant
of it, or that can deny it, since it is confessed and manifest among all men.

By these things he leaves to the Corinthians, of their own accord, thus
much to be gathered: Therefore they that are partakers of the sacraments of
the Gentiles are one body and one fellowship with the Gods of the Gentiles,
and the Gentiles which do sacrifice. Now by the figure Occupatio (which is
when in aunswearing we prevent an objection that may be made) he places
these words between: What say I then? That the idol is any thing? Or, that
that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is any thing? Whereunto by and by
he adds, But this I say, that the They are the members of the devil that
are partakers of unlawful Sacraments.
things which the Gentiles offer in sacrifice, they offer to devils and not
to God. Hereupon he might lawfully have inferred, Therefore if you continue to
be partakers of things offered to idols, ye shall verily be one body and
one fellowshippe, both with the devil him self and all his members. But
because this might have been taken of many, to have been bitterly spoken,
he adds another saying somewhat more mild and gentle, and says: And I
would not that ye should be (...), that is, communicants, or partakers, and
have fellowship with devils.

After which words by comparing the contrary parts, he brings in the
sum of the whole matter, to which he directed all his reasons and says,
Ye cannot drink the cupp of the Lord, and the cupp of devils: ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of devils. And so forth.

The Sacraments therefore do separate us from all other worshippinges and
religions, and do bind and consecrate, yea, and also as it were make us of
the same body with one true GOD, and sincere Christian Religion: because we
being partakers of them, do openly profess, that we be the members of Jesus
Christ, which no man that is well in his wits, will take, and make them the
members of fornication, and of idols. Zuinglius of binding Sacraments etc.


That which Zuinglius (that learned man) has, In expositione fidei Christian
ad regem Christianum, is not impertinent to this purpose. Sacraments (says
he) are in steed of an oathe. For Sacramentum with the Latins is used also
for an oathe. For, they that use one and the selfsame Sacraments, are one
peculiar nation, and an holy sworn congregation, they are knitt together into
one body and into one people: whom, whosoever betrayeth, shall perish. Therefore
the people of Christ, since by eating his body sacramentally, they are knit
into one body: Now he that is faithless, and yet dare be so bold as to make
himself one of this society or fellowship, betrayeth the body of Christ, as
well in the head as in the members, etc. Thus far he.

By this it is easy to understand yt sacraments put us in mind of our
Sacraments ^ut the faithful in mind of their duty.
duty: especially if we mark in the writings of the Apostle, how,
considering the manner of sacraments the Apostles frame their exhortations.
Where again the Analogy beeinge considered it has very much light and force
in it. Trees are pruned, and all that which is dry, barren, and superfluous in
them is cut away. And so by circumcision they that were circumcised were put
in mind to cut away with the knife of the spirit, whatsoever grew up in
the flesh against the law of God. Hereunto had Moses respect when he said in
Dent: Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your Deuteronomy. 10.
heart: and be no more stiffenecked. Whom Jeremy following in the 4. Cap.
says, Be ye circumcised in the Iere. 4.
Lord, and cut away the foreskinne of your hearts, etc. Those things which the
Apostle has taught touching the celebration of y^ Passover, are more plain
than that they need here to be rehearsed. And I have already entreated of
them at large in the sixte Sermon of my third Decade.

The very same Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, says, Know Romans 6.
ye not, that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been
baptized into his death. Wear buried then with him by baptism into his death,
that likewise as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the
father: even so we should walk in newness of life, etc.

So we are put in mind by yt mystery of baptism to renounce and forsake
Satan and the world, to mortify and subdue the flesh, and to bury the old
Adam, that the new man may rise up again in us thorough Christ. Furthermore,
the supper of the Lord does admonish us of brotherly love and charity, and of
the unity that we have with all the members of Christ: it warns us also of
purity and sincerity in faith: that because we have openly professed that
we are united to Christ, and to all his members, we should have a special
care and regard, that we be not found faithles and untrue to our lord Christ
and his church, that we should not defile our selves with foreign and
strange sacrifices. We are also admonished of thanckefulnesse, to magnify the
grace of God, who has redeemed us, according to that saying, As often as ye
shall cate of this bread, and drink of this cupp, ye 1. Cor. 11.
shall show forth the Lords death until he come.

Thus far have I entreated of the force, the end, and the effect of
sacraments, unto ye which I have (as I think) attributed no more nor no
less than I ought, that is, as much as may be proved out of the scripture to
be due unto them. They are the institutions of Christ, therefore they care not
for counterfeite and strange praises. They have praise sufficient, if they have
those praises, which he that instituted them, namely GOD and Christ Jesus the
high priest of the Catholic Church, vouchsafed to attribute unto them.

Now, because there is mention made very often of faith, in this That the
sacraments profit nothing without faith.
whole book, I will further show also that without faith sacraments profit
nothing, and again, that to those which receive them by faith, they are not
superfluous or vain.

For this seems as yet to belong to the ^ull exposition and consideration of
Sacraments. That Sacraments without faith profit not, it is easily proved.
For it is said that Sacraments are seals of ye preaching of the Gospel, and
things apperteyning to the same. For if the preaching of the Gospel be heard
without faith, it does not only profit nothing unto life, but it turns
rather unto judgment, (to him that hears:) the lord him self bearing
witness, and saying: If any man hear my words and John. 12.
believe not, I judge him not; for I came not to judge the world but to save
the world: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last
day. To that saying of the Lord agrees this of the Apostle. For unto us was
the Gospel preached Hebr. 4.
as well as unto the fathers: but the word which they heard did not profit
the^, because it was not coupled with faith to them that heard. Who now is such
a dorhead which can not gather that sacraments without faith are unprofitable,
especially since the same Apostle says: Whosoever shall eat this bread, and
drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood
of the Lord? But all our worthiness before God does consist in faith, the same
Apostle yet again witnessing out of the prophet, 1. Cor. 11.
The just shall live by faith, Romans 1.
And, By faith the elders (or fathers) obtained a good report. Whereunto Hebr.
11.
also belongs that which is read in the Gospel, They which were bidde^ Matt
22.
were not worthy: Whereupon it follows, that worthiness consists in
faithful obedience. Hereunto also may be referred (I think) those examples
whereof mention has been made more than once already before: Al our fathers
were baptized, and did 1. Cor. 10.
all eat of one spiritual meat: but in many of them God had no delight. And
Paul again says, Without faith it is impossible to please God: Heb. 11.
therefore without faith Sacraments profit nothing. The examples of Simon
Magus and Judas the traitor are very well known, of which one was baptized,
the other admitted to the Supper, and yet had no fruit of the Sacraments,
because they wanted true faith.

To these pithy and divine testimonies of God, we will now add Augustine does
teach that sacrament^^ received without faith are unprofitable to the
receivers.
some places of S. Augustine out of his ninetenth book against Faustus, and
twelfth chap. Peter says, Baptism saves us: and least they should think the
visible Sacrament were sufficient, by which they had the form of godliness,
and through their evil manners, by living lewdly and desperately should deny
the power thereof, by and by he adds, Not the putting away of ye silth of ye
flesh, but in that a good conscience makes request to god. Again, Lib. 2.
contra literas Petiliani, cap. 7. he says. They are not therefore to be thought
to be in the body of Christ which is the Church or congreagation, because they
are corporally partakers of his Sacraments. For they in such are also holy, but
to them that use and receive them unworthily, they shall be forceable to their
greater judgment. For they are not in that society of Christ's Church, which
in the members of Christ by being knit together, and touching one an other,
do grow into the fullness of God. For that Church is builded on a rock as
says the Lord, Upon this rock will I build my Church, but they build on
the sand: as the Lord also says, He that hears my words and does them
not, I will liken him to a foolish man. And again in his treatise upon John 13.
The syllables of Christ's name and his Sacraments profit nothing, where the
faith of Christ is resisted. For faith in Christ and his Sacraments is to
believe in him which justifies the ungodly, to believe in the mediator,
without whose intercession we are not reconciled unto God. Thus far Augustine.

An objection is made, If Sacraments do nothing profit without Sacraments
depend not on our worthiness or unworthiness.
our faith, then they depend on our worthiness or unworthiness, so that they
are not perfect. I answer, That among the wicked and unbelievers, sacraments
verily of them selves are sufficiently ratified and confirmed by the
institution of God, neither depends their perfectness upon the condition and
state of the partakers, that they are either better among ye good, or worsse
among the bad. For that remains perfect and sound, which the Lord has
instituted, and reteyneth his institution always good: howsoever men vary and
are faithles. For the Apostle says, Shall their unbelief make the faith of
God without Romans 3.
effect? God forbid. Yea, let GOD be true, and every man a liar. But I have
touched this matter also somewhat before. Yet, because it is one thing to
offer, and an other thing to receive, GOD verily offers of his goodness his
bountiful gifts unto me^ to this end to profit and to save the^, and to make
them whole, as ye physician does by ministering physic to his patient: but
because that foolish and madd man does not acknowledge the benefit, as ye sick
patient which refuses physic being ministered, ye benefit which is offered
does no more profit ye one, than physic not received does good to ye other,
not through ye default of him ye offers the benefit, or of him which
ministers physic, but through y^ folly of him which refuses and will none
of it. After this manner disputed s. Aug. also of this matter. For Li. 3. de
Baptismo cont. Donat, ca. 14. he says. It skilleth not, when the perfectness
and holiness of ye sacrament is in handling, what he believes, and what
manner of faith he has y^ receives the sacrament. Verily it avails very much
to y^ way of salvation, but for the question of the sacrament it makes no
matter. Also contra literas Petiliani lib. 2. cap. 47. he says, Remember that
the lewd life and corrupt manners of evil men do nothing hinder the sacraments
of God, to make them not holy at all, or less holy: but that to the ungodly
they are a testimony of their damnation, and not a furtheraunce of their
salvation. He also Tract. in Joan. 26. says, If you receive the sacrament
carnally, it cease not to be spiritual, but to thee it is not so. As easily
is that objection Of baptism of infantes.
confuted, that baptism profits not infants, if we still say that sacraments
without faith profit not: for infantes have no faith: thus they babble. We
answer first that the baptism of infants is grounded upon the free mercy and
grace of God, who says, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. And
again, Suffer children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of God,
etc. Infantes therefore are nu^bered and counted of the Lord him self among
the faithful, so that baptism is due unto them as far forth as it is due
unto the faithful. For by the imputation of God infantes are faithful:
whereunto perteyneth this saying of our Savior: He that shall offend one of
these little ones that believe in me, etc. For he manifestly calls Little
ones believing: for imputations sake doubtless, not for confession, which by
no means as yet is in little ones. To this also may be added, yt the father of
ye infant does therefore desire to have his child signed with the mark of the
people of God, to wit, baptism, because he believes the promises of God,
that is, that his infant is of the household of God: therefore there is faith
in the baptism of infantes. But the father does not believe: Be it so: Yet
that is no hinderaunce to the infant. For in the faith of the Church he is
brought to be baptized. The Church verilye believes that infantes ought to
be brought to the Lord: the Church believes that they are of the household
and people of God: therefore she commands them to be partakers of the
mysteries: so that again in the baptism of infantes a man may find faith.

Hereunto does S. Aug. add this saying, Lib. 1. de peccatoru^ meritis and
remissione, cap. 19. Wherefore infants are rightly called faithful, because
they after a sort do confess their faith by the words of them that bear
them. He reasons more touching this matter in his Epistle to Boniface, which
is in order the three and twentieth, where, he that desires may find more.

But all these things (say they) prove not that infantes have faith of their
own. For the faith of their parents, of their bearers, or the faith of the
Church is an others faith, and not theirs. Be it so. Yet most certain is that
saying, that the Lord counts infantes among his, that is, among the
faithful: so that now they are not only baptized in an others faith, but in
their own, that is to say, which it pleases the Lord to impute unto them.
Furthermore, that is not an others, which is common to the self same body: But
infantes are in the very same body of the Church, whereby that which is the
Churches, is their own and not an others.

Neither can any man easily tell, what motions of the holy spirit infants have
beside, etc. For in so much as they are of God, they have the spirit of God,
And who so have not, they are not of God. Romans 8. Romans 8.


As they decline too much to the That Sacraments or not superfluous or void
to them that have faith.
left hand, which are persuaded that Sacraments, yea, without faith do
profit the receyuers: so they go too far wide on the right hand, who
think that the Sacraments are superfluous to them that have faith. Faith
(say they) does fully acquit us, so that after we have faith, Sacraments can
increase nothing in us, therefore it must needs be that they are unprofitable.

Such in times past are the Heretics Messaliani read to have been, who were
both called Euchitae and (...), that is, Divine men, forsooth, and inspired of
GOD. For they did contend that the faithful, after they had received the
holy Ghost, had need of no Sacraments. But these me^ are very injurious eue^
to God him self, who instituted not his sacraments for the faithful without
great cause, neither unprofitably. And, Verily Abraham believed God and it was
reckoned unto him for righteousness, and he was counted the friend of God,
just and holy, not being void doubtless of the holy Ghost: but he also
Received circumcision the seal of the righteousness of faith which was before
he was circumcised. It is said to the same Abraham, Genesis 17.
Every manchild whose foreskinne shall not be circumcised, shall be cut off
from my people, because he has broken my covenant. Truly the angel of ye Lord
is ready to kill Moses, because he delaid circumcision Exodus 4.
in his children longer tha^ was lawful, either by his own negligence, or
through the fault of his Madianitish wife. What, shall there be found any more
righteous and holy than the son of God, as he which having received the
fullness of the spirit, pours plentifully of the same into his members? he
him self being the head, yet he came to John Baptist and requires to be
baptized of him in Jordan. And when he refused and said, I have need to be
baptized of thee, and come Matt. 3.
thou to me? he hears, Suffer it to be so now: For thus it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness. Certeinely righteousness gives to every man that
which is his own. Faith therefore which is the righteousness of Christians,
gives glory to God, and believes that he being wonderful wise does will well
unto men, and therefore that he has instituted nothing unprofitably, but all
things for the salvation of his faithful ones: a faithful man therefore uses
all the institutions of God without any reasoning or gainesaying.

Neither is there any here, I think, that will say that this dode of Christ
parteyneth nothing to him, whereby undoubtedly he laid before us an example to
follow. Yea that which he him self did, he willed other also to do, when he
sent his disciples forth and said: Go into the whole world and preach the
Gospel to all creatures, baptising them in the name of the father, etc. He
which shall believe and be baptized shall be saved, where truly he joins
together both faith and baptism, which to abide upon he would not have done,
if Sacraments were superfluous there where faith is. Whereby it manifestly
appears, that they are wrong as far as heaven is wide, which think that
Sacraments are indifferent, Sacraments are indifferent
that is to say, a thing put to our own will and choice, either to use or not
to use. For as we have heard already a flat commandment concerning baptism:
so the Lord instituting and celebrating the supper says: Do this in the
remembrance of me. He therefore that despises these commandments of God, I
see not how he can have faith, whereby he should be inuisibly sanctified.
Hitherto belongs now, that which the faithful prince of Acthiopia
confesses that he believed with all his heart in the Lord Jesus, yet
nevertheless as soon as he saw water, he said, Behold, here is water,
what lets me to be baptized? He does not say, I believe with all my heart,
and I feel yt I am instified and cleansed, why then should I be washed with
water, having no filth remaining? Therefore wheresoever true faith is, there
Sacraments are not contenined or refused, but more desired. For Cornelius, the
Centurion also, after he had received the holy Ghost, does not gainesay
Peter, who said: Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized
which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Peter was a faithful
preacher of the Gospel, a skillful teacher of the truth, therefore he
dereiueth no man, and he teaches us by his own deed, that faith does then
specially provoke us to be partakers of the Sacraments, when it is true in the
faithful. To whom Paul his fellowe-minister agrees saying: Let every one
prove himself, and then let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup:
but that proving is made by faith: therefore not faith, but unthankfulness
does contemptuously reject the Sacraments.

Truly I am not ignorant that Many are sanctified without visible sacraments.
very many without the use of visible Sacraments have been sanctified, and
at this day also are sanctified: but none of those despised or contemned them.
They were not partakers of the Sacraments being thereunto driven by necessity,
as there be at this day some, that are held captives under the tyranny of
Antichrist and the Turk, and for the time believe with their whole heart in the
Lord Jesus. Therefore the examples of these or such like, are no defense for
them, which may receive the Sacraments, if they regarded the ordinances of
God, and set so much by them as of duty they should do. I will note here
for the singular benefit of the readers, S. Augustines dispufation, because it
makes notably for our purpose. He, Quaest. lib. in Leuit. 3. cap. 84. says,
It is demanded not without cause, whether invisible sanctitication do profit
nothing without visible Sacraments, wherewith a man is visibly sanctified?
which without doubt is absurd. For more tollerably it may be said, that
this sanctification ^s not without them, than that it does not profit, if it
be without them, since in sanctification all their profit conu^teeth. But we
must also weigh this how it is rightly said, that without y^ Sacraments
sanctification can not be. For visible baptism did nothing profit Simon
Mag^s, to whom invisible sanctification was wanting: but by cause this
invisible sanctification profited them that had it, in like manner, they which
were baptized received also the visible sacraments. And yet neither is it
showed where Moses himself was sanctified with visible sacrifices or oil, who
notwithstanding did visibly sanctify the priests: but who dare deny that he
was inuisibly sanctified, whose grace was so great, surpassing, and excellent?

This also may be said of John Baptiste. For he was first a baptiser, before he
was seen to be baptized, whereupon we can deny by no means that he was
sanctified, yet we do not find that that was visibly wrought in him before he
came to the ministry of baptising. This also may be verified of the thief
crucified with Christ, to whom the Lord said as he hong with him on the
cross, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. For he could not have been
partaker of so great felicity, unless he had been inuisibly sanctified.
Whereby wegather, that invisible sanctification has been present with some,
and profited them without the visible sacraments: and that visible
sanctification which is wrought by visible Sacraments, may be present without
this invisible sanctification, but yet may not profit us. Yet nevertheless
the visible Sacrament is not therefore to be contemned. For the contemner
thereof ^an by no means be inuisibly sanctified. Hereof it is that Cornelius and
they that were with him, whon they did now appear to be inuisibly sanctified
by the holy Ghost poured into them, yet notwithstanding they are baptized:
neither is visible sanctification which had invisible sanctification going
before it, counted superfluous. Thus far he.

With this disputation an other Cyptians error touching the Sacrament of
baptism.
question also has some affinity or likeness, which is, Whether Sacraments
depend upon the worthiness of the ministers, and whether they be hindered in
their force by ye unworthiness of the ministers? Cyprian more than in one
place does contend, That they can not baptize which want the holy Ghost: which
error springs herevppon, for that he attributes too much to the ministry
of baptism. He does think that men are purified or cleansed by baptism: so
that thereby he does gather, that an unclean person can not purify or
cleanse, and therefore not baptize, and that the baptism of an unclean person
is not baptism: from whence he deriueth Anabaptisme, or rebaptising. But if
that holy man had rightly and religiously distinguished between power and
ministry, between the sign and the thing signified, between the outward
and inward sanctification, he had undoubtedly understood that we are
inuisibly sanctified by the mere grace of God, and that this inward
sanctification is outwardly by the ministry represented and sealed: there he
might have understood that sealed evidences may be published as well by an
evil minister as by a good. Gods sacraments are to be referred to God the
author of them, who is faithful and true in all his ordinances, how false
and faithless so ever men be. Although Judas were a thief, yet he preached
and, baptized, whose doctrine and baptism, was as well the doctrine and
baptism of Christ, as was Peter's and Andrews, James and John's. And touching
the perfectness and pureness both of the doctrine and baptism done by the
ministry of Judas, no man ever doubted, as though they were never taught or
baptized whom he taught and baptized, who in the mean while is called of the
Lord him self, not a diuelishe man, John. 6.
but a very devil. For he baptized not in his own name, but in the name of
Christ: he preached not his own, but the doctrine of Christ. To conclude, the
Lord of his goodness for his truths sake, and not for Judas sake, wrought in
the faithful: which working of his an others ungraciousness and
maliciousness could not hinder, as at this day verily it hinders not a
whit. Truly we must do what we can to have holy and unblameable ministers,
so far forth as by our care and diligence we are able to procure and bring
to pass: yea, let us deprive and disgrade them, whom we shall find to behave
them selves unworthy of their function: but in the mean time, let us not doubt
at all of the pureness of the Sacraments, which they while they were in
their office ministered unto us, that is to say, after the same manner and
form as the Lord instituted. And verily as the faithful do not fasten their
minds on the elements: so neither do they on the ministers. They in althings
look only up to God the author of all goodness, and to the end of those
things which the Lord ordained.

Saint Augustine has handled this matter very diligently, excellently well
applying to these things very effectual arguments, whose words I will set
down, Lib. 3. contra Donatist. de baptismo 3. cap. 10. The water is not unholy
(says he) or defiled, over which the name of the Lord is called on, though it
be called on of unholy and unclean persons: because neither the creature it
self, nor yet the name is unclean. And the baptism of Christ consecrated
with the words of the Gospel, is holy both by them that are unclean, and in
them that are unclean, though they be defiled and unclean: because his
holiness can not be polluted, and in his sacraments a divine power is
present, either to the salvation of them that use them well, or to the
condemnation of them that use them ill. Does the light of the Sun or of a
candle when it shines through a filthy sink, gather no uncleanness from
thence: and can the baptism of Christ be polluted with any man's wickedness?
For if we apply our minds unto the very visible things under which
sacraments are delivered, who knows not that they are corruptible? But if we
ascend unto that which is figured by them, who sees not that they be
incorruptible? though men by whom it is ministered according to their
deseruinges are either rewarded or punished. And so forth. I could allege
many examples of this kind, if I thought them necessary. For I think that by
them it is largely and plainly enough declared, that the perfectness and
pureness of the Sacraments are not to be esteemed by the worthiness or
unworthiness of the ministers, but by the truth of God who did institute them.
To him be glory, power, and dominion, for ever and ever. Amen.

Of holy Baptism, what it is, by whom, and when it was instituted, and that
there is but one baptism of water. Of the baptism of fire. Of the rite or
ceremony of Baptism, how, of whom, and to whom it must be ministered. Of
Baptism by Midwiues, and of infantes dying without Baptism. Of the Baptism
of Infantes, against Anabaptisme or Rebaptising, and of the power or efficacy
of Baptism.
The eighth Sermon.
Now I have to entreat particularly of holy Baptism, and of the holy supper
of the Lord, which may be done so much the more briefly, as we have largely
spoken already of Sacraments in general. Christ our Lord open your minds,
and guide my tongue unto the glory and praise of his blessed name for ever.
Baptism is a word fetched from Baptism.
the Ereekes, who use both these words Baptismus and Baptisma (both which
signify baptism) as the Latins also do. And Baptism is a dipping, which
word Tertullian willingly uses. For, (...), signifies to dip, or dip in,
and, (...), to plunge or put far in: whereupon also to baptize is used for
to plunge in, to wash away, or to cleanse: and baptisings in the Scriptures
are put for washings and purifyings, as it appears in S. Mark the seventh
chapter. and in Paul to the Hebrews the 9. chap. To be baptized with the same
baptism is prouerbially spoken of him that is partaker of the self same
danger or misfortune. And to be baptized with blood, is to be imbrued with
blood.

They define Baptism, for the What baptism is.
most part, to be a token or recognizaunce of our cleansing, yea, of our
inrolling, whereby we are received into the Church, to be of the number of
Gods children. But we describing the nature of baptism more at large do say,
That it is an holy action instituted of GOD, and consisting of the word of God
and the holy rite or ceremony, whereby the people of God are dipped in the
water in the name of the Lord: to be short, whereby the Lord him self does
represent and seal unto us our purifying or cleansing, gathers us into one
body, and puts the baptized in mind of their duty.

In this description of Baptism, these things seem chiefly to be considered.
Who did institute Baptism. Of what things it consists, Whether it be simple,
but one, and the self same, or drawn into many parts. What rite or ceremony
of baptising is delivered (to the Church.) What the end, and force of
Baptism is. It was no man that did institute the Sacrament of baptism, Who
instituted baptism.
but God him self, though by man it took the name, that is to say, by John
(it was ministered) who of it was called the Baptist. That we might understand
this, the Evangelists in many places have confirmed that the calling of John
was from heaven. For thereby we may gather, that his ministry was from
heaven. Does not he say him self in express words? He which sent me to
baptize with water, John. 1.
the same said unto me, upon whom so ever thou shall see the holy ghost, etc.
Also our Lord in the Gospel arguing that the baptism of John was not from
men, but from God, he demands of the Phariseis, The baptism Matthew. 22.
of John, whence was it, from heaven, or of men? Wherefore the godly, yea even
at this day do receive baptism, as it were at the hands of God him self,
though they be baptized through the ministry of men. For the Lord
establishing his institutions by his spirit, works salvation in the elect.
So that it must needs follow, that the virtue or efficacy of Baptism is not
hindered by an evil minister. Whereof has been already elsewhere and
hereafter shall be spoken. At that time truly baptism When baptism was
instituted.
was instituted and began at S. John the Apostle, when he began to preach
openly that the time was fulfilled, and that Christ was exhibited and given to
the world. But the signs of things to come or of things which should be
revealed, the thing it self being present, do no more remain, but ought to be
changed into other signs. And Circumcision was a sign of the blessed seed
which was to come, I mean, of the Messiah him self, which by the sheading of
his blood should bestow his blessing upon the whole world. Therefore when he
was come, and should forthwith shed-forth his blood, it was needeful that
Circumcision should be changed into Baptism. Whereof shall be spoken hereafter.

Now Baptism consists of the sign and of the thing signified, of the Of
What things baptism consists
word or promise of God, and of the holy rite or ceremony. The sign is the
outward actio^, that is, the sprinkling of water, in the name of the Father,
and of the son, and of the holy Ghost, with the calling upon of the name of
God. The promise or word of God is Baptising them. He that shall believe and
be baptized, shall be saved. And so forth. Whereof we have spoken abundantly
enough in the sixte Sermon. Many in the old time have distinguished between
the baptism of John, and the baptism One only baptism.
of Christ and his Apostles. For some of them deny that forgiveness of sins
was comprehended in the baptism of John: but if we diligently view and weigh
the doctrine of the holy Scripture, we shall find that the baptism of John,
and Christ, and his Apostles, is one and the self same. Certainly the doctrine
of John, of Christ, and his Apostles, is one and the self same every where.
For they al with one mouth do preach the gospel, and by it repentance and
remission of sins, in the name of Christ. Let him that will confer those
things which John the Evangelist writes of the doctrine of John Baptist in
the first and third chapter: and that which Luke writes in the ^ourand
twentieth chapter of his gospel, and in the Acts of the Apostles of the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and he will say that all their doctrine is
one and the self same. But to their doctrine is baptism set to, as a seal to
an evidence. Who therefore believes that there are diverse seals of their
doctrine, or diverse baptismes? S. John baptized with water: the Lord commended
no other element to his disciples than water: neither baptized they any other
wise than with water. They themselves The baptism of John, of Christ, and of
the Apostles is one and the self same.
baptized into Christ, into repentance and remission of sins. But Saint Mark
writes of John Baptist, John baptized in the wilderness, preaching the baptism
of repentance for the remission of sins. And S. Paul speakinge of the
doctrine and baptism of John, says: John baptized with the Acts. 19.
baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe on him
which should come after him, that is, on Jesus Christ.

By these testimonies who can not gather that the baptism of John and of
Christ is altogether ye very same? unless this peradventure seem to any man
to bring some difference, that John baptized in him that was to come and should
be revealed: but the Apostles into him that was already revealed. But I see not
how so little space of time can bring any difference, especially since John
spoke so much from the beginning of his preaching of him which should be
revealed: for immediately he did both point him out present with his finger, and
he bare witness that he was present and revealed, and that he should come no
more or be revealed. Hereunto is added, that Christ was baptized with no other
than with the baptism of John. For if John's baptism were an other baptism
beside the baptism of the church of Christ, it would follow that neither
Christ was baptized with our Baptism, neither we in the Baptism of Christ.
But Christ did sanctify with his body the baptism of John, and did
vouchsafe to be baptized with us into the same fellowship, so that we at this
day are also baptized, not with yt baptism of John, but of Christ, who by
John instituted baptism, and he him self consecrated the same. Wherefore
Christ in Matthew 28. Chapter, and in Mark the 16. Chapter, does not
abrogate the baptism which John began, he does not institute a new but
commands to continue and to minister the same to them that believe, In the
name of the Father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghostc.

Now where as John says him self, Of the baptism of Christ which is also
the baptism of fire.
I baptize with water, but he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, he
makes not difference between his own baptism of water, and Christ's
baptism, but he attributes somewhat more unto Christ, wherein no man or
minister Acts. 1.
(for they did err which in time past baptized with fire) had part with him,
but he olone gives the baptism of fire, that is, the singular gifts of the
holy Ghost, but first of all the use of tongues under the form of fire.
For so this matter is expounded in the Acts, first by the Lord Christ him
self, then by experience in the Church. For the Lord says, Depart not from
Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of Acts. 1.
the father, whereof says he ye have heard of me: for John truly baptized
with water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost after these few
days. And consequently upon the day of Pentecoste they were baptized with the
baptism of Christ, not with water again, but were all filled with the holy
Ghost, cloven tongues, as it were fiery, sitting upon each one of their
heads, and they began to speak with other tongues.

In the Acts, the Citizens of Samaria Acts. 8.
are baptized of Philipp, with the baptism of Christ in water lawfully and
fully: But the very same afterward are baptized with the peculiar baptism
of Christ, while by the laying on of hands by Peter and John, they receive
the holy Ghost. Not that hitherto they were altogether void of the gift of
the holy Ghost (for how could they believe without the holy ghost?) but for
that they were baptized with the visible Baptism of fire beside, and received
the gift of tongues, and other excellent graces. As it is also read of
Cornelius, who verily Acts. 10.
beeinge first baptized with fire, I mean with the peculiar baptism of
Christ, spoke with tongues, and afterward was baptized with water.
Contrariwise, those twelve disciples at Ephesus were first fully baptized
with the Baptism of John, and with the baptism of the water of the christian
church or congregation, and afterward Paul the Apostle laying his hands on
them, they are baptized, not with water again, but with fire, Luke bearing
witness and saying: The holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with
tongues and prophesied.

But this baptism of fire, and the visible ministration of the gifts ceased
together with miracles, neither at this day is it usual or common in the
Churh: but the baptism of water remains, which is one and the self same,
whether it be ministered by the hands of John, or of the Apostles, or by
diverse hands of the ministers of the Church. For diverse hands make not
diverse baptismes.

Wherefore, we rightly believe that there is but one only and simple Baptism
of the faithful in all ages. For Paul in express words says, There is one
Lord, one faith, one baptism, and one god and Ephesians. 4.
father of all. Whereunto also tends this saying of the same Apostle, I
thank God that I baptized none of 1. Cor. 1.
you, but Crispus and Gaius, least any should say that I had baptized in mine
own name.

Upon this Apostolic truth, the reverend fathers of the Counsel of
Constantionople are read to have made this confession in their Creed. I
believe one Baptism for the remission of sins. For there is but one Church
only, one body, one head, and one king, prince, and high Priest of the
Catholic Church.

Now I am come to expound the rite or ceremony of Baptism. It Of the rit^
ceremonies of baptism.
was simple and but one from the beginning, and not charegable or burdenous to
the Church, through immoderate ceremonies. John baptized in Aenon beside
Salem, because much water was there, and he baptized in the name of Christ. So
did the ^hon. 3.
Apostles likewise. Whereby it remains for an undoubted truth, that the very
best form of baptising is that which is done by water, in the name of the
Father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost. For so the Lord commanded
in the 28. of Matthew. Do you ask how it comes to pass, that Luke in the
Acts makes mention that Peter and Paul baptized in the name of the Lord,
and expresses not that they baptized in the name of the Father, and of the
son, and of the holy Ghost? I answer, That under the name of the Lord,
the mystery of the trinity is comprehended. For when the Lord said, I and
the Father are one, he which is baptized into the Lord, is also baptized into
the father, and so in like manner into the holy Ghost, which is not divided
from them. For verily they have one and the self same spirit. For truly Luke
says, that they were baptized of the Apostles in the name of the Lord, whom
the Apostles baptized according to the Lords instiution.

Some say Christ is the accomplishment or fulfilling, and the proper obiecte
of Baptism: wherefore it is no marvel that the Apostles baptized into the
name of the Lord, who nevertheless were commanded to baptize in the name of
the father and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. For all the mysteries of
Baptism are laid forth unto us in the only Son of God. Truly we say
both, To baptize into the name of the Lord, and to baptize in the name of the
Lord.

The use of speaking after the first manner, is read in the 28. of Matthew,
and in Luke Acts the 19. For both have (...). In nomen, into the name. And so
also Tertullian interprets it contra Praxea^. saying: He commanded that we
should be baptized into the father, and the son. etc. The latter manner does
the same Luke use in the Acts 10. and 2. saying, (...), and (...), that is, In
the name. What it is to baptize in the name of the Lord.
Moreover, what it is to baptize into the name, or in the name of the Lord I
told you in the last Sermon next before this, that it is to be enrolled into
Gods household, that he which is baptized may now receive the name of GOD, and
be called the son of God, yea and be as it were registered into the roll of
the children of God, Citizens of the kingdom of Heaven. Whereupon we have
also na^mes given us in baptism, that as often as we hear our selves named,
we may remember our Baptism and the mysteries thereof. Neither is it a new
thing or strange from the Scriptures, that names are given us in baptism. For
so it was used also in Circumcision, which is to be seen in Luke. 2. Chapter.

Furthermore, the question is asked, Whether we ought to baptize with these
bare words, I baptize thee in the name of the father, and of the son, and of
the holy ghost: Or whether it be lawful to ad or join some thing else? I
thinck we ought to answer, That it is ye servants duty to ad nothing to his
lords institution, but diligently to keep that which he has delivered, yea,
and advisedly to mark what in baptism the Lord him self and his Apostles
did, and holily to imitate the same, that in ye church of God, (as Paul has
commanded) all 1. Cor. 14.
things may be done decently and in good order.

But after that most holy form of baptising set down and delivered, we see
two things in holy Baptism and in the use thereof to be observed. For first
the Apostles and they that were with the Apostles did teach very
significantly of the promises of GOD and faith in Christ, which is apparaunte
in the Acts of the Apostles. It is lawefull therefore in the action or
ministration of Baptism, to recite the promises of God, to rehearse the
belief, and require faith, either of them that are to be baptized, being of
perfect age: or else of them which bring the Infantes to be baptized.
Moreover, when the Lord was baptized of John Baptiste in Jordan, he prayed.
Which thing Luke in his Gospel reports of him in the history of the Luke. ^.
Gospel. It is lawful therefore in the use of Baptism to pray, and solemnly
to call upon the name of the Lord.

At the first, these Prayers were moderate and short, not of a great length
and tedious: In process of time there was no measure kept, not only in
tedious blessings, but also in diverse ceremonies, which they that came after
added thereunto. Of the which it shall not seem altogether unprofitable to
rehearse somewhat out of the old Doctors.

Tertullian in his book De Corona militis, says, When we go to the font,
Ceremonies added in times past to baptism
there, and also a little before in the church, the bishop laying his hand on
us, we do confess that we forsake the devil, his pompes, and all his
angels. Then are we thrice dipped in the water, not (some leave out not:)
aunswering any thing more then the Lord has set down in the Gospel. When
we be taken out of the font we taste of milk and honey mingled together, and
from that time we abstain from daily washinge, by the space of a whole week.

We hear in this an utter denying or renouncing, a third dipping, a tasting
of milk and honey, and after baptism an abstinence from bathing by a weeks
spaces.

In his first book against Mart. hemaketh mention also of oil. Truly milk is
meet for children, unto whom also they that be of perfect age being baptized
are likened. Beside this, in the old testament there is often mention made of
the land of promise flowing with Milk and Honey. Those things were first
offered to be tasted of them that are baptized, to give the^ to understand,
that Christ Jesus being their captain, and having passed over Jordan, they
might by an infallible hope have an inheritance in the land of promise.

S. Hierome witnesses that wine was mingled with milk, and says Com. lib. 15.
ad Isaiam: The Lord provoke us not only to buy wine, but milk also: which
signifies the innocence of infants, which type and custom is even unto this
day kept in the weste churches, to give to the^ that are borne anew in
Christ, wine and milk. At this day neither of them both is given to infants,
no not of them which will seem to be zealous mainteiners of the old
ceremonies. They believe in the mean while that their omitting of these
ceremonies is without sin, and needs no satisfaction. Now also we may
gather out of the sixte book of Augustine de Bap. contra Donat. cap. 24. that
they used diverse and what prayers they thought good about baptism. The same
August. contra Pelag. and Celest. lib. 2. cap. 40. says: In baptising of
children, they first conjure and blow away all contrary power. Which also the
infantes by the words of them that bear them, do answer that they
renounce. This ceremony he mentions also Libro primo de Nupt. and Concup. ad
Valor. cap. 20. and libro 2. cap. 18. It is said in the ecclesiastical
Decrees, that the holy church through-out the whole world used that ceremony.
Again, August. In Epistola ad Bonifa. 43. says that the godfathers do
answer for the faith of the children, and confess their faith. We ask them
(says he) which offer the infants, and say: Believes he in God? (who being of
that age, knows not whether there be a God (or no:) They answer, He
believes: and so they answer unto every question which is asked. The same
Augustine in his book de Trinitate. 15. capi 26. makes mention also of Oil,
wherewith they that were baptized were anointed.

Rabanus Maurus Bishop of Mentz, a long time following after Augustine,
reckons up many more ceremonies of baptism. For he Libro de Institutione
Cleri. 1. cap. 27. says. They are marked in the forehead and heart with the
cross in baptism, that the devil seeing that mark, may know that that
sheep is not of his fold. Also consecrated salt is put into the childs
mouth, that being seasoned with the salt of wisdom, he may be free from the
stinch of wickedness, and rotte no more with the worms of sin. His ears
and nosthrilles are touched with spittle, saying the word Ephatha used of our
Savior being thereunto added, that by the virtue of Christ the high Priest,
his ears may be opened to receive the knowledge of God, and to hear the will
and commandments of God. Then the child is blessed, and his breast
anointed with holy oil, that no relics of the enemy may lurk and remain
in him. After this, in the name of the holy Trinity he is baptized being
dipped thrice in the water. And in his 28. Chapter: And being baptized he
immediately is signed in the forehead with the Chrisme, with a prayer together
followinge, that he may be made an inheritour of the kingdom of Christ, and of
Christ may be called a Christian.

And in the 29. Chapter: After Baptism there is delivered to the Christian a
white garmente, signifying pureness and innnocencie. Also for this cause were
the baptized clothed with white garments, that they might now remember that
they were set free, and of servants and bonde-slaues of the Devil, made the
freemen of CHRIST JESUS.

Moreover, white couloure in times paste was consecrated to victoryes and
triumphs. Whereby it may seem that the white garmente was therefore given to
them that were baptized, that they might be mindful that whiles they live
here on earth, they must continually fight and overcome in Christ. For the
life of man is a warrefare upon earth. And certeinely whereas offeringes
also began to be given to the baptized by the Godfathers, that seems to
have been borrowed from warrefare. For by the offering or earneste (which we
Switsers call, Die in bindeten) he that is baptized is warned of his faith
given in baptism, always to be mindeful what a Captain he forsook, and
into what garrison he was entertained, wherein he must keep his faith given
to the new captain Christ.

Many other things of this kind which I find^ among writers of this latter
age, I willingly pass over: least I should seem to abuse your patience and
gentleness. And who perceives not, yea that at this day, other of this kind
innumerable new devises are added to baptism. Therefore the safest and surest
way is to build upon the first foundations of the blessed Apostles. For if
antiquity seem to boulster up these last invented ceremonies, who dare
deny, that the authority of the Apostles does excel it many ways? For the
Apostles were before them all, which have lastly invented, and delivered those
manifold ceremonies to be used in Baptism.

This also comes in question, Whether we ought to baptize with water not
consecrated.
Whether we ought to baptize with bare fair water, or with consecrated water,
and why the Lord commanded to baptize with water. S. Cyprian Epist. lib. 1.
Epist. 12. says, The water ought to be cleansed and sanctified before of the
priest, to wash away the sins of the man that is baptized.

But the examples and testimonies of the holy Scripture do more prevail with
me, than the authority of Cyprian or any other man, whatsoever it be. This
good man of God was also deceived in another place, about the mystery of
Baptism, so that we must read his writings with judgment.

The Scripture tells us that John Baptist, and the Apostles and faithful
disciples of Christ baptized with water, not consecrated. For what can be
spoken or read more plain, than, that John baptized in Iordane? Yea, that
Christ him self and his Apostles also baptized in the River Iordane?

Where, or how did the Apostles consecrate the water of baptism in the Acts
of the Apostles? Philip when the Eunuch showed him water as they iourneyed, he
baptized him out of that pure and clear founteine.

Beside this, I have declared in the Sermon next going before, how little
pureness is in common form of baptism, whereby the font is consecrated.
But if any man think that we ought to Baptize with consecrated or holy
water, and by consecrated, do neither understand anointed, or prepared with
crosses, or sanctified with charms, but chosen to holy uses, I would stand
in contention with him never a whitt.

For the water of Baptism in very deed is holy, not in respect of the
words rehearsed, or by crosses and other signs made: but because God has
instituted it, and in respect of the holy use and prayers of the godly. Of
which matter I spoke not long ago, when I entreated of the sanctification or
consecration of the Sacraments.

And Christ commanded his Why the (...) commanded ^o baptize ^ith w^^er.
disciples to baptize with water, for diverse causes. For types or figures
went before Baptism in water, as the ^loud, as the redd sea, through which
the people of Israel passed, as diverse cleansinges and set washings mentioned
in the law. Neither do the Apostles of Christ dissemble those things. For
Peter says that Noe was saved in the water of ^. Pet. 3.
the flood, but the wicked drowned in the water.

Paul affirms that all our fathers were baptized by Moses in the Cloud and
in the Sea. Therefore mortification and viuificatio^ is prefigured. ^. Cor. 10.
And truly the principal badge of the new testament is Baptism, witnessinge
that full remis^ion of sins is brought unto us by Christ.

And the holy Prophets of God, by the mouth of the Lord foreshewinge and
promisinge this, have willingly shadowed out this inestimable benefit by
water: therefore Baptism must be ministered in water. This also served notably
to represent the mystery. Of which matter I have spoken in my last sermon,
when I entreated of the analogy or likeness of signs. And for these causes
chiefly, baptism ought to be ministered in this, and not in any other element.

There is contention also about Whether once or thrice the infant ought to be
dipped in the water.
this, Whether once or thrice he that is baptized ought to be dipped or
sprinkled with water. Truly the Apostles have not curiously commanded any
thing in this behalf. So that it is free either to sprinckle or to dip.

Sprincklinge seems to have been used of the old Fathers: For honesty and
shamefastness forbids to uncover the body. And also the (weak) state of
infants for the most part cannot away with dipping: since sprinckling also
does as much as dippinge. And it stands in the choice of him that minstreth
baptism, to sprincle him either once or thrice, after the custom of the
Church whereof he is minister.

Tertullian contra Praxeam, says: The Lord commanded to baptize into the
father, and into the son, and into the holy Ghost. Not into one: For we
are baptized not once, but thrice, at each name into each person.

And Gregory aunswering Leonarde the bishop, says: A diverse custom
hinders nothing the holy church, so that it be done in one faith. We by
thrice dipping do signify the mystery of Christ's lying in the grave three
days. Again, the reverend fathers in the fourth counsel held at Toledo, do
allow but one dipping in baptism, and then ad immediately this reason. And
lest any should doubt of the mystery of this Sacrament, why we allow but one
dippinge, he may se therein our death, and resurrection. For the dipping into
the water, is as it were the goinge down into the grave: and the coming up
again out of the water, is the rising again out of the grave. Also he may
perceive that therein is showed the unity of the Godhead, and the trinity of
the persons. The unity is figured, when we dipp once, the trinity, when we
baptize in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost.
This I do not allege to stay my self upon man's testimonies, but by man's
testimony to show, that it is free to follow that which serves most to
the edifying of the Church.

Also there is a question moved touching ye place of baptism: Whether it be
not lawful to baptize in any Of the place of baptism.
other place than in the Church? I say that the Church is consecrated to
ministeries, and to the worshipp of God, and therefore that comeliness it
self requires to baptize openly in the Church. But if necessity will not
permit this, the baptism of Christ is tied to no place. For we hear that
Philipp baptized out of the founteine in the broad field. Yet let us take
heed that we make not necessity a pretense for our lewd affections: But let
all things in the Church be clean which perteine unto Baptism: let all
superfluity be laid aside, let all filth and uncleanness be banished, let
all things (as says the Apostle) be done honestly and in order.

Touching the time there is no law prescribed of the Lord: that is The time of
Baptism.
left free to the judgment of the godly. They yt believed the preaching of S.
Peter at Jerusalem in the day of Pentecoste, the Eunuch also whom Philip
baptized, and Cornelius ye Centurion likewise: finally Paul the Apostle at
Damascus, yea and Lydia the purple-seller, a religious or devout woman, and the
keeper of the prison, they of Philippos also and other faithful men and women,
as soon as they had tasted of the gifts and graces of Christ, and believed
his word, forthwith they dersired to be baptized: they did not foade it off
till another next time. Wherefore they do very well, which neither in
themselves, neither in their families do linger in receiving baptism.

The delaying of circumcision in his children fell not out well unto Moses. As
therefore we grant that the time of baptism is free, so it ought to be our
duty, to take heed that we abuse not our liberty: being always mindful of
these words spoken by God: The uncircumcised manchilde in whose flesh the
fore-skinne is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut Genesis 17.
off from his people, because he has broken my covenant. But we are not
ignorante that baptism came into the place of circumcision. Therefore ye
omitting of baptism is not free. There were some in the time of Cyprian, which
held opinion, that baptism ought to be received on the eighth day, after the
manner of circumcision. But Cyprian, and the 66. Bishops and Elders that were
with him in the Counsel, ordained the contrary, to wit, that every one
without any delay, should receive baptism, and procure the same speedily in
their family. That place is extant, Epist. li. 3. Epist. 8.

Furthermore, Socrates ye hystoriographer. Lib. 5. Ca. 22. says: I know also
another custom in Thessalie, according to the which they baptize only on the
days of Easter. Whereby it comes to pass, that saving a very small number,
they dye unbaptized. But after a certain time, there was a law made that the
Infantes of the faithful should not be baptized, but at the feasts of Easter
and Whitsuntide. They excepted the time of necessity. We may read this in
Decret. Syricij Pont. in Isidore: and in the Epistles of Pope Leo unto the
Bishopp of Campania, and Sicylia, which in order are reckoned to be 57. and 62.
But the things that moved them hereunto, are such as may be easily disproued
and overthrown. Truly from the beginning the time of baptism was not so
limited. Nevertheless, that Law of baptising the faithful at the feast of
Easter and Pentecoste, was renewed by Pipine, Charles, Lodouick and Lothar,
French kings, and was spread far, as their dominions reached far. Many
things are sounge in the service of the papists, at the time of Easter and
Whitsuntide, which are not understood but by this law and custom. At the
length it grew out of use, and the faithful were baptized as occasion and
opportunity first served. This is also in controversy, Who ought to baptize,
and what the baptiser works? Of the last I will What the baptiser works.
speak first. The baptiser gives visiblie the sacrament of regeneration, and
a testimony of the remission of sins: but the Lord by his spirit does
inuisibly regenerate, and forgiueth sins, and seals the regeneration. John
and the Apostles baptize with water: Christ baptiseth with the holy Ghost: not
only with the visible sign of fire, and the gift of tounges, but even he
only gives all spiritual gifts. Which thing the ancient fathers that they
might expressly declare, did diligently distinguishe between power and
ministry. For August. tract. in Ioh. 5. says, It is one thing to baptize in
way of ministry: another thing to baptize by power. Our Lord Jesus Christ
could if he had would have given power to any one servant, to give his
baptism, as in his steed, and could translate or remove from himself power to
baptize and place it in one of his servants, and give as great force to
baptism being translated or removed into his servant, as it should have being
given by the lord. He would not do so for this purpose, that the hope of the^
which were baptized should hang on him of whom they acknowledge them selves to be
baptized. He would not therefore that a servant should settle his hope in a
servant. And therefore cried the Apostle when he saw men willinge to put
their hope and trust in him: Was Paul crucified for you? Or were ye baptized
in the name of Paul? Paul therefore baptized as a minister, not as the power
it self, but the Lord baptized as the power. And again, John Baptist learned
by the dove, Upon whomesoeuer thou shall see the spirit descending like unto
a John. 1.
dove, and tariestil upon him, the same is he which baptiseth with the holy
ghost. Therefore, O dove, let not deceivers seduce thee, which say, We
baptize. O dove, acknowledge what the dove taught. The same is he which
baptiseth with the holy Ghost. By the dove it is known that it is he, and
do thou think that thou art baptized by his power, by whose ministry
thou art baptized? If thou be of that mind thou art not yet in the body of
the dove: and if thou be not in the body of the dove, it is no marvel,
because thou have not simplicity. For simplicity especially is figured by the
dove. John learned by the simplicity of the dove, that this is he which
baptiseth with the holy ghost. Thus far he. Furthermore the minister of the
Church, being lawfully ordained ought to baptize. The Donatistes contend that
none can baptize, but he which is pure and holy. They boldly avouched that ye
baptism was fruitelesse and void of effect, which a lewd living minister or
defiled with wicked vices did administer. Against these Augustine gravely
disputed and convinced the^ by the truth of the scripture. He in his 166.
Epistle says: See how peruersely and wickedly that is spoken, which ye are
wont to say. Because if he be a good man, he sanctifies him whom he baptiseth:
but if he be an evil man, and he not know so much which is baptized, then God
sanctifies him. If this be true, then men ought rather to wish to be baptized
of minsters unknown to be evil, then of them which are known to be good,
that they may rather be sanctified of God than of man. But far from us be
this madness. Why then do we not speak truth, and are rightly wise?
Because that grace belongs always to GOD, and the Sacrament is his, and the
ministry only committed unto man, who if he be good, he cleaves to God, and
works with God: but if he be evil GOD woorketh by him the visible form of
the sacrament, but he himself gives the invisible grace. Herein let us al be
wise, and let there be no schisms or divisions among us. The same Augustine
in his third book Contra literas Petiliani. ca. 49. does plentifully set
forth the same mattter. And because we have also handled the same thing in
the end of our former sermon next before this, it is needelesse to speak one
thing twice.

Here is a question objected unto us touching the baptism of Middewiues:
Whether midwiues may baptize.
Whether women Midwiues upon the point of necessity, that is, when the
Infant is in ieopardie to die, before he come to be baptized at the hands
of the Ecclesiastical minister, ought and may babtise? We answer that baptism
is a sacrament of the Church, and that women are forbidden to minister in ye
Church: therefore that they neither can nor ought to baptize, as they are by no
means permitted to teach. The laws of the Apostle are well known, But I
suffer not a woman, says Paul, to teach, neither to usurp 1. Tim. 2.
authority over the man, but to be in silence. The same law is repeated of
the same Apostle 1. Cor. 14. and is confirmed by Gods law. Man's testimonies
agree with gods. For Tertulliin his book De Velandis Virginibus, says: It is
not permitted unto a woman to speak in the Church, much less to teach, or
to babtise, nor to offer, neither to take to her self the execution of any
man's office, much less the priests. This also is read repeated in the
fourth counsel of Carthage, where also Aurelius Augustine is said to have been
present. Epiphanius Bishop of Salome in Cypres disputing against diverse
heresies, and confuting Marcio^ says, He also gives women leave and license
to baptize. He says as much of the Quintilian and Peputian heretics. He
also reasoning against the heretics Collyridiani, says: If women were
commanded to sacrifice unto God, or to execute any regular thing in the
church, then Marie ought rather to do sacrifice in the new Testament, which
was made worthy to carry in her own arms, the king of al kings, the
heavenly God, the son of God, whose womb was made a temple and dwelling for
the dispensation of the Lord in the flesh, being prepared for that purpose,
through the bountifulnes and marvelous mystery of God. But it did not so
please God. But neither was it committed, or granted unto her to baptize.
Otherwise her son might have bin rather baptized of her tha^ of John. The
same author adds, And truly there is in the Church an order of women
ministers called women-deacons, but not permitted to sacrifice, neither to
attempt any thing, but for reverence sake of women-kind, or for the hour of
bathing, or visiting, or for affection and travel. Whereas they obiecte the
example of Sephora the Madianite, Sep^ora circumciseth.
wife of Moses, which circumcised her son in the time of necessity: that
does establishe no common law: as the particular example of Delbora, makes
not all women Judges. For there are many peculiar things done in ye scripture,
out of which if any man shall go about to draw general things and common laws,
he shall bring in absurdities innumerable. What if Moses in the same place does
only describe ye deed of his wife, moved there unto by anger and displeasure,
and not for religions sake, to perform ye ministry unto God? For she
grudging against her husband yea, and against God, took the foreskin of her
son, which was cut away, and cast it at his Father her husbands feet, not
without reproach saying: A bloody husband art thou unto me. As if you should
say, Ich habb woll ein Exodus 4. 25
bluotigmann an dirr. And though the Angel was appeased with Moses, because he
seemed to allow the deed of ye woman as well pleasing God, yet yt is more to be
imputed to ye mercy of god, rather tha^ to the righteousness of the woman's
deed. It did grievously displease God that David had stain Vrias, and
moreover had taken Beersabe 2. Sam. 12
to him self to wife: yet of his goodness and singular mercy, he vouchsafed
to call Solomon, who was born of Beersabe, by this name Iedidia, because ye
Lord loved him: so the gracious Lord is also reconciled with Moses, who either
by his own negligence, or through ye fault of his Madianitish wife, lingered
circumcision in the body ^f their son against ye law, longer than was meet,
and is content with, and takes in good part ye circumcision which ye woman
performed rather of indignation tha^ for religion: yet he will not yt after her,
as a perfect example, other women should circu^cise. But (you say) by baptism
of salvation of infant^^ ^eparting without ^aptisme
ministered by a woman, the peril of death or eternal damnation was to be
prevented, into which the infant falls, if he depart this world without
babtisme. My answer is: When the infant being newly delivered out of his
mothers womb, departs with too too speedy death, so that the Parents can
not, though they would never so feign, bring him to be baptized of the
minister of the Church: this pinche of necessity truly is not to the
damnation or death of the Infant: because he being received into the covenant
by the grace of God, is delivered from death through ye blood of the son of
god. We are not destitute of testimonies of scripture duly serving in this
behalf. In the law it was not lawful to circumcise an Infant before the
eighth day: but it is certain that very many departed out of this world
before the eighth day: yet in ye mean while, if any manchilde had departed the
third or fourth day after his birthe, no condemnation was imputed unto him.
For otherwise David a very sound man in religion, and one that loved his
children dearly, and one very desirous of the salvation of his household,
when his child was dead, which was begotten and borne unto him of Beersabe,
could not have showed himself so cherefull to his courtiers, to whom among
other things, he said that he should go unto the dead child, to wit, into
the land of the living. If it were no danger unto women children to die
uncircumcised, (for they without circumcision were saved,) neither verily shall
it be damnable for men children being not baptized, to die at the point of
necessity. For we have otentimes said ye holy baptism entered and took the
place of circumcision. Hitherto perteine ye testimonies out of ye law and the
prophets. In the law the Lord protests more than once, yt he has a most
certain care and regard of infants. In Jonas he expressly professes, that
he has a consideration, and a respect of those that are not yet come to the
years of discretion. For the Lord spared the most famous city of Niniue
partly for their sakes.

Thou say, These testimonies of the old testament perteine nothing to us,
which live under the new testament. I answer, That God after the coming of
Christ in the fleash, is not more rigorous unto us, than he was before
Christ's coming. For if it were so, what should we say else, but that Christ
came not to fulfill, but to weaken and abolishe the promises of GOD? since that
in times past among them of old, the grace and the promise were effectual in
necessity without the sign: but now among us being without ye sign, they
begin to be void, and of no force. Wherefore I trusting to Gods mercy and his
true and undoubted promise, believe that infants departing out of this world,
by too t^^ timely death, before they can be ba^^^sed, are saved by the mere
mercy of God in the power of his truth and promise through Christ, who
says in the Gospel, Suffer little ones to come Mark. 10.
unto me, for of such is the kingdom of God. Again, It is not the will of
Matt. 18.
my father which is in Heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.
For verily GOD, who cannot lie, has said, I am thy God, and the God Gen 17.
of thy seed after thee. Whereupon Saint Paul also affirms, that they are
borne holy which are begotten of holy parents: not that of flesh and blood any
holy thing is borne. For that which is borne of the fleash, 1. Cor. 7.
is fleashe, but because that holiness, and separation from the common seed of
men, is of promise and by the right of the covenant. For we are all by nature
and natural birth, borne the sons of wrath, death and damnation. But Paul
attributes a special privilege to the children of the faithful, wherewith
by the grace of God, they which by nature were unclean, are purified. So the
same Apostle in an other place does gather holy branches of an holy root.
And again elsewhere says. If by the sin of one many be dead, much more
the grace of God, and the gift of Grace which is by one man Jesus Christ, has
abounded unto many. And therefore Augustine doubted not to say. As all which
die, die no otherwise but in Adam: even so all yt are made alive, are not made
alive but in Christ. And upon this, whosoever shall say unto us, that any in ye
resurrection of the dead, can be made alive otherwise than in christ, he is to
be abhorred and detested as a common plague of Christian faith: Ad Hiero. epi.
28. They obiecte, By this means the use of baptism is made void and quite
taken away. Yea Pelagianisme is sprung up again, which with so great travel,
S. Aug. with many other learned and holy men beat down and kept under. He
falsely spoke that said, The soul whose foreskin is not circumcised, shall be
cut off from Genesis 17.
his people, because he has broken my covenant: He falsely spoke that said,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except John. 3.
a man be borne of water, and of the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom
of God. For if these sayings be true, and children not baptized, truly ye
sequel is, that they dying without baptism are not saved. I answer, that I
weaken holy baptism by no means, much less take it quite away: when I
defend that infantes upon the pinche of necessity not being guilty of the
contempt of God, or wicked negligence, are not damned, though they die
unbaptized. For so salvation should be tied to ye sign; and the promise of god
should be made void, as though that alone without the sign upon the point of
necessity were vain, and could work nothing: and as if the hand of God were
shortened, and bound as it were to the sign. For otherwise I teach by all
means that infantes are to be baptized, and ye baptism is not to be delaied
neglige^tly, or to be put off maliciously: but in the mean time, if by too too
speedy death they depart unbaptized, I exhort and charge that a good hope and
confidence be had in the truth and mercy of the Lord, who promises in the
law and the gospel, yt he is the God of young infantes, and that his will is
that not so much as one of his little ones should perish. With Pelagius and
Pelagians we have nothing to The Pelagians deny the baptism of infants, and
why?.
do: neither are we ignorant, what S. Augustine has written unto Hierome,
epist. 28. in this behalf: Who so ever shall say (says he) that infants which
leave this life, not having ben partakers of Christ his sacrament of baptism,
are quickened and made alive in him, this man doubtless does set himself
both against the preaching of the Apostles, and conde^neth the whole Church:
where for this cause they make have, and run with their children to have them
baptized, for that without doubt they believe, that by no means otherwise they
could be made alive in Christ. And against the Pelagians, epistle. 106.

The Apostolical seat dealing against Pelagius, accurseth them which said,
that Infantes unbaptized have life everlasting.

The same Aug. Lib. 1. de an^. etc. ca. 9. to Renatus, disputes against
Vincentius Victor, who granted that infants are inthralled to original sin,
and yet nevertheless are saved though they be not baptized: against who^ he
brings forth this saying of our savior, Except a man be borne of water, and
of the spirit, he can not enter into the kingedome of God. But we which
condemn both Pelagius and Pelagia^s, do affirm both those things which they
deny, to wit, yt infantes are borne in original sin, and therefore that the
sanctification of Christ is necessary unto them, without which they are not
saved. Again, we defend and maintein, yt the same infants ought to be baptized
if it be possible, though by ye right of the covenant they belong to the body
of Christ, and are sanctified by the blood of Christ. Pelagius taught, that
infants ought not to be baptized, for yt he held opinion they are without all
fault, or any sin, blame and offense. That wicked and ungodly man therefore,
did not acknowledge, either our own corruption, or the benefit which God has
performed by, in, and through Christ. Yet can thou find neither of these in
our assertion and doctrine, wherefore we take no part with ye Pelagians. S. Aug.
in that self same epistle unto S. Hierome, expressly says, Thou art none of
them which say that there is no guilt drawn from Adam, from which the infant
should be washed by baptism. And against Julian also Li. 1. ca. 2. he proves
by the sentences of the holy fathers, that infants have original sin, and
ther-vpon gathers yt therefore infantes ought to be baptized, because they
have sin. For the Pelagians gathered clean contrary. They have no sin,
therefore they are not to be baptized. For the counsel of Carthage writes thus
to Innocent. The Pelagians deny that infantes are to be baptized. For these,
say they, perished not, neither is there any thing to be^ saved: because there
is nothing in them that is corrupt or wicked, etc. But we in so much as we
believe that infantes are borne in sin, yea and that they are both borne the
children of wrath, and are corrupt and wicked: moreover, because we believe
that the son of God was borne without sin of a pure virgin, to fulfill, and
confirm Gods promises, which do not shut out infantes from salvation, but let
them in as ioyncte-parteners in the league: therefore we hold and defend that
they are to be baptized. And therefore this reason gathered of Augustine, we
cannot simply allow, Lib. 3. Depec^. me^. and remiss. Cap.
Out of the fellowship of Christ, no man comes unto life: But by baptism
we are joined as members into the body of Christ, and have fellowship with
him: therefore infantes which are not to be baptized, are without the
fellowship of Christ, and therefore are condemned. For as we deny not that we
are graffed into the body of Christ, by partaking of the sacraments, (as we
declared in our last sermon of Sacraments, next and immediately going before
this) so we have elsewhere showed, and that too oftentimes already very
largely, that the first beginning of our uniting or fellowship with Christ,
is not wought by the sacraments: but that the same uniting or fellowshipp
which was founded and grounded upon the promise, and by the grace of God
thoroughe the holy Ghost was communicated unto us and ours, yea before the use
of the sacraments, is continued and sealed unto us by the participation, or
receiving of the sacraments. Although therefore an infant die without baptism,
and being shut out by necessity from having fellowship with Christ, so yt he be
neither partaker, nor yet sealed by ye visible sign of the covenant, yet he is
not altogether an aliant or stranger from Christ, to whom he is fastened with
the spiritual knot of the covenant, by the virtue whereof he is saved. The The
exposition of the place, The soul^ of the uncircumcised shall be cut off.
place of Genesis 17. alleged of cutting off the uncircumcised from the people of
God, in consideration of the time, it fitly agrees to those yt are of perfect
age and well grown in years, and not to babes or infantes, which thing is seen
in Moses, who^ ye angel of ye lord, for neglecting circumcision, or for
delaying it longer than was lawful, would have slain, as he testifies of
himself: neither am I ignorant that certain old interpetours refer y^ not
to Moses, but to Eleazar ye son of Moses. But the very course of the
history, and the circumstances of the same, do sufficiently prove that the
danger lay on the fathers, and not on ye sonns neck. What if a reason be added
in the words of the law, which by no means agrees to infantes? Therefore
shall the uncircumcised perish (says he) because he has broken my covenant. So
that if we consider that circumcision in the very same place was commanded,
not only to infantes, but to such as were of perfect age, as to Abraham,
Ismael, and others desiring visibly to be joined into the fellowship of god, we
are not to marvel, ye destruction is threatened to the disobedient. For if any
man at this day understand and know the Lords ordinance comprehended in
these his words, He which shall believe and be baptized shall be saved, will yet
nevertheless not be baptized, but boasts ye faith is sufficient for him unto
salvation, that baptism is superfluous, he has despised the ordinance of God,
and is condemned for a rebel and an enemy to God.

Furthermore that place of John. 3. The exposition of the place, Except a man
be borne of water. etc. John. 3
is not to be understood of ye ourward sign of holy baptism, but simply of
the inward and most spiritual regeneration of the holy spirit, which when
Nicodemus understood not perfectely, the Lord figured and made the same
manifest unto him, by parables of water and of the spirit, yt is to say, of the
wind or ye air, by elements very base and familiar. For by and by he adds,
That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, etc. Again, The wind blows where
it lusts, etc. which must needs be meant of ye air. For the other part of
the comparison follows, So is every one that is borne of the spirit.
Furthermore he adds, If I tell you of earthly things and ye believe not, how
will you believe if I tell you of heavenly things? But the argument which he put
forth was not altogether earthly. For this is the argument of his whole
disputation: Except a man be borne from above, he cannot see the kingdom of
God: That is to say, unless a man be renewed, and as it were borne again by
the spirit of God, which is given from above, yt is to say, powered into him
from heaven, he cannot be saved. The doctrine is altogether heavenly: but the
means whereby he delivered, declared and set forth this heavenly doctrine, is
earthly. For by things taken from the earth, he shadowed out to man, being
gross of understanding and earthly; a spiritual and heavenly thing, and laid
it open as it were even ^^ the view of his eyes. As by water and air
oftentimes the qualities of bodies are changed, and as the effect and woorking
of water, and the air in bodies is merueilous: in like manner is the working
of the holy Ghost in the soul of man, which it changes, purifieth, and
quickens, etc. For so the Lord himself afterward (which I told you even
now) expounds an other parable of the spirit. And because al old writers,
for the most part, by water have understood sacramental water, that is to
say, holy baptism, we also receive this interpretation. For we willingly
grant that baptism is necessary to salvation, as well in such as are of
perfect age, as also in babes or infantes: so that necessity constrain not
the contrary. For otherwise, if we go forward stubbernly, with S. August. to
condemn infantes by this place, truly we shall be compelled also to condemn
even those that are baptized, if they depart this life without partaking of
the body and blood of Christ. For S. Augustine being infected with ye De
peccatorum meritis and remissione lib. 1. ca. 20.
like error, defends that the sacrament of the Lords supper ought to be put
into the infantes mouth, or else they are in danger of death and damnation,
because it is written: Except ye eat the flesh of the son John. 6.
of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Therefore after this
same order he places these two sentences: Except a man be born of water and of
the spirit, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And, Except ye eat the flesh
of the son of man, etc. So that if thou persist obstinately in S. Augustines
sentence, verily thou will condemn the whole Church at this day, which denies
ye partaking of the Lords supper unto Infantes. But if in this thing there be
admitted a convenient interpretation, why are ye so rigorous and obstinate in
another, and the like place and cause not disagreeable? What will you say, if in
this opinion Augustine does not satisfy no not himself in all and every
point? To a Layman he thinks it venial sin, if he baptize in time of
necessity. He cannot tell whether it be godlily spoken, ye baptism ministered
by a layman ought to be iterated, or done again. But how much better and
safer had it been, letting the necessity of baptism pas, which has no
lawful causes, to hold opinion ye infantes if they be not prevented by death
ought to be baptized of the minister of ye church, in ye church, their parents
procuring it as opportunity first serves: and yt too too speedy and souden
death, (which we call ye pinch of necessity,) is no let or hinderance to
salvation, to them which are not yet brought to be baptized. The same Augustine
trembles and is afraid to determine of the punishmente of damned infants, for
not being baptized: neither knows truly what he might certainly say. In his
first book De anim, etc. ca. 9. he says, Let no man promise to infantes
unbaptized, as it were a middle place of rest or felicity whatsoever it be, or
whersoeuer it be, between hell and the kingdom of heaven. But that sentence
is for the most part received of all men* whereupon also the infantes are buried
in the churchyard in a certain middle place, between the profane and holy
ground. And again the same Aug. contra Iulianum Pelagianum, lib. 5. ca. 8.
writes, That those infantes of all other shall come in the easiest damnation.
And immediately be adds: Which of what manner, and how great it shall be,
although I cannot describe, yet I dare not say, that it were better for them to
be as no body, tha^ to be there. And again, in his Epistle to Saint Hierome
28. he says: When I come to determine of the punishments of little infants,
believe me, I am driven into narrow streightes, neither find I any thing at
all to answer. Here also may that be added which he disputes upon, Lib.
4. contra Donatist. cap. 22. and 23. touching the thief which was crucified
with Christ, among other things saying, That then baptism is fulfilled
inuisibly, when not the contempt of religion, but the point of necessity
excludes and shuts out from visible baptism. Why then should we not
believe also that in infantes departing by to to timely death, baptism is
inuisibly performed, since that not contempt of religion, but the extremity
of necessity which can not be avoided, excludes and debarreth them from
visible baptism. And since very many at this day do grant that any man of
perfect age without baptism in the point of necessity may be saved, so that
he have a desire of baptism: why then may not the godly desires of the
parents, acquit the infantes now newly borne from guiltiness. But thus much
hitherto.

Touching this also, who are to be Who ar to be baptized.
baptized, both in time past and our age there has been bitter iarring.
Pelagius in time past denied that infants ought to be baptized, which we heard
even now. Before Pelagius time, Auxe^tius Arianus with his sectaries denied
that they are to be baptized. Some in the time of S. Barnard denied the same,
as we may gather out of his writings. The Anabaptists at this day, a kind of
men raised up of satan to destroy the Gospel, deny it likewise. But the
Catholic truth which is delivered unto us in the holy scriptures, does
simply pronounce, that all they are to be baptized, whom God acknowledges for
his people, and gives sentence that they are partakers of purification or
sanctification or remission of sins. For in all this treatise concerning the
sacraments, I have already, and do now show, that baptism is a badge or
cognizance of ye people of God, and an assured token of our purification by
Christ. Therefore since the young babes and infants of ye faithful are in the
number or reckoning of Gods people, and partakers of the promise touching the
purification through Christ: it follows of necessity that they are as well to
be baptized, as they that be of perfect age which profess the Christian
faith. But there is a busy disputation begonn, Who be the people of God.
Who be ye people of God, and partakers of remission of sins by Christ? So
that the disputation is touching the secret election of God, and other hard
questions depe^ding on this thing. But briefly and simply, we can rid our
hands of this. We say that the people of God are acknowledged, either by men's
confession of the Christian faith, or else by the bou^tifull promise of God. By
men's confession: for we acknowledge them to be the children of GOD, who being
now grown to perfect age, do openly confess the true God, that God is their
^^d, and that Jesus Christ is their savior. But that confession is either
unfeignedly, or hypocritically made. Unfeignedly, as when S. Peter says, Thou
art Christ the son of the living God: when the Eunuche says, I believe that
Jesus Christ is the son of God: but hypocritically, as when Simon Magus in
the Acts of the Apostles says, That he believes in Jesus Christ. But
whether a man believe unfeignedly or hypocritically, when he makes open
confession of his faith in Christ, (the secrets of the heart God only sees:
for he only is rightly believed to be the searcher of men's hearts) it
belongs not to us if he make a right confession to separate, or cast him away
from the people of God. For Philip did not cast off or put back Simon Magus:
but upon his confession received him for a faithful man, and baptized him as
a faithful man: though he in very deed, and before GOD, were an hypocrite.
In the first Sermon of this Decade we declared that hypocrites also are
reckoned in the church, til time they be revealed. But concerning remission of
sins, those only among them that be of perfect age, do obtain it, which
unfeignedly believe. Which in an other place is often showed. S. Peter said to
Simo^ Mag^s, though he we were baptized, Acts. 8.
Thou have neither partenor fellowship in this business, because thy heart is
not right in the sight of god. Furthermore, by the free and bountiful promise
of God, not only by the confession of men, we esteem, and acknowledge the
people of God. For to whom so ever the lord promises that he will be their God,
and who^ so ever he receives, and acknowledges for his, those no man without
an horrible offense may exclude from the number of the faithful. And God
promises, that he will not only be ye god of them that confess him, but of
infants also: he promises to the^ his grace and remission of sins. Who
therefore gainesaying the Lord of al things, will yet deny that infants belong
to God, are his, and that they are made partakers of purification thoroughe
Christ? And that GOD acknowledges infants for his, and sanctifies them, by
the very sum of the covenant it is manifest. I will make my covenant Genesis 17.
between me and thee, says the Lord unto Abraham, and thy seed after thee
in their generations, by an everlasting covenant, that I may be God unto thee
and to thy seed after thee. There is added circumcision, a sign of
sanctification, whereof I spoke abundantly, when according to order I entreated
of circumcision. Neither is there any cause why any man should fear, that with
circumcision and the ceremonies of the law, the promise is abrogated, and that
by the coming of Christ the covenant is broken and annihilated. For we said
even now, ye Christ came to fulfill the promises of God, and not to break
them. And therefore the Lord in the gospel speaks of infants, that is to say,
which have not as yet confessed the faith, and says, Suffer little children to
come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God. And
though it be said Of such, and not Of those, yet no man is so ignorant, but
understands there is a likeness between those things which are compared
between the^ selves. Therefore if the kingdom of God belongs unto them that
are of perfect age, because they are become like little children, surely it
follows of necessity, that the inheritance of ye kingdom of heaven belongs
also to infants or little children. For it follows in ye gospel. Whosoever
shall not receive the kingdom of God, as a little child, he shall in no wise
enter therein. Therefore it behooves ye heirs of the kingdom of God to be first
infants or little children. And who knows not, that no man, unless he be
sanctified and purified, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven? Children
enter into the kingdom of GOD: therefore they are purified, to wit, by the
grace of God. For by their nature and birth they are unclean, and sinners, but
for Christ's sake they are purified: who said, That he came to seek and save
that which was lost.

Paul also expressly testifies, That by the sin of one Adam, sin came on all
men unto condemnation: and that by the righteousness of one Romans 5.
Christ good came upon all me^ to the righteousness of life. Therefore it is
certain that infants are partakers of purification and remission of sins
through Christ, albeit they do not confess remission of sins. What, does not
the Lord say in the gospel? It is not the will of your father which is in
heaven that one of these little ones should perish: Again, He that shall
receive such a young child in my name, receives me: but he that shall offend
one of these little ones, that believe in me, it were better that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, etc. See therefore and take heed, that ye despise
not one of these little ones. For I say unto you, that their angels in heaven
do always behold the face of my father which is in heaven. Behold, what could
be more manifestly spoken? It is not the will of my heavenly father, that
infantes should perish. Therefore he receives them freely into grace and
favor, though they have not yet confessed. Moreover, he that receives such a
little one, to wit, as he him self set in the midst of them, for Christ's
sake, he is said to receive Christ him self. Lo, he attributes to the
receivers of infantes that which he promised to the receyuers of the Prophets.

He adds, But he which shall offend one of these little ones, that believe in
me. He manifestly calls Infantes confessing or believing.
the little ones, not yet able to confess, believers, because he reputeth them
of his grace, for believers. Neither is this any wonder or strange thing, since
god, yea, to them that are of perfect age, imputes faith for righteousness.
For in all points righteousness, acceptance, or sanctification is free, and
imputative, that the glory of his grace might be praised. Furthermore, his will
is, that little ones should not be despised, much less to be cast out among
the number of the Saints. Yea, he does affirm that Angels are given unto them
to be their keepers, who though they be ministers of Gods majesty, yet the
self same are given and granted to little children to be their guard: so yt
hereby we may judge what great store ye Lord sets by infants, and learn not
to wype them out of the skoare of Gods people, to whom the inheritance of
life is due.

We attribute nothing here to the birth, which is after the flesh, but all
things to the grace and promise of GOD. Now it is evident by all these
testimonies, that as well the infantes of the faithful are to be baptized, as
also those that are of perfect age, confessing the faith.

Now on the contrary part the Anabaptists do contend, that none By what
argument: the Anabaptists. ^each that infan^es. ought not to be baptized.
is to be baptized, but he alone, which both is able to be taught, and to
believe, yea, and to make confession of his faith also. And for confirmation of
this thing, they bring these sayings of our Savior. Out of Saint Matthewe,
Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the
Father, etc. Out of Mark, Go^ ye into the whole world, and preach the
Gospel to all creatures, he which shall believe and be baptized, shall be
saved, etc. Behold, say they, teaching goes before baptism. Therefore, they
that are notable to be taught, ought not to be baptized. Furthermore, to
believe goes before, and to baptize follows after. Infantes do not believe,
therefore they are not to be baptized. Upon all these, they heap up out of the
Acts of the Apostles, examples which prove that the faithful, that is to
say, they that confess the faith, were baptized of the Apostles. They reckon
up also the newly instructed Christians of the old time, to whom say they,
there had been no place given, if they had baptized infantes. I answer, If
the order of the words make anything in this matter, we also have in a
readiness to serve our turn. For in Mark thus we read, John baptized in
the desert preaching the baptism of repentance, in which place we see, that
to baptize goes before, to preach follows after. Yea, I will show also
that that place which they allege out of Matthewe for them selves, makes also
for us. For Matthewes words be these, All power is given unto me both in
heaven Matt. 28.
and in earth, says the Lord, Go therefore and (...), that is to say,
discipulate (that I may so speak) yt is, make ye me disciples or gather
together al nations: yea, he teaches them also the way and means how to gather
disciples unto him out of all nations, or al nations, by baptising and teaching
them. By baptising and preaching ^e shall gather me together a church. And he
sets out both of them severally one after an other, sweetly and shortly,
saying: baptising them in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the
holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things which I have commanded you.
Now therefore baptism goes before teaching. But we do not thereby gather,
that those nations which never heard any thing before of God, and the Son of
God, and the holy Ghost, are to be baptized, neither would the Apostles have
borne that: but we allege these things to declare upon how fickle a
foundation the Anabaptists do build. And we simply say, that it is not true
which these men imagine, that the Lord commanded his apostles to baptize them
only whom they taught.

Neither does he here point out who are to be baptized in the whole world,
but he speaks of them that are of perfect age, and of laying the first
foundations of faith and of the Church among the Gentiles, being rude as yet,
and ignorant altogether in religion.

They that are of perfect age, are able to bear preaching or teaching:
Infantes are not so. They that are of perfect age, are able to believe and
confess: Infantes are not so. Therefore he speaks nothing here of infantes.
Yet therefore they are not debarred from baptism. It is a general law, He
which does not labor, let him not eat: but who is so cruel and unnatural, to
think that therefore infantes are to be famished to death? The Lord when true
religion began to be spread abroad, sent his Apostles into all nations, unto
them which both were ignorant of God, and strangers from the Testamentes of
God: Truly it beh^^ued them not first to baptize, and afterward to teach,
but first to teach, and then to baptize.

If at this day we should go to (...) or turn the Turks to the says of
Christ, first truly we should ^eache the^, afterward baptize the servants of
Christ, and those that would yield themselves into his subjection. So the Lord
him self in times past also, first renewed his covenant with Abraham him self,
and instituted Circumcision for a seal of the Covenant, and after that Abraham
was circumcised. But he him self, when he understood that infantes also were
partakers in the covenant, and that circumcision was the seal of the
covenant: he afterward did not only circumcise Ismael being thirteen years
of age, and all that were borne in his own house, but infantes also, among
whom we reckon Isaach also. Even so the faithful which were turned by the
preaching of the Gospel from gentilisme, and confessing were baptized: when
they understood that their infantes were counted among the people of God, and
that baptism was the badg of Gods people, they caused also their infantes to
be baptized. As therefore it is written of Abraham, He circumcised all the
menchildren in his house: so we oftentimes read in the Acts and writings of
the Apostles, that after the master of the house is turned, the whole family
is baptized. But as concerning the newly instructed Christians, they came in
the old time from the Gentiles dailye unto the Church, whom these did instruct
in the principles of faith, being ignorant therein, and afterward baptized
them. But the ancient fathers them selves, nevertheless baptized also the
infants of the faithful: which anon we will declare.

Neither do they lawfully gather, when they conclude in this sort, He which
shall believe and be baptized shall be shwed: Infantes do not believe:
therefore they are not to be baptized. For again, it is certain that it is
spoken of them that be of perfect age, as in Matthew. And because he requires
faith, and confession of faith, of those that are of perfect age: it does not
follow thereupon, that he requires the same of infantes. For he accounts
these as his own, of his mere grace and free promise without their
confession. So that of the contrary part we do thus reason. They that believe
are to be baptized: (which the very adversaries also do confess:) Infantes
do believe. (For God reckons them in the number of the faithful, which I
have before manifestly proved: Therefore infantes are to be baptized. They
object Infantes understand not the mystery of baptism.
that infants understand not the mystery of baptism: and therefore that it
is not only repugnant to religion, but to common sense and reason to baptize
infants. For to baptize an infant is to baptize a logge, since neither of the^
has the use of reason: but these filthy knaves let their tongs run at randon
against the very majesty of God. God commanded to circumcise the infants:
and circumcision contains high mysteries, which infants understand not. But
has God ordained any thing against reason and co^monsense? Go ye falseknaues
go with your blasphemies to the place which you deserve. It is a most filthy
deed, yea, and more than barbarou^, in that ye compare infants to logges. For
what great store God sets by infants, we taught you already before out of the
Gospel.

But men which now begin to have the use of sound reason, are diligently and
earnestly to be taught and admonished, to remember they are baptized, and to
endeavor by calling on the name of the Lord, in all points to be answerable in
life and conversation to their promise and profession. For so Abraham
instructed his son Isaach, and all the holy fathers their children. But
letting pass these brainsicke, frantique, and foulemouthed That the baptism
of infantes is of God, and that the Apostles baptized infants
raylers, who as (we have heard) never want words to wrangle, though we have
had never so much, never so often, and never so earnest conference with
them. Let us proceed to declare in a sewe but yet manifest arguments that
infants are to be baptized, and that the Apostles of Christ our Lord have
baptized infants. The Lord commanded to baptize all nations, and therefore
infantes. For they are comprehended under the word of All nations.

Again, whom so ever God reckons among the faithful, are faithful. For
Peter in a vision hears, That which God has cleansed call Acts. 10
not thou common, or unclean. God reckons infantes among the faithful:
therefore they are faithful: except we had rather resist God, and seem to be
stronger than he. And now we count it out of all controversy, that the
Apostles of Christ baptized them, whom Christ commanded to baptize: but he
commanded to baptize the faithful: therefore the Apostles baptized infants.

The Gospel is greater than baptism: for Paul says, The Lord sent me to
preach the Gospel, and 1. Cor.. 1.
not to baptize, not that he did absolutely deny, that he was not sent to
baptize: but because he preferred doctrine. For the Lord commended them both to
his Apostles.

Furthermore in the Gospel children are received of God, and not refused: who
then, unless he be willingly obstinate, can debar them from the less? In
^acramentes the thing signified and the sign are considered. The thing
signified, is the excellenter: from ye infants are not debarred. Who then will
deny them the sign? Truly ye holy sacraments of God are more esteemed by the
word, than the sign. By the word we gather, that women are not excluded
from the Supper of the Lord. Although therefore we read not, that they were in
the first institution, and set at the first table of the Lord, neither that
there is any express law, which commands us to admit them to the Supper,
yet nevertheless without fear or doubt by a perfect argument we admit them.

S. Peter could not deny them the baptism of water, to whom he saw the holy
Ghost to be given, which is an assured toke^ of Gods people: for he says in
the Acts of the Apostles: Can any man forbid water that these should not be
baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Wherefore the
holy Apostle Peter denied not baptism to infants. For he knew assuredly,
even by the doctrine of his Lord and master (that I may speak nothing now of
the everlasting covenant of God) that the kingdom of heaven is of infants. No
man is received into the kingdom of heaven, unless he be the friend of God.
And these are not destitute of the spirit of God. For he which has not the
spirit of Christ, Romans 8.
the same is none of his: children are Gods, therefore they have the spirit of
God. Therefore if they have received the holy Ghost, as well as we: if they be
accounted among the people of God, as well as we that be grown in age: who (I
pray you) can forbid these to be baptized with water in the name of the Lord?
At the first the Apostls murmured, being the^ not sufficiently instructed,
against them that brought infantes unto the Lord. But the Lord rebuked them
and said, Suffer little children to come unto me. Why then do not the
rebellious Anabaptists obey the commandment of the Lord?

For what other thing do they at this day, which bring children unto
baptism, than that which they in times past did, which brought infants unto
the Lord? And the Lord received them, laid his hands on them, and blessed
them: and to be short, by words and gestures, he notably signified, that
children are the people of God, and most acceptable to God. But why then by the
same means, say they, did not he baptize them? Because it is written that
Jesus him self did not baptize, but his disciples. John. 4.
Now since of the thing it self, it is so plainly determined, why as yet do
we contend about the sign? Hitherto good men are satisfied: but contentious
persons go on to busy them selves with questions.

Beside this, circumcision among the old people of God was given to infants:
therefore baptism ought to be given to infants, among the new people. For
baptism succeeded in the place of circumcision. For S. Paul says: By Christ
ye are circumcised, Col. 2.
with circumcision made without hands, by putting off the body of the flesh
subject to sin, by the circumcision of Christ: buried with him in baptism.
Lo, Paul calls baptism the circumcision of Christians, made without hands,
not that water is not ministered by hands, but in that no men hencefoorthe is
circumcised with hands, the mystery of circumcision remaining nevertheless
in the faithful. Neither shall thou read any of ye old interpreters of ye
church, which have not confessed, ye baptism came in stead of circumcision.
Yea, the likeness and similitude of both of them do show a manifest
succession.

To that which I have said, I join this. The servants of God have always
been careful, to give the signs to them, for whom they were ordained. For
that I may pass Joshua. 5.
over al other, did not Joshua diligently provide that the people should be
circumcised, before they entered into the land of promise? And since the
Apostles, the preachers to the whole world, have been the faithful servant
of Jesus Christ, who hereafter may doubt, that they baptized infantes, since
baptism came into the place of circumcision?

Undoubtedly the apostles of Christ framed al their doings unto the types and
figures of the old Testamente, therefore it is certain that they framed
baptism also, and therefore that they baptized infantes, because they were in
the figure of baptism. For the people of Israel, went through both the red
sea, and the river Jordan with their children. And although they be not always
expressed, as neither women are in the holy Scriptures: yet they are
comprehended, and understood by them. To this apperteyneth that which is
clearly set down in the Scriptures, that the Apostles baptized whole houses
or families. In houses first of all children are comprehended, as the (...) and
most beautiful part of the house.

So then the Apostles baptized children or little ones, and not only them that
are of perfect age. And that a house especially comprehends infantes or
little ones, it may be declared very easily. And first out of the place of
Genesis 17. which even very now I alleged. Next, in that Joseph sent for
Jacob his father with his whole house, out of the land of Canaan into the land
of Egypt, least his house should have perished with hunger. There are many
places of this kind in the law, and the Prophets, and in the whole
Scripture. But be it yt there were no infantes in those houses (which thing
these ianglers object) which the Apostles baptized, yet nevertheless they do
perteine unto the house and are counted of it, so that if they had been in
the house, without doubt they had baptized them. Whereas therefore they
contend, that they were not baptized, in those families or houses, truly, I
say, that the fault was neither in the children, as though they had been
unworthy of baptism, neither in the apostls, as though they were not wont to
baptize infants: but in that, because they were not present. For if they had
been present, they had been baptized. For why? ye apostles baptized whole
houses, unto which children belong.

Now, I can show by the writings The baptism of in fants has lasted from the
time of the Apostles.
of the old doctors, that baptism of infants has continued from the
apostles time even unto us, neither was it ordained by any counsels, or by the
decrees of any Pope, or other men: but instituted and delivered of the apostles
out of the scriptures. Origin lib. Einarrat. in epist. Pauli ad Romans 5
expounding the 6. cha. says, That the Church of Christ, received of the
Apostles them selves, baptising of infants. S. Hierome makes mention of the
baptising of infants, Lib. 3. contra Pelagianos, and in his Epistle to Laeta.
S. Augustine cites the place of Chrysostom, nay being cited of Julian he
expounds it, Lib 1. contra Julian. cap. 2. He also unto S. Hierome Epist. 28.
says, S. Cyprian making no new decree, but most steadfastly keeping the faith
of the Church, was of this opinion with certain of his fellowe-byshops, that
the new borne child might rightly be baptized. The place of Cyprian is to be
seen in Epi. ad Fidum, as also I declared before, when I spoke of the time of
baptism. The same Aug. against the Donatists Lib. 4. cap. 23. and 24. boldly
affirms, That baptising of children was not fetched from the authority of
me^, or of counsels, but from the tradition or doctrine of the Apostles. Cyrill
Lib. in Leuit. 8. both approves the baptising of children, and condemns the
iterating of baptism. Which thing I do not allege to this end, to build the
baptising of children upon man's witness, but to teach that man's testimonies
agree with ye testimonies of God, and that the truth of antiquity is on our
part: lies and new forgeries on the shameless Anabaptists ^ide, who feign
that baptising of children was commanded by the Pope. Now I think it not
labor lost to speak somewhat of Anabaptisme. The history of Anabaptisme.
In the time that Decius and Gallus Caesar were Emperors, there arose a
question in the parts of Africa, of rebaptising Heretics. And Saint Cyprian
and the rest of the bishops being assembled together in the counsel of
Carthage, liked well of Anabaptisme. But Cornelius bishop of Rome, in very
deed an holy and learned man, and a martyr also, together with the other
bishopps of Italy misliked the same. For they would that heretics, after
they had renounced their wicked opinions, and made their confession touching
the right opinion, should be cleansed by the only laying on of hands. Ye may
read this in Eusebius Ecclesiastical history, Lib. 7. There is also extant a
treatise of that matter in the Ecclesiastical decrees, Cap. 52. But we must
understand that S. Cyprian affirmed nothing obstinately in this cause. For in
the end of his epistle to Iubaianus, he writes. These things have I briefly
sent unto you in writing, after our mean capacity (most dear brother,)
commanding no man to follow them, neither preventing any man's opinion, but
that every bishop, having liberty of his own judgment, may do what he
thinks best.

After that time both the Arians and Donatistes did rebaptise. Touching the
Arians, historiographers write, and especially Sozomenus Lib. 6.
Ecclesiastical writers do touch the same thing also elsewhere in their works.
Against the Donatists S. Augustine with other learned men disputed. There is
also an Imperial law made by Honorius and Theodosius, that holy baptism should
not be iterated. Justin. Caes. has published the same In Cod. Lib. 1. tit. 6.
in these words. If any minister of the Catholic Church be detected to have
rebaptised any, let both him which committed the unappeasable offense (if at
least Imperial law against the Anabaptists.
by age he be punishable) and be also that is won and persuaded thereunto,
suffer punishment of death.

Moreover, Valentin. Valens, and Gratianus give in charge to Florianus
Superintendent of Asia in these words: That same minister which by unlawful
usage, shall (...) holy baptism, we account him unworthy of an Ecclesiastical
function. For we condemn their error, which tread under foot the precepts
of the Apostles, and having obtained the sacraments in Christ's name, they
purify not again by a second baptism, but defile and deflou^e them under the
name of cleansing. Thus far they. And verily they which rebaptise, and are
rebaptised, they both defile ye name of God, which was called on over the
baptized in the former baptism, and cast from them the institution of God as
vain and vicious. Christ is read to be baptized but once. The Apostles were
not baptized twice. All ye saints of god are baptized only but once. Yea those
which Judas baptized once, are not read to be baptized again of a worthier
minister. For in my last Sermon I showed, that the pureness of the Sacraments
depends not upon the worthiness or unworthiness of the minister. Neither can
you read that any in the old time were twice circumcised, no not they which
were manifestly known to be circumcised of idolatrous priests, before ye
reign of Ezechias and Josias: but they were not baptized into idolatry, but
into ye covenant of the Lord God. Whereof I have admonished you elsewhere.
Therefore it is an horrible offense to iterate the Ceremony of baptism, and
it is without example. Neither in this matter is there any necessity: for to
what end is it to baptize again, when as baptism once given is sufficient
for the whole course of a man's life? Beside this, since Anabaptisme is nothing
else but a confederacy, conspiracy, and a certain lincking together by one
mark into a new and seditious, or at the least superstitious company, into a
new and scismaticall Church, and into a new and strange kind of doctrine, and
as contrary as can be to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles: truly it
is no marvel that the obstinate Anabaptists are kept under and punished by
common laws. For otherwise these things are damnable and not to be dissembled
or suffered of a Christian magistrate. But ye Anabaptists presently obiecte
unto us these two places. The first out of the fifte Chapter of Joshua, where
we read in these words: Make thee sharp knives (of Ios. 5.
stone) and go to again, and circumcise the children of Israel the second
time.

Behold, the second time they could not be circumcised, say they, unless The
places alleged to prove Anabaptisme are confuted.
they had been also circumcised before. I answer, To circumcise the second
time, or to do a thing once again, does not signify to do that which was
done before. For when the fore-skinne was once cut off, how could it be cut
off again. Therefore that which was left undone for a certain space, is now
again renewed, and is said to be done the second time. So that the second time
is not applied to them that should be circumcised, but unto the very time
wherein they that were uncircumcised should be circumcised. For they were
first solemnly circumcised in Egypt, before they did eat ye Passover. Now
entering into the land of Chanaan, they are the second time solemnly
circumcised, which hitherto by reason of the wilderness and iourneying were
not circumcised. And so it follows immediately in the same Chapter, that all
the males that came out of Egypt died in the wilderness, and that their
sons were uncircumcised, so that now it was expedient yt they should be
circumcised, as their fathers were before them. Therefore the Anabaptists in
this testimony of the law, have no defense at all.

The latter testimony to maintain Anabaptisme or rebaptising, they The twelve
men of Ephesus not rebaptised.
bring out of the 19. Chap. of the Acts, where they say that those twelve men
of Ephesus, were once baptized by Apollos, with the baptism of water, and with
that of John's likewise: but the very same afterward are rebaptised of Paul in
the name of Christ. I answer, That those twelve men were not baptized again
of Paul with water. They were once baptized with water, which was sufficient
for them. But neither could Paul minister another baptism of water, than that
of John's. For I taught and evidently proved anon after the beginning of this
Sermon, that ye baptism of water ministered by John, Christ, and his Apostles,
is one and ye self same. There I declared that the baptism of fire, or of the
spirit, is peculiar and proper to Christ. Those Acts. ^.
men therefore of Ephesus were baptized with the baptism of water, as the
Samaritans were by Philip: but they were not as yet fully instructed of the
baptism of fire, neither were they baptized with fire: yea they confess they
know not whether there be any such baptism, that is, whether there be an holy
Ghost, which in the visible form of fire should come down upon men. For
they could not be altogether ignorant, that there was a holy Ghost, without
whom undoubtedly they had not believed, yea, in whom they had believed, if
they had rightly believed. Therefore they were only ignorant of that baptism
of fire. As therefore Peter and John laid their hands on ye Samaritanes, and
they forthwith received the holy Ghost: So Paul lays hands on the men of
Ephesus, and they receive the holy Ghost. For Luke says, When they heard
these things, they Acts. 19.
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And least any man should
understand this of the baptism of water, by and by he adds the manner
thereof, and a plain exposition, saying: And when Paul had laid his hands
on them, the holy Ghost came upon them. This, I say, he called baptising in
the name of the Lord Jesus. For it follows, And they spoke with tongues and
prophesied. And this always has been the fruit and effect of the baptism
of fire, in the Primitive Church, as I declared anon after the beginning of
this Sermon. Wherefore the Anabaptists have no testimony out of the
scriptures, for their Anabaptisme or rebaptising. So that all that will gather
their wits about them, do plainly see, that they are to be forsaken and
shunned of all good men. But we have sufficiently disputed against them as it
seems. Now we go forward to expound those things that remain to be opened
touching baptism, which are not the last and of least account.

Now that we are come to entreat of the virtue and efficacy of baptism, Of
the ^orce of Baptism.
we will follow that order, which we shadowed out in ye description of
baptism, knitting up at least the particulars, because in the general
consideration of Sacraments we have spoken largely of them. Yet nevertheless
it is good first of all to know, what the adversaries of the Church have
sometime thought, touching the force of baptism. The Manicheis baptized none
of their sect. For they taught that Baptism did avail the receivers nothing
to salvation. The Seleucians who are called also Hermiani, did likewise set
baptism at naught. The Messalians, which be called Euchetes, or
prayer-makers, (as I have showed in the end of my former Sermon,) and the
Enthusiastes, inspired (I say) by some heavenly power, nay rather by some
hellishe fury, are persuaded that baptism neither profits nor hinders any
man. For so they did attribute all means of salvation to the inward woorking
of the spirit, yea, to man's prayers, in so much that they loathed and abhorred
all outward helps, yea and doctrine also as unprofitable and without force.
Which Theodoret in his Ecclesiastical history, Libro 4. cap. 11. rehearses
of them.

But the holy Scripture teaches that we are washed clean from our sins by
baptism. For baptism is a sign, a testimony, and sealing of our cleansing.
For GOD verily has promised sanctification to his Church, and he for his
trueths sake purifyeth his Church from all sins by his Grace, thoroughe the
blood of his son, and regenerateth and cleanses it by his spirit, which
cleansing is sealed in us by baptism which we receive, and thereof is it
called in the Scriptures, cleansing, and remission of sins, purifying, new
birthe, regeneration, and the lauer or founteine of regeneration: as
circumcision is called the covenant: and sacrifices, sins and
sanctifications. we are baptized into the remission of sins.
For we read in the Gospel according to Saint Mark: John baptized in the
desert, preaching the baptism of repentance, for the remission Mark. 1.
of sins. The same also is mentioned in Luke. Luke. 3.
In the Gospel of John the third chapter John. 2.
baptism is called Purifying. In the Acts of the Apostles, Peter says Acts.
2.
to the people which demanded what they should do, Repent ye, and let every
one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins. Ananias also says to Paul, Arise and be baptized, and wash away
Acts. 22.
thy sins, in calling on the name of the Lord. And now Paul himself says,
Christ loved the church and gave Ephesians 5.
himself for it, to sanctify it, when he had cleansed it, in the founteine of
water in the word.

Wherefore the promise, yea, the truth of sanctification, and ^ree remission
of sins, is written and engraven in our bodies when we are baptized. For God
by his spirit, thorough the blood of his son, has newly regenerated and
purged again our souls, and even now does regenerate and purge them. And
baptism is sufficient Baptism is effectual for man's whole life
and effectual for the whole life of man, yea, and reaches and is referred to
all the sins of all them that are baptized. For the promise of God is true.
The seal of ye promise is true, not deceivable. The power of Christ is ever
effectual thoroughly to cleanse, and wash away all the sins of them that be
his.

How often therefore soever we have sinned in our life time, let us call into
our remembrance the mystery of holy baptism, wherewith for the whole course
of our life we are washed: that we might know, and not doubt, that our sins
are forgiven us of the same God and our Lord, yea, and by the blood of
Christ, into whom by baptism once we are graffed, that he might always
work salvation in us, even til we be received out of myserie into glory.
Neither is there any doubt that Abraham in his whole life had continually in
his mind the mystery of circumcision, and rested in God and the seed
promised unto him: Yet I think that that ought diligently to be marked, which
S. Augustine pithily and plainly has often cited: That our sins are
forgiven, or purged in baptism: not that they are no more in us, (for as long
as we live concupiscence bears swaye, and always breeds and brings forth
in us, somewhat like it self:) but that they should not be imputed unto us:
neither that we may not ^inne, but that it should not be hurtful for us to
have or had sinned, that our sins may be remitted when they are committed,
and not suffered to be continued. De Fide and operib. cap. 20. And also many
more of this kind, Gratian recites Distinct. 4. de Consecrat.

Beside that, by baptism we are gathered together into the fellowship By
baptism we are gathered together to be the people of God.
of the people of God. Whereupon of some it is called the first sign or
entry into Christianity, by the which an entrance into the church lies
open unto us. Not that before we did not belong to the church: For whosoever
is of Christ, partaker of the promises of God, and of his eternal covenant,
belongs unto the Church. Baptism therefore is a visible sign, and
testimony of our ingraffing into the body of Christ. And it is rightly called
a planting, incorporating, or ingraffing into the body of Christ. For I said
in the general discourse of Sacraments, that we first by baptism were
joined with Christ, and afterward with all the members of Christ, our
brethren. For Paul says: All ye that are baptized, have put on Christ. But to
put on Christ, is, to be Gal. 3.
made one with him, and as as it were to be joined and incorporated in him,
that he may live in us, and we in him. For he only by his spirit
regenerateth and renueth us and most liberally inricheth us with all manner
good gifts, which the same Apostle in another place expresses in these words.
God saved us, by the founteine of the regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Tit. 3.
Ghost, which he shedd on us richly through Jesus Christ our savior. Yea, and
therefore Christ our Lord is baptized in our baptism, to declare Luke. 3.
that he is our brother, and we ioynteheires with him. Very well therefore
said S. August. That baptism is thus far forceable, that we being
baptized, are incorporated into Christ and counted his members. The same Aug.
calls Baptism the sacrament of Christian fellowship. For we are gathered
again visibly by baptism, into the unity of one body with all the
faithful, as many as have been, are, and shall be. For Paul also says, By one
spirit we are all baptized into 1. Cor. 12.
one body. And it follows hereby Baptism serves for our confession.
that baptism serves for our confession, and is rightly called the token of
Christian religion. For it is a badge or cognizaunce, whereby we witness and
profess that we consent and are lincked into Christian religion. We confess
that we by nature are sinners and unclean, but sanctified by the grace of God
through Christ. For if we were clean by nature, what needed we then any
cleansing? But now since we are cleansed, who doubts of the truth of God?
Therefore when we receive baptism, we truly and freely confess, both our
sin wherein we were borne, and also free forgiveness of sins.

Lastly, the remembrance and consideration of the mystery of baptism puts
us in mind of the duties of Christianity and Godliness, that is to say, al
our life long to weigh diligently with our selves, of whose body we be made
members, to deny our selves and this world, to mortify our flesh with yt
co^cupiscences of the same, and to be buried with Christ into his death, that we
may rise again in newness of life, and live innocently, to love our brethren
as our members, with whom by baptism we are knit together into one body, to
remain in the bond of concord, and in the unity of the church, not to follow
strange religions, being mindeful that we are baptized into Christ, to whom
alone we are consecrated, and far separated and divided from all other Gods,
worships, or religions, and to be short from all heresies. Let us think also
that we must constantly and valiantly fight against Satan, and the whole
kingdom of Satan. As often therefore as we remember we are baptized with
Christ's baptism, so often are these things put into our minds, and we
admonished of our duty. But the Apostle handles this matter more at large,
in the sixth Chapter of his epistle to the Romans, where he expressly makes
mention, that we by baptism are made the graftes of Christ, that is to say,
that we might grow out of him, as branches out of the vine, and feel in our
minds and bodies, both ye death and resurrection of Christ. For since we are
endued with the spirit of Christ, which works in us our body verily dies
daily, but our spirit lives, and rejoices in Christ. To whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

Of the Lords holy Supper, what it is, by whom, when, and for whom it was
instituted, after what sort, when, and how often it is to be celebrated, and of
the ends thereof. Of the true meaning of the words of the Supper: This is my
body. Of the presence of Christ in the Supper. Of the true eating of Christ's
body. Of the worthy and unworthy eaters thereof: and how every man ought to
prepare himself unto the Lords Supper.
The ninthe Sermon.
Unto the holy baptism of our Lord Christ, is coupled the Sacrament of the
body and blood of our lord, which we call the Lords Supper. For those whom
the Lord has regenerated with the lauer of regeneration, those does he also
feed with his spiritual food, and nourishes them unto eternal life:
wherefore it follows necessarily, that we entreat next of the holy Supper
of the Lord.

This has many names, even as Sundry names of lords supper.
has the feast of Passover, and is instituted in the place thereof, in old
time it was called, The Passing over, or the Lords Passover, which was in
deed a memorial of the Passover, also a Remembrance, Sign, Solemnity, a
festiual or holy day, a meeting together, or an holy assembly, an observation
of worshipping, a ceremony and sacrifice of Passover, a sacrifice or
offering, of which we have spoken in place convenient. This is called by S.
Paul ye Apostle, The Lords supper, because this Ceremony was instituted by
the Lord in his last supper, and because therein is offered unto us the
spiritual banquet. The The Lords table.
same Paul terms it and that doubtless for none other causes. By ye same
Paul it is also called the Communion, not so much for Communion.
that we have communion or fellowship with Christ, and he with us, as that
we being many are one bread and one body, which do partake of ye same bread.
Luke calls it Breaking of bread, naming the whole by a part. Breaking of
bread.
And it is evident, that our forefathers of old gave not unto the receivers of
the Lords supper a morsel, but that they brake the bread amongst themselves.
In time past, firm leagues A memorial of the Lords passion.
were performed by breaking of bread. It is called also a memorial and
remembrance of the Lords passion. For the Lord said, Do this in the A thanks
giving.
remembrance of me. It is named a thanksgiving, because when we celebrate
the Lords supper, we thank him for all his benefits, and especially for his
death, by the which we are redeemed. It is called also a Token, A Sacrament.
and a mystery, and a sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord. Our
forefathers did term it by this word Synaxis. Synaxis.
Synaxis is a joining together, a knitting, a closing, or an agreement. For the
Church is joined and united unto Christ in the holy Supper by a most straight
league: and to conclude, the members themselves are therewith joined very fast
together.

Furthermore, it is called an assembly of Saints, an holy company, and An
assembly.
a gathering together. For in the old time it was never customablye celebrated,
but in the common assembly of the Church. Which is plainly to be proved by
the words of the Apostle 1. Corinthians. 2. To conclude, we shall offend nothing at
all, if we call the supper A Testament.
of our Lord, The Testament and will of God, and of our Lord. For herein shall
thou find all things belonging to a full and perfect Testament. For Christ
is the Testatour, All faithful Christians are appointed heirs. The Legacy is
the forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting, obtained by ye body of Christ
(which was) given, and his blood (which was) shedd. The letters or table of
this testament or will, be the words of the Lords supper, wittnessing as it were
by a public writing, that Christ is the food and life of the faithful. The
order and doing thereof, is as it were the seal. Wherefore, even as we do call
that a testament which has letters sealed, containing a testament both by
writing and sealing: so the Lord himself did call his supper a testament. For,
This cupp, said he, is the new testament in my blood. For otherwise the new
testament is not the remission of sins. Which thing Jeremy the prophet
does plainly testify in the 31. Chapter, and Paul to ye Hebrews in the
eighth Chapter. This holy mystery has diverse other names, but these for the
most part are chiefest and most commonly used. Of the other names we will
speak elsewhere. They do define (for the most part) What the Lords supper is.
the Lords supper to be a spiritual banquet, wherewith the Lord does both
keep his death in remembrance, and also feeds his people unto life
(everlasting.) But let me set down a more large description thereof unto you.
The supper of the Lord is an holy action instituted unto the Church from God,
wherein the Lord by the setting of bread and wine before us at the banquet,
does certify unto us his promise and communion, and shows unto us his
gifts, and lays them before our senses, gathers them together into one
body visibly, and to be short, will have his death kept of the faithful in
remembrance, and admonishes us of our duty, and especially of praise and
tha^kesgining.

First we say, that the supper of the The supper of the Lord is an holy action.
Lord is an action or deed. For ye Lord when he made his supper did give
thanks unto God, he brake bread and gave the cupp, and said, Do this in the
remembrance of me. Again, it cannot be every action. For at the table where
we eat meat, we also give thanks unto God, we break bread, and give the
cup: but it is an holy action, because it is from God and instituted unto the
Church. Wherefore, it far differs from our ordinary meat suppers, as well
for yt it is specially instituted by the son of God unto the Church, as also
because it has ye word of God, and the peculiar example of Christ. Therefore
S. Paul making a difference between this and common eating, says: If any man
hunger let him eat at home, least that ye come together to your condemnation.
And again, Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? As though he might say,
This supper is mystical. Again, what manner of action it is, it does forthwith
appear by that which felloweth: where the Lord by ye setting of bread and
wine before us at the banquet, does assure us of his promise and communion,
etc. This supper therefore has his peculiar limits, of the which although I
spoke when I entreated generally of the virtue of the Sacraments, yet will I
repeat certain of them that make most for this purpose, when I shall draw
toward an end of this Sermon.

But concerning the description of this supper, these things are chiefly Who
is the author of the supper.
to be consider and declared: First who did institute it, and who is the true
author and maker of the Lords supper, not any man, but the very son of God
himself, the wisdom of the father, very God and man. So that we come not
to the table of men, although a man being the minister be ye chiefest there,
neither do we receive holy signs at the hands of the minister only, but
also at the hand of our Lord himself, whose guestes we are if we be
faithful. He has consecrated the supper for us, and does yet consecrate it
by his holy word, his will, and his power: of which matter we spoke before. And
because the faithful understand and know these things, they sit down to the
holy and heavenly banquet with Christ, being wholly occupied in heavenly
things both in mind and soul.

He instituted the supper the same night that he was betrayed, and the When
the supper was instituted.
next night by his death and bloudsheding he confirmed the new testament. For
so soon as he had eaten the figurative Lamb with his disciples, and had
plainly told them that from that time forwards that ceremony should not be
used, the supper was established in the place of that which was abolished. That
like as the bloody Lamb did signify that Christ should suffer, even so the
bread which is with out blood, witnesses that Christ who is the bread of life,
is already baked upon the cross and has suffered, and made the food for all
believers. Wherefore that night was worthy to be observed and celebrated, and
that last supper is full of mysteries. For we commonly most of all account of
the words and deeds of our dearest friends which they use a little before
their death. Wherefore as all Christ's doings are beloved and precious unto
us, so ought this his last supper to be most dearly beloved and precious in
our sight.

The supper consists of the word and manner, promise and ceremony. Whereof i^
consists
The word is this, that Christ is preached to have been given up to death for
our sins, and that he shedd his blood for the remission of our sins.
Promise is made unto all that believe, that their offenses shall be forgiven.
The same thing is also expressed by the manner. The manner is diligently set
down in writing by S. Matthew, Mark, and Luke, whom S. Paul following, has
nothing at all varied from them. The words therefore (dearly beloved) as they
be gathered out of these four into one text, I will recite unto you. The same
the words of the supper.
night in the Evening wherein he was betrayed, the Lord came with the twelve,
and when it was time he sat down, and the twelve with him. And while they
were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and
gave it unto his disciples, saying: Take and eat, this is my body which is
given for you (or broken.) Do this in the remembrance of me. Likewise taking
the cup (after he had supped) he gave than^kes, and delivered it unto the^,
saying: Take ye this and divide it among you, drink ye al thereof. And they
drank al thereof. And he said unto them, this is my blood, which is of the new
Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of their sins. This cup is
the new testament in my blood, (which is shed for you.) This do as often as you
shall drink it, in the remembrance of me. Verily I say unto you, that I will
not drink henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until that day come that I
drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom. These are word for word the
solemn and most holy words of the Lord spoken at his last supper. The high
bishop of ye catholic church Christ our Lord, celebrated his supper After what
manner the supper was celebrated and instituted.
with his disciples in like sort, as we have now seen and heard, without al
pomp, simply, plainly, and sparingly. He took away the ouer-busie ceremony
of the law, appointing an other very easy to be gotten and no thing
sumptuous. Most things apperteining to the law were troublesome, and all
belonging to the gospel easy and nothing sumptuous. The Lord sits down
with his twelve disciples. Whereby we learue, that first of all there must a
company be gathered together, which must celebrate the supper. In his
assembly these things does the Lord First of all he preaches most diligently
unto his disciples, of those things especially which concern the mystery of
his passion and of our redemption. But wheresoever is the preaching and hearing
of the word of God or of the gospel of Christ, there are also gronings and
vows or prayers of the faithful: wherefore they yt intend to celebrate ye
supper of the Lord, before althing, according to ye example and institution of
the high bishop Christ our Lord, they do most diligently hear ye preaching of
the Gospel, and also pray most earnestly. Afterward he took bread, and the lord
blessed it and brake it, moreover he gave unto his disciples and bad them eat.
Anon he parted the Cup among them, commanding them al to drink thereof. And
thereupon he plainly and expressly commanded saying: Do this: to wit, as you
have seen me do. Wherefore the disciples did eat the bread, and drank all of
the cup. Therefore they ye celebrate ye Lords supper lawfully, do one unto an
other break, distribute, and eat the Lords bread which they receive at the
hands of Christ's ministers: and likewise distribute and drink al of the
Lords cup, which they receive at the hands of Christ's ministers. And like as
the high bishop Christ bad the^ do it in remembrance of him, so they ye
celebrate the Lords supper, remember the death of Christ, and all his benefits.
Moreover as the Lord has gone before us in his example in giving thanks to God
the Father: so likewise do the faithful make an end with this holy mystery with
giving of thanks, praising his goodness and mercy, because he is good, and his
mercy indureth for ever. This is ye most simple and best manner of the Lords
supper, which the Apostles receiving of Christ, delivered to be observed of
all nations. Wherefore, when this question is asked, Whether it be lawful to
sup Wether it be lawful to ad aniething to the rite. etc.
after an other rite or manner, Whether it be lawful to add or diminishe any
thing from the manner left and delivered, or to change any thing therein,
Whether ye supper of the lord ought only to be celebrated, after the manner
already delivered, and not after any other? there is no small folly and
rastnesse, yea rather great ungodliness, therein bewrayed. For to what end
serves the most simple, most plain, best, and perfectest form of the supper
delivered of the Lord himself, and received of his apostles, if we devise
another? who I pray you shall deliver a better than the son of God himself,
the high priest of the Catholic Church has already delivered? Or who (I
beseech you) that is well in his wits shall either add or diminish any thing
to the ordinances of God? Who dare be so ^old as to change that which is
delivered by the everlasting wisdom of God? All the sayings and doings of
Christ are most perfect: Therefore the form also of the Lords supper, is a
most perfect form of a right singular and excellent ordinance or
institution. The rites or ceremonies of celebrating the sacraments of the old
testament were most perfect, so delivered from the first institution of them,
that nothing was added to the^ nor taken from them, by such as were religious,
no not many years after. For Ezechias the king celebrated the passover, so
likewise did Josias celebrate the same, but not after any Leuit. 1^. Leuit. 10.
2. Sam. 9. Number. 4.
other rite or manner than was delivered from Moses. The fathers circumcised
their infantes, but not after any other manner, nor any other rite than was
first instituted. In times past who so had not sacrificed in the same place and
according to the same manner which God commanded by Moses, was by the law
accused of murder. Nadab and Abihu are smitten with lightning from heaven, for
bringing strange fire into ye Tabernacle. Oza is smitten with souden death, for
that the Ark of the Lord of hoastes was not handled in such sort as was by
the law commanded. And therefore ye manner of celebrating the lords supper, as
it was by ye Lord instituted and delivered to the Church by the Apostles, is to
be observed with great religion: unless we will believe that the institutions and
manners of celebrating our sacraments are more imperfect than theirs of old
time: and that God the father does now a days less regard the profanation, or
the religious observation of his sons institutions, than these of Moses and
the forefathers in old time. But Paul the vessel of election, knowing
Christ's institution to be most perfect, and that the same ought to be kept
still in the Church simply and without any addition, says to the Corin. I
received that of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11.
which I have also delivered unto you For he thought it an heinous offense to
deliver any other thing to the church than that which he had received of the
lord. Let us therefore with great religion hold that fast which is delivered
unto us by the Lord and the Apostles. But the Apostle delivered none other
thing to the Corinthians, yea many years after the Lords ascension into
heaven, than that which was faithfully set down unto us in writing by the holy
Apostles and Euaungelistes, S. Matthew, How in old time it has been celebrated
in the Church.
Mark, and Luke. Certainly it is well known, how that certain hundred years
after the death of the Apostles, this simple manner of celebrating the lords
supper was held in the church.

For the pastor or minister of the church, after that he had preached the
Gospel, and given public thanks unto God in open prayer, then came he forth
into the mids of the holy assembly. Before the face of ye people stood a
table furnished with bread and wine, behind the which the minister standing
blessed the people saying: The Lord be with you. The people answered: And with
thy spirit. The^ replied ye minister, Lift up your hearts admonishing the
congregation, that the holy mysteries shall be celebrated, and therefore yt they
must lift up their minds from visible things unto invisible. The people
answered: We lift the^ up unto the lord. Afterward exhorting ye whole company
to give thanks, he cried aloude: Let us give thanks unto the Lord our God. The
Congregation answered: It is meet and right so to do. Then proceeded the
minister saying: It is very meet and right our bounden duty, and behoful
for us, (turning himself then to the Lord) that we give thanks always, and in
all places unto thee, Lord holy father, almighty and everlasting god, through
Christ our lord: who the day before that he suffered his passion, took bread,
gave thanks, brake it, and gave it to his discipls: with the residue as follows
in the gospel. These things being repeated out of the gospel, the minister
proceeded further, saying: Let us pray, being admonished by wholesome precepts,
and instructed by divine institution, we are imboldened to say: Our father
which art in heaven, etc. After the rehearsal of the lords prayer, the people
received the holy mysteries, and did communicate together, and after they had
given thanks and praised God they were dimissed. And of this form there
remain certain footsteps in the writings of the ancient fathers to be seen,
to wit, in S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, and others.

But consequently in later times, ye The four^e of the Lords supper changed.
prayers, blessings, and the ceremonies grew to be very great. Moreover
Christ's institution was changed, and turned into a strange use, and in fine
ye Mass was patcht together, in which appears but small antiquity. But
touching these matters I have in treted very largely in another place, and you
your selves are very well seen in this point: we which defend and hold yt the
institution of our Lord Christ which is delivered unto us by the Apostles is
most pure and perfect, do nothing regard, neither what any man, nor at what
time any bishop has added this or that to ye holy rite, or else has taken
away or changed: but rather what he, who is before and above all, did first him
self, and commanded to be done. If the authority of him yt did institute, if
learning and holiness, if antiquity may be of force, then ye victory is ours,
who have Christ on our side with the best chosen company of ye apostles, for
from these we have what we celebrate, and ye which we hold, that al godly men
ought to celebrate. But why the Lord instituted this mystery Why it was
insti^^ted in the form (...) bread an wine.
under the form of bread and wine, it is evident. For bread comfort, and
wine makes glad the heart of man, which I also touched where I entreated of the
proportion and agreement of ye sacraments. Moreover our fathers in the figure
of Manna, did eat bread which rained down from heaven. Also in their
sacrifices gratulatorie and of thanksgiving, and in their drink offerings they
used bread and wine. But there has sproung a great contention Whether the
bread ought to be leauened or un leauened
concerning the substance of ye lords supper, some holding opinion yt it ought
to be celebrated with unleavened bread, and others with such as is leuened. But
among our forefathers of old, there was about these no such co^tentio^: for
ye church used both indifferently as the^ pleased. It may seem y^ at ye first
supper the lord used unleavened bread at the table, acording to the ancient
manner of celebrating the Passetouer. Whereupon many churches used unleavened
bread, who notwithstanding condemned not them of heresy which used leauened
bread. The Pope and his adherents, co^ceiuing no small displesure here at, has
deeply accursed the greek church for so trifling a matter. But ye Artotyrites
were upon some just cause condemned by the ancient fathers, of who^ Epiphanius
makes mention between the Pepuzianes, and the Priscillianes, setting bread
and cheese upon the table in their celebrating contrary to Christ's institution.

It is furthermore disputed upon, Whether water is to be mingled with the wine.
whether unmingled wine or delayed with water, is by the faithful to be used
at the supper. Cyprian the martyr holds opinion, that in this mystery ye wine
ought not to be unmingled but delayed with water and so to be offered, yt is to
say, drunken by the faithful. For thus he has written, Because Christ has
borne us al, who also bare our sins, we may perceive that in the water the
people is to be understood: in the wine the blood of Christ to be
understood. For when water is mingled with the wine in the cup, the people
is united unto Christ, and the multitude of the believers is coupled and
joined unto him in who^ they believed. And thus in blessing the Lords cup, only
water may not be offered, neither in like sort may wine only. For if any man
offer only wine, the blood of Christ begins to be without us: but if it be
water only, then does the multitude begin to be without Christ. But when
they are both mingled together and are joined with a confused mixture betwixt
them, the^ is there an heavenly and spiritual sacrament wrought. By these words
truly does S. Cypria^ show unto us a good mystery: but why do we seek to
be wiser than Christ, and to mingle together more mysteries than we have
received of him? The holy scripture makes mention of no water, but rather
reports that the Lord used naught else but mere wine. For the Lord says:
Verily I say unto you, that henceforth I will drink no more of the fruit of
the vine. For he plainly said not the wine, but the fruit of the vine, that
herein we should make no manner of mingling. But what if that the holy martyr
of God himself Saint Cyprian, has labored by all the means he might, to
show that ye only is to be followed of the faithful in celebrating of the
Lords supper, which they have received of our Lord Christ himself? And
forasmuch as that testimony does make much to all this our treatise,
concerning Christ's supper to be celebrated according to ye words of the
gospel, I will recite it word for word out of the second epistle of ye 3.
book of his epistles. We must not In celebrating the supper nothing to be
followed but that which we have received of Christ.
(says he) depart in any respect from the doctrine of the Gospel, and those
things that our master taught and did himself, the scholars also ought to
observe and do. The blessed Apostle in another place speaks more constantly
and stoutly, saying, I meruell that you are so soon changed from him that
called you to grace, unto another gospel: which is nothing else, but there
besome that trouble you and go about to overthrow the Gospel of Christ.
Howbeit if we our selves or an angel from heaven, do preach unto you any other
thing than that we have taught, let him be accursed. As I have said before, so
say I now again, if any man preach any other thing unto you than that which
you have received, let him be accursed.

Since therefore, neither the Apostle himself, neither an angel from heaven
can preach or teach otherwise than Christ him self once has taught, and
his Apostles have preached, I much marvel from whence this custom has
grown, that contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel and the Apostles, in some
places water is offered in the Lords Cup, which being taken alone cannot
express the Lords blood. And again, there is no cause, dearly beloved
brother, that any man should think that the custom of certain men is to be
followed, if there be any that heretofore have supposed that water alone is to
be offered in the Lords ^up. For it must be demanded of them whom they have
followed herein?

For if in the sacrifice which is christ, none is to be followed but Christ,
doubtless then ought we to hearken unto, and to do after that which Christ
has done and commanded to be done, since he him self says in his Gospel:
If you do that which I command you to do, I will call you no longer
servant, but friends. And ye Christ alone should be heard, the Father him
self also witnesses from heaven, saying: This is my well-beloved son, in
wh^^e I have delight: hear him. Wherefore, if only Christ is to be heard,
we ought not to regard what any other before us has thought meet for us to
do, but what Christ did first who is before all other. Neither ought we in any
case to follow the custom of men, but the truth of God, considering what the
Lord speaks by ye prophet Isaie, saying: They worship me in vain, teaching
the commandments and doctrine of men. And again, the Lord repeating the self
same words in the gospel, says: Ye set Gods commandementes aside to establish
your own traditions. And in another place he says: He that shall break any
one of the least of these commandments, and shall on this sort teach men,
shall be accounted least in the kingdom of heaven. But if it be not lawful to
break the least of the commandments of God, how much more heinous is it,
to break things so great, so weighty, and so much belonging to the Lords
passion, and the sacrament of our redemption, or else to change it into any
other order by man's traditions, than is instituted by God? And so forth as
follows. There is no man can deny, but that these things are of authority
even against the author himself. For neither by the scriptures, nor by the
example of Christ can it be proved, that water was mingled with the wine at
the supper. As for the authorities and testimonies which the author alleges,
every man may perceive how little they make to the purpose, yea yt they be
wrested from their natural meaning. The gospel plainly pronounces that the
Lord drank of the fruit of the vine unto his disciples. And as often as Paul
makes mention of the cup, yet teaches he in no place that water was mingled
with the wine, or that it ought to be mingled with it. Wherefore, these
watermen, that is to say, they that use water only, in celebrating the Lords
supper, are justly condemned: such as the Martionites and T^^tianes were.
Howbeit it is an indifferent matter, whether you use r^d wine or white in the
supper.

Again, why did not the Lord deliver the Sacrament of the Supper Of both
kinds to be given and recei^ed in the ^upper.
unto us under one form of bread, or wine only, but rather under both kinds?
the doctors of the church by one consent suppose this to be ye cause, for that
he would signify, or rather testify unto us yt he took both soul and flesh
upon him, and gave the same for us, and also has delivered our souls and
flesh from everlasting destruction. For although there be 2. kinds, yet do they
make but one sacrament and they may not be separated. Neither is their opinion
of judgment to be allowed of, who of their own private, or rather
sacrilegious authority, do corrupt the institution of Christ, offering to ye
Lay people which do communicate, the one kind only of bread, and granting to
priests both kinds, and so challenging both kinds to themselves only. But Paul
the Apostle received the authority from the lord himself, to admit all the
faithful people of Christ unto the Lords cup: and therefore let these bold
fellows consider from whom they have received commandment to put back the
Layitie, and to forbid them the cup, which by the Lord our God is granted
unto them. For Christ in plain words, and as it were by the spirit of
prophecy, foreseeing what should come to pass in the Church, said not of
the bread, Eat ye all of this: But when he took the cup he added, Drink ye
all of this. Saint Mark also adioyneth hereunto not without deep judgment,
And they drank all thereof. Hereunto also apperteineth yt which the Lord
speaks in S. Luke: Take this and divide it among you. S. Paul the Apostle
having a special regard unto this excellent and plain institution of Christ,
three or four times joins the cup to the bread: saying, As often as you shall
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, you shall express the Lords death.
Again, Whosoever eats of this bread, or drinks of the Lords cup
unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And again
he says: Let a man examine himself, and then let him eat of the bread, and
drink of the cup Again, Who so eats and drinks unworthily, etc. These
testimonies are manifold, and worthy absolutely to be believed, and unto
which al traditions of all men whatsoever, should give place. The Lord has
instituted the cup of the supper unto all the faithful: wherefore the Apostles
exhibited the same unto all the faithful. For if the sacrament of the blood of
Christ were given to the Apostles only, surely then the thing it self, to wit,
the remission of sins which is obtained through Christ's blood, belongs
only unto the Apostles. Howbeit the Lord says plainly, This is the blood of
the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins. It is
also in other places of the scripture manifestly set down, ye Christ's blood
was shed for the remission of ye sins of all the faithful. Wherefore, if the
Laity be capeable of the thing, how much more of the sign? Now if our
adversaries proceed further and say, that the Apostles only sat at the
supper, (who represented the figure of the priests) and that the use of the
cup was granted unto them only, and not to be granted unto other, but to
such only as were present at the first supper: then do we demand of them by
what authority they give the Lords bread to the Laity, or by what right they
do admit simple women unto the Lords supper? since it is manifest that
neither the one, nor the other (according unto their speaking in this matter)
sat at the Lords table, And in this point they being taken tarde, can go no
further. But they object the danger of the cup, which if it be given unto all
without exception, it would come to pass through the folly and negligence of
men, there might some great offense be committed in letting it fall, or pouring
it on the floor. As who should say, the eternal providence has not foreseen so
great an offense, which these wisemen do well perceive now at length in the
end of the world, and do amend that, wherein the Son of God did amiss.

For they cry out, that one kind is enough for the lay people, for as much as
by a necessary coherence it follows, that where the body of Christ is, there
is his blood also: and thus must it then follow, that the one kind is
instituted in vain. But the lord distinctly first offered the bread, and
afterward the cup: and the Lord instituted nothing in vain: therefore both
kinds, since the Lord has so commanded, ought to be parted among all the
faithful: which as many as have read the writings of the ancient fathers, will
report was observed ever before even almost unto the time of the counsel of
Constance. Of whom many have not been afraid to say, that the dividing of
this sacrament after this manner, could not be done without sacrilege.

The matter and substance of ye supper being declared, there is lightly some Of
the co^s^eratio^ of the bread and wine.
question moved concerning ye form or of the consecration of the bread and
wine. But for as much as I have entreated hereof in the general consideration
of the sacraments, there is no cause why I should, with lothesomnesse to the
bearers, repeat the self same thing again. We do not acknowledge any
transubstanti^tion to be made by force of words or characters: but we affirm
that the bread and wine remain as they are in their own substances, but that
there is added unto them the institution, will, and word of Christ, and so
become a sacrament, and so differ much from common bread and wine, as we have
said in place convenient.

Consequently insueth the question Whether there must be one chief dealer in
the action of the supper
touching this point, Who should administer the Supper: that is to say Whether
any one of the congregation ought to be chief in the celebrating of the
supper: then, Who the same should be? Surely the thing it self requires, and
nature also commands, that every thing be done decently and in good order:
and religion requires that all things apperteining to the supper be done
according to Christ's example. But he was the chief dealer in the supper: And
he likewise has appointed ministers of the Church, by whom he will have the
sacraments to be administered.

Wherefore, like as every man does not baptize, but the lawful minister of
the church: so apperteyneth it not unto every man to prepare and minister the
holy supper, but to the minister which is ordained by God. Herein now we
disprove the Papistical doctrine which allows of private Masses, and teaches
yt the priest offreth up the body and blood of our Lord for the standers by,
and that by the Mass he applteth the merit of redemption unto them yt with
devotion come to that sacristce. For as there is no one word of the Lord
extent that commands the priests to sacrifice, or privately to apply the
supper for others, or that promises any thing unto them that stand by and
look on it, for he says, Do this, eat ye and drink ye all in the
remembrance of me: he says not, Look upon the priests only while they be
eating and drinking for you: so Christ is not bodily present in the bread and
wine: he is joined unto our hearts and minds by his spirit, For it were to
none effect that he remained in the bread. And if he were present there in
deed, yet could he not be sacrificed, both for that he has offered up him
self once upon the cross, neither can the most worthy and only begotten
son of God be offered up again to God the father by a sinful man: as also
for that there is no need for him to offer again. For S. Paul says, Christ
being one only sacrifice offered up Hebr. 10.
for sin, sits for ever at the right hand of God, looking for that which
is yet to come, until his enemies be made his footestoole. For by one
oblation he has made them for ever perfect, that are sanctified. And again
he says: Whereas is full remission of sins, there is no more oblation for
sin. But we have full remission of sin by the death which Christ once
suffered. Therefore there is no sacrifice in the church for sin. In deed the
Church does celebrate the memorial of the sacrifice which was once perfectly
finished upon the cross, but the Church does not offer up sacrifice any
more, either with blood or without blood.

Praise and thanksgiving are a most acceptable sacrifice to the Lord: ye same
the minister offers not for others, but with others. Here now therefore we
ascribe none other thing to ye minister but the ministry, that he be the
president or chief dealer to recite the prayers in the celebration of the
supper, and after the holy prelection, and the pronouncing of the solemn
words, let him, after the example of Christ, begin to break ye lords bread,
and distribute his cup, and let him receive also the sacrament for himself, as
the other faithful people do, as companion of the faith, and when the
communion is done, let him end the holy action with thanksgiving, and some
holy exhortation. Concerning ye place where the supper is to be celebrated, Of
the place where the supper is to be celebrated.
I find no contention has been amongst the most ancient ministers of the
church. It is read how that our Lord Jesus used the hall of a certain prinate
man's house. And also the Apostle Paul both preached Acts. 20.
and brake bread at Troas, in a certain dining place. The ancient Church
which insued immediately after the death of the Apostles, almost unto ye time
of Constantine the great, had none or very few large and public churches.
For it was scarce lawful or safe in so troublesome a time, for the Christians
to creep abroad. In the mean time they used very honest places, in the
which they met together in holy assemblies, having places of prayer. At this
present there seems no place to be more worthy or more commodious to
celebrate the holy supper in, than that which is appointed for doctrine and
prayer. For so have we learned of Saint Paul. Cor. cha. 11. How beit, if
tyrannical power will not suffer us to have a church, what shall let us but yt
we may reueritly celebrate the supper in honest private houses?

Touching the holy instruments Of the lords altar or table.
belonging to the Supper, the matter also requires to speak something in this
place. In the time that the Apostles lived, they iupped at tables set forth
and furnished for that purpose: they knew no fixed altars builded of stone,
which are more fit to make fire upon, and to burn beasts on for a sacrifice. A
removing table agrees better with the example of Christ. Notwithstanding we
condemn not standing altars, so that they serve only to the lawful use of
the supper. S. Paul in the 1. to the Corinthians calls ye altars of
Ethnickes, tables, so that we need not to marvel, that the ancient fathers
termed our tables, altars. For it is an easy matter to fall from the one to
the other: and it should seem that they alluded unto the only altar of the
Tabernacle of God.

In old time the tables were covered with some fair cloth, with some linen
table-cloth or towell. From whence perhaps were borrowed those things which
are called corporalls. As for that outward bravery and worldly trimming, it
was not then used on the altars of christians. We read how it is forbidden by
the law, that there must no altar be builded of hewn stone: by which prouiso,
all cost and branerie in Religion is forbidden.

Thus it is manifest, that in the ancient times there were no precious Of
vessels belonging to the Lords supper.
nor costly vessels used at the supper. For like as Christ and the Apostles
taught that frugalitie should be used in all places, condemning superfluity,
and beatinge into us the contempt of gold and silver: so in those holy
mysteries they have not overthrown that doctrine of theirs, or given occasion
of excess: After long persecution, when peace was restored to the Church,
then began the custume to celebrate in ye church wc vessels of golds and
silver* But the also there were some that brought the same again to his old
frugalitie and simplicity. Chrysostom cried out (as I have also declared in
another place) that in receiving the Lords supper, we ought to have golden
minds, not golden vessels. And Saint. Ambrose says, The Sacraments require
not gold, neither are those things plesaunt in gold, which are not bought
with gold. The ornament of the Sacraments is the redemption of captives. S.
Hier. commends S. Exuperius bishop of Toledo, who carried the Lords body in a
basket of wicker, and the blood in a glass, and had expelled covetousness out
of the Church. And truly that cano^ of the Triburean counsel which is yet
extante in the Popes decrees, for bidding that no Priest should minister this
holy mystery in wodden vessels, does prove sufficiently that certain
Churches more than eight hundred years since Christ's passion, used to drink
the blood of Christ in wodden vessels: wherefore wodden cups in the supper be
of all most ancient. Bonifacius the Archebyshop (which example although I
have alleged elsewhere, yet am I enforced to repeat it here again, for that
it agrees so fitly with this present matter) being asked long since, Whether
it were lawful to minister the sacraments in vessels of wood? answered: In
old times (says he) golden priests used wodden cupps: but now contrariwise,
wodden priests use golden cups. But if any man bring vessels made of any
other stuff without excess and superstition, I would not greatly strive with
him, so that he will also acknowledge that they do not offend which use the
wodden. For as touching the form and matter of the cups, all are free and
lawful for the faithful Church toovse.

Moreover, it is evident that the What garment is to be worn at the supper.
Lord in the first supper, yea and the Apostles also in celebrating the same
supper, used their own usual and decent apparel. And therefore it is not
disagreable from the first institution if the minister come unto the Lords
table covered with his own garment, so that it be comely and honest. Surely
the communicants do wear on them their own usual apparel. We must take
heed then that there creep in no superstition. Our forfathers as it seemed, did
wear a cloak cast over their common garments: which they did not after the
example of Christ or the Apostles, but according to man's tradition. At the
length that stuff which is used at this day was taken up according to the
imitation of the priests garment of the old law, and appointed to be worn by
the ministers that would celebrate the supper. Neither does Innocentius the 3.
of that name, disseble this matter in the 4. Chap. and 4. book of his work,
De Sac. altar. mysterio. As for us, we have learned of late, that all Leuitical
matters are not only put away, but not to be brought again in to the Church by
any. For as much therefore as we remain in the light of the gospel, and not
in the shadow of the law, we do upon good cause reject that Leuiticall
Massing apparel.

I have also declared in another place, that it has been the manner in What
tongue is to be used.
old time, that every nation has used their own native and vulgar tongue in
ministering the sacraments. Of the gestures which the ministers do use What
gestures.
in celebrating the Lords supper, we can say none other thing out of the
gospel, than what we have learned, The Lord took the bread, blessed it, brake
it, distributed it. etc. If the minister do follow these things he need not to
be careful of other gestures.

Those which at this day are by the invention of men received into ye
celebration of the mass, are so far off from giving any majesty to the
mysteries, that they bring the^ rather the more into contempt. I will say
nothing elso that may seem more grievous.

The matter is indifferent whether Of taking it in the hands.
the Church take the supper sitting down or going to the table: whether a man
take the holy mysteries in his own hand, or receive it into his mouth at the
hands of him that ministers. It is most agreeable with the first simplicity
and institution of the supper, to sit and to receive the sacraments in a man's
own hands of him that ministers, and afterward to break it, eat it, and
to dinide it unto others. For as the Lord sat at table with his disciples, so
he reached forth yt mysteries, saying: Take and divide it among you. Moreover,
as there is more quietness and less stur in sitting at the supper, while the
ministers carry the holy mysteries about the congregation: so is it well
known by histories of antiquity, that the sacrament has been delivered into
the hands of the communicantes. It is mere superstition, and repugnant to the
doctrine of the Apostles, to scrape the hands of yt lay people that have
touched the holy sacrament of the supper. Why do they not also by the same
law scrape the lips, tongue, and jaws of the communicants? Of these things
before handled springs an other question, What is to be The remnantes of the
supper.
thought of the remnaunts and leauings of the Lords supper, and whether there
ought any part of it to be reserved, and whether that which is reserved or
shut up ought to be adored? This question seems to have no godliness at al in
it, but to be altogether superstitions and very hurtful. For who knows not
that bread and wine out of the holy and lawful use appointed, are not a
sacrament? Shall we praceede to demand with these Sophisters, what yt is which
the mouse gnaweth, when he gnaweth the Lords bread?

These questions are most unworthy to be demanded and to be raked up in holy
oblivion. Touching the shutting up of the sacrament, the Whether to be shut up
and adored.
lord teaches us not one word in the gospel, much less of worshipping it.
Take (says he) eat, and divide it among you. He says not, Lay it up, and
worshipp it. For the true worshippers worship the father in spirit and truth.
Moreover we read how the Lord has plainly said in the gospel, If they say
unto you, behold where he is in the desert, go not forth: behold where he
is in the innermoste parts of the house, do not believe. He sets down the
cause of this his commandment, For like as the lightening goes forth of the
East, and appears in the West, so shall the coming of the son of man be.

The coming again of the son of man says he shall be glorious and not
obscure, neither shall he come again but to judge both the quick and the
dead And therefore S. Paul Coloss. 3.
the Apostle teaching us true religion, wills us to worshipp Christ, not
upon the earth, but with our minds lifted unto Heaven, where he sits at
the right hand of his father. And who will he so frantique, I beseech you, to
worshipp the holy sign for the holy thing it self? it appears by the
decrees made of late, that these things were invented by man's devise. For it
is certain, that the feast of Christ's body, commonly called Corpus Christi,
was instituted but of late years under Pope Vrbane, in the year of our Lord
1264. as it may appear in Clement the 3, book, title 16. the Chapter
beginning. Si Dominum.

It remains, that we discuss the question concerning the time of celebrating
what time to be celebrated.
the Lords Supper, and what season is meetest for the same, ye morning or
evening? whether we ought to sup together, whether we must receive it fasting
or when we have dyned? also how often we must celebrate the supper, once, or
often, or seldom? It is evidently enough known, that Christ sat down at the
table with his disciples in the evening, but it follows not hereof, that the
supper cannot be rightly celebrated at any other time but at evening.

The Lord upon occasion of the feast of the Passover, and because he should
be betrayed that night, did both eat the supper that evening with his
disciples, and instituted also ye supper for us. Notwithstanding he le^te the
liberty to remove this mystery unto the morning: for that when we be sober,
then are we most meet to deal in all matters, specialy in religion, for which
we be then fitter, then when our bellyes be full of good cheer. Wherefore this
banquet requires fasting and empty guests: but yet not so fasting, that a
man may not taste of somewhat a-forehand for his healthes sake. For S. Paul
says, If any man be hungry let him eat at home. The same Apostle also will
not have any other feast to be receuied together with the Lords mystical
Supper. And therefore we say, that we ought not to receive that with other
meat.

Tertullian writes that Christians have used oftentimes to eat other meat
with it: which kind of Supper, as he writes, was called (...), that is to
say, mutual love or charity, borrowing the name from love: for that there the
poor were refreshed with the feastinge of the richer sort. Howbeit provision
of meat, drink, and other necessaryes, might well enough be made for them
without the Church. Paul will not permit that in one place, both public
feasts should be made, and also the mystical supper of the Lord celebrated.

Furthermore, how many times in a year the faithful ought to receive How
often to be celbrated.
this Sacrament of the Lords supper, the apostles have given forth no
commandment, but have left it indifferent unto every Churches discretion.
For what is more plain than that which S. Paul has said? As often as you
shall eat of this bread and drink of this cup, you shall declare the Lords
death until he come. For the Lord (as the same Apostle sets it down) first
commanding, said, Do this as often as you shall drink it in remembrance of me.
Howbeit, let no no man think that the celebration of ye Lords supper is left so
freely unto him, yt he need never to receive it. For yt were no lawful
liberty, but most unlawful licentiousnes. They yt celbrate ye supper of y^
Lord upon certain and ordinary times of the year, would not have it brought
into contempt or loathed by reason of the daily frequenting. For they have some
consideration of their own people, and they would have the supper to be
celebrated worthily, and that the people may have a desire unto it. But they
that celebrate it very often, they suppose it an unmeet thing, that good
things by often frequenting them, should be despised: for the better the thing
is, the oftener, say they, it is to be used. Both these sorts desire to serve
the Lord, and would have that to be done to great and good effect, which the
Lord has left free. Between these if S. Augustine be made vmpier and Judge,
doubtless he would pronounce none other judgment than yt which he has
already pronounced of ye same cause writing unto Ianuarius, and saying: He
shall best decide this strife beetweene them, who so advised them especially to
abide in the peace of christ, and that every man do that which according to
his faith he is persuaded to be good and godly. For neither of them
dishonoreth the body and blood of our Lord. Only that meat must not be
contemned.

Now for whom this holy supper is iustituted, and to whom it is to For whom
the supper is instituted.
be ministered, we have also to consider. It seems that it is instituted and
to be given unto all faithful Christian people, of what sex soever, men and
women, high and low. Wherefore so great a mystery is not to be cast unto swine
and dogs to be contemned and trodden under foot. Before it be ministered all
men are earnestly and effectually to be admonished, unto whom this meat
apperteineth, namely to the^ ye acknowledge their sins, yt are sorry for their
faults, and believe in Christ: All are to be admonished, that every man
descending into him self, do prove him self, and afterward so eat of this
holy bread, and drink of this holy drink, that he eat not and drink not
thereof unworthily unto his condemnation. But after this severe admonition, if
any approach unto the table and sit down, and by their sitting down do as it
were openly profess, both that they are, and also desire to remain true
worshippers of Christ, by who^e they trust to have remission of their sins,
surely such are not to be put back by ye ministers, neither are ye holy
mysteries to be denied the^. For the Lord himself who is the searcher of
hearts, severely, diligently, plainly, and in many words in his last Supper,
before he distributed ye mysteries, admonished Judas being an hypocrit, a
thief, a traitor, a murderer, yea a parricide, a blasphemer, and a forsaker
of his master, but being admonished, when notwithsta^dinghe departed not from
the table but tarried among the Saints, the Lord did not violently put him
away, nor bad him openly to depart, neither wtheld he ye Lords bread from him,
but gave it unto him as he did unto others, although he knew assuredly what he
was. Which thing the ministers of ye church do not always so certainly know of
the^ that sit down at the table. Neither did the Lord offend any whit at all in
so doing, neither did he cast that which was holy to the dogs. For ye Lord
warned him diligently of all matters, whereof he was to be warned, and he
hearing and understanding the^ all remains notwithste^ding among ye Saints,
daunteth himself for one of the faithful not for an hogg, and as one of the
fathfull takes part of the bread and of the cup. By which hypocrisy
notwithstanding he provoked ye heavy judgment of god against him, eue^ as also
at this day this holy meat and this holy drink turns to the destruction both
of body and soul, of all hypocrites. Neither did the presence of the hypocrite
at ye Lords supper defile the other faithful disciples of Christ which sat at
the table: like as neither at this day are the faithful polluted, although
they see many hypocrites sit down at the table with the^. For they sup not
with them as with hypocrites, but as it were with the faithful. In the mean
while the hypocrite hurts himself and not others, he falls and perishes
to his own destruction, he eats and drinks his own damnation, but ye
faithful lives be his own faith: of which thing we have entreated in other
sermons. And although ye infants are reputed The supper was not instituted for
infantes.
to be of ye church and in the number of the faithful, yet are they not capable
of the supper. In this point the ancient fathers shamefully erred: which I
have also noted in the sermon of Baptism. Infants are not deprived of
everlasting life, although they depart out of this world without receiving this
mystical meat. This was instituted for them that are of lawful years, and
not for Infants. Let a man examine him self (says the Apostle) and let him so
eat of the bread and drink of the Cup. And the Lord says, Do this in the
remembrance of me. And again, Show forth the Lords death until he come.

All which sayings take place in people of lawful years, not in Infantes. Our
Children must be diligently instructed from their infancy, that they may
rightly understand those mysteries, and frequente them, which thing the Lord
commanded the children of Israel, saying: If your children shall say unto you,
What manner of worshipping is this? you shall answer: It is the sacrifice of
the Lords Passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel when
he stroke the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. Surely we must not show our
selves to be more slack in informing our children, than they were, since we
have received a more noble benefit than they have.

Of like nature unto this question are these other: Whether the supper Whether
it be to be celebrated against imminent dangers.
be to be celebrated privately for every cause or necessity? Whether it be to
be carried unto the sick, and those that keep their beds? Whether it be to
be applied to the dead, that is to say, to be offered for the dead, to
obtain rest for them? Touching these matters, I know what is commonly said
and done. There hapeneth some pestilence, famine, war, or tempest, and by and
by the supper is commanded to be celebrated, that as it were by this
sacrifice the present calamity may be taken away. Again, there is one sick,
another perishes with hunger, and afflicted for want of all manner
necessaryes, the same requires of the priest to have the Lords supper
ministered unto him, that thereby the disease may be cured, as by a most present
and approved remedy, and his hunger and poverty released. But this is not the
due celebration of the supper, but a filthye profanation thereof. For the Lord
has not instituted it to be a cleansing sacrifice against all calamities,
whereby he would be pleased, but to be a memorial of his death, and a dutiful
thanksgiving. For when we be at the supper we offer nothing unto him, for which
he should be favorable unto us, and turn away such an evil from us, and give
us such a good thing as we desire of him, but we give thanks for the benefits
which we have received. It is lawful otherwise for them that are oppressed
with troubles, to offer up their vows (that is to say) their prayers to the
Lord: but it is not lawful to convert his holy mysteries to any other
purpose than he has appointed.

Neither have we any examples to prove ye any holy men did ever use the Lords
supper to any such end, as these men do. The children of Israel received the
feast of the Paschal lamb in remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt,
and that they should continue thankful unto so beneficial a Lord: how great
an offense had they committed, if they had so oftentimes eaten their banquet
as being oppressed with calamities, they desired to be delivered, and desired
it by doing that deed? They received the Arc of the couenaunte from the Lord
in token of his divine presence and assured help: but when contrary to the end
whereunto it was appointed they bare it into the camp, to the intent they
might obtain the victory thereby, they them selves were putt to flight and
slain, and the Ark carried away by the Philistines into captivity.

Again, if the Lords supper be a public holy feast of the whole The
sup^er not to ^e celebra^ed at (...) priua^^^e, for the ^icke nor whole.
Church gathered together in one, in the which there ought to be breaking,
distributing, eating, and drinking, and thereby the communion of the body and
blood of Christ be declared and sealed: it followethe that the Lords supper
ought not to be ordained neither for any in health or sickness, neither for
any lying sick in his bed, or at the point of death, be it either privately at
home, or openly at Church: neither can the godly require the Lords supper unto
any such private uses. For the institution of Christ our Lord must not be
altered by any humane authority or custom. Verily S. Paul requires a
public assembly of ye church, and a general meeting for the due celebrating
of the supper. When you meet together therefore in one place, this is not to
take the supper of the Lord, that is to say, Ye do not eat the Lords supper.
The reason is, For every one when they should eat, takes his own supper etc.

Wherefore he will not that any thing be done therein privately.

Likewise in the same place he says, that they meet together and eat the
Lords supper to their own damnation, which make haste to the Supper, not
tarrying for the congregation until they do all meet, and they eat and drink
together. For he says, Wherefore my brethren, when you meet to eat and
drink, tarry one for an other (if any man be hungry let him eat at home, to
wit, yt he be not constrained to eat before the residue) that ye mete not
together to your condemnation. Wherefore the Lords supper is not a private, but
a public supper to be given to no man privately. And forasmuch as that
assembly is not public or general when four or five do communicate with
the sick, their saying is nothing which say that the supper may be ordained for
ye sick, if so be that others do sup with them. Moreover who will deny that
the example of Christ and the Apostles is perpetually to be followed? But it
is evident enough that Christ celebrated his supper in a common dyning place,
haueing gathered the Church unto him, as well as it might at that time be
gathered.

Saint Paul says, that in that point he followed the example of the
Lord, and that he has delivered no other thing to the church than that which
he received of the Lord. Neither read we in any place of the Scriptures, that
the other Apostles of Christ carried the Sacrament to the sick, and that
they ordained the holy Supper privately for every one to appease his tentation.

But all the apostles command us in every place, to confirm and strengthen
the sick and afflicted conscience with the Lords word: they teach us also
to succor the distressed with diligent prayer. S James has diligently James.
5.
set down in writing, how the faithful shall behave them selves toward the
sick, and them that are departing out of this world: but as touching the
celebrating or carrying the Sacrament unto them, he speaks not one word.
Neither is it likely that the Apostles, the most faithful doctors of the
Church, would dissemble the matter, if so be they had thought that it had
apperteined chiefly to our salvation. They have warned us often of things of
far less importance. And certain it is, that they have taught the Church
all things that beelong to true godliness and salvation: but as for this
matter they have not mentioned one word of it.

They obiecte out of the Acts of the apostls this authority, And breaking
Acts. 2.
bread from house to house, they eat meat together with gladness and
singelnes of heart, praising God. But that place is to be understood of the
bodily and nourishing meat, not of the mystical food. For it follows, They
received meat or sustenaunce together, And therefore as it is read in the 58.
Chapter of Esaias, to break bread is as much to say as to feed, and so it
signifies here also. For the richer sort gave food to the poorer, which
they did with a cheerful, not with a sorrowful heart: and they that received
the benefit, praised God. But if any man do stubbernly contend that the
Apostles did sup in private houses, We answer, that it makes nothing to ye
present matter of the sick, and of private communion. For as I have said
before, at that time they used private houses in steed of Churches. And
therefore they supped in private houses, not to feed the sick with the bread
of the sacrament, but because the universal church of that place was gathered
together in them: as it appears in the 20. Chapter of the Acts, as the manner
is in persecutions. They object moreover, that the ancient fathers sent the
sacrament unto them that were bound in prison, and to them that were
departing, to feed on upon the way. But I have declared in place elsewhere,
wherefore the ancient fathers did so. Hereunto also we add, that man's custom
cannot prejudice the word of God.

The blessed martyr Irenaeus writes, that the bishops of Rome were wont to
send the Sacrament to other bishops which come to Rome from other places, in
token of concord and agreement. But that custom was not used by all byshopps,
neither is it used in the Church at this present. Hereof it follows that
many things were used by the ancient fathers (as that whereof we spoke
before, which was in giving the Sacraments to infants:) which notwithstanding
are no law unto us. Good men also at this day may suffer a private supper, for
a time, for them that do not yet understand the full use of the supper. But who
will gather hereof, that every man ought of duty to do that, which is
permitted unto some upon sufferaunce? But if we continue contentiously to
affirm it to be a relief for us in our travail, it will grow to this
(which we have seen received already certain hundred years ago) that there
shall be hope and confidence putt in the receiving of the sacrament, as though
ye in respect thereof we were acceptable unto God, and when we depart out of
this life we should fly straight ways up into Heaven, but without receiving
the Sacrament be thrown directly down to hell. There must also needs
arise sundry other errors. Neither is there any necessity to constrain us
to minister the sacrament to the sick. For as prisoners are absent from
receiving the Lords supper without danger of salvation, so likewise are the
sick and those that are ready to dye. For being nevertheless by perfect faith
gathered to the body of Christ, and although they be absent in body yet being
in mind present with ye congregation, they are also made partakers of all
spiritual good things. And it is sufficient for the^ that as long as they have
been in health, they have been always present at the holy mysteries. The feast
of Passover was not celebrated every where, Deuteronomy. 16.
but at Jerusalem only, in one place. But how many were there, think we,
ye by reason of their bodily health, impaired with sickness, and for old age,
could not travel to Jerusalem from so large and wide a kingdom? And although
no man brought them home a piece of the Paschal lamb in their pockets,
notwithstanding they did communicate with the whole church of Israel. And who
doubts but that by the coming of Christ, the condition of the Christians is
made better? Our Lord Christ did not institute his mystical supper for the
dead, but for The sacrament not to be offered for the dead.
the living only: wherefore it is not to be celebrated for the dead, and to
be applied to their redemption. They that die without faith, immediately fall
under the judgment of damnation. But they that are dead in Christ, are already
joined unto the company of the elders, and stand before the Lamb, singing
Halleluiah for evermore. For I have declared in my sermon of the Soul, that ye
salvation of the faithful souls which are departed by corporal death, is most
undoubted. And where some object, that the ancient sathers have made mention
of offering for the dead, we suppose that it apperteineth not unto us. We
believe the Canonical scriptures without contradiction: we believe not ye
fathers further than they can prove their own sayings by the Canonical
scriptures. Neither would they have the^-selues otherwise believed. And
therefore if the fathers think that the supper is a sacrifice, and that it is
to be offered to procure rest to the souls departed, we do not receive that
opinion, as not agreeing with the Canonical scriptures, which teach that the
Lord instituted not his supper for that purpose, and therefore by such abuse of
the supper God is rather displeased than pleased: yea that there is no work of
man be it never so good, much less if it be against Gods word, that can
sanctify, since that prerogative belongs only to the merit of the son of
God: and moreover that the souls departed are not in any such state in the
other world, that they can or ought to be helped by any works in this world.
But if the ancient fathers by oblation or offering, do understand ye
sacrifice of praise or thanckesgiuing, we will not strive against them, but
that there may be made oblations for the dead, that is to say, that thanks be
given to God, and his goodness praised, who has called out of this miserable
world such as were endued with true faith, and has joined them unto the
companies of angels, and all the blessed saints in the everlasting kingdom
of all joy and felicity. But surely there is no truth nor godliness that
wills us to celebrate the supper for the dead. And we make a distinction in
sacrifice or oblatio^. For Sacrifices of 2. sorts of expiatio^ and confession.
there is a sacrifice of expiation, and there is a sacrifice of confession or
praise. The sacrifice of expiation is offered to cleanse or purge sins, and
also for satisfaction for sins. This cannot be accomplished without death and
blood: as S. Paul the Apostle shows plainly in the 9. Cap. to the Hebrews.
The sacrifice of Christ was such a one (the figures of which were all the
sacrifices of all the holy fathers of the old testament) who being both priest
and sacrifice, offered up himself once to God ye father, while he suffered upon
the cross, and shedding his most innocent blood, there gave up the Ghost. The
supper at this day is no such sacrifice, but a commemoration of the death, or
of the sacrifice once offered upon ye cross. For nether ought or can Christ
be sacrificed again, who being once offered, is sufficient to cleanse all the
sins of all ages. Why then should he be sacrificed again? Neither can the
son of God be sacrificed by any man, since that for the same cause, he
offered up himself once to God, as being a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech. Therefore, the minister of ye Church, does not in the Church
sacrifice the body and blood of Christ in the supper, for the living: but
together with the whole Church does celebrate the remembrance of the
sacrifice which was once offered upon the Cross. Of which as I have said
elsewhere, ye supper may also be called a sacrifice, because it is a sacrament
or sign of the sacrifice which was once offered by Christ, as Augustine also
has left written. The sacrifice of confession, is of praise and
thanksgiving, which we offer to God for ye redemption and benefits of god
freely bestowed upon his Church. And since we offer the same always unto GOD
in prayer, but chiefly when we are joined in the sacrament of ye Eucharist, or
celebrating the supper, therefore the ancient fathers called it a sacrifice,
because in the same we give thanckes unto God for our deliverance from death,
and for the inheritance of everlasting life which is given unto us. And that
this sacrifice is generally offered by the universal Church in celebrating
the supper, and not by ye minister of ye church alone, for those ye live in ye
Church, we Of the ends of the Lords supper.
told you before. Now forasmuch as we have hitherto discussed certain
circumstances, or questions which are wont to be moved about ye Lords supper,
so far forth as ye necessity of the matter seemed to require, and as much as
our small ability was able to perform, it remains that we descend further to
declare, for what cause the Lords supper was by the Lord instituted, which
place truly is not rashly reckoned among the chiefest. For we made mention of
the same immediately upon the beginning of this sermon. For the lord by setting
bread and wine before us in the holy banquet, would have his promise and
communion testified unto us, and his gifts represented unto us, and made
manifest to our senses, and would also gather us visibly into one body, and
retain the memory of his death in ye hearts of the faithful, and finally,
put us in mind of our duty, chiefly of praise and thanksgiving. All these
things have we severally expounded, having discoursed upon them at large in
the general consideration and treatise of ye sacraments: and therefore at this
present we will do no more but touch them briefly for memories sake, meaning
to handle those things somewhat more largly, which shall by occasion arise as
they are entreated upon. But this word Communion, The Lord witnesleth unto us
his promise and communion
I mean the society, conjunction, or partaking of the lord Christ, by the
which through his spirit he does wholly knitt and join himself to us, and we
are made partakers of him by faith, and are coupled unto him: so that being by
him delivered from sin and death, we may live in him being made heirs of
everlasting life, and that he may live in us and be wholly ours, as we be
wholly his. Neither do we say, that the communion of the Lords body and blood
is any thing else. For by his body which was delivered over to death for us,
and by his blood which was shed for ye remission of our sins, it is come to
pass, that we being purged from our sins, are made his members and he now
quickens us, and susteineth us as food which gives life: whereupon we are
also said to eat and drink him as the meat and drink of life. The promise
therefore whereof we made mention even now, is none other than the word of God,
which declares unto us that life is in Christ only: For Christ delivered his
body to the death, and shedd his blood for ye remission of our sins, that we
believing in him, may have life everlasting. But this promise and communion of
Christ is not now first of all given in the supper or by ye supper. For the
Lord our God immediately after ye creation of the world, promised life and
remission of sins unto Adam and his seed through Christ: and afterward renewed
the same promise wc Noe, Abraham, Moses and David, and the other fathers. And
that ye fathers did communicate with Christ, and were partakers of his goodness,
Paul the Apostle, wc the whole scripture is a witness. But this so great goodness
happened not to the fathers only. For the promise was made unto us also, and
the communion of Christ was conveyed unto us, and is conveyed particularly unto
every one of us in holy baptism, and also in the manifest preaching of the
Gospel: moreover we receive ye same by faith, by which we are joined to Christ,
and are made his members. Therefore, as we are not void and wcout Christ before
ye supper, but are quickened by him and made his members or partners: so in the
very action or celebration of the supper, ye promise is renewed unto us, and we
renew and continue that fellowship which we have with Christ, by ye body and
blood of Christ spiritually, truly participating his life and all his good
gifts through faith. And by this means we eat the Lords body, and drink his
blood. Moreover, the Lord does visibly declare and scale unto us ye spiritual
communion and promise of life made through Christ by visible signs, to wit,
the banquet of bread and wine joined to his word or promise, namely that he is
the quickening bread and drink: and that we (having received the signs by
faith and obedience) being thereto sealed, do take upon us ye promise and
communion of Christ, by imprinting or transferring into our bodies the seal
or sacrament of ye body and blood of Christ. Of which thing ye Apostle has
also entreated in the first Corinth. cap. 10. And also to the Romans cap. 4. and
we also have said more thereof in the general treatise of the sacraments. But
before I entreat further Opinion of bodily presence, confuted.
of other ends of the supper consisting in the description thereof, I will
recite what othersome allege of the promise and communion of Christ. They
condemn our doctrine as heretical. For they contend that the lord promised ye
he would give unto the faithful his very body and blood, to be eaten and
dronken under the form of bread and wine, therefore it must by all means and
wcout al contradiction be believed, that ye bread is the Lords natural body,
and the wine his blood, and that these ought to be eaten and dronken not only
spiritually, but also corporally, unto life everlasting. And that Christ is
bodily present in the supper, and ye the bread is his body, and the wine his
blood, thus they prove: That which the lord speaks cannot be false, for he is
the truth it self. But he says that the bread is his body, and the wine his
blood, Therefore the bread and wine of the sacrament, are verily, really, and
essentially the body and blood of Christ. Which truth, they say, must simply
he believed, although reason it self, the whole world, all senses, and nature
it self be against it. We answer, ye in deed all things are very true which
ye Lord has spoken, who is truth it self: but in that sense which he himself
said and understood, not in that meaning which we will enforce upon his words.
Wherefore, before all things we must search out the true sense of the Lords
words in the supper, This is my body, This is my blood, etc. These men cry out
saying, that the Lords words ought to of the true understanding of the Lords
words: This is my body.
be expounded simply, and according to ye letter. For they are words of the
testament: and the same would not have his words to be taken by a trope of
figure. But we say that all the Euangelical and apostolical books are
numbered under ye name of the testament, and therefore throughout all and every
place of the Scripture, nothing must be corrupted, nothing added, nothing taken
away, unless we will be subject to the curse We are also constreined to
confess, yt there be infinite sentences in the holy scripturs, which if we
will proceed to expound simply according to the letter, we shall overthrow the
whole scripture and the true faith, or we shall seem to go about to reprove
the scriptures of lies or contradictio^. I will bring forth one of two examples
of this sort. The Evangelist S. John writes. The word became flesh. Now if we
will cleave to the very words, then must we say that God was changed into man.
But forasmuch as this sense is contrary to the faith and the scriptures, For
God is immutable: and Christ is perfect God and man without all mingling or
converting of naturs, but remaining still in their ownepropertics, and so do we
admit this exposition, which declares that the word took flesh, and that God
was made man. And this sense is not against scripture. For Paul says that the
son of God never took upon him the nature of angels, but the seed of
Abraham. And therefore ye eatholique fathers, together with the apostle, do
expound this word Est, is, by this word Assumpsit, took upon him. Whereof
Theodoret has entreated at large in his Polymorphus, Dialog. 1. Again, ye
Lord says in the same John, The father is greater than I: we should make an
inequality in adoring the Trinity if we should contend that the Lords words
are simply to be understood without interpretation. But by conference of other
places (taking advise of faith) we say that the son is equal with the father
touching his divinity, but inferior unto him in respect of his humanity,
according to that saying of ye prophet, which is alleged by the Apostle to
that purpose, Thou have made him little inferior to the angels. We read in ye
Eospell, that Christ our lord had brethren, and that S. John the Apostle was
called the son of Marie, and Marie called the mother of John. But who, unless
he were infected with the heresy of Heluidius will stand herein, that these
places are to be expounded according to the letter? specially since other
places of the scripture do manifestly prove that they were called brethren,
which in deed were brothers and sisters children, cosen germans, kinsmen, or
near of blood: also ye circumstances of the place in the 19. cap. of S. John,
prove that Marie was committed to John as a mother to her son. Wherefore if
they have a desire still to wrangle, as hitherto at their own pleasures we
have by proof found them to do, crying out and in crying to repeat, This is
my body, This is my blood, This is, This is, This is, This is, Is, Is, Is: We
will also repeat, The word was made was made, was made flesh. The father is,
is, is, greater than I. Christ has brethren, I say he has brethren, he has
brethren. The scripture has so. The truth says so. But tell me now, what
commodity shall there redound to the Church by these troublesome and odious
outcries, and most froward contentions? How shall the hearers be edified? How
shall ye glory of God be enlarged? How shall yt truth be set forth? Necessity
therefore co^streyneth us to confess, that in some places we must forsake the
letter, but not the sense, and that sense is to be allowed which faith it
self, wc other places of scripture conferred with it, and finally the
circumstances of the place, the first being compared with the last, do yield as
it were of their own accord. Howbeit we also cry out, and repeat again and
again, that we ought not without great cause to go from the simplicity of
the word. But when as the absurdity, not of reason but of When to depart from
the letter.
piety, and the repugnancie of the Scriptures, and contrariety to the
articles of our faith, do enforce us, then we say, affirm, and contend, that
it is godly, yea, necessary to depart from the letter, and from the
simplicity of the words. And that these places which we alleged even now, do
constreine us to depart from the letter in these words of the Lord, This is my
body, This is my blood, we will prove by most sound arguments taken out of ye
sciptures, when I have first briefly declared the true and ancient sense and
meaning of those usual and solemn words.

The Lord sitting at the self same table with his disciples, reached the The
ancient exposition of the words of (...) body
bread unto them with his own hand. And he having only one true, humane and
natural body, with the very same body of his delivered bread unto his
disciples, and not a body either of any other man's, or that of his own.
Neither does that trouble us which S. Augustine recites of David, in
expounding the 33. Psalm: And he was borne in his own hands: where unto he
adds immediately: Who is borne in his own hands? A man may be borne in the
hands of other men, but none can be borne in his own. This is therefore meant
of David, not of Christ. For Christ was borne in his own hands, when as
commending his very body unto them he said: This is my body. For that body was
borne in his own hands. For by these words S. Augustine does not feign that
Christ has two humane bodies, but he means that the humane body bare in his
hands the Sacramental body, that is to say, the bread, which is the
sacrament of the true body. For he speaks plainly saying, He commending his
body, bare that body in his own hands. For in ye second sermon almost in the
same words being but a little changed, he says: How was he borne in his own
hands? For when he had commended his body, and blood, he took that in his
hands which the faithful know: and after a sort he bare himself when he
said, This is my body. By which words he manifestly de clared, that he meant
not that Christ in his natural body delivered his natural body to his
disciples: but ye which the faithful do know, to wit, the sacrament or
mystery. For it follows, And he bare himself after a sort, (I pray you
mark this saying, After a sort) when he said this is my body. Wherefore those
solemn words, This is my body which is broken for you: And likewise, this is
my blood which is shedd for you, can have none other sense tha^ this, This is a
co^memoration, memorial or remembrance, sign or sacrament of my body which
is given for you. This cup, or rather the wine in the cup, signifies or
represents unto you my blood, which was once shed for you. For there
follows in the Lords solemn words yt which notably confirms this meaning,
Do this in the remembrance of me. As if he should say, Now am I present with you
before your eyes: I shall die, and ascend up into heaven, and then shall this
holy bread and wine be a memorial or token of my body and blood given and shed
for you. Then break the bread and eat it, distribute the cup and drink it,
and do this in the remembrance of me, praising my benefits bestowed on you in
redeeming you, and giving you life. Although this interpretation be most
slanderously reviled and become abominable in the sight of many, yet is it
manifest to be the true, proper and most ancient interpretation of all other.
Tertul. lib. 4. contra Mart. says, Christ taking the bread and distributing it
to his disciples, made it his body, in saying, This is my body, that is to
say, the figure of my body. Hierom upon S. Matt. Gospel says, That like as in
ye prefiguring of Christ, Melchisedech the priest of almighty God had done in
bringing forth bread and wine, so he might represent the truth of his body.
Chrysostom also in his 83. homily upon Matt. If Jesus be not dead (says he)
whose token and sign is this sacrifice. Ambrose upon the first to the
Corinthians, cap. 11. Because we be delivered by the Lords death (says he)
being mindeful thereof in eating and drinking, we do signify the flesh and the
blood which were offered for us. Au. Aug. also in many places heapeth up many
speeches like to this same kind of speech. The blood is the soul, The rock was
Christ, And This is my body. Let us hear then what he says of these speeches,
that we may understand what he thinks of the true interpretation of this
text, This is my body. In the 3. book of Questions in the 57. question upon
Leuiticus, he says, It remains that that be called the soul which
signifies the soul. For the thing that signifies is wont to be called by the
name of that thing which it signifies: as it is written, The seven ears of
wheat are seven years. He said not, do signify seven years. And seven oxen
are seven years, and many such like. In like sort it is said, The rock was
Christ. He said not, The rock signifies Christ, but as though it were so in
deed, which is not the same in substance, but by signification. So likewise
the blood, because through a certain vital substance in it, signifies the
soul, in the sacraments is called the soul. Thus far he. The same Augustine
also against Adimantus, cap. 12. says, So is blood the soul, like as the rock
was Christ. And again in ye same place he says, I may also expound that that
precept of the blood and soul of the beast, etc. consists in the sign. For
the lord douted not to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his
body. Thus much Augustine. There is no fool so doultish yt will say, that
these words of Augustine are darcke or doubtful. Who so list may add here
unto that which the same author has plainly written concerning figurative
speech Libro. 2. Contra Aduers. Legis. Cap. 9.

But let us leave off to cite men's testimonies concerning the proper and A
demonstration of the figurative words of the supper: This is my body.
most ancient exposition of Christ's words, This is my body. Let us rather
proceed to allege sound arguments out of ye scriptures, as we promised to
do, thereby to prove that we must sometime of necessity depart from the
letter, and that Christ's words are accordingly as I have said to be expounded
by a figure.

First, it is evident that the Lord at this present instituted a Sacrament:
whereby it is manifest, that the Lord spoke after the same manner as he is wont
to speak in other places of the scripture concerning sacraments, as when he
says that circumcision is the Lords covenant, the lamb ye Lords Passover,
that sacrifices are sins and sanctifications, baptism the water of
regeneration. But we declared in the sixth sermon of this Decade, that all these
kinds of speeches remain to be expounded. This saying or speech therefore is
to be expounded: This is my body, This is my blood, because it is
sacramental. For it received ye common interpretation, which most truly and
for certeinty was used and received by the catholic church, ever since the
time of the Apostles: yea, and ever since the time of ye Patriarchs unto this
day, to wit, that signs do receive the terms and names of those things that
are signified, so that thereby they receive no part of their substance, but do
still continue and remain in their own proper nature. For this cause it
comes to pass, that our Lord Christ in the Gospel written by S. Luke, did
join ye banquet of ye Passover with this our lords supper, in such sort, that
he substituted this in ye place of the other, that it should not seem strange
if he said in this our supper, This is my body, for in ye solemnizing of ye
feast of Passover, it is thus said: The lamb is the Lords Passover. Which
kind of speech was not dark to be understood by the Apostles, who understood
that this lamb was a remembrance of ye passage once past. By that means also
they understood, that the Lords bread, given unto them by the Lord, is a
remembrance of his body. For in other matters of much less weight, they
diligently questioned and inquired of the Lord, touching ye proper sense and
signification of the words. But of these words they never once doubted or
asked any question. For all sacramental speeches were to the holy fathers very
well known. Moreover, if we continue to understand ye words of the supper
simply according to the letter, it follows that the Lord has delivered unto
us his body and blood corporally to be received. And, I pray you, to what end
should he deliver them, but that we receiving them corporally, might live. But
the universal canonical scripture teaches yt our life or salvation, and our
justification consists in faith only, which we repose in ye body which was
given and the blood shedd for us (which is ye spiritual eating) not in any work
of ours, much less in the bodily eating of Christ's body, which he shows in
another place to be nothing available. Then since there is but one means and
that most simple whereby to obtain life and justification, to wit, by faith
only, not by ye work of our eating, neither is the scripture repugnant to it
self, surely the Lord has not instituted any such work of eating: and
therefore the solemn words of the supper do admit some other exposition. If ye
bread were ye lords true and natural body, it must needs follow ye even the
wicked being partakers of this bread, should eat Christ's body, and that verily
his flesh should be meat to feed the belly: since they yt eat it, lack both
minds and faith. But all holy men abhor that thought as absurd and most
unworthy: of which matter I will entreat more hereafter. Therefore the saying
of Christ, This is my body, admits an exposition. The whole universal
canonical scripture witnesses, yt our Lord Jesus Christ took a body of the
undefiled virgin consubstantial in all poincts unto our bodies that is to say,
an humane body, yea, yt he was made like to us in all respects, except
sin. Now it is manifest that he spoke of his true sensible body, when he
says, This is my body. For he adds, Which is broken or given for you. But
the true, natural, sensible, or humane body was delivered and died for us. But
this appears not in the bread, or under the bread. Wherefore the Lords words
must be expounded. Surely, if it had been the Lords will to make his body of
bread and his blood of wine, according to ye power whereby he made all things
with his word, as soon ^s ever he had said, This is my body, the bread had
been the body of Christ, and that very body whereof he spoke, mortal,
passible, to be felt and seen. For he spoke the word and they were made, he
commanded and they were created. He said, let there be light, and light was
made, and such kind of light as might be perceived and did shine. But in ye
supper we see nothing in Christ's hands but bread, no body. And therefore it was
not our saviors meaning by these words, This is my body, to create or make
his body of the bread. For if he had meant so to do, surely it had been done.
Neither is there any cause why they should here as it were, casting their
mistes before our eyes, and apply their colored interpretations unto a rotten
construction, using words, vnspe^keably, supernaturally, inuisibly, not
qualitiuely, not quantiuely, not as in a place. For by these terms, they
intending in ye mean while to bring some other thing to pass, do by the
wonderful judgment of God, quite subvert and overthrow all that is their
own. For if this their mystery be unspeakable, why then do they use these
terms, essentially, substantially, really, corporally? For they that speak
so, do ^^ter truly and set down the manner of his presence. If the bread be
sup^rnaturally the body of Christ, why th^^ do they ad naturally? And if the
bread be Christ's body inuisibly, then can it not be corporally, neither can
it be a true body, whose property is to be visible. Who would not laugh if he
should hear that fire burnt and gave no heat, and that light did shine and
gave no light? If he be not present in quality, quantity, and as in a place,
then is he not corporally present. For I pray you, are not qualities,
quantities, and place belonging to the body? Hearken what Augustine says unto
Dardanus touching the presence of God, Take (says he) space of place from
bodies, and they shall be no where, and because they shall be no where, they shall
not be at al. Take the bodies themselves from the qualities of bodies, and they
shall be no where, and therefore it must needs be they cannot be at all. Let not
us therefore robb or spoil the Lords body of the properties thereof, and so
deny the truth of his body. Again yt we bring not so many contrary and
absurd things into one and the same opinion, we interpret ye words of the
Lord, This is my body, this is a memorall or remembrance of my body: or else,
This signifies my body. Moreover, if this word, Est, Is, be to be understood
substantiuely in the Lords words, This is my body, it follows then, that the
bread is changed into Christ's body. But that this is not so, all our senses
do witness, the very substance remaining, not only the accidents of the
bread. It is necessary therefore that our adversaries do understand, that in
this, with this, or under this, is Christ's body. But so are they gone from the
simplicity of the Lords words, who said, This is my body: and not, under
this is my body.

Again, if we we be so tied to the words above recited, that upon pain of
sacrilege we may not starte from them an hairs breadth, I beseech you then,
how durst Luke and Paul recite the words which belong to the cup, far
otherwise than Matthewe and Mark? For these two do set down the words
belonging to the cup in this sort: This is my blood which is of the new
Testament, which is shead for many for remission of their sins. But they
two recite them thus: This cup being the new Testament through my blood,
which is shead for you: And, This cup is the new Testament in my blood. But
shall we think that there is no difference between the blood of Christ and
the new Testament? S. Paul defines the new Testament after Jeremy, to be a
full remission of all sins. And the self same says, that this remission of
sins is obtained through the blood of Christ. But who will so impudently
contend, as will dare to affirm that the very cup, or the wine in the cup is
really and substantially the remission of sins? What cause is there if we
hold on and stick precisely to the letter, why we should be forced to
confess that the cup, not the wine, nor the drink, is either the blood of
Christ, either the new Testament, or the remission of sins. For the Lord
says not, This wine, but, This cup. Howbeit in this place to avoyde
absurdity, we willingly admit a trope: wherefore the^ are we not indifferent
in a matter of equal importance? Therefore like as the cup or the wine is the
Testament or remission of sins, so likewise the cup or the wine is Christ's
blood, and in like manner also the bread is Christ's body. But ye cup is not
substantially the remission of sins, or blood, but the sacrament of Christ's
blood, whereby the new Testament was dedicated, and full remission of sins
obtained for us: therefore the bread is the body of Christ, because it is
the sacrament of the body of Christ.

Surely it is a strong and firm argument that we have brought forth: and of
no less force and strength, we hope, is that behind which we will now
bring forth. The Lord at the celebrating of the holy supper, says: Do ye
this in the remembrance of me. These words do not import, that we should
determine them to be really present, whom we ought to remember. For who shall
be said to remember those things, which he beholds before him in presence?
But we must not go from the simple signification of remembrance or memory,
specially since Paul says, Declare the Lords death until he come. For thus
we gather thereby: He, whose remembrance is repeated until he come or
return, he surely is not counted to be present, but is looked for to come:
therefore the Lords body which was given for us, the remembrance whereof is
celebrated in the mystical Supper, is not present, but is looked for to come.

Now those places, touching Christ's leaving the world and departing hence, do
not simply admit the interpretation of the words of the supper. It is expedient
for you (says he) John. 16
that I depart. For if I go not away the co^forter shall not come unto you. But
if I depart from you, then will I send him unto you. Also, I went from the
father, and came into the world: Again, I leave the world, and go to the
father. And again, And henceforth I am not in the world, but these are in
the world, and I come unto thee. These sayings truly are repugnaunt: That he
went hence, That he is no longer in the world, That he left the world, and
that his natural body is in the world, and that verily it is given and received
really and substantially in the Supper. Neither is it lawful figuratively to
interpret the testimonies which are brought forth of Saint John's Gospel,
concerning Christ's departure. For the Apostles do confess, that the Lord
spoke plainly or simply without any parable. In so much therefore as the
Apostles do testify that this speech of the Lord was simple and simply
pronounced, it is needeful that those other words which are contrary unto
these, This is my body, be expounded by a figure, that the Scripture be not
repugnant

Moreover, those places which to it self. bear record that Christ's body,
after the resurrection was circumscribed by place, seen and felt, which also
do make a difference between Christ's body clarified and the angelical
spirits (where, by the way we may see, that here is no place left for the
device of the definitive mean) do not admit the bare interpretation of the
solemn words of the Lord. Mark. 16.
The Angels say, He is risen, he is not here. Behold the place where they
laid him. Also, He shall go before you into Galilee, there shall you see him.
And again, he him self says Luke. 24.
to his disciples, Feel me, and see: A spirit has not flesh and bones as
you see me have. These sayings of the clarified body (which is that which
ascended, and sits at the right hand of the father) repugne wholly with
vbiquitie, or being in every place, and the insensibilitie of Christ's body:
which notwithstanding must needs be granted, if we proceed to enforce the
real presence of Christ's body out of the words of the supper simply
understood. Whereunto belongs that which the Apostle disputing of the
resurrection of 1. Cor. 15.
the dead, says: If the dead do not rise, neither is Christ risen. But,
Christ is risen being the first fruits of them that sleep: and therefore
shall we rise also. Wherefore, by our own bodies being raised again it
appears, what manner of body Christ's glorious body was, or is, whereunto
our bodies are made like. But our bodies shall be true bodies, consisting of
sinews, veins, flesh, skin and bones, visible not invisible, and remaining
in some certain place in heaven, not every where: whereupon it follows that
the lords body is not invisible and every where. But if any man think that
to be no good argument which is fet from our raised bodies to the Lords raised
body, or contrariwise, let him 1. Cor. 15.
accuse Saint Paul, who has taught us this by his example. Therefore the
Catholic and right ancient faith constreyneth us to expound the words of
the Supper by a trope or figure.

Finally, when as the Capernaites had heard the Lord dispute touching the
eating of his body and drinking of his blood, and did think and imagine of a
carnal eating and drinking, he said that he would ascend into heaven: to wit,
that they should not think on the eating of his natural body, since in the
self same body he would ascend into heaven. Neither is there left here any
place for the new and frivolous device of certain men, which feign that to
ascend into heaven, is nothing else than to lay down the weak state and To
ascend unto heaven.
condition thereof, and to receive a supernatural. For Saint Luke, whom
altogether we must rather Acts. 1.
believe than such subtle devises or rather follies, says that the Lord was
lifted up on high, and carried up into heaven from the sight of his disciples:
moreover, that his body was receyned by a cloud: and that his disciples looked
up into heaven after him, until they heard the Angels say unto them, that he
would return again in the very same manner altogether as they saw him depart
away. But who knows not that he shall come again in the clouds of heaven?
Therefore heaven into which the lord ascended, is the name of a place, not of a
state or condition. Also in the gospel he promises us a place with him self,
saying, If I go to prepare you a John. 14.
place, I will come again, and take you unto me, that where I am, there you
may be also. Yea, he laid down all the conditions and infirmities of a mortal
body in his resurrection, so that he had no need to lay them down at his
ascension.

I suppose that there is none of the faithful that will deny, that the Lord
instituted nothing to us in vain, or without some singular and special
commodity to us. But when the Lord said in the Gospel, that his flesh
being corporally eaten, auayled nothing: where he speaks of none other body
than of that very same whereof he spoke in the words of the Supper, to wit,
which he gave for us: it follows without all contradiction, that the Lord
delivered nothing unto us in the Supper, but that would profit us. But he
should have delivered that which would not have profited us, if he had given
us his body to be eaten corporally. It is evident therefore that it is very
necessary the words of the Supper should be expounded. Hereunto belongs
the notable prophecy, and manifest commandment of our Lord Jesus Christ,
saying in the Gospel: Then if they shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ,
or there is Matthew. 24.
Christ, do not believe. For there shall arise false Christ's and false
prophets, and they shall work great signs and wonders, so that if it were
possible the very elect shall be brought into error. Behold, I have told
you before. If therefore they shall say unto you, Behold where he is in the
wilderness, go not forth. Behold where he is in the innermost parts of the
house, (in ye closets or coffers, I say: For this word, (...) signifies the
most secret and innermost parts of all the house, wherein we use to lay up
those things which we would have safest kept, which in Dutche we call Schryn,
schloss; vnd ghalt) do not believe. For like as the lightning goes out of the
east and appears even unto the west, so shall the coming of the son of man
be. But although this place is used to be expounded by many, of the calamities
of the Jews, yet that can not be denied, which S. Hierome also him self
confesses, that in the same likewise the destiny of all the world is
prophesied of, even unto the end thereof. Wherefore this place which we have
alleged, is concluded with the saying concerning Christ's last coming into
the world at the day of judgment. And moreover it cannot be denied, that the
Lord does absolutely condemn that doctrine that defends that Christ
remains or is present, in diverse places of the world in boxes or close
places: which not only the books of the teachers of transubstantiation are
seen to do, but also tabernacles which are erected unto Christ's body (which
they call meat tents) also chapells with famous temples and monasteries. In
all and every one of those places, I say, they show us Christ, saying, Lo
here is Christ, and there is Christ, Behold the bread of Angels. Christ is
wholly in all these sacrifices, and he is fully and wholly in every part of
them, even in such sort as he was when he was borne of the virgin Marie,
and houng upon the cross. Which thing they by and by confirm by miracles and
wonders, they also set it forth with circumstaunce of words, saying, that so
great mysteries are not to be inquired of, but simply to be believed. And that
these things were wrought unspeakably and inuisibly by the omnipotency of God.

Neither did the Lord dissemble how much this error should increase. There
shall be such plenty, such great numbers of people that receive this error,
and running after Christ into the deserts and innermost places of the houses,
ye the very elect shall be in danger. But in ye mean while in so great peril and
danger of things, what does Christ teach his elect to do? Immediately he
adds, Do not believe. What, do not believe? That Christ is here or there upon
earth, in the wilderness, or in the innermost parts of the house, or even in
the midst of the cities, or in the fields. He adds moreover, Go not
forth. Follow not the multitude which by distance of place seeks for
Christ, as if he were yet conversant upon the earth. Therefore now, if so be
the whole world, and all the counsels in the world, all the kings and princes,
yea, if all the Angels and Saints should command us to believe, that Christ
is here or there corporally: yet the commandment of our only redeemer Jesus
Christ, the son of God, the father of wisdom, by whom all things were
made, who forbids us to believe the same, ought to be of that authority
among all the godly, that they may know that they must not believe as
creatures commau^d them, but as the creator has commanded them. Yea
moreover, the Lord vouchsafes in this very same place of the Gospel, to
give us a reason of his doctrine. For why must we not believe that Christ is
conversant or bodily present upon the earth, but inuisibly? Because, like as
the lightening goes forth of the East and appears in the West, so shall the
coming of the Son of man be. Which is as much as if he had said: The Son
of God came once humbly into the earth, to redeem us through his humility
and death on the cross, which thing being finished, he forsook the earth and
ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of the father: from thence
he shall not return into these our regions, but to judgment. But then shall he
appear glorious, noble, to be seen of all men as it were the most clear
sun, yea, rather like a lightning right terrible to all the wicked. And
therefore there is no cause, why from the time of his ascension until his
coming to judgment, we should look for him to come inuisibly, and to remain
with us corporally present. S. Hierome expounding the same place, says: This
also must be said, that the second coming of our savior shall not be showed
in humility as before, but in glory. It were a foolish part therefore to
seek him in a little corner, or in some secret place, who is the light of the
whole world. Thus far he. But least I may seem to stay my self upon some
humane authority, I will rehearse that which S. Paul teaches us in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, saying: Christ appeared once before the end of the
world, to put away sin by Heb. 9.
offering up of him self. And for as much as it is appointed to men once to
dye, and after this comes the judgment: even so Christ being once offered
up to take away the sins of many, shall the second time be seen of them
without sin, who look for him to their salvation. Because therefore our
Lord came once into the world, he was once offered up, but he shall come
again, or the second time, at the end of the world, truly he comes not
again every day into the world. And because he has forbidden us to believe,
if any man should show him present here or there unto us in this world: it
must needs follow that he may be showed present here or there, (...)* in all
places where the Sacrament of thanksgiving is celebrated, if we will
understand the words of the Supper according to the letter: therefore it
follows without all contradiction, by conference of places, that the words
of the Lords Supper ought not to be expounded according to the letter.

I think herewith I have satisfied such as be not of a contentious
disposition. For undoubtedly their meaning is, that we should speak of the
sacraments sacramentally, and that sacramental speeches ought to be
expounded sacramentally. Besides that, we ought to beeeue nothing that is
repugnaunt to the rule of belief. But the miracles and the omnipotency of
God, brought forth and alleged in this place for the setting out and
persuading of an evil matter, they do no good at all, after so many and
manifest arguments of truth. Miracles are joined unto the word, as it were
seals, which thing the Miracles and the omnipotency of God.
Lord God him self testifies in S. Mark. If then they be repugnaunt to the
word, and affirm that which the word altogether denies: who will not
perceive them to be of that kind of miracles, whereof the Apostle speaks in
the second chapter of the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and whereof we
have heard now that the lord gave us warning in the Gospel, that we should in
no case believe them? The lord can do al things, but therefore he does not all
things: The Prophet says, What so ever the Lord would do, that he did, both
in heaven and in earth. Moreover, he will not do such things as are contrary
to his word and his faith, therefore he can not do that he will not do.
Theodoretus in his third Dialogue entitled Polymorphus, says: The Lord God
will do nothing that is not in him of his own nature, but he can do what
ever he will, but he will do such things as are fit and agreeing to his
nature. Therefore since God of his own nature is true, he can not do that
which is contrary to his word. Other sound writers do add: Not that he
can not do all things, but that he will not do that which is contrary to
his nature, and because it does not become to do against him self.

In the mean season, I do expressly profess, yt I condemn not or flatly OF
Chrstes presence in the supper.
am against all manner of Christ's presence in the Church, and in the action
also of the supper. For I am flatagainst that bodily presence of Christ in the
bread, which the Papists defend and enforce upon the Church of GOD. But I
confess and acknowledge with open mouth and sincere heart, that spiritual,
divine, and quickening presence of our Lord Christ, both in the Supper and
also out of the supper, whereby he continues to power him self into us, not by
sings lacki^g life, but by his holy spirit to make us partakers of all his good
graces, to justify, quicken, nourishe, sustain, and satisfy us: which
presence we do also feel in our selves through faith, by the which we are
both sustained, nourished, and satisfied. For Christ is the head of his
Church: and we have fellowshippe with him. But how should a living body be
without his head? How should we be partakers of Christ, if we should not
feel him present, yea, living and working in us? But of these matters we have
also entreated more at large in place convenient.

Some there are, I know well enoughe, who otherwise are not injurious to the
truth, which gainesay these things, crying out, that by this reason the manner
of Christ's presence in the Supper is not fully enough expressed, especially
since he him self also has said elsewhere, Behold I am with you
continually Matthew. 28.
unto the worlds end. I, says he, wholly, not my power or divinity, not my
spirit, nor my strength. Moreover, it is a haza^d^, least we should seem to
tear Christ in pieces, seeing that he cannot be wholly with us, unless he be
present with us as well in body as in divinity. But we wonder what is in their
heads. Do they not understand that the Lord in that divine talk, spoken both
in the very Supper, and also immediately after the supper, did beat upon
nothing so much as ye very same thing against which they set shoulder, to wit,
that Christ would be absent in body, but present in spirit: and that this
presence would be more profitable to the church than his bodily presence? Do
they not also understand, wherefore he took flesh, and was nailed on the
Cross, that is to say, what the effect and use is of Christ's body, to wit,
that the sacrifice of his body being once offered for us upon earth, he might
carry the same up into heaven, in token that both our bodies and souls
after our death shall through his merit be also carried thither? Therefore
after that the Lords body had fulfilled on earth that which it came to
fulfill, there is no cause why it should do any thing else upon earth.

He now sits, and ought to sit at the right hand of the father, that he
may draw all us thither unto him. If there be any that does not yet fully
believe that which we say, let him read the doctrine of Saint Paul the
Apostle in the ninthe and tenthe Chapters of his Epistle to the Hebrews. Let
him also read the fourteenth and sixteenth chapters of Saint John's Gospel.
But if it be a pleasure to them to hale at the gable of contention, and to
stick precisely as well to these words of the Lord, I am with you unto the
worlds end, as to these, This is my body, This is my blood, let them then
expound to me these holy testimonies of the holy Scripture. Paul says that
Christ dwells in our hearts, and that Christ lives in him, and he in
Christ. The Lord says to the thief, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. And the Evangelist says of the Lord being dead, They laid him into
the sepulcher. The Scripture says not, They laid flesh and bones into the
sepulcher: but, They laid him into the sepulcher. The Lord said not to the
thief, Thy soul shall be with my spirit or soul in Paradise: But, Verily I
say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Neither does Saint
Paul say, that Christ's spirit and life does live in him, or dwell in our
hearts: But he says simply, That Christ does dwell in our hearts.

But who is so foolish and given to contention, that for these words and
places of the Scripture, will contend that Christ's divinity was buried with
his body, that Christ's body was with his soul that same day in Paradise in
which either of the^ departed this life, that Christ's body together with his
spirit dwells in the hearts of the faithful and lives in Paul, and that Paul
lives in Christ's flesh? Al men do willingly admit the catholic sense of
the catholic Church gathered out of ye word of god, namely that Christ in
his spirit is present in his Church even to the worlds end, but absent in
body, and that the theefes soul was that day present in Paradise with Christ's
soul, not with his body. So judges it also of the residue. But if any man
mistrust mine interpretation, let him hear S. August. in his treatise upon
John, saying thus, He speaks of the presence of his body, when he says, the
poor you shall always have with you, but me shall you not have always. For in
respect of his majesty, of his providence, and of his unspeakable grace, is
that fulfilled which he spoke, Behold I am with you always, even to the
worlds end. But in respect of the flesh which the word took upon it, in
respect that he was borne of the virgin, that he was taken by the Jews, that
he was nailed to the Cross, that he was taken down from the Cross, that
he was woond in a sheet, that he was laid into the sepulcher, that he was
manifested in the resurrection, you shall not have me with you always. And why
so? Because he was conversant as touching his bodily presence, forty days
with his disciples, and they accompanying him, but not following him, he
ascended into heaven: And is not here. For there he sits at the right hand
of the father. And he is here: For he is not gone hence in respect of the
presence of his majesty. Thus far Saint Augustine.

But if they yet proceed, not regarding all this that we have said, to urge
that saying of the Lord out of Matthewe, Behold, I, even I, I say, am (...),
with you: we will also object against them this saying of the Lord, and the
same out of the Gospel, It is expedient for you that I (we here they have also
this word I) do depart: we object also against them this testimony of the
angels out of Luke: This Jesus which is taken up (...) from you into heaven,
etc. They shall be at length constreyned, whether they will or no, to reconcile
such places as seem to be repugnant, and to admit the general understanding
which we have alleged and defended hitherto.

Neither is there here any danger Christ is not divided.
of dividing Christ: neither divide we Christ's person with Nestorius, since
we defend the propriety of both natures in Christ against the Eutychians.
While Christ our Lord in body was yet conversant upon the earth, he him self
witnesses in the Gospel, that nevertheless he was also in the heavens. And
in deed Christ, who was both God and man, all at one time, was then in heaven
when he was crucified and conversant upon earth, although his body was not
crucified in the heavens. But as Christ divided not him self, although being
in heaven, he was notwithstanding conversant and crucified in body upon earth,
not in heaven: so neither do we divide Christ who is both God and man,
although we say he is present with us when we celebrate the supper, and that we
communicate with him: yet nevertheless we affirm that in his body he remains
in heaven, where he sits at the right hand of the father: and so let us
keep our selves within the compass of the Scripture. Of this matter I have
reasoned at large, where I have entreated of one person, and of both natures
in Christ vnpermixed.

Hitherto have I spoken of the natural meaning of the words of the Lords
Supper as briefly and plainly as possibly I could. Touching the place of Paul
in the first to the Corinthians, chap. 10. The cup of blessing which we bless,
etc. with such other textes, which are alleged to prove bodily presence, I
shall not need to use many words: for we have handled that place already once
or twice.

It remains therefore that we examine and weyghe what they deliver Of the
true eatinge of Christ's body.
unto us touching the eating of Christ's body, and also what the Canonical
scriptures do teach to be thought of that eating. What, say they, the lord
has promised, the same most surely and fully he performs. They add, But he
promised that he would give us his true body and very blood to be eaten and
brunken in the form of bread and wine unto everlasting life. They gather,
Therefore he has given his very body and blood to the saythfull, under the
form of bread and wine, for meat and drink to everlasting life.

Whereupon it must be eaten corporally as it is corporal. To the confirmation
whereof, they allege the Lords words as they are written in the 6. chapter of
John's Gospel. We answer, God most perfectly and fully perfourmeth that which
he has promised, but we add, that he perfourmeth not according to that
meaning that we devise, but as his word truly imports. We must therefore see
first of all, in what sense the Lord How christ has given his flesh unto. ^s
for bread, that is to say, to be meat for us.
promised to give his flesh for bread, and his blood for drink to the
faithful: and next how we ought to eat his flesh, and how to drink his blood.
These things truly which the Lord promises here are wel-nigh all allegories
and Parables. The Lord promises that he will give us his sleshfor bread or
meat, and his blood for drink. But because meat and drink are ordained and
given unto men to preserve their bodily life, and the Lord in the 6. chapter
of John speaks not of the life of the body but of the soul, there is a
passage made from bodily things to spiritual things. When therefore the
lord promised that he would give us his fleash for bread or meat, and his
blood for drink, what other thing did he promise us, than that he would give
his body to the death, and shed his blood for the remission of sins? For by
the death of Christ, we are as it were by meat preserved and delivered from
death.

By Christ's blood we are washed from sin, and our souls are as it were
with drink spiritually drunken. Therefore the Lord speaks nothing here of
the bread of the lords supper, neither does he promise that at the supper he
will make of bread his fleash, or that he would give his body in form of
bread. Then let this mine exposition of Christ's words concerning the giueing
of Christ's body or fleash in the form of bread etc, be false and ^eigned,
unless I confirm the same by the words of Christ. The Lord said in the
Gospel, Seek for the meat that perishes not, but remains to life
everlasting, which the son of man shall give unto you. A little after by
interpretation he adds, And the bread which I will give unto you is my
fleash, which I will give for the life of the world. I said that I would give
you bread or meat, (For this word bread, is after the Hebrew manner used by
the Lord for meat, and all manner of sustenaunce:) but says he this bread or
this meat is my flesh, and therefore I promise to give you my fleashe, when I
promise to give you The Bread of Life. Here haste thou expressly to
understand, that the Lord by bread did not mean bodily bread, or the bread
of the supper. But how does he promise to give his fleash for bread, that is
to say, to be meat for us, or to quicken us? The Lord repeateth this word, I
will give, and says, Which I will give for the life of the world, I will
give it, that is to say, even to ye death, that through my death I may quicken
you. By dying therefore my fleash shall feed, that is to say, shall quicken.
Thus much concerning the promise of his fleash for bread: hereafter
follows of the eatinge thereof.

Like as the holy Scripture sets down in every place without How Christ's
body is eaten, and his blood dronken.
trope or allegory, that we are made partakers of Christ's death, or of his
body which was given for the world unto life, through faith: so also in this
present place by a trope or allegory, he bids us to eat and drink the
fleash and blood of Christ unto everlasting life. Therefore to eat Christ's
fleash and drink his blood, is nothing else but to believe that Christ's body
was given for us, and his blood sh^d for us to the remission of sins, and
consequently, that were maine in Christ and have Christ remaining in us. For ye
faith whereof we spoke, is not only an imagination or thought concerning
things past and exceeding our capacity, but a most certain assurance and a
feeling of heaue*ly things received within us to our great commodity. For
therefore not only faith, but also the virtue and force of faith is by the Lord
signified in John by ye allegory both of eating and drinking. Meat passes not
into the substance of our body without delight: so also by faith thorough a
great desire of the spirit we are joined with Christ, that he may live in
us, and we may live in Christ, and be partakers of all his good gifts. This
is the spiritual eating of Christ who never thought no not so much as once
dreamed in this place of the gross and bodily eating, which is indeed
unprofitable. But for as much as the whole point of the controversy consists
in these words, of eating and drinking the flesh and blood of the lord, they
interpreting ye same words bodily and we spiritually, it seems good to be
showed, that by the words of eating and drinking, the Lord meant no other thing
than to believe, and consequently to abide in Christ, and to have Christ
abiding in us: we will therefore by conference of places of the scripture,
bring forth sire evident testimonies in confirmation of our assertion.

I am (says the Lord) that Bread of life, Who so comes to me shall 1
not hunger, and who so believes in me, shall not thirst for ever. But who will
deny that there is relation between to eat and not to hunger, to drink and
not to thirst? Because therefore y^ Lord said* He shall not hunger, he should
first have said, Whosoever eats me: But he rather used y^ word of coming, and
said, Whosoever comes to me shall not hunger. To eat therefore is to come, and
to come is to eat. And what it is to come to him, he expounds immediately,
saying: Whosoever has heard from the father and has learned, he it is that
comes to me, y^ is to say, receives me, and believes in me. For Paul also
says, Heb. 11.
Whosoever will come to GOD must beeleue.

These testimonies without contradiction do prove, that to eat, is nothing
else but to believe. Yet that follows which is more manifest, And whosoever
believes in me shall never thirst: And, Whosoever drinks shall not thirst:
therefore to drink, he has put for to believe. Therefore to drink is to
believe. For faith satisfies and pacifieth our minds. Here they have an
answer y^ make this objection, Whether the Lord himself had not words whereby
he might declare his mind, if so be by eating and drinking he had meant
believing? They have I say an open testimony whereby he uses the one for the
other.

Again in the same treatise y^ Lord 2
says, Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has everlasting life,
and I will raise him at the latter day. And again in y^ same tretise he says,
This is the will of him that sent me, that who soever shall see the son and
believe in him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him at the later
day. Lo here thou haste again these worde^, to eat Christ's flesh, to drink
his blood, and to believe in Christ, all in one sense.

Again the Lord says, I am the 3
lively bread which came down from heaven. And again he says, Verily I say
unto you, he that believes in me has life everlasting. Whosoever shall eat of
this bread shall live for ever. Then to eat Christ and to believe in Christ
are all one.

And again he says, Who so eats my flesh and drinks my blood, 4
abides in me, and I in him. Moreover, John in his Canonical epistle says.
John. 4.
Who soever shall confess, that is to say, shall believe, that Jesus is the
son of God, God abides in him, and he in God.

Again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, unless you eat the flesh of the 5
son of man, and drink his blood, you can have no life in you. And the same
Lord says also in the 8. chap. of John, If you do not believe that I am, ye
shall dye in your sins. And again, Verily, Verily I say unto you, whosoever
keeps my sayings he shall never see death.

Again the Lord says, Like as the living father has sent me, and I live 6
by means of the Father: so likewise whosoever eats me, shall also live by
means of me. And John in the ^. cha. says, Like as the father has life in
himself: so has he given to the son to have life in him felfe. And likewise
in his Canonical epistle he says. Whosoever believes in the son of God has
a testimony in him self. And, Whosoever has the son has life.

Unto these most evident testimonies of God, we will now join y^ testimonies of
men, which do say the very same, that to eat Christ, is nothing else but to
believe in Christ, and to abide in Christ. S. Augustine in his 2^. treatise
upon John, expounding these words of the Lord; says: This is the work of
God, that you should believe in him whom he sent, as he left written: This is
therefore to eat the meat that perishes not, but which remains unto
^uerlastinglife. Why then do thou prepare thy teeth and thy belly? Believe
and thou haste eaten.

The same again in his 26. treatise says. To believe in him, this is to eat
the bread of life. Whosoever believes in him, eats inuisibly, and is filled,
because he is borne inuisibly. And again in y^ same treatise he says, This is
to eat that meat and drink that drink, to abide in Christ, and to have Christ
abiding in him, and by this means who so abides not in Christ, and in whom
Christ does not abide, doubtless he neither eats spiritually his fleashe,
etc.

The same Augustine, Lib. de Doctrina Christiana, Cap. 16. showing when a
figurative speech is to be admited, and when not, says. If it be an inioyning
speech, or forbiding some heinous offense or trespass, or commanding some
profit or good deed to be done, it is not figurative. But if it seem to
command some heinous offense or trespass, or to forbid some profit or good
deed, then is it figurative. Unless you eat the fleashe of the son of man
and drink his blood, you can have no life in you, this seems to command an
heinous offense and trespass: therefore it is figurative, willinge us to be
partakers of the Lords passion, and sweetly and profitably to keep in
memory, that his fleash was crucified and wounded for us.

Thus said Augustine, who doubtless set down, not only his own meaning
herein, but also the meaning of the whole eatholique Church which was at that
time. Let our aduersari^s therefore take heed what they d^, who will drive all
y^ faithful to this wickedness and offense, to wit, that we should corporally
eat Christ's body.

Furthermore, hereunto is to be added yt which by reason of ye perspicuitie The
flesh profits nothing.
and plainness thereof, does almost surpass all that we have alleged
before, which the Lord himself aunsweared to those that woondred or rather
murmured, saying, How can he give us that his fleash to eat, after that he
had declared the sum of yt true faith. Does this offend you, says he, that
I said, I would give you bread which came from Heaven, even my fleash to be
meat to all believers? I suppose that offense shall take no just place, when
you shall see me ascend into heaven, from whence I came down unto you, and
where I was with my Father before all beginning: then shall ye perceive by my
divine ascension that I am the heavenly bread, the natural son of God, and
the life of the world: ye shall perceive moreover yt my fleash is not to be
eaten bodily, and to be consumed and torn in morcels, but is carried up into
Heaven, for a pleadge of the salvation of mankind. And shortly after this he
says further, It is the spirit that quickneth: the flesh avails nothing.
And yet more manifestly he speaks, The words which I speak unto you are
spirit and life. Certain it is y^ Christ's flesh avails very much, and is
more profitable to the world than any tongue, yea the most eloquent can
express. Yea the Lord has warned us before hand, that we shall have no life,
unless we eat his fleash. Then does the Lord deny that his fleash avails
us any thing at all, if so be it be eaten as the Capernaites understood, that
is to say bodily. For being bodily eaten it avails nothing, but being
spiritually eaten it quickens: and the Lord has plainly professed, that he
spoke of the spiritual eating in which consists life.

These things being declared and confirmed after this manner, we gather such
things into a short summarie, wherein we think sufficient answer is made
unto our adversaries objection. The proposition is true, which holds that
the Lord does certeinely perform that which he has promised. But the
second proposition is false, which says, that the Lord by his words in the 6.
Chapter of John, by bread meant the material bread of the sacrament, and
that he promised that he would convert the same into his fleash. For by
bread, he meant not the material bread of the Sacrament, but meat to live
withal, according to the propriety of the Hebrew tongue, yea his very flesh
which was delivered to the death, to be meat I say, that we might live through
Christ's death. Thus therefore should the argument have been framed. That
which GOD promises he perfourmeth: but he promises that he will give us his
fleash for bread, that is to say to be meat and life for us. Therefore has he
given his flesh to be meat, that is to say, he has given over him self to
the death, that by his death we might live.

Which being so, surely the meat whereof the Lord speaks is no bodily
meat, although the Lord him self have a true, humane, and natural body of
like substance to ours, but spiritual: not that the fleash is converted into
the spirit, but for that it ought to be received spiritually, not bodily. But
it is eat* spiritually by faith, not with the bodily mouth. For as chewing or
eating, makes us partakers of the meat: so are we made partakers of the body
and the blood of Christ through faith.

But thou will say, How comes it to pass, that seeing bread The lords
words in John. 6. arfitlie to be applied to the matter of the supper.
whereof mention is made in the 6. chapter of John, does not signify the
bread of the supper, that allmoste all the doctors, interpretours, and
ministers of the Churches do apply these words to the Lords supper? I
answer, that these words of the Lord may be applied to the matter of the
Lords supper for other causes, although the bread signify not the bread of
the sacrament. Yea I confess that these words of the Lord, of the eating his
fleashe and drinking his blood, do bring great light to the matter of the
Lords supper.

S. Augustine Lib. De Consensu Euangelistarum tertio, Capite. primo, says:
John said nothing in this place (John the. 13.) of the body and blood of the
lord, but plainly witnesses that the lord has spoken more at large thereof in
another place. This much says he, speaking undoubtedly of the 6. of Ihon.
Since therefore it is one and the self same flesh, and the same body of our
Lord whereof he speaks in both places, in the 6. of S. John, and the 26.
of Matthewe, and the self same is said in both places to have been delivered
to the death for us, or for our life: and like-wise, because there is but one
means to be partaker of Christ, which is by faith in his body, which was
delivered and his blood shed, and finally, because it is the catholic or
universal and undoubted doctrine, that Christ's fleashe being bodily eaten
avails nothing, surely the things before written in the 6. Chapter of John,
are agreeable and do fully open the matter of the Lords supper. And to the
intent that this yet may Of two kinds of eating the Lords supper.
be the better understood, I will recite what testimonies have been always
alleged in the Church out of the holy Scriptures, concerning the two
kinds of eatinge of Christ. Christ's body is eaten and his blood dronken
spiritually, it is also eaten and dronken sacramentally. The spiritual manner
accomplished by faith, whereby being united to Christ, we be made partakers
of all his goodness. The sacramental manner is only performed in celebrating
the Lords supper. The spiritual eating is perpetual unto the godly, because
faith is to them perpetual. They communicate with Christ both without the
supper and in the supper, and by it they do more increase and continue their
new beginnings, as we have also showed before: and now by adjoining of the
holy action althings are done more manifestly and plainly. As for the
unbelievers and hypocrites, with their captein Judas, they never communicate
with Christ, neither before the supper, nor in the supper, nor after the
supper, in as much as they continue in their unbelief, but they of the Lords
Sacraments to their own judgment and condemnation.

I know here what some do teach, and how they devise a certain The third
kind of eatinge.
third kind of eating Christ which is neither spiritual nor yet
sacramental, but altogether compounded of sacramental and corporal. For they
hold opinion also that the true and natural body of Christ is received
bodily by the unbelievers in the forms of the sacrament. How be it, it shall
easily appear by certain sound arguments of the Scripture, that this is but a
devise of man: which arguments we will apply to the traitor Judas, that by this
one example all the godly may learn, what they eat and drink at the Lords
supper. For that the judgment which is made of the head being revealed unto
us, it shall be easier for us to pronounce of the members.

Some truly do make a doubt whether Judas were present at the supper, That
Judas was present at the Lords supper.
when the Lord distributed the holy mysteries, among whom is S. Hilarie.
Howbeit the Evangelical history says plainly, that the Lord sat down to
meat with the twelve: yea Luke so handles his narration, that we cannot dout
but yt Judas did communicate of the mysteries with the rest of the Apostles,
which Saint Augustine also avouches, Libro De Consensu Euangelistarum tertio,
Capitulo primo. And likewise in the 62. treatise upon John, and upon the 10
Psalm, and in his 163. Epistle. Yea moreover, Aquinas also aunswering in this
point to S. Hilarie, approves the same with us, Part tertia, Quaesti. 81.
Art. 2. Now therefore What Judas received of the Lord at the supper.
being manifest that Judas was at supper with the rest of the Apostles, it
seems needeful that it were known, what he received of the Lord. He
received the sacrament of Christ's body as the other disciples did, but because
he had not faith as the other had, he partaked not of Christ, neither did he
eat and drink the Lords body and blood. For as many as eat the Lords body,
and drink his blood, do not hunger nor thirst: for they dwell in Christ, and
Christ in them, they are Christ's members, and they never dye. The contrary
altogether appears in Judas and all his fellows: wherefore the unbelievers
do neither eat the Lords body, nor drink his blood. Moreover, it is out of
all doubt, yt there is no agreement between Christ and Belial. For 2. Cor. 6.
this has the Apostle pronounced out of yt general consent of the scriptures.
But Judas is by Christ him self called satan: therefore Judas did not
communicate with Christ.

Now if we will contend absolutely, that Judas did eat the Lords body, truly
we shall be constrained wickedly to affirm, that it is not only an
unprofitable, but also an hurtful meat: howbeit, godliness teaches us, that
Christ is an wholesome meat all ways to all them that eat him truly.

S. Augustine also denies that Judas did eat the Lords body, or drink his
blood. In the 59. treatise upon S. John, The Apostles (says he) did eat the
bread which was the lord, but Judas did eat the Lords bread against the
Lord. They did eat life: but he punishment. Again in the 26. treatise, Whosoever
dwells not in Christ nor Christ in him, doutlesse he neither eats his
fleash spiritually, nor drinks his blood: although carnally and visibly he
break in his teeth the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: but he
rather eats and drinks the sacrament of so great a matter to his
condemnation. etc. The like also, and almost playner, does he write in the
21. book and 25. chapter, De Ciuitate Dei.

Against these they obiecte the authority of Paul, saying, That they which
eat unworthily, are not guilty of the bread and cupp which they have eaten
and drunken of, but of the Lords body and blood: and also that they do eat
and drink their own damnation, for that they make no differente of the Lords
body: whereby it follows necessarily, that they have eaten and drunken the
Lords body unworthily, and not only the sacraments of the body and blood of
Christ. We answer, that Paul says thus in plain words, Who soever eats
of this bread and drinks of the Lords cup. etc. Mark this, he says, Who so
eats this bread and drinks of this cup unworthily: he says not, Who so
eats the flesh and drinks the blood unworthily. For they which eat the
Lord, are not without faith, and Christ dwells in them, and they in him. If
thou yet marvel, how the unbelievers can be guilty of the Lords body and
blood being eaten but sacramentally, How the unbelievers are made guilty of
Christ's body and blood. John. 13. Matthew. 2^
learn this out of other places of the Scripture. The Lord says in John,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that receives whomsoever I shall send,
receives me: and whosoever receives me, receives him that sent me. Wherefore,
whose receives not an apostle, trespasseth not against y^ Apostle but against
God himself, although in y^ mean while he has not seen god, nor will not
seem to have repelled him. We read how y^ the judge will say to them that are
on his left hand, Depart from me you wicked into everlasting fire. For I was
hungry and you gave me no meat. I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink, etc.
But harke^ now how the reprobate will make exceptions against thus sentence of
the Judge. Lord, when did we se thee hungry or thirsty, and ministered not
unto thee? The^ hear again what the judge will answer, Verily I say unto you,
in that ye did it not unto one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.
wherefore like as he yt sins against a minister or a beggar, sins against
Christ himself, although in y^ mean while he has not hurt Christ's person in
any point: so is he also guilty of the body and blood of Christ whosoever
receives the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ unworthily, although in
the mean season he have not received the very body and blood of the lord. Paul
says in another place, that reuolters do crucify again unto them Heb. 6.
selves the son of God. He also denies in an other place by all manner of
means, that it is possible for Christ to be crucified or to dye any more.
Therefore Christ cannot be crucified again by the Apostataes or reuolters, how
beit their shameful falling away from him is so esteemed of, as if they had
crucified the Son of God.

Although therefore the wicked do not eat the Lords very body, nor drink
his blood, nevertheless they are guilty of betraying the Lords body and
blood, as far as in them lies. If a rebel tread under his foot y^ seal
or letters of the Prince or Magistrate: although he touch not the Magistrate
him self, nor tread him under his foot, yet is he said to have troaden the
magistrate under his foot, and is accused not for hurting the seal or
defiling the letters: but he is charged of treason, and accused for treading
the Prince under his feet.

What marvel then if we hear it said that they which do eat ye Lords bread
unworthily are guilty of the body and blood of Christ? For the bread and the
mystical cup are a sacrament and seal of it.

Hitherto have we disputed of the eating of the body of Christ, and Of the
other ends of the Lords supper.
of drinking of his blood, ha^dling every one point thereof with as much brevity
as we could. Now we go to knit up the other ends of the Lords supper being
placed in the description of ye supper. We said that ye supper was instituted
by the Lord, that it might represent visibly the gifts of God unto the Church,
and lay them forth before the eyes of all men. But we have learned by the
whole discourse of this matter, that Christ him self is a most full and rich
treasure of all the gifts of God, as namely from whom being delivered for us
unto death, we have all things belonging to life, remission of sins and life
everlasting. Since these things be invisible and gotten by faith, they be also
visibly, that is to say, by sacraments represented almost unto all the senses,
to the sight, to hearing, to tasting, and to feeling, to the intent that man
being wholly therewith moved both in body and soul, may celebrate this most
comfortable mystery with great rejoicing in heart. Here unto now
apperteyneth that analogy, whereof I have spoken before in the 7. Sermon of
this Decade, whereby I would have these things to be better learned.

Furthermore, we have said that the supper was instituted of the lord, that he
might visibly gather together into one body all his members, which were in a
manner dispersed throughout all parts of the world. Whervppon we have said that
the holy men some where else did call the supper a league or confederacy. We
are knitt inuistbly with Christ and all his members, by unity of faith and
participation of one spirit: but in the supper we are joined together even by a
visible co^iunctio^. For now not by words, but by deeds also, but by mystery,
but by sacrament we are very nearly knit and joined together, opening and
declaring to all men by celebrating the supper, that we are also of the number
of them that believe that they are redeemed by Christ, and that they are
Christ's members and people. But we bind our selves together unto Christ and
the Church, both that we will keep the sincere faith, and promising that we
will use good deeds and charity toward all men. Look for more touching this
matter in the seventh Sermon of this Decade.

Heerevppon truly did S. Paul prove, that it is not lawful for them which
receive together at the Lords table to eat of meat offered to Idols, and to
take part of profane sacrifices. Which thing, if at this day many would
rightely weigh and consider, they would not seem to be seen so busy in
strange and for reign sacrifices.

We said also that the Lord instituted the Supper, that thereby he might keep
his death in memory, so that it should never be blotted out with oblivion. For
Christ's death is the summarie of all gods benefits. He would have us therefore
to keep in memory the benefit of his in^arnatio^, passion, redemption, and of
his love. And although the remembrance of a thing that is past be celebrated,
to wit, of his death, yet the same belongs greatly unto us, and quickneth us.
Neither, most we think that this is the lest end. For there is none so
diligently expressed as this is. For the Lord repeateth this saying. Do this
in the remembrance of me. But ye holy rite or holy actio^, being joined with
the word or with the preaching of Christ's death, and the redemption of
mankind, how mauelously does it renew from time to time yt benefit, and
suffers it not to be forgotten.

Last of al we said yt the supper was ordained of ye lord yt thereby we might be
admonished of our duty, praise, and thanksgiving. It is our duty to be
sincere in the faith of Christ, and to embrace all our brethren with christian
charity for ye Lords sake, and to beware that we defile not our bodies with the
filthe of ye world, since we be cleansed with the blood, of Christ. Paul the
Apostle says: So often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of the
Lords cup, declare the Lords death until he come. But to declare the Lords
death, is to praise the goodness of God, and to give thanks for our redemption
obtained through his death. For the Apostle Peter says, Ye are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthod, an holy nation, a people, set 1. Pet. 2.
at liberty, that ye should show forth virtues of him that has called you out
of darkness into his marvelous light. But hereof we have spoken also in another
place. Thus much I thought good in few words to repeat touching the ends of
the supper, which every godly man being instructed by ye holy ghost does
diligently consider. I would now let you go, dearly beloved brethren, but yt I
see it will be a common commodity, to teach in few words flow every one should
prepare himself to the lords supper, that he come not to it unworthily. But
it were not lost labor Of worthily and unworthily eating and drinkinge the
Lords supper.
first of all to search (...), who do worthily or, unworthily eat and drinks
of the Lords bread and cup. There is no man that can deny that there are
degrees in our worthiness and unworthiness, if he rightly examine the
judgments of God, and looking narrowly into the nature of our religion is able
to give judgment thereof. The chiefest degree of unworthiness, is to come to
the holy mysteries of faith, without faith. He comes worthily yt comes with
faith: unworthily he that comes without faith. Such are said to be works
worthy of repentance in yt gospel, as are penitent works or seemly for such as
profess repentance. But what is more beseeming, more meet, and just, than
that he who is to celebrate ye Lords Supper, do believe that he is redeemed by
Christ's death, who was offered up as a price for ye whole world and that for
that cause is desirous to give thanks to Christ his redeemer? Contrariwise,
what is more unseemly and unjust, tha^ to receive that pledge of Christ's
body, and in the mean while to have no communion or fellowship with Christ? To
come to thanksgiving, and yet not to give thanks from the bottom of his heart.
For what unites us to Christ, or what makes us partakers of all his
benefits, and therewith also to be thankful, but faith? What does separate us
from Christ, and spoyleth us of all his gifts, and makes us most
loathesome, but unbelief? Therefore, faith or unbelief makes us partakers of
the Lords table woorthily or unworthily. Paul the Apostle in the Acts, says
to the Jews, who through unbelief did reject or set at naught the preaching
of the Gospel, The word of God ought first to be Acts. 13.
preached unto you: But because you reject it, and judge your selves unworthy
of everlasting life, behold, we turn unto the Gentiles. How did the Jews
pronounce against themselves that they were unworthy of everlasting life, and
like Judges gave sentence against themselves? In setting them selves against
Gods word through unbelief, neither apprehendinge Christ by faith, who is the
life and righteousness of the world.

Wherefore, the chief and greatest portion of our worthiness and
unworthiness is and consists in ^aith or unbelief. S. Peter witnesses,
that our hearts are purified by faith: true Acts. 15.
faith therefore is the cleannes of christians. Whereupon S. Augustine says,
The unbeliever eats not the flesh of Christ spiritually, but rather eats
and drinks the sacrament of so great a thing to his own condemnation:
Because being unclean he has presumed to come to Christ's sacraments, which
no man receives worthily, but he that is clean. Of whom it is said, Blessed
be the clean in heart, for they shall see God, etc. Moreover, they eat and
drink of the Lords supper unworthily, who although they be not destitute of
faith, yet by their abusing of it, do pervert the right institution of the
Lord: such seems to have been the error of ye Church of Corinth, which
mingled the private and profane with the Ecclestastical and mystical banquet,
and did put no difference between the Lords bread, which is called Christ's
body, and common meat. For Paul says: Who so eats and drinks,
unworthily, he eats and drinks his own damnation, making no difference of
the Lords body. Therefore, to make no difference of ye lords To make
difference of the Lords body.
body, is unworthily to eat ye lords bread, and to drink of his cup. For
this word ((...)) to judge or to make a difference, is to weigh and consider
of a matter exactly with judgment to ye uttermost of a man's power to judge of it
and make a difference between that and al other things. Furthermore, the Lords
body is not only that spiritual body of the Lord, to wit the church of the
faithful, but that very body which the Lord took of the virgin, and offered
up for our redemption, and that now sits at the right hand of the father. To
be short, the bread of ye sacrament in the supper is the Lords body, it is I
say the sacrament of the true body which was given for us. Whosoever therefore
puts no difference between this the Lords mystical bread and profane
meat, but comes to Christ's table, as he would to a table of common and
gross meat, and acknowledges not that this heavenly meats differs far
from other humane meat, neither comes after that sort as the Lord has
instituted, but follows his own reason, surely he makes no difference of the
Lords body, but eats and drinks his own damnation. Paul again expounds
himself saying, Therefore my brethren, when you come together to eat, tarry
one for another, that ye meet not to condemnation. Who so therefore preuenteth
the public supper by eating his own private supper that is to say, who so
suppeth not as ye Lord has appointed, the same eats and drinks unworthily.
For before un worthy eaters and drinkers are said to eat and drink their own
damnation: and here they are said to meet together to their condemnation ye
make have to the supper, not tarying for their brethren: and they make no
difference of the Lords body. S. Augustine in his 26. treatise upon John
says, The Apostle speaks of those which received the Lords body without
difference and carelessly, as if it had bin any other kind of meat whatsoever.
Heretherefore if he be reproved which makes no difference of the lords body,
that is to say does not discern the lords body from other meats, how then
should not Judas be damned who came to the lords table, feigning that he was a
friend, but was an enemy? etc. How much more grievously do they seem to
sin at this day, who perverting the lawful and first use ye was instituted
by the Lord, do stablish their own abuse with great contention: yea and
grievously persecute them that cry out against it and will not receive it?
Furthermore, since by experience we find every day, ye there are many things
wanting unto our faith, by means whereof diverse vices spring up among us
whereof our unworthiness is the hightest or lest of all which the Lord of his
grace may easily wash away, and almost wipeth away by sending his cross upon
us, not imputing such infirmities to us to our condemnation. For ye Apostle in
another place ^aith, that there is no condemnation for them which are graffed
into Christ Jesus, and walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. Neither
with equal punishment does our most just lord punish these sundry The
punishment of those that eat unworthily.
sorts of unworthiness. Let us therefore see what the blessed Apostle
teaches us concerning the punishmente of those y^ eat unworthily. Therefore
he says, Who so eats this bread, or drinks of the lords cup unworthily,
the same shall be gyltie of the Lords body and blood. By which words verily he
means that chief and most ^owle unworthiness of al other, to wit unbelief.
For he is guilty of ye lords body and blood, to whom the fault of the lords
death is imputed, that is to say, to whom Christ's death becomes death, and
not life: as it also happened unto them, who through unbelief and wickedness
did crucify Christ. For unto them Christ's blood seemed profane, as it had
been the blood of some beast, murderer, or wicked person, as being worthily
(...) for his offenses. And I pray you, what else does he think, than ye
Christ's blood is profane, who believes not that ye same was shed for the
sins of the world? And yet he dares take part of ye lords supper, ye he may
worthily be said to be guilty of the Lords body and blood. It is a very
great offense to eat the Lords bread and to drink of his cup unworthily
through unbelief: which thing by the example of Judas is laid before our eyes.
He believed not in ye Lord Jesus, yea he invented how to deliver him into the
hands of thieves and murderers, yet nevertheless he sat down to meat and
took part of the Lords supper, therefore in the end the devil worthily
challenged him wholly unto him. For S. John witnesses yt about the end of the
supper, the devil John. 13.
entered into Judas: not ye he was not in him before that he came to ye supper:
for he had begone before to dwell in him, and to stir him forward: but for
that Luke. 22.
after so many admonitio^s of our lord Christ, and after yt he had profaned
the mysteries of Christ, and as it were trodden them under foot, he wholly
entered into him, and fully possessed him.

The same Apostle Paul threateneth damnation to them that make no difference
of the Lords body, who are placed, as it were, in another degree of
unworthiness, saying: For who so eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation. The reason hereof he sets down in this
sentence, to wit, why we we ought not rashly and carelessly to come to the
Lords table, for yt we approach then to our condemnation. But comdemnation or
judgment is the pain or punishment which the Lord lays upon his faithful
people when they sin, not in another world truly, as he does upon the
unbelievers, but in this world. For it follows in the words of the Apostle,
which ministers unto us the same sense. For this cause, many are weak and
feeble among you, and many sleep. For if we had judged our selves, we should
not have been judged. But when we are judged, we are corrected by the Lord that
we should not be condemned with the world. The Apostle plainly
distinguishes between the unworthy eaters that are subject to Gods
correction, and worldly men, that is to say vnbeeleeuers, whose punishment the
Lord deferreth to that other world: but upon his faithful people, who yet
offend through the negligence, and come to the supper not sufficiently
instructed, he lays diverse and sundry afflictions, as pestilence, famine,
sickness, and such like, to shake off their drowsiness. For it follows, If we
had judged our selves, yt is, if we our selves had restrained our vices, and
separated our selves from evil, we had not been judged, that is to say,
punished and corrected. For immediately he adds, But when we are judged, we
are chastised of the Lord. To be judged therefore, is to be chastised. But
hereby we learn from whence there do flow so many mischiefs into the Church,
to wit, by the unworthy use of the Lords supper.

But some man will answer here, if How we should prepare our selves to the
Lords supper.
ye matter be so, it were better wholly to abstain from ye lords supper. But if
any abstain wholly, he also thereby sins against the Lord, and that
grievously. For he sets at naught the Lords commandment, who says, Do
this: yea, he sets at naught both the Lords death, and all the gyfts of God.
Wherefore he has not escaped danger, who has omitted to celebrate ye supper:
which thing also we have said before. Thou must go an other way to work, if
thou desire to avoid both danger and sin. Hear the counsel of Paul very
co^pendiously saying, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup. And we must mark, yt in this examination he
sends no man to another, but every man to him self. The Papists bidd thee,
Go to an auricular confessor, there to confess thy self, to receive
absolution, and to make satisfaction for thy sins, according to the form
that is commanded thee. And so they bid thee as sufficiently cleansed, to go to
the Lords table. But Paul ye doctor of the gentiles, and the vessel of
election, speaks not a word of those things, but says simply, Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. For
like as God is ye searcher of the hearts, and requires the affection of the
mind, and hates hypocrisy: so none knows what is in the heart of man, or
what affections we bear to godward, but we our selves do: therefore he wills
us our selves, to examine every thing in ourselves: that is to say, he wills
every man to descend into himself and to examine him self. This examination
cannot be made without faith, and the light of gods word. But the faithful
man haueing the light of Gods word shining before him, and faith extendinge
her force and power, inquireth of himself, whether he does acknowledge al his
sins which he has manifoldly committed against God: and whether he be sort
for them, being committed, and whether with sincere faith of heart he believe
that Christ has washed away and forgiven al his sins: and whether he
confess freely with his mouth as he believes in his heart, that life and
salvation consists in Jesus Christ only, and in none other: and whether he
have determined with himself to die in this confession: and whether he mean
diligently and earnestly to apply himself to innocence and holiness of life:
and whether he be ready to love, and help all the members of Christ's body,
of whom he is also a member, and be ready to spend his life for them according
to the example of Christ: and whether he have remitted or pardoned all anger
and enimitie: and whether he be desirous to call to mind Christ's passion, and
ye whole mystery of our redemption, and to give thanks to God for our
redemption, and for all other gifts of God already received and to be
received. This is the right examining which agrees with ye receiving of the
mystical supper: and when we have done so, we may in humblenes, and fear of
the Lord, and with gladness approach to the supper of our Lord Christ.

But here the faithful do tremble, who are as it were privy to their A comfort
or afflicted consciences.
own imperfection and infirmity. For they do not find these things to be so
perfect in their minds as otherwise they kn^w a just perfection requires.
Satan comes, and he casts in many and great stays, to the intent he may
draw us back from the celebration of the supper. Therefore we say, if any man
suppose that none is to be admitted to the supper but he that is purged from al
sin and infirmity, surely he shall drive away and exclude al men how many
soever live in this world, nay he shall altogether deprive the^ of the lords
supper, as not to be any longer for sinful men but for Angels. We must remember
yt this examination rests wtin his own bounds, and that God here also as
every where else, does use this clemency and mercy toward us. He knows
our weakness and corruption, and with us can bear our infirmities. The
Israelits under king Ezechias being not fully cleansed, took part of the
paschal lamb. But the king prayed, and said, The Lord, who is good will have
mercy upon all men, that with all their heart seek after the God of their
fathers, and will not impute it unto them that they are not sanctified. And
hereunto is added in the holy history, in 2. Chron* 30. chap: And the Lord
heard Ezechias, and he was pleased with the people. The worthiness which is
inquired for by exact examination, is no absolute perfection, but a will and
mind instructed by God, which humbly acknowledges it own unworthiness, and
therefore humbly prays for increase of faith and charity, and all perfection
in Christ only. At that first supper the Apostles were Christ's guests, and
among these was Judas: but because he lacked faith, and was a traitor, yea a
murderer, he was made guilty of ye body and blood of the Lord. The other
apostles were also sinners themselves, but not wicked, they believed in christ
they loved Christ and one of the^ loved aother like brethren: and therefore they
did not eat of the Lords supper unworthily, as Judas did. Although in the
mean time at the same table they showed tokens of great imperfection. For
Peter not without great contempt and reproach of his brethren, prefers Matthew.
26. Luke. 22.
himself before them all. Moreover, they contend among themselves for honor,
which of them should seem to be greater than another. I will not now recite
that streightway after they arose from ye table, they shamefully forsook their
master and ran away, and many ways behaud them selves vnworthili: but al
these things were easily washed away, for ye faith had taken very deep root
wtin them. Neither will I here stick to recite word for word, the comfort of
M. John Calvin, a godly and learned man, who with great commendation teaches
in the church at this day, my fellow minister and most well-beloved and dear
brother, which he has set down for the afflicted in this case: Let us call
to remembrance, says he, that this holy banquet is a medicine for the sick, a
comfort for the sinful, a largess to the pore, which to the whole, righteous,
and rich, if there could any such be found, would bring small vantage. For
seeing that in this banquet Christ is given unto us to be eaten, we understand
that without him we faint, fail and are forsaken. Moreover, seeing he is given
to us to be our life, we understand that without him we are but dead.
Wherefore, this is the greatest and only worthiness which we can give unto God if
we lay before him our own vileness and unworthiness, that through his mercy he
may make us worthy of himself: if we despair in our selves, that we may be
comforted in him: if we humble our selves, that we may be lift up by him: if we
accuse ourselves, that we may be justified by him. Moreover, if we attein unto
that unity which he commends unto us in the supper: and like as he makes
us all to dwell in him, so that we may with likewise that there were one soul,
one heart and one tongue in us all. If we well wey and meditate these things,
the^ shall these thoughts never trouble us: we that are naked and destitute of
all goodness, we that are stained with spots of sin, we that are half dead,
how should we worthily eat the Lords body? Let us rather think that we
being poor do come to a plentiful giver, we that are sick come to a
Physician, we that are sinful come to a savior: that the worthiness which is
commanded by God consists in faith chiefly, which reposeth al in God, and
nothing in our selves: secondly in charity, and such charity as it is
sufficient if we offer it unto God imperfect, that he may increse it to the
better, seeing we cannot perform it absolute as it ought to be. Thus far he.
This much have I said hitherto of ye most holy supper of our lord Jesus
Christ, the most excellent and wholesome sacrament of Christians, for which
even from the very beginning and while the Apostles were yet living satan the
most deadly enemy to our salvation, lying in wait, has gone about to
overthrow by many corruptions and defilings: from which being now for a time
faithfully cleansed, yet does he not so leave it but intermingles and throws
an heap of co^tentions into it being made unto y^ church y^ token of a
covenant never to be broken. Whereupon the thing itself and our salvation
requires, that we be circumspect and give no place to ye temptour, but
agreing altogether in christ and being joined into one body (by faithful
celebrating of the supper) we may love one another and give everlasting thanks
to our redeemer and Lord Christ to whom be praise and glory now and for
ever. Amen. Amen.

Of certain institutions of the Church of God. Of Schools. Of Ecclesiastical
goods, and the use and abuse of the same. Of Churches and holy instruments
of Christians. Of the admonition and correction of the ministers of the church,
and of the whole Church. Of matrimony. Of widows. Of virgins. Of monks.
What the Church of Christ determines concerning the sick, and of funerals
and buryall.
The tenth Sermon.
THERE remain certain things, but a few truly, which are to be expounded
unto you (dearly believed) the which partly apperteine to the institution of
the ecclesiastical ministry and preservation thereof, there are partly
certain peculiar or diuances of the Church which the Church can not want.
Whereof in this last Sermon of this Decade, so far as the Lord shall give me
grace to speak, I intend as briefly as I can to entreat.

First of all we must know that the Lord our God has not burdened The Lord
has not burdened his church with infinite laws.
his Church with over many laws and institutions, but has set down a few
easily to be numbered, and those not costly, nor intruate, nor long, but
pro^^table, ^imple, plain and short. In time past, when as under the law the
Lord appointed unto the people a costly and sumptuous worshipping of him,
notwithstanding all things therein were certain, (...), and moderate:
neither would he have any thing added to, or taken from i^ at the pleasure of
men, or to be otherwise used than he had appointed. Who then will think that
after the abrogating of the Law, the Lord would deliver unto the Church of
his new people, asumptuous and an infinite discipline? Wherefore it is partly
the covetousness of the pastors and estates of the Church, and partly the
monstrous superstition of the common people, that has made every thing so
sumptuous, and infinite in the Church. Let us stick unto this, that the Lord
our God has instituted in his Church, but very few things, and such as are
necessary: and therefore we ought all to endeavor, that the Church be not
ouer-burdened with traditi^ ^s and institutions which proceeded not from God
him self. The Church of God is gorgeously enough ^ecked and furnished, if the
^eteine and keep the institutions of her God and Lord.

The chief and principal points The chiefest points of true godliness in the
Church.
of the Godliness of the Church of GOD, are the sincere teaching of the law
and the Prophets, of Christ and ^he Apostles, faithful prayer offered unto her
only GOD through Christ (...), a religious and lawful administration and
receiving of Christ's sacraments: whereof we have entreated hitherto through five
Decades. Here unto belongs charity also, which is a communicating of
riches, or well doing, whereof we have said somewhat already in the first
Decade, and will say somewhat else in this Sermon.

Neither does Luke in ye Acts make mention of any other things, describing
what manner of Church ye faithful primitive Church of Christ was, being founded
by the Apostles, and what were the principal points thereof. They were
continuing, says he, in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in Acts. 2.
communicating, and in breking of bread and in prayer. Under these few points
all godliness is comprised. Unto the Of schools
Ecclesiastical ministry are joined these that follow. Christian schools
have the first place, which bring forth a plentiful increase of Prophets or
ministers of the Church. All nations unless they were altogether barbarous,
have understood that without schools no kingdoms or commonweals can
happily be maintained. And therefore not only Moses in the book of Genesis,
but also Strabo in ye 17. book of his Geographie, reports how that among the
Egyptians were instituted most famous Colleges for Priests and Philosophers.
Histories also make mention, that ye most noble men of all the world traueled
into Egypt to obtein wisdom in which number Plato also is said to be ye first
of the chief and principal among the Philosophers.

Neither is it unadvisedly written in the book of the kings, that Solomon
excelled the wisemen of the Egyptians in wisdom. And not only the Egyptians,
but also the Palestines, a Nation more famous for wars than for learning, are
said to have had their priests, of whom they asked counsel in matters of
doubt, as writes Samuel in his holy history. And Daniel also witnesses, that
the Babylonians had most famous Schools, as also had the Medes and Persians,
from whence sprang forth their Magi, I would say wise men, notable in all
parts of Philosophy. I need not to speak any thing of the Greeks and
Romans, since there is no man but knows their most famous city of Athens,
which is so much spoken of by all learned men, and also the goodly Colleges of
their Priests and South-sayers. But omitting foreign examples, let us
allege our own or such as are Ecclesiastical.

GOD, who gave unto his people, a most absolute form of an happy
Commonweal and kingdom, distributed schools through forty and eight
towns of the realm. Those towns by reason of ye Philosophying Levites, were
called Leuitical. For he had consecrated all the Leuitical tribe unto ye
priesthood and to studies: Not for that it was not also lawful for gentlemen
of other tribes to study Philosophy or wisdom: But because the Levites were
peculiarly appointed unto holy studies.

For it is evident, that Esaie and Daniel, two of the most brighte lights of
the y^ prophesied were of the tribe of Judah. Other tribes also have brought
forth men right singular in all kind of knowledge. And those towns likewise
were called Leuitical and priestly, not that priests only dwelt in them, but
because they had synagogues in them.

But at the tabernaele in (...), and specially in the city of Jerusalem there
was a schole surpassing all ^ther, and in manner of an university, as they call
them now adays. And the same holy history witnesses ye most famous men had
the government of Gouernoures of Schools. 1. Sam. 10. 4. Reg. 2. and. 4. cap.
those schools. For we read in Rama that Samuel, who was the very chiefest in
all wisdom, godliness, and learning, was governor and principal of the
Naioth, that is to say, the Burse as they term it, or College of the
Prophets. Helias and Heliseus the most clear lights of the Church of Israel,
were rulers over the schole of Hierico and Gilgal. That naughty Jeroboam did
pull down the schools, and troad under foot the order of the Priests, and
placed without all choice some that were of the refuse of the people in their
places. But the men of GOD Helias and Heliseus knew well, that without schools
the sound doctrine could not flourishe or be preserved: and therefore they
applied them selves wholly to the renewing of schools. And when lawful tributes
were denied them, being by wicked Princes bestowed upon flatterers and bellie^,
that is to say, priests of the Idols of calves and of Baal: yet it came to
pass by the goodness of the Lord, that some good men bestowed somewhat upon
such as were destrous of learning, who holding the^ selves contented with a
mean living, behaved themselves valiantly in that most corrupt age. But those
notable men, those wise men and Prophets, who had the government over schools,
were called fathers, where upon also the disciples and scholars were termed the
sons of the Prophets. Amos and Jeremy call them Nazarites. For, says Amos,
I am no Prophet, Amos. 7.
neither the son of a (...) to wit, not brought up in the knowledge of (...).
And the same man says again. I have raised up Amos. 2.
of your sons for Prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites. But he
commends also the manner of them that studied, which in his lamitations he
bewayleth to be altogether perished in the captivity. Furthermore, they were
called the sonns of the Prophets, for the affection which they bare toward
their schole masters, as if they had been their parents, and for their
obedience and daily study toward them. But how much the more noble and wise
the Princes were, so much the more diligence they employed in repayring
schools, and restoring Ecclesiastical orders. Which a man may see, not in
David and Solomon only, but also in Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Iostas, who were
most virtuous and most happy Princes. In the captivity and after the
captivity of Babylon, the Lords people was dispersed and scattered into many
kingdoms far and wide. But whether so ever they were carried, they erected
schools or synagogues, and when the city of Jerusalem was restored, then they
often came unto the same. For therefore the Acts of the Apostles make mention,
that at what time Saint Paul preached the word of God Acts. 15.
among the Gentiles, he went into the synagogues.

And Saint James the Apostle says, Moses of old time has in every city
them that preach him in the synagogues. Where he speaks not of the cities of
Iude^ and Galilee, but of the cities of the gentiles in Syria, Cilicia and
Asia. But that which we read in the Acts does show that they being dispersed
and scattered abroad, did sometime come unto the holy city of Jerusalem.
There were dwelling at Jerusalem certain Jews Acts. 2.
religious men, of all nations that are under heaven. And that also which
Acts. 22.
Saint Paul recites of him self confirms the same, that being borne free in
the city of Tharsus, he traveled to Jerusalem unto Gamalieles feet, that is
to say, to the intent to hear the instruction, and to be a scholar under
Gamaliel. So likewise we read that at Jerusalem there were Acts. 6.
Colleges or Synagogues of the Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrines, Cilicians,
and Asians. This use of schools continued until Christ's time, yea, and after
his asce nsion into the heavens, almost until the destruction of the city,
although in the mean time it may appear to have been sundry times depraved.

Christ also the son of God, our king and high Bishop, he him self
Christ and his Apostles, do institute Schools.
instituted the most famous schole of all other, calling there unto the twelve
Apostles, and the seventy disciples, chosen men, I say, to the number of
fourscore and two. Yea, the Apostles them selves drew unto them very many
disciples, and first of all Saint Paul the most chosen instrument of God to
convert the gentiles, is read to have had in his company, Sopater of Berrhoe,
Luke of Antioch, Mark of Jerusalem, Barnabas, Sylua or Syluanus, Caius and
Timothy, Aristarchus and Secundus, Tychicus and Trophimus, Titus and Linus,
Crescens and Epaphras, Archippus and Philemon, Epaphroditus and Artemas, and
many other. He has also commended most diligently unto good men, the studious,
and the ministers of the Churches, exhorting all men unto liberality, that
they may want nothing. And writing unto Titus: Bring diligently, says he,
Titus. 3.
Zenas the Lawyer and Apollo, upon their way, that they may want nothing.

Moreover it may be gathered by plain and manifest proofs out of the
thirteenth chapter of the Acts, that there was a very famous and that an
Apostolic schole at Antioche in Syria. Eusebius also of Cesarea abundantly
witnesses what noble schools were at Alexandria in Egypt, and in other
renouned churches. And we have also declared the same more at large, when time
served, in a book which we have written of the institution of Bishops. But
in process of time when al things apperteyning to the Church began to
decline to the worsse, Ecclesiastical schools also degenerated into Abbaies,
or into Colleges of Canons and Monks.

But of all these things whereof Schools apperteine to the preservation of the
ministry.
we have spoken, I think it not unknown unto any man, that schools do
principally belong to the preservation of the Church, and the maintenance of
the holy ministry, in which schools good arts might be exercised, very
profitable for the furtheraunce of the study of the holy Scriptures: of which
sort chiefest of all are the studies and knowledge of holy tongs, of Logic,
natural Philosophy, and the Mathematics, and these moderately known, and
directed unto the certain scope and end of Godliness. For a man may sometime
find wits worn and waxed old in diverse Arts and disciplines, howbeit not
once meddling or inured with holy exercises and studies. But I would to God
that the wicked being too much glutted with profane study, would also leave
to contemn holy Scriptures as things plain barbarous.

A man also may find some wits so busied in the study of the Mathematickes,
that they are more meet to be masters of buildinges, than governors or
pastoures of Churches. Yea they are so far crept into the study of
Astronomy, and the Astronomers heaven, yt they quite forget the blessed
heaven, which is the seat of ye blessed Saints, any thing to perteine unto
them, and that they shall be sufficiently happy if they can but once atteine
unto ye knowledge of ye motion of the visible heaven, and to the course of the
stars. As for those that meddle overmuch with the study of Philosophy, and
the trifles of Logic, and the rules of Khetoricke, never attain unto any
end, nor earnestly think upon the bestowing of their travels to the edifying
of the Church: commonly they become contentious and brawling disputers for the
most part, and arrogant controllers: unto whom nothing seems to be neatly and
aptly enoughe, either spoken or done of others, but that which is tempered and
as it were tuned to their great conceiving heads, and so agreeing with
prescript rules, that they swarne not there from, no not so much as a hairs
breadth. These men snarle and entangle all things with their doltishe
disputations, puffing out nothing else but quarelling controversies, taking
upon them most arrogantly to judge all men's doings and sayings what so ever,
you, though they be good and tolerable, they snap at them, and maliciously
cavil against them, being rather vain babblers, than Philosophers, yea, the
very plagues of schools and Churches: who spitte out the poison of debates,
contentions, variances, strises and divisions at and into the Church. Against
these Saint Paul the Apostle to Timothy seems to speak. 1. Tim. 6.
For after he had briefly set down the sum of sound doctrine, he adds
there upon. This teach and exhort. Who so ever teaches otherwise, and
holds not him self contented with the healthful word of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the doctrine which is according unto godliness, he is puffed up,
knowing nothing, but spending his time about questions and contention in
words, whereof grows hatred, strife, slander, evil suspicions, vain
conflictes, of men corrupt in heart, and destitute of the truth, which suppose
gain to be godliness. Avoyde the company of such.

Truly it never went well with The corruption of Schools.
the Church, when learned and studious men forsaking the playnenesse and
pureness of the word of GOD, turned their eyes an other way, and aimed not at
the word of God alone. They in ancient time, did not contemn the word of
God: but in the mean while they attributed more to traditions than was
convenient. But by that means they both gave occasion unto errors, and
confirmed such abuses as were already brought in. Certain years past and
gone, Gratian and Lombard, with other ecclesiastical writers, went about to
make an agreement of opinions, and to gather together a perfect and certain
sum of divinity. But thereby they did not only carried the schools away from
the Scriptures, but also intruded strange doctri^^s into the church.

After these there followed Alexander, Albertus, and Thomas, who not only
depended upon those sentences, and commended them unto others, but also
endeavored to mingle Philosophy with Divinity, and to couche them together
into one body. And hereof it came to pass that we had so many ways and
sects, so many puddles crauling full of frogs, so many schools, so many
Abbayes, so many sophisters. And if at this day likewise we continue unhappily
to couple Philosophy with the holy Scriptures, and superstitiously call them
into disputation, and to call them unto examination by humane rules, or to the
handling by arts, then shall we also corrupt them in the schools, perverting
the integrity of the Apostolic doctrine, to the great detriment of the
Church. In the mean while, certain it is that good Arts and learning do
make much unto perspicuitie and playnenesse, but moderately and religiously
applied with judgment, so that the scriptures may have the upper hand, and all
other Arts obey the same.

Wherefore, let pure godliness be taught in the Ecclesiastical schools, The
true end of Schools.
yea, let godliness be the end of all our studies: at the first let the
studious be diligently taught the Catechism, and let them never rest, until
such time as they have learned it perfectly and made it familiar unto them
selves: then let this young begun godliness be daily increased with Lectures
and holy Sermons: Let the writings of the holy Evangelists and Apostles be
always read unto the^, that they may become perfect in them in due season: Let
them also commodiously learn the tongs and good Arts, and let them be
exercised in writing and reasoning. But above all, let dissoluteness and
wantonness be banished out of the Discipline in schools.
godly instituted and Christian schools. Let discipline, yea, though it be
somewhat sharp, flourishe. For if youth be corrupted in the schools, and grow
up in that corruption, what I pray you shall we look for at their hands, when
they be set in authority over the Church? Let us not believe that they will be
the salt of the church, who as they are most dissolute and blockish, so can
they not abide sharpness in other. Shall we think that they will become
lights of the church, who do them selves hate the light, and are delighted
in darkness, and in the works of darkness? Wherefore, that which the
sons of Helie were in the Church of Israel, the same shall be and are the
corrupt sons of the prophets in the church of Christ. They therefore shall
likewise perish with the people which are committed unto them. And therefore
now adays, there is great offense committed through too much lenity in the
schools, a mischief which will never be washed away. For a man shall come
into many schools, where he shall think he sees so many soldiers and
ruffians, not scholars and students, whom they commonly call clearkes.

Neither their fare, neither their apparel, neither their manners, neither
their words, neither their deeds, declare them to be of any good
disposition, honest, or studious. I know, that much is to be ascribed unto
our unhappy and most dissolute age, in which the stubborn and rebellious will
not hearken to the counsel of the elders: and again I know, that there are
great offenses committed through the negligence and fond gentleness of them
that are in authority. But for as much as the welfare of the Church
consists of schools well ordered, we ought all of us to use great diligence,
that in this behalf there may no offense be committed through our
carelessness and negligence. This much have I said concerning Ecclesiastical
schools, in as few words as I might conveniently: of which I have entreated
more at large in my book of the Institution of Bishops.

Furthermore, to the end that schools Of Ecclesiastical goods.
with the whole ministry may be mainteyned, together with all holy buildings,
and Ecclesiastical charges, there needs to be some good wealth and ability
correspondent. This place therefore admonishes us to say somewhat concerning
Ecclesiastical goods. God in that commonwealth which he would have to excel
all other as best furnished with all things necessary, appointed standing fees
to be paid unto the holy ministry of the common charge, to wit, the
tithes, the first fruits, and sundry other kinds of offerings.

These things are in the law expressed by Moses the man of God in many
words: who nothing feared, least for handling of that matter he should be
accused of greedy desire, or covetousness. For those things which God
commanded him to declare plainly to the people, he uttered unto them
faithfully. Yea, the law of nature commands to reward him that takes
pain, and to maynteine common charges by common contribution. And those
revenues or tributes that were publicly gathered, were not bestowed but to
public uses. For they were partly given to the ministers for their ministry
and service, partly they were disbursed upon public buildings and holy
charges, and part was employed to the relief of the poor.

And although by the new Testament the Leuiticall law with the The c^urche of
the new testament has goods and revenues.
whole Priesthood be abrogated, notwithstanding it is certain that the same
universal law, which commands that public charges should be levied by
public contributions, is not abolished. For we read that our Lord Jesus
Christ, although he Luke. 8.
lived not of the tenths and revenues of the Priests, yet lived he of the
contributions of the godly. For he executed a public function. And sending
his disciples abroad to preach, expressly Matthew. 10.
says unto them: I would not have you to be careful for food and apparel:
For the labourer is worthy of his hire. Wherefore the Primitive church which
the Apostles have gathered to Christ, bestows their houses, lands, and
money for the preservation of the ministry, and other things necessary for
the Church.

The Priests and Levites at that time possessed the holy revenues, not Acts
4.
giving one jot to the Apostolic Church, which rather they wished might
storue for hunger. But the godly and faithful people knew very well, that
earthly substance and riches were very necessary for the preservation of the
Church. For GOD has appointed men and not angels to be ministers of the
Church: and has recommended poor men unto the Church to stand in his stead
But they as men are wont to do, lack and are destitute of many things,
wherefore good men through the motion of the holy Ghost, do contribute
together, and bestow money, houses, lands, and other goods, whereby both the
poor and also the holy ministry may be mainteyned. And herevppon also it is
evident that the Church of the people of the new Testament, had ever since
the time of Christ and the Apostles, goods and possessions publicly
gathered and received, and also laid out and bestowed them again for public
and common commodity.

Gregory the first of that name, bishop How in old time the church goods
were bestowed.
of Rome, says that it was the custom in his time and also before his time,
that there ought to be four portions or parts of ye church of God. One for the
bishop and his family, an other for the clergy, the third for the poor, and
the fourth for the repayring of Churches. But there are a great many that say
that a bishop ought not to receive wages of the Church. Let us therefore
examine, what Christ and his Apostles do teach us touching that matter. Christ
our Lord, who never committed any unjust thing, received, as it is read,
maintenance from such women as he taught, who ministered unto him of their
substance. He also sending his disciples abroad, and willing them not to be
careful for meat and drink, and raiment, says further, The labourer is worthy
of his hire. The Lord judges it to be worthy, meet, Ministers of Churches
ought to be rewarded.
and right, to minister necessaries unto preachers. Wherefore they do no
unworthy deed which receive wages, thereby to provide necessaries for the^
selves and their family: yea, he compares preachers not to idle bellies, not
to them that eat freely of other men's bread, neither to beggars, but to
laborers. For as the Lord sets down in the law, how that it is a great
offense to deny laborers their hire: even so their offense is not small that
suffer such as are faithful feeders of the flock, to perish and decay
thorough need. For in an other place the lord speaks to his disciples,
saying, Ye have freely received it, and therefore Matthew. 10.
give it freely. But he speaks of the gift of working miracles, and of the
benefit of health to be bestowed upon the sick, diseased, and oppressed. For
thus it is written: Heal the sick, cleanse the leaprous, raise the dead,
cast out devils. And to these words he added this, saying: Ye have received it
freely, and therefore bestow it freely. Therefore though the apostles received
reward of the^ to whom they preached: yet never any man read ye ever they took
any thing for the gift of healing which they received in the lords name. Like
as Heliseus would not take any thing at all though it were freely offered him by
Naaman y^ Syrian captain, for yt by his counsel he was healed of the leprosy.
Yet the self same Heliseus refused not the gift of the man that came unto him
from Baal-salisa Out of the self same Gospel of Christ our Lord, Ministers
have to learn to what use they ought to put that wages they have of the
church. For what time the Lord commanded Judas who carried ye pursse, John. 13.
to depart, the residue of the disciples thought that he had been commanded to
go and buy such necessaries as should serve for ye holy day, or else to bestow
something on the poor. Therefore it is plain that the Lord used with the
s^ipend which he received to provide necessaries for him and his, and als^ to
give alms thereof Mark well then that the ministers of the church may provide
things necessary for their living, function, and maintenance of their
household, of the wages they receive of the church. Again, they may also of ye
same wages give alms unto the poor, even as it were of their own goods truly
gotten. For the lord says plainly in the law, that ye sacrifice of the
Levites made of tithes and other oblatio^s or holy revenues, shall be as
acceptable unto him, as their sacrifice that offer any thing out of their own
chest, store, or possessions. Truly if a labourer do offer unto God any thing
of his hire or wages (yt is to say) if he give unto ye poor, does it not seem
a very acceptable sacrifice unto God? Very acceptable then is the alms that
the minister of the church does bestow, proceeding of the wages of the holy
ministry. Put the case a labourer in building a church, receives his wages
of the Church goods, should a man therefore say that the labourer took an
alms, and that one alms ought not to be given out of an other? He received
wages for his work. For he did labor. Therefore he gives alms of his wages
and of his own, lawful and proper goods. Wherefore then should the minister of
the church seem to live by alms, and that he ought not to give alms of alms,
who notwithstanding does labor for his wages, and therefore receives the
reward of his work as a labourer does, unto whom the Lord him self compares ye
minister? If any man be so far past honesty to think so, he shall hear not
what I say, but what Paul the apostle says. If we sow unto you spiritual
things, is it a great matter if we mow your carnal thing^s? And again. 1.
Cor. 9. 1. Tim. 5.
Such elders as govern well, are worthy of double honor, and chiefly they that
travel in preaching and teaching. For the scripture says, Thou shall no^
mousell the mouth of the (...) treading out the come. And, The labourer is
worthy of his hire. Behold therefore, ye apostle does not think that that
inestimable goodness of the ministry can by any means be reco^penced with a
vile thing, I mean with earthly wages. Again, They that labor, says he: They
that labor say I, not they says he, that loyter in teaching. These does he
compare unto an ox that is a toyling beast, and a thresher out of corn, and
also to a laboring man. That whereof I do so greatly warn you, is, that
because in this our wicked and unthankful world, certain men, nay rather
monsters most unthankful are to be found out, that are persuaded, that
ministers do nothing at all, yea, even such as most faithfully do their
duty. For they cry out saying, They eat their bread as beggars do, and it
costeth them naught. By which name and infamy they terrify many fine wits,
and make the^ to forsake ye study of good learning and divinity, so yt they
utterly abhor ye ministry, as it were a thing most beggarly and dishonest.
For in such sort y^ devil can devise to enlarge his kingdom, abusing, or rather
fitly using to his purpose our ingratitude and malice. But why do they not
suffer the^ selves to be numbered with Christ and the holy apostles, who were
fed and maintained by yt churches stipend, than to be reckoned up among those
unthankful and proud people, who have seraped and gathered al their goods
together for ye most part by vsery and other wicked means? or at the least if
they have not gotten their goods by sinister means, they have received the^
through the liberality and mere goodness of God, for the which they never
sweat or took pains?

S. Paul proves by strong and many arguments the right to receive a stipende
for the holy ministry. 1. Cor. 9.
Have we not (says he) power and authority to eat and drink, or may we
not carry about with us a woman sister? For he means the lawfulness The
Apostles received wagis
and authority to receive any thing necessary for him self, his wife, and
his whole household. And for that he asks a question, he shows what he
means, that thereby he may declare a plain truth and equity amongst all
men, and thereto adds examples, not of every man severally, but of all
generally, and specially of the chiefest apostls of Christ, and of them that
were kin unto Christ by blood, saying: Even as the other Apostles and
brothers of our Lord, and Cephas? And who is that Cephas, but Peter? To this
Cephas the Lord said in the first chapter of S. John: Thou shall be called
Cephas, which if a man interpret it, signifies a stone. But Peter also was
so syrnamed of a rock, to the intent the interpretation of the name may
always fail upon the same.

And who, I pray you are the Lords brethren, but John and James, and Mark. 6.
James the brother of Judas, and Judas and Simon the brethren of James? All
these, says Saint Baule, lived of a stipend they had, being gathered of the
common assembly of the Church. Unto these examples he adds other also like
unto them, commonly put in practice. Who (says he) does go to war at his
own costs and charges? Or who planteth a vineyarde, and eats not of the
fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk thereof?
Surely he brings forth these similitudes very finely and properly applied
unto them, and not unto any other. For the minister^ of the Church are sometime
called soldiers or vine yard-keepers, sometime husbandmen and shepherds. And
who, I pray you, is so far from reason, that he would deny unto soldiers,
husbandmen, and shepherds meat and clothing, for the pains they take in
warfare, husbandry, and about cattle? The true hearted men therefore, and such
as are of an indifferent judgment, do acknowledge that the ministers of the
Church may live by the Ecclesiastical ministry. But least that any man
should obtect that these humane parables and similitudes taken from the common
use, do prove nothing in an Ecclesiastical cause, he adds presently: Do I
speak these things according to man? Does not the law say also the same? For
it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shall not mussell the Ox that
treads out the corn. As though he should say, I have in a readiness for
the confirmation of our right, not only humane similitudes, but also
testimonies of ye holy scripture. And he allegeth a place out of the 25. chap.
of Deuteronomie, concerning y^ nourishing of laboring oxen. Again, lest any
man should say that that place is not to be understood of preathers, but simply
of oxen, he adds, Does God take care for oxen? Or does not he speak it
altogether for our sakes? Doubtless he has written it for our sakes, that he
which ploweth may plowe in hope, and he that thresheth in hope may be partaker
of his hope The Lord said he, in his law would provide for us. For he would
have the ^qualitie gathered by a certain syllogism or kind of argument,
after this or such like manner: If the Lord provided for beasts and cattle
and would have consideration to he had of them, how much more of men? It
were truly a very unjust thing that an husbandman should labor with his ox
without hope, that is to say in vain, and without commodity. Therefore were
it also a most unjust thing, for the minister to exercise ecclesiastical
husbandry in the church without hope or due stipend. Moreover, where it is
again objected here against, that unto the spiritual ministry, belongs no
corporal but a spiritual reward, the Apostle aunsweareth, If we so we unto
you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your temporal things? He
therefore thinks that the Corinthians give nothing when they give their
temporal things, namely if they be compared with eternal good things, which
the ministers do bring by teaching. For look how far the soul excels the
body, by so much are spiritual things better than temporal. The Apostle
also concealeth an evident argument in these words, where he admonishes, that
it is meet that he that sows should also reap. In this point also is great
inequality, in that the ministers sow the better, and reap the worse. Because
men set light by God and the divine ministry, therefore they think that the
ministers do nothing. S. Paul again confirms his own right by the example
of others, saying: If others be partakers of the power toward you, why
rather are not we? For seeing none had taken more pains among the
Corinthians than S. Paul, no man was more worthy of reward. Moreover he
confirms his right, by the example, commandment and ordinance of the Lord,
saying: Know ye not, that they which take pains in the holy things, do
eat of the holy things, and they that minister at the altar, are partakers o
the altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they that do preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Where has the Lord ordained this?
Forsooth when he said in the Gospel, that ye labourer is worthy of his hire.
But I judge this especially to be observed which the Apostle speaks in
plain words, That the Lord instituted his ordinance concerning the
maintenance of the ministers of the church unto the imitation of the ancient
laws of the Iewishe people. Hereof we gather, that we miss not much the
marcke, if in this and such like cases, we do not utterly reject the ancient
institutions of the fathers.

But in that S. Paul the Apostle used not his authority as he might S. Paul
received no wages.
have done, it makes nothing against these things. For one question is of the
deed, and another of the right of the thing. In very deed, he took nothing
of the Corinthians for diners causes, yet notwithstanding he took of other
Churches. Neither received he any thing of the Church of Thessalonica: yet for
all that this his deeing is not prtiudiciall to the equity of the right. For
he says unto the Corinthians: I have robbed other Churches, 2. Cor. 11.
having received wages of them, to the intent I might do you service. And when I
was with you and wanted, I was not burdensome unto any man. For the things
that were lacking unto me, were given me by the brethren that came from
Macedonia. And unto the Thessalonians he says, We behaved not our selves
inordinately amongst These. 3.
you, neither did we take our bread for nothing: But with labor and pains
both night and day doing our work, to the intent we would not be a burden
unto any of you. Not that it is not lawefull for us to do it, but because we
would set down our selves as a pattern for you to follow after. And again
the same S. Paul says unto the Thessalonians, I beseech you that you
acknowledge the^ that labor among you, and are over 1 Thessalonians. 5.
you in the Lord, and admonish you, that you have them in singular love
through love for their work sake. Be at peace with them. Let so much
therefore of the Church goods as is sufficient be given unto the ministers
and teachers, so far forth as honest necessity requires. And thus much have
we spoken concerning the portion that is due unto pastors.

In times past, the second part of ecclesiastical goods was allotted unto
clearkes. And clearks are the harvest Students to be maintained by wages of
the Church.
of pastors, studious of divinity, and wholly disposed to the holy ministry.
And forasmuch as these have dedicated themselves and all that they have wholly
to the Church and the ministry thereof, it is most fit that they should be
nourished and maintained by the costs of the Church. But it is convenient they
be nourished meanly, who ought to be an example of mean and thriftie living
to other. For to be brought up delicately, does nothing agree with the
ministeries of the Church. And therefore, Amos found fault that the Nazarites
drank wine, for that he meant that dru^kards did not maintain the Church, but
utterly destroy it. Of which matter we spoke in another place. Moreover, it is
fit that due portions be paid to Priests, scholemaisters, scholars, and to
all other ecclesiastical persons whatsoever.

Finally the third part of ecclesiastical goods are appointed for the poor.
And there are diverse sorts of poor folk: The poor to de reli^ued by the
Church goods.
as widows, pupils, or phanes, and infants cast out (whose parents are not
known.) Also they that are worn with old age, and spent with diseases. There
are infinite kinds of diseases, whereof the most grievous are these: leprosy,
fury, and madness, the French pockes, or the scabbe of India or Naples, the
palsy, the gout, and a great many more. There are not only poor men borne
within the land, but also strangers that are banished their country and home
for righteousness sake, and for the word of God. There are other who are not
yet come to extreme poverty, but are even now ready to fall into it, so that
if they be not helped a little with ready money, they by and by come to be kept
by the Church box. Again, there are some that are consumed by imprisonment,
by wars, by great floudes of waters, by fire, and diverse other mishapps, as
by hail, frostes, and other storms and distemperatures of the air. Of all
whose health and safeguard the Lord willed us to be mindful, whereas he says,
that Whatsoever we bestow upon the poor, we bestow it upon him. Therefore
if we despise and regard not the poor, without al doubt we despise and
neglecte even our Lord God himself in the poor. We ought of duty to
succor the poor of our own goodwill, by counsel, comfort, medicines, cures,
money, meat, drink, clothes, lodging, succouring, and by any means else that
we may, and in all such matters and cases, as they shall have need of our
help. If so be the Church goods are not sufficient to perform all this at
the full, then let the abundaunce of The pore not to be defrauded of their
portion.
all other good faithful people supply their want. But if there be goods
sufficient Ezech. 16. Isai. 16.
in stoare laid up, which have been in times past contributed by the
liberality of the godly, which notwtstanding through negligence or wickedness
of the governors are taken away, so that the necessity of the poor cannot
thereby be succored, for that cause truly most sharp tempests of
infelicities are powered forth both upon common wealths and kingdoms. For
why, they are very sharply punished which do not give unto the poor of their
own private goods if they be able: with how much more grievous calamities may
we think they shall be plagued, which wickedly sacrileqiously and forcibly take
away to their own private uses, those riches which were given by others to the
common use of the poor? He that has this 1. John. 3.
worlds substance and sees his brother want, and shuts up his affection
from him, is cruel: therefore he that takes from the poor that which is
already given them is more cruel, and commits sacrilege. It is read Ezech.
16. Isai. 16.
that the Sodomites with their fellow cities were drowned, because they
strengthened not the hand of the poor but rather weakened it. The Moabits and
Chaananits are destroyed for disdayning strangers, and for having no care of
the poor. But why do we fetch examples so far of? why do we not call to
mind the last sentence of the high Judge uttered from his heavenly judgment
seat which is stablished in the clouds, pronounced in this manner, Come ye
blessed of my father, possess the kingdom which Matthew. 25.
was prepared for you from the beginning of the world. I have bin hungry and
you have given me meat. I have bin a thirste and you have given me drink. I
was a stranger and you harbored me. I was naked and you clothed me. I was
sick, and you visited me. I was in prison, and you came unto me. The Evangelist
also adds that which agrees very much to our purpose: Then shall the just
answer and say, Lord, when saw we thee hungry and gave thee meat: thirsty
and gave thee drink? When saw we thee harbourlesse and lodged thee: or naked
and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick or in prison, and came unto thee?
The king aunswearing, shall say unto them, Verily I say unto you, in that you
did it unto one of the least of these my brethren, you did it unto me. Then
shall he say also unto them that are at the left hand, Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.
For I was hungry, and you gave me no meat. I was thirsty, and you gave me no
drink. I was a stranger and you harbored me not. I was naked and you clothed
me not. I was sick and in prison, and you visited me not. The^ shall they
answer and say unto him, Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty, or a
stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and ministered not unto thee? Then
shall he answer them, saying: Verily I say unto you, in as much as you did it
not unto one of the least of these, neither did you it unto me. It follows
after, And they shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous, into
everlasting life. The Lord also in another place in the Gospel substituting
the poor in his steed, says: Ye have the poor with you always, and when ye
will Mark. 14.
ye may do them good: but me ye shall not have always. And therefore we read
that the Primitive Church was careful in providing for the poor, eeuen to the
working of miracles.

S. Paul in all places commends the poor to the Church of God: he made
collections for the poor almost in all Churches, and the blessings which he
had gathered, he distributed with great judgment, faith and diligence. As it
will appear almost in all his epistles, specially in the 15. to the Romans, in
the first to the Corinthians the sixteenth Chapter, in the second to the
Corinthians the eight and ninthe Chapiters. And to the Galathians, While we
have time (says he) let us Gala. 6.
do good toward all men, especially toward the household of faith. In 1.
Tim. 5.
the first epistle to Timothy, he warns that there be consideration had who
should be helped, and who not be helped. In the same epistle he gives charge
to Timothy, and to all the bishopps how to deal with the richer sort in the
Church, saying: Command 1. Tim. 6.
them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, neither put
their trust in uncertain riches, but in the living GOD, who gives us all
things abundantly to enjoy, that they may do good, that they may be rich in
good works, that they may be ready to give, and bestow willingly, laying up
unto themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may take
hold of life everlasting. Heb. 13.
Also unto the Hebrews, To do good and to distribute forget not for with such
sacrifice God is pleased.

Wherefore, riches were gathered eue^ in ye time of ye Apostles to succor ye
necessity of the poor withal. Deacons were appointed by the church as
prouiders and stewards: among whom those first Deacons were most famous,
Acts. 6.
of whom the Acts of the Apostles make mention, and also the noble martyr of
Christ Laurence. And the writings of the ancient fathers do testify that
with those ecclesiastical goods, prisoners were redeemed out of captivity,
poor mayde^s of lawful years married, finally hospitals, almeries, spittels,
harbors, hostles, and nourceries were builded, namely to interteine poor
travelers, for the maintenance of the poor that were borne in that country,
for the relief of the sick and diseased, for the necessity of old men, and
for the honest bringing up of pupils and orphans. Concerning these matters
there are yet extant certain imperial laws. Wherefore in refourming of
Churches, very diligent heed must be taken Reformation of churches to be made.
that there be no offense committed in this behalf thoroughe oversight or of
purpose, that the poor be not defrauded, and that in taking away one abuse, we
bring not in many. If there be plenty of goods, let them be kept: if there be
none, let them be gathered of the rich. Then let the state of the poor be
searched, and what every man needs most, or how provision may best be made
for every one. Which being known, let that which is meet and necessary for
every one be done speedily, gently, and diligently. If then any of the common
goods remain, let them be kept against such calamities as may ensue. Let
nothing be consumed unprofitably or ungodly. Again, let not the treasure of
the poor unhappily be detained from them by fraud, and to the increasing of
their poverty. For there may be like offense committed on both sides. For on
each side the poor are defrauded of their goods. Touching liberality, we
have entreated in another place in these our Decades: and of providing for the
poor, in other of our works. And Lewis Vines has written very well of
relieuing the poor.

The fourth and last part o^ (...) of the Church, (...) holy Holy buildinges.
buildinges, as Churches, schools, and houses ^^longing to Churches and
schools. (...), which because of Temples of christians.
the companies gathered together in them are also called congregations, are the
houses of the Lord our God. Not that God whom the wide compass of the
heavens cannot comprehend, does dwell in such manner of houses, but because
the congregation and people of GOD meet together in those houses, to worshipp
and perform due honor unto God, to hear the word of God, to receive the
Lords sacraments, and to pray for the assistance and presence of God.
Churches therefore are very necessary for the Church and people of God.
Touching holy assemblies, I have said somewhat in the disputation of prayer. And
although that at the commandment of God, Moses builded a moveable Church,
and afterward the most wise king Solomon founded a standing Church not without
great cost, notwithstanding we must not think therefore that God likes of
such great charges after that he had sent Christ, and fulfilled ye figures.
For as before the law was made, it is not to be found that the Patriarchs
did ever build any Ministers or great churches, even so after the disanulling
of ye law in the Church of Christ, a mean and sparing clenlinesse pleases
God best. For God misliketh that foolish and madd kind of buildinges, not much
unlike to that unwise building of Babylon, enterprising to set up the topp of
the tower above the clouds. For God likes not the riotousnes of Churches, who
without all riot does gather his Church together from out all ye parts of the
(...), which Church also be h^th taught both sparingnes and the contempt of
all riot. A church is large and big enough, if it be sufficient to receive all that belong unto it. For the place is provided for men and not for God. But
above all things let that place be clean and holy. A Church is hallowed or
consecrated, not (as some do superstiously think) with the rehearsing of
certain words, or making signs and Characters, or with oil, or purging
fire, but with the will of GOD and his commandment, bidding us to assemble
and come together, promising his presence amongst us: and also, it is hallowed
by the holy use of it. For in the temple y^ holy Church of God is gathered
together: the true and most blessed word of God is also declared in the temple:
the holy sacraments of God are received in ye temple: and also in the temple
prayers are powered forth to God which are most acceptable unto him. Verily the
place of it self is nothing holy, but because these holy things are done in
that place, in respect that they are done there, the place it self is called
holy. Therefore not without great cause ought all profanation and filthiness be
far from the holy temple of the Lord. The Senators court or seat of
judgment is accounted so holy a thing, that whosoever either in word or deed
used himself irreverently toward it, should be accused of treason. And yet
in this Court the Senators only are gathered and assembled together, to hear
ye matters of suitors in things transitory that shall pass away and perish.
By how much the more then ought reverence to be given unto temples, into the
which the children of God do come to worshipp him, to hear the true word of
God, and to receive his holy sacraments? And therefore as we hate and abandon
all superstition in temples, so we love not the profanation of them, yea
rather I say we cannot abide it. Neither have we leisure at this time about
the consideration of temples to rehearse and search out open and plain
superstitions. Of which matter we have spoken in an other place.

I find it a matter of controversy among the fathers of old time, to Toward
what part of the world we must pray.
what part of the world we ought to turn when we pray. Socrates the
histographer in his fifte book cap. 22. speaking of the most ancient
Apostolic Church of the whole world at Antioche, says: At Antioche, which
is in Syria, the Church is set contrary to other, for the altar looks not
toward the East, but toward the west. It may be they did imitate ye fashion
of the old people in building and setting their tabernacle, and in the fashion
of their temple. For they worshipped God turning toward the West, without
doubt because of the coming of Christ in the latter time, and at the end of
the world. Otherwise it is commonly used that men worshipp with their faces
turned toward the East. But in all these matters so there be no superstition,
dissension, licentiousnes and offense, a man may do what him lusts.

But there ought no temples to be built for the worshipping of Saints.
Churches not to be builded to Saints.
For unto God only, to whom all honor and worship is due, we ought to build
Churches: which thing we are taught by ye examples of ancient fathers, and
the determination of the whole scripture. The heathenish idolaters built
temples unto creatures, sinning against the true and eternal God in committing
a grievous offense. S. Augustine in his book, De Ciuitate Dei, says
plainly, We build not temples unto our martyrs. And again in his first book
against Maximinus a bishopp of the Arians, If we should (says he) build a
Church of timber and stones unto some excellent holy angel, should we not be
accursed by the truth of Christ, and the church of God? Because we should do
that service unto a creature, that is due only to God? Therefore if we should
commit sacrilege in making a temple to every creature whatsoever, how may it
be that God is not true unto whom we make no temple, but we our selves are a
temple for him? Thus much says he. Again, they are to be counted liars, who
affirm that temples were built by certain religious men in the worshipp of
the Apostles while they were a live. Of which matter we have spoken in times
past, as we have both against the riotousnes of the Church, and the
unprofitable expenses thereof, in the first book entitled, De Origin
erroris, the 21. chapter.

Instruments belonging to the Church, ought to be holy, clean, and Holy
Instruments.
void of all riot, and far from any kind of superstition. The instruments
be these, an holy seat or pulpit, in the which the minister may teach and
preach: conueniente seats for the congregation: a Font ready to baptize
infantes in, and the Lords Table, with such things as are necessary thereto,
as water, bread, wine, books, candles, baskets and cups. These at sometimes
were all of gold: but good and godly bishops have oftentimes molten them, and
therewithal delivered prisoners out of captivity, and fedd such as were like
to perish for hunger. Many examples of this sort have I gathered in my book of
the Iustitution of Bishops, the 9. Chapter. As for candles whereof we made
mention even now, sure it is that the ancient fathers used them in the
churches to drive away ye darkness of the night, as it appears in the twenty
Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. But it is a foolish matter and nothing
religious, to use lights in the worshipping of God. Lactantius cries out,
shall we judge him to be well in his wits which offers the light of a burninge
wax candle or taper for a present to the author and giver of light? He
requires other manner of light at our hands, and that not smokie, but clear
and bright, to wit the light of the mind. But a man may commonly see in these
days, a great part of the worshipping of God to be reposed in the offering of
candles, which thing is clean against the manifest truth. Amongst other
instruments of the Church, bells are reckoned up, which at these days are
unto us, as in old time trumpets were unto the people of God. For they serve to
call ye congregation together, and they are numbered among tokens and warnings.
About bells there is a wonderful superstition. They are christened by bishops:
and it is thought that they have power to put away any great tempest. In the
old time men were stirred up to prayer by the ringing of them, what time any
sore tempest did arise: but now the very ringing of bells, by reason of their
consecration seems to have a peculiar kind of of virtue in it. Who can but
meruel and he astonished at this extreme blindness? Moreover they use belles to
bewail the dead. All which things are superstitious, and utterly to be
contenmed.

For So Much as the true v^e ^f the church g^^ds consists in those things Abuse
of the church goods.
which we reckoned up before, it follows that the abuse thereof must needs
be in the contraries, whether we do offend in one kind or in many. Justice and
equity is to be kept in these as well as in all other things. We ought not
to take from one man and give to another, but we must give unto every one that
which is his own. Therefore we may not take any thing from the poor and give it
to the ministers of the Church: neither is their portion and necessaries to be
taken from them, that the poor may live thereof. The holy scripture gives
one portion of the Church goods to the ministers of the Church: and the same
Church wills us to give unto the poor their part. Therefore if bishops or
ministers of the Church do challenge unto themselves all the Church goods, and
give not unto ye poor their parts due unto them, they destle themselves with
sacrilege. If the ministers do not challenge unto themselves all the goods of
the Church, and yet do take unjustly more then either it becomes them, or
than need requires, or otherwise than the decree of God and the Apostles
does allow: or else if they spend unthriftily y^ portion due unto them, they
grievously offend. But they sin greatly, yea, most horribly, if they wast the
goods of the poor, in hunting, diceing, drinking and rioting, whore-hunting,
or else in warrefare: and in the mean time have no regard of the Church,
neither care what is done there, or how.

But if a just and good portion fall unto the poor, perhaps there will be a
fault in this poinct, in the Steward or Almonar thoroughe favor or hatred,
that they that have most need shall have nothing, and the least worthy shall
have most, and in this case there is great offense committed thorough filthy
abuse. But of all abuses, that seems to be the shamefullest which is now a
days almost commonly used. We bestow great costs and charges upon stones
and stocks, that is to say, upon idols void of all understanding: but there is
no regard had unto the poor who are the perfect images of God. Which kind of
madness is heathenish and extreme folly. But for so much as other have already
very largly spoken of the abuse of the Church goods, and we also have set down
certain matters concerning the same elsewhere, I will for this time make an
end of speaking thereof.

I would also now entreat of ye holy time, which treatise is altogether like
Holy time
that of the Holy place, whereof we disputed els-where, unless we had also
discoursed thereof in the expounding of the ten commandments. This only I
add as for this present time, that there ought to be no odious contention in
the Church concerning that matter, but that in this and other such like cases,
discipline with charity is constantly to be observed. For it behooves us to be
mindful of the most pernicious contention about the keeping of Easter, which
with much danger and great detriment, much and long time troubled the churches
of the East and West: and beware in any case that through contention there be
not a gapp left open unto Satan to enter in. It were profitable in mine
opinion both in this case and in such like, to remember the counsel which S.
Augustine gives, That that which is enjoined us, and is neither against faith,
nor good manners, is to be accounted indifferent, and to be observed according
to the focietie of them with whom we live. In the 118. epistle to Ianuarius.

Unto the holy ministry belongs Discipline and correction of ministers.
also discipline and correction of the ministers. How necessary this is, it
may be gathered by these words of our Lord Christ, You are the salt of the
earth. If the salt have lost her saltness, what shall be salted therewith? It
is good for nothing else but to be thrown out of the doors, and to be
trodden upon by men. I know there be some that do boast themselves of certain
privileges whereby they are exempted from all discipline. But they are
deceived. For the Lord has made all the ministers of his Church subject unto
discipline. Whose therefore will be exempted from discipline, are not Christ's
ministers. Or who, I pray you, will say that he is free from discipline, whom
ye Lord would have altogether subject and bound unto it? Against the
commandment of God there is no Popes law, no privilege of king or Emperor
of force. For no man can abrogate the decree of the high God. And the lord
commands us to warn and correct every brother that does amiss: therefore
would he have us also sharply to admonish the ministers of ye Churches that
are negligent and go astray. Truly he himself did often and very sharply
reprone the whole order of the priests of the church of Jerusalem. Helie the
lords priest is ill reported of in ye holy history, for that he restreyned not
his sons being priests, with sharper discipline. We read how the prophets
of the lord blamed very bitterly all the colleges of priests, and the high
priests also. Examples are to be found in every place throughout the holy
history, and in the writings of the Prophets. Yea, S. Paul reproved the most
holy Apostle S. Peter (...).
at Antioch in Syria in the sight of the whole congregation, for yt he taught
not directly according to the prescript rule of the Gospel. And to be short,
Christ himself in the revelation which was made to S. John ye Apostle, does
very sharply admonish and reprone the Angels, that is to say, the ministers of
the Churches. Again, S. Paul the Apostle, says, Against an Elder, receive
1. Tim. 5.
no accusation, but under two or three witnesses. But those that do offend
reprove before the whole congregation, that the other may stand in fear. There
are extant also in the scriptures many notable examples of most holy Princes,
who by their Laws have restrained even the chiefest ministers of the Churches,
and have thruste down from their chaires and degree such as did not well
discharge their duties. Yea very necessity it self and the good estate of the
people of God requires, yt the naughty ministers of Churches be deposed. And
better it were that a few evil ministers were troubled, than so many
congregations brought into danger of body and soul. For the Churches and
congregations are utterly destroyed, through the negligence and ungodliness of
wicked pastors. Therefore let them be deposed with speed. But to the end that
Of Synodes.
the ministers of Churches might the better and the more easily be kept in
their function and calling, the ancient fathers in the old time solemnly held
conuocations of the Clergy once or twice in a year, applying the same as
remedies to the diseases of the ministers. And that I may not bring any thing
here far fette I will recite unto you (Dearly beloved) what is read in the
Imperial constitutions of the Emperor Justinian commanding after this manner:
The ancient Fathers solemnly held conuocations of the Clergy twice a
year, in every Prouincet, hat such things as are grown up may there be
examined, and amended by competent correction. Which hitherto not being
observed, it seems now to beneedful to bring it to the rightway. And for as
much as we our selves by reason of this negligence have found many to be
intrapped with sundry errors and sins, we command them all, that in all
provinces every year, either in the months of Iulie or September one Synod
be holden, and that the priests meet together either at the patriarchs or the
bishops, and that there matters of faith be handled and also of canonical
questions, and of the administration of Ecclesiastical things, or of
reproueable life, or other matters which require correction. These things
being thus observed, the layitie also shall reap much profit concerning the
true faith, and honest life, and amendment of them selves to the better.
Immediately after he adds these words: Moreover, we command the Lieutenants
of the provinces, if they see this to be negligently looked unto, that they
urge the Bishops to assemble synodes. But if they perceive them to seek
delays and to be negligent herein, let them certify us there of, that we may
proceed with due correction against such lingerers. Thus much have I
reported out of ye Caesarial decree. Therefore let bishops take heed, that in
this behalf there be no fault committed through their negligence: and if they
forget their duty, let the magistrate beware that he win^e not at their
sluggishnes to the destruction of the whole Church, and all the ministers of
Christ. There creep in continually many vices, for that the disposition of the
flesh is very corrupt. Unless therefore therebe admonition in the Church, and
correction continually put in use, those things which we think to be most
firm, shall fall to decay and perish sooner than we suppose. Like as the Lord
would have ye transgressing ministers of the Churches privately to be
admonished and Ecclesi^sticall admonition and correction.
corrected, so does he extend the commodity of the same admonition and
correction to the whole Church. And therefore the ancient Church had an holy
Senate of elders, which diligently warned them that transgressed in the
Church, corrected them sharply, yea and excluded them out of the
Ecclesiastical fellowship, namely if they perceived that there was no hope of
amendment to be looked for in them. But in the latter times, the Popes and
bishops tyrannically taking that kind of punishment into their hands, and
exercising it sacrilegiously contrary to the first institution, have turned an
wholesome medicine into an hurtful poison, making it abominable both to the
good and bad. S. Paul teaching that this kind of punishment was permitted by
the Lord to restreine the licentiousnes of many, says, I have decreed, that he
which has committed this offense, 2. Cor. 5.
when you be gathered together in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ and my
spirit with you, together with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, be
delivered to satan to the destruction of the slesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Lo, this is ye power and reuengement of
the elders of ye church. The means is, ye destruction of the flesh. The end
is, ye safety of the spirit, (...) the saving of a faithful man. For the fame
Apostle to the These. has these words, If there be any man, says be, that
obeys not 2 Thessalonians. 3.
our words, signify to me of him by an epistle, and fee that he have nothing
to do with him, that he may be ashamed: neither will I you to acou^t him as an
enemy, but warn him as a brother. The same Apostle also plainly showing in an
other place, who ought to be punished by the Ecclesiastical sword, not such as
be offenders through weakness of the flesh, or good men, being adjudged for
heretics of the bishops only and their company about them, or poor men
for not paying their duty to their ordinary or their official, but wicked
doers, and pernicious men. If any man, says he, that is called a brother, be
a whore-hunter, or a covetous person, or an Idolater, or a slaunderer, or a
drunkard, or a thief, with such see that ye eat not. S. Augustine does admit
moderation in giving punishment, and then especially, when through punishment,
not the edifying but the destruction of the Church is to be feared. Which
fear might perhaps seem either vain or else too much, if the same Apostle
who commanded the incestuous adulterer to be delivered to satan, had not
said in the latter epistle to the Corinthians: 2. Cor. 12.
I fear that when I come I shall not find you such ones as I would, and shall
mourn for many that offended before, and have not repented themselves of their
uncleanness, and of their whoring and wantonness they have used, etc. Truly he
threateneth them hardly that he will not spare them: but because he perceived
that it did rather tend to the utter destruction and overthrow of the
Church, than to the gathering together and increase thereof, if (as he did the
adulterer (he should deliver them unto satan, he used moderation therein
according to Gods commandment, Suffer both of them to grow, lest that while ye
pluck Matthew. 13.
up the cockle, ye also pull up the wheat by the roots. It is necessary
therefore that holy indgement be used, lest offense be committed either by too
mu^he favor, or by too much extremity. Moreover let speedy reconciliation
be of force among such as be repentaunt. S. Paul faith; It is sufficient to
such a man, that he be thus 1. Cor. 2.
blamed or chidden. Saint Peter who shamfully denied the lord, does hear of
women in the day of the resurrection the gospel preached by angels.

Moreover, we have showed yt there is a magistrate in the church, and
authority to execute the sword upon evil doers, and a magistrate which does
judge and exercise the sword, and not withstanding is reckoned up among the
true members of the Church, yea and that a magistrate is very necessary for the
church in respect of his office, as it is set down in our 7. and 8. sermon of
the second Decade.

The special institutions and ordinances which God has appointed Of
Christian matrimony.
in the Church, are these that follow. And truly amongst all the ordinances
of the Church, wedlock is not to be accounted least, which if it be well
used, it brings forth a great company of good fruits in the church, but if it
be not well ordered, it breeds a number of offenses and deadly mischeefes in
the Church. For they judge uprightly which say, that that church is most
holy, and best assembled, which is gathered together from out of many houses
well ordered: again, out of many wicked houses, a wicked church is assembled.
God therefore in his holy word, does diligently appoint couples, and garnisheth
wedlock derie beautifully. But it is not our purpose at this preset to set
forth the praise of matrimony. For it suffices to know that God himself is
the author of wedlock, and that he instituted it first in Paradise: and he
did it to this end, that man might live well and pleasantly with a follow: to
conclude, he first coupled them, man and woman together, and being coupled he
blessed them: and that ye most holy friends of God, the patriarchs, princes,
prophets, kings, bishops, wisemen and priests, lived in this kind of life.
Whereof perhaps S. Paul said, Wedlock is honorable Hebr. 13.
amongst all men, and the bed undefiled. He in another place, calls the
doctrine that forbids wedlock, The doctrine of devils. For it is evidently
known, that Christ's disciples 1. Tim. 4.
and the Apostles were married men, neither did they put away their wives when
they took upon them the office of preaching, though some most shamefully feign
that they did. It is notable that the Apostle requires at 1. Tim. 5. Titus 1.
the hands of a bishop or an elder, to be the husband of one wife: and that in
another 1. Cor. 9.
place he plainly says, yt it is lawful to carry about a Christian wife
being in the calling of the Apostleship: and he chalengeth it both to him
self and also to Barnabas. What shall I say moreover that it was pronounced in
the counsel of Nice, to wit, that to lie with a man's own wife is chastity.
For Saint Paul had said before, Let every man have his own wife to avoid
fornication. And, 1. Cor. 7. Hebr. 13.
The bed of wedlock is undefiled. Again, If a virgin marry she offends
not. Wherefore we judge that Papistical doctrine which forbids marriage unto
ministers, to be such as the blessed Apostle S. Paul termed to be the
doctrine of devils. The very papists themselves, who have not as yet put all
shamefastness away, will confess it with us. For if we judge the tree by the
fruits, I pray you what fruits of single life may we recite? What filthiness,
what bamderie, what aduiteries, what fornications, what rauishings, what
incests and heinous copulations may we rehearse? Who at this day lives more
unchaste, or dishonest than the rabble of priests and monks do? For as they
have no care or regard to obey Gods word and his laws, and to glorify GOD
with their holy life in chaste wedlock: even so has God through (...) desire
of their hearts given them up unto all uncleanness, that their bodies may be
stained with reproach.

But first of all, the holy scripture diligently teaches all men to have a
Co^tractes of marriage to be soberly made.
special care that they contracte matrimony deuoutely, holily, soberly,
wisely, lawfully, and in the fear of God, and that no evil disposition of
covetousness, desire of promotion, or fleshly lust may lead and provoke the^,
and that wedlock be not entered into, otherwise than either the laws of man or
of God will permit. And in this place we must consider of the degrees of
consanguinitie and affinity, of public honesty, of the reverence of blood,
of offense toward other, and that no man take unto wife a heathen woman, or
one that is of a contrarne religion. For we are expressly forbidden to yoke
oureselues with the unbelievers. Again, we are taught to enter into the knot
of wedlock lawfully, godlily, 2. Cor. 6.
and holily, with prayer and the receipte of Godly blessing in the temple of
the Lord, both in the sight, and with the prayer of the whole congregation:
and to beware that in any case we be not stained in this point with all
profanation of the filthy world.

Neither be we ignorant in this case also, that men of this world are commonly
wont to celebrate their weddinges more fit for the devil than God, with
riotting, pride, surfeiting, drunkenness, and all kind of wantonness.
Moreover we are taught to dwell with our wives according 1. Pet. 3.
to knowledge, moderation, patience, faith, and love, and also to bring up
our children virtuously and honestly, and them also to place and bestow when
time requires in holy wedlock. But if for adultery, Diuorcement.
or some other matter more heinous than that, necessity forces to break
wedlock, yet in this case the Church will do nothing vnadui^edly. For she
has her Judges, who will judge in matters and causes of matrimony according
to right and equity, or rather according to Gods laws, and the rule of
honesty. The holy Apostle would not have the faithful to I. Cor. 6.
contend and stand in law in the court of the unfaithful, wherefore he
exhorted them to take vmpiers to make agreements friendly betwixt them that
were in contention. But in causes and matters of matrimony there are far
greater matters that forbid the parties that sue or be sued to come before
unbelieving judges: Therefore the Church of God has very well appointed a
court to try matters of matrimony. But because we spoke of wedlock in the
tenth sermon of the second Decade, and also have set forth sometime a book
specially concerning the same, I have knit up this matter in these few
words touching christian wedlock.

The Church of God has widows in it, but such, as the Apostle of Christ Of
wi^ower.
does describe in this sort, saying. She that is a widow and a lone woman in
deed, trusts in God, and continues in prayer and supplication night and
day. But she that lives in pleasures and delights, is dead though she be
alive. The same Paul does will the younger sort to marry to get children,
and to govern the house, neither to give any occasion at all, for the enemy
to speak evil of them: the place is evident in the first Epistle of S. Paul
to Timothy, the fifth chapter. The Church also has virgins. These be careful
only for those things Of virgins
yt long unto the Lord, and are true virgins without all deceit or hypocrisy.
Paul says, A virgin cares for that that belongs to God, that she may be
holy both in body and spirit. There are many that rule and govern their
bodies, but not their minds: God requires both, and especially of the mind.
It is an easy matter to deceive men, but we cannot by any means deceive God.
S. Paul in the first epistle to the Corinths ye seventh chapter, sets forth
the praise of virginity, and by comparing a virgin to a married wife, he
shows how great the goodness of virginity is. Notwithstanding it is lawful
for virgins to marry if they will, which thing the same Apostle plainly
shows in the self same place of Scripture. Unto this testimony of God the
testimony of man also is agreeable. For Cyprian with his fellow Bishops and
Elders, making answer to a question demanded by Pomponius, says. Do thou
desire that we should write unto thee what we think of those virgins, who
after that they once determined to continue their state continently and
steadfastly, are found to have lien and continued in the same bed with men?
concerning which thing because thou do desire to know our judgment, thou
shall understand, that we do not depart from the traditions and ordinances of
the Gospel and the Apostles, whereby we should so much the less strongly and
stoutly provide for our brethren and sisters, and that Ecclesiastical
discipline should be kept by all means, for their profit and safety. And it
follows, But if thoroughe faith they have vowed unto Christ, and continue
chastely and shamfastly without leasing, let them steadfastly and stoutely look
for the reward of virginity: But if they will not or can not continue, it is
better that they marry, than to fall into the fire of their delights and
pleasures. And so forth. S. Augustine disputing of the words of the Apostle,
Having the 2. Tim. 5
greater damnation, because they brake their first promise and faith,
ascribes not this damnation to the marriage following, but to the inconstancy
going before. Such are damned (says he,) not because they entered into the
bond and promise of wedlock, but because they brake the first promise made of
continency and chastity. De bono viduitatis cap. 9.
And a little after that he adds these words, They therefore that say such
marriages are no marriages in deed, but rather adulteries, it seems to me
that they speak foolishly and without consideration. And thus much he. I
understand that by this word Condemnation or Judgment, is men by the Apostle
Reprehension, which we Switzers term, Ein anszricte^ oder nachred. For they
be evil spoken of by many, for that they have broken their first faith, that
is to say, they have broken the promise of continency. Wherefore the Apostle
thinks it much better, for young women to match themselves in marriage, then
to set down to themselves such an order of life, from the which, although
necessity forces them thereunto, they cannot depart without reprehension of
men. But in that place he speaks not of virgins but of widows. Saint Cyprian
speaks simply of virgins.

Monks and Nonnes were altegether unknown in the primitive Of monasteries and
^onkes.
church of Christ and the Apostles, the latter ages had monks, but not such
as are now a days, which are their own rule and law, whose monasteries
abound in all filthiness and uncleanness. Which though we should hold our
peace, yet to be true, truth it self and experience will sufficiently declare.
And those that seem to be governed by more severe discipline, are defiled
with hypocrisy, I will say none other thing. Touching the first monks, they
dwelt not in cities neither intermedled them selves with worldly affairs. We
have declared in another place, how that a writer of the middle age being made
an Abbat, required that he might leave off from being a clerk, for that no
man could well be both a monk and a clerk, since the one is an impediment to
the other. Then lived they not of the common revenues of the Church, but of the
travel of their own hands as the lay people do.

S. Hierome disputing of the original of monks in the life of Paulus, has
thus written: Among many it has oftentimes been called into question, who
first began chiefly to dwell in the wilderness of the monks? Some fetching
the matter somewhat far off, begin to reckon from Helias the holy prophet,
and S. John: of whom Helias seems to us to have been more than a monk: and
that S. John began to prophecy before he was borne. But others (in which
opinion the most part of all people do commonly agree) affirm that saint
Anthony was the first beginner of that order: which in part is true. For he
was not only the first, but also the motioner of all others thereunto.
Amathas, and Macarius saint Anthonies scholars, whereof the first buried his
masters body, do now affirm that one Paulus Thebius was the first beginner
of that way: which thing we also confirm, not only in name, but also in
opinion. And anon he adds, that Paulus forsaking the city being thereto
enforced for fear of torments under the persecuters Cecius and Valerianus,
departed into the wilderness, where he found a ^aue and lay hid therein until
he was found out by S. Anthony. The Emperors Decius and Valerianus governed
ye Empire about the year of our Lord 260. but it is said that S. Anthony
dyed when he was an hundred and five years old, in the year of our Lord, 360.
S. Augustine in the 80. epistle to Hesychius, who reports of his own time
how that he lived in the year of our Lord, four hundredth and twenty. but
Eutropius and Beda report how that he died in the year of our Lord, four
hundredth and thirty, in the thirty and one chapter, of the manners of the
catholic church, reciting the manners and institutions of the monks in his
time, reports such things as are very far from the orders and
institutions of our Monks now a days. In the time of Justinian the Emperor,
who made certain laws of Monks and Monasteries, there lived one Benet, whom
many of the Monks now a days do call father, whose life I will recite unto
you out of Trittenheymius, who died above fifty years since, to the intent
you may understand what power and dignity they obtained in process of time,
who at the beginning were contemned and of none authority. Benet Abbat of
Cassina, says he, first founder, beginner and governor of the monks in the
West, wroate in eloquent style, and with grave judgment, the rule for monks
in one book, which begins, Give care O my sonneto my precepts, etc. and it
contains three score and thirteen Chapters. He died in the year of our Lord
542. But Marianus Scotus supposes that he died in the year of our Lord, 601.
in the last year of the Emperor Maurice.

He writes also of twenty orders of Monks that were under Benets rule. Of S.
Benets order there have been eightteene Popes in the Sea of Rome. Cardinals
above two hundred. Archebishops in diverse Churches to the number of one
thousand, six hundred. Bishops almost four thousand. Famous Abbats, who
excelled in life, doctrine, and writings, fifteen thousand, seven hundred. Of
such as are Canonized, fifteen thousand six hundred. And that I may not
recite many other orders of monks, it is known, that the mendicant Monks and
Friars, being the faithful, diligent, and valiant Roman champions of the
Pope, and the spiritual Monarchy, were confirmed by Honorius about the year
of our Lord, one thousand, two hundred, twenty and two. Hereby I would
declare nothing else, but only that all men should understand that Monkerie
was devised by man's invention, not delivered unto the Church of Christ by
the Apostles: and that at the first it seemed to be tolerable, but afterward
became altogether intolerable.

How profitable it is to the common wealth, experience it self teaches. And
who so ever knows not that it is quite repugnant to true religion, knows
nothing. They feign that it is meritorius before God, and the state of
perfection. But who sees not how repugnant it is to Christ's merit, and to
the sincere doctrine of the Gospel? What godliness or necessity is it that
moves us, after that we have wholly betaken our selves to one God in baptism,
to betake our selves also and to make our vows to Saints, and to bind our
selves by religion of an oath to the observing of their rules? True religion
forbids us to vow our selves to Saints, or by any means to depend in way
of religion upon them.

True religion forbids us to choose us any other Fathers or Masters. True
religion forbids us to devise new ma^ners of worshippings, or new religions,
or to receive them that are devised by others. The example of Jeroboam, and his
fellows, makes us affeard. True religion forbids us to swear by the names
of other GODS. Religion refers us to one GOD by faith and obedience.
Superstition breaks this band, and admits creatures. S. Paul to ye
Corinthians says, Every one of you says, I am Paul's, 1. Cor. 3.
I am Apollos, I am Cephaes, and I am Christ's. Is Christ divided? was Paul
crucified for you? Or were you baptized in the name of Paul? Behold Christ is
our redeemer and our master. The faith of Christ has made us one body. By
baptism we are baptized into one body that we might be called Christians, not
Petrines or Paulines. S. Paul would not suffer that Christians should take
their name of the Apostles, how much less would he abide that at this day some
should be called Benedictines, some Franciscanes, some Dominicanes? We are
the Lords inheritance and possession: it is not lawful for us to bind our
selves to the service of men. But who so bind themselves they tear in sunder
the unity of Christ's body, they profane the cross and baptism of Christ.
The Apostle says plainly, Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you, or
were you baptized in the name of Paul? And therefore although they be commonly
called Spiritual persons, yet are they nothing less than spiritual. For the
Apostle says, When one of you says, I am Paul's, and I Apolloes, are ye not
carnal? To what end is it, after the receiving of the gospel of Christ Jesus
and the doctrine of the Apostles which conteyne and deliver unto us all
godliness, to invent new rules? For truly when they had once found out
certain peculiar laws and means of living, they separated themselves from
the common sort of Christians in all outward manner of living in their
behavior, and in all their apparel, to the intent that by that means they
might make evident to all men, that they would live apart, as it were, from
that common, lay, and imperfect Church, to live more holily, perfectly, and
spiritually. But how well the same has framed or does frame with them, the
whole world speaks it at this day. The vows which they vow, are most
foolish. They vow chastity which they have not. Chastity Of monas^ical vows
is ye gift of god, and it is not incident to all men. And S. Paul says, whosoever
cannot live continently, let them marry. For it is better to marry than to
burn. Generally he said to burn, whether it were in a vow, or out of a
vow. Neither is it lawful that an humane vow and which was foolishly taken in
hand and vowed, should prejudice the law of God. What manner of poverty it is
which is in Abbyes, experience it self teaches. They put off poverty when
they put off their common garments, and with their coule they put on great
riches. For Monks, a thing which in the old time would have seemed a strange
and monstrous matter, are made Princes. The common sort of them live idely,
and eat their bread freely and for naught, against the Apostles rule in the 2.
Epistle to the Thessalonians, cap. 3: where such be also accursed. They forsake
their parents and kinsfolk, whom by the law of GOD they are bound to serve
and obey, and betake themselves unto strange men, by whom they are enforced
to i^finite superstitions. And they which are thus freely set at liberty by
their parents, either they are set at liberty through superstition, or to the
intent they may have, all the days of their life wherewithal to lie and rot
in idleness. So that it is evident, that such put on the coule for their
bellies sake, not for any religion. What obedience is yt which is quite
contrary to the obedience which is revealed by the word of God? When the
magistrate commanded them to sustain and bear public burdens with the
residue of the faithful, they be evermore free and exempted. In old time,
ministers of strange religions, had under the Kings of Judah, princely
privileges and customs confirmed by prescription of long time: but forasmuch
as their ministry was not allowed by the word of God, but was rather
repugnant to the word of God, they were not ungodly, neither unjustly or
sacrilegiously broaken and disolued by holy kings.

Who can well abide to hear their excuse, who being admonished to do penance
for the sins which they have committed, make this exception, that by virtue
of their oath they are referred to their monkish order, so that with safe
conscience they cannot depart from the same? For it is evident that the oath
which they pretend is altogether a rash oath: which is not to be performed, as
I have declared in the 3. sermon of the second Decade. What, I pray you, can a
bond which is made by man without God, yea rather against the word of God,
bind one unto, specially being made unwisely or unadvisedly? If the cross of
Christ be of so great virtue that it has released us from the curse unto
which we were all subject, how much more shall it deliver us from outward bonds
wherewith we were intrapped not by God, but otherwise through the folly or
wickedness of men, or craft of the devil. The Apostle Saint Paul cries
out, Ye were bought for a price, become not the servants of men. But if
happily 1. Cor. 7.
through the malice of men, or our own folly we become servants, the godly
must endeavor that through true faith and obedience they may be restored to
the liberty of the children of God. Verily the Gospel is preached unto us, to
the intent we should be delivered from all unjust captivity, and serve GOD
in spirit and truth.

Moreover, where some object that it were good and convenient that all
monasteries through out the whole world were reformed and brought back to the
first simplicity: We answer, how that in this our unhappy age it were in
vain, yea plain folly to hope for it. They cannot be reduced to the ancient
simplicity, neither will the Princes and Monks suffer such reformation to be
made: for then they know that they must depart not only with much of their
profits, honors and pleasures, but with all together. Howbeit, they had
rather that the whole world were together by the ears, than they would deliver
up to God his kingdom, which they have hitherto enjoyed. But admit this thing
were easy enough to accomplish, who shall persuade us that if Abbyes were
reformed according to the ancient institution, that in this our age they
should be as well or better governed than they were in the old time? We see
what beginning they had, how they have gone forward, and how increased. We
see what hypocrisy, ambition and covetousness, pleasure and idleness could
do, and to what point al things are come. Do we think that men's desires at
this day will be more moderate? Do we think that discipline shall now be
less corrupted by us and our posterity, than it was by our forefathers? yea
we are constreined not to hope for the better, but to fear the worse, who
every day do experiment that which is worse than other. For we live in the
dregs of the world and in the very latter end of all ages, wherein the
dragon of the bottomless pit through the malice and ungodliness of men,
has gotten to him self great power and force to disturb and corrupt all
things that are in the whole world. Howbeit in so great perils, this
comfort us not a little which is written in the word of truth, yt for the
elects sake those days shall be shortened, and that he shall be loosed for a
short time, and then anon be cast into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone. Moreover, if we will make a just reformation, we must needs go to
the founteines themselves. But in the Primitive Church, we read of nothing set
down in the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles concerning Monkerie, and there
by we understand that it is not necessary for the Church: yea we have learned
by experience that it is noisome and hurtefull to the Church. Wherefore, true
reformation persuadeth us altogether to abrogate monkerie: not rejecting or
neglectinge in the mean season such as do repent whom the wickedness of the
time has made unprofitable both for themselves and others, but gently to
receive them into the care and alms of the Church. Thus much hitherto have we
said by occasion, and as it were by the way, concerning monkerie, which we
have declared to have had no place in the primitive Church of Christ and his
Apostles. Let us therefore return to other necessary institutions of the Church.

Likewise the faithful Church of How the Church seals with the sick.
Christ uses discipline about the sick, and such as are departing out of
this life. There come about them neighbors and brethren, and every one for
his part shows the duties of love and charity: they relieve the needy with
their goods, and if the sick be not needy then do they show other duties of
goodwill. There comes also the minister of the Church, who in comforting the
sick person prepares him to die by making first his confession of sins to
God: which he pronou^ceth out of the word of God to be forgiven if he do
steadfastly believe.

He requires of him also that he forgive, and be in love and charity with
all men, and that he keep no old grudge or malice in his heart. After this,
so^e public prayer is made to God by the sick person, and by those that are
about the party that is at the point of death. He is also admonished of
sundry things, he is confirmed in the faith, he is called to patience, he
is instructed according as his goods, and every thing else requires, and he
is taught that at his departing out of this world, he commend his soul into
the hands of God the father, according to the doctrine and example of our
redeemer, who at the very point of death cried aloud, saying, Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit.

This discipline have we learned of the Apostles of our LORD Christ. For the
Apostle Saint James says, If any be sick among you, let him send for the
elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in
the name James. 5.
of the Lord. And the prayer which is made in faith, shall deliver the sick.
And the Lord shall raise him up again.

And if he be in sin, they shall be forgiven him. Confess your sins one of
you to another: and pray one for another, that you may be safe, for the
hearty prayer of the just is of great force, etc. This is the Apostolic
discipline. But if you say unto me, Annoynting with oil.
Where is the oil? I answer, that in Saint James the Apostles time, and
certain ages after, there remained yet in the Church, the miraculous gift of
healing the sick. Of this we read in Saint Marks Gospel, And the disciples
going forth preached the gospel that they might repent, and they cast out
many devils, and they anointed many with oil, that were sick and healed them.
And again in the same place, says, Moreover, These signs shall follow them
that believe. In my name they shall cast out devils, etc. And anon he says,
They shall lay their hands upon the sick, and they shall be healed. And
because this benefit remained yet in the Church, Saint James bids us use
oil, and to use it in the name of the Lord, as the Lord had commanded. But
seeing that gift is now ceased in the Church, and we find by experience that
oil does no good to the sick, according to the time, and as our duty
binds us, we do the best we can to assuage and cure the diseases of the sick
by medicines most convenient for the sickness, being applied in the name of
Christ.

I know how by this testimony of the Apostle, the Papists go about Last
annoyling.
to set out and commend their extreme unction, or last annoyling: but they
labor in vain. But to let pass that Saint James speaks nothing of the
hallowed oil: and that they do not admit this medicine but in very
extremity, where S. James commands to annoint every on that is sick, how, I
pray you, can they defend out of Saint James words that which the priest
demands of the sick person, Do thou believe that the Lord will hear our
prayers for the merits sake, and prayers of the Saints? The sick man
answering, I do believe. He then says, Let us therefore pray to God and his
Saints. Or where, I beseech you has Saint James or any other Apostle of
Christ taught that which they bring in their anointing? In the name of the
Father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost, I annoint thee with holy oil,
that by this anointing thou may receive full remission of thy sins. What
scripture, I pray you, teaches us, that full remission of sins is obtained
by that anointing? These things are done manifestly against the principal
article of our religion, which teaches that we are purged from all our sins
only by the blood of Christ, and that most fully. To him only is the glory
due, not to the oil, nor to any creature in the whole world.

Moreover, the Church of Christ Of funerals and burial.
does not reject the bodies of the dead, as if it were a dead dog. For it
acknowledges that their bodies have been the Temples of the holy ghost,
which has dwelt in them. It acknowledges that they are buried in hope of
resurrection and glory of life everlasting, wherefore the Church does in
most reverent manner take the bodies, windeth them in a sheet, and covers
them very decently, and beeinge put into the coffine carefully carries them
unto the place of burial, or churchyard, y^ near friends, neighbors and
brethren following after, and accompanying the corse.

While the body is set down and laid in the earth, there are public prayers
made by them that brought the corse. For they give thanks unto God, for that
he has called the party deceased out of this world in the true faith, and
they pray also that it may please the Lord to take them likewise unto him
speedily, being lightened with the true faith. Moreover, the name of the dead
brother or sister is recited in the public assembly of the Church with
honor, and all the people are put in mind of their own destiny, and speedily
to prepare them selves to die. And after this manner, we read in the
scriptures, that the ancient fathers buried their dead, yea, the most holy of
them. We read nothing of canonizating, of woorshipping of relics, of
months and years minds for the dead, which are offered to the end the
souls of the departed should be delivered from the pains of purgatory.
There be certain burialles described unto us in the old Testament, as the
burial of Abraham, Sara, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, Aaron, Marie, Joshua,
Samuel, and David, etc. And in the new Testament of John Baptiste, and Stephan,
but they were all sparing, and without all manner of superstition.

In that Iosephes bones were carried forth, they were carried in a mystery,
that the Israelites might gather thereof, that they should be brought into
the Land of promise. Whereunto also that belongs, that the Patriarchs chose
a burial in Hebron. Otherwise the place avails nothing to purchase the
better or worse speed to the body that is buried in it. We must think that
the place, by reason of the bodies of the saints and holy men which are there
buried is after a manner sanctified, or at the least wise called holy: not that
the bodies do get any holiness or safety by the ground. Therefore unless
it seem good otherwise to ye divine providence of God, the saints would gladly
lie with their ancestors in the self same place of burial. But if it please
God otherwise, they acknowledge that they are notwithstanding received into the
same earth, without any exception, and that they are not separated from their
ancestors by distance of place. Wherefore there is no superstition in the
Church of God about burials and graves. But how much there was in the time
of Popery, no man can declare in few words.

These be the necessary institutions of the Church of GOD, and are The
church has ^o need of the leagal instruc^ion.
by the faithful religiously observed without superstition, to edification: as
for other matters which are only devised by the invention of man, the godly
nothing weighe them. I know what things may here be objected, That forsoothe,
the ancient people of the old Testament had sundry and manifold rites and
ceremonies instituted of God by his prophets, because being rude they had
need of such instruction. But since the common sort of Christians are also
more rude than is to be wished, so many sundry and diverse ceremonies were
devised by the ancient fathers not without the motion of ye spirit, which they
must also obey. I answer, that this is no true nor sound reason, whereby the
weak in faith may receive commodity. For surely then would not ye Apostles of
Christ have said nothing thereof. Moreover experience teaches yt the state and
condition of the weak and simple is such, that the more ceremonies are left
unto them, the more their minds are diversely dispersed, and are less united
to Christ, to who^ alone al things are to be ascribed. For it pleased the
father that all fullness should dwell in him, and to heap together in him al
things apperteining to our life and salvation. Yea, the divine wisdom of God
has taken away y^ whole external discipline and instruction, setting a
difference between us and them. We should therefore proceed to bring again
Iudaisme, if we should not leave of to multiply and heap together rites and
ceremonies, according to the manner of the old Church.

For in old time those ceremonies were had in use, although they were not
infinite, but comprised within a certain number. At this present there is no
use nor place for the^ in ye church. Neither do we want most grave authority
to prove the same. The Apostles and elders in a great assembly Acts. 15.
meet together at Jerusalem at a counsel, where the Apostle Peter plainly
tells them that they tempt the Lord in going about to lay the yoke of the
law upon the free necks of the Christians. There is also a Synodall Epistle
written, wherein by one consent they testify that it has seemed good to ye
holy Ghost and them, to lay none other burden (...) the church of Christ, tha^
y^ which (...) in few words. To the inten^ thereby it may be evident, yt the
doctrine of ye Gospel is sufficient for the Church, without ye c^remonies of
the law. If he would (...) have the rites which in old time were by God
instituted, to be joined to ye Gospel, how much less ought we at this present
to couple therewith ye inventions of men? Unto which moreover is wickedly
ascribed, either the preparation to the grace, and worshipping of God, or part
of our salvation, that we may say no less at this day, than S. Paul said long
ago, After that you have known God, how chances it Galath. 4.
that ye return again to weak and beggarly elements, which you would begin
to serve a new? Ye observe days and months, times and years. I am a feared lest
I have taken pains about you in vain. Unto all these things this is also to
be added, that this instruction of ceremonies, whereof they speak, belongs
to the worshipping of God. But we are fordidden to devise unto ourselves any
strange worshipping: we are forbidden also to put too, or take away any thing
from the institution or word of God. Wherefore, the Church of God, neither
ordeineth, nor receives of other any other such constitutions. Of which matter
we have also spoken somewhat before, whereas we entreated of the abrogating of
the law, and of Christian liberty.

I trust that in these fifty sermons, I have as shortly and conveniently as
might be comprehended ye whole matter of faith, godliness or true religion,
and also of the Church. That which I do often repeat in all my sermons, and my
books, that do I also again repeat in this place, that the learned may with my
goodwill and thanks gather and embrace better things out o^ the scriptures.
Unto the Lord our God, the everlasting founteine of al goodness, be praise, and
glory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

