DAPHNIS POLYSTEPHANOS.

An Eclog treating Of Crowns, and of Garlandes, and to whom of right they
appertain.

Addressed, and consecrated to the Kings Majesty.

By G. B. Knight.

Quod maximum, and optimum esse dicitur, oportet esse Vnum. ex Arist. Top. li.
7. John Morris.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld for Thomas Adams. 1605.

blazon or coat of arms

QVOD DEVS CONIVNXIT, HOMO NON SEPARET. Math. 19. Quatuor hasce cruces clypeo
coniunxit in vno (Quas ergo nemo separet) ipse Deus.

INVICTO, PACIF. FOEL. AVG. CHRISTIANISS. FIDEI DEFENSORI, IACOBO D. G. MAGNAE
BRITANNIAE, GALLIAE, and HIBERNIAE REGI, DOMINO SVO CLEMENTISS. HAEC STEMMATA,
and DIADEMATA, I. HAS GENEALOGIAE AVG. ET IMPERII BRITANNICI LEVES
ADVMBRATIONES, GEORGIUS BVCVS E Q. R. S P. C. L. M. D. D.
MOST SACRED SOVEREIGN:
I have adventured to present your Majesty, not with a fair pourtrait, but
with a slight shadow of your imperial greatness, Which I began long since,
but then the end was in nubibus, or in abeiance (as our Lawyers say) for I
could not finish it (according to my project) until such time as he, which
should be sent, Expectatio gentium (Britannicatu^) should come, who was
ordained from above to wear all these crowns and garlands, and to reduce this
whole Isle (with the hereditary Kingdoms, and Provinces thereof) to one
monarchy, and entire Empire, as they had been in the times of diverse ancient.
British Saxon, and some English kings of the Norman, or Danish race, as it
shall hereafter appear. The foundation of this great work has bin laid, by
many Kings your Majesty's ancestors (I mean by alliance, not by arms for
those plots were frustrate) but as lately by King Henry the eight when he
mediated the marriage of his son the Prince of England with the Princess of
Scotland your Majesty's mother: Vide R^. Ascam^in Toxophil. of the Iustnes of
this union.
as also in this manner many ages before the good king Malcolm Capito, vt
Buchana^.
Cammoir proiected this work (and that with happy success) by the marriage of
Margaret daughter of the Saxon Prince Edward Exul, Buchanan reru^. Scotie. lib.
7.
heir of the great Edgar) out of which royal bride-bed your Majesty is
issued. Likewise Alexander the first married Sibilla eldest daughter of William
Duke of Normandy king of England. The first David also king of Scotland married
Matilda daughter of the Earl Waldeof and of Judith niece to the said King
William: King Alexander the second married Joan Plantagenet daughter of King
John. King Alexander the third married Margaret Plantagenet daughter of King
Henry the third. King David the second married Joan Plantagenet daughter of King
Edward the second. King James the first married Ioane daughter of the Duke of
Somerset Grandchild to King Edward the third. King James the fourth your
Majesty's great Grandfather married Margaret eldest daughter of King Henry the
seventh, and of Queen Elizabeth Plantagenet daughter and heir of King Edward
the fourth. But these Princes married only but daughters of England; but You
(most sacred Prince) the great JACOB, An Do. 1603. Iul 25. ap. Westminster.
enthronized upon the Patriarch Jacobs fatal stone, and upon Saint Jacobs
Festival espoused solemnly fair England her self. And all the former
matches were but preparatiues, and (as I said) foundations of this great work,
which your Majesty (whom I may now call an English man, as well for being
descended from so many English Princes, as also for that your Majesty's Father
was an English man, and your mother Princess, and heir of England) has by
divine preordinance now finished and accomplished in plenitudine temporum; and
that by just right, for in your sacred person are jointly met, and coalesced,
the royal bloods, interests, and titles not only of all Great Britain, but
also of France and Ireland. Which to prove will not require much search, nor
study, for they are evident, and I will for breuities sake but thus point at
them. For some of them namely Scotland (the Crown and Scepter whereof (missa
per innumeros auos) your Majesty has borne from your infancy) all men know
and acknowledge your ancient royal right, His Majesty's title to Scotland and
to Ireland. G. Buchan.
and estate therein. And your Majesty's title to Ireland will be manifest in
your Genealogy herein deduced from that great Plantagenet King Henry the
second, Lionel Plantag. Du. of Clarence, third son of king Ed. 3. married
Eliz. daugh and heir of VVil. Murc-Burk Earl of Vlster L. of Connacht: from
whom the Dukes of York are descended. Camden in Hiber.
the first English Prince Lord of Ireland, and from his heroycall posterity
(as well Marches as others) who have been continually seysed thereof until
this day. His Majesty's title to France, see it more a(...) large in the
Argument
So likewise your Majesty's title to the Crown of France shows it self
clearly in the ancient possessions of these royal Plantagenets here presented,
your Majesty's Progenitors first Dukes of Normandy, then of Aquitaine, Earls
of Poictow, of Aniow, of Maine, of Touraine, and of Britain, and after of
Angolesme: And lastly Kings of all France in the right of Isabell or Elizabeth
sole daughter, and heir of Philip le bell King of France mother of King Edward
the third, Vide 1. Froissar a Tom ^
who made a most renowned and happy entry upon that his royal inheritance: and
he his great heirs were not only titulare Lords, but also actual possessors
of France many years, and yet to this day in token of that ancient right) have
seysine of a Gersey, Garnesey, Aldern^y, etc. are parcels of Normandy, and so
consequently of France yet possessed by the K. of Eng.
part of that kingdom, notwithstanding that counterfeit hethenish law Salica
maintained by all the power of France many ages against them.

His Majesty's title from the British Kings.
Your Majesty's title, and descent from the ancient kings of great Britain
(and which is least known) may thus redily be derived. The Welsh Bardes, as
also our best heralds record that Russin.
Rhese ap-Gruffith (surnamed Atgluid) prince of Southwales about the year of
our Lord 1196. (and issued from Cadwallader the last British King) had a
daughter named Fair Julian.
Gwenlhian married to Edmund.
Edneuet Vachan Lord of Bransencle, and chief Justice of Wales, and bare to
him a son called Gerion, or Ieronim.
Grono, this Grono had Theodore.
Tedor, Tedor had Grono, Grono had Tedor, Tedor had Veridik.
Meredith, Meredith had Owen. Which Owen married Catherine (widow of king Henry
the fifth, and daughter of the French king Charles the sixth) by whom he had
Edmond creaeted Earl of Richmond by King Henry the sixth, his brother vterine.
And this Edmond was father of King Henry the seventh, who was father of Queen
Margaret your Majesty's great granmother, etc. But some derive your Majesty's
British race from a namelesse, and a good namelesse daughter of Gruffith ap
Leolhin (a Prince ^f Wales about the year 1051) upon whom (as they pretend)
Fleanchus thane, D. Povvel in History of the Princes of Wales.
or Steward of Abria flying into Wales for suc^our) begat unlawfully a son,
who should be ancester to all the ^hiefe Stewards to this day: But this being
not acknowledged by ^he best Scottish Historiographers, and the thing not
honorable, I may well pretermit it. Lastly, to finish all these your Majesty's
native titles to these many Diadems mentioned in this Poesy, I have inserted a
Genealogy of the Saxon Kings drawn from the first uniter of the heptarchye,
His Majesty's title from the Saxon kings.
and the Godfather of Anglia King Egbert unto Matilda the Empress, daughter
and heir of King Henry the first, and mother of this great Plantagenet King
Henry the second, ancester of all the English Kings until this day. And from
him this poesy is a continued pedigree unto Queen Elizabeth the first, and
from Her to your Majesty, and to your Majesty's most excellent Son Henry, The
Prince of Great Britain.

Now it rests that I answer, or excuse some faults found in this Poesy. for
some note that I am too long in my induction, notwithstanding I propound in the
first stanze. Others reprove me because I began no higher. Others charge me
that I have concealed, and colored the faults of bad Princes.

The first objection is answered in it self. The second i^ answered in the
Argument following. The third may not only be answered but maintained by the
rule of Christian charity, 1. Peter. 4. Math. 7.
which (as the Apostle teaches) operit multitudinem peccatorum, and the
Evangelical law of Talion prescribes Quaecunque Vultis vt faciant vobis
homines, and vo^ facite illis. And I my self claim: the benefit hereof, for I
confess I have other faults besides these. I am ignorant, I am poor, M.
Scaurus ita suit patritius vt 3. supra cum etatibus iacuerit domus eius
fortuna, etc.
and I am as obscure as M. Scaurus was (of whom As^ Pedianus makes mention)
and so have been ever since the fatal journey at Bosworth: and had then
perished utterly had not the Princely Humanity of the great suruiuing Howard
preserved my young orphan ancester: which with my best service (as I am bound)
I will ever acknowledge to tha^ most illustrious family of Norfolk the
Durateus equus o^ great Captains, grave Counselors, high Seneschalles
Marshals, Treasorers, and Admirals of England: besides many other heriocall
Gentlemen fortunate, and faithful to the ANGLIAE REGVM PROSAPIA A TEMPORE QVO
ANGLIA APPELLARI CAEPIT, NIMIRVM AB EGBERTO REGE PRIMO EIVSDEM MONARCHA* VSQVE
AD HENRICVM (...).
royal genealogical tree I. W. S. delineauit.

Crown, and Kingdoms.

But to conclude shortly, whatsoever be the faults of the book, or of the Buc
I most humbly submit them to your Majesty's most gracious censure, who (next to
the omnipotent Lord of Lords) are vitae, and necis Arbiter, Vite, and neele
gentibus arbit Seneca.
and not only the supreme, and highest judge but (which is best) the best
judge. i. the most wise, the most learned, and the most clement judge. Quicquid
dominatur vim Dei habet. Artemidorus.
And so therefore eftsoons prostrating my self, my small talent, (or rather
mites) and all at your sacred feet; not seeking either praise, or thanks, nor
so much as one branch or leaf of any of these your many Garlands, but with the
old Poet Veniam pro laud peto laudatus abunde Ovid.

Si fastiditus non tibi Daphnis ero.


And with the new inauguratorie hymn still pray to the Almighty that.

Your happy days may not be done,
Till the great coming of his Son.
And that your health, your joys, your peace,
May as your reign, and years increase.
AMEN.
THE PREFACE, OR Argument of this Poesy.
DAmaetas having long bin a woodman had observed the natures, and propertyes of
many trees, and apprehended there was some mystery, and some peculiar
maiesticall matter in the Genest, more then he could discipher. Whereupon he
went to Silenus a man of great learning and authority (for he was held a
Pro^het) and exposes to him his conceit, and prays earnestly his aid.
Silenus entertaineth him courteously, and is very willing, (and by the means of
a late accident) well able to rese^ue him: for (says he): there was a
complaint mad^ ^ately to our great God Apollo against certain unworthy
fellows, which presumptuously took garlands of his ancient tree the Laurel
without leave. Whereat he having indignation, determined to take order for
that, and such like abuses. And forthwith calling the Muses to counsel in
Helicon established ordinances for the due wearing of that and of al other
Ghirlands. And because the ancient Ghirlands were abused, and profaned with
common and unworthy use, he made choice of a new tree (viz) the Genest, and
instituted Ghirlands thereof, and gave to them praerogatiues above the rest,
and appropriated them to one imperial family seated in Britania, or Albion
rather. Vide stanz 17. and it is taken out of Orpheus in his Argonaut: where
Ma. Camden rather reads (...) then (...). Albion or Alba, rather then
Pinaria, and iudiciously.
Leuceessa: and with express defense that none else should wear them. And
that not all the Princes of this family should have Garlands hereof, but to
some of them better deserving should be permitted a chappelet, and to the rest
but a branch, or Plant of the Genest. But the chief Garland of Genest
complete and adorned with diverse sacred flowers should be reserved for his
favorite Daphnis (the most puissant, and the most virtuous, and (in brief) the
most true heroycall Prince of that imperial race) ordained long-since by the
highest aeternall wisdom to reconcile the old, and unnatural fewd between
Locrine, and Albanact, to reduce all the Britannik Isles into one entyre
monarchy, to restore the ancient unity of religion, laws, and language in this
great Island, and finally to extend the limit of his Empire as far, as they
were in the times of Albion, of Brutus, of Artur, of Edgar, or of any other our
monarkes, whose dominions were largest. Thus far Apollo's decree.

After this Silenus declares more particularly, who, and what these royal
Worthyes were, which should bear, or wear Chappelets, or Garla^ds of the
Genest tree, and lastly the Garland complete.

Beginning with that great Henry son of the Empress Matilda (the first King
of this Island surnamed Plantagenet) and so deducing a genealogy from him
through his royal posterity to our present sacred Soueraign JAMES, He was also
surnamed Courtmantel.
his now next heir, and nephew, whom the Prophet herein styleth the true
Polystephanus, the Peacemaker, King Arturs successor, great Aedgars heir,
high Seneschall of Albion, the great Briton etc. And crowns his head with
this imperial Polyanthine Ghirland, and his reign with all the blessings of
peace, victory, long life, a rare fair wife, hopeful Princely issue, and a
perpetual succession of their posterity in the Empire of great Britain.

And now to that objection touched in the dedicatory, and made because I derive
not this title, and genealogy from some of the ancient monarkes of this Isle
Britons, or Saxons, or at the least from King William the Conqueror, I must
answer that to have chosen any of the most ancient Kings, I must have looked
so far back, as I should not only have made this Eclog ouer-long, and
tedious, but also have lost my self in the clouds of obscurity by soring too
high amongst them (as they know, which know what our ancient stories be.) But
as for William the Conqueror there be many reasons why I should not begin with
him (although I go as near him, as his sons daughter) for firstly, he was a
bastard, (and yet not that of the blood royal of England) having no title to
the Crown but violence, and his sword as he confessed, Vide lib. S. Stephani
Cadomensis de Gulielmo conqu^storre editum. an. 1603.
and thereof had remorse of conscience at his death. Secondly he was never
possessed of the one half of Britain, for he had neither Scotland, nor Wales,
and in Ireland he not one foot. Furthermore Girard Du-Haillan and other French
antiquaries according to their Salike heraldry say that his line ended in his
son King Henry the first: for all they hold as a maxim, ( La famille se
continue es masles, Philosalicus.
et se finist aux filles.) And yet Du-Haillan (notwithstanding, or forgetting
this) affirms in an other place, that the race of the Kings of England issued
out of the house of Aniow (viz) from our great Henry, In Summaire des ducs, et
contes d' Aniov.
and his ancesters) continues until this day. From whom there be many reasons
on the other side, why I should deduce the genealogy of our Kings passed, and
of our present Sovereign Lord King JAMES: for this great Henry was not only
rightful heir, K. Henry the second, the greatest king etc
and King of England, but also the greatest King (of whom there is any credible
story extant) which has been in this Isle of Britain since the time of the
Roman Emperous (who were reputed Lords of all the world) and which thus I
demonstrate, and briefly. He was King of England in the right of his mother
Matilda the Empress, daughter and heir to King Henry the first, by Matilda
Bona daughter of King Malcolm Canmoir, King Malcolm knighted this K. H. the
second at fifteen years of age, Novbrig. who writes much in the honor of
this king Malcolm. lib. 2. cap. 20.
and of Margaret his wife, who was the daughter of Edward Exul the Saxon Prince
the son of Edmond Ironside King of England Anno Dom. 1016. This Edmond was
son and heir to King Etheldred, who in ancient charters is written Totius
Britanniae rex (quod nota) because a late Anonymus in a little book dedicated
to his Majesty, affirms that never any Prince was king of this whole Isle
until now: But he is deceived for (besides Constantius Chlorus and his son
our countriman Constantine the great, Constans, Aurelius Ambrosius, Vter, and
others (which were Lords of all great Britain) Edgar also the father of this
King Etheldred was absolute Monarke of this Isleland, and so puissant in forces
both by land, and sea, as he was surnamed the Great, and was styled Totius
Albionis basileus, and Anglici orbis basileus (as G. Malmesburiensis and
Florentius Wigorniensis witness. Whereupon (to note also by the way) some
think that the word Anglia was sometimes used for the whole Isle, Britannia ab
aduentu Saxonum in insulam appellatur Anglia Ioa^n. Salisbur, in Policratico.
and which Ion Lidgate disertly asseuereth in King Arthurs complaint in these
words, Great Britain now called England: so likewise does Geffrey Chaucer in
the Franklins tale (viz.) In England, that Clepid was Britain: And Ranulfus
Cestrensis a grauer Author peremptorily affirms that King Egbert after his
conquests ordained, Ranulfus Higeden in Polichronic.
and commanded that the Saxons, and Iutes should be called Angles, and that
Britain should be called England: But I leave this to be discussed by
antiquaryes. And to return to the ancient Saxon Kings progenitors of this
Henry, and also possessors of this whole Isle (as I will show for the better
confirmation of that, which I have said against the opinion of this Anonymus.)
In diverse ancient records and charters of donations of these kings to
Monasteries, and to Cathedral Churches, and in other ancient monuments, I have
observed these several styles,

Ex archiuis Ciscestreasis Ecclesiae by the favor of the reverend D. Hen.
Blaxtoa Ch^unce^lor.
Ego Athelstanus rex Anglorum anno Dominicae incarnationis D. CCCCXXX. r^gni
vero mihi gratis commissi VI. Indictione III. Epoch^
Epactae xviii. Concurrente iiii. Nonis mensis Aprilis iii. Lunae rotigerae
vaga, tionis i. per eiusdem omnipatrantis dextram totius BRITANNIAE regium
solio sublimatus etc.

Ego Eadmundus rex Anglorum, ceterarumque gentium in circuitu persistentium
Gubernator et rector An. Dom. 945. Ego Edredus rex terrenus sub imperiali
potentiaregu seculorum, K Edred was uncle to Edgar Ingulf.
aeternique principis, magnae Britanniae temporale gerens imperium, etc. An.
Dom. 948. Ego Edgarus totius Albronis monarcha etc. An. Dom. 966. And in
another, Ego Edgarus totius Albionis, finitimorumque regum basileus. An. Dom.
974. These three last styles I find in the history of Ingulfus Abbot of
Croyland transcribed by him from the Charters of that Monastery. And the other
two before going, are copyed out of the records of the Cathedral Church of
Chicester, as also these three next following. Ego Eadwis (...), sub. rex. This
Eadvvis or Edvvin was elder brother to the great Edgar.
basileon totius Albionis etc. An. Dom. D.CCCC.LVI. imperii autem 1. An in
another, Ego Eadwin rex gentium Albionis etc. And in the date of a charter of
Bishop Brighthelmus, Anno 2. imperii Eadwin totius Albionis insulae imperantis.
I find also (in Asser Meneuensis) Aelured or Aelfred a more ancient Saxon King
then these written Omnium Brita^n. insulae Christianorum rector. An. Dom. 872.
Io. Asser in histor. de Gestis Ealfredi.


And Edward (surnamed Pius, and Confessor) was from the year of our Lord 1050.
King of this whole Isle (if there be any credit to be given to our stories)
and was styled rex Albionis, as Ion Twine auoweth out of his charters given to
the Abbey of Abingdon. Io. Tvvinus in Albionicis.
And that same King Etheldred before cited, I have seen this charter in the
hands of Ma. of Holland, a learned Gentleman, and a good antiquary.
was styled in the charters of Glastonbury, Aetheldred Anglicae nationis,
caeterarumque gentium triniatim intra ambitum Brita^n. insulae degentium etc.
basileus, and another K. in old inscription, Britanniae Anax: Sigillo. V.
and many such more, which were too long to recite. And some kings of the
Norman race (which is more rare) have been so styled For the Lord Bishop of
Bristow voucheth a coin of King Ion, Ion B. of Bristow in his first treatise
about the union.
wherein is stamped Ioa^nes rex Britonum. but that coin which his Lordship
showed to me had the arms of little Britain upon the reuerse: but his
grandchild King Edward the firsty and after him king Edward the third were
greater monarkes here then he. Vide Tho. VValshingham in K. Edw. 1. and in Ed.
3.
But this great Henry Plantagenets Empire extended beyond the bounds of the
Britannish world; and his greatness so far exceeded all other kings his
ancesters, Io. Praesul Carnotensis in Polycratico.
that he was styled Maximus Britanniae regum, as I will show by and by, and by
good right: for besides this his great Britain and Ireland, he was possessed of
a great part of France, and by these titles. K. Edw. 3. erected Aquitain into a
Princedome for his eldest son Edw.
He was Duke of Normandy by right of inheritance from his granfather King Henry
the first Duke of Normandy etc. He was Duke of Aquitain (that is) Gascoin, and
Guien (sometimes a kingdom) and Earl of Poictow by the marriage of Queen
Elianor daughter and heir of William Duke Ican de la Hay.
of Aquitain and Earl of Poictow (whose wife Ieanne was daughter of David king
of Scots) he was Earl of Aniow (seminary of kings) of Touraine, and of Maine
(his native country) by right of enheritance from his father Geoffrey Le Bell
Earl of them all. Gyr. du Hailian en la sommaire des contes d' Aniovv. etc.
He swayed all in little Britain; which authority he acquired partly by the
marriage of Constance daughter and heir of Conan Earl of Britain with his
third son Geffrey Earl of Richmont, but chiefly by his sword: as it
appears by Gu: Neuburgensis, who then lived, and thus writes. Lib. 11. cap.
18.
Cum a potentioribus in Britannia inferiores premerentur, regis Anglorum
auxilium expetentes, eius seditioni spontanee subdiderunt etc. ipsosque
potentes viribus subegit, sicque in breni tota Britannia potitus est. He also
conquered Auuergne: and thus much for his possessions in France: and now to
Ireland. He twice invaded that kingdom, and by arms seconded with the letters
of favor of his good friend Pope Adrian (an Englishman) he brought the
discording Princes there, Giraldus Cambrens. in Hiber. expugnata and G. Camden.
to submit their differents and their tytles to him, and so obtained the
possession of the Isle.

And as for those parts, and parties in this our great Britain (viz) of Engl.
Scotl. and Wales (which did not acknowledge his souerainty) he reduced them in
good time to the ancient subjection, and obedience, which they owed to the
British, and Saxon kings his progenitors. The Welshme^ in their stories
acknowledge this, and in their loyalty and duties (as the English) lively
express it every day. But for the other (if any doubt be made) G. Neuburgensis
(veridicus author as Polidore Vergill observes him) will thus satisfy him,
speaking of this K. Henry, G. Neuburg. lib. 2. cap. 38.
and of David K. of Scots his prisoner, being then both at York. Occurrit
eirex Scotorum cum vniuersis regni nobilibus, qui omnes in ecclesia beatissimi
apostolorum principis, regi Angliae, tanquam principali domino hominium cum
ligeantia (id est) solemni cautione standi cum eo, et pro eo contra omnes
homines (rege proprio praecipiente) fecerunt. Ipse quoque rex Scotorum coram
vniuersa multitudine nobilium vtriusque regni regem Anglorum modis solemnibus
dominum suum, seque hominem et fidelem eius declarauit, eique tria praecipua
regni sui munimina (scilicet Rokesburk, Berwik, et Castellum puellarum loco
obsidum tradidit etc. But Ion Bishop of Chartres makes his Empire yet much
greater, Io. bish. Carnotensis in Polycratico.
for he boundeth it to the Southward with Spain, and to the Northward with
the Isles of Orkney, and might as well (if it had pleased him) with the North
pole (as Giraldus Cambrensis did) and then styleth him Maximum Britanniae regum
1. the greatest of the Kings of great Britain vt supra: And Giraldus goes
further, for he compares him with the great Alexander, and ascribes (as some
interpret) the first discovery of the West Indies (which was made by Madok, D.
Povvell.
a younger son of Owin Gwineth Prince of Northwales An. Dom. 1170.) to this
King, because it was done by his auspices: as we may as well also attribute to
him the redeeming of our great Artur from the injurious imputation of a
fabulous Heroes, because he caused his monument to be sought out (which was sunk
deep within the ground in the Isle of Aualon) by the occasion of a Bardes song,
D. Powel in the history of the Princes of Wales.
which he heard in Pe^broke. But I will set down Giraldus his own words
written in manner of a Panegyric to this king, and in my conceit elegant enough
for those times. Certant cum orb terrarum victoriae vestrae a Pyrenaeis enim
montibus vsque in occiduos, Sil. Giraldus in Topographia Hiberniae cap. 47. and
48. Distinct. 3.
et extremos Borealis Oceani fines Alexander noster occidentalis brachium
extendisti. Quantum igitur his in partibus natura terras, tantum et victorias
extulisti si excursuum tuorum metae quaerantur, prius deerit orbis, quam aderit
finis. Animoso enim pectori cessare possunt terrae, cessare nesciunt victoriae,
non deesse poterunt triumphi, sed materia triumphandi. Qualiter titulis
vestris, et triumphis Hibernicus accesserit orbis? Quanta, et quam laudabili
virtute Occani secreta, et occulta naturae deposita transpentraueris etc?
Qualiter fulguranti aduentus vestri lumine attoniti occidentales reguli tanquam
ad lucubrum auiculae ad vestrum statim imperium conuolauerunt? And much more,
which for breuity I omit. Joan. Saresbur. in Policratico lib. 8. cap. 24.
That which the Bishop of Chartres writes of him before mentioned and
promised, is this: Rex illustris Anglorum Henricus secundus regum Britanniae
maximus etc. circa Garumnam fulminat, et Tolosam falici cingens obsidione, non
modo prouinciales, vsque ad Rhodanum, et Alps territat sed munitionibus
dirutis, populisque Profligatis.
suba^lis (quasi vniuersis praesens. immineat) timore principes co^cussit
Hispanos, et Gallos. And to these I will add only Will. of Neuboroughs elogie
for a Corollarie. G. Neuburg. lib. 11.
Regis supra omnes, qui vnquam hactenus in Anglia regnasse noscebantur, latius
dominantis (hoc est) ab vltimis Scotiae finibus ad montesvsque Pyrenaeos nomen
in cunctis regionibus celebre habebatur etc. Hunc finem habuit inclytus ille
rex Henricus ^. inter reges terrarum nominatissimus, et nulli eoru^vel
amplitudine opu^, vel faelicitate successuu^ secundus. And thus much for the
testimony of the greatness of his conquests, and of his Empire* as for his other
greatnesses (viz) of his wisdom, of his justice, of his magnanimity, of his
bounty and other heroycall virtues I shall not need to produce any proof, for
his wise and politik administration of his great affairs, and estate, his
victoryes and high acheeuements secretly intimate them at the full. He was also
well learned, as Giraldus affirms, Gyral. Cambr.
and (which was his best praise) he was very charytable, and pious, (
incomparabilis Eleemosynarum largitor, et praecipuus terrae Palestinae
sustentator.) And Radulph de Diceto writes that in the time of an extreme
dearth in Aniow and Maine he relieved with bread ten thousand people daily
from April till harvest. An Dom. 1176.
And William of Newborough adds that he received with great devotion the
character of the sacred Militia for the recovery of the holy land. Vide S.
Giraldum in Topograp. Hibern. Distinct. 3. cap. 48. and in Hiber. expugnala
lib. 1. cap. 45.
And afterward (because he was not able to go by reason of infirmities, and
for the great dangers wherein his estate should stand in his absence which
Giraldus shows) he gave toward this expedition the sum of 47. M. li. or
there abouts. Io. Sto. in Anna^
Iean de la Hay also writes that he built S. Andrews Church in Bourdeaux,
and S. Peter's in Poitiers, and founded a Bishops sea there, and enlarged the
town by the one half. He reedified the Abbey at Waltham in Essex, Fabian.
^^du Haillan es contes, and D. d' Aniov.
and the Charterhouse of Witham in Wiltshire. He repaired and much beautified
the Monastery of font Euerard (or Fronteuaux) near Egle in Normandy: and
founded the Priories of Staneley, He loved Hunting and hauking exceedingly.
Girald.
and of Dover. He also began the stoneworke of London bridge, which was
finished by his Son King Ion (or caused to be finished) for it is all one to
a common wealth. He first kept Lions, and made of the arms of Normandy (viz)
the two Leopards, and of the single Lion of Aquitain one coat of arms for
Engl. as it is yet borne. Nic. Vpton.
And he instituted the circuits of the Judges: and not to be tedious in the
enumeration of such particulars) in a word he was (as Ion Carnotensis who knew
him well) testifies, rex optimus apud Brita^nias, Normanorum, et Aquitanorum
dux faelicissimus, Io. Carnotensis. lib. 16. cap. 18.
et primus tam amplitudine rerum, quam splendore VIRTVTVM. Quam strenuus quam
magnificus, And much more, and much and in his honor writes Giraldus in
Hiberna pugnata. lib. 1. and G. Nevbrig. lib. ^. cap. 25. Whereunto for breuity
I recommend. the Reader.
quam prudens, et modestus quam pius ab ipsa (vt ita dicam infantia) fuerit,
nec ipse liuor silere, nec dissimulare potest: cum opera recentia, et manifesta
sint etc. And after those his great works, and all his high achiuements, his
victoryes, his trophies of his heroycall, and christian virtues, and a long and
happy reign, he departed at Chinon in Touraine, in the 35. year of his
reign, and in the 61. year of his age An. Do. 1189. and was with all due
funeral pomp enterred, at Fronteuaulx, and upon his tomb had this
inscription engraven.

Sufficit hic tumulus cui non suffecerat orbis,
Res breuis ampla satis, cui fuit ampla breuis.
Rex inuictus eram, mihi plurima regnasubegi,
Multiplicique modo duxque, comesque fui.
Cui satis advotum fuerant haud omnia terrae
Climata, terra modo sufficit octo pedum.
Qui legis haec pensa discrimina mortis, et in me
Humanae speculum conditionis habe.
Quod potes instanter operare bonum, quia mundus
Transit et incautos mors inopina rapit.
Thus this great Henry left his great name, and his glory to the world: and his
Kingdoms and his dominions to his posterity the Princes aranged, and enrouled
in this following Poesy. Unto which his Empire I dare affirm, and upon the
present allegata, et probata conclude, that never any Prince heir general of
this kingdom had so many, so ancient, and so lawful titles as He, to whose
happy inauguration this humble verse is consecrated.

AN ECLOG, Entitled DAPHNIS POLYSTEPHANOS, betwixt Damaetus a Woodman, and
Silenus the Prophet of the Shepherds, DAMAETAS. SILENVS.

Stanza 1.
OF all the trees in heavenly Siluan's guard,
(wherewith the worthest brow's were crowned of yore)
There is but one, or few (O reverend Barde) The ancient wisemen of Britain
were calle^d Bardi. Diodor. Sic.

Amid whose virtues maze I would require
A line of any learned wiserds lore:
The Plant of Genest chiefly I admire,
Whose humble highness makes me often surmise, Humilitas scala caeli. Bernard.

That lowly steps be ladders to the ski's.
2
For well I wist though Genest does not dwell
In proudest soil, nor tops of mountains hye,
She shows by this, that she foreseeth well
The perils, which do all extremes impend.
Flexit pinum ferox astris minantem, and de nube media vocat. Se^^ca
The Aspiring pine (whose top does threat the sky)
Divine Revenge does headlongs often down send,
When this is safe upon her humble hill,
Not thrall to any proud Superiors will.
3
Again I know her gentle property
To yield, and bow, as reason shall advise:
Lo here a type of true humility,
And therefore has by kind the sovereign power
Genuum doloribus modetur, hinc Genista ditta fu^^sius.
Of parts of man, which only duty ties
To bow to Kings, and to their Creator.
O just respects, who can so well deserve
For to command, as one that knows to serve?
4
And that the Genest does by nature hold
A special honor of aeternall green:
And that her boughs be charged with flowr's of gold:
And many such like graces more I wot:
But in my mind long this conceit has been,
That yet the greatest wonders I weet not.
And I am wont this tree often to compare
To that, which is in all the world most rare. Vide stanz 54.

5
Now good Silenus, as you are a man
Endew'd with passing skill, and mystic art,
Inform me rightly, (for I know you can)
What be the other mysteries of this tree:
And by the way I pray you to impart
Both which, and what those other flowers be,
Whereof (they say) the Apollo praeses luminis. Gal.
praesident of light
Has made a garland for his Sup. Daplmis quod nomen in hac celoga datus S.R.
Iacobo, sicut Iulin Caesari olim in Ecloga 5. Virgilii. a pastoribus.
favorite.
6
SILENVS.
Thou have long lived ( Damaetas) in the woods,
And there for Woodman have Genista served,
To prune her plants, and save her tender buds,
As seasons did the charge to thee commend:
And many of her virtues have observed,
Which use, or common might apprehend,
But for to deem the doubt thou stick'st upon.
Would ask some time bestowed in Helicon.
7
When first I went those sacred wells to see,
My will to good was harsh, benumbed and cold:
My head now white, was then like eben-tree
Died in the sensual sumes of youthful will.
Lo now of each the contraries I hold,
For Time, and travail, and those springs of skill
Capitis niues: sic Horatius.
Of frost, and snow have made my sculls attire,
And warmed my spirits with their holy fire.
8
Now of these flames I will impart to thee,
And happily perhaps thou have referred
The resolution of this doubt to me:
For why this case was argued long-agone,
In Helicon, and I my self it heard,
Where Phoeb (amid the Muses) on his throne,
Established by those sacred maids advise, The Italians, French, and Spaniards
write the first syllable of Garland with an i. and that is nearest to the
Etyemologie of Guir and dalen 1: green leaves in British.

What Ghirlands should be each acchiuements price.
9
The question grew because Apollos suite,
Praeferd a plant against such as praesumed
To wear a garland of his holy fruit,
Without desert or special grace divine.
Apollo was much moved, and chafed, and fumed,
And went anon to counsel with the Nine.
And when he had a leaf of Laurel eat, Hinc vates (...) olim olim dicti
Lycophron ap. Caelium. Rodig.

Thus spoke, as I his speeches can repeat.
10
The Laurel Garland. Plin lib. 15.
The Laurel-crowne was given, and shall be still
To peerless men, to Clarks, and Emperors,
And such as in a mood of metrik skill,
Could of my favors make their vants at large.
The Palm garland. A. Gell. lib. 3.
And then that long-enduring Palm of yours,
Was due (my sisters, and my sacred charge)
To such, as worthily to gain the price,
Had suffered watching, famine, fire, and Ice.
11
And he, which had with valiant hand preserved
The Oken Garland. Gel lib. 5.
A citizen, received a crown of Oak.
The Olive Garland. Gell. and Textor.
But he a wreath of Oliue-leaues deserved,
Who had with Arts, and plea's of peace beguiled
The bitter times, which discord had forspoke,
Or else some dangerous foe had reconciled.
And he, who long had flamed in true loves fire,
The Mirtile Garland. Virg. and Ovid.
Received a crown of Myrtle for his hire.
12
I mean whose amorous flame is fed by grace,
By grace of her, who does his dear persevere.
I mean not one forlorn, and in disgrace:
He must a wreath of bitter Willow wear: The Willow garland, authorized by
Homer and Virgil Homer calls this tree (...) 1. frugiperdam Odyss K. And
Virgil places the Forlorn lover inter salices: eclog. 10.

For as that tree by buds does promise ever,
A hope of fruit, yet fruit does never bear,
So vain, and fruitless is his, hope and love,
Who an inconstant woman's love does prove.
13
Of all the most authentik is of Grass, The Grass Garland. Plin. lib. 22.

That crown (before I had my Bays) was used.
And with those words his color altered was,
And fetched a sigh, which would have rent a rock.
So much his guilty conscience him accused,
Whose rape to escape a Maid was made a stock. Daphne versa in laurum Ovid.
Met. 1. and hereupon Lucian says Apollo was unfortunate (...). In dial. (...)

In brief remorse did so with him preuale,
That he had much adoo to end his tale.
14
Yet what he could his passions he subdu'de
What could he not, who was a wight divine?
And for that he his purpose would conclude,
The Garland of the Grass did serve (quoth he)
For some such politik, or Paladine,
The Cypresse-garland. Cato apud Plin. lib. 16.
Who from a seege should set a city free.
And then the hood of Cypresse-leaues was woorne
Of such, as had (as I have) cause to moorne.
15
The Veruain garland. Vergil. Plin.
For safe conuoy is borne the Veruain wreath
Of foecials, and Mars his orators.
Iuy Garl: Plin. lib. 16.
To Tuiscons race the Iuy I bequeath.
The Garlands of Lillies, Roses, and Thistles. de his vide Pierium in
Hieroglyph.
Lillis, Chardons, and sweets of Erycine,
Of several Empires be the signal flowers,
Symboles of beauty, power, and grace divine:
And now I do employ them to adorn
The crown, which of my Daphnis shall be worn.
16.
The Pine is Pan's, and he bestows that The Pine Garland. Propertius lib.
aeleg. 1.

Of herds, which best can skill to tune an Ote,
Or wist to make their cartell soonest fat.
But more from this, and from the rest I have
To speak more large of ONE (as you may note) The GENEST garland.

The first in honor, though in order last:
As it befalls with gold which is refin'de,
The worst comes first, the best remains behind.
17.
There is an Island Orpheus calls Britain (...) in Argonantic.
Leuceessa called,
And in that Isle there grows Gentile has diverse significations, sometime it
signifies supremo grado de perfectione per natura, percostumi, and per valor
etc. I. Ruscelli. sometime it signifies of, or belonging to the same stock or
nation, as Gentilis clyteus, gentile sacrum, and Gentilhuomo in Italian, and as
it is used here. Sometime also it betokens mild, or pliant, as it is used
stanz. 3 and sometime a Hethen or Pagan, as it is usually taken in the holy
scriptures and stanza.
a gentile tree,
Whose bough's be all of carved Emerald,
And for her flowrs my Rays I did employ.
For her abode she lists not to be
Where either heat, or cold can her anoy.
Whether the Be of homagers most true
Comes often to yield his suit, and service due.
18.
Upon this tree is set my chiefest care.
Now thou fair Genest art my dearest tree.
Thy ghirlands now of all shall be most rare.
And I pronounce, and make a solemn vow,
(Sisters accord for so it must needs be)
None shall prsume to were hereof one bough
But such as standing high in virtues grace,
Shall Be advanced to honors highest place.
19.
But to put on my new composed crown
The Garland of Genest, Roses, Chardons and Lilies reserved for Daphnis
Apollo's favorite. etc. viz. K. JAMES.
It shall not fall to any but to ONE.
And such an one, as merit, and renown
Shall recommend unto the supreme good.
Even such a one as shall deserve alone
To wear a wreath of each tree in the wood,
Wise, valiant, just in brief endued with all
Virtues Christian, and heroical.
20.
To him his neighbor potentat's shall bend,
The Polare princes shall his vassalls be,
Afrik, and Jude, to him shall prsents send,
Aesteeming those the happiest wights alone,
Which league contract with him or amitee,
Fortunes dearling, Pieties champion,
Successor and heir in all by right
To great King Artur The oracle given to Augustus, me puer Hebraeus, etc.
recorded by Nicephorus, and that reported by Eugubius, Heutripodes lugete perit
praesagus Apollo shows that these Hethen gods knevv Christ: quod notet B. I.
Iesu's faithful knight.
21.
Thus said the King, the Prophet, and the God,
(Which I must credit as my blessed belief)
And here he made his parting Period.
But that thou may the better bear away
This Oracle, I will declare in brief
What worthies have been graced unto this day,
By bearing branches of this happy tree,
As diverse have, and hearken now to me.
22.
K Hen 2. vide praeface.
You see ( Damaetas) that the Gods decree
Admitts but one to wear the complet ghirland.
But some, whose fame has scaled a high degree
May bear a branch, and some a chappelet.
The Empress Matilda's son, who conquered Irland:
(The greatest Britanne King, which has been yet)
Must by good right now lead this royal band
Of the triumphant worthies of this land.
23.
A prince formed of the true imperial mould,
He was as valorous, as politic;
He could well win, and what he wan could hold,
And fortune follows such men in their train.
Normandy not Neustria Pitheus.
Westria was his, he ruled in Little Britain.
Armorike:
And raignd in Albion, and in Aquitaine.
In breef a soueraign he did reign, and rule
From Pyren mountains to the frozen Terrarum vl^ima Thule, Seneca Island, or
Thylen sell, that is Shetland secundum Gasp Peucerum ap. G. Camd number.
Thule.
24.
With slipps of Broom he decked next his cap, K Rich 1. surnamed Coeur-de
Lion. married Borengaria daughter of Garcia King of Navarre. (...).

Whose valiant zeal, whose chiualry divine
Made in the pagan kingdoms such a gapp,
As all the Christian hosts might enter in.
He took Acon, and Ioppe in Palaestine, Richard demeura en Asic la ou il fist
plusieurs belles chooses. (After the departure of the French K. Louys)
Du-Haillan. li. 1.

And did besides, the realm of Cyprus win.
He warred with men, and slew the Austriak Lion,
And made a peace with GOD, and went to Zion.
25.
Next rides king Ion, to whom stout Caledoun K. Ion, brother to Ric. 1.
surnamed Sa^s-terre* he got Angolosme, by marrying with Isabell daughter and
heir of Almery Earl of Angolesme: and the I Will of Man by conquest.

Solemly vowed to be loyal leege-man
To him the King, and heyrs of his Crown.
And by his auspices the Walter Buc brought 700 men out of Braband, wan Ely
and diverse Castles for this K. Ion. vide Camdenum in Ottadini, and Holinsh.
Brabant Knight
From rebel Lords their i will of refuge wan.
By him great Themses bridge so exquisite,
(Which did before in wooden modells lurk)
Became of Europe the most stately work.
26.
K. Hen. 3. surnamed de Winchester married Elianor, daughter of Raimond Earl of
Prouence.
Then comes his son with other architects
(Not to build Babels and Castles in the air)
But he a holy house for GOD proiects,
The which he does at Westminster perform.
A temple high, magnificent, and fair,
A princely pile as well for use, as form,
K. Edward 1. surnamed Longshank, married first Elianor daughter of the King of
Castile, she was heir of Ponthieu, and mother of K. Edw. 2. by his second wife
Margaret daughter of the French King, he had Tho. of Brotherton, from whom by
Segraue, and Moubray the Hovvards are descended.
And shall remain to all posterity,
A glorious trophee of his piety.
27.
Now add the foremost two which bore his name,
(Who of the saint desguis'd a ring received)
To the one some give a Hammer for surname,
Because he bruised vide Tho. Walsingham in Edward 1. K. Edward 2. surnamed
of Carmarvon, married Isabell daughter and heir of Philip le Bell K. of France.
Gaiothel in his wroth,
And him of Jacobs stone, and chair bereaved.
But Jacob soon shall repossesse them both.
The other Edward the templars did expel.
Of whom I can no more say, to say well.
28.
Behold him next who in a doom supreme K. Edward 3. surnamed de VVind sore,
married Philip daughter of William Earl of Henalt, etc. he took Calais, and
wonn many victories of the French, as at Crecy and Slays, etc. Refused to be
Emperor. Paralipom. ad Abb. Vrspergens.

Pouuoir above an Estre did advance,
For he was offered Coesars diadem.
But followed boons forbod, and down anon
Cuts with his mothers sword the flowrs of France,
and plants them in his fields of Albion
And puts them in his royal Lions guard,
For so (quoth he) Dieu and mon droit award.
29.
Right gentile too was that conceit of his, The order of the Knights of the
Garter instituted.

When he the Garters order did ordain,
A noble pledge of princely grace it is:
Happy are they which therewith gird their knee.
Thrice happy he, and ay so may remain
Who does protect both that, and them; and he,
Which says not so, ill come to him and worse,
Then Ho^ni soit, qui mal y pense's curse.
Edw. de Woodstock Pr. of Wales, and of Aquitain, married Joan daughter and
heir of Edm. Plantagenet Earl of Kent.
30.
Philipp the famous Macedonian
Had not a son of higher worth then he,
Un tell prince estoit digne de gouerner tout le monde. Froisard.
For where the prince black Edward went he wann.
This honors comete first did fair appear
At Crecy field, which He ouerthrevv 60000. Spaniards and French in Spain
betwixt Navaret and Naiara. Idem.
Nauaret did see
After more bright then Mauors in his sphere,
But Poitiers cheifely, where he took King Joan,
For there a Le ieune prince doublement victorieux, aiant vaincuson enemi par
valeur, et par courtoisie, laissant vne venerable trophe de son humanite and
prudence, etc. Ie. de Serres.
double victory he wann.
31.
Two K. Ric. 2. his son surnamed de Bourdeaux, married Anne of Luxembourg
daughter of the Emperor VVenceslaus.
Richards more succeed, the one a Prince,
Whose goodly presence men to wonder moved,
And was as bountiful as any since.
K. Ric. 3. surnamed de Fotheringay, duke of Gloucester. etc. married Anne Nevill
daughter of Rich. the great Earl of VVarvvik.
Fame has been sharp to the other, yet because
All accusations of him are not proved:
And he built Churches, and made good law's,
And all men held him wise, and valiant,
Who may deny him then his Genest plant?
32.
But Henry Bolinbrook (me thinks does frown, K. Hen. 4. surnamed de
Bolingbrook, married Mary daughter and heyr of Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hertford.
etc. He was Duke of Lancaster in the right of his mother Blanch daughter of
Henry Duke of Lancaster, etc.

That Glo'ster here should next to Bordeaux come,
Because he from his cousin took the crown.
Mistake not Henry, for by right for neither
Of ye, in these triumphall car's is room:
But best of all ye may be matched together.
Yet do I grant thou were a princely Knight,
And patron of the bloody rose by right.
33.
But to thy son the Of this Dolphin vide Tho. Walsingham in An. Do. 1392.
He conquered France for the most part.
Dolphins strange repeyre K. Hen. 5. surnamed de Monmouth, married Katharine
daughter to Char. the 6. the French King.

(Swimming in post up to the royal port)
Foretold that he was born the Lillies heir.
This sign was soon by sequels verified:
Dolphin he was by right, or swords effort.
And he in France victorious lived and died.
Whom Azincourt so nobly did receive,
At He died at Bois de Vinciennes nere Paris.
Vincienne park of all he takes his leave.
34.
K. Hen. 6. surnamed the Saint, built a college at Eaton, and the Kings college
in Cambridge: married Marg. daughter of Rene K. of Sicil, Duke of Aniovv.
Henry his son surnamed of Windlesore
(Who was in London and in Paris crowned)
Most worthily a Plant of Genest bore.
But not by scepters sole his praise began:
His christian virtues made him most renowned,
K. H. 7. solicited the Pope to canonize K. H. 6. who refused.
For he was deemed a very holy man,
And had been made a Saint, and long since shrin'd,
But that the vice-saint maker was unkind.
35.
Rich. duke of York, heir general of the crown, Regent of France, married
Cecily Nevil daughter of Rafe Earl of Westmerland.
I must omit that proud Plantagenet,
Who in high parliament the king defi'de.
But I may not his gallant son forget,
Who twice did win the royal gole by arms:
And was the father of the happiest bride,
K. Edw. 4. married Eliz. VVidevile daughter of Ant. Earl Rivers. extinguished
Lancaster. Q. Elizab, 1. K. Edw. 5.
That ever Camber compassd in his arms:
She made the loss the lighter of that son,
Whose reign then ended as it was begone.
36.
She, and her Richmont (on'd by sacrament)
Refused the golden offer of Colone, K. Hen. 7. Earl of Richmont, married
Elizab. Plantag. daughter and heir of K. Edw. 4. For them Christopher Colonus
offered to discover the Indies. R. Hakluit to. 3.

Foreseeing that the riches and the rent
Would hardly counteruaile the keepers care:
And had besid's a secret reed that one,
(Who should hereafter set in Arturs chair)
Should fetch the fleece when he occasion saw,
And hold the golden monark in his awe.
37.
This Richmont was a very prudent prince Hen. Earl of Richm. vvanne both the
field and the crown at Bosvvorth. Margaret his mother was an heir of the
house of Somerset. he extinguished the male line of York.

And therefore was surnamed Solomon.
The world has seen great works acco^plish'd since,
Which were proiected by this Theodore.
This man of GOD did happily atone
The civil feud, which long had been before,
Betwixt the Rose, which first grew in the wood Vide Ovid in Metam. these Roses
were the devises of York and Lancaster.

And that which Venus colored in her blood.
38.
Margaret their daughter was married to Ia. 4 K. of Scotland, by who^ she had K.
James 5. who married Mary daughter to Claud duke of Cuise, who bare to him Mary
Queen of Scotland and of France, heyr apparent of England, and mother of our
Souerain Lord King James.
These happy Plants have ouerspreed this I Will
By Henry, and more fruitful Margaret.
(But Henry's branches florish'd but a while)
She is the root of the immortal seed,
Whence James the wise a new Plantagenet
did spring, and was her father who did breed
The great Polystephane, as shall appear
When they are past, which come triumphing here.
39.
K. Hen. 8 married Katarine daughter of Ferdinand King of Castle, by whom he had
Q. Mary: he had Q. Elizabeth by Anne Bolein daughter of the Earl of Wilsthire.
He had K. Edw. by Jane sister of the Duke of Somerset. Doctor Cooper B. of
Lincoln in Chronicis.
That Henry with his broom attempted first
To sweep out of this land the dross of Room;
A work of worth, which else no monarke durst.
And made a Bal when he had done this deed
In triumph of the flowers of the Broom.
Yet see how duly virtue has her meed,
For the Pope himself as (the Bishop says)
First styled him Defender of the faith.
40.
His hopeful son brought happily to pass
What was attempted by that hardy King. K. Edw. 6.

For he abollished the Romish Mass:
Timely resolved to maintain christian troth.
And as his years, so did his virtues spring,
But envious fates untimely cropd them both.
Then let this serve to make complete his praise, Quem dij diligunt, moritur
Iuvenis. Menander.

Whom Gods do love, he dies in tender days.
41.
This is king Henry's eldest daughters place,
A dame endewd with hev'nly virtues many: Q. Mary married to Philip 2. King of
Spain.

Devout sansdout, a MARY full of grace,
Just of her word as ever any Queen:
Her liberal hand was never closed to any,
whose need required. This maks her plant still green,
For what someuer piously is given,
Is with great usury restored in heaven.
42.
Q. Elizabeth. 2. she added Virginia to her Empire. etc.
Her younger sister next to her does set,
Who was in acts, and age the happier much?
And therefore wears the brauer chappelet.
A Queen, whose state so happily did stand,
That men did say (seeing her greatness such)
This Lady leads fortune in her hand:
A virgin which did keep her lamp still light
And eke for rarenes was a Phaenix hight:
43.
For weigh her peace established at home,
And next her victories acheev'd abroad
As well in the Indies as in christendom.
Then her safe garding her confederates,
Her zeal to the true worshipping of GOD,
Her wisely moderating her three estates,
These say she was a glorious Amazone,
As ever any was: but fates spare none.
44.
Add more, which joined strange scepters to their plant, Ric. Earl of Cornwall
brother to K. Hen. 3. elected K. of Almayin, or Romans.

As Cornwall did the scepter of Almain,
And that of Castile royal Ion of Gant,
Progenitor by sons, and either daughter Ion of Gant. Duke of Lancaster. K.
of Castile and Lion by Q Consta^ce his wife.

Of all the kings of Britain, and of Spain:
Without sir Bolinbrook, who for the slaughter
Of a king inunct ashamed hid his eyes K. Hen. 4 vt supra.

Long-sithence with a hood of strange desguise.
45.
But Bedford shall his fathers place supply, Ion Duke of Bedford. 3. son of
K. Hen. 4. rege^t of France where he took the great Champion of France Ieane
la pucelle: overthrew the vicont of Narbone at sea: wann the bataile at
Vernueil, which (as Serres says) Faisoit porter le dueil a toute la France.

Who though no King, yet was a great viceroy,
And in his place behau'd him royally.
Th'arm'd sorceresse committed to the flame,
Narbone, Alanson, and their K. Charl. 7. was called in scorn Le petit roy de
Bourges.
petty roy
Vanquished at Vernueil witness well the same,
Who while he lived preserved the inheritance
Of his drad leege, and kept in awe all France.
46.
Artur Plantag, Earl of Britain, son of Geffrey, 3. son of K H. 2. heir
apparent proclaimed by K. R. the first. Mary daughter and heir of Iam. 5. King
of Scotland, by Mary de Loraine daughter of the Duke of Guise, vt supra. 38.
Some more great Genesters recount I may,
Whose fronts should with this crown have circled been,
But they were absent at their sacring day:
As Artur, heir unto the greatest King:
And she, that was of France and Scotland Queen,
Whose virtues praises all the muses sing,
And wears in sted of chappelet of Plants
S. Peter calls the crown of immortal glory (...). 1. epist. ca. 5.
In hev'n a diadem of Amarants.
47.
And diverse other set on fortunes knee,
Highly advanced for virtues rare respects
Have worn a branch of this imperial tree.
Farther they neither did presume nor m(...)t,
For they were men, and had some light ^^fects:
DAPHNIS.
But yet they passed as far each other wight,
As he (that peerless he) eclipseth them,
Who is of all the world the rarest gemm.
48.
Defects empesch'd they were not absolute,
And fates conspired to keep them in their wants:
But GOD, and fates desert and public brute
Have all pronounced him sole the worthy ONE
To wear the ghirland made of many plants.
The high Seneschall (I mean) of Albion, K. James is high Seneschall of
England, Scotland, and France, by private heritages, viz. by Leicester, Ab. and
Aniovv.

Of whom Apollo in his holy rage,
Did as you heard such wondrous goods prsage.
49.
And this is he, for whom by desteny
The complet ghirland was reserved so long:
Of whom to say in sooth my fantasy,
It were in vain for any man alive,
With flatering hopes to do himself that wrong,
To think his style might at his praise arrive.
But true that is which erst thy Muse did sing, Vide Epigramma Latinum in calce
libelli.

He is the true Beau-clerc, and the best King.
50.
Sic Minerua dicta Olivisera ab Ovidio.
This is that Oliue-bearer of this I Will,
Who shall by high prordinance divine
That great intestine quarrel reconcile,
Which so unnaturally so long has been
Betwixt Brutes sons Albanact, and Locrine:
As Theodore did that, which was between
The bloody brothers Lancaster and York,
And was a figure of this greater work.
51.
To this his reunited Albion
Tria iuncta in vno: It is the mott of his Majesty's devise for the Knights of
the Bath.
He shall annex the crown of Pharamound,
And fair Hibornia's Joining three in one.
Still Victory shall follow his ensign.
He shall in treasure, peace, and years abound.
Aequity, Clemency, and lore divine
In all causes, and of all opinions
Shall be his judges in his dominions.
52.
And to accomplish this his happiness
Heavens do to him a princely spouse decree: Anne Queen of great Britain,
daughter of Frederick 2. King of Denmark.

All those frail saints, those gentile goddesses
shall kneel to her: so wise, so chaste, so loyal,
So fair, so good, so goodly she shall be:
And both thrice blessed in their issue royal:
For he, and they which from them shall descend, Henry Prince of great Britain.

Shall reign in Britain, till the world have end.
53.
And Britain had no sooner faith and force Prince Henry.

Combined, but her DOLPHIN in tender age
Vows to redeem from Gallile bands the cors K. Henry the 2. buried in
Frontenaulx in France.

Of his grand-sire the great Plantagenet,
And seize upon his Southern heritage,
And bounds, and trophies in the Pyrens set.
Soft Muse: but prosper GOD, and native right
This flower of flowers, this sweet S. Georges knight.
54
What do thou now ( Damaetas) more command,
Lo here discussed the mysteries of thy tree,
Thy doubts dissolved, assoiled thy demand,
And even thy thoughts (I think) descyphred are.
And if that rarest thing great DAPHNIS be,
To who^ thou did some time those plants compare,
Then lo at length the white is stricken pat,
Which thy conceits so long have aimed at.
55.
DAMAETAS.
O blessed Prophet hallowed be thy art,
Which has so much releeu'd my travaild mind,
Thou have discharged in faith a friendly part:
My thoughts, and doubts are ridled every-on.
And I confess his name thou have divined,
To whose high worth the plants were pargon.
In Stanz. 4.
Silenus live, and so naught rests now,
But to his service all my life to vow.
56.
Wherefore I wish I wist to bring to pass,
To have a Penn plucked from Angels wings:
And then to be as high as Atlas was,
Who on his shoulders did support the skies.
(O King of flours, O fairest flower of Kings)
Thus would I write in starry Paradise,
DAPHNIS a toy le chappeau roialest,
De Roses, chardons, lis, and de Genest.
57.
Triumph ye trees, which had so high a hap
To bear the flowers of this royal Hat:
Flourish ye flowers lul'd in Flora's lap,
Whereof Apollo did his ghirland make,
Ghirland in honor aequall be to that,
Which shines in hev'n for Ariadne's sake,
And may his state, for term with stars contend,
To whom the hev'ns this Garland recommend.
L' ENVOY au Roy.
LO now (great BRITON) by decree divine,
This fowre-fold Diadem devol'd to thee,
Great Aedgars heir by fortunes, and by line.
But greater by thy wisdom, and thy wit,
Thy mind inuict, thy bountee, pietee,
And all the virtues for a Caesar fit.
Wherefore on thee all happiness attend,
Whom heavens to us so happily did send.
Gran cose in picciol fasce stringo. F. Petrarc.
Dij boni quid hoc est, quod semper ex supremo fine mundi nova deum numina
vniuerso orbi colenda descendunt? Orator Belga in Panegirico Constantino D.
poluchronion.
The Hymn inauguratory for his Majesty: mentioned in the Epistle D.D.
O God of gods, O King of Kings,
Aeternall Father of all things,
In heaven and earth, and every where,
By whom all Kings their Scepters bear.
Great God of James our blessed King,
Who peace, and joy, to us did bring.
Whom thou a cheef, a royal guide
Did for thy herdlesse troops provide.
Now we beseech the mighty Lord,
To us such favor to afford,
That this triumphall festival,
This holy day imperial,
To his inauguring consecrated,
May be so often celebrated,
That finally it be not done,
Till the great coming of thy son,
And that his health, his joys, his peace
May as his years, and reign increase.
AMEN.
Epigrammatis S. Regi Iacobo Iampridem Hantoniae regiae oblati exemplar, cuius
mentio est Stanza. 49.
Anglice David aue, rex scilicet optime, vates
Optime, quos mundi secula sera vident.
Vir caelestis aue, nam non industria talem
Te fecit tun, sed gratia summa DEI.
Tu pius et fortis, tu prudens, ordine, stirpe,
Fortuna, meritis (prime Iacobe) vale.
Aliud de symbolo nummi noui.
Vos (Henrice) Rosas, vnisti Regna (Iacobe:)
Dat Deus vt fiet haec Vnio perpetua.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
In the Epistle DD. in the marg. Vite for Vitae.

Arbit for Arbiter. fol. B.

In the Prface. Britania for Britannia. fol. B. 2 in the Marg.

Conquestorre, for Conquestore. fol. B. 3. in the Marg.

Seditioni for se ditioni. fol. C.

In the Eclog, Datus for datur. stanz. 5. in the Marg.

Cars for Carrs. stanz. 32.

Hertford for Hereford. stanz. 32. in the Marg.

Abollished for abolished. stanz. 40.

? for: stanz. 42.

and eke for rarenes. read: and for her rarenes. stanz. 42.

chardone, for chardons. stanz. 56.


