two shepherds Prognostycacion, and Almanacke of two Shepherdes: necessary for
all Householders,

For exspences.
AS for Exspences, here and take right good head, that if in thy house thine
exspe^ces, and thine receytes be equal, than a sodeyne chance of loss by
infortune, may soon dystroye the state of it.

Neclygence.
The state of a necligent man mareth a ruynous house. For necligence of a man
gouernynge a house, is as a great fire, kyndled in the same search therefore
wisely and dylygently, and the purpose of them, that mynyster thy gooddes, for
a man ready to fall, and not yet fallen may soon be helped, for it is less
shame to abstain than to fall, often to over se thy gooddes, in what manner
they stand is great prudence.

Thy beasts.
Than remember the meat and the dri^ke of thy beasts, for though they hunger
and thirst, they cannot ask what they lack or need.

The costs.
To over sumptuous weddinges yeldeth hurt without worship, cost done to
resyste malice is worshypfull. Cost done to refresshe thy friends is reasonable,
cost done to sustain wastfull spenders is always but lost.

Meat and drink.
To norysshe thy meyne in a measure honestly, not delycatly, he that is a
gloton vnyeth otherwise, than by death shall change his manners, Glotonye of a
vile and neclygent person, is but corruption. The welfare of a dylygent
person is but a solace, if there be a strife between glotony and thy purse, be
thou thy self aduocat between them, and let the sentence or the most part be
with thy purse, for when he brings in his two witnesses with him, that is to
say, the cheste and the selier void, or else nygh void, I trow thou wylt hold
with the purse, and if the purse be bound with Covetousness tha^ the sentence
goth against glotony, Be not desirous of costly deyntes, for than thou will
give sentence wi^h glotony against the purse to his hurt.

The couetyce.
Couetyce does nothing rightful but when he lies, what is a couetouse man, he
that has suffycyent richesse, and ever dredeth pouerte, and yet he besyeth him
self a way to live in pouerte. A^l that is kept for other me^ he thinks it
well, and that thing that is spended upon him self, be thinks it but loss.

The seller of corn:
If thou be a corn seller, lone thou no derth, if thou do, thou sleest the
poor men, sell thy corn when it is at a reasonable price, and not when the
poor men may not bye it, not only to thy neighbor, but also to thy enemies
sell at an easy price, for not always with sword, but often times by meat and
drink thy enemy is overcome.

The enemies.
And if thou have an enemy be not to conuersau^t with unknown men but always
against him, and all against unknown persons, lett^ thine iyen be thy guide,
for a subtyl^ enemy intends at sometime to be avenged. The febl^nes of thine
enemy is not a perpetuell peace, but truse for a time, if thou wene that thou
be sure of thine enemy, thou put thy self in peril.

The gifts.
Receive gladly the small gifts of thy poor neighbor or friend, for often
times he is more trustye friend that gives with his heart, than he that
offeryth himself only, for in words there is great plenty of friends, call
not him thy friend that often prayseth the in thy presence, if thou counceyll thy
friend, desire not to please him, but to please reason, Say t^ thy friend in
counceyllinge, thus semyth me, not precisely, thus is to be done, for if thy
counceyll come to evil proof, there follows some re^rese, than if it come to
good effect, ^han it is praysynge.

The women.
Of thy women suspect what they do rather pretend ygnoraunce thanne knowledge,
for when thou know the crime of thine evil wife, of no Phesycian thou shall
be cured. The ^^rowe taken of thine evil wife, ^hou may abate when thou
hereth like things of other mene^s wives (...) noble and a gentyl heart
serchyth not the warkes of a woman, thou shall sooner chastyce thine evil wife
with smiling, than with a staff a young woman a strompet shall consume away
riches an old woman a strumpet if ye law would suffer i^ she were worthy to
be brent quycke.

The clothing.
Sumptuous Clothing outragyously a preyfe of little wit, over shynynge
colors in thy clothing gendreth disoa^ne to thy neighbors, study to please
with virtue, and not with clothing. The petycion of a woman asking clothes,
and is sufficiently clothed, she with her unsteadfastness, steryth dysdayne.

The Iogelars.
A man cherysshyng Iogelars shall soon have a wife, whose name i^ pouerte, but
who shall be her sone^ forsooth derysion, if if happen the to here the words of
a iogelar, feign thyself not to here them, but to thick on other things.
Iogelars that hurt any man either i^ his goods or in his body, be worthy to
be hanged, what is a iogelar? but a distroyer, or else death of a man's soul,
the instruments of a Iogelar please not our lord God.

The servants.
A servant of high heart put a way from the, as after to be thine enemy. A
servant glosynge in his manners and condycions remeue fro the, a servant nyghe
unto the, and ^ft times praysyng the withstand, a servant lightly shamefaste
love as thine own sone. Also and thou have a servant that is a liar or a
swerer, put him or her away, for they shall do the never profit.

Of building.
And if thou will build, let need move the, and not thine own voluptuousnes,
for the apetite of a buylder is never in building satyate. Inordynate and over
much desire of building causes and abides ye selling of things builded,
toure builded, and the cheste euacuat makes a man after wise.

The selling of heritage.
And if thou will selle, beware that thou selle not a part of thine heritage
to them that been greatter than thy self, but rather for less price, sell al to
him that offers most it is better to suffer great hungr^ than the selling of
thy patrimony, but it is better to sell than to do vsurye and worse.

Of felawshyp.
And if thou will have a felawe, rather felawshyppe the with him that
accords to the in manners tha^ in goods, and suffer him pacyeutly all in
lawful things, let not here of wrath be felawshypped unto the.

Dronkennes.
He that in dyuer syte and a boundaunce of wine is sobre is an erthly God,
droukennesse does nothing right but when she falls into the mire, when thou
art dystempred with wine fle conuersacyon and seek sleep. The dronken
excusing him self openly accuses his dronkenes, it semyth not well a young
man or a young woman to know wynes, fle a dronken phesycian fle also a
phesycyan willing to prove in the how from a like syckenes he shall cure
other folks.

Of dogs.
Lyttel dogs leave them to clerks and ladies, dogs that can keep thy house
be profitable, hounds for to hunte spend more then they shall get the.

Of fortune.
If fortune be to the contrary se that the rule of honest living be suffycyent
to the, what profytes it the, the rule of living? take heed thou see fools
not doing their deuoyre toget their living, and yet they excuse them by
fortune. It is seldom seen dew dylygence with infortune, but it is seldomer
seen infortune parted from Sloth. The slothful man abides to be helped of
god, which in the world dyspyseth to labor, watch therefore besylye and let
the lyghtnes of spending be recompensed with scarsenes of getynge.

Of thy tastament.
Aege comes I counceyll the rather commit the to God than to thy sone, when
thou shalt dyspose thy goods I council theto command first that thydettes
and servants be paid, that done look thou be take not thy soul to them that
be covetous, neither to players of dyce and cards, neither to them that loves
thy person, but to them that loves their own sowles, dispose thy self before
sickness, for oftimes by sickness a man is made the servant of syckenes, and a
servant may not make a testamente. Therefore in thy lybertye make thy testamente
or thou come to bondage, if thou have an heir make him not thy executour.

Of thy sons.
Now here of thy sons: when the ^ather is deed, the sons seek deuysyon, if
they be noble better is the spredynge abroad of them in the world ^^an the
deuysyon of thy heritage, ^r oftymes the deuysyon of the he^ytage is the
dystruction of the kyndred, if they be laborers let them do what they will, if
they marchau^^es their deuysyon is better than to ^e together lest the
infortune of one ^e imputed to other.

Of thy mother.
Here now of thy mother, if thy mother seek to be married she does unwisely,
but that she weep her sins I would that she being old might take a young
man, for he shall not only cast away h^^ ^ut also her goods which done she
shall drink with the cup of sorrow, which she deserved by her dotage.

Si vis ad vitam ingredi serua mandata.
He that will to heaven surely
keep the hestes of God almighty
Thou shall have no God but one
Idle oaths swear thou none
Thy sabbath days thou must k^^^
Father and mother worship eke
Sle no man in any wise
Lechery thou shall despise
False wytnes thou shall none ber^
Stele thou nothing in no maner^
Desire you not thy neighbors wy^^
Servant ne goods in thy life.
Now follows.vij. works ghost^^
that men ought keep souerayn^^
Teache ye unlearned, and give good counsel
Comfort ye sorry and chastyse ye rebel
^orgyue unkindness, and suffer wrong
And for thyn enemies pray among
Thou shall never be sure of heaven
But you fle the deedly sins seven.
Pride, wrath, envy, and glotony.
Couetyse, Sloth, and Lechery.
Christ shall ye axe when you shall dye
Seven bodily works of mercy.
Of fedynge the hungry with the thursty.
^^othyng ye naked, lodgyng ye nedy
^^mforte ye sick and prisoners both.
(...) bury the deed, be thou not loath.
Wits five of thy body,
Must well be used or thou dye.
^n herynge, and seeing,
(...) tastying, smellyng, and touching:
But wits five specialy,
Moves men graciously.
^yll, mind, ymagynacion.
^ith understanding and reason.
^yse man if thou art
^f thy goods take thy part
^r thou hens wend.
If thou leave thy p^
For executours to depart.
Thy part shall be no part.
at the last end.
Do some good man by thy live,
Whiles thou have thy mind.
Thy children will the soon forg^^
Thy wife will be unkind.
Executours be covetous,
And take what they find.
If thou wylt not when thou (...)
They will bring the behind.
Thus ends the wise Prognostycacion.
Imprynte* by me Robert wyer: Dwelynge in Saint Martyns parysshe, in the Duke
of Suffofkes rentges, Beside charynge Cross.

Almanacke, for a. M. D. lvi.
Days. Hours. Minu. Degree. ^anua. new. xii. ii. vii ii. Aquario. full xxvii.
xix lii. xx. Leo. ^^bru. new. x. xiiii xx. i. Visets. full. xxiiii. xix.
xxxiiii. xvi. Virgo. ^arc. new. xi. o. xxiiii. i. Aries full. xxv. xii. l. xv.
Libra. ^^^yll. new. ix. viii. liii. xxix. Aries. full. xxiiii. v. xi. xiiii.
Scor. ^^y. new. viii. xvi. xxx. xxviii. Tau. full. xxiii. xix. xlix. xiii.
Sagit. ^^ne. new. vi. xxiii. l. xxvi. Gemi. full. xxii. ix. o. x. Capricor.
(...) new. vi. viii. xxiiii. xxiii. Cancer full. xxi. xx. iii. viii. Aquari.
(...). new. v. xix. xii. xxii. Leo. full. xx. vii. xxxiii. vi. Pisis. ^^^^e^.
new. iii. viii. xlii. xix. Virgo. full. ^viii, xvii, xliiii iiii, Aries. (...).
new, iii, i, v, xxx, Libra, full xviii, iii, xxxix, iiii, Taurus, ^^ve^. new,
i. xix, xxviii, xix. Scorpi. full. xvi, xiii, xxvii, iiii, Gemini, ^^^e^b.
new, i. xiiii, xxx, xix, Sagit, full, xv, xxiii. xiviii. iiii, Cancer. new,
xxxi, viii, xxxvii, xx, Capricor.

The Golden nombre. xviii. The Cycle of the Son, xxv, The Sunday letter, E.
D, Between Chri^tmas and Sroftyde, ^i, weeks and, iiii, Days, Asshe wensdaye
the, x, day of February, Easter days the, v, day of Apryll, The Ascencion
day the, xiiii, day of May, Whitsondaye the, xxiiii, day of May, Good to
take medycynes all the day in this Sign,

