AN WHOLESOME

Antidotus or counterpoysen, against the pestylent heresye and sect of the
Anabaptists newly translated out of lati^ into Englysh by John Veron, Senonoys.

Pri^cipiis obsta, sero medicina para tur
Cu^ mala per lo^gas, inualuere moras
Vidiego quod fuerat, primo sana bile vulnus,
Dilatum longae, damna tu^^sse mora*
TO THE MOST REDOVBTED, prince Edward, by the grace of god, Duke of Somer^et,
Lord Protector, of all the Kings maiestes realms subjects, and dominions
and governor of his most total person health, prosperity, e^crease of honor
and heavenly knowleg from god y^ father, through out lord and savior Jesus
Christ So bett.
THE blesed aposttle saint Paul, in y^ xx. chapter of the actys, calling
together all the senyours or prestes, at a place and town called Myletum, did
speak unto the^ after this manner Take ye head to your selfs, and to a^ the
flock, over the which, the holly ghost has put you over seers to feade the
congregation of god, which he purchasyd with his own blood for I know this
well, that after my departing, shall enter in grievous wolfes a monge you, which
shall not spare the flock. And even of your selfs, shall a rise me^ speaking
perverse thin ges, to draw dyscyples after them etc. Here, most mighty
prince, did that chose^ and elected vessel of god, describe most lively, the
wicked and perverse nature, of false and seditious herytyckes, that study for
nowght else, but to deuid and separate the church, to get unto them
disciples, to scater and dissipate the flock of y^ most bountuous sheaperde
Jesus christ, to sow discord, and teach perverse things, etc. Which thing
truly, did chance in the primatyue church, even in the times of y^ a
postelles, to the great hynderance, and let of the gosspell of Christ, for
where so ever, the apostells and dysciples of our savior, had preachyd y^
kingdom of god, and with great peane and labor, had brough: the people, from
their superstytious, and ungodly ways, in to the way of the truth: there did
break in certain false prophets, and false a postelles also, with there
perverse and hypocritical doctrine, subuertynge the minds of them, that with
joyful hearts, had received the glade tidings of saluatin^ and delyueraunce.
These ar they y^ for their bealies sake, did, as a stormy and wyndy tempest,
trouble y^ peace and unite of y^ church seki^g their own glory and promotio^,
imagynyng always myscheffe, in their hearts, how they could get unto them
selfs, by their pestiferous blandiloque^ce, and venymed flattering tongues,
most shamefully and untruly, preferryng them selfs, unto the true a postlles
and discyples of our lord) a perpetual name and memory, Against them did y^
apostelles, and speacially saint Paul (whom we may right well call the
standard bearer, of our Christen religion) writ very ernestly, calling them
antichrists, false prophets and pseudoapostills, calling them evil workmen,
enemies of the cross and passion of christ, as it appears more euydently in
the actys and in the epystylls, that they have written and sent to sondrye and
many churches, to arm and fense y^ flock of christ, against such rauenyng
wolfs. Yet not wtstondynge after the departing of the a postells, that is to
say, after y^ god had done his blessed will with them according to the commen
course of nature: these false prophets, did so preualle against the true
doctrine of christ, y^ in a manner these xii. hunderd years, few or none durst
speak the truth. For as soon as any man, by y^ inspiration and gift of the
holy ghost, did begyne in those days, to preach the gosspell, purely and
sincerely, to the great glory of god and edyfyeng of the church, defending
with the swerd of the spiritee, that libertee and fryedome, that christ with
his precious blood has purchassyd unto us (did not these hypocrites, bring
all the world in to thraldom, puttyng upon christian menes necks heauear
^urde^s of humayne traditious and ceremonial dreams, tha^ ever did the Iues
bear? which as saint Augustyne says, though they knew not the time of liber
tie, yet not wtstandyng war lodid and burdoned not with men's presumptions, but
with ye burdens of the law only?) by and by was he, as a false heriticke, or
as he that has kyllyd both father, and mother, most cruely put to death. In
so much that the yearthly princes, whom, with their abhomynabyll
dysscimulation, they had gotten on their sede, blyndynge and poyseynynge them
most subtillye and craftily, with the golden cup of ye purplyd hoar of
Babylone, thought, that they did a great sacryfyce unto god, when, with all
the tirannye that could be, for these belys sake, murdered, and persequuted
them, whom god had chose^ and sent, to show unto them, the way of truth and
salvation. But blessed be that bontuous lord, which has not suffered the
princes, whom by his divine providence, he has made and ordoned, to be
supreme governors of his church, immedyatly under him (though by y^ tyrannical
power of those false prophets, and antichrists, they ware put, by that
superyorytye a great while) to err and be deceued any longer, but did most
merciful open their eyes to look upon that comfortable son of ryghtuosnes,
and light of the truth, y^ they might, in these thyk darkenessys of this
wretched world, be gydes unto his people, to bring them out of the egypt of
ignorannycye, and so lead them through y^ parylous deserts, into y^ land of
promiscion. For the which things, we are all greatly bound, to give daily,
and hourley, immortal tha^ckes unto god, and specially that, of his bountuous,
and mere goodness he has given unto us such of noble and coragious prince which
now in his tender years, is so delegentli brought up, i^ all godlynes and
virtuous learning, that he hereafter, as a nobyll Solomon, shall with all
prudence and godly wisdom, not only shed the blood of them that did shede the
innocent blood, but also, build up, myghtely, the temple of the living god.
Which thing, as dauyd in y^ old law, so now our most vyctoryus prince.
Henrye the eyghte, the father of this, our sofuerayne lord king Edward the
syxte, would had done, if god had not dysposed otherwise, with him. But
thanckes be to god, that he has so well, prepared all things, before his
death, and that he has with y^ tow edgged sword of the spiritee, cutted a way
already, the bushes, thorns and brembles, that should had let the buyldyng of
the temple, making the ground even, by abbatynge the pride of these false a
posteles, and puttyng away, by litell and litell the rubbyshe, of ungodly
traditions and vain ceremonis. Which thing will be no, small spur, unto our
most sofuerayne lord, king Edward the syxt, to perform and bring to
prosperous, and joyful end, that, which his loving father, has begone, so
godly. And I doubt not, but now (god willing, who never for saketh his true,
and faithful servants, though, to try their faith, for a time and season,
suffers the^ to be persequuted) all things shall be done to y^, glory of
god, and great conforte of ye loving subjects, of this noble and floryshyng
realm. Among whom (as we may, easily pr^ceyue, by their dylygent and greadye
coming to the churches, when they hear of any sermon, and preaching) is fallen
now a great hunger and thrist, not of this materyall breaed, and drink, but
of the lively word of god. But alas instead, of y^ heavenly bread, y^
feadeth to everlasting life, they be deluded with blind and dome ceremones. Which
thing, I trust, not long shall co^tynew in christ's church, where ye word of
god, only should reygne, and without y^ which, purely and sincerly preached, is
no church but a de^ of thieves. Except I say these, vanytes, and pestyferous
inuetions of men: be utterly ba^nyshed a way it is more like the carnal
temple of the Iues (in whose Synagoges Moses, and the prophets war read
every Sabothe day, without fail) than the church of christ. But now, since
that it has pleased god (who lokynge mercyfully upon the affliction of his
people has sent the (...) mighty deliverer) to enhaunce, and make your grace,
not only high protector and defendour of this noble country of England, but
also a faithful ouerseer, of y^ buylding of this spiritual temple, which is
the church of the living god, that, with his precious blood, he did wash,
from all spote, blote, and macule, to tryu^phe with him everlasting life, in
his heavenly kingdom, and y^ toward the same buyldyng, as in the old law,
toward the setting up of y^ tabernacle some men did offer gold, some silver,
some precious stones, some a gain did offer purple, scarlet, and sylkes: I
thought according, to my pouer abylytye, be cause I could, offer none, of y^
above reherced things to offer at lest, either some vile gotes: skynes, or some
led, to cover this spiritual temple, and to keape, the rain, and foul
weather, from that gorgyous and goodly ornaments, that other men, according
to their rich, and pregnant wytts have abundantly offered. It is so, that
otherwhyles, for lack of good couerture, many fair, and goodli places, well
and gorgyously trym med wtin, and decked plesantly, with gold, asure, and
precious stones, do fall in short space, in to great dekaye, by reason of the
rain y^ falls in. Lykwyse if a remydye, be not provided, that the church of
god, and celestyall Jerusalem (which is now almost buyldyd up again, and
through reparated, by our godly Nehemias) may be fe^sed, against y^ tempestuous
heresis of the Anabaptists (which, where soever the truth does spryng, and
begins to come a broad, do break in, infectyng the minds, of ye rude and
simple people, with pernicious and detestable opinions) surely thereof, as before
of the doctrine of ye papists great co^uenie^tes must neades follow. Many
towns and cytyes, in Germany and in the Sussynres land, where, the word of
god did flourish goodly affore, ware clean subuertyd by this abhomynable sect.
of ye Catababtistys (for they ware called anabaptistys, because yt they ware
autors of rebaptization, or babtizyng again, and Catabaptistys, because, yt
they did speak and hold oppynyon, against the baptime of children) in so
much, yt they had almost extynguysshed the gosspell there as it is more
euydently showed, in ye works of certain famous clerks of Germany and
Heluetia Which incomoditie and hurt, that it may not chan^ce hereafter, in
this illustre and victorius realm of England: I have according to my small
learning, enterprised, to translate out of latin, in to english a litell
treaty, that ye famous clerk Henry Bullinger, has before written in the
Germanysh tongue, and after, was translatid into latin by Leo Inde, byshope of
Tigure against the pestiferous venime of the Anababtistes. Wherein the false
and pernicious oppinions of these antichrists, are so clerkely both by
scriptures, and also good learning, confuted* that it is impossible, where
such books, shallbe dilygently per^syd, and read, that this cursyd heresy
should take any place. This shallbe therefore an holso^e Antidotus or
conterpoyson against such pestilent doctrines Which I do, most humbly offer
and dedicate unto your grace, as unto him, that will, with all his might, and
godly power, see that the word of god, shallbe every where, pureiy and
sincerly preachyd, and that, as a tender father, would be full loathe also, yt
any such erroneous doctrine, should creep in, to infecte the louinge, and
faithful subjects of this realm, desiring, and most mekely besichynge
your grace, to accept this my rude labor, which I have bestowed in
translating this first book, being always ready, at your graces
commandment, to translate the other.iii. as sone, as god will give me grace,
who of his infinite bountuousenesse, preserve your grace, and all the noble
counseil of England, long to continue, in love, wealth, and prosperitee, in our
lord and savior Jesus Christ, to who^ be praise, honor and glory, world
without end.

AMEN.
By your humble and poor orator John Verone.

The first, book against the errors of the Auababtistes, divided into
dialogues, whereof, the enterloquutors are, Ioiada, who represents the true
christen man* and Simon, that takes the Auababtistes part.
How that the world, is easisy deceived, and brought to division, by fass
doctrine.

Ioiada. THat truly, which the wise men of the heathen, did complain upon,
saying that al mortal men, are exceadyng studiouse, of new things, appears
now to be true: in so much that they do suffer them selves wilfully to be
begyled, and utterly spoiled, by shameful and abominable impostours and
deceauers (so that they be commended, with hypocrisy, and vain blandiloquence
or flatteryng) although this thing (if any man, should esteem it after human
reason) is by it self, both miserable, and full of horror, yet
notwithstondyng, it owght most of all, to be lamented, among us Christen men,
which have sure and definite, short and most approved grounds or
foundacions, both of our faith and of our living, where upon, we may surely
leine, and trust, not suffryng our selves, thus to be carried about and tossed
to and fro, by such erroneouse persons. But surely, our sins, and
infidelity do deserve it, which do hear daiely the word of god, but do
not receive it, with a true heart, sekyng, I can not tell, what other thing
beside the glory of god, and true innocence of life Therefore, are we
deseruyngly given, in to a reprobate mind, and in to all kind of filthiness
and abhominacion.


Simon Lo I set the man, whom I have looked for, agreate whyll. But is it he,
in deed whom I see coming hetherward, to mete me, or not? I will speak unto
him.

God speed, most wellbeloued brother. Art thou not


Ioiada. with whom, I did familyarly live, in the city of Lions. Tell me I
pray the, how do thou? Are all things safe, or well? Or what thing,
makes the, to go, so pensyf, and troubled in thy mind?


Ioiada. As touching my self, all things ^ewell, thanks be unto god, But it
greueth me, that such great dissencions, and troubles are among Christen men.
And although such debates and strifes, be neither necessary, nor profitable,
for any manner of thing, yet not withstondyng we do see, the poor simple
people, to be, on every side entangled with the errors of the Anababtistes I
am both asshamed and sorry also, that such blyndnesse does reign, that men,
can not see, what misfortune does follow, whersoeuer these anababtistes, do
fix or set their feate. Surely, it did behoue, that they should have perceived,
and espied such things, and after that they were ones known, to shun them,
and not toswarue, as much, as the bredthe of a nail from the sure articles of
the faith.


Simon. Tell me I pray y^, if thou art a good fellow. What harms, do these
men, go about to do? for I dare say and affirm, that I have not hitherto
hard, that they have gone about any thing, that does abhor, from truth and
honesty. In the mean season I know, that many things are imputed unto them,
falsely, moreover that they be accused, and blamed in many things, which they
do not knowlage them selves, to be gylty in.


Ioia. I do hear also, that thine eyes are blinded by such men. Which if I
do, both heal and open unto the, thou will give me thanks, and remember
this benefyt.


Simon. I can not utterly blame this sort of men, for yet I have not hard,
that they have done any abhomynable thing.


Ioiada. But I will make it, manyfeste unto the. This sect did utterly subuerte
the whole city of Waltzhountum, and did cause many of the cytezens, which
were both good and ryghtfull men, to be exyled, and to be put from their
possessions. Wherefore the gospel (which did florysshe godly there) was also
outrageously extynguysshed. The which thing did almost chance, in a city,
called Vormantia. There were Anababtystes in Auguste, in Basile, and in
Morania, which did affyrmt, that Christ was but a prophet, saying that the
ungodly persons, which for their ungodliness were damned, and the dyuelles
also, should enjoy, the heavenly bless. In a town called Sanctogallus, one
of them, did smite of his own brothers head, the father of heaven (as he
said) bidding him thus to do. What abhominacion they do commytte, under
the pretense, and color of spiritual matrimony, the towns and cittees, that
did oftentimes, grievously punysshe them, for such wicked and abominable
factes, do manifestly show and testify. And this no man can denay, but that
many of them, do leave and forsake their own wives and children, yea all
office and honesty being casted a side, do live, feade, and fat them
selves, with other men's labors, snortyng both day and night, most
slougardely. And where as, they be wholely given to so foul and detestable
sensualytee, they do interpret it, to be, the commandment, of the
heavenly father, persuadyng to women and honest matrones, that it is
impossible for them, to be partakerres of the kingdom of heaven except they
do abhominabli prostitute, and make common their own bodies to all men,
sith that it is, written, that we must forsake and renounce, to all things,
y^ we love best, and that we ought to suffer all kinds of infamy, or
reproach, for Christsake, beside that, that ye publicans, and harlottes shallbe
preferred, to the ryghtwes, in the kingdom of heaven, There is no end, nor
measure of there infydelitie, and falshod, of their liyng and sedition, with the
which vices these disobedient persons are on every side infectyd. Are these, my
Simon, and other much greuoser, which I do pass over here, for the nones,
to be called virtues? Do they seem unto ye yet, to have done no dishonest
act? Or canste thou denaye, but that they have done these things


Simon. Truly many things are ascribed unto them falsely and the fame or voice
of the people, does always add somewhat unto it.


Ioiada. That, which is said hitherto, may be prouyd by sealed letters, and
with sure and infalible witnesses. I have here wittingly passed over their
abominable crimes, and have said, a great deal less, than they have done
them selves. Therefore, it greauith me the more, that men are so blind, that
they can not perceive, nor ponder in their hertes such things. But rather,
that a great sort of men, do embrace those erroneous fellows and
rennegates, eauen as, if they ware fallen, or sent done from heaven and were
saints among mortal men, which should preach, none other, but godly and
heavenly things. Where as they do pass, in filthy living the Nicolantes, and
Valentynians.


Simon. These things have been hitherto unknown unto me. And I suppose, that
they be not all pollutyd, with those filthye abhominationes. But what
skyllithe, to them, yt are good, what few among the^ Do commit? In the
hollie nu^bre of the apostelles, Judas was a traitor, and yet nevertheless
was called an apostyll. Which (I suppose) could not hurt the other. Moreover
they teach so excellent and godly things, of god, of shunninge sins, that
I can not perceive yt they be so wicked, and lewd. When they are taken, they
praise and laud god, they give thanks, when they are put to death they do
constantly endure and sustain, dyeng gladly and wyllynglie. This thou canste
not denaye my Ioiada, wherefore I would gladly, that thou had hard them as I
have.


Ioiada. I could paraduenture, bring here few things, against the except
I know well alredye, all this sort, of men and that a great while a go. But
I am not ingnoraunte, how much hipocrisye can prevail, by the means of
fraud and deceate. And as touching thine answer, thou say very well in
that, that is to wit, that the wicked fact of few, shall not harm the
innocent. But thou haste not yet proved, that the cause of the Anababtistes is
just and good, Nor thou canste not show one among them which is not
commaculate, and infected with some of these said vices I mean lyenge,
falshode, perjury, disobedience, sedicion, idelnes, forsakynge of their wives
and children, turpitude. And though all these vices do not stick or cleave to
them al at ones, yet not withstandyng are they every chone pollutid with some
of them. That in the mean season I should speak nothing of their heresy, and
sects, of their pertinacie, of their false and erroneous doctri^e. And because
thou say, that they speak much of god. I would feign know of the, whether
they, yt do preach the gospel, do not speak of god also?


Simon. This they do greatly denaie.


Ioia. In this thing truly they do wrong and injury to the preachers of the
gospel, testifiyng the contrary to the universal church, that is to say,
denaiyng, that by the gospel truly and syncerely preached the people is taught
to put their trust, in the only and true living god through Jesus Christ. In
so much that among the enemies of the gospel, it is said in manner of a
proverb, that priests do preach nothing else, but of god and faith only,
being offended, with this preaching: Man is justified by faith alone.


Sym. Truly the mattier is so.


Ioiada. Now therefore if the Catababtistes, do teach of god and faith
otherwise, surely they do blaspheame god and seduce the people. And if they
do teach, all one thing with us (for so it must be, if they do teach right,
and according to the scriptures) why do they therefore separate them selves
from us. Or is not that sufficient, that we teach, sithe that we do teach
both one thing?


Sym. There is one thing, that ye will not teach, that is to say, that they,
which are godly, should not sin at al. And again sinners are not shunned of
you Nor ye will not separate your selves, from this polluted, and wicked world.


Ioiad. We were taught by our savior Jesus Christ, that they, that are whole,
have no neade of the phisycian, but they that art sick. For the Pharisees did
obiecte the same to y^ disciples of Christ, saying: Why does your master eat
with sinners? furthermore seeing that no man lives without sin, not as much,
as the infaunt of one day: we owght not to teach, that men should not sin
at all, but rather to repent daiely and hourly, and to beware of sin, as of
a snake, and that the godly owght not to despair, if they fall, at any time As
for the sins, that are committed openly, they are so exagitate or rebuked by
the ministers of the church. Such seueritee and extreme grauitee is used in
rebukyng, that their enemies are wont to say already, that they can none other
thing, but chide and braule. Again, touching abstencion or separatyng, we do
not see that ever Christ did the same, as long as there was any hope. We do
not separate our selves, least we become like unto the Pharisees, Luc. xviii.


Simon. But sins are not forsaken.


Ioiada. And that, owght not to be imputed to the doctrine, but to them,
which do not follow the teaching. The teaching and doctrine (as thou grauntest
thy self) is wholesome, and in it, nothing is wantyng or lacking. What other
thing do then, the Catababtistes, in teaching the contrary, but show their
pertinacy and a certain syngularitee or love of them selves, whereby it comes
to pass, that nothing but that, which they do them selves pleases them? As
this, is not done, without affection, so it can not be without vice.


Simon. And yet not withstandyng, thou do not believe, how devout they are to
god, how full of constancy and grauitee, how fervently they love god.


Ioiada. I can not believe, yt this devotion of theirs is without blame, or is
sincere and pure. For they divide the church, where no neade is. For thou
can not denaie, but that god, is taught by us truly and faithfully. And that
sins are reprehended and rebuked, with great libertee and constauncie. What
do they therefore, that we do not, save only, that they do separate them
selves, from other, and are full of obstinacy? Does not Satan also
transform him self, into an a^gell of light? What merueill is therefore, if
these impostours or deceitful persons, can feign them selves, to be
sheapeherdes? They that do fisshe, do not cast a bare hook before the
fysshes, but do hyde and cover it, with some pleasant and sweet bait. And
Cato did say veary well. Whiles the byrder, the birds begyleth, The flute
alwai swetely pipeth. Nor he is not so foolisshe, as for to set or lay his net
before the birds eyes. Did not the bishop of Rome seduce us so many years,
with his peincted hypocrisy, and with his godly and dyuyne dissimulacion and
fraud? But these things are gone out of remembrance, sithe that we do, so
lightly addicte or bind our selves, to these new impostours, and hipocrites.
By what crafts, did monks get so great richesses, was it not, by flatteryng,
and hypocrisy? Was it not, by a feined sanctimony, and holiness of life? As
for that, yt they do rejoice, when they are taken, and dye gladly, with
praysyng and laudyng god, thou do so exaggerate and extol it, as though
these things (if they be done) should show and prove that their doctrine is
true, and that their deeds are good. If thou can prove that, it shall
follow, that theft and robbery, be just and good deeds also. For when they be
punisshed at the galows, or upon the whele, they do oftentimes suffer it
patiently, and moreover, do praise and laud god. Who is so folysshe, to
think, that he may thus make his argument? This man is tormented and
punisshed, and yet not withstanding, does give thanks: ergo, he is a just
man and holy. If any man, should contend, that this does follow, he must
needs to grant also, that the religion of the Iues, is most holy, yea, that
their religion only is true. For no man* does pacientlyer endure, to the very
death, for his religion, tha^ the Iues do. How many heretics were there
(think thou) which did most constantly suffer death, testifiyng, with their
ou^e blood, that they had taught the truth. Do not ofte^time robers and
traitors, which suffer death, according to their deseruyng, stiffly defend
their innocence, to the last breath? Is therefore y^ cause of such an obstacle
and desperate man, justified before god? Who does not perceive, y^ the farther
he is from repentance and confession, so much the worse he is


Simon. It is so as, thou say, nor I can not say, against it. But this is
most to be lamented, that we, which are simple persons, are so tossed and
carried to and fro, in so much, that we can not tell, what is best to be
done. The Anababtistes do say, that ye do err, and ye say again, that
they be out of the right way. After my judgment, what misery so ever, or
trouble there is, it does come of the priests. And I do think, yt there
were never so troublesome times. It were peradventure better, that I following
mine own mind, should believe, none of you al, doing al things after mine own
appetite, and wit.


Ioiada. Thou shall not do so, my Symo^, but now, learn by thine own self what
good, does come of the anababtistes and what thou have sucked of the^, for
thou do show openly, ye fruit, that is to say, desperacion, and to trust
in thy self, have thou forgotten, what god has commanded, in Deuteronomy?
saying: ye shall not do every man, y^, which seems good unto you, but that,
which y^ lord has commanded. So this pha^tasticall and new fangled men, do
entangle with them selves, other men, and cast the^ hedlyng, into all errors.
But ye your selves, are in the fault, being the autors of your one harms, for
such deceitful persons, do please you. By and by, as soon as any co^tencious
body, or some new and unaccustomed thing, does set forth his head, ye come
re^ning by troppes, and neither warninges nor prayers nor rebukes can avail
among you. And when ye be come into y^ botomles pit of misery or myschef ye
put ye fault in the overseers, which do give you warnyng before, with great
fidelity and trothe. Whose admonitions if ye would here, or rather give ears
to ye word of god preched unto you, and setforth by the^, ye might live
pesibly, sei^g therefore, yt ye cast yourselues through your onefoli, i^to such
perplexites ye have no cause to i^pute it, to y^ faithful sheapherdes, which
warned you before to beware of such things exhorting you to peace, charity, and
concord, but to your ou^e selves.


Sy. I have said y^, which I do think yet, y^ there was never a more troblous
world, who so ever ar ye autors of it.


Io. will thou know what ye mattier is? this thing do stir up sedition and
timulltie, y^ ye do make every rascal knave minister of gods word, and that
without any descretion. Beside this, thou show thiselfe utterly ignoraunte
in histories, and vnexperte of wordely things, which do scarsely know, the
acts of one age, nor doeiste not consider farther, than is at hand. If thou
had read the hollie gospelles and acts of the Apostelles, thou should
have found greuouser dissentions, which did rise of the sermons of Christ and
of his apostelles. Finally that histories are full of tumultes, which did
spryng in times paste, of the false oppinions of Marcion, Valentinus, Arrius,
Nestorius Enriches, Donatus, Pelagius, and other heretics. There were great
tumultes and rebellions, not only of cities and towns, but also of whole
realms, which were so great, yt ours owght not to be compared with them. Did
not both christ himself, and his apostels give warnyng before, that sects,
should arise? Not because, that for the^ we should be amasyd, or despair
utterly, but because, that we should ye more dilygently watch against such
pestiferous sects not only to avoid and shun them, but to resist also.
Paul does apertely say, Corin. ii. that sects must be, that they which are
faithful, may be known. For even as a sieue does not lise the corn, but
clensithe from chafe and darnell, so the wheat of faithful men, does not
perish by false doctrines, but is tried, the duste and chafe beeng sifted
out. Ihon says: They went out from us but they ware not of us, for if they
had be^ of us they truly should had remained with us. Therefore we have need of
co^staunce and fortitude or strenght, nor we ought not in^o^tine^tly to forsake
the stern but resist corageously y^ waves and storms. This co^sta^cy and
perseueraunce in the te^peste is a token that we are not light, but have
believed steadfastly and well. Tentations are signs or proves of faith and of ye
truth, and do manifest and show, how far we have believed to ye true veritee.


Sy. Thy meaning is good Saying therefore yt thou show thyselfe so friendly
toward me, and that we have bego^e ones to commone of these things: I will open
my whole mid unto ye co^fering many and sundry things with the, touching
Catababtisme or oppinio^s of y^ Anababtistes, if so be y^ thou have time and
leasyr to hear me.


Ioiada. I will gladly obey the and follow thy mind. If thou have any thing bring
it forth, i^ gods name. Sy I do meruell, if there is no good thing, in the
doctrine and oppinions of the Anababtistes. For unto me, it seems much
otherwise, yt is to say, y^ there be many things strongly grounded upon the
scriptures.


Ioiada. This is all the good, that is in it, that it caus^the a great meanye
to read the scriptures, which else would but little, study in them. As for
that which they teach well, they have it commune with us, all the resydue will
I prove to be false and foolyshe. I am minded to write hereafter against the^
wherefore I had noted against their doctrine, certain conclusions, which the
greatest part of them do hold For against such ungodly and blasphemous
re^negates, which do reiecte the scriptures, which do affirm that the
deuelles and ungodly or unfaithful persons shall obtain at length, the
everlasting life, do denaye the god head of Christ, and commite openly with
out all shame such enorme and abhomynablee acts, what neade is it to write?
But now will set in order my conclusions,


The second treaty or dialoge.
(...) conclusions against the doctrine of the Anababtistes, put here
affirmatyuely* even as Ioiada which ^^pr^senteth the faithful christen man
does hold them.

Ioiada. That spirit, which repugnith against the meaning of the spirit that
speaks in the holy scriptures, is not from the father of truth but from the
father of lies the deuell.

None of the Saints did ever by violence or force, set forth or thruste them
selves in to the commune office of a preacher, save only when they ware sent
by god, elected and chosen, by the apostells and church.

Christ and the apostels did never trouble ye church for yerthly and temporal
things, but did chiefly study to nourysshe the peace and unity of all the
churches. It appears therefore, that they, which do trouble and divide any
churches being well ordained and pacified in christ for such things, are
sedicious, liars and heretykes.

They are to be counted false prophets, which not without blasphemy and
contempt of the cross of Christ, doteache, that Christ did take away only
origynall sin, affirmyng that they, which do fail again, after that they be
ones purified, and cleansed by the water of regeneracion, shall not obtain daily
remission of their sins. They be also false prophets, y^ do attribute or
adscrib justification to our own works.

Such are blasphemous against the gospel, which do conte^d and affirm that
the souls do sleep, after this life not knowing the nature of the soul, nor
the virtue of the resurreccion of Chrfst.

Rebabtization or babtizing again, is not of god, but a new sect dividing the
unity of the church, whereby the most pestiferous, and hurtefull heresy, of
Nonatus, Anpencius and Pelagius is renewed.

THe babtime of young infantes is of god, which has been and did continue
always in the church, sens the time of ye Apostels unto this time, and not
lately brought in, by y^ bishops.

THe office or example of any christen man, co^pelleth not that we should not
have all things in common, and nothing private, or to our selves, but does
move and ^^^orage us to care, and see to our household, to exercise liberalitee
and mercy.

SVche are therefore ^poters and ^^^ules of christ's flock which d^ forsake
their familye and household, and being add^^^ed or given to sedicious fables, do
f^de them selfs, with other men's labors, being in this thing, most like
unto monks, which did the same, with their hypocrisye.

THe preachers of the gospel, or ministers of the word of god, may have
goods of their own, that is to say howses and possessions, and moreover may
live of the gospel.

THat the Anababtistes ar so envious, and do imagine al ways and forge
calumniacions and lies, who does not see that it comes of a hatered that
they have against the preachers of the gospel, that they may crepe in and
advance the^ selves, e^tenuatyng therefore the faythfulnes and fidelitee of the
sheapeheardes before the commons, because they may the better be, believed them
selves?

CHristen men, which are ryghtfully chosen, may with out any offense of god be
are rule, since that power is the mynister of god.

THis power is not only profitable, but also necessary, for christen men,
therefore we must be obedient unto it, according to the doctrine of christ,
Peter and Paul.

THey which will not be obedient to the common magistrates and rulers, or do
resist against them, doing them at any time wrong and reproach fulness, be not
christen men, but Sanlonites

They that refuse to make laufull oaths, unto the public rulers, do
manyfestlye against the will of god, being autours of sedicion, and all
dysobedience.

THe magistrate and rewler has the sword from God, wherewith he may smite the
malefactors, and shed the blud of wicked dooers, that both the malefactors
may be punysshed and the good and righteous live surely among the wicked.

THe liberty of a christen man is not carnal, they therefore that in the
gospel, do seek carnal things and fleshly, are the fellows of Simon Magus.

We do not learn in y^ gospel, that we should pay neither rentes nor tithes,
but that we ought to pay, our debtes, unto whom so ever we owe any thing.

THe administracio^ of bodily things does perte^ue to y^ magistrates and
rulers, which do christen men like, when they do after this rule: what so
every will that men do unto you, do the same unto other.

Who so ever keeps this law and rule, may be, and remain still a christen
man, though he receives both rentes and tithes.

These articles have I, here put generally, because that a great part of y^
Anababtistes do hold against them* for I know, y^ it is impossible yt any man
should rehearse al their errors since yt they be i^finit and without number For it
is no meruel yt they do fall, from one error into an other, seeing, yt they
have not ye same spirit of truth. Which thing causes yt so diverse and
contrary sects, do arise among them, that the one does condemn and
excommunicate the other.


Simon. If thou had rehearsed these articles before them, thou could not
have done it, without a (...) and sharp answer.


Ioiada. I have proved, my Simon, and that a great while a go, their poisoned,
and v(...)d hert^s, and tounges, both ready to all kind of reuyling, and
opprobriousues, and also more bitter, than is any worm wode, where by any man
may coniecte and know, of what spirit, these pha^tastical fellows do
speak. But read thou, the thryde chapter, of the epistle of saint James,
and thou shalt know that I say true.


Simon. I pray the, that thou wylt rehearse, out, of this chapter, the
things, yt most chyefly, do for our purpose,


Ioiada. These are the words of the apostel: Who is wise, and endued with
knolage among you (Let him show, by his good conversation, his works, with a
gentell wisdom. If so be, that ye have bitter envy and contencion, in your
hertes, do not ye boaste of it, nor be liers against the truth. For that
wisdom, is not connyng from above, but yerthly beastelyke, and deauelyshe. For
where tnuye and contentacion, is, there is inco^stancie and wicked works. But
the wisdom which is from heaven or from above first is chaste, after
peasible, meake, tretable, full of mercy, and of good fruits, without rache
or unadvised judgment, and simulacion Hitherto have we rehearsed the words of
James. Ponder and judge now, whether the holy Apostle, did not liuelye describe
the fashions, and doctrine of the Anababtistes. For what do they else, but ineth
and rail against other men, and that of a despitefull envy and bitterness,
oppressing the^ with prejudicial sentence, and judgment?


Sy. They promise to make an answer, before any manne, and to give a
reasonable accoumpt of their doctrine and learning.

Moreover that they will suffer them selves patiently to be convicted of error.


Ioiada. Why do they promise that which they will never perfourm? Thou thy
self haste known many (to say the truth, they do all of a pretudiciall
sentence, stiflie and with great pertinacy, stand in their own oppinions which
said, that they ware sufficiently tawght. did knoledge their error, and
offered them selves to recante, yea and did forswere their error. And by and
by as sone, as they ware come, to their complyces or fellows, they did renew
their heresee, and against their oath, and all honestye beside, did obstinatly
defend it, What should we do with such men? Paul says: Shun thou an
heretyke, after that thou have warned him o^es or twyse. Their doctrine
therefore, is a certain pertenax contention, and bitter wisdom, such as Saint
James does descrybe.


Simon. In the mean season, they will never grant, thy conclusions to be true.


Ioiada. This is, that I say they be more styfe and more obstacle tha^ does
be come any christian men, to be. But thou, that haste lived, most famylyarly with
them know well and perfitly, their foundacions, where upon they ground them
selves.


Simon. No Anababtyst better.


Ioiada. I would therefore, my Simon. that thou should now dispute against my
conclusions as the Anababtistes are wont to do but without stomach and
conte^cion I will endeavor my self to corroborate and streingthen them with
holy scripures, and to prove that they be true.


Sym. Be it as thou say. For I desire to be taught. Thou shalt have me
also obediente. so that I may understand and perceive yt thy doctrine and
teaching is true.


The third treaty or dialoge.
How that the spirit, which repugneth against the spirit, that speaks in
the scriptures, is not from the father of truth, but from the father of lies
the deuels.

Simon. First and foremost, I do meruell, what moves the, to put this
conclusion where as after mine oppynion and judgment, it is no need, thereof.


Ioiada. But, it seems unto me, to be very necessary. For many of the
Anababtistes, do boaste, I can not tell, what spirit, and father, against the
manifest scriptures. For when they perceive them selves, to be over comed,
with holy scriptures, and so holden in that they can, by no way escape: by
and by, they cry out, saying that the spiritee, teaches them, an other
thing, that is to say, either to hold their peace, or to speak forth some
tryflyng matter* and that they be, neither subject, ne bound to the litterall
sense, or letter. In the which thing, they do no less err, than the
doctoures of the bysshope of Rome, which in matters of faith, will not admyt
the scripture to be judge, but refer al things, to their interpretation and
spiritee. Is not this an high blasphemy, that a sinful man should presume,
to sete him self judge, over the word and will of god? asthough he ought not,
to be obedient unto it, except, he were moved, with his own spiritee, and
mocion, to reiecte, or receive it. I hard ones a papiste doctor, openly in a
disputacio^, say: that we, which teach the gospel, do teach the truth,
and did allow our teaching veary well, but that he could not, nor durst
subscribe unto it, exrepte our teaching were adprobated and allowed, by the
bisshoppe of Rome. Behold my Simon, what abhominacion is this, that a mortal
man should take upon him, to adprobate, and allow, the divine and heavenly
veritee? and set him self judge over god? Therefore have I put this conclusion
in the forefront because that the Anababtistes, do for y^ most part, boast
and advance their spirit, under such pretense, deceiuyng the simple and rude
people.


Simon. Does not Paul teach this, that the letter, does kylle, and the
spirit viuifieth or does quieken? ii. Corin. iii And Christ does say. Joan.
xiiii. The spirit shall teach you all truth. It is spoken by the lord also,
Hieremy. xxxi. Every man shall teach no more his neighbor, saying: know thou
the lord, but all shall know him, from the lowest, to the highest: Finally,
John does say: It is no need, that every man do teach you, but as the
unction teaches you of all things which is true and is no lie. What can
thou say, against so manyfeste scriptures?


Ioiada. To the words of Paul I aunsweare thus: That Paul speaks there of
the law, which kylleth us, as he does declare more apertly in the.vii.
chap. to the Romans. And by the spirit, he understands faith, and the
consolacion or comfort of the gospel. That, it is so, the text of the whole
chapter does testify. Therefore this place helps nothing your error. For
when we speak of the word of god we do not understand the bare and dead
letter, or void sonnde of it. but the word well and truly vnderstonded, and
as it is, in veary deed.

And as, for that, that Christ does promise a spyrite unto his dysciples,
teaching them all things, we do admytte and believe it. But that spyrite
can not be contrary to Christ, nor teaches any other thing, than Christ
has taught Therefore does he add, by and by: teaching you, what so ever, I
have said unto you. What do, these things perteyne, to the spirit of the
Anababtistes, which teaches contrary things to the spirit of Christ.

The prophecies of Joel, and Hieremye, are vnderstonded of that same spirit,
that Christ does both promise and give to his disciples, as it is
evidently seen, in the second chapter of the Acts, and the eight, to the
Hebrews. John, in his epistell, when he speaks of the vnctyon, does
plainly expound him self, saiynge: I have written unto you, that ye be not
deceived (or that, ye do not suffer your selves to be brought in to error)
which thing, will then come to pass, if ye do stedfastely abide, in the
doctrine of the spirit, which ye have hard at the beginning, and swerve not
at all, from it. The holy ghost is the spirit of truth, which can neither
lie, nor repugne against him self, being all ways constaunte, unchangeable,
every where, like unto him self.

Now, no man can denaye, but that the same everlasting, unchangeable, and holy
spirit, has inspyred the holy scriptures in to holy men's hertes and minds.
Whereby it follows necessarily, that the same spirit, which speaks against
the meaning of the spirit, that does speak and express him self in the
divine scriptures, is not of god, but rather an human main affection,
which, if it be styffe, may be deseruyngly called, a deauelysshe spyryte,
as Christ does prove against the Iues. John. viii. Or can thou think, in
thy mind, that spirit to be good, which contemns the clear, manyfeste,
pure and holy scriptures? and when by them, he is convicted of error, does
boste an other spirit, which should teach clean contrary things? Is not
this to despise y^ spirit of y^ scriptures, and to repugne against him? As
though our spirit means truly, and the spirit of the scriptures most
falsely? Where have the Anababtistes learned, to set their spirit against y^
scriptures, yea and prefer him, to the holy word of god?


Simon. But who has given you this libertee, to judge al things after the
litterall sense or letter?


Ioiada. That, we do not, as thou do interpret the letter. But we say,
that the word of god, contained in the scriptures of the Bible, is a touch
stone, whereby spirits are tried. For what spirit so ever does agree with the
scriptures, is of god, the father of truth. And again what spirit so ever is
contrary to the holy scriptures, is of the dyuelle, the father of lies. Seeing
therefore, that the spyrite of the Anababtistes, will not be ruled by the holy
scriptures, but prefers him self, to the word of god (calling by craft,
the word of god, a bare letterre) yea and set set him self judge over it,
he cannot be of god. For if he were of god, he would come to light and speak
that same thing, that the holy ghost does speak in all the holy scriptures.
But now, since yt he does not depend of the scriptures, but will be at his own
liberty, it is a token that it is a craft and subtlety of the deuell, which
does always scatter and repugne against god.


Sy. Thou speak these things mightily and stronglye, but without the word
of god. And this is your familier custom, to speak many things without
scriptures. As touching the spirit, what he techeth, I have brought and
alleged places and testimonies out of the scriptures. But that the spirit
ought to be tried by scriptures, or rather ma^cipated and bound unto them, and
not be at his own liberty, it is thy part for to prove. Or peradventure thou
do prefer the creature unto the creator.


Ioi. What, and if I should say also: My spirit has taught me this thing.
What could thou do or say unto me?


Sym. But that is not to answer.


Ioi. Nor ye do not answer sufficiently, when ye bost your spirit, without or
against the scriptures. But in this thing we do learn, that when it pleases
you, ye use the scriptures, and again when ye see to be expede ent, ye boaste,
and advance your spirit. When I affirm that the spirit must be tried by the
scriptures, I do not mancipate nor subdue the creator unto y^ creature, but I
will that the thing which is uncertain, be tried and proved, by yt, which is
certain, and that any spirit, be tried, by the holy spirit of god, that is to
say by the scriptures, whether he agrees with him self or not. And if he be
like every where unto him self to be received, if not, to be refused and
rejected, as false and deceitful. But when ye speak of the spirit, ye do
understand a bare creature. For your spirit is not the holy ghost, but a
carnal affection.


Sy. Ye do yet without any scriptures of the Bible enhaunce and magnify, the
letter.


Io. Not so, but rather, we here ground ourselves, both upon ye scriptures of
god, and upon examples.


Sy. Show therefore, yt the truth, must be tried, by the scriptures, and not
rather with a fre spirit, without scriptures.


Io. By thy words, do I perceine, what thing does begile you, that is, yt
ye do sever these.ii. things, being united and inuisebly knitted together, yt
is to say, the spirit and the scriptures, which can nor ought to be separated
asunder, the one from ye other. For when we name ye scriptures, we do
understand ye expressed word of yt spirit. For as ye voice, or sound of ye
word, can in no wise be separated, from ye lively breath of ye living creature
So ye scriptures can not be divided from ye spirit yt inspireth the^ for ye
scripture, is ye expressed will of god, but now will I bring ye testimonies and
places with thou requirest, our lord Jesus Christ, unto whom ye heavenly father,
did give witness from heaven, and who has received the holy ghost, after no
measure, did not despise ye sciptures, in so much that he did corroborate all
his sayings, by them only, and did command that the Jews should try both
his words and factes, by the scriptures. Ihon. v. and Luke xvi. He bids
them to lift up their eyes to Moses and the prophets, and not to apparaunte
spirits. He reprouyng also the Saduceis, did show that this was the cause of
their error, be cause that they were ignorant in scriptures, or neglected
them Mark.xii. The Apostles (as we may understand by the book of the Acts)
did receive abunda^tly in the beginyng, the holy ghost and that by a sertaine
visible toke^. And yet not withstandyng, did they not therefore forsake or
conte^ne ye scriptures, nor boste their spirit against the^. But rather did
prove and strengthen all their sermons, with the word of god preaching nothing
else, but the pure and plain scriptures. These things are euydently proved, by
the epistels of Peter. John does plainly show and teach that the spirits
owght, to be tried, whether they be of god or not.i. Io. iiii. Whereby, it is
euydent enowgh, that spirits owght to be tried, and that they be not so free,
as the Anahabtistes will have them. And how they must be proved, it is
manifestly declared in yt place. Paul which was rauisshed, in to the third
heaven, and did learn his gospel of Jesus Christ, being him self, the chosen
vessel of god, full of the holy ghost, and heavenly wisdom, never the less
before the king Agrippa, he does testify, that he did teach nothing beside
Moises, and the prophets. Act. xxvi. In the epistell to the Galathians, ye
first chapter, he says thus: if I, or an angel of heaven, should preach unto
you, any other thing, then ye have hard, let it be anathema, or acursed, He
also warnyng and teaching Tymothe, that be should beware of false and
erroneous doctrines, did direct and send him, to the redyng of scriptures.
But read thou the iii. chapter of the second epistell, to Tymothe, and it
shall appear, what we owght to judge and think of the Anababtistes sect, what
of the spirit, and of the scriptures.


Sy. That place, is known well enowghe, and I am almost persuaded. But this
vexed my mind, that Paul says that a spiritual man, judges all things,
but he is judged of no body.


Ioiada. I long to know of the, of what spirit, Paul does speak there.


Simon. But I have leauer to hear it, of the


Ioiada. Considre the words, yt go before. For he says thus: We have not
received the spirit of the world, but the spirit, which is of god, that we may
know what things, have been given unto us by Christ.


Simon. But to what purpose did Paul speak here, of the holy ghost.


Ioiada. I ask of the, wheather yt same self spirit did not inspyre the
scriptures.


Simon. Truly, that same self spirit.


Ioiada. Seeing therefore, that it is all one, and both the same spirit, that
Paul speaks of here, and that which speaks in the scriptures, have I not
proved, that Paul, by a spiritual man did not understand him, which boasts,
I can not tell, what spirit, despisyng in the mean season the scriptures, but
such a spiritual man, as is and will be ruled and governed by the holy ghost,
that way, that he shows and expresses him self, in the holy scriptures? He
therefore that strives against the holy scripture and inspiracyon of the holy
ghost, can not be that spiritual man, whom Paul does speak of. Now, if he
be not spiritual, he can not judge, but he must be judged. The Anababtistes
therefore can judge nothing, but ought to be judged and tried, by the word of
god. Has not here the spirit of the Anababtistes lost both his win ges? But
I do remember other ii. places, which do utterly stop the mouths of the
Catababtistes. The first is, in the.x. chapter of the Acts, touching
Cornelius the centurion, which although he was elected by god, yet not
withstandyng, being so tawght by the angel, did send messangers, to fetch
Peter, yt he migh hear by him, the preachi^g of our savior Jesus christ. If
that, the spirit should disanulle and abolisshe the scriptures, it should
follow, yt this outward preaching and such like things, were done in vain. The
other is in the.xvi. chapter, concerning the Thessaloniens, which after that
they had hard the preaching of Paul, did daily seek and search the
scriptures, to know, wheather Paul did teach true or not. Which thing, they
would not have done, if the spirits should not be tried by the scriptures
wherefore what so ever the Anababtistes do teach concerning this thing, is
false and erroneous, and not unlike unto the error of Montanus.


Sym. What monstrous thing is yt?


Ioiada. This Montanus about.xiii. hundred years a go, was a great heretic,
who did almost speak of the spirit, as the Anababtistes do. For they do call
in again, the old and abolisshed errors, as it shall appear hereafter.


Sym. Go forth I pray ye, and let us discuss the arguments of the second
conclusion. For I can not believe that none of the saynttes (which thing thou
do affirm stiffly) did thruste them selves, into the office of common
preachers, except they were called. What other thing is this, but (as the
bishop of Rome has done in times paste) to hyde the truth from the commons,
that none, save only they, that are learned, dare speak and talk of it?
Where as, not withstanding, god did manifest him self to the littell ones and
not to the wise. Matthew. xi.


Ioiada. I will do it gladly, but I will first confute that, which thou
bryngest of the learned, and of the simple. For it is not convenient, that I
should pass over these things unspoken, sith that therewith ye do blind the
eyes of the simple and rude people.


The.iiii. treaty, or dialoge touching simplicitee and erudicion.
Simon. IS this, to blind the eyes of the simple, and rude people, Christ him
self, did say so, when he gave thanks unto his father, because y^ he has
reuelated and showed such high, godly and divine mysteries, not to the wises,
but to the litell ones, and to the simple. Ma. xi. And again, he did not chose
learned men but simple and idiots, to be his apostels.i. Cor. i. Therefore we
have no need of great learning, but the simpler that any man is, the more apt
is he, to this office.


Ioiada. It is manifest and evident, that ye understand not the words of
Christ. For if by the simple, he should understand them, that lack wisdom
and learning (for so ye expound the words of Christ) truly no man should be
more apt, than fools and diserdes, which be in deed ignorant in all manner of
things. But every man does see, that it is against al reason, to think any
such thing. Therefore Christ understands by simplicitee an other thing.


Simon. Tell you what it is.


Ioiada. He is called a simple man, not he that is without wit, without
reason and wisdom, but he which is plain and sincere, and without fraud, he
which is good, and true inwardly in his heart, being without craft and
deceit. Else it would come to pass, that every man should defend his
error, by ignorancie. Which thing, what could be else, but a carnal malice
or libertee, whereby every man would begin and go about, to boaste and set
forth hs ignorancie, and therewith to defend his errors? Who did ever see,
such temerarious audacitee, as these shameful rennegates do use? that with
their ignorancie and rudeness dare defend any thing? By ignorauncy truly,
errors are detected, and not confyrmed.


Simon. Yet, the apostels were ignorant and unlearned, nor we do not read,
that Christ did choose any that were learned.


Ioiada. Truly they were endued with such simplicitee, as we have spoken of
before. But they were not unlearned and ignorant. For they were familiarly
co^uersant with Christ, above three years, with Christ, I say, in whom are, all
y^ treasures wisdom of and knowlage, yea, which is himself, yt eternal wisdom
of y^ heavenly father. Of this fountain dra^ke they abundantly, by this
master, were they instituted and tawght, and at length were so endued, and
illuminated with the holy ghost that they were ^unnynge in all tongues and
scriptures. That may be seen, both by their writyngs and also by their acts.
As for that, that thou denaiest, y^ christ did call none, which were learned,
do thou not repugne here against y^ manifest truth? Paull was excedyngly
well learned.

Barnabas, Gamaliell, Nicodedemus, and Apollo y^ Alexandrian were great
clerks. That in the mean season, I should pass over all the other, that is
to say, Moises, which was learned in all the sciences of the Egipcians
Steauen, Esaie, Timothe, look better upon the.xiii. chap. of the first epistel,
to the Corinthians, and upon the first chap. of the epistell, to Citus, and
thou shall find what erudicion and learning an ouerseer or bisshoppe ought to
have. Therefore, these arrogant and presumptuous Anababtistes, can not excuse
nor defend, their impudent ignorancie, by simplenes, but that it is already
manifest unto the world yt they are given into a reprobate sense, as they, that
be not ashamed, to boast, and to set forth unto all men, their ignorancie, instead of good learning, as though children, do not smell already, their craft
and subtiltee. But in y^ mean season, no man ought thus, to interpret our
sayings as though we should speak here, of them, that are falsely, called
learned men. For we speak of such, as have been taught, by god and to the glory
of god. Of whom, there were many, in the primitive church, as Pa^tonus,
Tertulian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Augustine, and many other.


Sy Thou speakeste, with good reason. For we ought not to think that Christ
did commend such simplicitee, whereby the vnconnynger that a man is, the bolder
he should be. As many, which though they can scarsely read y^ vulgar tongue,
yet not withstandyng, do without shame, ingerate and thrust them selves, in to
y^ office of preachers, stamering most foolysshely in the common pulpit, But
because they should not be found to be ignorant, in some thing: they begin
first to excuse their ignorancie, with such words. Be not ye offended,
obretherne, that I am ignorant and unlearned. For the father, does manifest
him self to the simple and unlearned. Finally, seeing that Christ, does
promise, to his disciples such wisdom, and eloquence, that their
adversaries, should not be able to withstond it (where as, on the contrary
part, these men do reckon their ignorancie, to be a glorious thing unto them)
I may easily perceive, that these are not such simple persons as Christ does
speak of, but rather such, as do clothe them selves, in sheapes skins,
faining them selves, to be sheapes, but inwardely, within their hertes, are
rauenyng wolves. But now, I pray the, to take that away quickly, which
offends me in the second conclusion.




The.v. treaty or dialoge.
Of the vocacion and office of preachers, against them, that ingerate them
selves being uncalled.

Ioiada. AS for that, that thou gatherest, by this conclusion, y^ so, it should
not, be iaufull for every man, to speak and talk of god, thou go far out
of the way, and do not un derstond my sayings. I speak of common
preaching, and not of private communicacion or talk. For he that takes upon
him to be a common preacher, not being called, does raven as he, that makes
him self, by his own authoritee, a king or governor, making and calling
together a particular Senate or counseill, and begins thus, of his own
head, to rule and administrate the common welthe, commanding, and forbiddyng
what so ever pleases him. Truly, no man, can do this, but yt he shall be
accused, not only of folishenesse and disobedience, but also of tumultee, and
high treason. Else, we do not denaie, but yt every man may talk of god, yea
and may sing of him, according to ye doctrine of Paul.iiii. Ephesy. And the
more, yt it is done, the better we allow it. But to separate him self from y^
church to seek woods and corners, and there to assemble a company, to institute
and ordein sects and to take upon them selves, being uncalled, and unsent, the
office of preachers: not only, it has no example, in y^ holy scriptures, but
has been judged and condemned alwais as heretikall. But we will now,
corroborate and strength these sayings, with holy scripture. In the epist. to
the Romans x. chap. Paul teaches after this manner: who so ever calls upon the
name of the lord, shall be saved. But how can they call upon him, in whom they
have not belued? and how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not hard?
And how can they hear without a preacher? And again how shall they prea: the,
except they be sent? By these words of Paul, we may perceive, that sendyng
is veary necessary, which does not equally pertain unto all men. For
Paul.i. Corin. xii says, that there be many gifts. And eauen as the body is
one thing, and has many lymmes, which lymmes, though they belong all to one
body, yet nevertheless, have not all own office, in the body, so it is in the
church, and mystical body of Christ. God did put and ordeyne some, in the
church, to be apostels, some to be prophets and interpretours of scriptures,
some to be teachers, some to be potestates and rulers, sum to have the
gifts of healynge, sum to minister to the poor, sum to govern, and sum
again to have the knowledge of tongues. If so be, that the office of teaching,
should equally perteine unto al men: Paul would have said, that god had
ordained all, to be prophettes, and teachers, but he says: he has ordained
sum to be apostels. etc. Why dare then the Anababtistes presume so much, as
for to set them selves forth, by their own autoritee, to preach and to teach,
against the doctrine of Paul? Hebrews.v. No man (says he) does usurp, or
presumptuousli take that honor unto him self, but he, which is called by god,
as Aaron, so christ did not glorify him self to be made bisshoppe, but he
that said unto him. Thou art my son and to day have I begotten the. And in
an other place: Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchysedecke.
After this manner does John Babtiste, testifye of the mission and sendynge of
Christ in the first, and third chapter of John. And of his own sendyng,
does he him self speak, in the.i. cha. of John, saiynge: There was a man
sent by god, whose name was John when he was also asked, by what authoritee he
did teach and babtize, he did bring forth out of Esaie and Malachie, a
testimony and witness of his mission and sendyng. So the Apostelles were both
called and sent, as it appears, by the x. and.xxviii. of Matthew, by y^ last
of Mar. and.xx. of Io. Paul does testify in y^ beginning of his epistels,
and specially in the epistell to y^ Galathia^s, that he was called. In
the.xiii. of the Act. he with Barnabas, is segregated by the holy ghost and
sent to preach. In Moises also, and in all the prophets their mission and
sendyng is manifested. But against them that do run, being not called, and
without sendyng do preach, in the.xxiii. of Hieremy, the lord speaks thus
They did run, but I sent them not. Therefore, I do think, that this
conclusion is sufficiently proved, and that it is manifest enough, that the
Anababristes do not in this thing, behave them selves well and godly, which,
thowgh they be not called, doingerate and thrust them selves, in to the office
of preachers Which thing (as we do read) was never done by none of the
Saints.


Simon. All this that thou have brought, does nothing against the
Anababtistes For they say, that they be sent, by the father, and by the holy
ghost.


Ioiada. To what thing or for what purpose. Symo^. To teach the truth, to
preach of god, and to rebuke sin. Ioiada. It is proved before (as thou thy
self haste granted) that we do, the same thing, in those places, where the
gospel is preached. What need have we then of this mission, and sendynge of
the Anababtistes. To these places where the gospel is preached, god does not
send men to plant and set errors, to move sedicion, and to teach contrary
doctrine, to the truth, to separat and make division in the church. But the
Anababtistes, do all these things, therefore, they be not sent by god. For
god, is not the god of dyssencion, but of peace, and concord,.i. Corin. xiiii.


Simon. They say always, that they be sent of god.


Ioiada. They do say so in deed, but not truly. For Satan can transform
and transfigurate him self into an angel of light ii. Corin.xi. but he is not
therefore a good angel.


Simon. Is it not written in the.iix. cha. of John, that he, which is of god
speaks the word of god? the Anababtistes do preach the word of god,
therefore, they be sent of god.


Ioiada Arrius did preach the word of god. That is to say, the father is
greaterthan I am, ergo he was sent by god.


Simon. Not so.


Ioiada. Is not this the word of god, the father, is greatterthan I am?


Simon. He did preach the word of god being falsely vnderstonded, wrethyng
and wrastynge the scriptures, ergo he was not sent, of god.


Ioiada. The Anababtistes do the same, the refore they be not sent by god,
though, they do never so much boast and crake, that they do preach the
truth and word of god. Which thing, all the heretics did before, and Satan
also does usurp the word of god, Matthew.iiii. but it follows not, that he
is sent by god. That saiynge, which thou have brought out of the.iii. chapter
of John, perteyneth only to Christ, who because y^ he was come from god,
has perfect knowlage, of divine and heavenly things. Which thing John
Babtiste, goes about to prove to his disciples.


Simon. The Anababtistes do say, that ye do deprauate the scriptures.


Ioiada. It skylleth not what they say, which are nothing shamed to lie, as
it shall manyfestly appear hereafter. For sithe that by this authoritee taken
out of the. iii chapter of John, and applied to Christ alone, they adscribe
unto them selves that, which belongs to Christ only: who does not
perceive and see, that they be enemies of the truth. We know, what sklanderous
words they do vomit out, and speak against us, calling us thieves, robbers,
Antichrists, false prophets, and seductors. We do impute this to the
weakness of the flesh, and forbear for Christ's sake. We might clear our
selves, if need were, and prove that they do beelye us. But so they have need
to prove, y^ they be sent of god, by other things the^ by sklanderous words
and railinges.


Sy. I can not say none other, but that I have hard them say, that they are
sent of god.


Ioiada. No doubt there is, but that they be ignorant, and know not, which
way, god does call, and what are the tokens and signs of vocacion and
sendyng. For they, that are called and sent of god, are manifested by certain
tokens and signs which do follow, that it may appear, that they be truly
called and sent either by miracles, or by manifest vocacion and sendynge, but
specially by dexteritee or aptenesse, integreted of life, constauncy and
steadfastness, erudicion and learning, worthy such sendynge and vocacion.


Simon. what, and if ye do feign all this, without scriptures?


Ioiada. I will prove all, that I have said by the word of god. A littell
before, that Christ did depart from his apostels, he did send them, unto the
world, to preach the gospel, unto all cretures, but before, yt they should
take in hand this office, they should tarry a while in Nierusalem till they
were endued with grace from above. For he did promise unto them, to send the
promised spirit and comfort our of the father upon them. And after, that they
had ones received the holy ghost, with it, they did receive, the knowlage of
all sciences, speches, and tongues. Luc. xxiiii. Act. ii. when Moises did draw
back, and did bring many excuses, knowledgyng him self, to be without
utterance, vneloquent, chyldisshe, and unmeet for that office, that god would
have sent him to: the lord, did promise, that he would be in his mouth, as, he
did also promise to his apostelles, such mouth and wisdom, that no man
should be able to resyste against it. Matthew.x. Paul writynge to Tymothe
and Titus, concerning the election of bysshoppes, requires such one, as, is
apt to teach, able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, which can reuycte, and
confound them, that resyste and withsaie the truth.i. Timothe, iii. Titus.i.
There Paul does forbydde, that none of them, which were newly converted,
should be admitted to the office of a preacher. Netherto, have I brought
places and testimonies out of the scriptures, touching the learning, that ought
to be in an ouerseer or bishop. Now shall we hear, what the scriptures do
testify and witness concerning the miracles of them, that are sent. We do
therefore allege here the wonders, that Moses did show, in Egypt and other
innnmerable signs, and tokens, that be written in the Acts, the manifest
imposicion of hands, and that they did receive the holy ghost visebly.
Moreover that they, which be sent, ought to be laufully elected and chosen by
a common assent, we do dryng the first chapter of the Attes, upon the
election of Mathias the vii. and.xiii. of the Acts upon the election of Steven
Paul and Barnabas. The.xiii. chap. also of the Acts does manifestly show,
that Paul and Barnabas, when they had created, through all the churches by a
general election priests or seniours, laiyng their hands upon them, and had
made their prayers with fasting, did commit them unto the lord, in whom
they had believed. Now thou see, my Simon, that in y^ times of the Apostels.
every man did not rasshely advance nor set for the him self to preach. For
if it had been so, what should have neaded any election, and imposicion of
hands? But election was made after prayers and fasting. The same is also
written in the epistell to Titus.


Sy. What, and if thou fyndest all such things, among the Anababtistes?


Io. Not y^ less jot, of al y^ above rehearsed things, ergo they are not sent
by god, but se^sualitee and ipmpudent boldness, did impell and move them.
For, what miracles do they? except, these are, to be called miracles, that
they, with their pernicious doctrine, do bring men, out of their right, and
godly mind, in to stark madness, or, that they, make the gammons, and legs
of bakon, hanging in the larders, of the simple and poor people, invisible?
What learning, should we look for, where rudenes, and (as they do speak
themselves) simplicitee, is taken for high rudicion? I do pass over here,
many of them, which can scarcely read, yea and what will ye say of them, y^
can read no manner of thing Are not these, y^ neophites (by y^ neophites, I
mean not only them, that are newly converted, but such as do lack learning)
that Paul do reiecte? But they promote them, that by all their lives time, did
never read the Bybles, having only in readiness, certain sentences, not
vnderstonded, which being, either plucked out, of al parts of scripture, or
stolen, or else borrowed, of their gydes and leaders, they do wrethe, wrast and
turn to contencion, with all maledicence, and reuilyng. And so, stondyng among
the simple people, have alwais in their tongues ends, y^ father of heaven and
the spirit. What name, my Simon, may conveniently, be given unto them? I may
not call them apostels, for they are not sent, by god. Again, they do not
preach where nothi^n has been yet preached of god but where y^ people, has been
a long season, and with the great labor of the true and faithful ministers,
taught the way of truth there do they break in, destroiyng, peruertyng,
and, as a storm or tempest, stirryng up, all things, making the commons so
perplexed, and doubtful, that they know neither end nor beginning. If any
man, should call them prophets and expositours of the scriptures, it were
none other thing, but to call a filthy swine, an excellent and cunning
Musician. For they are ignorant in all manner of tongues, in so much, that they
do contemn them, being content with y^ vulgar tongue only, If thou call
the^ doctors, they know nothing less, than the right way and trade of
teaching, Besides, that they want the truth, which is chiefly required in a
teacher. But paraduenture, they will be called bishops and sheapherdes. Why do
y^ lack then al such excellent gifts, as Paul requires in a teacher or
bishop In so much that they be unlearned, striuers, contencious and rude
neophites? Briefly they have nothing, that perteine to y^ office of a teacher.
Whereby any man may perceive, that the Anababtistes, are such, as do send
them selves, being perplexed, sedicious debatefull, and ambitious heretykes.


Sy. They be both chosen, and sent.


Ioi. By whom?


Sy. By their church Moreover, one brother, does lai his hand upon y^ other,
giving him full power and autoritee.


Io. This sendyng, and election, makes me, to remember y^ bishop of Rome, for
after, that the bishop of Rome, did ones get and pourchasse unto him self,
thorowgh disobedience, tirannie and pernicious craft, such great power: by
and by, did he promote to bisshoprykes, every mule keeper, bawdes and blody
souldyours* But, who did teach them, to sever and divide the church, being
united, and glued with faith, and charitee? seeing that there is but one God,
one faith one babtyme, and one church? Who has sent the authors of this
sect, to make and congregate a new church? Truly, amulacion, envy, strife,
contencion, auaryce, ambicion, and stiff pertinacy. I could well and
sufficiently prove all these things. except, I should here wittyngly, spare
some people. Their Church therefore, is not the Church of God, but a certain
sect, and congregation of styffenecked and disobedient people, among whom,
there is no more just election, then is in the company of rebels and
traitors, which forsakyng their own prince or governor, do retchely, and
without aduisement choose, this man or that man, to be their Captain. But let
us grant, that it is a Church, yet not withstandyng, they err in election,
which is not used among them, according to the precepts of the apostle,
Donatus, did gather a particular Church. Nonatus likewise, and both in
Africa. And yet not withstanding, none of them both, was called or sent by
god. And their Church also, were no Churches, but conuenticles or assembles of
Heretics.


Simon. What thynkest thou by the saying of s, Paul.i. Corin. xiiii. where he
does give free liberty, unto all men to preach, or interpret the Scriptures.


Ioiada. I am of the same self opinion, that Paul is: Two or three (says he)
may speak in the church: Let the other hear and judge. Finally, if it be
reuelated to an other syttyng by, let the other hold his peace.

And by and by it follows: For ye may al prophecy, one after another, that
all may learn and have cousolacion.


Simon. By these words, it appears. that Paul does not give liberty to
every man, to preach what he lists, when he names ii. or.iii. and byddeth
the other to hear, and to give attendance to that that the Prophets (in the
new Testament, such, as do expound the scriptures are called Prophets) do
expound and set furthe out of the scriptures. Nor he does not give lysence to
the hearers, to interrupte the sermons of the Prophets, except it be, when
any thing is left or peruersly expounded by the Prophet, or interpretor. By
this, it follows, that it is not semely ne comely, that any man should
interrupt, if the truth be sufficiently enucleated and showed, much less,
that any man should, under such pretense and color sewe in, or bring in his
errors. I do see and perceive, that the effect of the matter does consist,
in this thing: If it be necessary, if any thing be omitted and left, by them
that are Prophets, that ought not to be omitted, or which being left,
may do harm: and again, which being showed, may edifi the church, that
then it may be showed unto them, by any man, but that, with all sobrenesse and
charity. If nothing be wanting or lacking, all the audience to hold their
ptace.


Ioiada. Thou take the right sense of it. For it follows by and by: The
spirit of the Prophets, is subject to the Prophets. For God is not the
auctor of confusion, but of peace. The Holy ghost does not break forth
rashely, and with affection and strife, but is treatable: nor he does not
styffely contend for every light matter, but suffers him self to be
instructed, and taught: and so gives easily place, to him that has better
understanding. But the Anababtistes are far from al such things, boastyng
nevertheless a spirit, but as Judas did boast his Apostleship: sayut James,
did not without a cause, warn us, saying: Let not many masters be among you,
knowing that we shall receive greatter dampnacio^ or judgment, that is to
say: we that are teachers.


Simon. But here thou haste brought me into a greter dout: For now I ask the:
Whether of them two* is greatter, the Prophet. unto whom the spirit is
subject, or the spirit? If thou say, that man is gretter, then the spirit,
beware that thou do not attribute to much to a mortal and frail man. If
the spirit is higher, how can that thing, which is gretter, be subject to a
thing, that is less. If so be, that thou preferrest the spirit unto men, and
again will have the saying of Paul to be true, I do not perceive, by what
reason it can stand. Or how can a man be greatter, then the Spirit, which
makes him a Prophet?


Ioiada. Thou dooest ask right well this question. But it is to be noted,
that Paul does not here take the spirit for the holy ghost, which is the
third person in trinity, but for the gift and operacion of the spirit of
God. The sense and meaning of this place, is therefore, that the gift of
prophecy, is so in the power of the Prophet, that has it, that he may both
speak, and hold his peace, in the congregation of the saints, when, and as
long, as it is expedient for the hearers. For they are not so instructed and
moved, with the spirit, as mad, and fantastical men are, that they should
all cryout at once, with an unseemly clamor, murmuryng one against another,
with a debatefull contencion and strife: For so, one could not understand
another. The spirit of God is gentle, treatable. and peasable, not stirrynge
or mouyng any man to contencio^, and debate, but to peace and unity. Wherefore
he says: ye may Prophecy all, one after another. To the which exposicio^,
Theophilactus, agreith, interpretynge this place, after this manner: The
spirit, that is to say, the grace of the holy ghost, which is in thee, the
operacion or workyng, that has invaded thee, is subject to the gift or grace
of another man, which is moved to Prophecy, that is to say, does give place
and hearing. But now, if thou be so pleased, let us go about the third
Conclusion.


Simon. I am well content, begin thou.


The. VI. Treatise or Dialogue.
Of the Unity of the Church, against the Sects of the Anabaptists.

Ioiada. IChynke, that thou wylt say nothing against the third conclusion: For,
what can be said more truly, then that Christ, and his Apostles, did always
congregate, or assemble the Church, and that they did never tumultuate or move
sedision, for outward and temporal things. Or is there any man, that can say
the contrary?


Simon. I will show him unto the by and by, that is to say, Christ, which does
say: I am come, not to bring peace, but the swoorde.


Ioiada. Thou dooest writhe and wrest the words of Christ: For he speaks nor
these words of his Church, that they should disagree within themselves, as
the Anabaptists do move tumulte, in those churches, where Christ and the
Gospel is preached sincerely, but does expres the nature of the infidels,
which do persecute the faithful. For, whersoeuer Christ is preched, they
that are godly, do receive and embrace him gladly: and they that are ungodly,
do both let and persecute Christ and his Disciples. Now Christ does call this
discencio^ a sword: which sword is not among the godly in the Church: but the
infidels do use it against them that are godly. Does not Esaie say, that there
is no peace to the ungodly. The cognisaunce or badge of them that are godly, is
Charity, Peace, and Concord. Wherefore, the Lord, does call them, that be
peasable, or love peace, blessed, and children of God. Mat. v.


Symou. I do easily grant, that peace and unity ought to be, in the Church.
But that Christ, and his Apostles did never move sedicio^ for temporal
things, thou do affirm it scantly.


Ioiada. yea, and truly also, or else show thou the contrary.


Simon. In the.xv. chap. of the Acts, we do read that Paul and Barnabas, had
no small discencion, and reasonyng against them, which did teach Circumsicion.
Who will deny, circumcision to be an outward thing?


Ioiada. I understand and call outward things, that do help nothing to our
salvation, perteining to the body, more, then to the soul, and which being
necessari to the body, do, in process of time, wax old, waste, and consume
away, such as be, condition, richesse, and gross elements of this world.
But circumcision, was not taught by the false prophets, as an outward thing,
but as a necessary and needeful thing to salvation: which they did very
vrgently and instantly persuade, that it should be observed and kept, yea,
and all the whole law beside. Hereof, did rise the disputacion, whche is
written of, in the xv. chap. of the Acts Else Paul did circumcise, Timothy,
for peace and tranquillity sake, and because that he would not offend
certain weak brethren, in the Church: but after that, some men did vrgently
bring in, circumcison, as necessary, Paul did greatly repugne, and would not
suffer Titus to be circumcized.xvi. of the Acts.ii. Galat. This sedicio^
therefore that thou aledgest here, has a greatter cause, then an outward
thing.


Sy. How dare thou call richesse outward things, which do exclude a man
from the kingdom of Heaven? For Christ says that it is easyer for a camel,
to go thoroughe the eye of a nydle. then for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of Heaven.


Io. We do know well inoughe the false sighynges and tears of the Crocodyle,
which, these light and inconstant Anababtistes, do pour down daily,
dispisynge richesse, none other wise, then the Fox, did in times past dispyse,
the sweet grapes, that she could not come by. Richesse, are by them selves
nether good, nor evil, but the use, does make them either good, or evil. If
thine eye be simple, and lyghtsome, all the body shall be lyghtsome: but if
thine eye be wicked and evil, all thy body shall be darkness. Mat. vi.
Therefore, if a rich man be faithful and godly, the richesse that he has, be
good, and that, by reason of the good use. If the master or owner of the
richesse, is unfaithful or an infidel, his richesse are naught. Luke.xvi.
Such, do christ speak of, when he brings in, the similitude of the camel.
and of the eye of the nedle. There were innumerable, both in the old and new
Testament, which, in great richesse were called no small friends of God: as
Noe, Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob. Job, Joseph, etc. Which in the myddest of
their richesse, did cleave unto God, with a sincere heart, and good faith. Look
what opinion Paul has of this thing, and what he writes of it.i. Timoth. vi.
Therefore, I care not what these hipocrites do babble and prate, since that the
richemen may do good to the poor, in Christ's Church, which occasion they
that have no richesse do lack. To what purpose or intent do then these mad
brains, trouble all the world for trifelyng and unnecessary things? I do
know sum, which, if they had as much as they do lack, thorough their own
negligence and slugherdnesse, they would find by and by a way, to justify
their unjust and evil gotten goods.


Sy. I do let that pass, I pray the, to prove the second conclusion.
Peradventure I shall learn somewhat by it.


Ioiada That Christ did never cause tumult, for outward things, but did
always study to peace and tranquillity, we will bring the.xvii. of Matthew,
where he speaks to Peter after this manner: Lest we do offend them (that is to
say, that do receive the didragme) go thy way to the sea, and cast in, thy
hoke, and the first fysh that comes, open his mouth, and thou shall find a
stater, take it and give it for the and me. In the. xxii of Math, when he was
asked, of the yearly tribute, that was paid unto Ceasar, he did so fly from
tumulte, that he did iyone both god and Ceasar together, biddyng them to pay
their duty to each of them. Nor, he did not condemn them, that did receive.
Nor again he did not say: Blessed are they, which do give. He did not say: ye
owe nothing by Gods law, but notwithst andyng give: woe be, unto him, that
does receive. In the.xiii. of John, Christ does so teach his Disciples: I
give you a new commandment, that ye love each other, as I have loved you. By
this, shall all men know that ye be my Disciples, if ye love each other. And
incontinent in that long sermon that he made unto his Disciples, after his
Maundy, he does chefely speak of the Spirit of the faithful. And a little
before, he should send his Apostles, he did say: Peace unto you, as my father
has sent me, so I send you. The.xiiii. chap. Romans Paul says: The kingdom
of God, is neither meat nor drink, but rightousnesse, peace and gladness in
the holy ghost. For, he that serves unto christ in those things, is accepted
both before GOD, and before men. Therefore, let us follow that, which
belongs to peace, and edifieng, one toward another. In the.i. Cor. i. he
does exhort the Corinthia^s, after this manner: I beseech you, brethren, in
the name of our Lord Ihesu Christ, that ye do speak all one thing, and
that there be no dissencio^s among you, but that ye be one whole body, of
one mind and opinion. Let no such contencio^s be among you, that one should
say: I am Cephas disciple, another, I am Paul's: an other, I am Christ's. Is
Christ divided: was Paul crucified for you? Or were ye baptized, in the name of
Paul? When ye do say so, ar ye not yet carnal? Moreover, look, and consider
what Paul writes in the xii. cha. to the Cori. exhortyng them to concord and
charity, by the exemple of the body and the lymmes. In the.xiiii. he says
apartelye, that God is not aucthor of discencion, but of concord and peace,
which thing may be seen, in the Churches of the faithful. In the.iiii. to the
Ephesians, Paul does exhort us, to behave our selves, and walk so, as it
does become the vocacion wherewith, we are called, with all obeisaunce and
lowlynesse, with gentleness of heart, forbearing each other thorough charity,
and that we should study to keep the unity of the spirit by the bound of
peace, being (says he) one body and one spirit, as ye are called in one
hope, of your vocacion. There is but one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one
God and father of us all* etc. In the* ii. chap. to the Philippians, with like
study, exhorts he, the faithful to be of like affection, to have between
them selfs, love and charity, to be of like mind and like judgment, and
that nothing should be done among them, by contencion or vayneglorye. But by
humility and lowlynesse of heart, every man should think an other man, to
be more excellent, then he is himself. etc. Are not these, sufficient
testimonies?


Sy. What do these things against the Anabaptists?


Io. Very much, for they prove and show manifestli, that the Anabaptists be
authors of tumulte and sedicion.


Sy. What is that?


Ioi. That is to say, that they against al good order, and exemple of the
Apostles, do make strife and contencion in the Church of Christ, and that
only for certain outward trifles.


Sy. But they do teach many things of God and of faith. What outewarde
things are they, wherefore they do make division in the Church?


Ioi. If they should preach none other thing, but of God, of faith, charity
and innocencye of life, it should be no need of this seperacion. For these
things are taught also in our Churches. so that it is no need at all, that
they should preach. But they separate them selves therefore, because that
they teach these things hereafter rehearsed, that is to say: That we have
need of a new Baptysme, and that a Christen man may not receive rentes, nor
revenues: That Christen men are free from paiyng of tithes: That a christen
man may not bear rule or be a maiestrate: That no man is bound to make a
lawful oath, when he is commanded, by the maiestrates: And also they do take
away richesse from christian men. Are not these, outward things? And again,
do they not for such things divide and trouble the Church? Beside that, they
do bind their disciples, that they shall not hear the word of God among
them, where Baptysme of children is used, rentes and tithes paid, any lawful
oath is made, magistrates be, and richesse ar counted good. Now call in
remembrance, the places and testimonies, that we have brought and aledged
before, of Christ, and of his Apostles, and ponder well, whether this
separation, is Apostolical, or sedicious.


Sy. It skylleth not that ye call them sedicious. For that did chance to
Christ, and to his Apostles, to be accused of tumulte and sedicion. But in this
thing, they do praise God, and give thanks, that they be counted worthy, to
suffer for the name of Jesus, remembering what Christ says: Blessed are ye when
men do curse you, and speak all evil against you, rejoice and be glad, for
your reward is great in heaven.


Ioia. Why do thou leave that clause which Christ added unto it, when he was
speaking such things?


Sy. What have I left?


Ioia. Lying (says he) for my sake. That we do call the Anabaptists
sedicious, it is not done for Christ's sake, but because, that they do divide
Churches being well ordered and pacified, for the things before named. The
which thing never Christ nor his Apostles did. Nor we do not lie, when we
accuse them of tumulte, and sedicion. For the thing is so manifest, that it can
not be denied. But they that imputed such things to Christ, and to his
Apostles did lie, and did not say true, as it appears by the xxiii. of Luke,
the.xvi. and.xxiiii. of the Acts. There were some which did falsely report,
that they preached against paiyng of Tribute, unto Ceasar, seducyng the
co^mens, and mouyng sedicion, which things were not true. For neither christ,
nor his Apostles did it, but rather taught the contrary always. But the
Anabaptists, because, that they repugne against public magistrates or rulers,
and go about to abolysshe the ordinance of God, are ryghtfully called
tumultuous, rebels and sedicious heretics.


Simon. I would gladly (if I might obtain that thing of thee) that thou
should leave, that word, Heretic: For as often as I hear it, I do all
quake and tremble in my heart.


Ioia. When I do say heretic, I do not understand him, that the rude and
unlearned people does mean, but him that is aucthor of sects, and makes
division in the Church, which does obstinately break and trouble the unity
of the Church, with false and erroneous opinion. But I will bring mo places
to confirm my conclusion.


Simon. I will gladly hear them.


Ioia. In the xx. of the Acts Paul speaking unto the overseers, being
assembled together, at Miletyng, did bid them to take heed to them self, and
to the whole flock, over the which, the holy ghost has made them over seers,
to govern the Church of God, which he had purchased with his own blood. For
says he, I do know this well, that grievous wolfes, shall after my departing,
enter in, not sparyng the flock: even from you shall rise men, speaking
perverse things, to draw after them disciples. Thou see, my Simon, the
nature of heretics, which is, to make division in the Church, to get unto
them disciples, or folowers of their heresye, not to spare the flock, to sow
discord, to teach perverse things, to allure men, to reyse or styr up
parts, sects, and factions, to congregate a particular Church.


Sy. These arguments do almost touch the Anabaptists. For they make division
in the Church, and do bring up and maintain a singularity among them or by
themselfes. But have thou more testimonies or places?


Ioiada Paul does warn the Romans with these words, saying: I pray you,
brethren, that ye look upon them, that cause among you dissencion and strife,
against the doctrine that ye have learned, and that ye do fly from them.
For they that are such, do not serve unto our lord Jesus Christ, but to their
belie, and by blandiloquence, and flatteryng, disceiue the hearts of the simple.


Sy. This authority the Anabaptists do use, but against you.


Io. Consider, my Simon, in your mind, how truly they do bring such things
against us. Where did we ever make division in the Church? which thing is
familier and proper unto them? Where did we ever put offe^dicles, or stombling
blocks, unto the church? Where as, they have made an innumerable sort of me^
so perplexed and doubtful, that they do abhor from the gospel and do believe
neither us, nor them. Paul did more lively express them, that do disceyue and
seduce the people with fair speaking, seruyng to their belyes, in the iii*
chapter to the Philipenses, with these words: For many do walk, of whom I
have spoken many times, and now do speak weeping, enemies of the cross of
Christ, whose end is perdicion, whose belie is their God, and glory or
reioysyng, in their opprobriousnesse: Which do care for earthly things only.
Now judge, my Simon, unto whom these things may be applied, unto us, or unto
the Ana. baptistes. They vociferate and cry always, against Tithes, Tributes,
Riches, Oaths, Magistrates, property of goods. We do preach Faith, Innocence
of life, Charity, and that men may use all things well, as the gifts of God.
Who boasts more, or reioyseth in reprochefull things, then they do, that is
to say, in their Catabaptisme, or oppinion against Baptism. in forsakyng of
their household, and in their slouthfulnes, wherein they do wander about, as
idle vacaboundes. Moreover, of these things, that they do teach, tumultes,
sedicio^s, wars, robbyng and spoilyng, did always rise. I think thou do
understand, whom Paul does call belyes, and enemies of the cross of Christ.


Sy. If thou have any more testimonies or places, I pray you, hyde not them
from me.


Ioia. Touching the unity of the church against the Anabaptists, there is a
singular place, in the* x. of the Hebrews: Let us (says he) consider, and
look one upon another, for this intent, that we may provoke each other to
charity, and good works, not sorsakyng the mutual fellowship or congregation
of us, as some men ar wont to do. And what other thing do the Anabaptists, but
for the weakness, or (as they do say) for the wickedness or ungodliness,
of some, forsake the Church* and exhort other to do the same.? But let us
come now to the.iiii. conclusion, which shall show plainly, that the
Anabaptists are false prophets, and enemies of the Cross of Christ.


Sy. Bring it furthe, that I may hear what it is.


Ioia. They are false prophets, whosoever they be, that do affirm, that
Christ did only abolish and take away, original syn. They are false Prophets,
that do deny grace, and forgyuenesse of sins unto them: which, after that the
truth is once known, do fall again, into sin or error. They are false
Prophets, that do attribute, salvation, unto our works. Sith that the
Anabaptists do teach these articles, they be not only enemies of the cross of
Christ, but more over do deny Christ.


Sy. They do no such things,


Ioi. Though they do not with their mouth. deny Christ, yet notwithstanding,
they do in very deed deny the virtue, and strength of Christ, and of his
death: as Peter does say.ii. Peter.ii. for swearynge the Lord, that bought
them. Is not all one thing, if a man should say Christ is not. And there is no
such thing, wherefore Christ did come? Christ did come to take away our
sins, which thing if he did not, Christ is not Christ. If he be dead only
for them, that were in the old testament, and not for us, he can not be our
savior, and how is he then Christ? If so be that our works, do save us, is he
not dead in vain? Do thou not see, how the enemies of the Cross are known?


The.vii. Treatye or Diasogue.
How that Christ did not only suffer, for original syn.

Simon. Take heed, that thou do not rashly and without aduiseme^t, blame the
Anabaptists. For there has been always some, which did say, that Christ
has suffered only, for them, that were before him, that is to say, for the
Fathers, which did live under the old Testament, and that he has only pourged
in us, Original sin, and that we ought to expiate, or to make amends and
satisfaction, with our own deeds and works, for the sins, that we commit,
after that we be ones purified.


Ioi. If ye have been so taught hitherto, and have believed so, why was Peter
Abelardus counted an heretic, and made to recant again, by saint Bernarde, in
the council of Sens? He did teach very like things.


Sy* This does move me. but little.


Ioiada. In this thing, are ye blame worthy, that ye Anabaptists, do know,
neither new nor old histories, and yet ye will be teachers. What audacitie is
this? But how ^ayne your opinion is, and how much, it does ene^uate and
af^eablysh, the virtue of the passion of Christ, we will show, by the holy
scriptures. John Baptist, showing with his finger, that pure and immaculate
lamb Jesus Christ, did say: This is the lamb of God, which takes away the
sin of the world. By these and other words of the scripture. it is
manifestly proved, that Christ is the full satisfaction, for the sins of all
the world. Or can thou say, that the fathers of the old Testament are only
the world.


Sym. No, but he says syn, and not sins.


Ioi. John does use this word sin, as he does, this diction world. By the
world, he understands, whatsoever is worldly: so by this word sin, he
understands, all that can be named sin, the gender being here put, for the
species. For he says, which takes away, and not, which has taken away, or
shall take away, that this word Tollit, takes away, may signifye action or
doing and not time. For what sins soever are taken away, they are taken away,
by the sacrifice of Christ, done in the Cross.


Sym. Thou must bring clear and more strong testimonies, for these, can easily
be confuted.


Ioia. This authority is both plain and strong enough. Nor it can not be
subverted, by any contradiction. But that thou may see, that we are not
without auctorities. Read the.v. to the Roma. and thou shall understand, and
perceive, that the vertewe of the death of Christ, is abolyshed by you. And not
as by one man (says saint Paul) which had sinned, death did come: so is the
gift of GOD. For judgment, did come, by one sin to condemnacion, and the
gift did come, to justify from many sins. Do not these words, O Simon,
prove, that Christ with his death, did not cleanse or pourge only one sin,
but all manner of sins? But read all the whole chapter, and then, thou
shalt understand it better.

Paul speaks of Christ in the ii. chap. to the Collossen. after this manner:
And you (says he) when ye were dead thoroughe your sins or in the prepucie
or vncircumcisio^ of yourflesh, he has quykened also with him forgyuyng unto
us all our sins. Because that in him does inhabit all plenitude or
perfection of God head corporally and ye are made perfect in him. Which thing,
truly, could not be, if he had not washed us clean from all our sins. But
the contrary is evidently known, by the.x. chap to the Hebrews. He (says
saint Paul) one oblacion being offered for sins, sits euerlasti^gly on
the right hand of God the Father. For with one oblacio^, he has made perfect
for ever, them, that are sanctified.i. Ioh. i. The blood of Christ, does
cleanse us, from all our sins.i. Io. ii. If any man does sin, we have an
advocate, before the father, that righteous Lord Jesus Christ. And he is the
satisfaction for our sins, and not only for our sins, but for the sins
of all the world. If Christ did take away, only original sin, the
testimonye and authority of Jesus, is void. And again, if Christ dyed not
for us, but for them only that were after him: what belongs unto us, the
death of Christ. Or why should we confess it, if it perteyneth nothing unto
us? Do thou not see yet, who are false Prophets, enemies of the cross of
Christ, and subuersers of the Christen faith?


Sy. I do see it well enough, and I am well content, touching this Artitle.
But as for that, that they do deny, or will not grant repentance, and
grace unto them, that be fallen again: they prove it strongly by the.vi. chap.
to the Hebrews, and by the ii. Peter. ii And, verily, as far, as I can,
perceive, they speak well enough in it. That is to say, that we be no more in
the flesh, and that me ought to sin no more after this: which thing I would
think to be good, if we might ^olyue. For they do so, v^ry stu^^ously and with
great diligen^^.


The.viii. Treatye or Dialogue.
How that a sinner may come to grace, as often as he reuen^ethe, and that no
man is without sin.

Ioiada. O Lord God, that the simple, do so miserably suffer themselves to be
blinded. If Menander and Symo^, should come again: I think they could find
adherentes, and disciples, sith that the sect of Nouatus and of the
Catharians, is so regarded and believed among many.


Sy. What do these things mean*


Ioia That the said heretykes, did teach, about.xii. C. ye^r^s ago, the same
things, that thou have now brought of the Anababtistes. For they did deny all
grace and forgeuenes, unto them, that were fallen again: They did arrogate,
and take upon them, pureness or clenlynesse of life. They did congregate and
assemble a particular Church, auoidyng and shu^nyng al communion or fellowship
of sinners. In the mean season, they did pass al mortal men, in
presumptuo^snesse and arrogance, in envy, hate ^e ^^ contencion, in
covetousness, and intemperancy of life. But read thou Ciprian, upon the
matter, in the.iiii. Epi^^le to Antonianus. The Anabaptists if thou look
better upon the (...), are in all things like unto the Catharians, and do
teach all one thing with them. S^^^^ct^ them therefore* For he, that agreith,
with manifest h^^e^^^^s is living, conditions, conversation and teaching, can
not teache the truth, nor be a rightful man. Or how can thou allow them whom
all godly persons did always abhor?


Sy. I care not for the Catharians, nor I know not, what the Catharia^s be.
That I do, in this thing, agree with the Anabaptists, the scriptures compel
me to do it, therefore I do not believe them, but the scriptures.


Ioia. This is that I have said, and yet do I repete it, that nothing boldeth
them so much in their error as does ignorance. If they had read, and tasted
the old histories, they would be more modest and sobre, and not so
presump^^ous. Is not this a miserable and perilous thing, that men being so
rude and ignoraune in all things, do take upon them, to be teachers? Whereby,
it comes to pass, that they corrupt, confound and subvert al things, not
having the right understanding of scriptures. For that which Paul in the*
vi. chap. to the Hebrews, and Peter in the ii. chap. of his second Epist. do
write, does not strength nor prove the oppinion of the Anababtistes, but that
there is no remission for them, which do swerve from the faith, and through
misbeleue or infidelity do despair of the mercy of god. For they do sin
against the holy ghost, which syn is not forgyuen here, nor in the world to
come, as Christ teaches. Mat. xii. and.i. John.v. But, my Simon, discuss
thou and wey, the words, of both the Apostles, and consider to what purpose
they were spoken. Truly for this purpose, to prove, that it is impossible for
him, that has believed ones perfectly, to fall away from his faith. Peter,
with the other disciples, being asked of christ, whether they would, forsake
him also, did answer. Lord, to whom should we go? thou have the words of
everlasting life. And we do know and believe, that thou art the son of the
living God. If so be, that any man does fall clean from faith, he does show
manifestly, that he had never a true faith. They went from us (says John) but
they were not of us: for if they had been of us, truly they should had remained
with us. He therefore, that swarueth from the known faith has no salvation.
But why? For Christ is the only salvation from whom he doothe falsely
swerve, and therefore can find no other salvation. Thou do understand, I
think, that the fall, whereof Paull speaks, is not the fall, that does
chance daily, by thinfirmitie and weakness of the flesh in them, that are
godly, but extreme desperacion thorough misbeleue and infidelity, whereby a man
swarueth from God. Read the.vii. and. viii to the Heb. and thou shalt see,
that daily remission of sins, is not denied unto them that are fallen again.
For he says also, in the.v. cha. that Christ is a bisshoppe, that can have
compassion, of our infirmities, unto whom we must fly, having license and
liberty, to do it.x. chap. to the Hebrews.


Sy. In the.xii. chap. Paul teaches. that Esau could find no place of
repentance, though he did seek it with tears.


Ioia. Paul does not speak in this place, of repentance, and forgyuenesse of
sins. but of election, and recovering of his first birth which he had lost
ones, thorough glotony, and intemperance, and could never recover it again,
though he had assaied and proved it, with wepynges and tears. for Jacob had
bought the right of the first borne. and had prevented him. Wherefore he
speaks nothing hear, of the inward remission of sins. And often times,
this word penance is taken in an other significacio^. But the Catharia^s did
use the same arguments, in so much, that some weak persons, among them, that
were godly. did abhor, and suspecte the Epistle to the Hebrews, as some do now
a days the Epi. of saint James. But now I come to the authority of Peter, who
speaks after this manner: It had been better for them* not to have known the
way of righteousness, then after that they have known, to turn from that,
that was taught them by the holy precepte. But that chances unto them, that
is wont to be spoken in a true proverb: A dog going to his vomittyng (or to
that which he had vomitted) again: And a washed sow, being returned to the
mire wallowyng or walteryng. If thou considerest well and truly these words,
thou shall find that they be spoken of infidelity, and unfaithfulness. From
the which, after that they were ones called, through faith, they did fall again
from God, into the first unfaithfulness and infidelity. We do set therefore
that infidelity is condemned every where.


Sy. What say thou of this, that they do affirm that we live no more in the
flesh


Io. The flesh does stycke unto us, to the very grave. For the flesh does
contrary, the spirit, and again, the spirit does repugne against the flesh,
in so much that we do that, which we would not do, the Romans the vii. It is
therefore great boldness, to presume and boast of that, which the Apostles
did never presume ^^ boast of. For Paul did complain of his flesh, which has
more spirit, and did labor more, to tame his flesh, then all the
Anababtistes. And yet they dare say, that they be not in the flesh. For this
cause peradventure, because that they be, none other thing but flesh, that is
to say, all carnal, drouned in their sensuality and affections. Which thing is
manifestly known, by their life. But paul did conclude all this whole matter,
more perfectly, and more briefly also, saying: I do, with my mind, obey and
serve unto the law of god, but with my flesh, unto the law of sin. He does
more, at large expound these things, in the.viii. Romans and v. Galat. Where he
does show, in few words* that they, which do not fear God, nor rare, for
heavenly things, but are all earthly, do live after the flesh. And that he
walks in the spirit, or after the spirit, which though he has, and feels
in him self, sin, and weakness of the flesh, being tickeled with
sensuality, and affections, yet not withsta^dyng, does not give the bridell,
unto the flesh, ne unto sin, but resists still, and is always a frayde to
fall. And if so be, that he chances to fall, by and by, draws he back his
foot, and repentyth.


Sy, But they say, that a man may be, without syn


Ioi. We are without sins, as dogs be without fleas, in the month of
August. O abhominacion, that men should think or presume such things. I
pass over here, that by this opinion, they do blaspheme the verity, of the
gospel, yea, and take utterly away the grace and mercy of God For where sin
is not, there is no grace, where preuaricacion and transgression is not, there
is no Remission among them, there is no transgression, ergo, the grace of God,
is not a mong them. Is not this, to abolish the grace of God? What shall I
say, but that these mad brains, do fall into another heresye, that is to say,
in to the heresy, of that blasphemous man Pelagius, who did deny the grace of
God, magnifiyng and extollyng the strength of man. He was.xi. C. years ago.


Sy. But they prove this, with scriptures.


Ioia. The verity of the scriptures does teach nothing so. Beside that, thou
can bring no exemple, but the exemple of Lucifer, which would be like unto
God, as they will be without sin, whereas no man can be pure, and without
sin, but God only.


Sy. Does not John say, that he, which is of God, synneth not?


Ioia. He synneth not to death.


Sy. Thou do so expound it, or this is thine exposicion.


Ioai. Consider the words that go before, and thou shalt understand, that I
say true.


Sy, What sin is that? or is not a man without sin, when he synneth not to
death?


Io. Christ says unto the Iues: If ye do not believe, ye shall dye, in your
sins, Ergo, unfaithfulness is a deadly sin or syn to death. And though a
faithful beleuer, is without this syn, that is to say, without infidelity, yet
he is not without vice or syekenesse, which he must be ware of always, lest he
be drouned in syn. or soiled and defiled with the abominable fylthynesse of
sins: and therefore it follows in John: We do know, that all that is borne
of god, sineth not: but he that is borne of god, does keep himself, and theuyll
touches him not. So therefore the godly sineth not: and though he falls by
frailnes, yet notwithstanding that malicious Satan can not catch him. For the
diligent study and labor, that the godly does take, in shunnynge and auoidyng
sin (that is to say faith) does that syn is not imputed for syn. It is
written in the.viii. Romans That there is no condemnacion unto the^ that be in
christ, which do not walk after the flesh, but after the spirit. Else saint
John does say in the same self epistle: If we do say, we have no syn, we
deceive our selfs, and truth is not in us. If we do confess our sines god is
both faithful and rightwise to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from our
iniquity. If we do say, we have no sin, we make him a lier, and his word,
is not in us. There be many such places every where in the scriptures. David
does cry out: O Lord, do not enter into judgment, with thy servant, for in
thy sight, no man shall be justified. And again, if thou look extremely upon
our sins, o lord who is able to abide it? In the xliii. of Esa. the lord does
speak thus, by the Prophet, unto the Iues, which did glorify and boast them
selves in the rightwysnes of ye law. I am he, I am he (says y^ lord) that
takes away thine iniquities, for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
sines. Bring me into remembrance, let us be judged together, tell forth if
thou have any thing, to justify thy self. Thy father has sinned first, and
thine interpreters have gone out of the way. None of the most holy men were
ever without sin, which thing manifestly appears, in Adam, Noe, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron `Dauid Josias, Ezechias, Peter, Paul, Matew. etc.
Therefore Job speaks truly. Job.ix. What am I, that I should answer him, and
speak with him, with my words, which though I had some rightwysnesse, will not
answer, but entreat my judge. If I will iustifye my self, my mouth shall
condemn me: if I say that I am innocent, my mouth shall prove me wicked. etc.
Paul in the.iii. Romans says, that al men have sined, and do want the glory of
god. In y^.xiii. of Ihon, christ says, he that is washed has no neade, but
to wash his feet: for he is all clean. If he be all clean, what neade has
he, to wash his feet? If he has neade to wash his feet, how can he be all
clean? Therefore we are cleansed and purified, with the blood of Christ, that was
shed upon the cross, from the filthiness of syn, and be all clean, But it
follows not by this, that we be no more i the flesh, or that we be no more
sinners. For the dregs of syn do remain in our feet, that is to say, in our
affections, as long as we live, and walk in this dust i and foul way, we are
soyled and contaminated, with the filthynesse of sin, which we neade, with
perpetual study and daily care, to wash away, and afterward, to wype out,
these filthinesses, with great inward grefe repentance, and tears, in the
virtue of the passion and death of Christ. Finally christ, in the.xv. of John
says: I am the true vine, and my father is the husband man. He does take
away every bough in me that brings forth no fruit, and every bowgh y^
brings for the fruit, he does purge and make clean, that he may bring
forth more fruit. By the which sayings we may understand, ye we that are in
Christ, through faith, as a bowgh, is in y^ vine, and do bring forth fruit,
living godly, have nevertheless need to be made clean, and that, by the
spirit, and virtue of Christ. Now, ye, which is made clean, must needs to be
vnpure, and unclean? So we, that are in Christ already ar made clean daily, for
we do offend in many things, and no man is living, that sins not, and that
has no need of this clensyng. Except the Anababtistes, which in their has,
be made so pure and clean, by their water, wherewith they do wash their
disciples, among whom, water does take away that, which the blood of Christ
does not take away in them, that are godly.


Sy. I do not see yet proved, that he, which falls again, after that he has
known the truth, does daily find grace and pardon.


Io. It is sufficientli proved by y^ saiyngs of John, and by the exemple of
Dauyd, and of Peter. For if we be all sinners, and yet nevertheless do enter,
into the kingdom of heaven, where no unclean thing enters, it follows that
our sins are forgyuen us.


Sy. I do not denay, but that we were ones all sinners, and that those sins
were ones forgyuen us, by Christ. But I will say this, that after that the
sins, which we committed before, through ignora^cye, be ones, through the grace
of God forgyuen us, and so be received by the free gift and goodness of
Christ, in to y^ number of the children of god, that then we be pure holy, and
clean, and that we ought to sin no more, and that, if we sin wittyngly,
after that we have ones known and received the grace, such sin is not
forgiven.


Io. But thou might, sufficiently understand by the places before aledged*
that we be yet sinners still, after that we have known the truth, and that
those sins, which we do daily commit as long, as we are in Christ ^e daily
forgyuen unto us. For Christ says, that his disciples, are all clean, but
nevertheless that they have neade to wash their fete. And again, the father
does make clean the bowghes, that do bring forth fruit in Christ. If they
do bring forth fruit, they do bring forth fruit, in faith, and in the known
truth (for without faith, it is impossible, that any man should please God,
and what so ever is without faith, is si^ne and not fruit) If they be made
clean, they have some filthiness in the known truth. Else they should be
clean, and should need no clensynge or purgynge. But since that they be made
clean, the filthinesses that they do gather in bringyng forth fruit, ar
forgeuen and washed away. Neither Pelagius, nor Nouatus, nor none of the
Anababtistes, is able to withstand this veritee.


Sy. I am not far from this opinion, yet notwithstanding, had I lever to
hear plain scriptures, that a man, may come to grace, as often, as he synneth.


Io. And that can I show unto the, beside, the fore aleged places. The lord
speaks thus by Ezechiell: When the ungodly shall turn from y^ ungodliness,
that he has done, and does judgment and rightwisnesse, he shall get life
unto his soul. Is the death of ye ungodly, a pleasure unto me, says y^
lord, and not rather, that he turn from his ways and live? Turn and repent
from al your iniquitees, and your iniquitee shall not hurt you. In the.ii. of
Joel. Turn to ye lord your god (says he) for he is gentill, and piteful, he
is pacient, and of great mercifulnes, and repents upon y^ plage, yt he had
threatened.


Sy That, which thou have aleged, is to be understood of the ungodly, and of
y^ remission of sins yt is granted unto them, that never knew god, and never
believed in him.


Io. I would y^ thou should look better upon y^ words of Ezechiell, thou
should se, yt he speaks these words to y^ children of Israel, which
were the chosen people of god. Moreover considre, with what end, he does
conclude this chapter. Why should ye dye (says he) o ye house of Israel, I
will not the death of a sinner but y^ hereturn and live. Or can thou return
to him, with who^ thou wast never before?


Sy. No, but I do come to him, and do not return, but with whom I was before,
and from whom I was gone, to him do I return again.


Ioi. Ergo it follows, that they, which are exhorted, by the prophet, to
return to god, were somtymes with god. If they were sometimes with god: ergo
this is not the first sin, that they did commit, before that they knew the
truth but it was the sin, that they committed, after that they knew the
truth and had faith. We have proved, I think, that the sins that we commit
after the knowledge of the truth, are forgeuen, by God. In the.xxiiii. of the
Proverbs, it is written that a rightwyse man falls vii. times in the day,
and ryseth a gain, but that the ungodly do fall, to their utter dampnacion.
Here thou have a manifest and a plain difference, betwexte the godly and the
ungodly, or betwixt the faithful and infidel. The ungodly, after that he is
come, in to the bothomlesse pit, of ungodliness, does contempne, and
remains in sin to the last end with despair. A godly man, is not he that
synneth not, but he, which falling.vii. times in the day, does not continue in
sin, but ryseth again. With this place, are the Palagians, Nouatians, and
Anababtistes confounded and convicted. Add unto these the.xviii. of Mat. and
the.xvii. of Luke, where Christ does plainly say: If thy brother does
trespass against the, rebuke him betwixt the and him alone, if he be sori for
his offense or repents, forgive thou him. And if he.vii. times in the day
does offend the, and.vii. times in the day comes to the saying: I am sorry
for mine offense, thou shall forgive him.


Sy. But he does not say, that he will forgive us our sins.


Ioia. Can thou pray, or say thy Pater noster?


Sy. yeas.


Ioia. Do thou not thou pray this: Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us? Unto these words does the Lord add, by and
by, in the.vi. chapter of Matthew. If ye do forgive unto men their fautes,
your father, that is in heaven, shall forgive you also. Seeing therefore, that
we do forgive, unto our brethren daily, it follows, that the father of
heaven forgeueth us also daily. Do not the saints or holy men pray so, and
that every day? Now, I ask the, whether they do lie before God: praiyng thus
or not?


S. They do not lie.


Io. If they do not lie, it follows, that they have in them self trespass
and sins. If so be, that sin, as thou thynkest, is not forgeuen, why did
Christ teach us to prai so? forgive us our trespass. Is not this an
abominable thing, that any man, which knows not, what he does pray,
should take upon him, not only to be a teacher, but also to teach that which
repugueth against ye manifest truth and prayers of the Saints? But what
thynkest thou of Peter, was he, a faithful Christian man, and elected of God,
or not?


Sy. He was not a faithful Christen man, before his fall, else he would not have
denied Christ.


Ioi. If he had been an infidel, to what intent were these words spoken. mat.
xvi. Thou artchrist the son of the living god? Are these the words of an
infidel. And again, if Peter had been, an infidel or hipocrite, when he did
make such a godly confession, Christ would not have said: Thou art blessed
Symo^: Flesh and blood has not reuelated this thing, unto the, but my father,
which is in heaven. The LORD prayseth not, hipocrites and infidels, but
abhors and hates them, Mat. vi and.xxiii. He would not, have said unto him:
he that is washed, has no neale, but to wash his feet. And again, Peter, I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith do not fail or slake. Read beside that,
the.xvii. of Johan. Now I ask the again, whether Peter was a faithful Christen
mam, or not?


Sy. The scripture does compel me to confess, that he was a faithful christian
man.


Io. Now I ask again, whether his fall, was a sin or not?


Sy. Again, the scripture co^pelleth me, to confess that it was a sin, for
he did weep bitterly And again, if to deny christ, is no sin, what shall be a
syn tha^?


Io. Ergo, it follows, by all these arguments, that Peter did sin, after
the knowledge of the truth, and receiuyng of the faith. Therefore, a faithful
man is not all without sin. And here Peter did commytte not a small, but a
very grievous sin, denyeng thus, the Savior of the world. Now I ask whether
his sin was forgiven him or not?


Sy. yeas truly: for Christ says: When thou art turned again, conforte or
confirm thy brethren.


Ioia. So should the Anababtistes do, if they were sent by God. But seeing
that presumptuousnesse and partinacie has sent them, and do so bytterly, and
with such stubburnesse, speak against the gospel, teaching for conforte,
desperacion: they are such Prophets, as the Lord does complain upon, in
Ezechiel, which regard nor care nothing for the diseased and wounded sheep,
(which thing nevertheless, they had learned of the Lord, which is deseruingly
called the good and true shephearde. Luc. xxv. or of Paul. ii. Corin. ii.) but
dissipate and scatter the Lords flock. For what makes them, beside a
singularity, or singular love of them selfs, to separate them selfs, from
our church, but that (as they do say) we be sinners, that is to say, usurers,
publica^s and dronkardes? I can not, but that I must confess, that there be
many enorme sines used among us (which is the more pity) yet we ought not to
despair of many, but that they may be brought to repentance. And truly, as
for our elues, we are not very negligent or slothful in rebukynge sins,
criynge out still bitterly against them, that commyt such things. And yet
against the precepte of GOD, Math. xiii. and exemple of the Apostles, which did
condemn no man rashly, they do separate them selves from us. But this is the
nature of Phariseis.


Sy. As touching this article, I am sufficiently taught, and I thank God of it,


Iaia. John, without exception, does say: Children, I have written this unto
you, that ye should not sin, but if any man does sin, we have our
advocate, before the father, that rightwise LORD Jesus Christ. etc. Here no man
can bring any cauillacion. Christ is here named and appointed to be Advocate or
mediator for all sinners, and that, at all times, as he offers him self. ri.
Matthew, saying: Come unto me all ye that labor and are loadyd, and I will
refresh you. That same thing does Paul teach, concerning the only Savior
Jesus Christ.i. Tim. i. It is a faithful saying, and worthi to be received of
al men, that Christ did come, into this world to save sinners. If the
Anababtistes therefore, do teach the contrary, they are the open enemies of
the Cross of Christ: in the which opinion, if they do abide, or persist
obstinately, they are manifest heretics, whom all godly persons ought to
fly and abhor.


The.ix. treaty or dialoge.
How that our salvation and rightwisnesse, is not to be described to our works
but to faith.

Simon. IF the Anababtistes do teach, that our salvation, and rightwisnes,
ought to be ascribed to our works (which is the.iii. part of this article)
thou will not say (I think) that they do err in it.


Ioiada. There is nothing that I will grant them, less. For this thing
being ones granted, al ye epistles of Paul ar condemned, as false, and which
did seduce the people. For this is the thing only, wherefore Paul, with such
a zeal did repugn and resist against false prophets, which did teach, that
rightwisnesse did come of works: where as saint Paul did attribute our
rightwisnes to faith. That may easily be seen by ye epi. to the To. and to
the Gala. But I will bring out of them, certain places, which can not be
confuted. In the.iii. cha. to the Romans, Paul says thus: All have sinned
and ar destitute of the glory of god, but are justified freely by his grace,
thorowgh the redemcion that is in Christ Jesus. And in the.iiii. To. If Abraham
were justified by works, the^ has he wherein to rejoice, but not with god, for
what says ye scripture Abraham believed god, and it was counted unto him, for
rightwisnes. To him yt works is ye reward not reckened of favor but of
duty. To him y^ works not, but believes in him, that justifies, the
ungodly, is his faith counted for rightwisnes. Even as David describes the
blessedfulnes of that man, unto whom god imputes righwisnesse without deeds.
Blessed ar they (says he) whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered. etc. And in the xi. to the. To. There is a remenaunt left according to
the election of grace, if it be of grace then it is not now, of works. For
tha^ grace is no more grace But if it be of works, then is it no more grace.
For then were deseruyng, no more deseruyng. In the second to the Galathians:
The life, which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith, of the son
of God, which loved me, and gave him self for me, I despise not the grace of
God. For if rightwisenesse comes of the law, then Christ, is dead in vain.
In the third chapter, he does argument and reasone after this manner: That
no man is justified in the sight of God, by the law, it is euydent. For the
just shall live by faith. The law is not of faith, but the man, that
fulfylleth the things, contained in the law, shall live in them. Christ has
delivered us from the curse of the law, in as much, as he was made accursed
for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come on the gentilles thorough Thesu
Christ, and that we might receive the promise of y^ spirit, through faith.
Brethern, I speak after y^ manner of men. Though it be, but a man's testament,
yet if it be allowed, no man despises it, or adds any thing there unto. To
Abraham, and his sede, was the promise made. He says not, in thy seeds, as in
many, but in thy sede as of one, which is Christ, this I say, that the law,
which began. CCCC and.xxx. years after, does not disanulle the testament,
which was confirmed before of God, unto Christ ward, to make ye promise of no
effect. For if the inheritance comes of ye law, then it comes not of ye
promise. But god gave it, unto Abraham by promise. For if there had been a law
given, which could had given life, the^ no doubt rightwisnesse, should have
comed by ye law. But the scripture, concluded al things under sin, yt the
promise, by y^ faith of Jesus Christ, might be given unto them yt believe. In ye
ii. cha. to the Ephe. ye ar saved through faith, and not of our own selves. It
is the gift of god, and comes not of our deeds or works. For we are his own
workma^shyp, created in Jesus Christ to do good deeds, which he has prepared
for us to walk in, and in the.iii. to Ti, we were also folyshe, disobediente,
deceived, seruyng to lusts and voluptuousnes, living in malice, and envy,
hateful or odiouse and hatyng each other. But after yt the goodness and love of
our savior God, not according to the deeds of rightwisnes, which we have
done, but according to his mercy, had made us safe, by the fountain of
regeneracion, and renuynge of the holy ghost, which he has poured upon us
abundantely, through our savior Jesus christ that we being justified by his
grace, should be made heirs of everlasting life, according to our hope. These
places are plain, and can not be avoided. For they, that speak against them,
are no christen men, but fellows of the false Apostles, against whom Paul
writes, calling them evil workmen, and subuersours of the gospel of Christ.
And by these words, not only the Anababtistes, but also, all popish
doctors, are noted, and whosoever beside, do attribute our rightwisnes and
salvation to our deeds and works.


Sy. I can say nothing against the manifest veritee. But I would feign know of
the, in what reputacion thou haste the epistle of James, and how much thou
do esteem it.


Io. And I ask the first, what thou think, or what oppinion and judgment
thou haste, of the before aledged places, and how strong thou cou^test them to
be.


Sy. They are manifest, and true and also strong enoughe, and do attribute
salvation, and iustifiyng: to faith, but Iamis does adscribe salvation to our
works and deeds.


Ioiada. What seems unto the then? is it right, yt many places, should give
the over hand to one, or one place to many.


Simon. The interpretacio^ of one place, must be taken out of many. But what
does this to the epistle of James?


Ioiada. Had the apostles all one learning and spirit?


Simon. All one. But I asked the, touching the words of James.


Ioiada. I have had always in singular reputacion, the epistle of James, and
have always given great credit and a faith unto it, though it has been
suspected by Eusebius, and other beside, and counted less apostolical. But if
it be Apostolical, it follows, that it has the same meaning and spirit, that
the epistles of Paul have. For this thou have granted before, that they had al
one learning and spirit, moreover that the places, which I have aledged out of
Paul, and do adscribe salvation to faith, and not to works, are both true
and strong. Now it follows necessarily that it is not the meaning of James,
that works should iustifye and save, and that therefore this dark place and
saying of James ought to be expounded, by many plain and manifest testymonyes
of Paul.


Simon. What is that?


Ioiada. That is to say, that James does not go about, to prove, that
works justify, and that faith justifies not, but that faith without works,
is no faith, but an oppinio^ and credulity, or light believe, which faith can
not save. And y^ it is sufficient to salvation to trust and leyne upon this
vain oppinion. It is manifest therefore, y^ James does not take here faith,
for that true and lively faith (which faith is a gift of God, and renuyng of
the mind, and life) but for a false oppinion, which foolyshe men do call
faith, with the which faith, the devil believes, all quakyng and tre^blyng,
but by it, he is made never the better, nor saved. Beside that, he
understands not human or bare works without faith, but faith workyng
effectually thorough charitee and love. Ponder the words of saint James, and
thou shall perceive, that he proves there, partly, that faith can not be
without works, partly that faith workyng thorough charitee, does both
justify and save. Therefore James does not disagree from Paul, but means
al one thing with him agreyng, both in one spirit and learning.


Sy. Yet it seems unto me, that our salvation is adsribed to works, when it
is attributed to faith. For if faith can not be without works, nor works
without faith, they must be all one thing, and that, which is attributed to one
is attributed to the other.


Ioia. Faith and works are almost so one thing, as the godhed, and manhead,
are one person in Christ. And yet it followed not that the godhed is mortal,
because that Christ dyed in very deed upon the cross. Yet notwithstanding, it
is all one person. which can not be divided. So we may speak in this
business. Faith justifies. Here faith is taken, for the election, and grace
of God, and also for the redemption, which is not adscribed to our own
works, though they can not be separated from faith, and which following most
certainly of faith, are very sure and undoubted signs and tokens of faith and
election of god. For so Paul does speak: Whom he has predestined, them
did he chose, whom he has chosen, them did he call, whom he has called,
them did he justify. And John also: We know, that when he shall appear, we
shall be like unto him, and every man that has this hope, does make him self
clean, as he is pure.i. Io. iii. In one son, there is both light and heat,
and the one is not from the other. Yet notwithstanding the lightyng or
illuminacion, is attributed to the light, and not to the heat, and the heatyng
or warmenesse, is adscribed to the heat, and not to the light.


Simon. But the scriptures do often and in many places, adscribe salvation,
to our works and merits.


Ioiada. That is done, not because that the work, should be barely taken by
it self, but as a work or deed, coming of faith, whereby that, which is
farthest, and chyefest (that is to say faith) may be manifested, and showed.
I ask the, can a man, do any good thing of him self.


Simon. No. For no man, is good, but god only.


Ioiada. And Christ says in the.xv. of John. As boughs can not bring forth
fruit, except, they remain stylle, in the vine. So ye can bring forth no
fruit except ye remain in me. For without me ye can do nothing. Now I
ask again, who brings forth the grapes and the wine?


Simon. The vine.


Ioia. If god, should take away his strength from the vine, and should not
work in it, that, which we do see, could that vine bring for the wine?


Sy. No.


Ioiada. The chyefe thing therefore that gives wine, is not the vine, but God,
and yet notwithstanding, we do adscribe the wine to the vine, whereas it
does only come of God.


Simon. I can say nothing against the truth.


Ioiada. It is all one reason, when the salvation and everlasting life, is
attributed to our own works, where as it comes of God only, and of
gratuitee and free election. For GOD works (...)s, both to be willing, and
to do or perform the thing, that he has moved us, to be willing to do,
according to his bountuous will. He, I say, works in us good works, as in
his electes, notwithstanding the works ar attributed unto us, and are called
ours, which nevertheless are Gods, that glory and honor may be given to god
only. Do thou understand what I say?


Sy. I do understand it very well.


Ioia. Does it satisfy thee?


Sy. ye as truly, Now do I perceive, that the lernyng of the Anababtistes,
comes of ygnoraunce and boldness, and that it is very pernicious and
hurtful, which is gaye in the sight of the simple, but in deed is an error,
and malicious rudeness (...)ut I desire to know, what thou will say of
the.v. conclusion: For they be fully persuaded, that souls are a sleep.


The.x. treaty or dialoge.
How that the Souls after that they be departed from the body do not sleep,
but live in christ.

Ioiada. But, with this opinion, they do abolish the gospel, which teaches of
the resurrection of Christ: as saint Paul, in the first chap. to the Romans,
does say: Beside that, they do deny, the last Article of our faith, that is
to say: The life everlasting, after this life. Is not this therefore a
pernicious Doctrine, that repugneth against so manifest verity, and sure
believe?


Sy. Thou do not understand the Anabaptists, For they do neither deny
the Gospel, nor the Resurrection of Christ. They say that the Souls, after
the death of the body, (if they do depart in faith) do sleep in the bosom
of Abraham, till the day of judgment, and that then, they do enter into
everlasting life. And prove their sayings by the gospel, and by Paul. Luc.
xvi. i. These. iiii. I will not have you to be ignorant touching them, that are
a sleep. etc. In the Old Testament, it is written of the Fathers, that they
fall a sleep, with their Fathers. And also, it is said of Stephen, that he did
sleep in the Lord. And that they at length, shall receive everlasting life,
they do prove it by Paul.ii. Timoth. iiii. I have says he, fought a good
fight. Now is there laid up for me, a croune of rightwysnesse, which the
Lord, who is a rightful judge. shall give or render unto me, upon that day,
not only to me, but also to al them that love his coming. There is such a
thing. Phil. iii. and i. John. iii. Or what neade is it, of that last
judgment, if by and by, after his death, every man receives his own dome:
these do seem unto me strong. Now will I feign he are what thou can say
against it.


Io. I say the same thing that I said before. If our souls do sleep,
after the death of the body, the soul of Christ sleeps also, and the
resurrection is disanulled. For Christ did prove that there was an everlasting
life by his rising again, which can not be everlasting, if the soul slepeth,
and begins then to live, when judgment does come. Wherefore the sleep of
the Anababtistes, does euacuate and disanull, the gospel and resurrection. As
for the bosom of Abraham, I ask the whether it be, a slepyng place and
dormitori, or a receptacle, and place to receive the living?


Sy, A place whereunto, the souls of ye faithful Christen men, ar gathered
together, till the day of judgment.


Ioi. Where is that place, above, or benethe?


Sy, It is uncertain to me, God does know. Nor it is not lawful for us, to
inquire


Sy. So ye do defend al uncertain things, that ye do teach. And ye that do
speak and babble much of the bosom of Abraham, and do not know yet (...)

That coming of Christ shall be in the last day of all.


Ioia. What and I understand that, of the coming of Christ, at the end of
every man's life?


Sy. So thou do say: but it must be proved by the holy scriptures.


Io. These are not my words, but the words of him, that speaks there, of his
own death. For he uses this word, to go, for to dye. (so that to go, and to
dye, is all one thing, with him) And again, this word, to come, wherefore the
Anababtistes do strive, is not taken, for his last coming, but for the
resurrection of christ: and ye help and aid, that he shows upon the
faithful christen men being in extreme need. For he came again, after that he
was risen from death, and did declare, that he had opened the kingdom of god:
that we might be sure, that as he did enter in to heaven him self, so we should
come in or enter in also. But he is entered, in to immortal life, and not in to
sleep, in to the kingdom of God, and not in to the bosom of Abraham, and that
by and by after his death. Therefore we shall also, incontinent after our death,
enter in to everlasting life, and into the kingdom of God. For he takes us
away, when he calls us from death to life. John. v. For it is added by manner
of exposicion: That where I am, there ye may be also. Therefore are we taken in
soul, from death to everlasting life, and in body, to judgment. Or tell me,
did Christ with his death, reserate and open heaven, which was locked up before
or not?


Sy, I do grant that he did open it.


Ioi. But what neadeth this reseration or openyng, if the souls do not enter
in to life? Where as notwithstanding Paul does say: I coueit to be dissolved,
and delivered from this body, and to be with christ. beleuyng that after this
death, he should be with Christ. Peter moreover does say, that for this
cause, the gospel was preached unto the dead, that they should be judged in the
flesh, but live, after, or in ye spirit, do not these manifest places teach
and prove, that the souls do live, with God? For he says that y^ gospel
was preached unto the dead: What is else the gospel, to be preached, but
redemption and life to be preached. And what were they that were dead, but
they, which after that they were departed, were gathered in the bosom of
Abraham?


Sy. But how was the gospel preached unto them?


Ioia. The virtue of the passion of Christ, and the fruit of his death, which
were profitable unto them.


Sy. How?


Ioi. Because that they being delivered, thorough the death of Christ, ar
received, as touching their souls, into everlasting life. In the last day,
they shall rise bodily, and as all other, shall be judged, in the universal
judgment. In the mean season their souls do live with God. Is it proved
sufficiently that the souls that were in the bosom of Abraham are delivered,
and brought in to heaven?


Sy. I do not say against it.


Ioia. And thou shall find none other thing in the word of god* It follows
therefore, that the Bosom of Abraham is no dormitory, or slepyng place, but an
everlasting life: Which thing we may prove by the.xvi. of Lu* For there it is
written, that Lazarus is in joy and solace, when as the rycheman is punyshed in
hell. If so be that the soul (as ye do say) should sleep, she could have no
joy, except i^ were by dreams: if she reioyseth or have joy, it is
impossible that she should sleep. Likewis^ it is manifest li known and showed
in the.viii. of Matthew, that many shall come, and sytte in the kingdom of God,
with Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob. That in the mean season, I should sai
nothing, that sleep is clean^ contrary to the nature of the soul, which is in
Greek called ^ntesecheia, or Endesechia, that is to sai ^ perpetual and
vnrequietable ^otion or workyng.


Sy. These ^hinges are more manifest, and more strong, then I thought.


Ioia. It is the point of an unwise man to say, I thought not, and having
heard, but one ^arte, to give sentence. The A^ababtistes do advance, and ^et
forth gaily, and paintyngly their arguments, but they are weak and nothing
strong.


Sy. I would feign know, in what significacio^, the scripture uses this word
to sleep, which is so often times found, in every place of the Bible.


Ioia. Among the ancient fathers, this word, to sleep, was to dye naturally,
or after the commen course of nature. And because of the resurrection, it was
said, that they which did dye, sleep. For as a man gives him self to
sleep, doubting nothing, but that he shall wake again from his sleep: so the
body sleapeth that is to say dies, and does ly^ in the grave, being kept
there ^yl the day of the general resurrection. So the Fathers dy^ sleep: so
Stephen, and all other godly persons. Seeing therefore that to sleep, is to dye,
and the souls can not dye, it follows that they can not sleep. For Stephen
did say: Lord, receive thou my spirit, which thing: when he had said, and
ha^ committed or commended his soul to the heavenly father, his bod^ sleapynge,
did dye. In thy thing, they are deceived, tha^ they do attribute unto the sou^
that which belongs to the body only. But in the mean season it is attributed
to the whole man because of the unity of the body and of the soul, being
knytted in one person. Which example was brought before, of Christ, in whom the
body died only, and not his godhead, nor his soul. Likewise a man slepeth, but
with his body, and not with his soul. The Anababtistes do not, nor will not
understand this figure Sin^cdoch^, nor the other figures, and tropes. Which
thing causes them to err in many things. But ignorauncye makes them the
bolder, to teach, what so ever they do dream or conceive in their sleep.


Sy. Yet it is evident that Paul says, that a cotoune of rightwisnes shall be
re^dered unto him at length, when the Lord comes. And also that which is
written in John, an^ in the Epistle to the Philipen^ is sure and strongly
grounded*


Ioia. This ought to be obserue^ Simon, that the day of the Lord in
scriptures, is not always to be taken for the las^ day, but sometime, for the
truth and light: as in the gospel o^ John, otherwhyles for the vi^ sitacion of
the Lord: as often times, in the Prophets, and.^ Cor. iii. sometime for the
end^ and death of every man: as John vi. I will resussitate or rays^ him
again, to everlasting life in the last day, that is to saye^ when he dies.
For when an^ man dies, that day is last vnt^ him. After this manner, dy^ Paul
call, the last day, in the Epistle to Timothe. For he had spoken before of his
death, saying: I am ready to be offered: affirming, that he had been faith full
and loyal, in his course, and therefore, he did not doubt, but that the
rightwise judge, should render unto him, the coroune of rightwysnesse, which,
as he leaves no vnrightwysnesse unpunished, so always rewards them that
lobor faithfully. And this place does rather for us, then for the
Anababtistes, seeing that Paul does hope, that the coroune of rightwysnesse,
duyd unto the rightwyse, shall be renderyd unto him, at the time of his death.
Ergo, he believes not, that the souls do sleep, but that they do live
everlastingly. That, which thou aledgest out of John and Paul to the
Philipenses, are spoken, of the last judgment, but they prove not that the
souls are a sleep. For that, which they do speak of salvation there, do
perteyne more to the resurrection of the body. For these are the words of
Paul: He shall transform (that is to say Christ) our vile body, that he may
make it conform and like, to his glorious body. What mean these things
else, but that our bodies have full hope of resurrection. or risyng again? As
Job did speak Job.ix.


Sy. If the souls do receive by and by, their judgment as sone, as they be
departed, what neadeth that universal judgment?


Ioia. It perteyneth to the whole man, which shall be repaired or made new
agane, with the body, that shall rise, and with the soul. Of the which thing,
it is written, Chess.iiii. and Mat. xxiiii. and.xxv. Do thou yet desire any
thing?


Sy. I had leauer hear foundations and grounds out of the scriptures.


Ioia. I have brought very many already, what dooest thou ask more?


Sy. Thou have other helps yet, the which I pray the, to bring forth.


Ioia. Seeing that thou art desirous of the truth, I will hyde nothing from
the. This Doctrine and Opinion, of the Sleep of the Souls, does not ouelye
repugne against the Scriptures and faith, does not only disanulle the
Gospel and Resurrection of Christ, but is also against all common sense and
reasone, a rude and vnclearkelye ignorance, but go to, let us expound these
things: I ask thee, if the soul be a body, or a spirit?


Sy. It is not a body, nor any gross substance, but a syngle and pure
spirit.


Ioia. Can then a spirit be subject to bodily infirmities, as to be an
hongered, to be weryed, to dye. etc.


Sy. No, for these perteyne to the body only. A spirit, is immortal,
incorruptible, everlasting or perpetual.


Ioiada. Thou say very well, therefore mark thine argument thus: Since the
soul is a spirit, and not a body, it can not be subject to bodily passions
or infirmities, but is exempte from them: sleep does chance to the body,
thorough werinesse. Ergo the soul can not sleep: for the soul cannot be
weary. Or can thou bring any other thing concerning sleep?


Sy. No, for all operacions and senses do cease and rest, and except the
body should brethe, folks would think that it were dead.


Ioia. Now, if our souls should sleep, it should follow, that after this life,
we do feel neither good, nor evil, which does directly pugne against the
Gospel. Moreover, we will prove by the nature of the sleep, that the souls can
not sleep, but the body only. For now I ask the, when does the soul sleep,
after that she is departed from the body, or when she is yet joined to the
body?


Sy. At both times.


Ioi. Neither of them can be true: and I do meruail that so gross an answer
did come from the. For seeing that the Soul, can much less sleep, when she
has put away the burdeyn of the body, then when she bears about yet, the
burdeyn of the body, and does not sleep, when she is yet in the body, it
followet^ that she sleapeth much less, when she is delivered from the body
And that she does not sleep being in the body, it may be known by this, that
in the time of wakyng, the body does always, without rest and quiet, work,
which actions do come from the soul. Ergo, it is manifest, that whiles that
the body waketh, the soul sleapeth not. And again, when the body has given it
self to rest and to sleep, the soul works with a perpetual motion or mouyng,
and does never rest or cease, either she bretheth, or does some thing
always, with the virtue of remembrance and understanding, or with the other
excellent virtues and powers. All man's life is either waking, or rest: in none
of them both, does the soulesleape. Ergo the soul does not sleep at all.
Therefore sleep, longs only to the body, and not to the soul. For when the
soul begi^neth ones to have life it is a perpetual Entesechia, comeyng from
the everlasting and eternal fontayne of goodness, the which perpetual
Entesechiia, that is to say, vnrequietable, and perpetual action and mouyng in
the soul, if any man denayeth, by that same reason he must denay the soul


Sy. These things are somewhat dark unto me.


Ioiada. Therefore, I will declare them, by an example: Fire is a very pure and
actual thing, which after that it begins ones, can never cease from his
operacion and workyng, till it be quenched: and that is, when it has nothing,
whereupon, it may show, and exercise his operacion. If thou denyest the
operacion and working of the fire, thou have denied the fire. The nature of the
soul is very like, which after, that she is poured in to the body, by god, is
a lively and working spirit, and can never cease nor be at rest. Wylt thou
have no fire, take away the operacion. If thou denyest the Soul, attribute
unto her, sleep. For to say, that the soul is a sleep, and to say, that the
soul is not, is all one thing.

If the soul slepeth, she does rest, if she does rest, she works not, if
she does not work, she is not. For to work, and to be in the soul, is all
one thing, ^yth that she is a perpetual motion, and workyng. But the soul is,
therefore she sleapeth not. Dooest thou understand this thing?


Sy. Very well.


Ioia. Therefore did I say, that the A^ababtistes know not, the nature of the
soul.


Sy. Thou should peradventure have persuaded somewhat, to Timens, and
Phedrus, Platos disciples, I had leauer hear Scriptures.


Ioia. The Saduces, did teach that there was no Resurrection, and by this, did
deny the immortality, and perpetual workyng of the soul, yea, and also
Angels, and all manner of Spirits. Act. xiii. The Lord did stop their mouths,
with these reasons. Ye err (says he) not knowing the scriptures, nor the
virtue of God. God, after the death of the Fathers, calls him self, the God
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which is not the God, of the dead. but of the
living, and that therefore, Abraham, and the other Fathers were a live, and not
dead. They were dead in body, a great while before, and buried: Therefore Christ
speaks here, of the life of the soul. Ergo, the soul being separated from
the body, is in her own kind, works lively, and slepeth not. This
syllogysme and argument, do I put to all the Anababtistes, to answer to, that
they may clear them self from the heresye of the Saduces. For they are like
unto the Saduces and Manicheans. What should I say of the words of Christ,
which hangyng upon the Cross, does comfort, the thief with these words,
saying: To day thou shalt be with me in Paradise.


Sy. Paradise, and the Bosom of Abraham, are all one thing, to the
Anababtistes, where they say, that the souls do sleep.


Ioia. They do affirm this with out scriptures, and with an heretical
spirit. Christ says: To day, thou shalt be with me in Paradise. Ponder
every word. If Paradise, is a sleapyng place, Christ sleapeth in it also. For
he says: To day thou shalt be. Moreover, the thief prays Christ, to
remember him, when he should come in to his kingdom. If the kingdom of God,
is a Dormitorie or Sleapyng place: what do the scriptures speak, of the
Resurrection, and Ascendyng of Christ in to heaven? Ye ate obstacle asses, O
Anababtistes, which dare make mention of such sleapyng, against so manifest
places of the scriptures. What shall they say, to the words of Christ. John.
v.? He that hears my word, and believes in him, that has sent me, shall not
come in to judgment, but is passed from death to life. Which words are so
clear, that no man can denay them, but heretics. Let the.xi. of John. and
the.xv. of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Item the.ii. Cor.ii. be read,
and it shall evidently he known, that the sleep of the Anababtistes, is a
blasphemy against the Gospel and Resurrection of Christ.


Sy. If the matter be better looked upon: the Anababtistes can not clear them
selves, from the crime of over boldness and ignorancye: but they have not
pondered all these things so exactly


Ioia. Why do they presume to teach then, and take upon the^ that, which
passes their strength? And again, when they be convicted, will not give the
upper hand to the truth? But because they will be seen steadfast, they be
found, in all things, froward, and obstacle. To say briefly: They do all
things, with contention, arrogancye, and ignorance.


Sy. I would had questioned with the, touching the.vi. Conclusion, but that I
must go to mine June: Tomorow, if thou can have leasyr, I will be here
betymes in the morning, and reason farther with the.


Ioiada. I am well pleased, for I will go, to mine Inn also: be thou to morrow,
in better readiness.


Simon, God be with the.


Ioiada. Fare well.


SOLIDEO HONOR ET GLORIA*
Thou shall understand, good Christen Reader, that immediately after this, as soon as may be, thou shalt have the second Book, which entreat upon as
many things as this Book does, both fruitful to be known, and also most
necessary for these perillouse times: in the which, the Devil does all, that
he can, to extinguish the true Doctrine of the Gospel: which at this time,
thorough our godly Magistrates, does revive, and flourish again: Fare well,
and pray, that we may perform the Work that we have in haude.


