A MOST excellent Sermon of the Lords Supper, wherein briefly (and yet
plainly yenough) is lively set forth the matter of the Supper of the Lord
Jesus. By Henry Bullinger. Translated out of French, into English, by I. T.

Matthew. 17.5. This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye
him.

Imprinted at London, nigh unto unto the three Cranes in the Vintree, for
William Ponsonby.

To the reverend Father in God, Thomas Bishop of Couentrie and Lichfielde.
FInding me self unable in all respects (reverend Father) to requite the least
benefit received at your Lordships hands, I have long intended to present your
Lordship with some thing, whereby you might at the least perceive my grateful
mind, in accepting your undeserved goodness often unto me showed. And finding
nothing which might pleasure your Lordship, being no less skilful in learning,
than godly in life, (for as Solomon says: Prou. 27.7.
He that is full, abhors an honey comb.) I thought I could not better please
you, which are no less careful for the Christian Congregation, than is the
Father for his children, than by taking in hand some such matter, whereby I me
self might be well occupied, the Christian common Wealth edified, and God
glorified. For this cause, that the unlearned, not only of your Diocese, but
also of all places else in England, which are destitute of painful Preachers of
Gods word, (for who knows not, that the laborers in Gods Vineyarde be very
few?) might be instructed, at the least by reading, in the true profession of
Jesus Christ, I have presumed to translate forth of French, a Sermon of the
Lords Supper, made by the learned and grave Father, master Henry Bullinger.
Neither did I perceive, whereby I might more profit all me^, than by handelyng
the Lords Supper, which yearly and often ought to be received of al men, nor
wherein I might better serve my carnal and transitory country, than in
setting forth that food, whereby we are fed to out spiritual and everlasting
country. For if we ought to travail painefully for the food of the body,
(according to the admonition of the Apostle Saint Paul: 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
That if any would not work, the same should not eat:) which although we
have in abundance, mainteyneth us not always, being by syn made subject to
death, how much more painful ought we to be for the atchieuing of the food
of the soul, Christ Jesus, which is the bread of life, whereof if we eat by
faith, we shall not die, being by grace made partakers of everlasting life?
Whereas there be many, which have learnedly, and godly handeled this argument, I
am moved to think my labor best bestowed upon this author, because there is
none which I have read, that does in so brief a sum, in my simple
judgment, more plainly set forth the doctrine of the Lords Supper, to the
comfort of the professors of the Gospel, or more sensibly disclose the errors
thrust into the Church of God, concerning; the same, to the grief of the
adversaries of the truth: both the which points he has so aptly handled, that
I know not in whether he has used more facility. It may be, that some, which
have not only travailed of purpose into France (the hithermost coasts whereof
I never saw) there to learn the french tongue, but also at home have
diligently studied to attain the finenes of the English tongue, (wherein I
confess I was never curious,) might have translated this Sermon, much more
finely, than by me it is. I envy not their skill, neither disdain I their
travail. I have done mine endeavor, so near as I could, to use my self like
a faithful Interpretour, in yielding the sense of the Author truly and yet in
such sort, as best might be understood by the unlearned Reader. Touching the
testimonies of holy Scripture, alleged by this author in this Sermon, I have
thought good rather to set them down after the last translation of the Bible,
set forth by authority, than to translate them forth of the French, that I
might the rather hereby cut of the cauilles of the adversaries of the truth,
whith they are wont to make upon the diversity of Translations. And that the
diligent Readers, if it shall please them to confer the Testimonies with the
Text, may the more easily find forth the same, I have quoted in the Margent
both chapter and verse, whence they are taken.

Thus, have I yielded unto your Lordship, the causes of my bold enterprise,
with the order of the handeling of the same, which if it may please God to
bless with the increase of the Readers knowledge, I have my desire. God long
preserve your Lordship, to the comfort of his Church.

Your Lordshyppes to command, I. T.

A Sermon of the Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God.
THe Apostles, the Evangelists, and Paul also the vessel of election, and
Apostle of the Gentiles, have diligently and perfectly described the holy and
mystical Supper of our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, in these words:

When the Even was come, Mat. 26.20. Mar. 14.22. 1. Cor. 11.23.
the same night in which Jesus was betrayed, he sat down with the twelve. And
as they did eat, Jesus, when he had taken bread, and given thanks, brake
(it,) and gave it to his Disciples, saying: Take ye, eat ye, This is my body
which is broken Or given.
for you, This do in the remembrance of me. Likewise also when he had supped,
he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, saying:
Drink ye all of it, and they all drank of it. Then he said to them, This is
my blood of the new Testament.

Saint Luke and Saint Paul have:

Luke 22.20. 1. Cor. 11.25.
This Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you, and for
many, for the remission of sins. As often as you shall do this, do it in
remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this beead, and drink this Cup,
ye do show the Lords death till he come.

The principal points of this sermon.
In the holy and mystical Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, we must not only
consider the words of the Institution presently recited, but also we must
here join the things going before, with those which come after: as such,
whereby the whole mystery is more clearly and amply set forth.

And first, we must consider the doctrine which the Lord taught his Disciples
in the Supper. Secondly, what he did, and how he instituted this Supper: that
is to say, how the Lord celebrated it, and ordained it to be celebrated by the
Church, unto the end of the world.

Finally, of what sort the disciples were in this supper, and how they behaved
them selves therein: that we may learn hereby, how we ought to behave our
selves in celebrating this most holy banquet, and also that by the declaration
of all these points, we may understand truly what the mystical Supper of the
Lord is: that is to say, (speaking in the first place, of the sum of the
matter, although it be inwrapped in shadows and figures, and proposing the
whole matter, as it were to be beholden with one only sight) that it is a
sacramental Ceremony, or an holy action, What the mystical supper of the Lord
is.
ordained for the Church, by Jesus Christ, our Lord, Redemer, and high
Priest, whereby, in setting before us in this Banquet, the bread and the wine,
being mystical tokens and pledges, he commends unto us in like manner his
doctrine, and also makes us a full promise of everlasting life, the which (in
giving his body to death, and shedding his blood) he has prepared for us: and
offered them unto us, to be received by faith, in lively meat and drink, and
by this certification he ratifieth it unto us.

Moreover, he represents or signifies by these tokens and pledges, renews,
and as it were sets before our senses his gifts or benefits, which the
faithful receive. Also he gathers together visibly his servants into the
company and unity of his body: finally he confirms unto us the remembrance
of his death and passion, and of our redemption, admonishing us in the mean
season of our duty, which is chiefly to yield him praise and thanks giuyng.

Of what fort the doctrine of our Lord in the Supper is.
Touching the doctrine, as it is every where so is it also here: that is to
say, a thing so excellent, that it surmounteth all the rest, which doctrine,
although it be diverse and most copious, yet is it such, as may be gathered into
certain and a few Articles.

The first article of the doctrine of our Lord. The end of the Supper.
For the first and chiefest matter, which it handles at large and most
evidently, is the principal point of our Christian religion, and the end of
our mystical Supper: that is to say, that the Lord our God of his mere grace
and mercy taking pity of mankind, sent into the world for the salvation of
the faithful, his only son our Lord Jesus Christ, who by his death has
purged us from all our sins, and delivered us from death, from hell, and from
Satan, and made us heirs of life everlasting.

And for so much as in this point consists chiefly all the matter of our
salvation, he commends unto us, and repeateth this thing in many sorts and
diuersely, to the end that we should not forget him, or lightly regard him,
but that he might show himself clearly unto the faithful for ever, as a
most clear light, which might shine unto them and lighten them.

Moreover he figureth, proposes, and commends unto us, under most apt
figures and shadows, this most excellent part of doctrine.

For in the beginning of the Supper, The Lord washes his disciples feet.
the Lord washed his disciples feet. By the which act, (after that he had
lively declared unto them a great humility of heart, with charity, and
affection of mutual service, and of all kind of dutiful behavior one toward
another,) we read, that the Lord said unto Peter, which gaynesayd him:

John. 13.8.
If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me,

And straight way afterward:

John. 13.10
He which is washed, needs not save to wash his feet, but is clean every
whit.

Whereby we gather, that the Lord has taught hereby, that they, which are
once received to the favor of God, and purged by the blood of the Son of
God, received by faith, are fully justified.

But because they, which are justified, so long as they live in this world,
have infirmities in their flesh, wherewyth they are after a sort soulied, as
be the feet of them, which are washed with muddy water, he signifies, that
they should cleanse these spots by continual repentance. Here unto agrees
the worthy saying of the holy Apostle:

Rom 8.
There is then no damnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit.

The Lord eats with his disciples the Pascal Lamb.
Again the Lord sets before our eyes our redemption, obtained by his death
when he eats with a great desire with his Disciples the Pascall Lamb being
offered up. For we know, that Jesus Christ is the Lamb of God, which takes
away the sins of the world, and that Christ our Passover is offered up, and
that the sprinklyng of his blood stays and keeps far from us the
destroying Angel. Also that he cleanses our sins, and refreshes us with
spiritual drink, guides us to eternal life, and makes his father pacifyed
with us, who, were it not for this, would still be angry against our sins.

Moreover he commends unto us the mystery of our redemption, by the bread
and wine holily instituted, for signs and Sacraments of his body delivered
to death, and of his blood shed for us, and wills us, that we never forget
him. Besides this, he has not only commended unto us this principal point of
our salvation in parables and figures, but also has expounded it unto us most
manifestly in clear and evident words, John. 14.2.
as when he says plainly, that many mansions (that is to say, sufficient
dwelling places) are prepared, with his heavenly father, to receive all the
elect, and that he departs hence, that by his death, he might open the
heavenly dwellings, to bring in thither his faithful servants.

Io. 14.3.
For I will receive you (even) unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be
also.

And again he says,

Io. 14.6.
I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no man comes unto the father but
by me.

Also:

Io. 15.3.
Now are ye clean through the word, which I have spoken unto you. Bide in me,
and I in you.

I omit here purposely many such like things: for you have sufficiently
understood by that which we have alleged, with what diligence, and how
abundantly and aptly, he has expounded and commended unto us in his doctrine
(the which often in his Supper he repeated to his Disciples) the principal
point of our salvation.

The second article.
Now for so much as the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ does not only show
unto us our redemption, The second Article.

The Lord teaches us also repentance in the Supper.


and teaches that faith in Christ, which truly justifies, but also
instructed us to repentance, and to a grave and earnest accusation of all our
misdeedes, a man may find a singular discourse of all this matter in this
Supper. And because there be two sorts of men, the one altogether
hypocritical and unfaithful, whereof Judas Iscariot which betrayed our
Savior, is the true pattern: and the other righteous, pure, perfect, and
faithful, nevertheless laden and burdened with vices and sins, the which the
other Disciples of our Lord do represent: the Lord in the beginning
addresseth his speech to Judas, and admonishes him gravely, reproves him,
and touches him nearely, threatening him with everlasting destruction:
Consequently, he represseth his Disciples reasonyng among them selves, who
should be greatest: he confirms, comfort, and strengthens the weak, the
fearful, and ready to fall.

Also he aduertiseth them of their grievous fall, exhorting them after their
fall, to repentance, in setting before them the example of Peter, to whom he
said:

Luke 22.31.
Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has earnestly desired to sift you.

And the rest which is to be read in the.22. of S. Luke.

What the faithful should do before they come to the Supper.
Out of all the which things we may gather, that in all the Sermons which are to
be made to the people, both before the Supper, and in the Supper, whereby they
are to prepare them selves thereunto, it is necessary that the first part be an
earnest accusation of the former disordered and wicked life, with a most
diligent admonition to repentance: to the end that al may know them selves,
and acknowledge their sins, that they may confess them selves to God purely
in their hearts, that they may ask full pardon of the high priest Jesus
Christ, and that they may change their filthy and ungodly life, into an honest
and godly life, and also that they may thoroughly repent them selves, and be
ashamed of their sins committed, and lastly, that they may all by steadfast
faith refourme the^ selves, and behold the grace of Christ.

Hereunto without doubt apperteineth the saying of the Apostle Paul:

Let a man examine him self, 1. Cor. 11.28.
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup.

Moreover, the doctrine of repentance may not cease after the Supper. For it
must often be repeated unto men, that they keep them selves from committing
any thing unworthy him, whose members they be made in the holy Church.

This self same doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, The third article.

The doctrine of ye lord touching charity, patience, and prayers. etc.


brings to our remembrance faith and repentance, mutual love and charity,
the which without ceasing, it requires of all those, who being the Disciples
of Christ, are made in like manner, brethren of the^, which call upon his name.

By this shall all men know (says the Lord) that ye are my Disciples, John.
13.35.
if ye have love together, as I have loved you. This is my commandment,
John* 15.12.
that ye love together, as I have loved you.

And many other things to the like effect.

Moreover, he teaches us constancy in true faith, and patience in adversities
and afflictions, declaryng the griefs which the faithful must suffer in this
world, for Jesus Christ. The doctrine of the Lord is manifest in S. John, in
the xv. and.xvi. chapters. There he exhorts the faithful to continue firm
and fast in him, by a sure hope, and not to be plucked thence by any means.
Also he admonishes them, that in his name, (as in the name of the only and
true Mediator) they call upon God without ceassyng. In so doing, he promises
them most certain and most ready help. By the which things we learn to exact
the whole, according to the doctrine of the Evangelists and of the Church, of
all them which be partakers of the Lords Supper. That is to wit, that they be
in love and charity one with another, that they be constant in faith, pacient
in afflictions, which they suffer for Jesus Christ: and finally, that they
continue steadfast in hope, and that they separate not them selves from Christ,
and all his members, to commyt them selves over to to strange Religions: and
moreover, that they continue in prayers.

To be brief, The fourth Article.

The Lords doctrine of his body, and his spirit.


there is nothing which the Lord repeateth more diligently, nor more often unto
his Disciples, in the Sermon which he made unto them after the Supper, than
this: That he would no longer be neither with them, nor with his Church,
bodyly, and yet notwithstanding that he would not forsake his in any thing, but
that he would always be careful for them.

And I will pray the Father (says Christ) and he shall give you another
Comforter, John. 14.16.
that he may bide with you for ever, (even) the spirit of truth, John. 14.17.
(and) he shall teach you all things, and bring al things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you.

It is expedient for you, that I go away: John. 16.7.
for if I go not away, that comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart,
I will send him unto you.

And the rest which follows in the.xvi. of saint John: Whereby we gather
necessarily, that this doctrine ought to be continual in the Church, the
which must be often times inculcated, and brought to mind in the Supper of the
Lord, that the church of Christ may understand, that those things which are
spoken of the presence of the Lord, in the church, and of the eating of him,
must not be expounded carnally, nor corporally, but spiritually: and that the
heavenly food eaten spiritually, profits.

Hitherto I have entreated briefly of the diverse, plentiful, and wholesome
doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, proposed to his disciples in his mystical
Supper, and delivered by him, to be always set forth in his supper to his
church, until the worlds end. And now we come to the other part of this
Sermon, to show with such brevity and facility, as possibly we may, not
only that which the Lord spoke, but also that which he did: that is to say,
how he instituted this ceremonial supper (if it may so be called) and how the
Son of God him self, having distributed the bread and the wine, celebrated
the Supper, and instituted it to be celebrated in his Church, until the end
of the world.

This has been from the beginning received, and the Lord our God has always
used to join signs to his promise or word, A brief exposition of the
Sacraments, and of the reason of the same.
whereby he brings to remembrance his great and free benefits bestowed
upon men before, or to be bestowed upon them after, by the which signs he
gathers men together into one company, wherein those benefits may be
declared solemnly by the word of God, and that also they may (as a man would
say) be renewed and imprinted perpetually in their memory. And moreover, that
such graces may be set forth to our view, by pledges and signs to be
beholden of us, and to be fastened more deeply in our hearts. Also, that they
may be confirmed by a witness, and that the faithful may understand what it
is, that the Lord requires again at their hands, and also what the duties
and exercises of godlynes are.

Wherefore the signs take the names of the things signified, and are called
most certain and true seals, marks, and Sacraments of the promises and
benefits of God, because they represent them, signify them, bring them to
remembrance, and seal them according to their property. These therefore
consist in the word of God, by the thing signified, through the sign or
Symbol, which is the outward thing joined to the word of God.

Such were the Sacraments of the ancient people, as the Passover, the sundry
sacrifices of the Fathers, instituted partly for the acknowledging, calling to
remembrance, and setting forth of Gods benefits: partly to signify, that
Christ should come, and dye, by whose innocent death, mankind should be
delivered from everlasting death: the which most excellent and free benefit
for all ages was bountifully bestowed in Christ upon the faithful, in these
latter times.

Wherefore we must not only consider in such holy Sacraments or Symbols, the
outward custom and facion of doing, I mean the manner of eating, and
sacrifising, neither yet the things set before our corporal eyes, but much
rather ought we by the contemplation of the sign, (being instructed by his
word, and inwardly lightened by the holy Ghost) to lift up our selves, and to
pierce unto the consideration and full fruition of the spiritual things
signified, whereof comes great profit, if they be received by faith.

They which behold only the outward custom and facion of the Sacraments of
the old Fathers, without the word, faith, and the inward lightenyng of the
spirit, and do consider none other thing in the Pascal supper, nor in the
sacrifices of the Fathers, but that which we behold outwardly with our eyes,
what difference think you, may they put between those things, and a common
banquet, or a slaughter, wherein the beasts are slain before the bouchers
table, even in such sort as upon the holy Altar? Contrarily, it will seem to
our flesh, that these holy things have no majesty at all, but that they be
rather to be mocked at. For this cause, we read, that the most holy and most
wise Prophets of God did greatly reprove them, which esteemed the sacrifices
by the outward appearance only, without faith, and the spirit, saying:

Esaias. 1.12. Iere. 7.20.
Who has required this at your hands? Heap up your burnt offerings with your
sacrifices, and eat the flesh. For when I brought your Fathers forth of
Egypt, I spoke no word unto them of burnt offerings and sacrifices.

The rest is in Jeremy the seventh chapter.

After that ye sacraments of the ancient Fathers had taken an end among the
ancient people, the new sacraments were instituted for the new people.
Now because all the sacraments of the ancient Fathers did promise, that
Christ should come, and redeem his elect, and also considering that the Lord
Jesus Christ is already come into the world, being given of his Father for the
salvation of all the faithful, it had been very unseemly, that the signs
should continue in the church, which should witness, that Christ should come,
who already was come.

Wherefore Christ, after that he had abolished the Symboles, and ceremonies of
the ancient fathers, to wit, Circumcision, the feast of the Passover, and the
sacrifices, in stead of Circumcision, placed Baptism, and in stead of the
Sacrifices, and of the Pascall Supper, ordained his mystical Supper, for a
perpetual sign, and unchangeable memorial of his body yielded up, and given
to the death, and of his blood shed.

Therefore you must not only regard in this our mystical supper, the sign,
the fashion of doing, and the outward act, but rather the thing signified.

The symboll or the sign in the Supper, is the bread and wine, and the holy
banquet it self, and the mystical action, which Jesus Christ has given us.
The thing signified, is the body of our Lord delivered for us, and his blood
shed for the remission of sins, and the passion of the Lord it self, and
the remembrance thereof, and our redemption which ensued thereof.

This do (says the Lord) in remembrance of me. Luke 22.19.


The company therefore of the faithful assemble them selves together to
celebrate the mysteries of Christ. In the which according to the ancient
custom, the simbols of bread and of wine, borrowe the names of the things
signified, and be called the body and the blood of the Lord Jesus. Hereby are
we called back from visible things to behold heavenly things, which are
spiritually communicated unto us.

For if thou behold only the breaking of the bread, and the distribution of
the the cup, with the brotherly feast: and if thou know not what this bread
is, what this wine is, and what things they represent unto us, in refreshing
our memory therewith, this Supper will not seem to differ much from a common
supper. The sacrament therefore of Jesus Christ delivered to death and of his
passion, and in like manner our redemption, is delivered here unto us. And that
we may the better understand these things, we will proceed in searching out
thoroughly that which the Lord did in this Supper, and that which he commanded
us to do.

It is not needful that I be tedious unto you in speaking more of the form
and manner of the Institution of the Supper: Of the form and manner of giuyng of
thanks in the Lords Supper.
for the Lord our Savior instituted it, and he did not institute the Mass.

And if the Mass seem unto any to be worthy of commendation, price, and
estimation, because it was ordained by the ancient Popes of Rome: how much
more, I beseech you, ought the Supper to be renoumed and esteemed, which was
instituted by the great and only priest Jesus Christ, before all Popes, and
before Rome had received the faith from Jerusalem.

Moreover, it is most certain, and out of all controversy, that the Lord
ordained this form, and none other. And for this cause we read, that saint
Paul Doctor of the Gentiles, said:

That which I delivered unto you, 1. Cor. 11.23.
I received of the Lord.

Truly the Evangelists and the Apostles are witnesses, that the Lord said
often times: This do ye, (I say) this do ye, Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24. and
25.
this do ye: that is to say, This which you see me first do. We have then
the express commandment of God, and the clear word, whereunto not without
cause we are obedient: We have a famous and notable example, which if we should
not follow, we should woorthily be called transgressors. And truly that which
is delivered unto us by the Son of God himself, which is the wisdom of the
Father, and the light of all the world, deserves well to be preferred before
the authority of the most excellent personage of the world.

And if the ancient Fathers be in great estimation among you, whose
authority, knowledge, holiness, and auncientnesse has woonne unto them a
great renoume, in so much that in consideration of them, the Mass is taken to
be an excellent thing, ought not the Apostles, the Father of Fathers to be much
more esteemed of you, who in holiness and learning, and in all things are to
be preferred before all men, and before all that is in the world? They knew
not what the Mass meant, but they celebrated the Supper in the same form as
the Gospel here teaches us. For as much then as the Mass was as it were
unknown unto the ancient Fathers them selves, as we said, let us, setting it
apart, approach to the Supper of the Lord, and let the Institution of the Son
of God please us. Let us think, that without the word of God, there is no
holiness. That which swarueth from the word of God, is sacrilege.
Wherefore that which repugneth the ordinance of God, and is not done, as God
has appointed, may rightly be called cursed sacrilege. These things are
confirmed by the authority of God and man. For the Lord says in his Law:

Who soever offers not at the door of the Tabernacle, an offering unto the
Lord, Leuit. 17.4. This testimony is alleged according to the sense of the
place whence it is taken.
shall be guilty of blood, and shall perish, as if he had shed blood.

Consider, wherefore in the histories of the kings, the high places are
rejected with so great indignation. And in like manner Paul accurseth, and
pronounces every thing cursed, which agrees not with the Gospel, or which is
contrary thereunto.

Saint Cyprian also the Martyr says, that every thing which is devised by man's
madness, to break Gods ordinance, is adulterous, wicked, and full of
sacrilege. In his first and second book of his Epipistles: Epist. 3.
We ought not (says he) to follow the custom of man, but the truth of God,
for so much as God speaks and says by Esaias the Prophet.

Esaias. 29.13. Mark. 7.7.
In vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines the commandments of men.

For if in the sacrifice which is Christ, none but Christ only is to be
followed, then verily ought we to hear and do that which Christ did, and
which he commanded to be done, considering that he himself says in his
Gospel.

John. 15.14. and 15.
Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth call I not
you servants.

And that Christ only ought to be heard, the Father also bears witness from
heaven, saying:

Mart. 17; 5.
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him.

Wherefore if Christ only be to be heard, we must no tregard, what any
before us has supposed should be done, but what Christ, who is before al men,
did first. All this says S. Cyprian.

Therefore let us go foreward to examine diligently that, which the Lord did
before all, and that which he has enjoined us to do by his commandment and
example, yea and inculcated, and often repeated by his Apostles.

Jesus having partly ended the wholesome admonitions, took bread, He takes
the bread.
and the cup also, he took (I say) of the bread which then was upon the
table of the Pascall Supper. He took also of the wine. Now my brethren, when
we hear these things, let not the simplicity of our Supper, without pomp,
without worldly ornament, and without any great ceremonies, engender in us a
contempt thereef. For our lord celebrating these holy things with his
Disciples, had on but comely and common apparel. There was not seen any
Aaronical attire, nor any Ephod, nor any priestly vestures. There was neither
glittering of gold, nor of silver. Neither was there to be seen any precious
stones. Let us therefore esteem all these things by the author thereof, I
mean, by the son of God, who is the wisdom of the Father, whom since this
simplicity pleased, it ought also to please thee, seeing that if he would, he
could have given to all this matter, a form much more famous and precious,
then all the things of this world. And also remember the words of Samuel
saying to Saul:

1. Sam. 15.22. The ceremonies of the supper are simple, and without pomp.
To obey, is better then Sacrifice.

Verily our Lord has taken away the painful ceremonies of the law, and has
instituted a new form, without labor or sumptuousness, and easy to be
furnished. Also, all things apperteynyng to the Gospel, have more efficacy of
the spirit, and of spiritual virtue, than of show, as also they are more
simple, and easy to be provided, than are the figures and ceremonies of the
Law. And Lactantius an ancient Author, in the sixth book, and five and
twenty chapter of his Institutions, says: He which thinks that God has
pleasure in garments, precious stones, and other things which are greatly set
by, is utterly ignorant what God is. etc.

That more is, this simple Institution is the true blessyng and consecration of
the Supper, having the word of God for an express mark and commandment.

Neither must we here depend of the Minister, neither look for the breathing
of a Priest consecrated by a Bishop, recityng distinctly the five words of
Consecration, and thereby taking upon him to consecrate the Sacrament. For the
first consecration of our Lord restrains yet effectually her virtue and
efficacy testified by the word of truth, and endures still, having even
now full force in our celebration: wherein we do none other thing, but that
which he himself did, and commanded to be done.

We have then yet hitherto the consecration of the Lord, and we have nothing
to do with these Massemumblers, because we celebrate the supper of the Lord,
and a most strange Supper. For even now we receive the whole from the very
hands of Christ, by the ministry of a lawful and Ecclesiastical Minister.
To be brief, we do justly esteem this consecratyng and blessyng of our high
Priest Jesus Christ the son of God, more precious than the consecration of
all Bishops, which has no testimony nor confirmation by the word of God, and
for this cause we greatly abhor it.

After this, the Lord The fiste Article. The Lord gave thanks and blessed.
gave thanks: let us therefore give thanks to God the Father also. Mat.
26.26. Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24. Mark 14.22.
He blessed: and let us bless him also in like manner.

Notwithstanding the other Evangelist expounds this blessyng, by geuyng of
thanks. Even so is there often times afterward mention made thereof. Therefore
it is no marvel if the ancient Writers have given it especially the name of
Eucharist, The Sacrifice of thanks geuyng.
(that is to say, Thanks giving) although besides this, it have diverse other
names. For the which cause they called it A Supper, a Sacrifice. For
invocation, praise, and geuyng of thanks, is a Sacrifice acceptable unto God:
But the flesh and the blood of the Lord, are not offered in the Mass
eftsoons for the sins of the quick and the dead. For since they have been
once offered, they retain always their virtue for the salvation of the
faithful.

Moreover, the Lord The sixte Article. The Lord brake the bread. Mat. 26.26.
The breakyng of bread.
brake the bread which he took, and which he blessed, or over the which he
gave thanks. Wherefore the ancient writers named the whole holy mystery, by
this part of the action thereof, the breaking of bread. Let us then break the
bread having received it at the Ministers hands, or rather let us receive it
being broken by him. The hand sins not here by touching, for so much as
neither the tongue nor the mouth which likewise touch the same, do sin any
whit at all. Superstition says, Taste it not, touch it not. But the breaking of
the bread brings to our remembrance the passion of the Lord. For that which
Saint Paul utters thus: 1. Cor. 11.44.
Which is broken for you. Saint Luke utters thus. Luke 22.18.
Which is given for you. Admonishing us also of our unity and duty. Because
we which are many 1. Cor. 10.17.
make one body, for so much as we are all partakers of one bread, as the
Apostle expounds this mystery in the first to the Corinthians the tenth
Chapter.

Moreover, the Lord Matt. 26.26. Mark 14.22. Luke 22.19.
gave unto his Disciples the bread being broken, and commanded them to Matthew.
26.26. Mark. 84.22. 1. Cor. 11.24. He gave the^ the bread being broken.
eat. And for this cause the ministers ought in the Supper of the Lord to give
the bread unto the faithful people, that they may eat it. And verily the
Disciples in the first Supper took the bread which was given them, and did
eat it. Let us therefore do the like. Neither must we enclose it in the
closeds pixes, or boxes, neither ought we to bear it this way and that way for
a show, neither may we woorship it bowing our knees, in singing this Hymn.
Tantum ergo Sacramentum veneremur cernui) That is to say, Let us woorship so
great a sacrament bowing our selves downwarde* etc. The Lord in his
institution to his Apostles has taught us nothing touching these matters. For
these things were ordained long time after, by the Popes of Rome and their
ministers, Dan. 12.11.
that that which was forespoken by Daniell and by our Lord Jesus Christ might
be accomplished. Math. 24.15.
Now because he gave them bread to eat, he expounds forthwith that which
is signified by this bread, least peradventure any should lightly esteem this
bread, and make as little account thereof, as of usual and common bread:
therefore says he.

This is my body which is given for you. Luke 22.19.


Which kind of speech is altogether like unto that of the pascall Supper,
that is to say:

This is my body. Mat. 26.26. Mark. 14.22 Exodus 12.11
Of this manner shall ye eat it: with your loins girded, and your shoes on
your feet, and your staff in your hand, and ye shall eat it in have: For it
is the Lords In Hebrew, Pesa, that is to say, a Passage.
Passover.

Even so does the Lord speak in this place in like sort:

Take ye, eat ye: this is my body.

Howbeit this speech is sacramental and mystical: Math. 26.26 Mark. 14.22 The
bread is not changed into the substance of the body of Christ.
wherefore it ought to be expounded simbollycally and according to the meaning.
For the bread is a sacrament, sign, or pledge of the body of Christ. And
truly the ancient Doctors of the Church have so expounded these words of
our Lord. And in deed we do not devise any new matter, in saying, that the
bread signifies the body of Christ: For we have else where showed at large,
that the ancient Interpreters of the Scripture, as well Greeks as Latins,
have used this exposition.

Also we have given you to understand by many evident reasons, that these
words of our Lord: Matt. 26.26. Mark 14.22. 1. Cor. 11.24. Mat 26.26. Mark
14.24.
This is my body, Matt. 26.26. Mark 14.22. 1. Cor. 11.24. Mat 26.26. Mark
14.24.
This is my blood, ought not to be taken according to the gross literal
sense, but to be expounded mystically, or sacramentally. For the bread
remains in his substance, and is not changed into the substance of the body
of Christ. The property of the body of Christ.
In like manner the natural body of Jesus Christ (the which being given once
for us, and raised from death, is ascended into heaven) is not hyd nor enclosed
under the kind or form of bread. For the Angels of God, speaking of this
body, bear witness thereof, and say:

Acts 1.11.
This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, even as
you have seen him go into heaven.

In like manner S. Peter says:

Acts 3.21.
The heaven must receive Jesus Christ, until the time that all things be
restored. etc.

S. Paul says also:

Jesus Christ after he has offered one sacrifice for sins, is set down for
ever on the right hand of God, from henceforth tarying till his foes be made
his footestoole.

Wherefore, we read that S. Augustine writing to Dardanus, said rightly, and
according to the Scriptures: Christ, as he is God, is all wholly present in
every place, but, according to the measure and property of a true body, he
has his place in some one place of heaven. He has given immortality to his
body (in the glorification thereof.) After this form he is not to be thought to
be diffused and spread abroad every where. Wherefore we must take good heed,
that we do not so affirm the Divinity of the man (Christ) that we take
away the truth of (his) body. For one person is God and man, and one Christ
Jesus is both two, being every where, in that he is God: but being in heaven,
in that he is Man.

Yea, and this Author has left in his books, these things, and many other
like, both Catholic, and according to the true sense of the Scripture,
agreeable to this matter. Moreover, the Catholic verity suffers us not to
feign, that Christ has two bodies. But if thou take the words of the Lord,
Math. 26.26. Mark. 14.22. Luke. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
after the Letter, This is my body: without doubt the blessed body of the Lord
being set at the Table with his Disciples, gave unto them also, I know not
what other body: for he could not give him self with his own hands unto his
Disciples. Therefore with his true body, and with his hands, he delivered unto
his Disciples, the Sacrament of his only body. Hereuppon it follows, that
the faithful acknowledging the Sacrament and mystery, receive with their
mouth, the sacramental bread of his body: but with the mouth of the spirit,
they eat the very body of the Lord. How we eat the body of Christ. Io. 6.
from ye. 27. verse unto the end of the chapter.
He is eaten in such sort, as he may be eaten: that is to say, spiritually by
faith: as the Lord him self expounds this mystery unto us at large, in S.
John, the sixth chapter. Neither have the purest Doctors of the ancient
Church, taught any otherwise.

Yea, and this place may well be applied to the words of the Supper of the
Lord. For seeing our Lord has but one true body, the which he gave up to
death for us, and that in these two places he speaks of this self same body,
it seems unto me, that this place of Saint Matthewe ought to be expounded by
that of S. John, seeing that S. Augustine also in his third book of the
agreement of the Evangelists, supposes that S. John speaks not of the
Institution of the Supper of the Lord, because in another place he had set
forth this matter at large. All the ancient Doctors of the Church, speaking
of the Supper, allege the words of the Gospel of S. John, and apply them to
the supper of the Lord.

To be short, me thinks, The lord expounds himsefe.
that there cannot be found a better interpretour or expounder of the Lords
word then the Lord himself, who for so much as he says in the.vi. Chapter of
Saint John, that his flesh being eaten (to wit, corporally, as the Capernaites
took it) profits nothing: It is most certain, that he would not give in
the.xxvi. of Saint Matthewe that which profits nothing, and that he has not
ordained here, that which he rejects and reprooueth there.

Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ, sitting in his true body at the right hand of
the Father in heaven, makes us partakers of life, which he purchased for us by
giving his body for us, and by shedding his blood) and we receive the same life
of Christ, by true faith, that is to wit, all the heavenly gifts of Christ,
that Christ may live in us, and we in him. And there is none other mean to
receive Christ, but by faith. Even as bodily food cannot be taken to conserve
the bodyly life, but by the mouth of the body: so spiritual food, cannot
otherwise be received of us, to bring us to the spiritual and eternal life,
but by the mouth of the soul, that is to say, by faith.

We do not ^ache the bare ^eastyng of bread.
Hereby all men may see, that we do not acknowledge in any respect, the naked
and profane eating of bread, as some do wrongfully charge us. For we do
acknowledge and confess Christ to be the meat and the drink of life, the
which conceive spiritually by faith, as it has been foreshewed, not being able
to eat him present, with the corporal mouth, carnally and corporally. We do
acknowledge that the faithful are partakers of Christ truly, and that they do
receive him: And yet do not the faithful so restrain or tie this partaking
either to certain time or element, as though they did not confess, that it
might be obtained without the Symboll or Sacrament.

In both the two Sacraments there is one reason of the communion of Christ,
and in both the two, those things, which Christ has commanded the faithful
to do, are done by them with a singular profit. Therefore let no man esteem
the use of the Sacraments vain or superfluous. Cornelius did not despise
Baptism, Act. 10.49.
or think it superfluous, but he received it as the washing of regeneration,
notwithstanding that he did believe before Baptism, and had received the holy
Ghost. Neither do we receive the Supper in vain, when as we, proouing our
selves (according to the commandment of the Apostle) come to the Supper with
faith, 1. Cor. 11.28.
and even with Jesus Christ dwelling already in our hearts.

For in the celebration of the Supper, we continue the communion, which we
have with him, in doing (not without great joy) that which the Lord has
commanded us to do, in remembrance of him. And yet there is no doubt, but
faith oftentimes may be poured and given even in the very celebration of the
Supper, unto them which come thereunto, al though they be not so thoroughly
prepared, as it were meet they should, that they may be made by the same faith
partakers of Christ. For who dare prescribe or assign unto our so liberal a
God, any time or mean? There is a figure in the words of the Lords Supper.


Therefore utterly rejecting all carnal cogitation, let us acknowledge that a
mystery is given here unto us. Let us remember that the holy Apostles and
Evangelists of the Lord have in such sort written the words touching the
cup, that if any perhaps would tie himself unadvisedly to the bare words
touching the bread, and keep himself close thereunto, he should nevertheless
be constrained to come short in the words touching the cup, and necessarily
acknowledge a figure therein.

Now is it meet to interpret the words as well of the bread as of the wine,
with like observation. S. Matthew and S. Mark call the cup plainly Blood, Math.
26.28 Mark. 14.24.
This (cup) is my blood. Is the cup then delivered unto us that we should
drink it? No, say they, but the wine which is in the cup, the wine is the
blood. I understand you well: but I answer, that there is a figure, in that
you say, that by the cup, we must understand the wine which is in the cup.
But if you urge us in these words, Mat. 26.26. Mark. 14.22 Luke. 22.19 1.
Cor. 11.24.
this is my body, to rest wholly in the literal sense, what should let us to
press you also in the words of the cup, with the like literal sense? But
if you object unto us the absurdity in these words, we will object to you
the like absurdity in those words also. Saint Paul and Saint Luke say, 1.
Cor. 11.25. Luke 22.20.
This cup is the new Testament in my blood. What then? I demand of you,
whether the cup shall be the Testament? Who knows not, that the Testament
or covenant is the forgiveness of sins? For the prophetical and
Apostolical Scripture does so witness it also. How than? Shall the cup be
rather within the blood, than the blood in the cup? Who is he I pray you, if
he be not blind, but he sees here the figure. For the wine in the cup is
the Sacrament of the true blood of Christ, shed for the remission of sins,
the which comes unto us by the testament.

What shall we say of that, which was forbidden in the Law, that the ancient
people of God, should not eat of the Leuit. 17.10.11.12.13. and 14.
blood of any oblation, whatsoever it were? who will then believe that in the
most perfect Supper of the new Testament, we should drink blood? If it were
so, the Paynims long ago said truly, that the Christians were wont in their
assemblies to eat man's flesh in deed, and to drink blood drawn from the
very veins of men. The Lord, as touching his body, has left the earth, but he
is present in spirit.
Moreover, the ancient Christians did understand these mysteries spiritually.
For me thinks that the things, which we have touched, when as we are in
hand with the doctrine of Christ in the Supper, ought here to be remembered.
For the Lord has no less plainly expressed in the Supper the bread to be
his body, than expressly said forthwith after the Supper, that his body should
no longer be in the world, but that by his spirit he would continue with his
unto the worlds end: wherefore these words of the Lord pronounced in the
Supper, and incontine^tly after, ought to be co^ferred together. And that
which more is, these words of the Lord: Mark. 14.22 Mat. 26.26. Luke 22.19.
1. Cor. 11.24.
This is my body, be figurative and sacramental, but the other pronounced
after the Supper, be not figurative, neither have any fruit or use in the
church, if Christ remayn corporally in the church, hid under the kind or,
form of bread.

These things said I not unto you, John. 16.4.
(says he) at the beginning, because I was present with you, but now I go my
way to him that sent me.

And again:

John. 16.7.
I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you, that I go away: for if I go
not away, that Comforter will not come unto you.

Also.

I went out from the Father and came into the world: John. 16.28.
again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.

John. 17.11.
And now am I not in the world, and and they are in the world, and I come to
thee.

It may be they will say, that they will not affirm so gross a presence of
Christ in the Supper: Let them then show, what manner of presence it is, which
they do affirm. Surely they will say, that they understand a corporal
presence, but yet notwithstanding spiritual, invisible, and ineffable. But the
body of Christ is, and abides a true body, The unity of the person of Christ
does not take away the properties of the natures.
and is not converted or changed into a spirit, although it be glorified. It is
very true, that it is joined to the divinity in unity of person, yet the
natures nevertheless abide whole, and not confounded. Therefore all the
ancient true, and catholic doctors cry every one with one consent: Christ
very God and very Man, is one Christ, who is not divided, but the properties of
the natures remain in him whole: in such sort, that as he is God, he is
every where, and as he is Man, he is in one certain place of heaven, and not
every where, saving only according to the communication of the properties.

Consequently they accurse, and account as accursed, all such which think the
contrary. It follows therefore hereuppon, that there can none other
spiritual means be established in the Supper, but that, whereby Christ our
Lord (which has and retayneth a true body, and is resident in heaven) is
present unto us by his holy spirit, reuiueth us, feeds us, refreshes us, and
saves us: and this virtue is divine and above other most excellent, and not a
thing void and vain.

For this cause it is not necessary, that in treating of the Lords Supper, we
should dispute of the corporal presence of Christ in the Supper, and of the
carnal eating of his body, and yet ineffable, considering that our Supper is
mystical, and not capernaycall (that I say no more) the which if it were
carnal, might be expressed: for contraryly if it cannot be expressed, it
cannot be called corporal. Let it not therefore be denied again, which
already is agreed upon.

Therefore the ancient ministers of the Church, were accustomed in the
beginning of the Supper to cry to the people: Lift up your hearts. Whereunto in
like manner the saying of the Apostle may be applied: when as he says.

1. Cor. 10.3. and 4.
Our Fathers did all eat of the same spiritual meat: and did all drink of
the same spiritual drink.

The which we read in the.x. Chapter of the first to the Corinthians.

Touching the rest, we will speak some other time how the unfaithful being
partakers of the symboll and Sacrament, and not of the thing, which it
signifies, eat and drink their judgment and condemnation.

The seventh
The Lord in like manner took the cup after supper, Article. He offers also
unto us the cup.
and distributed it amongst them all. For he shed his blood for them all. And
as he is the meat of al, so is he also the drink of all. Therefore said he
plainly: Drink ye all of it. And in like manner S. Mark affirms that they
also did, saying: Mark. 14.23 Mark. 24.24.
And they all drank of it. Let then the decrees and ordinances of all men
whatsoever, which ordinances commau^d that the lay or secular should
communicate at the Supper, under one of the two kinds only (that is to say,
under the form of bread) give place to these clear and express words of
the Lord. Now as he declared before, what manner bread it was, which he gave to
his, so does he here in like manner show, what manner cup or wine this is,
Math. 26.27.
that is to say, sacramental. This is my blood, (says he) of the new
testament, or, Luke 22.20. 1. Cor. 11.25.
This cup is the new Testament in my blood. We have declared before, that in
this speech there is a figure. For the chalice or the cup is the Sacrament of
the blood of Christ, by the which blood the new testament is consecrated and
dedicated, and by the which we have obtained remission of sins. We drink
therefore spiritually the blood of the Lord by faith, as we also eat his body.

The signs and seals of our salvation.
Furthermore these Sacraments or symbols, serve us for a seal and for a true
testimony, that the son of God, having taken humane flesh, is come into the
world, who having given his body, and shed his blood, has fully redeemed his
elect, fulfyllyng all things promised and written in the law and Prophets.
The which matter Saint Paul in the Epistle to the Hebrews does more at larg
expound unto us.

The Lord adds hereunto:

Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.25.
So often as you do this, do it in remembrance of me.

And Saint Paull says.

1. Cor. 11.26.
Ye do show the Lords death till he come.

The eight Article. The celebration of the supper is free.
This sentence teaches us three things. First, that it is lawful for the
Church of Christ, To celebrate this Supper, so often as it will, and that it
is not bound, or subject to any certain number. And for this cause, the
sentence of S. Augustine to Ianuarius is commendable: The which he utters
thus: Some will say, That we ought to receive the communion every day, and
other will say the contrary. But he reconcyleth them well, which admonishes
them to continue especially in the peace of Christ. Let every one do that,
which he believes Godly according to his faith, that he ought to do. For
neither of them both dishonors the body and blood of the Lord. This food
may no wise be contemned.

Consequently the end of the Supper is showed, when as it is not once only,
The supper is the memorial of Christ. Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24. and 25.
but often times repeated: This do ye in remembrance of me. For the Lord by
the holy assembly of his people, and by this action (the which after a sort
speaks, yea and lays plainly before our eyes these things to be looked upon
by us,) would that we should retain, and imprinte in our memory, this great
benefit and mystery of our redemption, and of his passion, that is to say,
that he had delivered his body to death for us, and shed his blood for the
remission of our sins, and given them us also in meat and drink for our
salvation. Wherefore in beholding the bread and wine, we must not stay our
selves only in the beholding of them, but we must behold the things which
they represente unto us, that is to say, the passion of the Lord, and our
redemption.

Our Lord came once into the earth, he died once, and has purged and cleansed
us all: Afterward he ascended into heaven, from thence he shall not come,
before he come to judge the world: Also our Lord shall dye no more, he died
once, but his only death has strength and efficacy for ever. And the Lord
works in us through his holy spirit sanctification and life.

To be brief, these things which we do, serve us for remembraunces,
remembraunces (I say) instituted touching things past, to confirm and
refreshe often times the remembrance of the passion of the Lord, and of our
redemption. Wherefore the saying of S. Augustine against a Manichee is praise
worthy. The flesh (says he) and the blood of this sacrifice, were promised
before the coming of Christ, by the oblations and offeringes, Which were
figures of them, in the passion of Christ, they were performed by the truly
it self: and after the ascentio^ of Christ, You shall show the death of the
Lord.
they are celebrated by the sacrament of the memorial. Lo what he says
hereof. Now the same Lord in ancient time ordained the Pascall Supper, which
he called also a memorial and commemoration, that the benefit of the
deliverance forth of Egypt (the true image and figure of the universal
redemption by Christ) might be refreshed and renewed every year to the
remembrance of the faithful. There was meat in both the two, there were
great benefits in both two, but yet the truth is here in the Supper, and the
shadow in the other, in both two the remembrance, in both two salvation, and
life, through the Messiah, finally in both two there were praises, and
spiritual reioysyng. For in the Supper we are commanded to show the death of
the Lord: which in deed is nothing else, but the commandment, which is given
us to yield praise, and thankesgiuyng to the Lord for his death. And so this
part, whereof we have heretofore spoken, is again repeated, and for this
cause we are often put in remembrance thereof, as of that thing, which is not
the least in that holy bankquet.

The ninth Article. Until he come.
Now we are commanded to do these things, until he come, That is to say,
until the Lord return in Judgment. All the sacraments of the ancient
fathers were instituted until the time of correction, that is to say, until
the coming of Christ, who by his coming into the world, has fulfilled all the promyses, having abrogated and abolished the shadows and figures. Therefore
has he now instituted this sacrament, that it might be perpetual and
immutable, That is to say, that it might endure in the Church, until the
Lord return in judgment fully to accomplish that, which he promised by his
word. Who is he than, that dare change it? If any have been so hold to make
any such change, who is he, which sees not, how greatly he has sinned
against God, and how unworthy he is, that we should hear him?

By these things we are confirmed to continue in this simplicity, keepyng our
selves from receiving at the hands of any person, whatsoever he be, any thing,
which agrees not with this institution and holy manner of doing. Let the
tradition of Christ suffice us, let us here do simply that, which the Lord
has commanded us to do, having herein set forth him self to us, for an
example and guide.

It rests that we declare in two words, What kind of men the Apostles were
in the supper.
what manner of men the Disciples of the Lord were in this Supper, and how
they behaved them selves therein, that hereby we may learn, how we ought to
behave our selves also in the celebration of this most holy banquet. True it
is, that they were weak and sinners, the which they well declared in the
Supper by certain tokens. Nevertheless they believed by true faith in the
Lord, were received into his favor, and cleansed from their sins, they
acknowledged their weakness, made their supplication to the Lord, depended
upon him only, and obeyed him simply in all, and through all, submitting them
selves to him, and doing simply in the Supper all that which he commanded them.
And the Apostles were not defiled by the presence of Judas the traitor, for
they were far from his conditions. Therefore least no man think himself
defiled, when he sees in the Supper the wicked and profane receive it, but let
him take heed, that he him self be not wicked. Every one shall bear his own
burden.

Let us follow in all things the Disciples of the Lord, in simplicity, faith
and obedience, doing that, which they did, following the commandment of the
Lord, believing that we are acceptable to the father through Jesus Christ, of
whom only it behooves us to depend, beseeching him to absolve us, to make us
perfect, and to conserve us. To him be glory for ever. Amen.

To fill up these leaves, we have joined hereunto this notable place of Saint
Vigilius the Martyr forth of his first book against heresies.

It seems to me, that they are so covered and blinded with the veil of
treason and falsehood, that they can neither see, nor understand, that one
thing agrees to the divinity of Christ, another thing to his humanity,
although they be in like sort common to both the two. For he says to his
Disciples: If ye loved me, John. 14.28.
ye would verily rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father, for the Father
is greater then I. And again: John. 16.7.
It is expedient for you, that I go away: for if I go not away, that
comforter will not come unto you. And undoubtedly the word of God, the virtue
of God, and the wisdom of God, has been always with the father, and in the
father, even then also when it was in us and with us. For in that time, when by
his mercy he dwelled upon earth, he forsook not his heavenly dwelling. For
with the Father he is all in all places, of equal Godhead, and no place can
comprehend him: For all things are filled with the Son, and there is no
place void of the presence of his Godhead. Wherefore then, and why says he
again or how does he affirm, that he will go to the Father, from whom
undoubtedly he never departed? But to go to the Father and to depart from us,
was to take forth of this world the nature, which he had taken of us. Thou
see therefore, that it was proper to the self same nature, to be taken
hence, and to depart from us, the which in the end of times, must be restored
to us again, according to the witness given by the voice of the Angels: This
Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, Acts 1.11. Matt. 28.20.
shall so come, even as you have seen him go into heaven. wherefore behold
the miracle, behold the mystery, and the secret of the two properties: The
Son of God is departed from us according to his Manhead, but according to his
Godhead he says: I am with you always, unto the end of the world. If he be with
us, how says he: The days will come, Luke 17.22.
when ye shall desire to see one day of the Son of man, and ye shall not see
it? But he is with us, and he is not with us. For these, whom he has left, and
from whom he is departed touching his Manhead, he has not left, neither is he
departed from. Touching his Godhead. For by the form of a servant, which he
has carried from us into heaven, he is absent from us: but by the form of God,
which does not depart from us, he is present with us in earth: notwithstanding
both present and absent, he is unto us, one and the self same.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, nigh unto the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas
Dawson and Thomas Gardyner, for William Ponsonby.


