A Sermon preached the 30. of January last at Bletsoe, before the Lord
Saint-Iohn and others, Concerning the doctrine of the Sacrament of Christ's
body and blood, Wherein the truth is confirmed, and the errors thereof
confuied, by Edward Bulkley Doctor of Divinity.

Prou. 14.6. The scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not: but knowledge is
easy to him that will understand. LONDON. Printed by John Wolf for George
Bishop. 1586.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, and my very good Lord and Lady: John Lord Saint John,
Baron of Bletsoe, and the Lady Catherin his wife, grace, mercy, and peace
from God our father, and Jesus Christ our Savior.
THat wise Philosopher Plato in an Epistle to Dyonisius King of Sicile, Page
671.
has a wise saying, (...). That is: It is great safety not to write, but to
learn* for those that publish things in writing to the view of all, do make
themselves subject to the sharp censures of many. Of whom, some will find
fault with the matter, and some with the manner of delivering the same. And
surely I suppose, there was never age more fertile then this, in bringing forth
malicious momouses, that are more ready to carpe and reprehend the well doings
of others, then any ways to do good themselves. Yea there be many which by
finding fault with other men's good and profitable labors, seek to procure to
themselves an opinion and fame of fine wits, and singular learning. Therefore
for that I have been unwilling to be bitten with such Theons teeth, and
considering both the great abundance of books, whereof in my judgment a great
number might well be spared, and the plenty of learned writers, which this
learned age does yield, I not being ignorant of the measure of mine own foot,
but well discerning my small myte, from other men's great and many talentes, have
thought good to follow Platoes safe counsel, in being rather a learner, then
a writer. Insomuch that hitherto I never published any thing in print, but one
other sermon preached about 14. or 15. years past at Paul's cross, the which,
that reverend, godly, and learned man of blessed memory M. Thomas Leauer, not
only desired me, but upon my refusal and denial vehemently adjured and
charged me in the name of God for to pen and to print. But that simple and
short sermon was so handled in printing, above 60. foul faults being
committed in it (such is the great and intolerable negligence of some
printers, which deserves sharp punishment) that I have been ever since more
moved to continue Platoes safe course of not writing, but learning.
Notwithstanding whereas of late it pleased your Lordshippe to request me to
preach at the ministration of the holy communion in your Church (although you
have there placed a man indewed with good gifts, who both is well able, and
also diligently does discharge that deuty) the which when I had performed in
such sort as God by his spirit enabled me, it pleased your Ladyship to
conceive so good liking of it, that first you sent, and after your self spoke
unto me to give you the same in writing, not only for your own use and
instruction, but also for the reformation (if it might please god to give good
success thereunto) of the unsound judgment of some, whose well doing you
greatly tender. The which your godly request, tending to so godly an end, when
I could with safety neither of conscience, nor duty deny: I have labored
(although more willing to preach six sermons, then pen one) to satisfy your
desire. And for that there were others also at the same time, which moved me to
the same effect as your Ladyship did, and were desirous to have copies thereof,
whom without my over great trouble I could not content: I have by these causes
bin urged, and by some men persuaded, to let it pass in print Hoping that as
it liked your Honors, and the other godly hearers, who acknowledged that they
were greatly edefied and confirmed in the true doctrine therein contained, by
hearing of it: so by the reading of it, some may be more established in the
truth, and others if they will lay away preiudicate opinion, and wilful
affection: and according to the old law of the Athenians will equally and
indifferently hear both parties may be reformed by it. Aeschines cont. (...).
But it is very miserable and lamentable to see, how stubburnly many stand
against the truth, and even wilfully shut their eyes from beholding the clear
light thereof. So that they will neither hear the word of God preached, nor
read godly and learned books published for their instruction. Zachar. 7.11.
Wherein they follow the steps of their forefathers, who refused to hearken,
turned their backs, and stopped their ears that they might not hear, and
hardened their hearts as an adamant, that they might not hear the law and the
words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by the hands of the former
Prophets. Therefore great wrath has comen from the Lord of hosts. But of
these men I will not further at this present speak, only I beseech God open
their eyes, that they may see the miserable estate wherein they stand, and that
at the length they may turn from darkness to light, Acts. 26.
from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive inheritance among
those that be sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ. And to the end that this
simple sermon may be a better mean and instrument for the instructing of such
as be simply ignorant, and not wilfully perverse and obstinate, I have enlarged
the same more in penning, then I did in preaching. And have added some
discourses, and sundry testimonies of ancient fathers, with places of popish
and Ethnish writers which in preaching, partly the shortness of time would not
permit me to utter, and partly of purpose I did omit, This sermon I have
neither in preaching, nor penning sought to beutifie with ornaments of words
and eloquence, which in these divine and heavenly matters is not so needful:
but have thought it sufficient for me, to deliver and set forth the plain
truth, in a plain and simple phrase, being more desirous, that it may lighten
the minds, and instruct the hearts of the hearers and readers of it, with sound
doctrine, and substance of matter, then tickle and delight their ears with a
vain sound, or glittering show of words. The which simple sermon such as it
is, for as much as your lordship requested me to preach it, and your Ladyship
moved me to write it: I have thought it most meet, to offer and present it
unto your Honors, as a true testimony and token of my loving and dewtiful mind
toward you for your great favor showed me, and sundry benefits bestowed upon
me. And I humbly beseech your Honors, that if you have found and felt increase
of knowledge in Gods holy truth, and of true comfort, by hearing this and such
other sermons preached, as I am assured you have, that then you would daily
more and more increase and go forward in the love of the preaching of Gods
word, and to imitate that noble example of that noble man of AEthiopia, Act.
8.22.
who both read (and that in his charet, travailing by the way,) the Prophet
Isaias, and also heard Philip expound the same. Even so that your Honors may
daily more and more grow in the true knowledge, fear, and obedience of God,
Wherein true Nobility does chiefly consist, not only daily and reverently
read the word of God your selves: but also diligently hear faithful Philips,
that is, godly and learned ministers truly expound and preach the same. Which
is most needful for you. For as that noble man profited by reading, but was
converted unto Christ by Philips preaching: Romans 10.14.
so it is chiefly the preaching of the Gospel, which wins us unto Christ,
planteth faith, and works repentance in us, and directs and stirs us up
to walk warely and uprightly before the Lord our god. For as spice when it is
bruised, is of more force to season, and meat when it is chewed is more meet to
norish us: Even so the word of god, when it is by exposition as it were bruised,
chewed and applied unto us, is of more power to season the corrupt humors that
be in us, and effectually to feed us, that we may live in holiness and
righteousness unto God: for want and contempt of the preaching of Christ's
gospel, it is lamentable to see how many fearfully fall away from the grace of
god. Therefore that your Honors may not only constantly continue, but also
daily increase in the true worship and fear of God, love earnestly the
preaching of gods word, let it be dearer unto you than thousands of gold and
silver, sweeter than honey, and the honey comb, and hunger after it as your daily
food: Matthew. 13 45.
esteem it for that precious pearl which ought to be more dear unto you, tha^
al these earthly and transitory things of the world, for all flesh is grass,
Isai. 40.
and all the glory thereof, is as the flower of the field, which soon fades
and falls away: but the word of our God abides for ever, and shall make us
stand and flourish for ever in gods kingdom, if faithfully in our hearts we
believe it, and obediently in our lives and conversation follow it.

Thus assuring my self that your Honors will take in good part this my bold
adventure in presenting this small mite and poor gift unto you: I will
forbear from further troubling you: beseeching God the father of mercy so to
work by his holy spirit in you, that you may be filled with the knowledge of
his will in all wisdom, Colos. 1.9.
and spiritual understanding, that ye may walk worthy of the Lord, pleasing
him in all things, being fruitful in all good works and increasing in the
knowledge of God. etc.

Your Honors most humble in Christ Jesus to command Edward Bulkley.
At my house in VVoodhall the 18. of February. 1586.
A Sermon preached by Edward Bulkley Doctor of Divinity at Bletsoe the 30. day
of January 1585. upon the doctrine of the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ.
Matthew. 26.26. As they did eat, Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed,
he brake it, and gave it to his disciples, and said: take ye, eat ye, This is
my body. Also he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave to
them, saying, drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new Testament,
which is shed for many for the forgiveness of sins. I say unto you that I will
not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine until that day, when I shall
drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom. And when they had song a psalm,
they went out into the mount of Olives.
WHen the time did now draw near, Ephesians. 5.2.
that our Savior Christ was to offer that sweet smelling sacrifice and
oblation of himself upon the Altar of the cross for our redemption and
reconciliation: it seemed good to his heavenly wisdom to ordain this
Sacrament to be a perpetual memorial, remembrance and pledge unto us of his
death and passion until his coming again. 1. Cor. 11.25.26.
And because the law did require the Paschal lamb at that time to be eaten, he
coming not to break, but to fulfill the law, that he might discharge all our
breaking of the law, Matthew. 5.17.
did first with his disciples according to the law eat the passover, and so did
put an end unto the same, and then did institute this his supper to succeed in
his Church for ever in the place thereof. That as he had ordained baptism to
succeed in the room of Circumcision, so he would have this Sacrament to
succeed in the place of the Pascall Lamb: and as they had been Sacraments and
seals of the old Testament before his coming in the flesh: so these might be
after his coming sacraments and seals of the new Testament and covenant
whereof we read Hieremie. 31.31. and Hebrews 8.8. Therefore the Evangelist in
the first words of my text says, As they did eat, Meaning that when they had
eaten the Paschall Lamb, then they did receive and eat this his holy supper.
Whereupon I may gather this, that it is not so unlawful (as some think) after
the tasting and eating of some thing, to eat this blessed Sacrament. The which
I speak not for that I would have men eat and drink and fill their bellies,
before they come to this holy supper, which with all reverence and sobriety
ought in Gods fear to be received: but to take away the superstition of some,
who think that if they (being in never such infirmity and weakness) do taste
never so little, they be thereby unmeet and unworthy to receive this holy
mystery, and thereupon abstain from it. But if we did judge rightly, we
should think, that not the receiving into us of a little of Gods creatures
soberly with thanksgiving, and that upon infirmity, does make us unmeet
communicants: but those things that come out of us, even out of our hearts, as
evil thoughts, murders, Mat^h. 15.15.
adulteries, formeations, theftes, false testimonies, slanders are the things
that defile us, and make us more loathsome unto Gods majesty, than any
leprosy unto men. These things make us unmeet gestes for such a celestial
banquet, and unworthy receivers of this blessed Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood. Well says Chrysostom: Non enim comedisse confusionem nobis affert, In
Genes. hom. 10.
sed mali quippiam egisse. i. Not to eat, but to commit any wickedness
brings shame unto us. Therefore I exhort you to abstain from these and all
other such filthy sins, and to come with clear consciences and good hearts
to this holy table. And as touching meats, I wish men to refrain from them,
when they come to communicate on this sacrament, unless it be for some great
infirmity and necessity etc. Now it follows.

Jesus took bread etc. Here the Evangelist shows two causes of this
sacrament, the efficient and material cause. The efficient cause is Jesus
Christ the son of God, John 1.29.
who is the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, who has made
peace between God and us by the blood of his Cross, Collos. 1.20.
and has reconciled us in the body of his flesh through death, 1. pet. 1.18.
who has redeemed us from our vain conversation received by the traditions of
our fathers, neither with gold nor silver, but with his own precious blood,
who has loved us, has washed away our sins in his blood, Apocal. 1.^.
and made us kings and priests unto his father, even this Jesus our only
Savior and redeemer, has ordained this holy sacrament for us and left it unto
us, in remembrance of his death, and for a gage of our salvation purchased
thereby. Wherefore if Jesus Christ and our salvation procured by him, be dear
and precious unto us: then also this sacrament, which he has delivered unto
us, and instituted for us, to confirm our faith in him, ought to be dear and
precious unto us. Therefore we should be very careful, that neither
negligently we absent our selves from it, nor irreverently come unto it, nor
that we make not small account of it: for if we use to make great account even
of small things, which our dear friends leave us at the hour of their death,
in remembrance of them: How much more account ought we to make of this
sacrament, how small soever it seem to the outward eye of flesh and blood,
seeing that our dear redeemer Jesus Christ, even as it were at the hour of
his death bequethed and committed it unto us, and has left to be a necessary
food unto our souls, that thereby we may daily more and more grow up in him.
But hereof I shall have occasion hereafter further for to speak, when I shall
entreat of our dew preparation in coming to receive this holy Sacrament. The
second cause touched in these words which is the material: is bread, and wine,
as after follows, which be the outward matter and elements of this sacrament,
and be holy signs of Christ's blessed body offered, and of his precious
bloodshed for us. And here that we may the better know the true nature and use
of sacraments, we are to understand that God in offering to us our salvation
purchased by Jesus Christ, uses two things, ye one is his words: wherein be
contained his sweet and precious promises of mercy grounded and founded upon
Jesus Christ: the other is external signs which we call sacraments, and be
added to the word, for seals to seal and to confirm unto our consciences the
promises of the word, and even to set that before our eyes which the promises
of gods word do sound into our ears: for we are to mark this, that both the
promises of the word, and also the sacraments lead us to one self same thing,
that is to Jesus Christ, in him only to seek our salvation. for as the word
does this as appears by those places before alleged out of John, 1.29. Col.
1.20. 1. Pet. 1.18. Apocal. 1.5. and infinite such other: even so do the
sacraments lead us as it were by the hand unto the same, and lively set the
same before our eyes. As for example: baptism does teach us to the eye, that
even as water washes away the uncleanness of our bodies: so Christ's precious
blood which he shed for us cleanses us from the filthiness and giltines of our
sins. And this sacrament of Christ's supper teaches and assures us, that even
as bread and wine feed, nourish, strengthen and comfort man's heart: so also
Christ Jesus who offered his body and shed his blood once for all and even for
us, feeds, nourishes, strengthens, and comfort our feeble sinful souls
unto eternal life. And these two things, his word, and outward sacraments, God
has from the beginning used, thereby to offer our salvation to us, and to
assure us of his favor. When God had created Adam and Eve, and placed them in
Paradise, he did not only by word teach and admonish them to serve and honor
him their creator, but also he did set the tree of life in Paradise, which
should set before their eyes, and effectually teach them to employ that life
which they had received of God to Gods glory. When God had brought that
fearful flood upon the world, for the horrible corruption and wickedness
thereof, and did in mercy determine never in like manner to destroy it so
again, Genesis 9.11.
he did not only assure us thereof by his word and promise: but also the more
to confirm it unto us, did set his bow in the clouds, that as often as we
behold the same, we should be assured of the performance of gods promise, as
even to this day appears. When it pleased God to accept Abraham and his seed
to mercy, he did not only signify the same to Abraham by making his covenant
with him, Genesis ^7.
that he would be his God, and the God of his seed, and that in his seed al
nations of the earth should be blessed: but also he gave unto him the sacrament
of Circumcision, to be a seal of this his covenant, to assure them that by
that blessed seed Jesus Christ, he would circumcise the foreskinne of their
hearts, and cut away all their uncleanness. And when God as it were renewed
this covenant to the Israelites when he brought them out of Egypt, he did not
only give his Law unto them, wherein his covenant was contained: but also
ordained the passover, and many other sacrifices to confirm the same unto
them, in being holy figures and signs of Jesus Christ to come, upon whom the
covenant was grounded. Even so to confirm the new testament and covenant made
with us, whereof I made mention before: Hierom. 3^.31. Heb. 8.8.
(which is the same in substance with the old: but called new, because it is
renewed unto us in Jesus Christ reueiled, and adorned with greater graces of
Gods spirit) Christ has ordained sacraments in number (as S. Augustine
affirms) fewest, August. Epist. ad Ianuar. 118.
in observation easiest, in signification most excellent, that is, Baptism and
his holy Supper. And therefore our Savior Christ speaking of the cup (as S.
Luke and S. Paul report his words) says. 1. Cor. 11.25.
This cup is the new testament in my blood, that is to say a sacrament and
seal of the new testament and covenant of God confirmed unto us in his blood.
And this manner of teaching and delyuering of things by these two kinds of
things, words objected to the ears, and outward signs to the eyes, it seems
that we by the instinct of nature, or rather of God, have in like sort
received. for in conueighing of things from one to an other we observe the same
order. As if a man make conueiance of lands or goods, he does it by words and
external signs. If it be by words committed to writing for continuance, we
use to those writings wherein be contained graunts and covenants to put seals,
which serve for the further ratifying and confirming of them. If a man take
possession of a piece of ground, he does it not only by uttering certain
words, but for further confirmation thereof, he diggeth up, and takes a clod
or piece of earth in his hand. If a man make a promise to do this or that, he
does it not only by words and speech, but for ratifying thereof gives his
hand. When a King or Queen take upon them the government of a kingdom, they
do it not only by certain words, but also they have a crown set upon their
head and a septer put in their hand, which be outward signs and tokens of that
dignity and dominion which they receive. And thus commonly we deal in all
other matters. Whereby we see and plainly perceive, that our gracious God,
having in mercy respect to our infirmity, and as it were humbling himself to
our capacity, does use the like means in offering to us our salvation in Jesus
Christ, that we use in these earthly matters and affairs, that is to wit, his
word wherein be contained his sweet promises of mercy, 2. Cor. 6.16.
that he will be our God, and we his people, that he will be merciful to our
iniquities, Heb. 8 ^0* 12.
and never remember our sins any more: and sacraments which being outward
signs and elements he does annex unto his word, to seal those promises and
the more effectually to confirm them unto our consciences. Hereby as I said
we may learn the true nature and use of Sacraments, which is to seal and
confirm gods promises unto us, thereby to strengthen our faith in them, and to
be gages and pledges to us of our salvation in Christ Jesus. For this cause it
is said that Jesus took bread. It now follows: And when he had blessed etc.
The papists by blessing understand consecrating, and by consecration they mean
a converting by the speaking of certain words, of one thing into another. But
this is not true consecration, but rather a magical incantation. neither can
they show any good Latin writer, that ever used this Latin word Consecrare,
in such sense: but it signifies to dedicate a thing to a holy use. And so we
do consecrate the sacrament, when by preaching gods word, rehearsing the
institution of Jesus Christ, and calling upon God by prayer, we do take the
bread and wine from a common use, to be a sacrament of Christ's body and blood
given for us, to be a seal of Gods promises, and a pledge of our salvation in
Christ Jesus. This is our consecration which is true consecration: as for their
secreat whispering of certain words to turn one thing into another, we will
none of it, we are content they use it, which is more meet for wicked
coniurers, then godly Christians: But in this place by blessing is meant nothing
else but thanksgiving, as most plainly appears in the next verse: for whereas
it is said that Christ taking the bread did bless, in the verse following it
is said that he taking the cup gave thanks. And whereas S. Matthew and S.
Mark say, that he taking the bread blessed: Matthew. 26.2^. Mark. 12.22. Luke
22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
S. Luke and S. Paul say that he gave thanks. Whereby it most plainly appears
that blessing and thanksgiving is al one: the which also is evident by that
saying of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 14.16.
when thou blessest in the spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the
unlearned, say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knows not what thou
say? here it is most plain, that which S. Paul in the former part calls
blessing, in the latter he calls thansgiuing. So that our savior Christ,
when he blessed, gave thanks to his heavenly father. And as our Savior did
never taste any of Gods creatures, but always (as the Gospel shows) he gave
thanks to God his father, to teach us that we should walk in his steps, and
whenever we receive or enjoy any of Gods benefits, always to give God
thanks for them, from whose hand and gracious goodness we do receive them: so
here at this time no doubt but our savior Christ had a further respect, and
gives thanks to his father, for his great and infinite mercy to mankind, and
for that great and wonderful work of our redemption which he was then ready to
accomplish. Whereby we have in like manner to learn, that as we ought to give
God most hearty thanks for all good gifts which he gives us, and al benefits
that he bestows upon us: so when we come to this holy Supper of Jesus Christ,
we ought to consider on ye one side our own mysery by sin, how that we be
of our selves children of wrath, enemies of gods grace, unprofitable servants,
yea and prodigal children, which are not worthy to be called or counted Gods
children: and on the other side gods great and infinite mercy, who spared not
his own dear son but gave him for us to redeem us and reconcile us to his
mercy, and to be a spiritual food to norish us to eternal life. Of these
inestimable mercies we ought most specially when we come to this holy table to
be mindful and to give God most hearty thanks for them. Not only in sounding
forth the praises of God with our tongues, but also in indeuoring carefully to
yield holy obedience to God in our lives. And for this cause the godly fathers
called this sacrament Eucharistia which does signify thanks giving, for that
it being a pledge of our redemption and salvation by Jesus Christ, we should
when we receive it, give thanks unto god for the same. The which I beseech you
as at all times, so specially when ye come to this holy mystery diligently for
to do, Xenoph. lib. 1 (...).
The old Persians condemned no sin more greatly, nor punished none more
severely, then unthankfulness. If therefore we be not sincerely tha^kful to God
for his great mercies powered upon us by Jesus Christ, we shall not escape his
fearful and terrible plagues. It follows. He brake it, and gave it to his
disciples etc. The breaking of the bread does set forth unto us the breaking of
Christ's body, and the pouring of the wine the shedding of his blood upon the
cross for us, for this sacrament is as it were a glass for us to behold
Christ crucified in, and hereunto we must apply all the holy actions used in
the administration thereof. So the giving of the bread and wine represents
unto us the giving of Jesus Christ for us, once upon the cross for our
redemption, and daily to be a spiritual food to nourish us to eternal life.
The receiving also of the bread and wine into our bodies does signify and show
unto us our inward receiving of Jesus Christ into our hearts by faith, Ephesians.
3.17.
by the which he dwells in us as the Apostle says, and we be made flesh of
his flesh, 5.30.
and bone of his bones. Moreover Christ did break the bread, not to eat it all
himself as mass priests do, Durand lib. 4. cap. 53.
nor to offer one part for the souls in heaven an other for them that be
alive, and the third for the souls in purgatory as it is also their use, but
to distribute it to his disciples, that they might take and eat it. And
therefore my text says, he brake it and gave it to his disciples saying take
ye, eat ye, this is my body. Wherein we are to note that he says not, look
upon it, kneel and knock unto it, and worship it, but he says, Take ye, eat
ye, promising then it shall be his body unto them: so that here is a
commandment, and also a promise. The commandment in these words: take ye,
eat ye: the promise in these, This is my body, wherefore if we look to be
partakers of the promise, we must yield obedience to the commandment, ye which
if we refuse to do, we cannot look to be partakers of ye promise. As for
example, God says, psalm. 50.15.
call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee: if we obey
the commandment, and call upon God in the time of our trouble, we may be
assured of the performance of the promise that God will deliver us, then and in
that sort, as he knows to be best for us, for our God is not more liberal in
promising, then he is most faithful in performing. But if we do not in our
trouble call upon God, we cannot look that he should deliver us. Even so here
if we obey not Christ's commandment, and do not take and eat it, but look,
kneel and adore it, we cannot look that it shall be Christ's body unto us: for
it is not further a sacrament to us, then we according to our saviors
institution do take and eat it. No says B. Boner? I will easily confute that:
In M. Philpots examinations.
is not a capon a capon unless I eat it? even so says he, it is a sacrament
and Christ's body although we do not receive it. I answer that B. Boner had
as it appeared by his fat face, greasy belly, and by his foolish reasoning
better skill in a fat capon, then in the doctrine of divinity, and namely of
this sacrament: for a capon being a natural thing, is a capon, as bread is
bread and wine is wine although they be not received: but a sacrament being a
thing not of nature, but by grace, is not further a sacrament, then it is
joined to Gods promise and institution, and applied to that use whereunto it
was ordained. The water which flowed in the wilderness out of the rock was a
sacrament of Jesus Christ to the Israelits which drank of it, 1. Cor. 10.4.
as Saint Paul shows: but whereas not only the Israelits, but also their
cattle did drink of the same water, was it a sacrament to the cattle? No. If
one should take the water wherein a child has been baptized, and apply it to
some common profane use, is it then a sacrament? No. It is not a sacrament
further then it is joined to Christ's in^titution and one baptized in it. Even
so the bread and wine is no further a Sacrament, then according to Christ's
institution and cammaundement it is taken and eaten. Therefore to the Papists
in their private masses not taking and eating it according to Christ's
commandment, but gaping and kneeling to it, and worshipping it, which he has
never commanded, Hierem. 7.31*
neither ever came into his heart as the prophet speaks, it is not Christ's
body, but they commit most abominable Idolatry, in giving that worship to the
creature which is due to Christ the Creator who is blessed for ever. But
further of this their Idolatrous adoration, I will not now entreat: but come to
that which follows. This is my body in expounding of which words many
respecting more the outward sound of the words, then considering the simple
sense and meaning of Jesus Christ, have been foully deceived, and have hereof
gathered sundry great errors. And even so the very Evangelists do show, that
diverse more regarding the external sound of Christ's words, then marking his
meaning, have been greatly deceived. As when our Savior Christ warned his
disciples to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Saduces, Matthew. 16.6.
his Disciples did think that he spoke of outward bread, whereas his meaning
was to admonish them to take heed of the sower corrupt doctrine of the Pharisees
and Saduces. 12.
So when our Savior said unto the Jews, John. 2.19.
destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again, they thought
that Christ had spoken of the material temple of Jerusalem, and therefore they
said, forty and six years was this Temple a building, and will thou rear it
up in three days? But he spoke of the temple of his body. In like manner when
our Savior Christ said to Nicodemus, Ioh. 3.3.
except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus taking
it grossly of the outward birth, said: how can a man be born that is old? can
he enter into his mothers womb again, and be borne? But Christ spoke of
spiritual regeneration wrought by the holy Ghost. Many such other examples
might be alleged, but I will content my self only with that one of the
Capernaits, the cosen germans, or rather dear brethren of our papists, for
whereas our savior Christ said: John. 6.51.
I am ye living bread, which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which
I will give for the life of the world. They grossly understanding this of the
carnal and external eating of Christ's flesh, said, how can this man give us his
flesh to eat? and again this is an hard saying: who can hear it? 60.
But Christ spoke spiritually of the spiritual and not of carnal eating of
his flesh, and therefore he says, 63.
it is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: the words that
I speak unto you are spirit and life. In like manner let us in this matter
take diligent heed that by too much grating upon the letter, and respecting the
outward sound of words, and not considering Christ's meaning we be not seduced
and carried into error, in grossly and carnally taking that, which Christ our
savior spiritually and sacrame^tally did speak. Aduers. Praxca.
The counsel of Tertullian herein is to be regarded and followed, who says:
Malo te ad sensum rei quam ad sonu^ vocaboli exerceas. i. I would that thou
exercise thy self rather to the sense of the matter, the^ to the sound of the
word. Therefore that we may understand the true sense and meaning of these
words, This is my body. We are to consider, that it is no marvel, if our
savior Christ hear speaking of a Sacrament, do speak sacramentally, and do
use a phrase of speech usual and common to all Sacraments, that is, to give the
outward sign the name of the thing signified. for whereas a sacrament
consists of two things, an earthly and an heavenly as Irenaeus says: Lib. 4.
cap. 14.
the outward element, and the thing whereof it is a sacrament, and that there is
a similitude and agreement between these two, as namely in this sacrament: for
as bread and wine (as above I have declared) do nourish, strengthen, and
comfort man's heart and body: even so does Christ's body and blood nourish
stre^gthen and comfort the souls of Gods children: by reason of this agreement
the name of the thing signified being the heavenly, is attributed to the sign
being the earthly. And this is done for good and great reason, that we in
receiving this Sacrament should not set and fix our minds upon the earthly
thing the bread and wine, but thereby be lifted up to behold the heavenly
thing, that is the body and blood of Jesus Christ given for us. This doctrine
the ancient Fathers do most plainly set down, how strange soever it seem
to ye favorers of the rotten and ruinous Religion of Rome. Augustine writes
thus: August. Ep^st. 1^ ad Bo^^facium
Si enim sacramenta quandam similitudinem etc. i. If sacraments had not a
certain similitude and likeness of those things whereof they be sacraments,
they were no sacraments at all. And by reason of this similitude they do often
take the names of those things. As therefore after a certain sort, the
sacrament of Christ's body is Christ's body and the Sacrament of Christ's
blood is Christ's blood, so the sacrament of faith is faith. And again, August.
Le^^. quest. ^7.
Solet autem res quae significat eius rei nomine quam significat nuncupari etc.
The thing that signifies is wont to be called by ye name of ye thing which it
signifies, as it is written, the seven ears of corn are seven years: for
he did not say, Genes. 41.26.
they signify seven years? And the seven kine be seven years, and many such
like. Hence comes it that was said. The Rock was Christ, for he said not The
Rock does signify Christ, but as though it were that, which in truth by
substance it was not, but by signification. In like manner does Theodoretus in
his first Dialogue Theodoretus dialog. 1.
(...) etc. Therefore our savior changed the names, (...).
and to his body has given the name of the sign, and to the sign the name
of his body. So he that called himself a vine, has also called the sign his
body. (...). This thou have spoken truly, but I would learn the cause of this
change of the names* (...). The scope and end is evident to them that be
instructed in divine matters. for our Lord would that they which be partakers
of the divine mysteries, should not set their minds upon the nature of the
things that are seen, but by the change of the names, to believe the change
that is wrought by grace: for he that called his natural body wheat and
bread, and again called himself a vine: the same has honored the visible
signs with the name and title of his body and blood, not changing nature,
(...).
but adding grace unto nature: hitherto Theodoritus. In which words he flatly
affirms that the name of the thing signified is given to the outward visible
sign, and shows the cause and reason why it is so done. And that it is a
usual and common phrase (as I said before) in all sacracraments it is most
plain by many places of the scripture. Cap. 17. (...) Hoc est p^ctum page 13
(...)
In Genesis God says of Circumcision: This is my Covenant. And again: My
Covenant shall be in your flesh. Here Circumcision is called the Covenant, and
yet it was not the Covenant: for this was the Covenant, that God would be God
to him, and to his seed after him etc, of this Covenant Circumcision was a
sign and seal, as in the same place is said: ye shall circumcise the
foreskinne of your flesh, Genes. 17.11.
and it shall be a sign of the Covenant between me and you. This Circumcision
which was a sacrament and sign of Gods Covenant, is called the Covenant it
self, to the end they using and remembering it, might be put in mind of Gods
Covenant which it signified, sealed, Exodus 12.11. ^stenim phase (i^ est
transitus) domini.
and confirmed unto them. So the Paschal lamb is called the passover in these
words: Ye shall eat it in have, for it is the Lords passover. And again:
Choose out and take ye for every of your households a lamb, and kill the
passover. So our Savior Christ also calls it in this Chapter: Verse. 18.
I will keep the passover at thine house with my Disciples. Here ye see that
the lamb is called the passover: and yet the lamb properly was not the
passover, for the passover, was the passing of the Angel over the houses of
the Israelits, where the blood of the lamb was sprinkled, when he destroyed
the first borne of the Egyptians. Now the Lamb was a sacrament, holy sign,
and pledge of this passover and deliverance, and so consequently of that true
deliverance from eternal destruction and damnation by Jesus Christ. The
sacrifices in the old Law were called sins, because they were offered for
sin: in which sense God by the Prophet says of the priests, they eat up the
sins of my people, Hose. ^.8.
meaning the sacrifices which they offered for the sins of the people. So
likewise Christ is called sin: He that knew no sin, 2. Cor. 5.21.
was made sin for us, that we should be made the righteousness of God in
him. The Rock is called Christ. The Rock was Christ says S. Paul, 1. Cor.
10.4.
yet the Rock was not properly Christ but a Sacrament of Christ. But to come
nearer to this matter. 1. Cor. 10.1^.
Saint Paul says the bread which we break, is it not the communion of ye body
of Christ? in which words he means and affirms bread to be the communion
of the body of Christ. And yet properly bread is not the communion of the body
of Christ, but a Sacrament and pledge of that spiritual communion which we
have with Christ, for as the bread received into our bodies is joined unto us,
and made ours: so Jesus Christ received by faith into our souls is made ours:
Ephesians. 3.17. 1. John. 1.3. Ephesians. 5.30.
and we have fellowship with him, yea and be made flesh of his flesh and bone
of his bones. Moreover whereas Christ says (as S. Paul records) This cup
is the new Testament in my blood etc. 1. Cor. 11.25.
I would ask of these men that grate so earnestly upon the letter, and urge so
eagerly (...) the word: whether the cup that is made either of silver, gold or
wood, (for by the way as Bonifacius the martyr sometime said. B. Rhenanus in
Annotat. in Tertull. de Corona militis.
In old times we had wooden Chalices and golden priests, but in these days we
have golden Chalices and wooden priests) be the new Testament? No, no, say
they: by the cup is meant by a figure, the thing in the cup. Thus they that
have cried out against figures and figurative speeches in the sacrament, and
have scornefully called such as have used them figurators, M. Anto. Constantius
fol 2. etc. tibi saepe.
are now forced to flee to a figure, to forsake (...). i. the express words,
and by the cup to understand the thing contained in the cup. But to grant
them this, what is in the cup? wine say we, blood say they. Now to grant them
this their own assertion for disputation sake: I will ask them whether blood
be the new Testament? I suppose they cannot with any forehead or face say yt
blood is the new Testament, for what is the new Testament, but the new leage
and covenant which God makes with us in Christ Jesus, as it is set forth in
Jeremy and the Epistle to the Hebrews in these words: Hierem. 31.31. Hebr.
8.10.
This is the Testament that I will make with the house of Israel, after those
days says the Lord, I will put my Laws in their mind, and in their heart I
will write them, and I will be their God and they shall be my people. I will be
merciful unto their unrighteousness, and I will remember their sins and
their iniquities no more. This promise of mercy is the new Testament: And
therefore neither wine nor blood is properly the new Testament, but a Sacrament,
a holy sign and seal of the new Testament, confirmed unto us in the blood
(not of Oxen or Goats) but of Jesus Christ the son of God. Whereupon I thus
reason with the Papists: as the Cup or that in the cup, is the new
testament, so is the bread the body of Christ: but neither the cup nor the
thing in the cup is properly the new Testament, but a holy sign and
Sacrament of the new testament: So the bread is not properly the body of
Christ, but a holy sign, and pledge of his body offered upon the cross for us.
And this phrase of speech in attributing to the Sacrament the name of ye thing
whereof it is a sacrament, which seems so rough in these fine men's mouths:
both the spirit of God in the holy scriptures, and we in our common talk use
to give too bare and naked signs, which do not exhibit as sacraments do the
thing signified, but barely signify the same* as in the example before
alleged by S. Augustine, Genes. 41.26.
the seven thin ears of corn, and the seven lean kine are said to be seven
years, when as they did but only barely signify the seven years of famine
which were to come. Genes. 40.11.
So also Joseph says of the three branches of the vine, and of the three white
baskets, the three branches be three days, and the three white baskets be
three days: 16.
when they did but only signify the three days, wherein the butler should be
restored, and the baker hanged. So S. Paul calls ye wives veil or covering
of her head, 1. Cor. 11.10.
her power being but a bare sign of her husbands power over her, and many
such other examples might be alleged out of ye scriptures but these shall
suffice. In our common speech we use to call bare pictures, by the names of
those persons whereof they be pictures. Alluding to the pictures which hang in
my lord S. John's great Chamber.
So we say this is king Henry the seventh, this is king Henry ye eight, this
is Francis the french king, this is the Lord Cromwal, and yet those pictures be
not those personages, but only and barely represent them. Now if we use to
speak thus of pictures, which be but bare signs of men, and do but only
represent the forms and shapes of the^. How much more may we so speak of this
Sacrament and call it the body and blood of Christ, being not a bare sign and
representation thereof, but an instrument of Gods grace whereby the body and
blood of Christ is truly offered to all, and effectually received of the
faithful children of God, to nourish and comfort their souls. Yea moreover
the very profane Poets have used this phrase of speech, as Virgil says
faliere dextras for to break promise, where by Dextras the right hands he
means promises made by giving the right hand. Iliad. 3.
So Homer says: (...). i. The Herolds brought from the city the faithful
oaths of ye gods, two lambs, pleasant wine, the fruit of the earth. And
again: (...). Ibidem post.
i. but the gorgeous Harolds brought forth the faithful oaths of the gods. In
which places by the faithful oaths, are meant the lambs and wine which they slew
and powered out in confirmation of those promises, made touching the combat
between Menelaus and Paris, and so Eustathius understanding it: expounding
(...) by (...), the faithful oaths, that is the sacrifices. Where we see that
the external sacrifices, the lambs slain and wine powered out, to confirm
those oaths, that they which did not perform them, might be slain, and their
blood and brains powered out as those lambs and wine were, are called the
oaths themselves. These places to this end only I allege to show us that it
should not seem so strange a thing, to attribute to the outward sign and
Sacrament the name of that thing whereof it is a sacrament, and for the
confirming whereof unto us it is ordained and used. But that this exposition of
mine or rather of God himself, as has been proved by many places and reasons
out of the scripture, may plainly appear to agree with ye doctrine of the
ancient and godly fathers of the Church I will set down some places out of
their books, to be as witnesses to give testimony to the truth of this
doctrine. Tertullian says, Lib. 4. aduers. Marcionem.
Christ professing that he did greatly covet to eat the passover as his own
(for it were unmeet that God should covet that which were an others) taking
the bread and distributing it to his disciples, made it his body saying, this
is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body: but it should be no figure,
unless Christ's body were a true body, for a vain or void thing, such as is
a ghost, cannot have a figure. Phantasma.
Here Tertullian expounds these words. This is my body, by this that is
figure of my body. And by this reason proves our Savior Christ's body to be
not spectrum or phantasma a ghost or fantastical body, as Marcion that
monster blasphemed, but a true body like unto ours, because the Sacrament is a
figure of it, which it could not be except it were a true body. But ye Papists
doctrine in this point sauoreth strongly of Martions blasphemy, for to say that
Christ's body is in heaven and earth, yea and in infinite places of ye earth at
one instant, and that the natural real body of Christ is under the forms of
bread and wine, without any form, quality, or quantity of a body without
breadth, length, or thicknes, what is this but to make it no true body as
Martion did. And even so S. Augustine entreating of Christ's body says: Epist.
57. ad Dardanum.
Na^ spatia locorum toll corporibus, nusque^ erunt, and quia nusquam erunt,
non erunt, Toll ipsa corpora qualitatibus corporum, non erit vbi sint, and
ideo necesse est vt non sint. i. for take from bodies the spaces of place, and
they shall be no where: and because they be no no where, they be not at al. Take
the bodies from the qualities of bodies there can be no place where they may be
and therefore it must of necessity be that they be not. But the Papists
attribute neither place nor quality to Christ's body in the sacrament, and
therefore by S. Augustines judgment they make it no body, and so as I said
agree in one with that monster Martian. But to return to my purpose and to
show that the fathers have expounded those words of our savior Christ in that
sense which I have before declared. Augustine says: I may expound that
commandment to be put in the sign, Lib. cont Adunantum Maneche. did. cap.
12.
for our Lord did not doubt to say, This is my body: when he gave a sign of
his body. In Psalm. 3. in 1. ^or. 11.
Again he admitted him (Judas) to the feast wherein he commended and delivered
to his disciples a figure of his body and blood. Ambrose says: De iis qui
initiantur. cap. 9.
In eating and drinking we do signify the body and blood of Christ which were
offered for us. Again, De Conse^ra. did. 2. cap. Reuera.
before Consecration it is named an other kind, after Consecration the body of
Christ is signified. The greek Fathers in like manner call the sacrament a
sign, figure, or token of Christ's body. Gegory Nazianze^: Ap^l^g p^g. 1^ (...).
how dare he (which first has not offered himself a lively sacrifice) offer to
God that outward sacrifice, which is a sign or example of those great
mysteries: and the like he has in his oration upon his sister Gorgonia. Basile
says: Page 56. In Can^^^ ^^turgia. (...)
he has left unto us memorials or remembrances of his passion by which comes
salvation, which according to his commandment we propound unto you. So
Theodoritus (...) Tell me therefore, Dialog. 2.
those mystical signs which of the priests be offered to God, of what things
be they signs? (...) of the Lords body and blood. (...).
(...) of his true body or not of his true body or not of his true body?
(...) of his true body (...). very well, for an image must have a pattern
whereof it is an Image, (...).
even as Painters also do imitate nature, and paint the images of those things
that be seen. (...) that is true (...). (...).
if then the divine mysteries be signs or figures of a true body, the body
of our Lord is yet a body, not changed into the nature of the godhead, but
replenished with divine glory. Homil. 27. (...).
So says Macarius: In the Church is offered bread and wine, examples of his
flesh and blood. These places (that I allege no more) sufficiently show that it
was not strange to the godly fathers, to call this sacrament a sign, token,
figure, and example of Christ's body, and that they understood these words,
This is my body, in that sense, the bread to be called Christ's body, because
it is an holy sign, example and pledge of Christ's body offered upon the
cross for us.

Now although I may seem to have sufficiently spoken of the true sense and
meaning of these words This is my body, and withal to have opened the true
doctrine of this sacrament: yet because many men be not as yet satisfied in
this point, but the popish doctrine of Transubstantiation, and carnal presence
of Christ's body under the forms of bread and wine, sticks still in their
stomaks, I have thought it very needful further to prosecute this matter, and
more particularly, and largely to confute the said errors, and to lay open the
nakedness and weakness of them. The false doctrine of the Papists, concerning
their Transubstantiation, which they corruptly gather of those words of our
Savior Christ consists in two special points, the one, in that they say,
that after the words of Consecration there remains no substance of bread and
wine but only the outward accidences thereof, as whitenes, roundnes, etc. The
other that the very natural body of Christ, which was borne of the blessed
virgin is there under the said forms of bread and wine. As touching ye first,
that there remaneth no substance of bread and wine. I say that this is contrary
to the holy scriptures, contrary to the writings of the ancient godly fathers,
contrary to the judgment of all our senses, contrary to the nature of a
Sacrament, and lastly such a doctrine as brings with it many absurdities.
Matthew. 26.29.
That it is contrary to ye scriptures I prove it thus. Christ says I will
drink no more of the fruit of this vine, until that day, that I shall drink
it with you new in the kingdom of my father. Our Savior Christ here speaking
of his supper and after his supper, calls it the fruit of the vine, which is
wine and not blood. S. Paul says the bread which we break is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? 2. Cor. 10.16.
S. Paul here not only says that bread is the Communion of Christ's body, but
also says. Which we break. Now what do we break? only accidences without a
substance? that is an absurd folly: or do we break Christ's body? as Pope
Nicolas with his counsel compelled that learned man Berengarius to affirm, D^
Consec. did. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius.
but that is wicked blasphemy. Therefore it is manifest, that that which is
broken is bread, and that bread broken, is the communion of the body of
Christ, that is (as I before declared) a Sacrament and pledge unto us of our
spiritual, and yet true and effectual communion with Christ Jesus. Again S.
Paul says immediately after: 1. Cor. 10.17.
we that are many, are one bread, and one body, because we are all partakers
of one Bread. Again, as often as ye shall eat this Bread, 1. Cor. 11.26.
and drink of this cup ye show the Lords death till he come. Again,
whosoever shall eat this Bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: And again, let a man
therefore examine himself and so let him eat of this bread and drink of ^his
cup. Here Saint Paul five times call^th it bread even when it is received and
eaten, therefore I conclude that it is bread. But here the Papists come in with
a crafty cauillation and think they have found a fine devise to shift off
these plain words of the Apostle, they say that saint Paul calls it bread,
because it was bread, as Aarons rod being turned into a serpent, Exodus 7.1^.
and being a serpent is called a rod: Aharons rod devoured their rods. I
answer first that they compare things utterly unlike: for in the Sacrament
there must continue a similitude and agreement between the sign and the thing
signified, as before out of S. Augustine I declared, and therefore the
substance of the sign must needs remain, without which there can be no such
similitude. But in this matter there is no such agreement between the rod
and serpent, but rather be clean contrary, and therefore the reason of these
two are not alike. will have Saint Paul to call that bread, which they say is
not bread: so why may not our savior Christ call that his body, which not
properly but sacramentally is his body. Thus I trust this their cauillation is
sufficiently confuted and that you plainly perceive that S. Paul calls it
bread, because it is bread. The which now. Substance, and figure, and kind,
(...) etc.
and be visible and tangible as they were before, here not only Theodoritus
plain words do affirm the nature and substance of bread and wine to remain
after consecration, but also the whole drift of the disputation, between the
true Christian, and the Eutican heretic, tends to the same end. But if the
doctrine of transubstantiation had been then in the Church received, it had
most fitly served for the heretics purpose, that as the bread after
consecration, is turned into Christ's body: so Christ's body after the ascension
is turned into the deity, and so the heretic reasons but the true Christian
answers that he is catched in his own snare, for as bread and wine after
consecration are not turned into Christ's body and blood, but remain in
substance as they were before: so Christ's body after his ascension is not
turned into the deity, but replenished with glory and immortality.

Gelasius a Bishop of Rome writing against the same heretic Eutiches that
Theodoritus did, and using the same reason, sets down the same doctrine in
these words: Gelasius contra Eurichen.
Certe Sacramenta etc. i. Surely the sacraments of the body and blood of
Christ, which we receive are a divine thing: and therefore by them we be made
partakers of the divine nature, and yet it cease not to be the substance or
nature of bread and wine, and indeed an image and similitude of the body and
blood of Christ is celebrated in the Accion of the mysteries etc. Chrysostom
also writes thus: Chrisost. ad C^esarium Monachum.
Sicut enim antequam sanctificetur panis etc. For as before the bread is
sanctified, we call it bread, but when the divine grace has sanctified it, by
the means of the priest, it is in deed delivered from the name of bread, and
is counted worthy of the name of the lords body, although the nature of bread
do still continue in it, and is called not two bodies but one body, of the
son etc. Both the words of Gelasius, and Chrysostom, and also the drift of
their discourses tending to the same end that Theodoritus does, most plainly
show, that after consecration the substance of bread remains, even as after
Christ's assention the substance of his true body continues, or else these
reasons taken from the sacrament do not only not make for them but directly
against them, yea and plainly make for those heretics whom they by these
arguments seek to confute. Origin also says: Panis ille etc. Orig. in Mat^h.
cap. 15.
That bread which is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, according to the
material substance which it has goes into the belly, and is cast out into the
draught, but by the prayer which is joined to it, according to the proportion
of faith is made profitable. By which it appears that it is the substance of
bread and not Christ's body (which were blasphemy to affirm) that is so cast
out. Cyprian says: De unction Chrismatis.
Dedit dominus noster etc. Our Lord at the table whereat he did participate his
last feast with his disciples, gave with his own hands bread and wine, but upon
the cross he gave his body to be wounded by the hands of the soldiers.
August. de consecr. did. 2. qui mandu.
Augustine also says: Quod videtur panis est etc. That which is seen is
bread, and the cup which our eyes also do show unto us etc. He says it is
bread, and not seems or appears to be bread. August. in psalm. 98.
And in another place: Spiritualiter intelligite quod loquutus sum. Nen hoc
corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis etc..i. Spiritually understand that which
I have spoken. You shall not eat this body which you see, nor drink that
blood, which they shall shead that crucify me. I commend unto you a certain
sacrament, which being spiritually understood shall quicken you. For although
it must of necessity be visiblie celebrated, yet it must inuisibly be
understood. Justinius Martyr says: Justinius Apol. 2 (...). Page 162.
that the substance of the sacrament is turned into us, and that thereby our
flesh and blood is nourished. But it were a great absurdity to say that our
flesh and blood is nourished of Christ's body and blood converted into them.
Therefore it is bread and wine which be turned into us, and whereby we are
nourished. By these places that I allege no more it is as clear as the sun
that the godly fathers did nothing at all doubt of this our doctrine, but were
of this judgment, that the substance of bread and wine remain still in the
sacrament. Now it follows that I show that this doctrine of the Papists is
contrary to the nature of a sacrament, the which sufficiently appears, by
that which is before declared, for I showed that a sacrament consists of two
things an earthly and an heavenly the sign and the thing signified, and that
there must be a similitude and agreement between these two, or else (as I
alleged out of Augustine) it can be no sacrament, Epis. 13.
for as bread and wine, feed, strengthen, and comfort man's heart and body: so
Christ's body and blood, feed, strengthen, and comfort our souls. Now if there
be no bread nor wine, then it cannot feed, strengthen, and comfort us, and
then it has no similitude and agreement with Christ's body and blood, and so
by consequent (according to Augustines judgment) it is no sacrament. And thus
the Papists striving through blind ignorance, to take bread and wine from the
sacrament, do indeed take away the sacrament it self, and so have nothing but
an Idol of their own. Now it remains that I prove it to be contrary to ye
judgment of our senses, the which needs no proof: for who knows not, that
to the eye it is bread and wine, to the taste it is bread and wine, to the
feeling and smelling it is bread and wine, and not the body and blood of
Christ. Therefore I conclude that it is bread and wine. But here me think I
hear some Papists exclaiming and saying, phy for shame, that you should use
such Arguments, to measure these mysteries by ye external judgment of our
senses. I answer that I am nothing at al ashamed of this argument, seeing that
the best disputer that ever was in the world, and that most mightily maintained
ye truth, and confounded his adversaries used the same, which was neither
Chrisippus nor Aristotle, but Jesus Christ the son of God, for when he appeared
after his resurrection to his disciples, and they were abashed and afraid,
Luke. 24 37. Ioh. 20.2^.
supposing they had seen a spirit, he said unto them, why are ye troubled? and
wherefore do doubts arise in your hearts? 17.
behold my hands and my feet: for it is I my self: Handle me and see: for a
spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. Here we see that our
savior proves by seeing and handling, his body to be no spirit, but a true
body. The same reason does Tertullian use, against that monster Martion of
whom I before spoke: his words be these: Hic primum manus ei iniectas
animaduertens, Lib. 4. adue^^. Martionem.
necesse habeo iam de substantia eius corporali prefinire, quod non possit
phantasma credi, qui contactum and quidem violentia plenum detentus and captus
and ad precipitium vsque protractus admisserit. i. I considering that here
first hands were laid upon him (Christ) I must of necessity determine of his
Corporal substance, Luke 4.
that he cannot be thought to be a spirit or ghost, who being detained, and
kept, and brought even unto the steypie place suffered himself so violently to
be handled, and to that purpose immediately after alleges a verse of
Lucretius. Tangere enim and tangi nisi corpus nulla potest res. i. Nothing can
touch and be touched but a body. Therefore either our savior Christ and
Tertullian used a reason that has no reason, which I trust our adversaries
will not say, or else our reason is very strong, that try it by touching,
seeing, and tasting and it will appear to be bread. And so much the stronger
is this reason, for that our said adversaries cannot show one example in all
the scriptures, where one substance by Gods mighty power being changed into an
other, there was not also an outward change of the qualities and properties
thereof, to be deserved by the outward senses. As when Moses rod was changed
into a serpent, Exodus 4.3.
it was not only in substance, but also in external show a serpent, so that
Moses for fear fled from it. Exodus 7.21.
When the water in Egypt was turned into blood, it was blood not only in
substance, but also in external appearance to the eye and taste, so that the
Egyptians could not drink of it. John. 2.9.
When our savior Christ had in Cana of Galile turned the water into wine, the
governor of the feast as soon as he tasted it, perceived it to be very good
wine. And therefore this should seem to be very strange, that here should be
such a change or transubstantiation (as they term it) of one thing into
another, and no alteration of any outward qualities to be discerned by the
judgment of the senses. This were contrary to Gods working in all other
miracles. So that it is hereby evident that this is no such miracle as they
imagine, as also Augustine flatly affirms in his third Book and 10. Chapt.
of the Trinity. Aug. de mirab^^ libus Script.
And ye same Augustine writing a particular book of all the miracles in the
scriptures, makes no mention at all hereof: by these reasons before alleged
it does I trust plainly appear that the substance of bread and wine in the
sacrament do remain and continue: well then say the Papists it is but bread,
and we may receive it as only a piece of bread? Nay not so, we teach and
believe, Justinius Apog. 2 Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 34.
that it is not to compted nor received as common bread and wine, but a
sacrament of Jesus Christ, a seal of Gods promises, yea and an effectual
instrument of Gods grace, whereby Jesus Christ with his righteousness and al
other benefits of his passion is offered unto us. And to make this matter more
plain by an example: even as the Queens majesty's seal joined to her Letters
pattents, is in substance wax still, but yet not to be reputed as common wax,
but to be reverenced as her majesty's seal, and it and the said Letters
pattents to the which it is joined carry a power with them, and be effectual
instruments to convey never so great a thing to us, yea even to bring us pardon
for our life, being condemned to die: even so the promises of God and the
sacraments annexed as seals thereunto be means to conueigh Jesus Christ unto
us, and with him forgiveness of all our sins, and a free pardon from eternal
death which we have deserved. And therefore although bread and wine do there
remain, as the substance of water does in Baptism (the other sacrament and
seal of Gods promise) continue: yet it is very reverently to be received, as a
Sacrament of Jesus Christ, and a pledge of our salvation in him. Now lastly
that this doctrine of theirs draws with it diverse absurdities, has partly
alredie appeared. As for to say, that they break not the substance of bread,
but either only accidences, or Christ's body is an absurdity, to say that the
accidences do hang in the air, without any subject, is, an absurdity: or to
say that they be in Christ's body, is an other absurdetie. To say that there
is a conversion and change of the substance, and none of the external
qualities and properties is an absurdity and contrary to all other miracles in
the Scriptures as before is declared. But of other absurdities which follow
this absurd doctrine of transubstantiation I will hereafter by Gods grace
entreat.

Now I come to the second error of the Papists, concerning the presence of the
very real and natural body of Jesus Christ, under those accide^ces and
forms of bread and wine, which I affirm to be contrary to the Articles of
our faith, to the holy scriptures, to the sayings of the ancient fathers, and
that it brings with it sundry absurdities. First we believe and confess in
the Articles of our faith, that Christ is ascended into heaven, sits at the
right hand of God, and from thence shall come again to judge the quick and
the dead. Matthew. 26.11.
So in the scriptures our Savior Christ says the poor ye shall have always
with you but me ye shall not have always. Again, I came out from the father,
and came into the world: Ioh. 16.28.
Again, I leave the world and go to the father. Also he says, Ioh. 17.11.
and now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world: Peter also
says, Acts. 3.21.
that the heaven must contain him, until that all things be restored. But
here the Papists have an other shift, ye Christ is not here now upon earth in
that visible manner, that he was then. This is as much as if a man should say: I
will leave this house, I will abide no more in this house, and yet he hides
himself under some hangings that he is not seen: does that man say truly? or
is he not therefore in the house? yea but they reply and say that our Savior
himself said. Matthew. 28.
Behold I am with you to the end of the world. I answer that our savior
Christ by his divine nature and godhead is with us to preserve, direct and
comfort us: but in respect of his body and humane nature which he took of the
blessed virgin, he is not now upon earth. And therefore our Savior himself
warns us to beware and take heed of such false Prophets as say here is
Christ, or there is Christ, Matthew. 24.23.
he is in the desert, or in secreat places, 26.
and bids us believe them not, for (says he) as the lightning comes out
of ye East and appears in the West, ^7.
so shall also the coming of the son of man be. As though he should say, my
coming shall not be secreat and invisible under the forms of bread and wine,
but even as the lightning is visible and terrible to the world, so shall my
coming be, which then shall be when I shall come in majesty, power, and glory
to judge the quick and the dead, upon which words S. Hierome writes thus:
Hierom. in Matthew. 24.
Stultum est itaque eum in paruo loco vel abscondito quaer^re, qui totius mu^di
lumen sit.i. It is therefore a foolish thing to seek him in a small secreat
place (such as is a pix) who is the light of the whole world. Christ therefore
in respect of his humanity and body, is not to be sought or found upon earth.
But they reply that in as much as our savior Christ is not only man but also
god, being Immanuel god with us, and that these two natures being united in one
person, and make one Christ, therefore wheresoever is the one nature that is
the deity, there is the other viz. the humanity. I answer that this
follows not, for although I confess that to be most true of the uniting of
the two natures in one person: yet we must not with the heritike Eutiches
confound those two natures, but acknowledge the several properties apperteining
to them to remain distinct, and that they are to be distinguished of us. John.
14.28.
In this sense Christ said, The father is greater then I, the which is to be
understood in respect of his humanity: for in respect of his deity, he says
the father and I are one: and as S. Paul says, Philip. 2.6.
he thought it no robbery to be equal with God. Mark. 13.32.
So in respect of his humanity he confesses himself to be ignorant of the day
of judgment, but in respect of his godhead he knows all things. In respect
of his manhood he was subject to infirmities, as hunger, Matthew. 4.^. John.
4.^6.
weariness, yea and unto death. but in respect of his deity he was subject to
none of these, but was impassible, and immortal: So in respect of his manhood
he was contained in place, and when he was risen, the Angel said he is risen
and is not here, but in respect of his godhead, he is in all places, 1. King.
8.^7.
the heavens of heavens do not contein him. So I conclude that in respect of
his human nature and body as when he was in earth, he was not in heaven: so
now being in heaven he is not upon earth, and therefore in respect of his
humain nature he said, me ye shall not have always, I leave the world, I am no
more in the world: and in respect of his deity he said: behold I am with you
to the end of the world. And yet I confess that we may truly say that whole
Jesus Christ God and man is with us to the end of the world, In vnitate
personae, non proprietate naturae. as S. Augustine says, i. in unity of
person, not in propriety of nature: for if we consider perticulerly his human
nature that is not with us. This doctrine the ancient Fathers most plainly set
forth, as Augustine: August. Epist. 57 ad Dardanum.
Vna enim persona deus and homo etc. i. for he being God and man is one person,
and booth is one Christ Jesus, who is every where in that he is God, but in
heaven in that he is man. Again Ille absens est praesentia corporis, August.
in Psalm. 127.
sed presens vigore maiestatis.i. he is absent in respect of the presens of his
body, but present by the power of his majesty. And again: Sursum est dominus
etc. i. the Lord is above, August. in Joan. tract. 30.
but also here is the Lord the truth. For the body of the Lord, wherein he did
rise, can be but in one place, but his truth is dispersed every where. Again:
let good men also take this, August. in Joan. tract. 50.
and not be careful: for he spoke of the presence of his body. for as
touching his majesty, his providence, his ineffable and inestimable grace, that
is fulfilled which he said, behold I am with you always to the end of the
world: But touching the flesh which the word took to it, touching that, by
which he was borne of the virgin, apprehended of the Jews, crucified upon
wood, taken from the cross, wrapped in clothes, laid in the sepulcher reueiled
in the resurrection, ye shall not always have him with you. Why? because he
was conversant with his disciples 40. days in respect of his bodily presence,
and they waiting on him, seeing him, but not following him, he ascended into
heaven, and is not here? for he is there, sitting at the right hand of the
father: and he is here, for he has not left us by the presence of his majesty
etc. Contr. faustum* lib. 20. cap. 11.
Again, Augustine says: Christ according to his corporal presence, could not
be at once in the son, in the moon, Lib. 1. co^^. Eutic^e^.
and upon the cross. Vigilius a godly Bishop of Tridente and Martyr gives
most plain witness to this truth, saying. Nam vide myraculum, vide vtriusque
proprietatis mysterium etc. for see a miracle, see the mystery of the property
of both the natures. The son of God according to his humanity is gone from
us according to his divinity he said unto us. Behold I am with you, always to
the end of the world: if he be with you, how does he say, The day shall come
when ye shall desire to see one day of the son of man, and you shall not see
it. But both he is with us, and he is not with you: for whom he has left, and
from whom he is departed in his humanity, he has not left nor forsaken by his
deity: for by the form of a servant, which he has taken from us into heaven,
he is absent from us, but by the form of God, which does not depart from us,
he is present in earth with us: so he being one and the same, is both present
with us, and absent from us. And again the same Vigilius says, Lib. 4. contr.
Eutichen.
Deinde si verbi and carnis etc. Moreover if there be one nature of the word
and flesh, how comes it to pass, that the word being every where, the flesh
is not also found to be every where, for when it was in the earth, it was not
in heaven: and for that now it is in heaven, it is not in earth, and in so much
it is not, that according to it, we look for Christ to come from heaven, whom
according to the word, we believe to be with us in the earth. Therefore
according to your doctrine, either the word is contained in place with ye
flesh, or the flesh is every where with the word, seeing that one nature
receives not in it self any thing contrary and diverse. Hitherto Vigilius,
whereby we may see how near the papists join with that old heretical Abbot
Eutiches condemned in the counsel of Calcidone, in confounding the properties
of both natures, and holding that Christ's flesh and body is at one instant both
in heaven and earth and in infinite places of the earth. Therefore we are not to
seek our savior Christ in earth, but we must be Eagles to soar up by faith
into heaven, and there to eat his flesh and drink his blood. S. Paul exhorts
us to seek the things that be above, Colloss. 3.^.
where Christ sits at the right hand of God: in which words he moves us to
seek the things that be there where Christ is, but Christ is above in heaven,
therefore we must seek the things that be above in heaven and not the
things that be upon earth. But if Christ be upon earth as the Papists teach,
then either Paul's reason is not good, or we may seek the things that he upon
earth, which he does in express words forbid us. But I will prosecute this
matter no further, only I will lay forth certain absurdities that follow of
this gross doctrine of Transubstantiation.

First, If Christ's real and natural body be there under those forms of bread
and wine as they teach, then we do with our mouths receive and eat the very
body of Christ, and drink his blood, but this is not only an absurdity, but
also wickedness and impiety as S. Augustine says, August. lib. 3. de doct.
christ. cap. 16.
whose words are worthy well to be marked and considered. He giving rules how to
understand the scriptures, amongst others gives this for one, That if the
scripture seem either to command any thing that is evil and naught, or to
forbid any thing that is good and profitable, then it is not a proper speech,
but a figurative. The example that he brings is this. Except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood ye shall have no life in you.
He seems to command (says he) a horrible and wicked thing. Therefore it is
a figure, commanding us to communicate upon the Lords passion, and sweetly and
profitably to hide up in memory, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for
us. In which words S. Augustine not only condemns, that gross and
Capernaicall eating and drinking of Christ's flesh and blood, which the Papists
imagine, but also shows what it is to eat his flesh and drink his blood,
even faithfully to believe and acknowledge in our hearts, that his body was
crucified and his blood shed upon the cross for us. But Pope Nicolas with the
Roman counsel enforcing that excellent learned man Berengarius to recant, and
deny the true doctrine which he had mainteyned, caused him to confess (as
appears in the Popes own decrees) the very body of Christ in truth to be
handled by the priests hands, De consec. did. 2. Ego Beringarius manibus
sacerd. frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri.
and to be broken and torn by the teeth of the faithful. The which is so
absurd and gross that the very barbarous writer of the gloss upon that
place, gives warning warely and wisely to understand Beringarius words, or
else we may fall into greater heresy then he held.

An other absurdity is this, yt if Christ natural body be in the sacrament,
then our savior Christ did eat his own body, for that our savior Christ did
eat the sacrament, does appear by these his words after supper. Verily I say
unto you, Matthew. ^6.
I will not henceforth drink any more of the fruit of the vine etc. And as
our Savior vouchsafed to be baptized, that he might sanctify Baptism unto
us, even so he did receive this sacrament also, to sanctify it unto us, and
thereby to assure us the more of our communion and fellowship with him.
Chrisost. in Mat. Homil. 83. de Consecr. did. 2. cap. nec Moses. Et glos. in
cap. in Christo.
This both Chrisostom does flatly affirm, and the papists themselves do not
deny, but plainly confess in these rude rimes without reason. Rex sedet in
Coena turba cinctus dnodena. Se tenet in manibus, se cibat ipse cibo. i.

The king sitting at his supper with his xii. Apostles held himself in his
hands, and fed himself with the meat of himself.

Now whether this be not an absurdity, that our savior Christ sitting with
his disciples, did with his natural body, eat his natural body, I will commit
it to the conscience and judgment of the godly to consider. And whether it
must not hereof follow that he had too bodies, one an Active, that did eat,
and another a passive that was eaten.

that whereas the papists teach ye Christ's body is in the sacrament, being
impassible, mortal, and glorified, contradictories must needs be affirmed at
one instant upon Christ's body: for his body wherein he sat at the table with
his disciples was visible, but the body in the sacrament invisible: that body
was passible, this impassible: that subject to death which shortly after died
upon the cross: this not subject to death. Now it can no more be, that Christ's
body at one instant, should be visible and invisible, passible, and impassible,
subject to death and not subject to death: then it can be a body and no body.
And therefore this is a foul absurdity.





men do eat the very body of Christ. Whereas Christ himself says: John. ^.54.
whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, 56.
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And again, he
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, 57.
dwells in me and I in him: he that eats me shall live by me. But the
wicked have not eternal life, neither do they live by Christ being dead in
their sins. Therefore the wicked do not eat Christ's flesh nor drink his
blood. Augustine says: August. in Ioh. tract. 26.
Huius rei sacramentum id est vnitatis etc. The sacrament of this thing, that
is of the unity of Christ's body and blood is prepared in the Lords table, and
received of the Lords table, in some places every day, in some at certain
times, of some men to life, of some to destruction. But the thing it self
whereof it is a sacrament is destruction to none, but life to every one that is
partaker of it. Again the same Augustine says: August. lib. 21. de imitat. Dei
cap. 25.
Non dicendum eum manducare corpus Christi, qui in corpore non est Christi. i.
we must not say that he does eat the body of Christ, who is not in the body of
Christ. And again in the same place. Idem ibid.
Nec isti ergo dicendi sunt manducare corpus Christi, quoniam nec in membris
computandi sunt Christi etc. Therefore they are not to be said to eat the body
of Christ, because they are not to be counted among the members of Christ, for
not to speak of other things they cannot at one time be the members of Christ
and the members of a harlot. Origene says: Est verus cibus. i. Orig. in Matthew.
15.
that is the true meat, which no wicked man can eat: for if a wicked man
could eat the body of Christ, it would not be written, He that eats this bread
shall live for ever. These places I do allege to confute not only this absurd
assertion, but also that gross doctrine of transubstantiation: for if the
bread be so transubstantiated into Christ's body (then the wicked do eat
Christ's body: if the wicked do not eat Christ's body, (as by the proofs before
alleged does plainly appear) then is there no such transubstantiation nor
carnal presence as they vainly imagine, and falsely affirm for to be. But
here also they want not a shift, which is, that the wicked do eat Christ's
flesh and drink his blood but not worthily. But I would have them to prove that
a man may eat Christ's body unworthily. In deed I confess that the wicked
may unworthily eat of this bread and drink of this cup of the Lords, 1. Cor.
11.27.
and be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, as S. Paul says, because that
through infidelity they do reject Jesus Christ offered thereby. But that the
wicked and reprobate be either worthily or unworthily partakers of Jesus
Christ, that I do deny. Yet to prove this shameless assertion see how they be
not ashamed wilfully to corrupt the holy Scriptures.

Titul. 21. Arti. 1. de sumpt. Euch.
Bunderius a lying and false Friar, is not abashed thus to allege S. Paul's
place which even now I brought forth: Multi enim indigne accipiunt de quibus
ait Apostolus: Qui manducat carnem, and bibit calicem domini indigne iuditium
sibi manducat and bibit. i. For many do unworthily receive of whom the Apostle
speaks. He that eats the flesh and drinks the cup of the Lord
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation. Here this deceitful Friar
for panem the bread puts carnem the flesh that whereas the Apostle says, he
that eats this bread, and drinks this cup etc. He makes him to say, he
that eats the flesh and drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily: wherein
you see how he alters S. Paul's words and corrupts the place. But no marvel
for such shameless assertions, and corrupt doctrine, cannot be defended without
shame less corrupting of the holy Scriptures. But they will say, the sense and
meaning is all one: for he that eats that bread, eats Christ's body. But
that is the question, and therefore they use a deceitful Argument called
petitio principii, taking that for granted which is in question and is denied:
for the bread is one thing, Christ's body an other: And although we are not to
separate Christ from the sacrament, yet we ought not to confound them, but to
distinguish between them: for even as the godly Fathers did teach touching the
two natures of the deity and humanity in our Savior Christ, that they are
neither to be distracted a sunder and separated, as did Nestorius, nor the
properties of them to be confounded, as did Eutiches: but the said properties
are to be distinguished. Even so are we to deal in this matter of the
sacrament, concerning the sign and thing signified, that neither they are to
be distracted a sunder, and divided: nor to be confounded together, but to be
distinguished. The sign which is the bread and wine, are things visible and
corruptible which will in short time putrify: Jesus Christ the thing signified,
is to our outward eyes invisible and is incorruptible. The bread and wine are
upon earth: Jesus Christ is in heaven at the right hand of God. The bread and
wine are received with our mouths, broken with our teeth, and feed our
bodies: Jesus Christ is fide digerendus says Tertullian Tertull. de resurrect.
carnis.
received and eaten by faith, and feeds our souls to live to God eternally:
The bread and wine are received of all both faithful and unfaithful, godly
and wicked. Jesus Christ is only received of them who be faithful, Ephesians. 3.
in whose hearts he dwells by faith. They that do eat the bread and wine do
die, not only this outward death, but also many die eternally: John. 9.51.
but he that eats this bread that came down from heaven which is Jesus
Christ himself shall live for ever. Thus a difference is to be put between the
external sacrament, and Jesus Christ of whom it is a Sacrament. And yet we
must not distract and separate altogether Jesus Christ from the sacrament, but
believe that he is truly offered to all, and effectually received of those
that be gods children, and have a true faith, which is the very mouth of the
soul, whereby they eat his flesh and drink his blood, as Christ says: John.
^.35.
I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that
believes in me shall never thirst.

Now I will only show briefly the uncertainty of this doctrine of
Transubstantiation, Lib. 4. did. 11. cap. Si autem.
and so I will end this discourse. Peter Lombard the master of the sentences
writes thus: Si autem quaeritur qualis sit illa conuersio an formalis an
substantialis, vel alterius generis, definire no^ sufficio: formalem tamen non
esse cognosco quia species quae ante fuerant remanent. i. If it be asked what
kind of conversion that is, whether formal or substantial, or of any other
kind I am not able to define. But yet I know, that it is not a formal
conversion, because that the forms and shows which were before do still
remain. Afterward he adds: some think that it is a substantial conversion,
saying that one substance is so converted into an other substance, that the one
is essentially made the other, to the which sense the fore alleged authorities
do seem to consent. But some do not grant that the substance of bread, is at
any time made the flesh of Christ. Others be grant, that that which was bread
or wine, after consecration is the body and blood of Christ: Some do say thus,
that that conversion is so to be understood, that under those accidences,
under which before was the substance of bread and wine, after consecration is
the substance of the body and blood: but others have thought that the substance
of bread and wine do there remain, and that there also is the body and blood
of Christ. Hitherto the master of all the Popish schoolmen, whose book of
Sentences was of such credit and authority with them that it was more read and
expounded then the holy bible. Whereby we may plainly see how uncertain this
their doctrine is, and what diverse opinions have been of it. So Gabriel Byell
Gab. Biell in exposit. Canonis Missae lect. 40.
an other great scholeman writes thus: Quomodo ibi sit Christi corpus, an per
conuersionem alicuius in ipsum an sine conuersione incipiat enim corpus Christi
cum pane, manentibus substantia and accidentibus panis, non inuenitur expressum
in canone Bibliae. Vnde de hoc antiquitus fuerunt diuersae opiniones.i. How the
body of Christ is there, whether by conversion of some thing into it, or
without conversion, there begin to the body of Christ with the bread, the
substance and accidences of the bread remaining still, it is not found
expressed in the canon of the bible. Whereupon in old time there were diverse
opinions hereof. And afterward he rehearses four. Besides this, what if John
Fisher bishop of Rochester, a great patron of the Pope and his doctrine, do
flatly confess that this presence of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament
cannot be proved by the scriptures. Ioh. Roffens. Episc. in defentio Regiae
assertionis cont. captiuit. Babilonicam M. Lutheri N. 8. and O.
Whose words be these, Hactenus Mattheus etc. Hitherto Matthew who only makes
mention of the new Testament: neither is there any word here set down, whereby
it may be proved that in our mass, there is made a true presence of Christ's
body and blood: for although Christ made of the bread his flesh, and of the
wine his blood, it does not therefore follow, that we by virtue of any word
here set down, can do the like, when we attempt the same. Again he says: Non
potest per vllam scripturam probari etc. It cannot be proved by any scripture,
that either a layman, or priest as often as he attempteth the same, can in like
manner make of bread and wine the body and blood of Christ, as Christ himself
made, seeing this is not contained in the scriptures. And again he concludes
this matter thus: Ibid.
Ex iis opinor etc. By these things I suppose every man perceives that the
certenty of this matter depends not so much of the gospel, as of the use and
custom, which so many ages has been commended unto us from the very first
fathers. Here by the judgment of Bishop Fisher, this doctrine of
Transubstantiation and real presence, depends not so much upon the Gospel,
as upon custom: and that it cannot be proved by the Scriptures: whereby we may
see how uncertain it is. So that we may say with Tertullian: Nihil de eo
constat, Lib. de carne Christi.
quia Scriptura non exhibet.i. We know nothing thereof, because the Scripture
does not show it. And again: Lib. de monogamia.
Negat scriptura quod non notat.i. The scripture does deny that, which it does
not express: wherefore let us forsake this doubtful doctrine, yea this
erroneous, absurd and false doctrine, and let us embrace the truth before
declared: let us not seek Christ here upon earth, but let us lift up our
hearts into heaven, and there by faith eat Christ's blessed body that was
offered, and drink his precious blood shed upon the cross for us, to feed
and nourish our souls to eternal life, which is not to be done carnally, but
spiritually, yet truly and effectually. Now let us prepare our selves to come
reverently and worthily to this holy sacrament, the which that we may do: we
ought as S. Paul exhorts us, 1. Cor. 11.
to prove and examine our selves, and so to eat of this bread and drink of this
cup for he that eats this bread, and drinks this cup of the Lord
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation. We are therefore, not so
much to examine others, which by confessions priests did in popery, as to try
our selves and to call our selves to account before god. First we must examine
our own hearts, whether we embrace and believe in our hearts the true doctrine
of Jesus Christ sanctified unto us in ye scriptures, and sealed with ye blood
of Christ: and chiefly whether we rest only upon the righteousness of Jesus
Christ, and that we seek our salvation only in him, who is given of God, 1.
Cor. 1.30.
to be unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, that he
that rejoices, may rejoice in the Lord. If we do not unfeignedly yield to this
true doctrine, it is impossible, that we can be worthy receivers of this
Sacrament which (as I have declared) is ordained and given unto us to seal and
confirm the said true doctrine of our salvation only by Jesus Christ
crucified, unto our hearts and consciences. And therefore if any that do not
believe with his heart, and confess with his mouth this holy and heavenly
doctrine, but being still frosen in the dregs of wicked superstition and
deceiuable error, seeking some part of salvation in men's merits, and in their
own works, come to receive this holy mystery and sacrament, they cannot
worthily receive it, but does most wickedly abuse it. Doing in like sort, as if
a man should put her Majesty's seal, to such a writing as she never allowed,
granted, nor commanded, but is directly contrary to her will and pleasure, he
that so uses her seal, abuses her majesty, is a traitor, and deserves to
be hanged: even so these men believing erroneous and false doctrine, such as
has no warrant of Gods word, and is injurious to the death and passion of
Jesus Christ the son of God, whereof this Sacrament is a seal: in receiving
it do horribly abuse it, in making it a seal of their damnable doctrine, and
be traitors to Jesus Christ: and unless God in mercy grant them repentance
will hang in hell for it. Therefore such as profess popery, or any other
wicked heresy, and will not reny and forsake to sin, are not to be admitted
to receive this sacrament, Exodus 11.43.
for if no stranger might receive the passover: the^ such as be not only
strangers, but also enemies to the truth, are not to receive this our
passover, which is a sacrament of Jesus Christ, by whom we have true
deliverance from eternal destruction and damnation. They are therefore first
to be instructed diligently in the truth, the which if they stubbernly
withstand, they ought severely by the magistrate to be punished, yea and
generally all that are to be received to communicate of this holy sacrament are
first to be catechized and instructed in the true doctrine of salvation, and
are to be taught, what this sacrament is, to what end it was ordained, and what
comfort, and spiritual profit they are to receive by it. Eod. 12.26.
So God commanded the Israelits to instruct their children in the doctrine of
the passover, and to teach them the causes wherefore it was ordained, and
appointed by God. And we read that when Josiah did keep that great passover,
^. Paralip. 35.6.
he commanded the Priests both to sanctify themselves, and to prepare their
brethren, that they might do according to ye word of the Lord by ye hand of
Moses. Therefore both parents ought privately to teach their children, and
ministers should publicly instruct the people in all true doctrine, and
diligently prepare them, that they come worthily to the receiving of this holy
sacrament. But these things are in a manner utterly neglected, for parents have
no care nor conscience of doing this duty which the Lord lays upon them, yea
most be so blind and so ignorant themselves in gods truth, that they be neither
able to instruct themselves, nor to teach others. Ministers for the most part
neither preach, nor Catechize the people, but admit al hand over head to this
holy sacrament, where by it is greatly profaned and abused. Some think it
enough sometimes to preach, but they neither catechize and instruct the people
in the grounds, and principles of religion, nor privately examine and prepare
them to the worthy communicating of this holy mystery and sacrament. And
therefore the people come ignorantly and without knowledge unto it, without the
which the mind of man cannot be good as Solomon says: Proverb. 19.2.
and so most wickedly abuse it, and kindle gods wrath against them for it: Let
therefore parents do this duty, which God lays upon them in teaching their
children and families the true knowledge of god, and the right use of this
sacrament. Let ministers both publicly preach Christ's Gospel, and also
perticularly catechize and instruct their people in the doctrine of salvation,
and namely of this Sacrament, that they may reverently and worthily for the
strengthening of their faith and comfort of their consciences receive it.

Moreover every man that comes to the lords table must examine his own heart,
whether he feel the same touched with true repentance, and an effectual
remorse for his manifold and heinous sins committed against Gods majesty, for
as the Israelits were with bitter herbs to eat their passover: Exodus 12.8.
so we ought to receive this holy sacrament of Christ's body and blood with
bitter repentance for our manifold iniquities, being inwardly pricked in
conscience, that we have so grievously offended our gracious God, in doing
such wicked things as he forbids, and not doing those holy things that he
commands us, or not doing them in that pure sincere sort that he requires
of us.

This true repentance must bring with it, a true amendment and reformation of
life, in forsaking such sins as we have heretofore committed, and in indeuoring
diligently to do those things, that we know to be good acceptable before God
our Savior. James. 5.12.
He that has been a swearer must swear no more, but let his speech be yea yea,
nay nay, lest he fall into condemnation, and he must use his tongue not to
blaspheme, but to glorify Gods name, and to praise him for his mercies every
morning renewed unto him. Lament. 3.23.
If any have been a prophanour of God Sabbath, a neglecter of gods service,
and a contemner of his word: he must forsake these sins, he must sanctify
the Sabbath day, and consecrate it as glorious to the Lord, not doing his own
ways, nor seeking his own will, Isai. 58.13.
nor speaking a vain word, he must carefully serve God with a pure conscience,
earnestly love his holy word, and hunger after it, as his daily food. He that
has been an adulterer or fornicator must flee and forsake this filthy sin, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
and keep the vessel of his body and soul in holiness and honor not in the
lusts of concupiscence as do the Gentiles that know not God. And if any come to
this holy table like a filthy dog before he have bewailed unfeignedly this his
wickedness, and if it be open, before he have publicly showed true tokens of
his true repentance, and reconciled himself to the Church of God, he treads
under his filthy feet ye blood of Jesus Christ the son of God, and eats
and drinks his own damnation. Those that have been dronkards, ought to
forsake this beastliness, and live soberly and temperately in Gods fear, or
else they in coming to this sacrament provoke Gods anger and indignation
against them, and so receive it to their destruction.

But it is lamentable to see what infinite numbers of whoremongers adulterers,
incestious persons, drunkards, and such other filthy swine, without any sign
of repentance or satisfaction to the Church of God by them offended, do come
and be received to the communicating of this holy sacrament.

Lastly we ought to examine our selves whether we live in Christian love and
charity one with an other without which, 1. Cor. 13.1.
though we speak with the mouth of men and angels and could move mountains,
and did give all our goods to the poor, yea and our bodies to be burned we be
nothing, and without it, we can do nothing, that may be acceptable before God,
as our Savior Christ teaches us in these words. If thou bring the gift or
oblation to the alter, Matthew. 5.24.
and there remember that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thine
offering before the alter, and go thy way: first be reconciled to thy brother,
and then come and offer thy gift. Our Savior Christ here speaking of the alter
and oblations that were in the old law, does teach us, that we can do nothing
acceptable to God, unless w^ be truly reconciled to our brethren, and do
sincerely love them, even as we desire God in Jesus Christ to love us.
Therefore if we live not in true brotherly love and charity one with another,
we cannot come worthily to this holy supper of our Lord Jesus Christ: for it is
a sacrament of unity as Saint Paul says, we that are many, 1. Cor. 10.17.
are one bread and one body, because we al are pertakers of one bread. For even
as we al eat of one bread, and drink of one cup, so we declare and
acknowledge thereby that we be all one in Christ Jesus, all members of one
mystical body, and all lynked together in brotherly love one with another. And
as the bread is made of many grains knoden together, even so we ought all to
be knit together in a holy profession of one truth, and in brotherly sincere
love one to another, which must bring forth her fruits in humbling our selves
one to another in the fear of God, in helping, comforting and releeuing one
another etc. But lamentable it is to see how cold Christian charity is waxen,
and how rare it is among men. Al men seek themselves, and their own private
profit, and not the good and benefit of their brethren: we despise and
disdain one another: we seek to exalt and advance our selves one above an
other: by usury, bribery, extorsion, and oppression we pinch, bite, yea and
devour one an other. If these be our fruits, if thus we lead our lives, and
yet come to communicate on this holy sacrament, we provoke gods fearful
vengeance against us, fearfully for to plague us. So Paul shows, that for
the abusing of this sacrament at Corinth, 1. Cor. 11.30.
God had so stricken them, that many were dead, and many weak and sick among
them. And when I consider how horribly this holy Sacrament is abused among us,
how this pearl is cast before swine, and ministered to all, without making any
difference between the clean and unclean, how ignorantly, irreverently and
profanely it is received, I cannot but stand in terror and horror of gods
fearful plagues to come upon us, even to the depriving us, of the word of
life, the Gospel of our salvation, and of this precious pledge of our
Redemption by Jesus Christ. Let us therefore dear brethren, judge our selves,
that we be not judged of the Lord our God, but let us humble our selves under
his mighty hand, let us truly turn unto him by unfeigned repentance, and
amendment of life. Let us with all reverence come to this holy feast,
unfeignedly confessing our sins with an inward feeling of them, and remorse of
conscience for them, and truly trusting in gods mercy through Jesus Christ, who
came into this world to save us sinners: 1. Tim. 1.15. 2. Cor. 8.9. Philip. 2.7.
who became poor to enrich us: took upon him the shape of a servant to
purchase eternal freedom, and liberty to us: submitted himself to shame, Gal.
3.13.15.
to procure everlasting glory to us: took upon him the curse, to obtain the
blessing of God for us: finally suffered death to give eternal life unto us.
Thus when we come to receive this sacrament, let us thus declare the death of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and acknowledge with heart and mouth, that the life we
now live in the flesh, Gal. 2.20.
we live by the faith of the son of God, who has loved us, and given
himself for us. This is our worthy receiving of this holy mystery, even
effectually from our hearts to confess our own unworthiness, and earnestly
to hunger for the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which only is able to
discharge our unrighteousness. If therefore we do unfeignedly confess, our
unworthiness and wickedness, and (not with a perfect faith, which no where is
to be found, and which if we had, we should have no such need of this
sacrament, which is ordained to strengthen our faith and to be as it were a
prop to uphold it) but with an unfeigned faith (as the Apostle terms it) come
unto Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 1.5.
lay our sins upon him, believe that he has made peace by ye blood of his
cross, Coloss. 1.20.
and that by his stripes we be healed, if we do truly amend our sinful lives,
1. Pet. 2.24. 2. Pet. 1.4.
feeling the corruption that is in the world through lust, and purelie serve
God with good consciences. And finally do reconcile our selves one to an other,
and live in brotherly love and Christian charity one with an other: in coming
to this sacrament, we shall not only lick the rock, but also suck the honey
and Oil out of the same as S. Cyprian says: Sermon. de Caen^ Domini.
we shall not only eat Panem domini, the bread of the Lord as Judas did:
August. in John tract. 59.
but also Panem Dominum, that bread which is the Lord, as the other disciples
of our savior Christ did: we shall not only receive these visible elements of
bread and wine, but also we shall eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood, John.
6.56.
he shall dwell in us and we in him, and shall hereby more and more grow up in
him, and be more and more assured of our salvation in him. These things the
father of all mercy work in us, and continually increase in us, to his own
glory, and our eternal comfort and salvation through Jesus Christ our only
savior and redeemer, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all
praise, laud, and glory now and for ever Amen.

HOSEA. 14.10. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? and prudent
and he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are upright: and the just
shall walk in them: but the wicked shall fall therein.

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf for George Bishop. 1586.


