A most sure and strong defense of the baptism of children, against ye
pestiferous sect of the Anabaptystes, set furthe by that famous Clerk, Henry
Bullynger: and now translated out of Laten into Englysh by Ihon Veron Senonoys.

Genesis. xvij. chap. I will be thy god, and the god of thy sede after thee.

Thou shall read the contents of this book, in the ii. pagyne after this.

The contents of this book.
i That rebaptizatyon or baptizing again is not of god, and that there is but
one baptysme. ii That ye baptism of children is of god iii That the baptysme
of children has continued in ye church of Christ ever sens the times of the
Apostles.
To the reader.

I have, good christian reader, already proved and set forth these artycles that
follow, against these erroneous dyuels the Anabaptists.

i The spiryt, which repugneth against the spiryt, which speaks in the holy
scriptures, is not of ye father of truth but of the devil, the father of liyng.
ii Of the simplicyte and lernyng, that ought to be in godly preachers. iii Of
the vocatyon and calling unto the ministry and office of preachinge against
them that thrust them selves unto it, being not called. iiii Of the unity of
the church, against the sects of heretics. v That Christ did not suffer
only for original sin. vi That a sinner is received to grace as often as he
repents, and that no man is without sin. vii That salvation and
ryghteousnes depends not of our works, but of faith viii That the souls,
which are departed from the body, do not sleep but live in Christ. ix That a
christian may execute the office of a magystrate. x That a christian magistrate
is not only profitable, but also most necessary to a christian commune weal.
xi That we ought to be obedient unto magistrates. xii That it is not lawful to
resist the magistrates. which things if thou do read dilygently, I trust
thou shalt be well enarmed against this pestiferous sect. Beware of them, for
they are worse then all other herytyques have been, yea, they are renewers of
all old heresies. So fare ye well. And pray to god that all erroneous sects
being vanquysshed, his glory may florysh for ever and ever. Ame^.
To ye right worshipful Master Thomas Fletwod, Comptroller of the Kings
Majesty's Minte, in Southwarke, Ihon Heron wyssheth peace of conscience, and
increase of dyuyne knowledge and understanding from god the father, through
our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT is not for naught, Ignorance is ye mother of al errors
right worshipful Sir, yt of al men, ignorance has been compted the mother
of all errors. Which thing too be most true, we do now at this presence,
plainly perceive and se. By godly learning, the erroneous sect of the
papists is in a manner proflygated and overthrown, so that the chief
maynteyners of it are clean ashamed of their old occupatyon, I mean, What
godly learning does.
of their Idolatry and superstition. But godly learning was never so
diligente, in purgynge the field of the gospel from the rubbisshes of
Antichrists kingdom, What stubburne ignorance does.
as stubburne ignorance is now busy in sowynge it over, with cockle and
darnill, with tares, and most pestiferous poison, which they do so over lay
with sugar and honye, that is to say, with painted and colored hypocrisy,
blandiloquence and flatterye, yt a man at the first sight, would embrace this
error and heresy, for a most wholesome doctrine, and unfeigned relygyon. But if
he, putting on the spectacles of gods word, will look more narowly upon it,
he shall espy such a blyndnes and ignorance in their procedynges and
doctrine, that by good right, he might marvel, that the very infantes do not
now, in this florisshyng time of the gospel, perceive and smell out this
deuylysshe heresy. For who would not say that this comes of deuilysshe
ignorance (onles he be blynder then ye blindness it self, that they so
shamefully deny the baptism of young infantes and children? What is to deny ye
baptism of infants
Is not this too put our children, from that everlasting couenaunte which our
lord god did make with Abraham, and in him, with all us that believe? I will
(says the lord) be thy god and the god of thy sede after the. Gene. xvii
chapi.
Which promise Abraham believed, and therefore when he came home, he did both
circumcise him self, and all the male children that were in his house. For
why? Cyrcumcision was the seal of the people of god, which by the
commandment of god was ministered unto all them yt were comprehended in the
Lords covenant Instead whereof baptism has been instituted in the new
Testamente. as the Apostle sayncte Paul. Colloss.ij. Chapter, Does plainly
testify. Circumcision insted of baptism
Sith therefore that children were circumcysed in ye old Testament, and long
after instructed in ye knowledge of the law: it follows, and that by good
consequence, ye baptysme ought to be mynistred unto our young infantes, whom
we are bound afterward to bring up in ye faith, and true doctrine. This
argument all the rablement of ye Anabaptists, is not able to dissolve Suffer
not therefore, O good christyans, suffer not your selves too be seduced by these
smatteryng Anabaptists, which understand not the letter of the scriptures,
wherein (I mean, in the bare letter) they do trust most. And no maruayle
thereof: For they are most shamefullye ignorance in all those things, yt
serve for to expound and understand the letter. They know not the phrases of
the scriptures. The Anabaptists are ignorance in those things that serve for
to expound and under stand ye letter.

The chyef causes of ye Anabaptists blyndnes and error.

Nouatus aucthor of rebaptization.

How many ways this word baptism is taken in ye new Testamente.


They do not observe and mark how many ways one thing is taken in the
scriptures and word of God. Which truly to ye chyef cause of their blindness
and error. For if they had marked how many ways in the scryptures of the
new Testamente, this word baptysme is taken, they had never renewed the old
condemned heresye of Nouatus, touching this folysh Anabaptisme that is to
say, rebaptyzaty on or baptyzyng again. For baptysme is not always taken for
that outward sign and seal of the people of God, which is an outward
wasshyng of water, done and mynystred in the name of the father, of the son,
and of the holy ghost, whereby we are initiated into a true faith, and
innocencye of life: which kind of baptism Ihon and the Apostles did mynyster,
and now in the church of Christ, is by the^ administered, yt be appointed
thereto: but often times it is taken for the doctrine as Mathewe.xxi. Chapter,
and Acts, ye xix. Which place the Anabaptists do allege to maintain their
error in this point. Otherwhiles this word baptism signyfieth death or
matyrdome, as Matthew.xx. Chapter. Where Christ answers to the sons of
Zebede, after this manner: Can ye drink the cup yt I shall drink? and be
baptized with ye baptism that I shall be baptized with? there the blind may
se, that he did mean his passion that he should suffer. It betokens also the
inward illumynatyon of the holy spirit of God, whereby the hearts of the
faithful are illumynated and drawn, as Acts.i. Chapter. Ye shall be baptized
with the holy ghost after these few days. Now as they are deceived in this
thing by ignorance and lack of knowledge, so are they in all the other
points. But now that the ignorant and simple might have an wholesome Antidotus
and conterpoyson against this pestilent error, especially in this point of
rebaptyzatyon, and baptysme of children: I have here translated three most
fruyctfull Dialogues upon this matter, out of Laten into English: which, if
they be dylygentlye perused, may enarme and fence the reader, against all the
obiectyons that can be made and invented by these phantastycall and mad
brains. And because that your worshypfull mastershyp has been always earnest
in ye defense of the truth, bearyng a singular affectyon and mind, toward all
them that are studyous to set forth the glory of god, which godly affection
and mind ye have many times (as I have been by credible persons enfourmed)
declared in your communycatyon, toward me: I could do no less of duty, but
to dedicate this little labor of mine unto you, in token of gratitude and
thankfulness, sith that none otherwise, I am able to deserve or recompense
that beneuolente heart of yours, toward me. God of his mercy, vouchsafe
with his holy spirit so to rule and guide your mastership with ye worshipful
gentlewoman your wife, yt whatsoever ye shall do, or think in all your
affairs, may be to ye glory of god, and salvation of of your soul. Ame^.

Three most fruitful Dialogues, treating upon the baptism of children, very
necessary to be red of all Chrystyans, in these most paryllouse times. Simon
the Anabaptist, Ioiada the true Christyan. That rebaptizatyon or baptyzyng
again, is not of god: and that there is but one baptysme.
Simon. I Have tarried here for the, more than an hole hour, Ioiada, I was
almost persuaded, I did almost believe, yt thou durst not come because that
thou haddeste little trust and confydence in the other articles.


Ioiada. There is no article, yt I am so sure of: it is so far, that I
should be afraid to speak of it.


Simon. But I will prove that rebaptyzation is of God.


Ioiada. By what scriptures? Acts. xix. chapi.



Simon. By ye.xix chapter of the Acts, where it is expressly set furthe, that
the.xii. men, yt had been baptized by Ihon, or in the baptism of Ihon, were
baptized again by Paul in the name of Christ. If it was lawful after the
baptism of Ihon, to receive the baptysme of Christ, why should it not be
more lawful, that the baptysme of ye Bishop of Rome, should give place unto
ye baptism of Christ? For as those men of Ephesus, had been ignorauntlye and
vnwyttingly baptized with the baptysme of Ihon, and again were baptized by
Paul: In like manner, we were ignorauntly baptized with the baptism of the
Busshop of Rome: Ergo, we may lawfully be baptized again, with the baptism
of Christ.


Ioiada. As many words as thou have spoken, so many errors have thou vomyted
and spued out First, thou say that those men of Ephesus were twice baptized,
which thing thou can not prove, Ac. xix. cha Baptism is not taken for water,
but for the doctrine.
for the baptism of Ihon, ought not here to be taken for water, but for the
doctrine.


Simon. This is the only refuge that ye flee to, when ye be ouercomen by the
truth. But ye can not prove nor strengthen these your sayings with ye
scripturs, nor by any truth


Ioiada. But I will prove unto ye, yt baptism is not always taken for ye
wasshing yt is done in the water, Ihon. i. and iii. chapter Mat. xxi. chapter.
but rather for the doctrine. Iho^.i. and.iii. chap. And of this thing, there
be most sure tokens, signs, notes, as Mat. xxi. chap. where Christ asks ye
pharisees whether the baptism of Ihon was of god, or of men, Baptism is taken
for ye doctrine for as the water does wash away ye filthiness of ye body, so ye
true doctrine does cleanse the soul from all errors and superstytyon. Act. xii.
cha Appollo.
and since yt it was of god, why did they not credit and believe him,
understanding by baptism (as it most manyfestly appears) ye doctrine or
testimony, which they ought to have believed,


Simon. Well, go to, put ye case yt in this place it is taken for the doctrine:
yet notwithstanding, it follows not, yt in ye Acts of the apostles, it should
be taken for doctrine.


Ioiada. In ye mean season, ye were to much ouersene in this thing, and over
blinded, saying most shamefully, yt we did affirm without any truth, ye
baptism is often times taken for ye doctrine. But go to, we will also prove, ye
baptism is taken in ye Acts, for ye doctrine. In ye.xii. of Acts, Luke says,
yt a certain Iue called Apollo, being an eloque^t man and taught in ye way of
ye lord, did come to Ephesus, and yt he did teach dilygently those things yt
were ye lords, knowing only the baptism of Ihon. Here ye very blind may se
ye Luke did speak, not of the water, but of ye doctrine. The same Apollos did
teach and instruct those. xii men in ye way of the lord. who^ afterward,
Paul does ask, whether after that they had believed and given credit unto the
doctrine, What is to receive ye holy ghost
they had been pacified in their hertes and consciences, by the holy ghost.
(Here it is to be noted, that faith is not taken for that heavenly gift,
Faith is here taken for the doctrine of faith.
that illumynateth the heart inwardlye, but for the doctrine of faith, which
one man does receive of an other by hearing) But they did so answer, that
Paul might easily gather by their answer that they knew not what the peace
of consciences, nor what the holy ghost was. He marueylyng therefore, In quid
initiati fuisse^t This word to initiate, which we are compelled to use in this
place, signifies to instruct, or give instructyo^ in any kind of relygyon,
science or knowledge.
what manner of doctrine this was, that had not set forth unto them, so
necessary and principal points, did ask them wheruntoo they were baptized,
not wherein: For he knew right well that men are baptized in water. But he
asks whereunto they were baptized, that is too say, initiated and taught,
what at length was the mark that they did shoot at, fithens yt they knew
not yet the holy ghost? They made him answer that they were baptized, that is
to say, initiated in the doctrine of Ihon. The Apostle did understand and
perceive that they were not yet right well taught and instructed in ye doctrine
of Ihon. He begins therefore, and with express words sets forth the
doctrine of Ihon. Which words, if they were well weighed and pondered, they
make altogether against you For thus are the words of Paul: Ioannes baptisauit
baptismo poenitentiae: yt is to say, Iho^ has baptized with the baptism of
repentance. What mean these words, What is to baptyse with the baptism of
repentance
he has baptized with the baptism of repentance, but that Ihon did preach
repentance? or did teach how we ought to repent, that will be initiated in
Christ or receive the first instructyon in the religyon of Christ? Afterward
he did speak of him that should come after him that they might believe in him,
that is to say, in Jesus Christ. Out of the which faith and belief, peace
does spryng in ye mind and conscience of man. Romans v. To. v chap
chap. When they had understood that they did receive the baptism of water
in the name of Jesus. The words that follow of ye imposityon of hands, make
me to expound this last, of the baptism of water. As I think now, I have
suffyciently proved, that this place helps nothing the Anabaptists: for
they, who^ mentyon is made of, in the.xix. chap. of Acts, were not baptized
again, but baptized once for all, and twyse instructed and taught. Whether ye
baptism of Ihon, and ye baptism of Christ, be all one.



Simon. By this it should follow, that the baptysme of Ihon, and the baptysme
of Christ is all one, and yt there is no dyfference between them.

This can not be, for the doctrine of Iho^ did differ from the doctrine of
Christ


Ioiada. In this thing ye are greatly deceived, for the doctrine of Ihon, and
the doctrine of Christ, are all one, and their baptism all one (Here I do
speak of ye baptism of water) and by this we do gather and conclude truly,
that these me^ of Ephesus were not baptized with the baptysme of Ihon, (I
speak of the water) for if they had been baptized with ye baptism of Ihon, it
had not been necessary and needful, that Paul should had baptized them again
in the baptism of Christ, for both their doctrine and their baptism are all
one.


Simon. If the doctrine of Ihon, and the doctrine of Chrste were all one, why
did Luke write that Apollo was taught only in the doctrine or baptysme of
Ihon, and that therefore Priscilla and Aquilla, did take him unto them, and did
teach him more exactly in the way of the lord. What is meant by this, that
Appollo was taught more exactly.
If the doctrine of Ihon, and the doctrine of Christ were al one, what did need
to teach him more exactly? for he that did know the doctrine of Ihon, did also
know the doctrine of Christ.


IOI. Luke says, that they did expound unto him more exactly in ye way of the
Lord. The doctrine was all one: but in Apollo there wanted somewhat, which
knew not all things exactly and perfectly. For these.xii. do say also, that
they were taught and instructed in ye baptism of Ihon, whose doctrine for all
yt they understood not perfectly, although they were instructed in the doctrine
of Ihon, yet notwythstandynge are they taught more exactly by Paul.


SIM. But Paul says not that the doctrine is all one.


IOIA. Thou do every foot bring darkness into the manifest light. Tell me, I
pray the, which is the sum of Christ's doctrine, and of the apostles?


SIM. And I do ask ye whether Paul in the.xix. chapter of the Acts, did teach
that Ihons and Christ's doctrine were all one?


IOI. To that will I answer after that I have herd of the, which is ye sum
of Christ's doctrine, and of his Apostles. Note the obstnacye of the Anabaptists



SIM. I will not give the over hand, but persyst and abide in ye words of
Luke, which are written, Act. xix chap


IOIA. Thou do persiste and abide in thy contention and obstinacy. And this
are ye wont to do, either when ye have nothing to answer, and when ye
perceive that ye are ouercommen with the truth. Go to, I will declare what is
the sum of the doctrine of Christ, The sum of the doctrine of Christ, and of
ye Apostles. Mark. i. Chapter. Math. iiii. Chapter.
and of ye Apostles. Mark. i. chap. It is written after this manner: Jesus came
too Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of god, and saying. The time
is fulfilled and the kingdom of god is at hand, repent ye, and believe the
gospel. Mat. iiii. chap. Jesus departed into Galilee, and did begin to preach
and say: Repent ye the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Christ does also send
his Apostles, saying: As my father has send me, so I do send you, Ihon xx.
Chaptre.
Iho^. xx. chapter. But the father did send Christ to preach repentance and
forgiveness of sins ergo, Christ sends his Apostles too preach the same.
Luke xxiiii. Chapter.
This is manifest and plain by the.xxiiii of Luke, and last of Mark. So it
behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from death upon the third day, and that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached among all nations in
his name, beginning at Jerusalem, and ye shall be witnesses of these things.
Acts.ii. iii. Chap.
The book of the Acts does testify, that the Apostles did preach the
same.ii. iii. chap. Haste thou any thing against so manifest scripturs?


SIM. Nothing: The doctrine of Christ and ye doctrine of Ihon be all one.
But now I ask the whether the doctrine of Ihon, and the doctrine of Christ
be all one.


IOI. I do prove and conclude by the places before alleged, that it is all
one. It is said that the fame of the doctrine of Christ and of the Apostles, is
comprehended in this one thing, that men should repent, know the kingdom of god
to be at hand, and believe in Jesus Christ. Do thou grant these things?


SIM. What the^?


IOI Ihon did teach yt self same thing: ergo, their doctrine was al one, I
prove ye first proposityo^ by ye third of Matthew: Ihon baptist did preach in
ye desert of Jury, and did say: Repent ye, ye kingdom of god is at hand. In
like manner, Luke.i. Luke i. cha. Iho^. i. and iij. chapter
chapter And thou child. etc. It is manifest by ye first and third of Ihon,
that Ihon baptyste did preach the Gospel, Acts.xix. (Which place we have
treated upon already) he preaches the same, as we may gather by the words of
Paul. For he speaks there after this manner: Ihon did preach the baptism of
repentance speaking of Jesus Christ, in whom they should believe. Here I do
beseech the to confess and tell plainly, whether these things do not
sufficientlye prove that ye doctrine of Iho^, and the doctrine of Christ be all
one.


SIMO. What do thou gather and conclude thereupon. The Anabaptystes do teache
ye things yt they can not prove by ye scryptures.



IOI. That ye Anabaptists are again overthrown and that ye have taught that
thing which ye could not prove by the scriptures and yet for all that, ye are
so obstacle and stubburne, that ye will in no wise give place unto the truth.
Who would have believed the to be so stiff necked, that I should be feign to
drive the to it with the scripturs?


SIM. What make these things to the baptizing again?


IOI. Very much. for if the doctrine of Iho^ and the doctrine of Christ be al
one, their baptism alsoo is all one. There is no exaumple of baptizinge again
in all ye scryptures.
Ergo, ye have no example at all of your rebaptizatyon or baptyzing gain. Also
they, whom mentyon is made of Acts.xix. Chapter could not have been baptized
with the baptism of Ihon. that is done in ye water and again be rebaptized by
Paul. For so they should had been twice baptized with one baptism of water,
and the one should had abolisshed ye other, which thing can not be done by no
mean. For their baptism is all one.


SIM. Thou say right well, if there were only one baptism. There is
only one baptysme which ye anabaptystes do deuyde.

The doctrine is more excellent then baptism.





IOIA. Ye do not only divide the church, but also baptysme. I do bring
against the, the words of Paul which says: Christ has sent me, not to
baptyse, but to preach ye gospel. Now I do ask the whether of these two is
more excellent, the doctrine of the Gospel, or the baptysme?


SIMO. The doctrine is more excellent then baptism, for baptism, is annexed
and joined, to the doctrine.


IOIADA. If Christ and Iho^ do agree in the doctrine, it follows that they did
also consent and agree in the baptysme, ergo, their baptysme is all one.


SIMON. It can not be alone, for the Apostles and Christ did baptyse in the
name of Jesus, alsoo in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy
ghost, Ihon did not so: Ergo, it can not be all one baptysme.


IOIADA. Christ him self did not baptyse, but his Apostles in his name.
Ihon.iiii. Chapter. Ihon.i. Chapter. Mark.i. Chapter. Iuke.iii. Chapter. Ihon
and the Apostles did baptize in the name of Jesus.
Iho^.iiij. Cha. Where as thou say yt Ihon did not baptyse in the name
Jesus, thou doste greatly err. For Ihon.i. Chapter. Mar. i. chap also, Iuke
the third Chapter, it is most manifest and plain by his own words that Ihon
did baptyse in Jesus. For there he does expound his baptysme, saying, I do
baptyse with water, but he that shall come after me, will baptyse you with the
holy ghost. What other thing is this, but that I do prepare you to Christ,
which shall make you perfect. Is not this to baptize in the name of Jesus? In
what, I pray the, did the apostles baptyse, but in the name of Jesus?
Acts.ii. Chapter.
Acts.ii. Chap. Se now what thou have won, truly none other thing, but
that with thine own words, thou haste confyrmed and proved, that their
baptism is all one.


SIMON. Yet he did not baptyse in the name of the father, ye son, and the
holy ghost.


IOIA. Although Ihon did not know Christ to be one god with the father, and the
holy ghost. Whereby it should follow, that when Ihon did baptyse, and send or
direct men unto Jesus, that he did baptyse and direct or send them unto a
bare man. Which thing how ungodly it is, who does not see? Ihon Baptist did
know Christ to be the son of god, equal with the father in all things, he
knew also yt the spirit of god did inhabyte and dwell in him, which was given
unto him after no measure, Ihon.i. Chapter.
but of whose fullness all men did receive. Ihon.i. Chapter. For this cause he
attributes so much unto Christ, that he did send all men unto him and
prepared the people for him. Farthermore he did baptyse them in the name of
Jesus, because that he knew him too be one god with the father and the holy
ghost.


SIM. These be thy reasons, and not the word of god.


IO. I will prove the these things by the word of god. When Ihon did baptize
Christ in Jordan, the heavens did open, and he did se ye spirit of god
descending and coming down upon him. And behold a voice from heaven, saying:
This is my well-beloved son, In who^ I am pleased. Who will say now yt Ihon knew
not ye father and ye holy ghost. Ihon.iij. Ihon.iii. Chapter.
Chap. He does celebrate and set forth with many goodly praises, the majesty
of Christ, among al other things, speaking after this manner: He who^ god has
sent, speaks the word of god. For god does not give him the spirit after a
measure. The father loves ye son and has given al things into his hand These
things do testifye and witness that Ihon did know right well the mystery of
the trinity and unity in Christ


SIMON. I grant that he did know as thou say, yet it follows not thereby
that Iho^ did baptyse in the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost.


IO. It follows plainly. For I do ask the whether he that baptizeth in
Christ, does baptyse in man, or in god?


SIMO. In god truly.


IOIA. Now I ask whether Christ touching his own godheade be separated from
the father and the holy ghost?


SIMO. No, for there is but one god only.


IOIA. Now make thine argument after this manner: Christ Jesus touching his
divine nature, is not dyuyded from ye father and ye holy ghost. And he yt
baptizeth in Jesus, baptizeth not in his humain nature, but in his divine and
godly nature. Ergo, he that baptizeth in Jesus, baptizeth in ye father and ye
holy ghost. Iho^ (as it is proved before) did baptize in Jesus Christ, yt is to
say, in him yt should come after him: Ergo, Ihon did baptize in ye father and
ye holy ghost, for these sentences are of like syngnificacion and importance:
he did baptize in god, he did baptize in Jesus Christ, he did baptize in the
name of the father, the son and the holy ghost. For, there is one god only
unto whom we are brought, and grafted by baptism.


SIMO, I never understood this thing before, for I thought that Iho^ had only
begone with his baptism, but yt the baptism of Christ had the^ at length
begone, when he did send his apostles in the last chapter of Mark, and of
Matthew. Which thing if it were true, the baptism of Ihon, and the baptism of
Christ could not be all one.


IOIA. Of this did come and spring the error of of the Anabaptists. Because
that they think, that baptism was the^ ordained and instituted after that
Christ did rise from death. And I do merueyle, that they did fall in too this
error, since that with plain testymonyes of the scryptures it is set forth
and expressed, that Christ had by his apostles, baptized before his death and
before that they had received the holy ghostes Ihon.iii. Ihon.iii. and.iiii.
Chapter.
and.iiii. Chapter. After this Jesus did come and his discyples, into the land
of Iuery, and there he did abide with them, and did baptize. Ihon also did
baptyse before Christ, wherefore he was called baptyste.


SIMON. Ergo, baptysme has his beginnynge and institutyon of man.


IOIADA. Truly Ihon was a man, which thing no man can deny, yet
notwythstanding, his doctrine and baptysme, were not of man, but of God. Math.
xxi. Chapter.
Mathewe one and twenty Chapter. But it is called the baptysme of Ihon, and of
the apostles, not because it is theyrs, but because it is mynystred by them. I
will speak more plainly. Math. xi. Chapter. how this saying. The law and
the prophets were till Iho^ came.
Christ. Mathewe.xi. Chapter, says that the law and the prophets were till
Ihon came, whereby Christ does show that the thing that the Prophets did
before prophecye, to be or too come, was more fullye set furthe and declared by
ye preaching of Ihon. For the things ye before by the prophets were prophesied
to come, under dark fygures of words the self same things are set furthe
by Ihon, as fulfilled and present, Ihon begins with his baptsme, the
gospel and new testament.
and are in a manner showed with the figure. The law had a mystical lamb:
Ihon did show the true lamb with his finger. Ihon therefore does begin first
the gospel and the new Testamente, and shows that the Messiah is come. It
was necessary then, that he should abolisshe the old signs, and change them
into other, that should be without blood, worthy of the new testamente.
Circumcyon is changed intoo baptism.
For circumcision was changed into baptysme. Therefore Ihon begins baptism
first, as a sign or seal of the people of God. But let us hear his own
witnesses and testimonies of that thing. Math. iii. Chapter.
Mat. iii chap When he did se many of the Pharyses and Saduces, coming too
his baptysme (that they also might receive baptism of him) he said unto them:
Bring ye forth fruits, worthy of repentance. By ye which words Ihon does
plainlye declare, wherefore, and for what purpose and use, he did minister
baptism, although he should say, It shall not be sufficient to have your body
washed in the water, but rather this, ye must have a respect unto, yt ye be
new me^ that ye be sorry and repent of your mysdeedes that are passed, and take
heed of them, that are to come. There is no cause why ye should boste your
selves to be the children of Abraham, unless ye do follow ye faith of Abraham.
What did Abraham? he did believe in god, he was obediente unto the word of
god, he did approve him self, or showed him self faithful in all things
unto the same god. For I say unto you, ye god is able, to raise unto Abraham,
Children of these stoones (that is to say of the gentiles) Now also ye axe is
laid to the root of the tree, What is to be understood, by ye unprofitable
bows
where with the unprofitable branches that bring forth no fruit, are cut of.
That is to say, the bowghes, that did grow of the natural olyue tree, I
mean thee unfaithful Children, being cut of and cast away from the
Testamente of god, shall be destroyed and burnt. Understand therefore my words
a right. Prepare your hearts against the coming of the Messiah, the new
king, I do baptize you with water, and in a manner initiate you, or give you the
first instruction in the religyon of Christ, to the intent yt ye be such, ye
will repent and receive Christ When he is received, he shall baptize you with
the holy ghost, that is to say, Too baptism with the^ holy ghost
he shall seal and make you perfect, with his holy spirit, he shall pardon and
forgive you your sins, he shall also endue you with fire, that is to say,
with feruente charytye. Study with all diligence to receive him worthily. etc.
By these testymonies we do conclude and gather, that Ihon did baptyse first,
and that he did also baptize in Christ. The apostles after that they had
received Christ, did use none other baptysme, but the same yt they had learned
of Ihon. Yea, Christ him self was alsoo baptized in the baptysme of Ihon. The
baptism of Ihon, is the true baptism, else Christ, was not well baptized.
If Ihons baptysme is not true, it follows that Christ was not truly
baptized, and that he ought too be baptized again. Who is so mad too say
so? Ergo, the baptysme of Iho^, is the true baptism, which Christ did confyrme
and sanctyfye in him self


SIMON. I do agree unto all these things: but what do they make against
rebaptyzatyon?


IOIADA This trewlye, that the men of Ephesus, whom mentyon is made of, Acts.
the nynetene Chapter. Were not baptized again, sith that ye baptism of Christ
and the baptism of Ihon be all one. If they were not baptized again, the
anabaptists have no example at all, of their rebaptyzation. Whereby it
follows, that their rebaptyzatyon is not of God For they deuyde that one
only baptysme. Paul says. One god, one faith one baptysme, which is in the
church of god, without the which, there is no baptysme. Sith then that the
anabaptystes do forsake the church, The anabaptists have no baptism.
yea, do divide the church, and are fellows of herytykes, they have no
baptysme. For they are not in the church of Christ. Ergo. their rebaptyzatyon
is repugnaunte unto GOD, and is nothing else, but a new sect, against the
unity of the church. Objection both foolyshye and chyldyshe.



SIMO. But thou do disse^ble this, that they do abhor ye baptism of the
busshop of Rome, none otherwise then in times passed, ye holy fathers did
abhor the baptysme of heretykes, or minystred by heritykes. For they yt had
been baptized by herytykes and scysmatikes, were baptized again.


IOIA. Who did ever baptyse men with the baptysme of the Busshoppe of Room?
Did the busshop of Room begin baptism?


SIMON. No, Ihon did begin baptism, but the busshops of Rome did add many
things of their own.


IOIADA. The things that were added by the busshop of Room, as salt Oil,
coniurynges, etc. are they baptism, or part of baptysme? Though ye bishops
of Room have added many things to baptism, yet it ought not to be called ye
baptism of ye Byshope of Rome.



SIMON Neither of them, for then, neither Christ nor Ihon, had baptized truly,
which did not add those things.


IOIADA If these new added things are not baptysme, nor yet part thereof,
why do ye call it then the baptysme of the busshop of Room? Or was ever any
man that did baptyse in the name of Clemente, Bonyface, Leo, or Gregorye?


SIMO No man.


IOIADA. In what then were ye baptized?


SIMON. In the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost.


IOIADA. Ergo, ye were not baptized in the baptysme of the Busshop of Room,
but in the baptysme of GOD. And they that baptize you now, in what, or with
what words do they baptyse you?


SIMON. With water, and in the name of the father, of the son, and of the
holy ghost


IOIA. Were ye baptized in the same and with the same word in your youth?


SIM. Yes truly.


IO. What neadeth the^ this last baptism? do thou not se ye ye are stark
mad?


SIM. When we were children we knew nothing of baptism. We vow now unto god
pureness, and a life without sins.


IO. Could ye not do this without baptism? If ye could, ye neded no water, if
ye could not, the virtue is in ye water. Ergo, our saluatyon is alligated and
bound to the elementtes, against the nature of faith and of the scriptures.
What answer canste thou make here.


SIM. It is better, that we thus consecrate our selves unto god. Anabaptists
are like unto monks.



IO As monks did hear before times bynd themselves unto god with there vows.
Here poison is hydde^, yt ye do challenge and attribute unto your selves
pureness of life, ye do detest and abhor other as unclean, and as the
catharians in times passed ye do gather and assemble unto your selves a
peculiar church, markyng and sealyng your selves as though ye were the purest
of all men. Rebaptyzation is a new sect against ye unity of the church
Wherefore I may well call your rebaptizatio^ a new sect against the unity of
the church, which thing appears more and more by thy words Tell me, I
pray the, if your church is without sins, or is no more in ye flesh
where is then the lost and prodigal child the straying sheep, the fyeld sown
with cockle and darnel, the net that draws all kinds of fisshes, the supper
or banquet where all they that are bidden, do sit also they that have not the
bridegromes liuerie. If ye be pure and wholl, then have ye no need of Christ,
the physician of the souls. O most bold and shameless hipocrytes, O disguysed
and masked hery tykes, who has bidden you, to make dyuision before time? Or if
ye be so holy and pure, when will ye of charity, bear with us, our heavy
burdens, wherewyth we are ouercharged and burdoned, that ye may fulfill the
law of Christ? When will ye have compassyon of our infyrmities? When will ye
that are strong, take us that are weak, unto you? Why do ye cut of and
contempne the sick and weak members? What are ye but scismatykes?


SIMO. Thou have not yet told why the aunciente fathers did baptyse them
again, that had been baptized by heritykes.


IOIADA. They were not baptized again, It is no baptism unless it be
ministered in the name of ye father, the son, and of the holy ghost.
but they were baptized as they that had not been baptized. For herytykes did
deny the trinity, the god head of Christ, and the holy ghost. Besides that,
they were not of the church: Ergo, they had no baptism, nor did baptize in ye
name of Jesus, whom they did deny. Moreover, the custom of rebaptizyng, or
baptyzing again, was not commonly used in the church. For they that had been
baptized in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost, were
not baptized again, but were received by the imposition of hands, and also
were admonisshed to persiste and abide in the sincerity of faith. This
therefore helps you nothing, but rather does make against you. Among the
true christians, ye have no exaumple at all of your rebaptization, but among
these ancient heritikes, that have been already condemned of the church.
For ye do renew the heresies of Aupentius. The Anabaptists do renew old
heresies.
Nouatus and Pelagius.


SIM. What manner of men were they.


IOIA. In the year of our lord.CC.lv. there rose in Room, a ceraine man,
called Nauatus, a very arrogante, proud, obstinate and bold man He did
teach, Nonatus error.
that a man after baptism was pure and clean, which pureness if he had ones
lost through sin, he could never be forgyuen. And if any man for fear and
dread, or necessity of death, had denied Christ, that he ought not any more
to be received intoo the church (though he lamented never so sore for his
fall) but that he ought to be separated, and as a dampened creature, too be
shunned of all men. This thing did cause a counsel of grave and holy men
to be gathered at Room, A counsall against Nouatus.
which by the scriptures, being truly understood did condemn this
opinion, as ungodly and herytycall. Yet in the mean season, Nouatus does not
leave of, nor yet recant his ungodly opinion: but rather did assemble and
gather a peculyar church, condempning the churches, where sinners and
repentaunt persons were, he did call his church pure. Therefore were the
Nouatyans, Why the Nouatia^s were called Catharians.
called Catharyans. Whom he did receive into his church, them did he bind
unto his error and consecrate unto his vnpure clenlynes, by reqaptizatio^ or
baptizing again. I do not bring these things out of mine own head, but out of
those ancient doctors, Cornelius, Ciprianus, Dionesius, Alexandrinus, and
Eusebius. Of whom some did live in Nouatus time. The Nouatians and
Anabaptists are like in all things.
Now if thou do diligently look upon these ancient Nouatians, and the
anabaptystes of our time you shall find very little difference between them, for
as Nouatus being openly convinced in that most famous counsel of learned
Bishops, does not forsake his error, but obstinately does defend it. so ye
Anabaptists do at this present. For how often have they been overthrown in
the open disputations, that have been kept with them in Tigure, Sanctogallum,
Berne, Basile, Constance, Argentyne, and Auguste? And yet for all that, they
will rather loose their life, then for sake their error: yea, they do gather
and assemble peculier churches, they baptize again, they condemn our
churches as unclean, they do atribute unto them selves, pureness of life, to
be short, they do all things that Nouatus did. In the mean season, they
are ambitious, arrogante, proud, pufte up, and very hipocrytes.


SIMON. I understand that the Anabaptystes are Nouatyans.

What say thou of the other two?


IOIA. Aupentius was busshop of Milan, Aupentyus condemns the baptism of
children.
before Ambrosius, of ye sect of Arrius. He did condemn the baptism of
children His error was condemned in ye counsel of Miluent.


SIMON. But it follows not thereby, that infantes must be baptized.


IOIADA. Verelye it follows, which thing we will prove by and by.


The second Dialogue. That the baptysme of children, is of God.
SIMON. Whatsoever thou say, I will prove by most strong arguments, that
the baptism of children is not of god.


IOIADA. And I will gladly hear how thou can do it. The chyef Arguments of
the Anabaptists against the Baptism of infantes.



SIMON. In the last of Mark, Christ says to his apostles go throughout all
the wholl world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believes
and is baptized, shall be saved: He that believes not, shall be condemned.
Also in the last of Mathewe it is written after this manner: Al power is given
unto me in heaven, and in earth going therefore teach ye al nations, baptizing
in the name of the father, of ye son and of the holy ghost. By these it seems
to follow, and that necessarely, that baptism ought only to be ministered unto
them yt can be taught and instructed. For he says first, teach them, and then
afterward: baptyse them, whereby it follows also, that baptism is a sign
of the faith that went before. For he says: he that believes and is baptized
shall be saved, Let us now add and join unto these, and ponder dilygently
both the examples and factes of Ihon, and of the apostles, and that which I say
shall be manifest and plain. For Ihon did baptize them only, that did
confess their sins. Acts.ii. Chapter.
Acts.ii. Chap. Luke does write after this manner: And they which received
gladlye the word, were baptized. Philip does then at length baptyse the
steward of Queen Candace, after that he had declared unto him. ye. liii. Chap.
of Esaias, and had questioned with him of his faith. Acts. viii. Chapter.
Acts. viii. chapter. All the apostles after that they had preached the
Gospel, and that the faith was received, did baptize the faithefull. It
follows then, that baptysme as a sign is due unto the^ that can both hear
and receive the doctrine. Infantes, because that they want the use of reason,
can neither hear nor receive the doctryn, and therefore they have no faith.
For Paul teaches that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of
god. Romans x. Chap, Roma.x.
Since then that Children can neither hear, nor understand the word of god,
they can not believe. Ergo baptism is not due unto them, which is a sign of
the faith that goes before. If thou canste, A solution to the arguments of
the Anabaptists.
answer me to these: I will tell and set forth, mine other arguments hereafter.


IOI. Thou have rehearsed the chief and principal foundatyons of the
Anabaptystes, that have any show or appearaunce, but this is no new thing
unto us, which have learned and red in hystories, that above three hundredth,
xlviii. years agone that is to say, in the year of Christ. M.C. lxxxii.
there have been heretykes, The sum of the Anabaptists arguments.
that have taught the same doctrine. But because, yt ye do lean upon a weak
and brickel foundation, your foot shall easily be subverted and overthrown, in all your doctrine ye do most vrgently beat this into men's hedes, ye baptism is a
sign of ye faithful or of them that have faith already. Infantes or young
babes have no faith. Ergo baptism ought not to be ministered unto infantes. In
very deed (if the words be well and truly expounded and understood) we do
gladly grant this thing unto you: That baptysme is a sign of the faithful
people. But we do not deffyne, cyrcumscribe, This word fidelis, faithful or
fidel ought not to be limited as the Anabaptists will have it
or limite the faithful, as ye do: for if no man should be baptized but they
that believe truly, and from a sincere heart, Judas, Simon, of Samaria, Demas.
and other hipocrites, had never ben baptized. Let no man thus take my sayings,
although I would have baptysme to be ministered unto them, whom it is
manyfeste and plain to be infydels, but mine intent is to show, that by this
word, fidelis, faithful, some what more is to be understood, then the
Anabaptists do express,


SIMO. What can thou make of a faithful but a faithful? I can not
understand how infantes and young babes can be faithful, since that they do want
the use of reason.


IO. But in this business, we do so speak of the faithful that we do in no
wise exclude the children from the number of the^, sith that the children and
infantes are of god whom god does always admit and receive into his church
emonge the faithful.


SIM. It behooves the to have proved the same, Who be ye fideles and faithful.
Gene. xvii Chapter. O comfortable saying, both to us and too our children.
as I have already proved ye contrary,


IOI. I will prove it. Genesis xvii. chapi. Where god does make a covenant with
Abraham. the lord does peculyarly comprehend the children in the covenant,
for he says. I shall be thy god, and ye god of thy sede after the. And
afterward he commands the infantes to be cyrcumcised upon the eight day,
and to receive ye sign of the Testament. Whereby it follows that god is not
only the god of the^ that be of age, and can believe in God, but also of the
infant, Children are fideles or faithful and be in ye church the members of
Christ.
which for lack of age can not yet believe, for they through grace and the
promise, are received in to the covenant and number of ye faithful.


SIM. I care not for the old Testamente of the Jews, these old things are
abolished by ye gospel.


IO. By Jesus Christ the ceremonies are abolished and the figures fulfilled,
What part of ye old testament is abolyshed by Christ.
but the couenaunte made with Abraham, stands still. Else god were not our
god, and the God of our sede, and should be made by Christ more unmerciful and
more strange, the^ he was to the aunciaunte fathers before Christ. Which to
think, were a foolysh thing, that I should not say an ungodly, specially sith
that in the new Testamente, The faithful are the children of Abraham. Roma.
iiii. Gala. iiii. Mat. viii. Luke.xiii. and.xix. Chapter. Ihon.i. Chapter.
alsoo the faithful are called the children of Abraham. Romans iiii. Gal. iiii
Mat. viii. Luke xiii. and.xix. Chap. Besides these, Christ wc express words,
does say: Suffer young children to come unto me, for to such does belong ye
kingdom of heaven. Paul speaking of ye children of ye christians, says: Your
children are clean: How should that be, unless it were through grace, mercy,
and the promise of god? It follows then, that the children of ye christians,
are of god, and ought to be numbered among the children of god.


SIM. These things do altogether repugne unto the scriptures and gospel, as
though ye carnal birth should avail some thing before god, whereas Ihon
says: Which were not borne of blood, nor of ye will of the flesh, or of man,
but were born of god Ye say that the child does belong to the church, because
that his parents are of the church.


IOIA. We do say this through the grace and mercy of god, whereof is the
promise: The children are of the church, not for their carnal generation and
birth, but for the promise of god, which he has promised, that he will be the
god of the children.


SIM. What if the parents of the child, Whether ye children of them, ye
feygne the^ selves to believe ought to be baptized Act. viii. Chapter
should feign their faith, and not believe truly: should not these children be
borne of unchristian parents, and therefore ought not to be baptized?


IOIA. I ask the, Simon, did Simon Magus of Samaria, believe or not?


SIMON. He did not believe, but he did feygne him self to believe.


IOI What if thy sayings be repugnaunte unto the scriptures?


SIMO. I do not think it.


IOIA. I will show the therefore. Act. viii. chap. it is written after this
manner: When they of Samaria had given credyte unto Philippe, which preached
unto them of ye kingdom of god, and of ye name of Jesus Christ, they were
baptized both men and women. Then did Simon Magus believe also and being
baptized did join himself, too Philippe


SIMON. He did believe, that is to say he did confess the faith with his mouth
and said that he did believe.


IOIADA This yt I say, this word fidele, or faithful is of a larger
sygnificatyon, and can not be so narowly taken, which thing thou thy self
do grant with me, being constrained thereto, by the authority of the
scriptures. But I ask ye, why did Philyp baptize him, since that he did not
believe truly? Did thou not say before that baptysme ought too be
mynistred unto no man, except he does believe truly? and that baptism is a
sign of ye faith that goes before?


SIM. Because yt he said with ye other, that he did believe in Christ, Philyp
does not se the heart, but being content with the confession of the mouth,
does pronounce and baptyse. God only sees the heart.



IOIA. So thou should have spoken and confessed, that god only sees the
heart, and that we ought to be content with the outward confession, and upon
this confession to baptize. Since then that ye father of ye infant, does
confess ye faith with his mouth, and says yt he believes in Christ Jesus,
moreover does believe and confess yt god is his god, and the god of his sede,
and yt he does therefore bring his child unto baptism, it is convenient and
mete, yt we believe his words: and though some time we doubt of ye words of
the father, yet know we yt the child shall not bear the iniquitye of ye
father, and yt the carnal generation does make nothing to this, but yt they
are, and shall be called the children of god, which partayne too the free
election and gratuite promise of god. Do not all men know, Ezechias.
yt Ezechias being a faithful king, was borne of a wicked parent? But yet this
thing did harm or hinder him nothing at all: Esau.
even as Esau got no profit thereby, yt he was borne of a godly parent: ergo ye
election of god does remain fre.


SIM. What if ye child yt is brought to baptism, were not of ye elect? were it
not better yt a man should the^ at length be baptized, when we should se and
perceive yt he is of ye elect? For they which are not elected, are not of god,
and they that are not of god, ought not to be baptized.


IOIA. When should thou the^ baptyse him that came at the evening in too the
vineyarde? when should thou baptize ye thief on ye cross? By this mean no
man should be baptized, and baptism should be abolyshed, for the electyon of
god, is not always known unto us: yea, we should by that mean, take that
upon us which belongs to god only: God only knows who be elected and who be
not.
for god only does search the heart and knows only, which be elected, and
which be not. I do let pass, yt we could not thus avoid the hipocrites. For
Simon Magus did feign his faith whereby ye anabaptists do judge and measure ye
election, and yet he was not elected. Ismael and Esau were not elected, and
they were cyrcumcised.
Other that are already of age may do the same. But tell me, were Ismael, and
Esau elected or not?


SIM They were not elected.


IO. When they were yet babes and infantes, were they numbered among ye people
of god, or not?


SI. I can not tell.


IO. But it behooved yt to know it, sith that thou takesse such matters in
hand. That they were of ye people of god, I prove it by the circumcision They
were circumcised by ye commandment of god: circumcision was ye sign of the
people of god, ergo, in their infancy they were the children of god, and also
they wear of the people of god, yea, though they were not elected. It is plain
and manifest by the life that followed, ye they were not elected and chosen.


SIM I could well grant, that they were of ye people of god, but I can not
reckon them emonge the faythefull.


IOIA. Are not they, that be of ye people of god, faithful?


SIM. They that be of age are faithful infantes and young babes, can not be so
for they can not profess their faith.


IO Ye sing always one song, haste thou not heard a great while agone, that
children, though they can not confess their faith, are rekened emonge the
faithful Or is god only the god of them that are of age, and not also of the
children? Or did Christ suffer only for them that are of age, and not also for
the Children?


SIMON. He did suffer for the satysfactyon of all the sins of the whole world.


IOIADA. Have the Children any sin?


SIMON. They have the origynall sin. Children are restored by Christ, and
not only they that be of age.



IOIADA. Sith then that Paul says, that whatsoever was fallen by Adam, the
same was restored by Christ, and not only they, that be of age, but also
Children, be lost in Adam, It follows that children are restored again by
Christ, If they be restored by Christ, they are of God, and ought to be sealed,
with the seal of the people of god Baptism is the seal of ye people of god
Ergo, children ought too be baptized.


SIMON. Prove that baptism is the sign or seal of the people of god.


IOI I prove that by your own confession. For ye say that baptism is the
sign of the faithful. Acts. x. Chapter. What is to receue the holy ghost.
I prove besides, by ye words of Peter, which Acts. x. Chapter speaks
after this manner. Whoo can forbid them to be baptized, that have received the
holy ghost as well as we?


SIMON. But children have not received the holy ghost.


IOIA. In this place to receive the holy ghost, is too receive a wytnes that we
are of god, which receives us, and that we are cleansed and purged by god. Act.
x. xi. xv. Chap.
This may be proved by the x. xi. and.xv. Chapter of Acts. Children are
cleansed and purged by God: ergo, they have the spirit of god. If they have the
spiryt of god, they are of God, and baptism is due unto them: as it is
suffycyently proved by the old and new Testamente.


SIMON. If Christ should say The kingdom of heaven belongs unto them, I
would easily agree to the, but he says not unto them, but unto such.


IOIADA. But thou most think and consider, yt there must be some likeness and
affinitye between the things that are compared together. I can not say, If
thou wylt be saved, do as Judas did, for Judas is not saved: but damned. If the
children were not of god, nor ye kingdom of heaven theirs: the Lord had not
said. If ye will enter into the kingdom of heaven: be ye made as these
children are. Therefore when he says: unto such, he shows that children are
such, as he will have them to be, that are of god.


SIM. It were better, to prove with express testimonies of the scripture, that
children have the spirit of god.


IOI. By what arguments, will thou have those things that are plain and
manifest, to be proved unto the? But hear thou, a more plain testimonye.
Paul. Roman. viii. faith: that he that has not the spirit of god, is not
his. Whereby it follows that he, which is of god, has ye spirit of god, the
children are of god: Ergo, they have the spirit of god. Children have ye
spirit of god
If they have ye spirit of god, then ought they by good right to be baptized.
For Peter says: who can forbid them, yt have receuid the holy ghost, to be
baptized.


SIMON. I will not contend. How beit I merueyl, that it is so expressly
said. Teache ye, baptizyng. Again, yt Peter baptized the^ which reaceaued gladly
ye word: so likewise Philip did baptize ye steward of Queen Candace. How the
places aleged by the Anabaptestes ought to be understood.



IO. Both ye places and examples, which you have brought and aleged, ought to be
understood of them yt are of age, and not of children. Christ did not send
his disciples to preche ye gospel unto children but unto the^ ye were of age
and had ye use of reason. Nor we do not teach, yt children ought to be
baptized in those places, where ye gospel was never preched. But where ye word of
god and the holy gospel, has been both preched and also received by faith, it
is no dout, but there it is both taught and believed, yt the children are of
god, and yt it is ye will of god, yt the children, which be of god should be
sealed with baptism, and in a manner brought unto god. The doctrine is greter the^
yt baptism
Therefore they are not excluded from ye people of god, but are received and
rekened emonge ye people of god. Or else tell me Simon, whether of the two is
greater, baptism or the doctrine?


SIMON. The doctrine is greater than Baptysme.


IOIADA. What is the doctrine?


SIMO. The holy gospel: For Mark says: Go thoroughout all the wholle world,
and preche the gospel unto every creature: Mathewe likewise: Teach them to
keep what soever I have commanded you.


IOIADA. Does then this gospel teach that the children are not of God?


SIMON. No, else it should be harder and more unmerciful then the law.


IOIO. Does Christ co^mande his discyples to preach that children ought too
be rejected and cast away?


SIMON? No, But rather he does chyde his dyscyples because that they rebuked
them, that brought children unto him.


IOIAD Thus I do conclude then, sith that in these words of Christ. (Teach
Baptize) the doctrine is more excellent and greater, and yet children are not
forbidden it, but rather brought unto it: It follows that they are not
forbidden baptysme, which is less, Infantes that dye without baptism are
notte dampened
but rather ought to be brought unto it. Thus it is manifest and plain, that
this commandment of Christ stands with us, and not with you.


SI. It should follow yt the infants which die wout baptism, are not dampened.


IO That follows plainly, and also this does follow, that thou being
ouerco^men with the truth, do seek how to bring me into an other purpose,
least I should bind the more straightly.


SIM. I confess that I can say nothing against so manifest truth. But I
have brought this of the children, to the intent that thou should teach and
instruct me in this point.


IOIA. Justifying and saluatyon is much less bound to the outward elements
the^ in times passed in the law. Why the infant is baptized.
Heb. ix. chap The infant therefore is not baptized for this intent, yt by
baptism, yt is to say: by ye outward wasshyng of water, he should be made ye
child of god, but he is therefore baptized because he was before ye child of god
through grace and promise. Wherefore if they die before that ye water of
baptism be poured upon the^, they are nevertheless ye children of god, and are
saved through the grace and promysse of god, by the force and strength of the
covenant, by the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, yt he made on ye cross, for
all mankind. In the generalitye of mankind, not only they, that are of age,
but also children are included.


SIMO. By this mean, we should need no baptism. For if the child is alredye
before the child of god, what good does ye water? whereby this also should
follow, that baptism is bare water. We ought to speak reverently of ye
Sacraments The outewarde elements and signs being omitted and left in
necessytie can not dampne one.

The baptism of blood.





IOIAD. We must speak more reverently of the sacraments. None of the
faithful is so alligated and bound to the elements, and outward things, that
they may condemn him if they be omitted and left in necessity: for the blood
of Jesus Christ, has cleansed him. I do call necessity, as when a child
departs before baptism, or when a man, being converted to the faith, is before
he can be baptized, taken to martyr do^n, which thing was often times done in
ye primitive church, for unto him the cross was in stead of baptism,
wherefore the ancient fathers did call it ye baptism of blood. Howbeit no man
ought to neglecte or contempne the order that Christ has instituted, nor to
despise baptism, if he may have it. If he contempneth or does neglect to
receive baptism when he may have it, he is no christian, but ye disciple of
Iulianus and Porphirius For if baptism were unprofitable, Christ would not have
instituted it. All things that Christ has given and left unto us, are
excellent, holy, and profitable. Ergo, baptism is not only profitable unto
us, but also most necessary: Farther more, we do add this also, that baptism
touching ye mattyer, is water, and yet it ought not to be contemned and cast
away, or esteemed as the common water of ye well. For the water is only part of
it, and a certain sign. The whole action of baptism conteyneth great mysteryes
But the wholle action co^teyneth a great mysterye, and an honorable
sacrament. Wherefore it was called by ye holy fathers, a purging, and remission
of sins, also, regeneracion or renuyng, and other like names. Not that ye
water has ye strength to purge or renew. For then Simon of Samaria, Judas,
Himeneus, Phyletus, and other false brethern and hipocrites had been cleansed
and renewed, for then were washed with the water of Baptism. But it is plain
and manyfeste, yt they were not purged inwardely, but defiled with all
iniquitye and wickedness, that they were not the children of god, but the
children of the devil. When therefore these godly and spiritual things are
attributed unto baptism, they be not attributed unto ye outward wasshing, but
to ye wholl action, which conteyneth the faith of ye minister, of ye church and
of him yt is baptized, also ye grace, election and promise of god. It is then
chiefly attributed unto ye, which is signified by ye pouryng on of ye water.


SI. what is signified the^? What is signified by the pouryng on of the water.



IO. That he which is baptized, is of ye people of god, and that he is cleansed
inwardlye by ye grace of the holy ghost, ye wholesome water, yt he is washed by
ye blood of Christ. and initiated unto a new life, even as water does wasshe and
cleanse ye outward filthenesse.


SIM. very well, Sith, then that the mysteries of batisme are so high
excellent, and holy, why, Circumcision was in times passed, a great sacrament.
I pray yt are they given and ministered to infantes, yt are not able to receive
so excellent things?


IO Was not circumcision in times passed, a great sacrament, a sign of ye
people of god, and an initiation or entrance into the true faith and innocence
of life. Deu. x. Hier. iiii. Roma ii and iiii Cha. And yet it was given and
ministered to ye children, which long after were instructed in the law. Deu.
vi. Why should we not do ye same? Why should we not seal our children being
newly born with ye seal of ye people of god? and when they be of age, bring the^
into knowledge of ye gospel? Of this, Confirmation.
did spri^g among au^ctant fathers co^firmacio^ or bisshoping, yt is to say, an
establyshyng of those things, that were begone in baptism. The children were
brought forth, they were asked of their faith, of the Lords prayer and other
necessary articles, wherein they were instructed and confirmed. Wherefore they
that did bring the children to baptism, are witnesses that the child which is
brought, is borne of chrystian parents, askyng both in their name, and in the
parents name, that the seal of the people of god may be given and ministered
unto the child. Wherefore they be called in our vulgar tongue godfathers and
god motheres, because that they bring the child to god, and witness that he
is of god, promysing that they will bring up the child in the true faith, if
need should require. If ye ask, by what scripturs we do strenghten these our
sainges, we do bring unto you the Analogye, or co^ueniencie of the ceremones
of the old law, yt is to say, of circumcision: For eue^ as in circumcision
the children were brought unto ye Lord, so we do read in ye gospel ye children
were brought unto Christ.


SI I do let these things pass now, and return unto the first. Thou
dyddest say if I remember well, that where Christ is not preached, yt me^ must
be taught first and then at length baptized. They ought not to goo about to
baptize where the gospel is not preached.



IOIA. So it is, nor it can be done none otherwise (as thou thy self do
know) for if any man should come in to Greekland where ye Turk does now raygn,
and there would baptize, before he had taught: should not lose his labor, for
men being not yet taught what baptism is, or what it sygnyfieth, would neither
the^ selves receive baptism, nor suffer it to be ministered unto their children.


SIM. Did not, I prai yt, the Iues know, ye god was their god and the god of
their children?


IO. They kenw it right well, and therefore they circumcised their children.


SIM. what needs the^ any preaching among ye Iues, yt knew god already before?
Why did they not by and by bring and intiate ye children by baptism unto
Christ?


IO. The Apostles did preach baptism against circumcision. The Iues wc toth
and nail defended circumcision. Therefore there was need of long preaching among
the Iues, that they might understand ye baptism should be in sted of
circumcision.


SIM. The anabaptists do say that ye teach these things without the
scriptures.


IO. They should easily understand ye baptism is com in ye stead of circumcision
if they would diligently look upon the use of them both. For in baptism, as
in times passed in circumcision, the name is given unto children. So it is
written. Luc ii chapter. But these things are of little weight among you.
Therefore we do refer all our saynges to the Acts of the Apostles. x. xi. xv.
and Collosse.ii. chapte. For there Paul does comfort the faithful that were
of the gentyles, and byddeth them that they should not be sorry, because they
were not circumcised: for why? Baptism was the circumcision of ye faithful.


SIMON. But there he does plainly and with express words speak of ye
circumcision yt is done without hands, understanding thereby a renewynge of the
mind and of ye inward man.


IO. We speak of none other. But in the mean season Paul does mean that
Iewysshe circumcysyon, that was done in the priuye membre with a flynte stone,
and with hands. I say that ye are cyrcumcysed, O ye Collossenses, and have a
cyrcumcysyon, not that cyrcumcysion that is done with hands, but instead of
ye bodily and outward circumcision, ye have Christ's circumcision, yt is to
say, baptism. For as by circumcision, ye cuttyng away of affections was
signified: so by ye wasshing, done in ye water of baptism, the purging and
clensing from sin, is fygurated and betokened. That this is the true meaning
and sense of this place I will prove by the very words of Paul In Christ (says
he) ye are complet, which is ye head of all rule and power, by who^ ye are
circumcised with the circumcysion yt is made without hands, when ye did put of
the sinful body of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, being buried
together with him, through baptism, in the which also ye be risen with him, by
the faith wrought in you of god, which raised him from the dead. Bring hither
to this place yt.vi. to the Romans and confer them together, and you shall
understand ye baptism is called the circumcision of Christ, and also ye
baptism has been placed in the stead of ye circumcision. Upon these things I
do conclude after this manner: Young children were in times passed, circumcised.
Baptism occupies the place and roum of circumcision: ergo, our children must
be baptized


SI. What, on ye.viii. day?


IO. We are bound neither to time nor too place, but we are fre from all those
things by Christ Al things the^ being considered, We are free from al outward
ceremonies of the law by Christ.
it is manifest and plain, that the baptism of children is of god, against ye
which, since that the anabaptists do repugne, it is without doubt. that they do
contrary the gospel, the election of God, and the everlasting covenant. They
are therefore over bold and rash, they are open violatours or breakers of ye
covenant of god, unfaith full against god, since that they do exclude and
debar them from the covenant of God, whom gods grace does comprehend in
the couenaunte.


SIMON. Yet ye have no express word of God, ye children ought to be baptized.


IOIA. Shall not all that we have hitherto aledged and brought, prove ye same?
But go to, put the case that we have no express word thereof in the scriptures.
Tell thou, where have ye one express word ye children ought not to be baptized?


SIM. Teach baptyzyng. Again: They came and confessed their sins. Item: They
that received the word gladly. were baptized. Baptism is in the stead of
circumcision.
And he that believes and is baptized.


IOIA. I have answered already before to all these: but so ye are wont to
repeat every foot, your bald reasons and arguments. The Anabaptists are
prompte and quick to speak, but not redye to give place to ye truth.
For ye are very prompt and quick to speak, but not so ready to give place to
the truth. I have not yet heard in all thine allegations, any such saying or
sentence. Children ought not to be baptized.


SIM. But that does follow of ye places before alleged.


IOIA. This is neither commanded there, nor yet forbidden. Besides that, your
consequences are false, and without foundatyon. If ye be nothing ashamed of
your false consequences, we will be nothing ashamed of our true. Therefore
when ye cry out saying. Where does ye scripture teach that children ought to
be baptized? we cry again: Where does ye scripture forbid to baptyse them? Ye
do answer in the last of Mark. We bring against you. Gene.xvii. Mark.x. i.
Corinth. vii. Act. x. Colloss. ii Chap. Moreover, we do submit these our
sayings and writings, to the judgment of all godly persons. Whether that it
be more like unto the truth, that they do exclude and debar the children whom
Christ has washed with his blood, from ye covenant of god (for why do they
deny unto them, the sign of the couenaunte: and of the cleansing?) or yt we
do teache ye children to be of god, redeemed by Christ Jesus, whom he bids and
wylleth to be brought unto him, and also too be baptized? Judge thou Simon, and
tell me whether of them is more like to be true.


SIM. If the matter be considered by it self, all contention being laid aside,
ye which ye say is most true, and most weighty. But this I do wonder and
marvel at, that thou doste say, that the baptism of children has continued
in the church, ever since the time of the apostles, which apostles did never
baptize children. Here I do most earnestly desire the to bring furthe
whatsoever thou have yet in store, I will gladly receive all truth: for many
of us have thought hitherto, yt ye baptism of children was brought in by the
busshop of Rome


The third Dialogue. That the baptysme of children has continued in the church
of Christ, ever since ye apostles, unto this time.
IOIADA. No man can deny, but ye the busshop of Rome and the fathers have
added certain things to ye baptism of Christ, but no man yt is wise, will say
yt it had his beginning of them, that is to say, that did begin the baptism of
children. Those things then that were added, and were repugnaunte unto the word
of god, were taken away again, lest any man should make any business for it. As
for that, that ye bring against us, that the apostles did never baptyse
children, no man living is able too prove it. For I will show no small
arguments, that the apostles did baptize children, whereby you shall easily
understand yt the baptism of children has continued in the church of Christ,
ever since the apostles time, and that it is no new invention of the busshop of
Rome. i Certain arguments against the Anabaptists.
First, we do make our argument upon the force and strength of ye precept and
commandment of christ and of the doctrine, after this manner: Christ did send
his disciples to preche the gospel and to baptize: ergo, he did send the^ to
baptize children. The prove of ye consequence, or argument



SI. I deny ye consequence


IO. But I will prove it after this manner It is so far, yt the gospel should:
reiecte and cast back the children, yt it does rather bring the^ unto Christ.
Now the doctrine is greater then baptism.i. Cor. i. cha. If ye, which is
greater, yt is to say, the gospel is the chyldrens, that then, which is less
that is to say, baptism shall be theirs, Ergo, the apostles did baptize the
children

ij
The second argument may be made and gathered upon the nature of him, to whom
baptysme is due, and which is able too receive baptism. As many as god does
reckon among ye fideles or faithful, they are fideles, or faithful. For Peter
did hear this saying of the Lord. That god has purifyed or made clean,
call thou it not common or unclean. Acts. x. chapter. He does put the
children in the number of the faithful: Ergo, the children are of the number
of the fideles or faithful, and ought to be compted and reputed of us among
the fideles, or faithful, unless we will repugne against god and be stronger
then he. Now it is most certain, that the apostles did baptize all them that
Christ commanded them to baptyse. Christ commanded them too baptyse the
faithful (as ye your selves do grant and confess) Ergo, the Apostles did
baptyse the children. The second proposition (which is, that the children are
of the number of the faithful) is known well enough.

iii.
The third argument is gathered upon ye fact of Peter, which is peculier, but
yet in it ye public administraction of baptism is touched. He could not
forbid them the water of baptism, yt had received the holy ghost, but sealed
them as the people of god. Ergo, he could not deny baptism unto ye children,
sith yt he had learned in the gospel yt the children be of god, and that the
kingdom of heaven is theyrs. Who would think, yt any man is mete for the
kingdom of heaven, without ye holy spiryt?

iiii.
We do make and gather the fourth argument upon the strength and force of
circumcision, instead whereof, baptism is in the church of Christ. As many as
were ye servants of god, did before al things, labor and endeavor themselves,
to circumcise their children. Iosu. v. Exo. iiii. The Apostles were the most
faithful ministers of god: The^ did not they omit or leave ye thing, yt was
not brought in, instead of ye circumcision, Ergo, they did baptize, not only
the^ that were of age, but also children.

v.
Fyftely we do thus reason upon the use and custom of ye Aposltes. The
Apostles of Christ did dyrecte al their doings to the co^ueniencie and example
of ye old testament.

This we do prove by ye. iiii. Evangelists, the Acts of ye apostles, by the
epistles of ye Apostles, Romans xv. ii. Cor. ii. ii. Tim. iii. ii. Peter.i. chap.
Ergo, they did order baptism after the Analogy and figure of the old
Testament. The going through ye red sea, The going thorough ye read sea, is a
figure of baptism
was a type and figure of ye baptism yt was to come.i. Cor. x. cha. Children
were in the figure (for both men and women went through with their children)
Ergo the apostles did not deny baptism unto the children. The custom and
manner of the scripture (which custom and manner is used almost among al
nations) is not to reherce by name, women and children, and yet nevertheless
it does include them, for in ye name of the father of ye famylie, or of the
good man of the house, al his whole famylie is comprehended, as in the chief
or head. If this were not, women should be in no small ieoperdy, if therefore
they were not of god, because yt they be not circumcised. Al these things are
done, by ye means and help of a figure yt is called Sinecdoche. The sixte
argument shall be taken out of ye manifest and express testimonies of the
apostles. The apostles did baptyse al whole households and famylies, ergo they
did baptyse children also, for the children are in ye number of ye famylie or
household. This we do prove by ye.xvii of Gene. For Abraham does circumcise all the male children yt were in his house. For he understood ye promys of god,
that says. I shall be thy god, and the god of thy sede. Likewise in ye new
Testament, when the goodman of the house, had herd and believed ye gospel, that
is to say, ye god was his god, and the god of his sede also, he caused all
them that were in his house both great and small, to be baptized. Thus ye
apostles did baptize hole households and famylies. That the children do perteyne
unto ye fathers household and famylie, it is plain and manifest by the.xii. of
Exodus and ii. of the Acts: this do I inculcat and beat the oftener into men's
heads, because yt I se the Anabaptists to be at this point that they do
exclude ye children from ye famylie and household. for they can not deny but ye
hole households were baptized by ye Apostles. But who does not se, that this
comes of mere contention? For though they could prove that there were no
children at all in the famylies and housholdes, that ye apostles did baptize,
yet had they not proved that al families or households were, or be without
children: wherefore we do make again our argument after this manner The Apostles
baptized al wholl housholdes, ergo, they did baptize children, sith ye children
are ye princypal and chief part of the family and household. But let us put ye
case, yt there were no children in those families and households, yt the
Apostles did baptize, yet do they perteine and belong to ye household, and are
rekened in it, and if there had been any, they would have baptized the^. For
they did baptize ye wholl household. The fault then should not have been in the
Apostles nor in ye children, yt they were not baptized: but this had been the
cause that they had been baptized, because yt there were none: For if they had
had children they would have baptized them.

Seuenthlye, we do gather by the hystoryes and chronicles that the baptism of
children has continued ever sens the apostles time, unto this time. Origene,
which in the year of our salvation.c.c. and.xii. did live in ye church of
Alexandria, does in his v. book, yt he did wryt upon ye epistle to the
Romans, testify and witness yt he has received ye baptism of children,
from, or of ye Apostles. After this time, about the year of our Lord.
C.C.lv. ye holy man Cipryan was, he does prove, and that with no small
arguments, ye baptism of children, in the.iii. book of his Epistles, and
viii. epistle Adfidum, To fidus. In ye year of our lord.c.c.c.xx. Lactantius
did write in ye.iiii. book of his divine Insttucion, ye baptism was come in ye
stead of circu^cisio^ whereby all natyons should be gathered unto the faith,
and into the church. Lactantius in his iiii. book, and iiii. chapte
Hierome which did live about the year of our lord c.c.c. and lxx. does with
plain and express scriptures prove ye baptism of children to Leta and against
ye Pelagians. In ye same self time and.xl. years after. Augustyn, being a man
endued with great holiness of life, with exceading great erudition and
learning, and with a sharp and exact judgment did teache in Aphrica. This man
writes many things of baptism against ye Donatistes, to Marcellinus and
Petilianus, where he does manifestely say, Christ could not be baptized
before ye baptism was instituted by Iho^. For the law did regne till them.
that the church has received the baptism of children, from ye apostles. I
have brought these things therefore yt thou may see and understand, that ye
baptism of children is no new invention, and that they which teache such
things do lean to no truth, but to plain error. For although christ was not
baptized, till he was.xxx. years old, yet being an infant he was circumcised
upon ye eight day, that I should in the mean season let pass, that baptism
was not yet instituted, which had his beginning of Ihon. But now we will stryke
up our sail clothes, and show how vnkunninglye ye gather your arguments,
when ye do reason after this manner. We do not read that the apostles did
baptize the children of the faithful: Ergo, they ought not to be baptized. If
we should only goo by conjectures and reason, it is more lykelye, that the
Apostles did baptyse the infauntes then otherwise in the famylye, and household
of Stephana, of Lidia, of the keeper of the prison, and of other, if at least,
there were any infantes in those famylyes and housholdes, Do not think good
reader that we goo about to defend unwritten verytes.
which examples ye shall never be able to confute. There be many things done
both by Christ and by the apostles, that never were written. Nor we can not
make our argument after this manner: This thing was not done. ergo, it may not
lawfully be done. That we should grant unto you ye the apostles did baptize no
children, yet have ye not proved therefore, that children ought not to be
baptized. Again we may not to this affyrmatyue. (The apostles did baptyse them
that were of age and did believe) infer or bring in, this negative (Ergo
children ought not to be baptized) for we may never, neither in ye profane nor
yet in the holy scriptures, make our argument, a facto ad ius, To argument or
reasone a facto ad ius is when we go about to prove a thing to be lawful
because ye it was don before, or else to be unlawful because it was not don
before
but then it is lawful to bring the fact and deed for a law, when it is
proved that the deed was done rightfully.


SIMON. As I do hear the controuersye is of the fact, and of the right or
lawfulnes.


IOI. Thou say truth if any thing be lawful, as soon as thou have done
it, thou have done well though that none of the apostles did it before the.
Therefore baptism ought not to be denied unto infantes, because that we do not
read expressly, that the apostles did baptize infantes. Both because yt it
may be, yt they did baptize infants (as we have proved and showed already, and
hereafter, if need be, will show more largely) and yet it was not written, and
also because yt no man's factes ought to be prejudicial unto ye law, much less
ye things yt are left undone. Therefore, if it were written any where with plain
and express words of ye apostles after this manner: The apostles did not
baptize infauntes, yet it should not follow that they ought not too be
baptized: but we ought too inquire and search, whether that they left it
undone, because that it was notte lawful, Christ did not baptize. Christ did
not baptis and yet we ought to baptize.
Ihon. iiii. Ergo, after or according to your saying, we ought not to baptize
at al. Who is so mad to say so? For ye Apostles did baptize and that lawfully.
Ergo, If ye apostles, did baptize lawfully, though christ him silf did never
baptize, we shall also lawfully baptize infants, though ye apostles did not
baptyse. There is no diversity at al, yea, we have gotten ye better end of ye
staff, sith that we have Christ ye did not baptize, and yet we ought to
baptize, and ye only have the apostles. Bring ye therefore any law yt
forbids to baptize children. We do not go about by these reasons and
examples, as by some strong foundacio^, to prove or strengthen ye baptism of
infantes (For we have many other strong arguments and foundations) But we will
show, ye ye do both rashely and lyingly say, that the apostles did never
baptize infantes or young babes. For ye have no testimonye of that thing. And
though ye had never so much, yet it should not follow therefore, yt infantes ought
not to be baptized: For upon a thing that is done, or left undone, nothing can
besureli concluded, but only upon that, which is sure by gods word to be
lawful. Again, we did bring so many reasons and examples to this intent, that
we might prove yt it is more likely, yt they did baptyse children than
otherwise.


SI. Thou do bost much of foundations, The children are as well of the people
of god, by the strength of ye covenant as their pare^tes.
but thou bring forth very little. I pray ye, which be these strong
foundations.


IO. I have cast this foundation, yt the children of ye faithful are as well
wtin the church, and emonge ye Children of god, as the parents and that by the
force and strength of ye promys, as well as they were in ye old Testament.
Besides ye, circumcision (as touching ye sacramental meaning) was ye same
thing unto them, yt baptism was unto us. Did I not alredie both say and
prove these things? Why say thou then that I have brought yet little or
nothing?


SIMON. Why do thou take all things out of the old Testament.


IO. I know what the matter is, ye cast away the old Testament, for ye se that
the baptism of children may be proved and defended by it Did not both Christ
and his Apostles a alege ye old Testament, when so ever they would prove and
strengthen their sayings Or tell me now when Christ does bid ye Jews to search
ye scriptures, does he not send them to the old Testament?


SIM, I do not deny that.


IOI. Why do ye blame us then, if we following the example of Christ, do
strengthen and confirm our sayings with the scriptures of the old Testament?
The new Testament and the old are included one with in an other
The new testament is included in the old, and ye old does shadow and prove
the new. If thou be sufficyentlye persuaded in this conclusion, let us pass
forth to ye other.


SI. Certain things do please me well, but that thou do reckon and number
the children in the family and household, I do not se it proved yet.


IO. Did you never se then, yt men are borne of men? and that parents (I
mean fathers and mothers) do nourish, keep, and bring up their children?
Haste thou so cast of all humayne reason, understanding and affectyon? But yet
in this most plain matter, I will bring and alege the scriptures. Acts.ii.
Chapter. We read after this manner: And all they that believed, were together,
or in one place, and had al things commen emonge them. Here I do ask the,
whether the faythefull had their children with them, or not? If they had
them, why should they not be then of their famylye and household. If they had
them not, why do we not read then, that the faythefull took thought,
because they might not have their children with them? Or was the spirit that
governed them so cruel, that it did teach them to put away their children,


SIMON. We will not say, that they had not them with them, or that they did
not bring them up, but that they were not in the famylye and household of
Christ.


IOIADA. Whom do ye comprehend then, under the name of famylye or household?


SSMON. Such as be of that age already, that they may know what the law is,
and what sin is. For he that will be baptized, must repent: sithe that
infauntes can not repent, they can not be comprehended under the name of the
famylye, or household.


IOIADA. Why do thou still make up a rope of sand, have we not proved
already before that, not only they that be of age, ought too be baptized:
But year so styffe necked that ye will in no wise believe, that any may be
baptized, unless he may repent of his misdedes. And by and by ye do conclude
that, ergo, children ought not to be baptized. But in the mean season, ye have
not yet showed any law ye orbiddeth to baptyse the children. We (as we have
declared before already) do know, Isaac. Agar. Ismael.
yt Isaac being an infaunt was so of the family and household of Abraham that
he did cause his father to put away ye bond woman, with her child. For Paul
says with Moises: The son of the bond woman shall not be heir, with my son
Isaac, he was heir, then without doubt he was of ye family, for they that be
not heirs, as servants and fre men are of ye family. Exo. xii. We read
after this manner: If any stranger will come to dwell among you, and keep the
passover of the lord, let al his male children be circumcised, and the^ he
shall keep it well. Why is it said, al his male children? Does this pertein
only to them ye be of age? It is your part then to prove, yt they which
receive the seal of ye church of god, according to ye religion of their
parents, are not of the familye and household of their parents. But I will
bring an oher testimonye. In the.xxi. of Acts, Luk writes after this manner:
And after certain days, we departed from thens and they al brought us on our
way, with their wives and children. Were al these children of age? Or if they
were not of age, were they not of ye family and household of their parents?
What miracle, or what affection was it if ye men did only bring forth ye
apostle on his way, with their wives and young men? But this was ye great
affection, yt the fathers with their wives, did bear and draw their children
with them, as in such a business it is wont to be. Now, they did not draw with
them, other men's, but their own children. Ergo, they were of their family.


SI. What though they pertain to their family and household? Does it follow
therefore yt they were baptized?


IO. How should then Paul say, yt he has baptized the household of Stephana,
which he had not baptized, if there were children in it, who^ he had not
admitted or receued? Again, in ye Acts, it is said. He was baptized (yt is to
say) (the keeper of ye prison) and al his household. At the begininge of ye
church ye faithful were wont to follow ye example of Abraham and of his
posteritye.
Why will ye not se yt at ye beginning, ye faithful were wont to do as Abraham
and his posterity, which did circumcise al their servants, and not only their
children? And in ye.xii. of Exodus (as it is said already before) al ye male
children of the family, are commanded to be circumcised and yet there no
mention of faith, or of the knowledge of god (which things ought to be cared
for above al things) is made there.


SI. Thou semest too me always to leave those things, ye make against ye. For
in ye epistle to the Corin. Paul names such a familye and household, does
manifestly declare, yt not infants and young babes, but such as have reason and
understanding, ought to be understood. For he says: ye know ye house of
Stephana, yt they are the first fruits of Achaia, and have given the^ selves to
the service of ye saints be ye obedient to the^, and to all ye work and labor
with them. Why do ye not speak of such a family and household?


IO. We have said already, and that often, yt this is a Sinecdochicall phrase,
or manner of speaking: such as is.i. Cor. x.. Al our fathers were under the
cloud, for infantes were also under the cloud: but no express mention is
made of them. Al went through ye sea, but the infants could not go through They
went through then, yt went not through, but were born by them yt went through. So
there were some in the familye of Stephana, yt believed first of al Achaia,
there were also some of the congregation yt could not yet believe in deed, for
lack of age, nor give the^ selves to the ministerye and service of ye Saints.
Al were baptized in Moses: he speaks al things of ye fathers yt is to lay, of
ye aunceters and grandfathers who^ notwithstanding, we do so take, yt they yt
were then children, are now called fathers by Paul. For ye people of Israel was
of the^. Therefore, not only they yt were of age, were baptized in Moises, but
also the infants. For if they yt were then infants, were not baptized in ye
going thorough of ye red sea, the^ Paul said not well yt al were baptized in
Moises. For they were also (as we have said before) the fathers of them yt came
after.


SIM. This was a figure, what shall thou then prove by it?


IO. I am well content. It was a figure yt as ye infants were then of ye family
as well of the earthly father, as of ye heavenly, and were signed or sealed with
their sacraments, yt so now, they that are the children of the christians,
sith yt they are the children of god also, ought to use the sacrament of the
children of god. Thou can find no starting hole, to escape at. For ye do
folyshlye upon factes and exaumples, bring in a negative: yea, rather upon
neither factes nor examples, that is to say, ye do unwisely make your argument,
after this manner: This thing was done, as we may prove both by testimonies and
examples: Ergo, that thing ought not to be done. For what other thing can ye
alege for your selfs: but we do not read, that ye apostles did baptize
infantes: ergo, they ought not to be baptized. We do not so: but we might stay
our selves upon facts and examples (if ye would stand to) after this manner.
The infantes of ye Hebrews were al baptized under the cloud, and in the sea^,
as well as ours. For Paul does altogether prove there in ye foresaid place, yt
they were no less initiated with our sacraments, the^ we are our selves. First
and formeste, then it follows, yt in Paul's time, The fathers had the same
sacraments yt we have
ye apostles were wont to baptize infants. Secondly, yt whosoever denies yt he
does deprauate and mar the sentence of Paul. For what other thing does he
there, but make al things equal? and yt we are not above, or superiors unto
the^, nor they inferyours unto us? For he attributes ye same sacraments unto
the^, yt we have, and the same unto us, yt they had, as Colloss. ii. Now al
those ancient fathers could not have been baptized as well as we, if we be not
al baptized with our family and housholdes. Them al therefore being baptized and
made equal unto us it is manifest and plain, yt as all their infa^tes were
baptized in ye red sea in Moises yt so in the apostles time, al ye children of
ye christians, This figure Senecdoche is when either some whole thing, is taken
for part of it, or part of it for the wholl, as ye shall herafter have
examples enowghe.
were baptized in Christ. It is then Sinecdochically spoken of ye children of
Israel: They went al through the sea, where as, after ye letter or literally,
ye going thorough, is applied only unto the^, yt were in health, and of age to
go through their selfs. And al they did eat one spiritual meat, where as
they only did eat, yt were spiritual, and yet nevertheless it is spoken of al
them yt did eat. In like manner, if paul in this place had added this word (All)
and so had said: All they of ye house of Stephana have given them selves to the
ministry and service of ye saints, yet by ye force and strength of this
figur Sinecdoche we should understand, yt there were infantes in ye family and
household, and yt they, which had believed alredie, had given the^ selves unto ye
Lord. For this is ye nature of this figure Synecdoche, yt when there is some
wholl body, yt has many parts, which in some thing are like, and in some
thing unlike, if any thing is spoken of ye wholl body, ye same may be
understood of a singular part of it: Again, if any thing is spoken of any
singular part, ye same may like wise be understand of ye wholl body. Learn ye
this yt I say, by familyar examples. All wholl Iurye went forth unto him: Here
ye se, that al Jury is put only for them, yt went forth unto him, and yt there
be to manner of Synecdoche, ye one whereby yt which conteyneth any thing, is
taken for yt, which is contained, as the country of Iurye, for all ye
inhabitours: and ye other, whereby, it is said yt all the inhabitours went forth,
where as part only did go forth unto him. Contrary wise in Esaye. The daughters
of Syon.
iii. Because yt the daughteres of Syon, are waxen proud, there the daughters
are part of Syon. and yet they are taken for all the wholl people, and
especyally for the princes and rulers, which ungodly did rise against the
Lord. Exo xvi. All the congregatyon did murmr against Moses. But how did ye
children murmr, which knew not what was done? The anabaptystes are
ignorant in those things yt serve to expound the letter which they stycke to
always.
If they did not murmur and grudge al ye congregation did not murmur: For ye
infants were of ye congregation. Now se, I pray yt, what pratinge smatteres
ye are, ye thing, yt ye trust most upon, ye are most shamefully ignorant in.
For ye stick to ye letter, but ye are ignorant in ye thing, yt does most
chyefely serve to understand and expound ye letter. Tell I beseech yt, Simo^ to
who^ is it said: Do not take ye name of thy Lord god in vain. Thou shalt not
steal, and such like?


SI. To them yt were of age, which are ye people, and congregation of god.


IO. Ergo, because yt these things can not be said unto ye children, shall
they not be of ye church and people of God? God forbid: For Infantes were ye
members of ye people of god, and fathers of nations and peoples. Gene. xxv. It
is plain and manifest then, yt what soever is spoken, to any wholl body or
generality: Mark ye this.
And in ye same generaletye there is some part, to whom yt which is spoken, is
not applied, yet notwithstanding it is of ye body, yea, though certain thing do
pertain nothing unto it. Again, if any thing be spoken to part of ye body, or
of ye generality, which not withstandyng, does not pertayne unto ye part: It
perteyneth so to ye wholl body, yt it touches and admonishes only those
parts, yt may be subject unto that, which is spoken. Thou art mine
enheritaunce, O Israel. To who^ is this spoken? Is not this spoken to ye wholl
posteritye of Israel? But children do not understand it. It follows not
therefore, yt they are not of ye enheritaunce or of ye peculier people. But
though it is a part, yt understands not what is said, yet nevertheless it
pertains to ye whole body. In like manner, when Christ says: Go ye, teach al
nations baptizing them etc. The apostles did teache as many as were able to
receive ye doctrine, and baptized as many, as were able to receive baptism,


SI. Therefore I do think ye infantes ought not to be baptized, sith yt Christ
says so expressly: Go thorough out al ye wholl world, and prech the gospel,
whosoever shall believe and is baptized etc. Going forth, teach ye all nations.


IO. This is the only refuge yt ye always flee to, although Christ, had
instituted baptism there, where as Ihon and the apostles did both prech and
baptize long before, when Christ was yet a live: The contention was emonge ye
apostles touching ye preching of the gospel to the gentles.
There was a contention among ye apostles, whether ye gospel ought to be
preached to ye gentyles, or not. Which contention did rise partly of a false
conclusion and conjecture, and parttely of a likelyhode. The false conclusion
or coniectur was this: Christ is promised unto us, ergo he does not perteyne or
belong to yt gentyles. Who is so without understanding, which does not
perceive, yt this can follow by no mean? The messiah is promissed unto us yt be
Iues, ergo, he does nothing perteine to gentyles. For it may be yt he is also
promissed to ye gentyles, which thing ye scriptures do testefy in many places.
In ye same self manner do ye gather your argument, but falsely: The wrytinges of
ye apostles do testifye and witness, yt they did baptize them, yt had both
hard and believed ye word: ergo, they did not baptize infantes. For these.ii.
sentences may both be true. The apostles did baptize them yt believed: and: ye
Apostles did baptize infants. Ye do make an indefinite proposityon, an
exclusyue or negative proposition, yt is to say, ye do make of a sentence yt
affyrmeth, a sentence ye utterly deneith. For both these are negatyues: No man
ought to be baptized, unless he does believe, and: Infants ought not to be
baptized. Ye were not hitherto able to prove any of them by ye scriptures. The
lykelyhode whereby ye apostles were moved to think, yt the gospel ought not to
be preached, unto ye gentyles, was this: In their first mission and sending,
they were forbiden to go into yt way of the gentyles: which word might had
caused them to contend and strive, and that stoutely, yt Christ was minded to
keep him self for ye hebrews only. If ye had now any such word, O lord god,
so ye would triumph against us. Mark thou therefore. These.ii. commundementes
(Go ye and teache all nations baptizing them: and: Go through out all ye wholl
world, and preach ye gospel) were a dispensation and an abolisshyng of this
interdicte or prohibition (ye shall not go into ye way of the gentilles.) For
they had already before both taught and baptized, which thing either ye do not
mark, or else ye do dissemble it craftily. He does therefore open ye wholl
prouynce of all the wholl world unto the^ ye were before included and in a manner
shut up with in ye borders of Jury. These places the^ are set against ye first,
Antithesis is a figure where by one contrary is set against the other.
as twoe Anttytheses.


SI. The place ye thou have aleged before out of the second of ye Act, does
make greatli against ye. For it should follow, ye infantes had both sold and
distributed their goods, and many other things might be gathered thereupon.


IOIADA. When ye gather your argument after this manner: If ye infantes be
numbered among ye faithful: It follows, ye they did sell and distribute their
goods, ye they did pray and break bread, for they ye believed, did so. Who
does not see, yt ye expound all things after the letter, and yet ye do not
weyghe and ponder it? The infantes are of the family and household of their
parents, which thing we have proved sufficienly before, whom since yt ye had
rather to comprehend under ye name of houlshold stuff, then of the faithful,
ye do not only in this thing, most ungodly, but also most cruelly. It is not
requieted in this figur Synecdoche, yt whatsoever is spoken or said of some
whole body ye same be verified of al parts. For the^ it is no Sinecdoche: When
yt which is spoken, may be veryfied of al parts, it is no trope nor figur. But
the^ it is a true sinecdoche, when either some part is taken for ye wholl body,
or else ye wholl bodi for part thereof. As in Exo. xxiii. where it is written:
That al ye male kind shall apeare before the Lord thrice in ye year, here you
see this word (All) Tell me now, were all ye children in ye cradelles carried
from al Palestina thrice in ye year to Jerusalem? If you say est yt it was so,
ergo ye infantes (according to thy reason) did.vii. days eat unleauened
bread, did sow fyeldes, did offer ye first fruits. Which thing sith yt they
did not: it follows yt the male children are not comprehended. If they were
not brought, then this is not true that all the male kind did thrice in ye
year apear before ye lord: and though at ye first sight, it seems to have a
show, yt al ye male children are commanded to come to ye three feasts, yet for all yt, they are only bound by ye law, that are of ye age, yt may hear and
understand ye doctrine, or offer ye first fruits, or bear about branches of
trees according to the variety of ye feasts and fashion of ye rightes As it is
written Deuteronomy.xxxi. of ye coming to ye lecture or reading of ye law: it
apeareth ye those children did come, which did alredi begin to understand, what
was red.


SI. What is this figure Sinecdoche, or from whens does it come?


IO. Synecdoche, is compounded of Syn, Whereof synecdoch comes.
ek, and Dechome. As if a man should say: When I do take an wholl body, I do
understand some thing a part, or by it self of those things, ye are
together comprehended in ye same body. It may in laten be called comprehensio,
howbeit it agrees not all together with ye Greek word. But what do we strive for
ye word? Tell me now, have these things yt we have reasoned upon he thereto,
satisfied the?


SI. I have nothing to say against so manifest scriptures. Nor it is not decent
yt a man should repugne against ye truth. I would that thou should take mine
objections although, they did proceed from an ignorance person, which yet
coueteth to be taught and instructed.


Imprynted at Worceter by Ihon Oswen.

ANNO. DO. 1551.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


