The Government of Health: A Treatise written by William Bullein, for the
especial good and healthful preservation of man's body from all noisome
diseases, proceeding by the excess of evil diet, and other infirmities of
Nature: full of excellent medicines, and wise counsels, for conservation of
health, in men, women, and children.

Both pleasant and profitable to the industrious Reader.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Sims dwelling in Adling street, at the sign of
the white Swan, near Bainards castle, 1595.

To the right worshipful sir Thomas Hilton knight, Baron of Hilton, and
Captain of the king and Queens majesty's castle of Tinmouth, William Bullein
wishes increase of worship and health.
QVintus Curtius, the famous writer of the great battles that king Alexander,
the son of Philip of Macedonie, had against the most noble and rich king of
the Medes and Persians, called Darius (right worshipful sir) declares (that
when one Philip the Physician unto the said king Alexander, and his most
trusty subject,) by sudden chance the king fell sore sick, to the great
heaviness of all his royal army, at which time with all speed this physician
did prepare a medicine, most excellent for his sovereign Lord, whom he so
dearly loved, to this end, that the great virtue thereof might prevent his
present sickness, and immenent danger: but malicious spite that wretched
enemy, which never sleeps but watches ever, to bring virtue and good fame
to destruction: Immediately before this gentle Philip did present himself unto
the king with his medicine, Letters were sent to king Alexander, containing,
that the said Philip was corrupted so with money from king Darius, that he had
put most deadly poison and incurable venom into Alexanders medicin. The king
perusing the letters, kept them secret until he had drunk his medicin, and
immediately he took his physician by the hand, and delivered him the letters
that he might read them, having in him so great confidence, that he did in no
manner of case mistrust him. The cause why I have alleged this most worthy
prince king Alexander, and his excellent physician Philip, is to declare the
great trust in the one, and the fidelity in the other, not forgetting the
shameless conditions of the flattering Parasites, which ever walk with two
faces in one hood, bearing fire in the one hand, and water in the other: sowers
of discord, reapers of mischief: which be always enemies unto the disciples
of Philip, whose venomous stings can not hurt them, which ever have in store
the precious, Jewel of patience, and arm themselves to do good to every
good man, for the preservation of their lives, by the true rules of the
Government of health, which here I am so bold to present unto your worship. For
whereas there lacks government in a common wealth, the people do eftsoons
fall into ruin. The ships that lack good governance, oftentimes be cast away
upon sands and rocks. And therefore there is nothing under heaven that has
life, but if it lack good government, it will quickly fall into utter decay.
For like as the Creator of all things has formed the bodies of all men, into
the goodliest shapes of every living thing that ever was, or ever shall be:
even so he has ordained for man, herbs, fruits, roots, seeds, plants,
gums, oils, precious stones, beasts, fowls fishes, for the preservation of
health, to be moderately used with discretion, which peserueth the body in
good estate, without whose virtues the bodies cannot live, for they be the
nourishers of life. But misusing or abusing them, brings to the body many
diseases, as rheumes, cathers, dropsies, impostumes, gowts, flixes, opilations,
vertigoes, blindness, ruptures* fransies, with many mo noisome diseases, which
come through the corruption of meats and ill air. For what avails riches,
honors, costly buildings, fair apparel, with all the pomp of this world,
and to be honored of the people, and in the mean time to be eaten with
worms in the breast, or in the belly, consumed with Agues, tormented with
gowtes, soreness, bone-ach, etc. Well, I think an whole Codrus is better than
a sick Mydas. Codrus, Mydas.
And seeing that to possess health, is better than to govern gold, insomuch
that health makes men more happy, stronger and quieter than all manner of
riches, lacking health: as example. Great princes, noble men, men of great
substance, when they be wrapped and enclosed with many and sundry sicknesses,
and in daily dangers of death, in their extreme pains and passions, they do
more greatly covet one drop of health, than a whole tun of gold, crying out
for the help and counsel of the Physician. Whom Jesus Siracke in his godly
book did counsel all wise men to honor, Cap. 3^.
and whom the almighty God did create and ordain for the infirmity of
mankind, and also medicine for his help, and that no wise man should despise
them. Therefore yet again (right worshipful knight) I shall most humbly
desire you, to accept the good will of him, which wishes the years of your
prosperous life and health, to be equal to Nestor, Arganton, Nestor. Galen.
Arganton.
and Galen, whose lives were long, healthful and happy. And thus wishing the
daily increase of your worship, with continual health, to Gods pleasure: who
ever be your guide and governor, Amen. Your worships to command.

William Bullein.

THis book to praise, I will not be curious,
Let the wise Reader with judgment discus
The sun need no candel, to give it more light,
The Eagle requier none to teach him his flight,
Each fruits has their taste, and forth witness bring,
From what trees they came, and had their growing,
So is this work a manifest seal,
Of great commendacion, to which I appeal,
The beginning, scope, and end of the counsel,
Health to prefer, and sickness expel.
Such matter digesting as they do assende,
Applying good medicines those evils to a mende,
With herbs that does bind or else be expulsive,
Vicious humors, to correct and out drive,
Diseases thus ^anished, and health brought in place.
Thou may live quietly, and finish thy race,
If death then shall come, whereto thou must trust,
Thy soul shallbe safe, let him do his worst.
quod R. B.

FINIS.
A Table of the contents of of this Book of the Government of health.
THe Epistle Verses in meeter against surfeiting commending moderate diet.
Verses in praise of the Book Of the Epicures lif^. Fol. 1 Heliogabalus court
fit for Epicures ibidem Belly gods plagued 2 Fruits of inordinate banquets
ib. Variety of opinions ib. An objection against physic ib. God, author of
physic 3 God ordained herbs for the health of men ib. The praise of Physic
4 A definition of physic ib. Sundry sects of physicians 5 Physic divided
into five parts ib. The description of the four complexions 6 The description
of the four lements 7 Creatures compound of mo elements than one 8 Elements
felt and not seen ib. The 4 complexions divided into four quarters of the
year ib. Meats and medicines be known ^ The bringing up of children 10 Best
time to provide for age 11 The description of the four humors 12 Men hot, but
women's tongues hoter 13 Al things brings their apparel with him, man only
except 14 A definition of members 15 A part called by the name of the whole ib.
What anotomy is 16 Four things considered in the body of man ib. Against
dropsy 18 Helping the Emerodes ib. Thernia excellent triacle ib. Capers good
ib. Miracle helps when physic fails 19 Time for all things ib. Of blood
letting 20 Usurpation 21 Morning best to let blod ib. Of meats and medicines
ib. Best time to purge 21. Vomites and their profits 22 Custom in vomiting il
ib. Of bathings and their properties ib. Discommodities by common hot houses
ib. Before bathing use good ointments ib. Perilous to bathe upon an empty
stomach ib. Of neesing 23 Of suppositers ib. Boxing good for the body ib. Of
glisters ib. Manupractitioners ib. Beasts and birds use pruning, etc. ib. Hot
water unwholesome 24 Frication wholesome ib. Combing the head ib. Cutting off
hair and paring nails ib. Consideration to be had in eating ib. A cause why
the soul departs from the body 25 To eat both flesh and fish together
hurts the flegmatike ib. Diverse sorts of meats corrupt the body ib. Good
diet prolonges life 26 What meats do cause good blood ib. To go to bed with
empty stomach hurts ib. An order in dieting ib. An order for them that be
sick. 27 Of sirrops and drinks 28 As the complexion is, so man desires ib.
Moderate walk after meat profits ib. To help digestion by diverse ways 29 A
note which be the wholsomest aires to dwell in 30 What aires do corrupt the
blood ib. Corrupt air brings sun dry diseases ib. Fervent prayer unto God
does mitigate his wrath ib. Sweet aires to be made in time of sickness ib.
What situation is best for an house 31 Pleasant people ib. Moderate exercise a
sovereign thing ib. What profit comes by exercise. 32 Use makes labor
easy ib. Idleness the mother of mischief ib. Of exercise before meare ib. Of
sleep and weaking 33 To sleep after dinner hurts ib. To sleep on the right
side best 34 Lodging to be kept clean ib. To sleep in fields is hurtful ib.
The cause of the stone ib. Remedies for the stone 35 Of vrines with the colors
thereof, and the judgments ib. Contents in urine be the chief things to know
diseases by 36 Of stools, and the judgment of the colors thereof ib. Of
doctor Diet, Quiet, and Meriman 37 Better to lack riches than to want quietness
and mirth ib. Many apt similitudes for the same ib. Poor men's pleasure 38 The
torments of the mind. ib. Thought kills many. ib. Ire is a grievous passion
ib. Devils incarnate. ib. A good face in a glass. ib. Better to be spited than
pitied in some case. 39 The virtues of Wormwood. 40 The property of Annis
seed ib. The virtue of Mouse are. ib. Of Chickweed. 41 The properties of
sorrel. ib. The properties of plantain. ib. Of Camomel and his property. 42 Of
Sage and his property. ib. Of Polipodio and his property. 43 Of horehound and
his properties. ib. Of veruen and his properties. ib. Of Rue or herb grace.
ib. The properties of Burnet. 44 The properties of Dandelion. ib. Of Spinach.
ib. Of Cucumbers. ib. Garlike and his property. 45 Onions. ib. Lettis and his
property 46 Mints and their properties ib. Fenel and his properties 47 Isope
and his operation ib. Sencion and his operation ib. Parcely and his operation
48 Mugwort and his property ib. Of cabbage ib. Philopendula and his operation
49 Agremony and his operation ib. Of Dragon ib. The virtue of violets ib. Of
the white lilly and his operation ib. Centory and of his virtue 50 Rosemary
ib. Peniroyall and his operation ib. Of mustard and his operation 51 The virtue
of buglosse ib. The virtue of Basil ib. Roses and their virtues 52 Sauory and
his virtue ib. Time and his virtue ib Parcely and saxifrage, and their
operations ib. Liuerwort and his operation ib. Bitony and of his virtue 53
Beetes and their virtue ib. Maidenhaire and his virtue ib. Nelilot and his
virtue ib. Pease and beans, and their operation 54 Of hutles and tares ib.
Leekes and their properties ib. Of radish and other roots ib. Herbs engender
melancholy ib. Good things to digest choler 55 To purge choler ib. To digest
fleugme ib. To purge melancholy 56 To provoke urine ib. Comforts for the
brains to smell on ib. Things good to stop the flixe ib. Good things to
provoke neesing ib. Good things to comfort the heart ib. Figs and dates ib.
Of pears 57 The friars pear ib. Of apples ib. A medicine for the small pox 58
Of peaches ib. Of quinces ib. Of cherries 59 Of grapes ib. Sweet prunes
laxatiue ib. Of Barberies and medlers 60 Of Capers ib. Of Biefe ib. Remedy for
the flix ib. How to help disgestion 61 A medicine for the eyes ib. Porke and
his operation ib. The description of swine ib. Beasts have no reason 62
Puddings of swine ib. A plaster of Saint Anthonies fire 63 Of rams,
weathers, and lambs ib. Of read and fallow deeres flesh 64 Of hares and
conies, and their properties ib. A medicine for bloody eyes 65 Of cocks,
hens, and capons ib. Of geese 66 The properties of great fowls ib. Of the
flesh of duckes ib. Of pigeons and doves ib. Of the flesh of peacocks 67 Roasted
pigeons ib. Of the flesh of cranes ib. Of swannes flesh ib. Of herons, bittors,
or shouels ib. Of partriches, sesants, and quails, etc. ib. The properties of
small birds 68 The operation of fishes ib. The best feeding for fish 69 Soon
labor after eating fish hurts ib. Fat fish gross ib. The election of fish 70
Crauises and crabs ib. Of oil ib. Of water ib. What kind of water is best 71
Of vinegar ib. Of common salt 72 Of honey ib. Bees example to us ib. Of milk 73
Milk not good for full stomachs 74 Of Butter and Cheese ib. Of eggs 75 Of
wine ib. Heat of excess in drinking 76 Beer and Ale ib. Bread of all sorts
77 Rise 78 Almonds ib. Walnuts ib. Filberds 79 Nutmegs ib. Of Cloves,
Galingale, and Pepper ib. A practice ib. Callamus ib. Of triacle 83 Of
methridatum ib. Of saffron ib. A regiment of the pestilence 84 Good air ib.
Noone sleep 85 Of sleep ib. Exercise ib. Of mirth ib. Signs of the
pestilence ib. Mithridatu^ andromachi 86
FINIS.
The Government of Health.
John. OF al pleasures and pastimes me think there is none like unto good
cheer, The Epicure desires to live altogether in belly cheer.
what should a man do but pass away the time with good fellows, and make
merry, seeing we have but a time to live, cast away care, wherefore is meat
and bellies ordained, but the one to serve the other? The flesh that we daily
enc^^^se is our own. Abstinence and fasting, is a mighty enemy and nothing
pleasant to me, and be used of very few that love themselves, but only of
beggars, and covetous sparers, which do spare much, and spend little.


Humfrey. I know well your goodly expense of time, I wis it is no marvel,
although you make your belly your god, and boast of it. You see that all
lusty reuellers, and continual banquet makers, come to great estimation, as for
example, Varius Haelyogabalus, which was daily fed with many hundred fishes
and fowls, and was accompanied with many brothels, baudes, harlots and
gluttons, and thus it does appear by your abhorring virtue, that of right you
might have claimed a great office in Haeliogabalus court, Haeliogabalus. court
fit for belly gods.
if you had been in those days, but you have an infinite number of your
conversation in these days, the more pity.


John. What? good sir, I require not your counsel, I pray you be your own
caruer, and give me leave to serve my fantasy. I will not charge you, you are
very ancient and grave, and I am but young, we be no matches.


Hum. Good counsel is a treasure to wise men, but a very trifle to a fool,
if thou had seen those things which I have seen, I know thou would
not be such a man, nor thus spend thy time.


John. What have thou seen, that I have not seen?


Hum. I have seen many notable and grievous plagues, which have fallen upon
greedy gluttons, as wasting their substance, disforming their bodies,
shortning their pleasant days: The just ceward of belly gods.
and in this point to conclude with thee, whereas gluttony remains, from
thence is moderate diet banished: and those bellies that follow the lust of the
eyes (in meats) in youth, shall lack the health of all their bodies, in age
if they live so long.


Ioh. Me think thou can give good counsel, thou seem to be seen in
physic. I pray thee, is it so great hurt to delight in plenti^ of banquets?


Hum. Sir, The fruits of inordinate banquets.
if it will please you to be somewhat attentive, I will tell you. It is the
very grain whereof comes stinking vomits, sausy faces, dropsies, vertigo,
palsies, obstructions, blindness, flixes, apoplexis, caters, and rheumes, etc.


Ioh. Is it true that you have said to me?


Hum. Would to God daily experience did not try it, I do perfectly know it.
And once thou shall be a witness thereof, if thou come to age.


John. Then I beseech thee gentle friend Humfrey, declare to me, why there is
such division among Physicians.


Hum. Thou see among the Theologians there is much variety, and yet but one
truth. Uarietie of opinions among men.
Discords be soon known of Musitions, and the Physicians be not ignorant of
the general natures of things. No division is although it do so appear: for
regents, place, age, time, and the present state of man's nature must be
observed, and not the old rules in all points. For man's nature is sore altered
and changed, into a viler sort than it was wont to be.


Ioh. Some do report that men of great estimation say: what needs physic,
An objection against physic.
it is but an invention only for money, we see (say they) who lives so well, as
they which never knew physic, and so evil as these pothicarie men?


Hum. Many men be more rich than wise, and more esteemed for titles of their
honors and worships, than for any other virtue or cunning, such men in some
points, be more ungrateful to natural remedies than dogs: which can elect
or choose their vomitting grass, or birds which can choose gravel or stones
for their casting. But to conclude with thee in this matter, Pliny the great
clearke, has a thousand reasons, God the author of physic.
to prove them foolish that will object against physic. And the author of
all things did well foresee and know, The inestimable goodness of God ordained
herbs for the health of man.
what was good for man's nature, when he stretched out so large a compass
round about the earth, with the noble Planets and signs, and their courses,
influences and heavenly qualities, and garnished the earth with fruits, herbs,
flowers, leaves, grains, oils, gums, stones, for man's comfort and help, and
ordained the Physician for to help man. Thus the Almighty has done (says
Solomon.) And in recompense, Solomon.
God has not appointed the Physicians to be rayled upon, or despised, Eccle.
36.
but honored and rewarded: yea, esteemed of princes. And seeing good nature
and wise men be on my side: I force not of other men's fantasies, with whom
neither good wisdom, nor good nature is guide.


Ioh. Why is physic of such great authority, or has it bin in estimation
among old fathers, May that be proved of thy part?


Hum. Yea that I can.


Ioh. If thou can bring in any reverent fathers that loved physic, I will
not despise, but greatly esteem it, and desire counsel in demanding of a few
questions.


Hum. The praise and excellency of physic.
Physic has been in so hie an estimation, that the Gentiles did al consent,
it came from the immortal gods. The Hebrews did well know it, as Moises in
the most ancient book, Moises.
called Genesis primo, does describe the work of the almighty God: of herbs,
fruits, Adam.
and plants, that Adam might teach the virtues of the^ to his children. Jesus
Sirack. cap. 38.
Jesus Sirack which was endued with the spirit of God has left a laud
behind him greatly commending Physic amongst the divines of the Hebrews,
Mercury amongst the Egiptians, Diodoro. Test. Ovid. Meramor.
Ovid does greatly commend Apollo, the inuenter of herbs, when they were
almost out of memory, he revived their virtues, and taught their nature to
others that followed him. After that came in Aesculapius, which did many most
excellent cures. And Chiron, the instructor of Achilles, Chiron centaurus.
whose name can never die as long as the herb Centauri, grows upon the
earth, which is called after his name. Podalirius, and Mechaon, Podalirius.
Machaon.
were two brethren, in the time of the battle of Troy which were excellent
Physicians, and be greatly commended of Homer, who was more excellent than
Hippocrates, in the I Will of Coose: Hippocrates.
whose works will never die, for he brought in Physic, and digested it into
fair books, for man's great health. Then came Galen, Gallenu^*
not unknown to all wise and learned Physicians. I could rehearse many more,
but this shall suffice to prove Physic to be of great authority amongst
the old fathers.


Ioh. I pray thee friend Humfrey, what is physic? I would be glad to learn
some of thy knowledge, for thou have a good order in talking* and seem to be
grounded of authority. Therefore I am sorry that I have co^tended with thee: I
pray thee be not angry with my former talk.


Hum. Hippocrates in lib. de fla.
Hippocrates in his book of winds or blastes, says that physic or medecin
is but a putting to the body which it lacks, or taking from the body things
superfluous. And although our life be short, A definicion of physic.
yet the art of physic is long, because great numbers of things be in it, and
requires much study, labor and practice, and first of all, it requires much
conte^placion or knowledge, Hippocrates in primo
in studying good books, which is called Theoricha. Secondly the very effect
of contemplation or study, Aphoris.
Theoricha.
is practica or actiua, which is doing of the things, that learning has
taught, as reparing, amending, or preserving the bodies of men, women and
children, etc.


Ioh. It seems to be a goodly science.


Hum. Herodot.
Herodotus says: they greatly err that call it a Science, for it is an
excellent Art in doing of notable things. And science is but to know things.
There is also in this excellent art sundry sects of phisicions, some be called
Emperici, who suppose that only experience does suffice, Emperic.
and so by use and experience do take in hand to heal diseases, not knowing
the cause of the said disease or sickness. Philinus.
Philinus was one of that sect at the first beginning. Then followed Serapion,
Serapion.
and after that the Apolonis. Apolonii.
And then came Glaucius, Menadotus, Sextus, etc. Another kind of phisicions,
be called Methodici, Methodici.
which neither observe time, place, age, state, nor condition: and think them
things of small profit, but only their respect is to their disease: they love
not long study in physic, and are greatly deceived, because they would build
without foundation: and have the fruits before they have planted the trees.
These men's cures be but by chance medly. One Sirus began this, which received
certain rules of Asclepiades. Asclepiades.
The chief and best sect of Physicians called Dogmatici. Dogmatici.
These be the wise men which set not the cart before the horse, nor the roots
of the trees upward. They do prudently consider the change of man's nature,
the dwelling place, the alteration of the air, the time of the year, the
custom of people, the manners of diseases, the fashions of men's diet. And this
they will prove by true arguments and reasons, and will be very careful for
their patientes^ The disciples of those men, be the best scholars, therefore I
counsel thee John to love well Hippocrates the prince of Phisicions,
Hippocrates.
which began the best manner to give rules to all the lovers of physic. Of this
writes Galen, much lauding Hippocrates and his followers, and in these days
Leonhardus Futchius, Matheolus, etc.


Ioh. Seeing thou have spoken of sundry parts of Physicians, I pray thee what
parts be there of physic?


Hum. Truly there be five things to be noted in physic, Galen de elemen. de
temp. de facul*
as five principal parts, as Galen says: in lib. de Elementis. Physic
divided into five parts.
The first is, to consider the nature of man's body. The second is, to keep
the body in health, and to defend it from sickness and infirmities. The third
is, to know all the causes, rules, and seeds, whereof the sickness does grow.
The.iiii is Crises or judgment of the disease of things present, past, and to
come. The fifth is the best and most excellent, for it shows the manner of
healing, dieting, fashion, order, and way to help the sick body, and
preserve the same, as long as man does remain in the state of life.


Ioh. Thou have spoken of the parts of physic, what is the form manner or
distribution thereof?


Hum. It is distributed in 3. forms, one is natural, another unnatural, the
iii. against nature. The first is, Gal. lib ^ de. temp. cap 4.
by those things whereof the body is compact, constituted or made, as Galen
says: in his.iii. book of his Temperamentis. Cap. 4. The second is called not
natural, as meats or things to preserve the body (...) health they be not
called unnatural, because they be against the body, but because the (...)
taking, or glotonous using of the^, may bring many things to the utter
destruction of the body. The third, be things against nature, which does
corrupt the body or po^^on nature whereof Galen writes. Gal. in lib. 2 The
(...). meth^.



Ioh. Now thou have taught me short rules of the parts and forms physical, I
pray thee show me some pretty rules of the complections of men, and that I may
aptly know them with their properties, elements, temperaments, and humors.


Hum. Upon my Lute some time, to recreate my self, I join with my simple
harmony, many plain verses. Among all other one small song of the four
complections: will thou hear it? take that chair and sit down, and I I will
teach thee my song.


Ioh. I thank thee.


Humfrey. The bodies where heat and moisture dwell,
Be sanguine folks as Galen tell,
With visage fair and cheeks rose ruddy:
The sleeps is much and dreams be bluddy.
Pulse great and full, with digestion fine,
The description of sanguine persons.
Pleasantly concocting flesh and wine,
Excrements abundant, with anger short,
Laughing very much and finding sport,
Urine gross, with color red:
Pleasant folks at board and bed.
Where cold with moisture prevails much,
Flegmatike folks be always such,
Fatnes softnes, hair plain and right, The description of the fleugmatike
persons.

Narrow veins and color white,
Dull of wit, no heart, too bold,
Pulse very slo^, disgestion cold,
Sleeping over much, urine gross and pale,
Spittle white and thick thus ends the tale.
Choler is hot and dry as fire,
Leanness of lims and puffed with ire.
Costiue bellies* with lite sleep.
Dreams of fire, or wounds deep. The description of the cholericks.

Sallowe colored, or taw^ie red,
Feeding on salt meats, and crustes of bread,
Voice sharp, and quickenes of wit,
Urine yellow and saltnes of spit,
Pulses swift, and very strong,
Cruel countenance, not anger long.
Melancholy is cold, and very dry.
As here in rhyme the signs will try,
Hair plain, and very thin, The description of Melancholy.

A lean wretch with hardness of skin.
Color whitelie, or like to lead,
Much watch, and dreams of dread,
And stiff in folish fantasy,
Disgestion slow, and long angry.
Fearful of mind, with watrie spitle.
Seldom laughing, and pulse little
Urine waterie, and very thin,
The cold earth, to him is kin.

Ioh. This is a good song, and I will learn it, for though it seem not very
pleasant, yet I perceive it is profitable. Now thou have spoken of the signs
of the.4. complections, I pray thee teach me shortly, how to know the
elements.


Hum. Hippocrates de Element. Auic. in cauteca.
They be the four beginners unmingled and untempered, from whose mixtures
every corporal thing has his substance.


Ioh. What be the parts? I pray thee tell me.


Hum. Four, the one is earth the heauiest matter and grossest, which is cold
and dry, and melancholy. And the other is water, which is lighter and more
subtle then the earth, The description of the.iiii. Elements.
and of nature is cold, moist, and fleugmeticke. Then is air more purer and
lighter then water, and if it be not altered with any other strange cause,
Galen. in li. 8. (...).
it is hot and moist and sanguine: Then fire is most light, pure and clear, a
clarifier and a clenser of all the other elements, when they are corrupted, and
is of his own nature hot, dry, and choleric.

And of these four Elements, both man, beast, fishes, foul, herb, stone,
metal, have their proper working, not of one of the Elements alone, but of
all: some more and some less, according to their natures.

Hippocrates says: Hippocrates in lib. de na.
after the soul is gone from the body, the body does return to the first
matter whereof it was made* And to conclude, all things that be made upon
earth, shall return unto the earth again in time.


Ioh. What, might not men, beasts, fish or foul, herb or tree, be of one
element as well as of four? I pray you tell me.


Hum. No, for Aristotle says: Deus and natura nihil agunt frustra, God and
nature has done nothing in vain. And if any thing upon the earth sencible
were of one element, Ereaturs are compounded of more elements then one.
no sickness could hurt it, nor disease corrupt it, but every thing living
upon the earth, seeing it has had beginning, it must needs have ending, to
whom these four complexions does belong if they do greatly abound or diminish
or withdraw their virtues with quantities or qualities.


Ioh. May a man see any of the Elements?


Hum. The thing which men do see be none of the four Elements: not earth, but
earthie, not water, but watrie, not air, but airie, not fire, but fiery. But
the things which man does feel, Elements felt and not seen.
be the four Elements, as earth, air, fire, and water. And these be the
uttermost simples of complexions, diversely and specially, alone of them selves,
or mingled with other, taking sundry and diverse effects, manners, condidions,
forms and qualities, both in man and beast, and every living thing, sensible
and insensible.


Ioh. What is the complexion of the quarters of the year, and names of the
signs?


Hum. The spryng time when blood does increase: Hippocrat. in lib. de Natura
humana.
Summer when red color does rule: Harvest when color aduste, or melancholy
does reign. Winter when fleugme does abound in full strength. Winter, Spring.
Summer. Harvest.
It is called winter from the twelfth day of December, unto the tenth day of
March: This season is cold and moiste, it is called spring time, from the.xii.
day of March, and ends about the.xii. day of June. Summer begins about the
xii. day of June, and ends about the.xii. day of September. Autumn or
Harvest, begins about the.xiii. day of September, and ends about the.xi.
day of December. Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, be winter signs, Aries,
Taurus, and Gemini, be signs for the spring. Cancer, leo, and Virgo be the
signs for Summer. Libra, Scorpio, and Sagitari, be the signs for harvest. And
the sun goes through al these xii. signs in xii. months. And ye Moon goes
xii. times through each of the foresaid signs once in the year, and do take
sundry effects in man, beasts, and fruits, in the said signs: hot or cold,
moist or dry.


Iho. What be the complexions of medicines?


Hum. Those things that overcome and govern the body, as purgations,
expulsiues, etc. These be called medicines, Auic. in. p^^. can.
and those things that nourishes and augmenteth the body, be called meats.
For the complexions of meats and medicines be known by their tastes, as
coldness, hotnes, moistness, drines, Meats and medicine be known b^ ^asting.
bitterness, saltnes, sweetness, fatnes, sharpnes, stipticke, and clammie. And
because thy request is to have prescribed unto thee, but only a little
government of health: I will show unto thee another of my little songs, in
plain meetre, how thou shall know meats and medicines by their tastes.


John. That is my chief desire, I will hear thee, say on.


Humfrey. Cold quenches the cholers pride,
Cold. Moist. Salt.
Moist humecteth that which is dried,
The flowing moisture, by proof I try,
Is wasted of humors hot and dry,
The subtle food, that is piersing quick,
The clammy meats, makes it thick,
Bitter things, cleanse and wipeth often,
And expel fleugme, and makes soft.
Salt dries, and resolves fleugme tough,
Fat nourishes, and makes subtle enough.
Stiptike or rough taste on the tongue,
Binds and comfort appetite long.
Sweet things in clensing, is very good
It dissolueth much, and nourishes blood.
These things well used, nature will please,
But abusing them beastly, brings disease.

John. In good faith, me thinks thou say well, for there apeare perfect
reasons in these thy pretty rules. Now thou have declared unto me, the signs
of complexions of men: with the way and apt knowledge of meats by their
tastes, I would feign learn, shortly the temperaments and complections of
mankind.


Hum. There was never so discreet nor wise physician, that either feared God,
or pitied mankind, or loved his own honesty, would take in hand either to
prescribe diet, or to minister medicin to any body, before he well did consider,
and wisely wey with himself, the temperament, mixture or complexion of mankind:
first, whether he were hot or cold, moist or dry, fat or lean, or
indifferent between them both: Auic. in pri. ^ract. ^antico. Gal. lib. 1. cap.
2. lib. 2. cap. 3. lib. 4. cap. vlt. Sim. Med.
tempered by health, or distempered by sickness, as the extremities of
hotenesse, coldness, moistness, and dryness. Therefore John, these things
may not be forgotten: you must note also the four ages of mankind, and first
the tender state of children, which begins at the birth, and so continues
until xv. years next after their said birth: Their temperaments or
complections, be hot and moist, very like unto ye seed whereof they be
procreated, then next unto childhood or innocent age. Youth which is the second
part of life, begins to reign, his temperament or complexion has rather
more fiery heat, than perfect natural heat, and this second age, continues for
ten years, as Galen says. Gal. lib. 5. Aphor. commen. 9.
Well, in these two first states of life, let all natural fathers and mothers
bring up their youth, set God before their eyes, An earnest brief exhortation
for the bringing up of youth.
for they have no small charge committed unto them, that must give account to
God, how they have brought up their children: and they that in these years do
space correction, truly be grievous enemies unto their children, and at last
shall be reco^pensed with shame, when they shall see misfortune and wretchedness
fall upon the fruits of their own seeds. For men have small profit of their
corn, which be choked and overcome with Thistles, Briars, and Brakes which
were not weeded in time, much less of their children, which have received
neither correction nor honest learning in due season. If the keepers of gardens
be careful over their late sown seeds, and tender herbs, which are in
danger to be destroyed of every frost: What should good fathers and mothers
do for their children, whose tender and youthful years be carried away, and
ouercommed of every foolish fantasy, and it is no marvel. But this shall
suffice for the wise, and smally profit the fools: but to my matter which I
took in hand, I will return unto the third age of mankind, which is called
the lusty state of life, and begins at xxv. years, and continues unto
xxxv, This age is hot and dry, and very choleric, as Galen says: Galen.
in lib. Simp.
This part of life is subject, to many burning and extreme fevers, and hot
ulcers: therefore it is necessary to know this temperament of complexion,
which is called choleric, as plainly may appear by age, strength, diet,
urine, etc.

This is the best time for mankind to travel in, with godly exercise in
science, art, and profitable trauelles in his vocation, putting in practice,
the virtues which he has learned in youth, for this is the summer part of
life, wherein all goodly fruits do flourish in every good occupation. The best
time to provide for age.
This is the very harvest, to gather the precious corn, and the fruit of their
labors against the cold storms and cloudie days of their aged winter,
wherein the body shallbe weak, and the eyes sight decay, and the hands
tremble, and therefore it is not comely to see the state of age, without rest,
which in the time of youth, did honestly travel. For there is a grace given to
many creatures unreasonable, both beasts and fowls: to make provision before
hand, what is then to be required of men reasonable, as follows in these
verses. THe Bird in time her nest can make,
The Be will build his h^use full fine,
The Crane with stone in foot will wake,
The Conie will carue under the mine,
The Squirel in trees her nuts can keep,
Against cold winter to feed and sleep,
And should not a man well foresee,
In youth to know his old degree?


Then from.xxxv. or few years following, the lusty branches of youth, begin to
abate his pleasant leaves, flowers and fruit by little and little will decay, raw
humors, crampes, dropses, quaterns, melancholy, will then draw near. The riots,
surfets, sore labors, bearing of extreme burdens, wrestling, acts venerous
with the abuse of youth, will then spring forth, to the detriment of age and
sudden decay of life, in especial of drunkardes.


Ioh. What, be the places of blood, Choler, Fleugme, and Melancoly, natural or
vnnatrual? Thou have not made a particular distinction of their proper places,
but generally thou have spoken well in thy song.


Hum. There are also other descriptions of the four humors very necessary to
be known, and their places whereas they dwell within the body, and first of
blood, as Galen says: in his first book of effected places, blood (says
he) that is in the pulses, does greatly differ from the blood of the veins,
for the blood of the pulses is thinner, yelower and hotter, and this blood, may
be called the governor of life. The four humors natural and unnatural are
described.
The spring and fountain of the blood general is in the liver, which serves
every vein of blood, and this blood in color is very red. Fleugme is
white, and is engendered in the stomach, and at length by the virtue of
natural heat, pure fleame is turned into blood. There be also watrie, slimy,
glassie, gross, salt, sower, thick, hard binding, and extreme cold fleames,
which in deed be unnatural, that be engendered through surfets, coldness or
idleness, bringing to the body many noisome deseases. There is also choler,
which is yelowe, whose place in the body is the gall, which comes of the
clensing or purifying of blood: and this choler is clear, hot and dry, and
the comforter of decoction. Green choler, or choler myngled with fleugme, be
unnatural, melancholy natural: in the Spleen is nothing but the six
degrees, or heavy residents of the blood, the natural melancholy is known
by his blackenesse, the unnatural comes of the burning of choler, and is
lighter and hoter, brown of color, sower of taste, and puts the body in
great danger: as madness, black ianders, continual fevers, and sudden
deadly diseases. Therefore my friend John, remember this short description of
humors, Auicen in lib. can.
as the words of Galen and Auicen say.


John. Thus I have heard thy several placing of the four complections of
blood, Choler, Fleugme and Melancholy, and is there any distinct hotenesse,
coldness, moystnesse, and dryness, in any other creature besides man? tell
me.


Hum. Not only in man, but in beasts, fish, foul, serpents, trees, herbs,
metals, and every thing sensible and insensible, according to their natures,
and be equally mingled or tempered together, which is called mean temperance,
or else exceeds in degrees, which is called intemperance, hot and moist, may
be compounded together, so may cold and dry, hot and dry, cold and moist:
example, A choleric man, hot and dry: Galen. in lib. 4. de tempor.
a fleugmatike man, cold and moist, etc. Of herbs, as Hysope and Rue, hot
and dry, Purslen and Cowcumbers, cold and moist, etc. But temperaments or
complections of men, beasts, and trees, be some hoter, some colder, according
to their natures. As a Lion is hoter than a choleric man: Pepper is hotter
than Cloves. And though there be degrees in more hotnesse or more coldness,
yet they are called but hot or cold, as men after labor or travel, they will
say they are hot, but the fire which people warm them at, is hotter.

Also there be things repugnant to temperaments, as moist and dryness
together, heat and coldenesse together, as fire to be cold, or the water of
his own nature to be hot, which water peraccidence of the fire is made hot:
and fire quenched by the water. And every thing exceeding greatly with
distemperaunce or wanting temperaunce or complexion, do eftsoons come to an
end, as man by extreme sicknesses, surfets or wounds, or finally age. lacking
natural virtue. Of heat and moistnes of trees and herbs, from whom juice
and sap is withdrawn, Galen. in lib. 4. de tempor. Arist. de Gene.
these things of necessity must needs die, and come to corruption, as Galen
and Aristotle say.


Ioh. Whether be men or women of colder complexion?


Hum. Auicen says: Auicen.
like as men be hot and dry, so be women cold and moist.


Ioh. Yea but Lucian says: they be perilous hot of their tongues and full of
venim: though I am no physician, yet can I make a description of that member,
Whether this be true let the married judge
for I am oftentimes stinged with it, I would to God they had been wormed when
they were young, but when they are old, they are past all cure: but the best
medicine that I have, it is a gentle herb called Rewe, of which I am never
without great store.


Hum. Mankind was borne naked to this end, that he might cloathe himself
with other creatures: Every thing bringing his apparel with him, saving man.
which he brought not into this world with him, as cloth, leather, harness
made of iron, for his defense, because he is the chief creature. But horses of
nature have hard hooffes, Lions sharp teeth, Porpentines sharp pricks, which
is their continual and natural armor, as things ever prepared to debate and
strife, and by no Art can scant be tamed. The Rose as pleasauntly as she
does appear, and as sweetly as she does smell, spring not further without
a great number of sharp pricks. Therefore it is tolerable for men to bear
with them whom nature has sealed and marked for his own. With that humor
most choleric, digress from this thy communication, and let us talk of
things more profitable, for in deed this is pleasant to no man.


Ioh. Seeing thou will not describe me these particular members, of which we
have spoken, I would be glad to know the parts of mankind, with a short
description of his members.


Hum. Members be simple and also compound, the simples be ten in number, the
cartillages, the gristles, the bones, veins, and synewes, arteries, pannicles,
lygaments, cords, and the skin. Members compounded, A definition of members.
be those that be joined and builded together of simple members, as the
hands, face, feet, liver, and heart, and so compounded members be made of
simple.

Some of the compounded members be called principalles: as the heart from
whence the arteries springs, the brain, from whence the sinews springes, the
liver which is the well of the blood, from whence the veins do spring, and
the stones of generation from whence the seed of life springs: but those
compounded members that be principal be all the other members except the
simple, as the nose, the ears, the eyes, the face, the neck, the arms and
legs, and the brains and chief substance of our flesh, be compounded
members of sinews, and covered with panacles which be of a sinew nature, but
that sinews give feeling to all the whole body: even as the arteries gives
spiritual blood from the heart to every member. The whole body is covered
with filmes and skins. Out of the head springs hard matter issuing from the
places called the pores, to purge vapors and smoke from the brain, which
ascends out of the stomach into the head, and is cleansed through pia matter,
called the tender covering of the brain or spirits animal. And therefore as
some parts of the body being divided in sunder, be each like unto the other,
and yet called by the name of the whole, as for example: When the bones be
broken in sunder, or the flesh cut into diverse pieces, or the blood powered
into sundry vessels, a piece of flesh is still called flesh, A part is called
by the name of the whole and not the whole by the part.
a fragment of a bone, is called a bone, and a drop of blood is called blood:
Even so an hand, arm, vein, or such like vnseparate parts being divided
into pieces, or called by the name of pieces, and not by the name of the whole
part (as is before.) But my friend John, to make a large description of
Anatomy, it were too long for me, but shortly I will say some thing. And
first, the definition thereof is, when the body of a dead man or woman, is cut
and opened and the members divided, What Annothomie is.
or for the want of dead bodies to read good books, as Galen, Auicen, etc.
And it behooves them that cutteth a dead corpse, to note four things. First,
Four things considered in the body of man.
the nutrimentall members, as the liver with the veins: the second is, the
members spiritual, as the heart with the arteries: Example.
the third is, the animal members, as the head, brains and sinews: the
fourth and last, be excrements of the body, as arms, legs, skin, hair,
etc. Of these said members, with the bones, is all the body compounded. And
like as every tree and herb, have their roots in the earth, and their
branches springs upward, even so the roots of mankind, have the beginning
in the brain, and the sinew and branches grows downward: in the which
brain, dwells the virtues of imagination, fantasy, memory, etc. And these
animal virtues, be placed as it were heavenly above all the members,
communicating their heavenly influences, down unto the heart, as to a prince,
or chief ruler within the body, which gives life to every part thereof Thou
shall consider, that the heart was the first that received life from the
spirits, and shall be the last that shall die. Note also, that as there be noble
senses given to the body, as seeing, hearing, smelling tasting, feeling: even
so nature has four principal virtues, first Attractiue, the second
Retentiue, the third Digestive, the fourth Expulsive. Attractiue is that by the
which every part of the body draws the food of life, and serves the virtue
disgestiue, and the Retentiue does hold the meat until it be ready to be
altered and changed. Digestive does alter, and makes the food like unto the
thing that it nourishes, as fleme, blood, etc. Expulsive separateth them from
the other, the good from the bad. Thou ought also most chiefly to learn the
knowledge of the veins, and for what sickness, they must be opened, and what
medicines either in sirups or pills thou must use. And first mark this figure of
the Anatomy here present before thee, with the heavenly signs, because I have
not painted at large the several parts of the said Anatomy.



The middle vein of the forehead is good to be opened against Megrim,
forgetfulness, and passions of the head. And they that be let blood of this, or
any other vein, must first have their head purged with pillule Chochi Rasis,
or some purgation, but first use things to extenuate matter, as syrruppe of
Buglosse, etc.

Against Leprosy and deafnes. Let blood the two veins behind the ears, and
use the said pills or else pillule Aurea Nicholai or Arabice, or co^fectio
Hameth minor.

Against replexion or too much blood, or blood in the eyes, flowing in the
head, upon the temple veins called Artiers, for they be ever beating. And use
to purge with pillule Artritice Nicholai or puluis, ad epithema Hepatis.

Against Squinancie, stopping the throat, and stopping of the breath: Let blood
the veins under the tongue. And for this use Philoniu^maius Necholai and
Gargarismes pilule Bechie and oxymel Simplex.

Ueines called Originales, open not without great counsel of a learned
Physicion, or cunning Surgeon. They be in the neck, and have a great course
of blood, that governs the head, and the whole body.

Against short wind, and evil blood aproching to the heart, and spitting
blood. Open the vain called Cordiaca, or heart vein, in the arm. Use things
to extenuate, as Aromaticum, Chariophillatum Mesue, serapium ex Absinthij in
cold time, serapium Boraginis hot time, and pillule stomachi.

Against palsy, yellow Iaundies, burning heats, and apostumations of the
liver. Open the liver vein upon the right arm. Take Serapium exendiue.
Diamargariton frigidum Auicennie.

Against dropsy, Dropsy.
open the vein between the belly and the branch, the right side against the
said dropsy, and the left side against the passions of the milte, but be not
rash, unless ye have the consaile of one well seen in the Anothomie. Use
pillule Hiere cum Agarico. Helping the Emorodes*


Against the stopping the secret terms or fluxions of women, or helping the
Emerods, and purging sores, Open the vein called Sophane under the ancle.
Thereaca is an excellent triacle.
Theriaca Andromachi, Pillule, Mastichine, Petri de Ebano.

Within twenty hours after one is infected with the pestilence, coming
suddenly: Open the vein between the wrest of the foot, and the great toe. Use
Serapium Cichorij, and Pillule pestilentialis Ruffi.

Against stinking breath: Open the vein between the lip, and the chin. Use
for this Catharicum imperiale. Nicho. Alexandri.

Against the toothake: Open the vein in the roof of the mouth. And first
purge with Pillule. Choci Rasis, or with pills of masticke.

Use to eat Ca^ers, and take Pillule Jude, Haly, o^ pillule de lapide Lazule.
Against quartens, tercians, and pains of the left side: Open the spleen vein,
commonly called the low vein, with a wide cut, and not deep: For Chirurgions
nicely pricking or opening veins, with little Scarisfactions, do let out good
pure blood, and still retain, gross, cold, and dry earthly matter, to the
great hurt of their patients. And albeit many more veins might here be spoken
of, and their vtilities, yet this shall well suffice by Gods grace to keep all
people in health, that upon just cause have these veins opened: except old
men, women with child, and children, under xiiii. years of age, or men after
diverse agues. For blood letting, will then engender perilous palsies, as
very excellent Physicians have well declared. And after one be infected with
the pestilence xxiiii. hours, before he have received medicine, Miracle
helps, but no medicine in this case.
or blood letting, miracle helps him, but truly no medicine has virtue to
do it.


Ioh. This same figure although it appears in many books: yet very few do
understand it in all points, such be the secret works of nature. And whereas
thou have well spoken of some veins, and apt medicines for the body: I would
feign see the true form and shape of the bones.


Hum. Oh John, it were a long time to show the singular members with
compounds, as Galen does in his book of the parts and bones. It requires
only one work, but I have taken in hand to teach thee but a Government of
health: notwithstanding at thy request, I will briefly rehearse the number of
the bones, no less true than new, which is, the very timber, or posts
whereupon our frail flesh is builded, beginning in our mothers wombes, and
ending in earth the mother of all things. And as the noble prince Auicen
affirms, the number of all the bones, be two hundred forty and four, beside
Sasamina, and Os laud.


Ioh. Thou have spoken of the opening of veins, and medicines convenient to
cleanse the blood, with the number of bones, but thou have not spoken of
convenient time when to let blood, nor of the state or age of them whose veins
should be opened. Therefore I would be glad to learn, not only time of
bloodletting, but also, of purging, the belly vomits, bathings, neesings, and
rubbing of the body, etc.


Hum. Time for all things.
Every thing has his time convenient, and must be done with sober discretion,
and not with rash ignorance, which kills an infinite number. Therefore the
cause must be known, and the time observed, as Galen writes in the
Commentary of the Afforismes of Hippocrates, Hippo. in ^. Affor. 3.
many bodies be extinguished by sudde^ death, in whom is extreme fullness, or
abundance. For abundance of blood or any other humor says Aristotle,
Aristot. in pri. prob. 56. Auic. in 2. pri. doct. 2. cap. 6.
is the cause of many sickenesses, and those men that use much gluttony in
Winter, shall be apt to receive many diseases in the Spring time. Therefore
when the body has extreme heat, fulness of veins, flushing, with sudden
redness in the face, gross and red urine, and such burning heat in the night
that let the sleep, etc: then it is time to euacuate the body, with some
purgation, blood letting, or abstinence as the strength and age of the patient
will serve. For many diseases, be helped by discrete blood letting, as
Plurises, hot Fevers, Galen in lib. de flobothomia.
Frensies, Repletion, or Surfets taken with overmuch eating or drinking, as
Galen says, The letting of blood dries up the superfluous moisture of the
belly, helps memory, purges the bladder, quieteth ye brain, warmeth the
marrow, opens the organs of hearing, helps digestion, induces sleep, etc.
Unto this agrees Rasis, Rasis in 4. alman. cap. 14.
saying, it helps greatly against Leprosy, Squinances, Appoplexes,
Pestilences, etc. But old men, children, or women with child, ought not to be
let blood, nor also those people that dwell in cold regions, may not be let
blood, because the blood is the chief warmer of nature. The people that dwell
in hot regions, if they be letten blood, it will dry their bodies, for blood is
the chief moister of nature. Therefore is the heat of Summer, and the
coldness of Winter, forbidden to open veins, or let blood, except for a
stripe, or sudden chance, Rasis in 4. allmen. cap. 14.
as Rasis says, the spring of the year is the chief time to let blood in the
right arm, or right foot, The middle ^ey^e.
in the vein called Mediana. Which vein must be opened as well at other times
in the beginning of sicknesses, as hot fevers, and plurisies, etc. as Basilica
should be opened in the middle, or toward the end of a sickness. Purgations
ought to be ministered with great discretion, and not rashly to be taken, for
every trifle as thou have heard me speak of blood letting. So observe the
self same rules in purgation, as time, person, quality, or quantity. Hip. in
3. pri. doct. 2. cap.
For Hippocrates says, without doubt it is needful to purge the superfluity
of the body. As if blood do abound to take things to purge blood. If fleugme
be superfluous, then take things to cleanse his superfluity. If choler be too
ardent hot, use things to extinguish: If melancholy be too extreme then taste
things to bring him into a mean. And not to purge one humor with the
medicines of an other, Usurpation in medicine is evil.
but to take them in due order and aptnes. For the said humors as Valarius
Cordus. Mesue, and Nicholas, teach the manner of making of the most excellent
purgations with their quantities. In the morning is best to let blood, evil
toward night.
And as in blood letting sleep must be avoided for viii. or xii. hours after
them: so when your purgations be taken, air is to be avoided and to be kept
close for ii. or three days or more as the malice of the disease, or power of
the purgations be, and the counsel of Rasis must be followed: Rasis in 4.
alman. cap. 15.
which says, oftentimes to take Purgations or laxatiue medicines does make
the body weak, and apt to the Fever ethicke, and specially in very lean or
weak persons, they that be very fat have small guts and veins, purgations
be very noisome unto them. But strong bodies having large vessels, may
sustain purgations without any hurt, but strong purgations, either in pills or
potions, if they any thing do exceed be very hurtful: therefore the doces or
quantities may not exceed. And also they must be made as pleasant as Art can
do them, unless they offend the stomach. Meats and medicines greeth not
except pils^ before supper.
Hippocrates gives counsel that men should not mingle medicines with meat,
but to take them three or four hours before meat, or else so long after.
Unless they be pills called Antecibum, which may be taken at the beginning of
supper, or else Pilli chochi, a little before sleep, two hours after supper.
The best time of purgations is in the spring time, Time to purge.
as the doctors does affirm: the apt days and signs are commonly known in
the English Almanacks, calculated into English. As in the writings of master
Leonard Digges, Digges. Kenningham.
and of William Kenningham, a learned student both in Astronomy and Physic,
with many mo good men that takes pains to profit the common wealth. There
is another manner of purging of the body by vomit, Vomits and their profits.
for it cleanses from the midriffe upward, if they have large breasts, and be
choleric persons. It is good against dropsies, and leprosies, and better in
summer than in winter, Hip. Sent. in 4. Aphoris.
as Hippocrates says: and wholsomer one hour before supper than at any other
time, and not to be used as a custom: Custom of vomit weakneth the stomach.
for the custom of vomits hurts greatly the head and eyes, and makes the
stomach so feeble, that it will scant bear any meats or drinks, but
eftsoons cast them up again. They which have narrow throtes and breasts, and
long necks, vomits be neither apt nor good for them. And Auicen says, Auicen
in 4. Pri. cap. 13.
that vomits ought to be twice in the Month for the conservation of health,
but that which is more does hurt the body. Of bathes and their properties.
There is another kind of the clensing of the body by sweating, as with hot
drinks, warm clothes, perfumes made of Olibalum brimstone, niter, etc. There
is also bathes and sweating in hot houses for the pockes, scurffe, scabbes,
hemerodes, piles, which hot houses have the virtue of helping the said
diseases. The discommoditie of common hot houses.
But if any that be of an whole temperate complexion do sweat in dry hot
houses, it does them much harm: as hyndring their eyesights, decaying their
teeth, hurting memory. The best bathing is in a great vessel, or a little close
place with the euapuration of diverse sweet herbs well sodden in water, which
have virtue to open the poores softly, letting out feeble and gross vapors,
which lies between the skin and the flesh. To use ointments after bathings
is good.
This kind of bathing is good in the time of pestilence, or fever quarten: in
the end of the bathes, it is good to anoint the body with some sweet oil, to
molifie and make soft the sinews. And thus to conclude of bathing, it is very
wholesome, so that it be not done upon an empty stomach, To bathe upon an
empty stomach is perilous.
palsies may come thereby, or to take sudden cold after it, there follows an
other purgation, called neesing or sternutacion which is beneficial for the
body if it be used upon an empty stomach. Of neesing
Twyse or thrice in a morning with a leaf of Bittony, put into thy nose, it
helps memory, good against opilation, stopping, and obstructions: Suppositers
be good for weak people or children, Of suppositers
made with Hieria Picra and honey, Boxing does much good to the body.
made in the length of a finger: Scarifiyng or boxing, as Galen says, applied
unto the extreme parts, as the legs, and the arms, does great help unto
the body, in drawing watery humor away from the body, but boxing is not good
for the breast, applied thereto in hot fevers, is dangerous. Glisters made
according to art, I will speak more of Glisters in my book of healthful
medicines.
be good for them whieh be too weak to take purgation. The manner of the said
glisters, because they be not here to be spoken of at large, I entend by Gods
grace to set forth in my next book of helthful medicines. Many practitioners of
acts venerous.
Purgations venerous, there be so many practicioners thereof, that I need to
write no rules but this, that affection, lust and fantasy, have banished
chastity, temperance, and honesty.


Ioh. Plain people in the country, as carters threshers, ditchers, colliers,
and plowmen, use seldom times to wash their hands, as appears by their
filthynes, and as very few times comb their heads, as it is seen by floxe,
nittes, grease, feathers, straw, and such like, which hangs in their hairs.
Whether is washing or combing things to decorate or garnish the body, or else to
bring health to the same? Beasts and birds use frictions and ^^nning them
selves.



Hum. Thou see that the dear, horse, or cow, will use friction or rubbing
them selves against trees both for their ease and health. Birds and hawks,
after their bathing will prune and rowse them selves upon their branches and
perkes, and all for health. The profit which comes in washing the hands with
cold water.
What should man do, which is, reasonable but to keep himself clean, and
often to wash the hands, which is a thing most comfortable to cool the heat
of the liver, if it be done often, the hands be also the instruments to the
mouth and eyes, with many other things commonly to serve the body. To wash
the hands in cold water is very wholesome for the stomach and liver, Hot water
is wholesome to wash hands in
but to wash with hot water engenders rheumes, worms and corruption, in the
stomach, because it pulls away natural heat unto the warmed place, which
is washed. Frication is holsom for the body.
Frication or rubbing the body, is good to be done in mornings after the
purgation of the belly with warm clothes, from the head to the breast, then to
the belly, from the belly to the thighs, legs, and so forth. So that it be
done downwarde, it is good. And in dry folks to be rubbed with the oil of
camomill. Combing the head
Kembing of the head is good in mornings, and does comfort memory, it is evil
at night and opens the pores. The cutting of the hair, Cutting of hair and
paring of nails be comely for men.
and the paring of the nails, clean keepeing of the ears, and teeth, be not
only things comely and honest, but also wholesome rules of Physic for to be
superfluous things of the excrements.


Ioh. The chief thing that I had thought to have demanded, and the very mark
that I would have thee to shote at, is to tell me some thing of dieting my
self with meat and drink, in health and sickness.


Hum. A consideration to be had in eating and drinking.
There is to be considered in eating, the time of hunger or custom, the place
of eating and drinking, whether it be cold or hot, also the time of the
year, whether it be Winter or Summer: also the age or complexion of the
eater, and whether he be whole or sick: also the things which be eaten,
whether they be fish or flesh, fruits or herbs. Note also the complections and
temperaments of the said meats hot or cold, dry or moist, and most chiefly,
mark the quantity, and so forth. And like as lamps do consume the oil,
which is put unto them, for the preservation of the light, although it cannot
continue for ever: so is the natural heat which is within us preserved by
humiditie and moystnesse of blood and fleugme, whose chief engenderer be good
meats and drinks. As Auicen says de ethica. When natural heat is quenched
in the body, then of necessity the soul must depart from the body. For the
workman can not work when his instrument is gone. So the spirits of life, A
cause why the soul departs from the body.
can have no exercise in the body when there is no natural heat to work
upon. Without meat says Galen, it is not possible for any man to live, either
whole or sick: and thus to conclude, no vital thing lives without refection
and sustenaunce, whether it be animal reasonable, or animal sensible, without
reason or any vital thing insensible, both man, beast, fish, and worm, tree,
or herb. All these things be newtrified with the influence or substance of
the four Elements or any of them.


Ioh. Well Humfrey, thou know my complexion and disorder of my diet what
remedy for me, that have lived like a riotter?


Hum. I know it well thou art flegmatike, To eat both fish and flesh together
hurts the phlegmatic.
and therefore it is long yer thy meat be disgested. When thou do eat fish
and flesh together, it does corrupt in thy stomach and stink, even so does hard
cheese and cold fruits. And old poudred meats, and raw herbs engender evil
humors: so the diversity of quality and quantity of diverse meats, does bring
much pain to the stomach, and does engender many diseases, as thou may read
in the first book of Galen: Inuementis membrorum. cap. iiij. Galen.
And the Prince himself says in 3. prim. doct. 2. cap. 7. Hippocrates.
Saying, nothing is more hurtful than diverse meats to be joined together.
For while as the last is receiving, the first begins to digest. And when the
table is garnished with diverse meats, some roasted, some fried and baked, some
warm, some cold, some fish, some flesh, with sundry fruits, and sallets of
diverse herbs to please thine eye, remember with thy self, that the sight of
them all is better, than the feeding of them all.

To feed of diverse sorts of meats corrupts the body.
Consider with thy self thou art a man and no beast, therefore be temperate in
thy feeding, and remember the wise words of Solomon. Eccle. 27.
Be not greedy, says he, in every eating, and be not hasty upon all
meats: for excess of meats brings sickness, and gluttony comes at the
last into an unmeasurable heat. Through surfeit have many a one perished, but
he that dieteth himself temperately, A good diet prolongeth life.
prolongeth his life. Therefore gross fish, lambs flesh, the in-meates of
beasts, raw herbs, pigges brains, and all slimie meats, be evil for
thee: but late suppers is woorst of all, and specially if they be long, for it
causes painful nights to follow. But Galen says in his Book De ethimia,
the meats which be without all blame, be those which be between subtle
and gross. Good bread of clean wheat, flesh of capons or hens, phesants,
and partriches, pigeons, and turtle doves, black birds, and small field
birds, roasted veale, or boiled mutton: These do engender good blood says
Galen. Note also, What kind of meats do cause good blood.
that any other meat that thou do eat at supper, although it seem
repugnant to a fleugmaticke stomach, if thou sleep well after it, and feel
no pain, thou may use it as a meat necessary. And when thou can not
sleep well, if the default came through meat, mark that meat or drink,
although it appear pleasant, refuse it as an enemy.

And whereas thou have used evil diet as a custom in abusing time, quantity
and quality, by little and little bring thy self into good order, and to
time, both for thy breakfasts, dinner, and supper. Provided always to eat good
things, but not many things. For like as repletion or abundaunce of meat is an
enemy to the body, and the soul, and brings sudden death: even so is
emptiness a shortner of time, What hurt comes of an empty stomach, when ye
go to bed.
a weakner of the brain, a hinderer of memory, an increaser of wind, choler,
and melancholy. And oftentimes to many brings sudden death also, except
nature have some thing to work upon, as I did tell thee before: use some light
things at breakfast of perfect digestion, within four hours after that
receive thy dinner observing the good order of diet, drinking wine or beer
oftentimes, and little at once, eschewing great draughts of drink, which is
used among beasts, and mingle thy meat with mirth, An order of dieting.
which is ever the best dish, at the board, and be thankful to God And so
leave with an appetite, passing ye time wisely between dinner and supper,
with exercise, labor, study or pastime, unto the end of six hours, and then
begin thy supper, provided that it be shorter than thy dinner, eating thy
meat by little and little: for greedy and sudden eating is hurtful to
nature, as Galen says in his Diatorie. Note also, Galen me trite.
that thou may eat more meat in Winter than in Summer, because thy natural
heat is enclosed with thy body in Winter, but universally spread in Summer.
Also choleric men may as lightly digest beef, bacon, veneson, etc. With as
much speed and little hurt as the fleugmatike man may eat, rabit chicken, and
partridge, etc. But the melancholy man through the coldness of the stomach
has not that strength in the stomach as he has promtpnes in will: The
Melancholy.
to eat things warm and moist be good for him. The sanguine man is not so swift
in this digestion, as the hot choleric man is. The Sanguine.
But notwithstanding, he has good digestion through the humiditie and warmnes
of blood, and coueteth to eat sweet things, which greatly augment the blood:
therefore sharp sauces made with vinegar, onions, and barbaries be wholesome.
Purslen, sorrel, small fishes that feed upon the stones in fair running
waters, cowcumbers and pure French wine partly delayed with water, be good for
the said sanguine men: to keep them from much increase of flesh.


Ioh. Thou have showed unto me a very discrete and wholesome order of diet
particular to my self, and partly to other complexions: but what rule or pretty
Government is for sick folks?


Hum. They that be suddenly vexed with sharp sicknesses, An order for the
dieting of such as be sick of sharp feners.
must have thin diets, with water gruell, thin mutton or chicken pottage
without any fat or thicknes, violet leaves, endive leaves, and such like
cooling herbs, and let their drinks be made of Tezantes, thus do to them
that have hot sharp sickenesses, occasioned of choler. And also cold siroppes
of endive, violets, sugar, water, and vinegar, sodden together be very
wholesome. But if sickenesses be long of continuance, their diet must be the
thicker, and their meats made the stronger, specially if their diseases be
cold: with the flesh of cocks, capons, temperate wine, stewed broth, with
wholesome herbs, as buglos, borrage, basil, parcely, and finkle roots, with
some maces, dates, damask prunes, reisins of the sun, and such like. Of
syrops and drinks.
Sirops of Isope and citeron, provided that they neither take meat nor
medicine immediately before, or soon after their fittes: posset ale with
clarified herbs, excepted, which they may take, for their comfort, according
to the estate of their disease, for such as be sick must have meat, contrary
to their complexion. For they that be cold, must have hot meat, and
medicines. And they that be dry, must have moist things. But they that be
hot must have cold things, for the ardent heat of the fire is quenched with
the moystnesse of the water, and so the quantity of one quality, overcomes
the quality of an other. And in deed, Physic says, the bodies that be
hot, must be fed with things like, as they that be moist, with moist things to
preserve their moistnes. They that be hot, with hot things to preserve their
heat and such like. But when they do exceed in heat, cold, moist or dry,
then let the qualities of moistnes, be tempered with drienes, and the coldness
with warmnes. As the complexion is, so man requires.
For like as man delights in things of like, as the choleric man,
choleric things, even so do beasts, and fruits, as the Colloquintida, which
is bitter, delights in bitter ground. Hot spices delight to grow in hot
ground, and every fruit and herb does delight in the thing that is of like:
even so does man in his food. But in all things let him beware of
distemperaunce, surfites or repletion rear suppers and drunkenness.


Ioh. But if a man feel great grief after meats or drinks, what way is
there then for to help him?


Hum. Use walking up and down, and perhaps that will disgeste, The.iii.
doctrine, The.vii. chap.

Moderat walk after meat ^rofiteth.


as Auicen says: And Rasis says, to walk a hundredth paces after meat, is
wholesome, for it comfort disgestion provoke vryne, and gives one power and
strength of stomach to eat his supper. But the counsel of Galen must here
be observed. Which says: Galen, in. 6. de accedenti and morbo. i. cap.
there is no meat but it will corrupt or stink, if the body be cast into a
sudden heat, by strong travel soon after meat, which coruption of disgestion
is the mother of all diseases, and the beginner of all infirmities, Auice. in
13, theo. 3. tract. 3. cap.
as Auicen reports: And if you see this will not help to digest your
ingorged full stomach, then provoke your self to sleep lying upon your right
side, leaving toward your breast and belly, laying your warm hand upon your
breast, as Auerois says: the power of disgestion is made strong when a man
sleeps. To help disgestion by diverse ways.
For natural heat that is drawn inwardly with warmnes, or heat has power to
digest. But if sleep ease you not, provoke vomit or fast it out, and this is
the counsel of many learned men. For it is no marvel although many meats
corrupt one man, which be of sundry and diverse workinges in the stomach, liver
and vein, Hipo. in secundo Prim. doc. 3. ca. 6 Haec signa declarant.
for the qualities do hinder nature as much as the quantities. And take heed,
these signs and evil tokens be not found in youth. The pains of all your
members with idleness and wearines, to go or move your body. Sudden great
blushing or redness in your face, veins swelled and puffed up, red vryne, and
gross skin, exte^ded or stretched out with fulness, like a blown bladder and
full pulses, small desire to meat, il rest and grief in sleep, seeming in
sleep to bear some intolerable burden, or dreaming to be speechless: these
be the evil and dangerous tokens of replection. And of this I give you
warning, for it has slain as many by abundance, as hunger has killed
through scarcity.


Ioh. I have heard say that wholesome air is a great comfort to man's nature, but
corrupt air does much harm: I shall require you therefore to tell me of the
good and the bad air, that I may learn to use the good, and refuse the bad.


Hum. Galen in lib. de Sectis. says: A wise physician ought to know the
natures of men, of waters, of air, of regions, and dwellings, generally,
particularly to thy self, being a natural English man of birth and education:
this land is very temperat. Howbeit, our dwellinges in this land, be variable
as fennes, marshes, woods, heithes valleis, playnes, and rockie places, and
near the sea side. Note which be the most wholsomest aires to dwell in.
But the said Galen gives counsel in his regiment of health, saying: a good
air, which is pure and wholesome, is that, which is not troubled in standing
water pooles. Therefore marish grounds and places where hemp and flax is
rotten, and dead carrions be cast, or multitudes of people dwelling together,
or houses environed with standing waters, whereinto iakes or sinks, have
issues, or wallowing of swine, What aires corrupt the blood.
or carrion unburied or foul houses, or such like places be dangerous,
corrupts the blood, which is worse than infection of meat, for the prince,
says that al places of co^cauets, as sellers, vaults, holes of minerals where
mettels be dug, or houses, or walls joined together where as the sun with
reflexio^ beats in wc sudden heat, whose absence brings cold: this air is
distempered, but pleasant clear air, sweet gardens, goodly hills, in days
temperat when one may see far off. These be good also, Corrupt air brings
sundry diseases.
there be certain stars called infortunates, in their exaltation, whose
influence brings corruption to creatures, rot and pestilence to man and
beasts, poisoning waters, and killing of fish, blasting of fruit in trees, and
corn in the fields, infecting men with diverse diseases, fevers palsies,
dropsies, fransies, falling sicknesses, and leprosies. Against the said
influences al christian men must pray to God to be their defense, Fervent
prayer unto God, ^oth mittigate his wrath.
for they be Gods instruments to punish the earth. Example we have of mortal
pestilence, horrible fevers, and sweating sickness, and of late, a general
fever, that this land is often greatly plaged withal. Sweet air to be made
in the time of sickness
Then one must make a fire in every chimney within the house, and burn sweet
perfumes to purge this foul air: and now in conclusion to answer thy
question, for the health of dwelling, Auicen says, to dwell upon hills is cold.
And in valleys comprised with hills, is hot. Upon a hill side against the
north, is cold and dry Toward the west, gross, and moist, very subtle
toward the East. And clear and warm toward the South. And Rasis says, in
his first book Afforien. A man dwelling near the Sea side, or great waters,
can not live long, nor cannot be without weakness of members, or blindness, but
the best building of a house, is upon a dry ground, Situation best for a house
and a hill toward the west side, and southwest doors, and windows open
toward, the east, and north east, having near unto the said house, sweet
springs of running waters from stony or chaulkie ground, which is both
pleasant and profitable to the house. For Hippocrates says in his book of
Air and Water, the second chapter, cities and towns, which are placed toward
the east, be more sure, then the towns builded toward the north, for
temperat air or wind, and sicknesses be less. And in the said book Auicen
greatly commends pleasant rivers, running toward the rising of the sun,
Pleasan^ people.
the dwellers in such places says he, be fair and well favored: smothe
skinned, clear and sharp voices: and thus to conclude with thee, this shall
suffice at this time, what, and where, good and pleasant dwelling is. Note
also, that thou must observe air in sickness, as thou must do meat in sickness,
cold sicknesses, warm air, dry sicknesses, moist air, and so in the
contraries to them that be sick and they that be hole, air of like quality is
moist holsom, they that have long sicknesses, change of air is a great help,
both in fevers, dropsies, falling sicknesses and rheumes.


Ioh. I have found very much disquietnes in my body, when my s^ruants and
laboring family, have found case, and yet we are partakers of one air.


Hum. The cause why thy laboring servants in the field at plough, pastures,
Moderate exercise a souerain thing.
or woodde, have such good health, is exercise labor, and thy disquietnes
comes, partly of idleness, and lack of travel, which moderatly used, is a
thing most soueraign to nature.


Ioh. I pray thee tell me some thing of exercise.


Hum. The well learned man Fulgentius, Fulgen. in lib. 2.
says: that exercise is a file and chaufer of the heat natural, which
chaseth away sleep, and consumes superfluous strength. What profit comes by
exercise.
Of the natural virtues, redeeming of time, enemy unto Idleness, due unto young
men, joy of old men, and to say the truth, he which does abstein from exercise
shall lack the joys of health, and quietness both of body and mind. And
Galen says in his regiment of health, if we will keep perfect health, we
must begin at labor and moderate travel, and then to our meat and drink,
and so forth to sleep, and this is the cause why hawkers, shooters, hunters,
and plowmen, gardeners, etc. have so good disgestion and strength of body. Who
be stronger armed men than Smithes, because of the exercise of their arms:
stronger bodied, than carpenters, which lift great blocks: and masons which
do bear great stones, not only in their youth, but such men will take
marvelous travels in age, which to idle people seem very painful, Use
makes labor easy.
unto them selves that travel, no pain but pleasure, because of custom?

These people can digest gross meats, eating them with much pleasure, and
sleeping soundly after them, whereas the idle multitudes in Cities, and noble
men's houses, great numbers for lack of exercise do abhor meats of light
digestion and dainty dishes, Marie in deed they may be very profitable to
Physicians. But if travail be one of the best preseruers of health, so is
idleness the destroyer of life, as Auerois writes, and Hippocrates saying,
Apho.
every contrary is removed and helped by his contrary, as health helps
sickness, exercise puts away idleness, Idleness the mother of all mischief.
etc. But every light moving or soft walking may not be called an exercise as
Galen says, therefore tennis, dancing, running, wrestling, riding upon great
horses, ordained, as well for the state of men's health, as for pleasure,
whereunto it is now converted, rather to the hurt of many, than the profit of
few, exercise does occupy every part of the body, quicken the spirits,
purge the excrements both by the reins, and guts, therefore it must be used
before meat, Exercise before (...).
for if strong exercise be used immediately after meat, it conueyeth
corruption to each part of the body, because the meat is not digested: but
when thou see thy water after meat appears somewhat yellowe, then may
thou begin exercise, for digestion is then well. But sick folks, lean
persons, young children, women with child may not much travail. The exercise
of dice, cards, fighting, drinking knauish railing, of bauderie, and such
like, rather may be called an exercise of devils, than of men. And thus to
conclude with Solomon, quam pretiosus sit sanitas thesaurus.


Ioh. After painful labor and exercise, or disquietnesse of the mind, there
was never thing that has done me so much comfort as sleep has done.


Hum. Auicen says, that sleep is the rest and quietness of the powers of the
soul, of moouings, and of senses, Auicen in can. Of sleep and waking.
without the which man can not live. And truly sleep is nothing else but an
Image or brother to death, as Tullie says. Tulli. in lib. de seen.
And if by imagination thou did perceive sleeping and waking weied in the
balance together, there thou should see them equal in weight, for Aristotle
says, that man does sleep as much as he does wake. Arist. in. lib. de so.
But this is to be considered in sleep, that natural heat is drawn inwardly,
and digestion made perfect, the spirits quieted, and all the body comforted,
if the true order of sleep be observed in six points. First, a quiet mind,
without the which either there is no sleep, or else dreadful dreams,
tormenting the spirits. Secondly, the time of sleep, which is the night, or
time of most quiet silence, for the day sleeps be not good, most chiefly
soon after dinner, except to sick persons or young children, in their times
convenient. Thirdly, the manner of sleep, Sleep after dinner not healthful.
that is, to eschew the lying on the back, which brings many grievous
passions, and kills the sleeper with sudden death. To lie upon the left
side is very evil in the first sleep, but tolerable in the second, but the
most surest way to make the digestion perfect, is to lie upon the right side,
with one of the hands upon the breast. Fourthly, sleep has the quantity
which must be mean, Sleep on the right side is best.
for superfluous sleep makes the spirits gross and dull, and decays
memory, six or eight hours will suffice nature. For, like as much watch
dries the body, and is perilous for falling sickness, and blindness: even so
too much sleep is as perilous, for extremes be ever ill. Fifthly, Gal. sen. 1.
t^rap. cap. ^.
in the time of cold fevers, the patient must not sleep until the trimbling
fit be past, for then the hot fit that follows will be extremer than any
other fit, and hard to help. Note furthermore, that those bodies that be full
of hot inflammations sleep not well, therefore they must use things to
extenuate and to make cold, as Tizantes and cold sirops, or gentle purging
from the belly and liver, or finally to have the median vein opened according
to time, state and age. Sixthly, the chamber must be considered that it be
clean, sweet, comely clothes fit for the time of the year, and the age of
the people, and to keep the head warm, is very holsom, for in sleep natural
heat is drawn into the body, for the brain of nature is cold and moist. Thy
lodging must be kept clean.
Windows in the south part of the chamber be not good, it is best for them
which have cold rheumes, dropsies, etc. to lie in close lofts, and for dry
bodies to lie in low chambers, and in the time of the Pestilence, often to
shift chambers is healthful, lying upon the ground in Gardens, under trees, or
near unto stinking priuies be hurtful to the body: Note that sleepers in
fields in harvest shall be in danger of quarteins in winter.
and this shall suffice for thine instruction of sleep, provided, that thou
do not long retain thine urine, for fear of the stone, and pain in thy
reins.


Ioh. There is nothing which I more fear than the stone, for my father was
sore vexed therewith, what shall I mark in mine urine?


Hum. Among all mortal diseases, the stone is the greatest, a preuenter of
time, a deformer of man, and the chief weakner of the body, and a grievous
enemy to the common wealth. How many noble men and woorshipfull personages
has it slain in this Realm* The cause of the stone.
many one, which comes of hot wines, spices, long banquets, repletions,
fullness, costifenesse, warm keeping of the back, salt meats, etc. The
remedy whereof is, Remedies for the stone.
in all points contrary to these causes, small wines, temperate beer or ale,
no spices, but wholesome herbs, as Time, Parcely, Saxifrage, etc. Light meals,
most chiefly the supper, no baked, nor roasted thing, but only sodden meats,
and oftentimes to relaxe the belly with Cassia Fistula, new drawn from the
Cane, with sugar, and to eschew salt meats, and not to keep the back warm:
the stone is often found in young children, which comes of the parents, and
oftentimes in old folk. Which stones be engendered as I have said: besides
milk, fruits, herbs, saltfi^h, and flesh, hard chee^e, etc. Now mark well
this lesson following, for thine urine.


Ioh. That shall I gladly, read but softly, and I will write thy words.


Humfrey. First in urine four things mark, Four things noted in vrines.

Thus said Actuarij the good clearke,
Color, regents and contents therein,
Substance gross, thick or thin,
A fair light, an vrinall pure,
Then of thy sight thou shall be sure.
Golden urine.
Color of bright gold or gil^e,
Is health of liver, heart and milte.
Red urine.
Red as chery* or saffion dry,
Excess of meat in him I spy.
Color green, or like dark red wine,
Or ^esembling the liver of a swyne,
Is adustion with fiery heat
Green urine.
Burning the liver and stinking sweat
Couller like lead.
Leaddy color or black as ink,
Death draws near as I do think.
Except the terms which women have,
Or purging black choler, which many do save
Color gray as horn, or clear water,
Gray urine.
Is lack of disgestion says mine auther.
Urine like flesh broth.
Urine like flesh broth is very good*
Begins disgestion and norish blood.
Subcitrine and yellow be urine next best,
Bread and flesh will well digest.
White and thick urine White and thin urine.

Yelow urine.


The urine that is white and thick
Is ever called phlegmatic.
Melancholy water is white and thin,
The red and gross is sanguin.
Yellow and thin spring from the gall,
Wherein holler rules all.
The swelling and brains bloody,
Causes circles thick with color ruddy,
But when circles be thin and red,
Choler green the right side of the head, Circles are t^ be noted.

If leaden circles swim on the brinke,
It is falling sickness as I do think.
When Oil in urine does vppeare,
Resolutio pinguis draws near.
When Oil appear in fevers hot, Oil in urine.

Dissoluing the body, causes a blot.
But of Periotides, thou feelst no pains,
This Oil Pronogstick, consuming raines* Periotides, is tertian or quarte^ Of
grauel in urine.

The gravel red declares for ever,
In dry backed men duble tertian fever.
When golden gravel appears alone,
It hurt the raines but is no stone:
When grauel is of color white,
Stone in the bladder works spite.
Contents like small threeds or hears,
Through heat, and drienesse the body wears.
Consumtion, scabbe small sport and lust, Contents in urine be the chief
things to know diseases.

Is when many hairs be mingled with dust.
In the bottom of veins, or vessels great,
Lies stopping matter like bran of wheat,
Wherein contents are, like skales of fish,
As appears in the chamber dish.
These signify fevers, and ethickes old.
Or scabbes, which the bladder do infolde.
White froth swimming, comes of wine*
The yelow froth, is of Iaundise kind*
Thus of vrines I do conclude,
With words of truth, but meeter rude.
Here is also a little of the signs of the excrementes of the belly.

Our filthy dung, and fex most vile.
Many colors in one stool be evil.
The dregs of natures food,
When they be diverse colored made
The signs be never good.
If the siege be like unto the meat,
New drawn into the mawe,
Signs of crudi^ie and wind.
Or fleeting with fleame or burbles great.
The body is windy and raw.
Collerick signs, Signs deadly.
The yelowe does from choler come,
The green^ is burnt adust
The black and leady be deadly signs,
The flesh will turn to dust.
Oil excrements signify consumption, except the cause be of fat meats.
Stools soft and hard.
The excrement that is in the iakes cast.
If it have oil or fat,
Consumption of body then begin.
The chiefest sign is that.
The privy soft well compact,
Made in the accustomed time,
Is ever good, and the hard is ill,
And thus I end my rhyme.

Ioh. Once I fell into a great sickness, and hitherto I am skant recovered of it,
the surfit was so great, but counsel was given me, that I should not stay my
self upon the opinion of any one physician, but rather upon three: then said
I, to retain three at once, requires great charge, for those men to whom
lives be committed, ought liberal reward to be given. Then said my friend, they
are good gentlemen and no great takers. What be their names said I? he
answered saying: The first was called doctor Diet, the second doctor Quiet:
Diet Quiet Meriman.
the third doctor Meriman. I did writ their names, but yet I could not speak
with them.


Hum. Hitherunto I have said some thing that shall well suffice for thee to
know doctor Diat, as for Quiet, and Merry man, they lie in no phisicions hands
to give, but only in Gods. It were better to lack riches, then to want
quietness and mir^h.
For small it helps to any man, to have honor, riches, fame, cunning, etc.
And in the mean time, to want quietness, and mirth, which be the chief
friends. Tenderest nourses wholsomest physicians, most pleasant musitions, and
friendliest companions to nature, pleasant birds singing in the branches, be
more happier than ravening cormorants, and greedy hawks, which with pains
inchaseth their preyes. The quiet lambs be ever happier in their kind, Many
apt similitudes or metaphros.
than the greedy ravening foxes, wolves and lions, which never cease vexing
themselves, to kill living things for their food. The poor Oister, lurking
under the rock, or sand, which is never removed of strong ebbes nor
flouddes, is farther from travel and continual pains, than the horrible
whale, most fearful to fishes. The low shrubs, or bushes growing near to the
ground, be ever in more sauegarde than the lusty high flourishing trees,
spredde with pleasant branches, which be subject to every strong wind. The
poor boats in harbor, be in less peril than the rich fickle ships, tossed
up and down on the cruel floods.

What shall I say but this, that the miserable ragged beggar called Irus, was
more happier in his poverty with quietness and mirth, than was the gluttonous
beast, and monstrous man king Sardanapalus, with all his golden glory, court
of ruffians, and curtizans which came to a shameful end. Diogenes, I warrant
you was not inferior to Alexander, in the state of happiness, and have left as
great a fame behind him, saving that Alexander was a more cruel murderer than
Diogenes a chaste liver. In deed ye poor silly shepherd, The pleasure of poor
men.
does pleasantly pipe with his sheep, when mighty princes do fight among
their subjects, and break many sleeps in golden beds, when bakers in bags,
and brewers in bottels, do snort upon hard straw, fearing no sudden mishap.
The great pains and secret griefs that disquieted minds do daily sustain,
be not much unlike unto the infernal torments that the wicked do feel: The
torments of the mind.
Physic unto an extreme troubled mind (say what they list:) helps as
little, as to apply a plaster to the breast, or head of a dead body, to
reuocate the spirits of life or soul again. The sickness of the body must
have medicine, the passions of the mind must have good counsel. Through
thought many are killed.
What pleasure has a condemned man in music, or a dead man in physic?
Nothing at all God knows. Oh how many men have been cast away by thought, and
most for loss of estimation, and some of other affections of the mind, as
inordinate love, or coveting things that they cannot get, or obtaining those
things that they cannot keep, or ire of other men's prosperity or good hap!
as Tully says: Ire is a grievous passion. Tul^i^ tuscum. li. 3 Ovid. in lib. 2.
metha.
Ovid, as fine in poetry, as Apelles was in painting, discribeth this vile
passion of ire, with a pale face, lean body, scouling look, gnashing teeth,
venom tongue, choleric stomach, tongue full of poison, ungrateful, seldom
smiling but at mischief outwardly appearing as it were quiet, inwardly the
serpent gnaweth, fretteth and deuoureth, etc. Devils incarnat.
These men be devils incarnat, beginning hell in this life, most enemies to
themselves, and if they did behold themselves in a glass in ye time of their
tempests, should not their countenances be more fearful to themselves than
their Ire hurtful to others? yes, and perhaps make them staring mad, in seeing
such a devils image, therefore let wise men be of this mind: First to think
that they would have no man be irefull against them, or disdain them, even so
let them do to others: Secondly, let them think, Better to be spited than
pitied in some cases.
it is better to be spited, than pitied, for every prosperous felicity, has
his enemy waiting upon him: The fool hates the wise. The wise man, pittieth
the fool: well, co^et rather to be spited than pitied, the wrech enuieth the
worthy man, and so forth: Only except adversity, and extreme misery, all
prosperous men have enemies, let this suffice, and consider what Galen says,
Galen. de regem sani libr. 1.
that immoderat ireful motions, cast the body into a choleric heat, whereof
comes fevers, and all hot diseases dangerous to the body, of this writes
Petrus de ebano. In com^n. 32, septi. Problem.
The passion of the mind called dread, or fear, is when the blood and sprites
be drawn inwardly, and makes the outward parts pale and trembling to this,
be sides pitiful experience, Haliabas, Hali. in 5. theo. ca. vltimo. Ga. 1. qui
de acc. and morbo. c. 6. Ari. 10. proble.
Galen, and Aristotle do witness the same. The suddayne passion of joy, or
gladness, is clean contrary to fear. For the heart sends fourth the
spiritual, blood, which in weak persons, the heart can never recover again,
but death incontinent, as Galen says, and as we may see by experience: As in
the meeting of men, and their wives, Children and their parents, which either
by prison, or banishment, were without all hope, ever to see each other, and in
joy of meeting the delating, and spreding of the heart blood, have cast the
body into sowning. And thus my friend John I do conclude upon certain
effections of the mind, wishing doctor Diet, Quiet and Merry man to help, when
thou shall need. For mirth is beloved of musicions, Hudson.
pleasant birds and fishes as the dolphins. What is mirth honestly used? an
image of heaven. A great lordship to a poor man, and preserver of nature, and
Solomon says, Non est oblectatio super cordis gaudiu^, Eccle. c. 30.
etc. and yet I say. The irefull man is ever a thrall,
The joyful mind is happiest of all.
Zeal burn like flames of fire,
When honest mirth has his desire,
Love well mirth, but wrath despise:
This is the counsel of all the wise.



Ioh. I would very feign know the natures of sorts of simples, and first what
is worm wood?


Hum. A common known herb, it is of diverse kinds, as Ponticum Romanum, etc.
It is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree, and it is very bitter,
and being dried, keeps clothes from worms and mothes, and the sirop thereof,
eaten before wine, The virtues of wornewood
preserves men from drunkenness, if it be sodden in vinegar, it will help
the sores that breeds in the ears, being laid warm upon it, is good to be
drunk against Appoplexia and Opthalmia. Which is a sickness of the eye, Auicen
lib. 2. Sim. 2.
is greatly helped with the wormwood, if it be stamped and made luke warm with
rosewater, and laid upon the eye, and covered with a clean pyked walnut shell,
the syrop helps the bloody flixe, it does help a cold stomach, if it be
drunk ten days together, every morning two spoonefull of the syrop is good
against the dropsy, every day drunk two ounces fasting, and thus says
Auicen, figs, cocle, wormwood, nitre stamped together, and made in a
plaster, is good against the disease of the spleen, and also kills worms in
the belly, used in the foresaid manner, one dram of the powder may be drunk
at once in wine, it has many mo goodly virtues.


John. What is the properties of Annis seeds.


Hum. It is much like unto fennel seed, and is called Roman fennel, that is
warm and sweet, and hot in the second, and dry in the third degree, the new
seeds are the best. Galen de sim.
It ingendereth vital seed, opens the stopping of the reins and matrix,
being drunk with Tysants, or clean temperate wine.


John. What think thou of Mouseare?


Hum. An herb commonly known, cold and moist in the first degree, as Galen
says, the decoction of this herb sodde^ in water with sugar, is good against
the falling sickness, being oftentimes drunk, and put a lease thereof into
the nose it will provoke sternutation, or neesing which wonderfully does
cleanse the veins.


Ioh. I would feign know what is Chiken weed?


Hum. Almost every ignorant wontan does know this herb, but there be of
diverse kinds, The operation of chickin weed.
they be very good to keep wounds from impostumations, stamped and applied
unto them, and draws corruption out of wounds: and sodden with vinegar, does
draw fleugme out of the head, if it be often warm put into the mouth and spit
it out again. In this same manner it helps the teeth, and sodden in wine and
so drunk, it will cleanse the reigns of the back.


Ioh. What is Sorrel, might I know of thee, and the property thereof?


Hum. Thy Cook does right well know it, The properties of Sorrel.
and all they that make green sauce, but the description I leave to
Dioscorides, and Leonard Futchius, not only in this herb, but in all other,
and to tell thee the virtue, I will, it is cold and dry in the second
degree, it also stops: it is like endive in property, because it
overcomes choler* and is much commended, it helps the yellow iaundies, if
it be drunk with small wine or ale, also quenches burning fevers: to eat of
the laaues every morning, in a pestilence time is most wholesome, if they be
eaten fasting* This herb does Dioscorides, Galen, and Auicen, greatly
commend, besides the great learned men of this time.


Ioh. What is Planten, or Waybreed?


Hum. The greater Planter is the better, The properties of plan^ine.
it has seven great veins, it is cold and dry, the seed of it, drunk with
read wine, stops the bloody flix: the roots sodden and drunk in wine,
stops the bloody flix: the roots and leaves being sodden with sweet
water, and with sugar or borage water, and given to him that has an ague,
either tertian or quartaine, two hours before his fit: prove this, for thus
have I helped many, it is very comfortable for children that have great flixes
and agues and is a friend unto the liver, this herb is greatly praised of the
Doctors.


Ioh. What is Camomill, and the operation thereof?


Hum. This herb is very hot, it is drunk against cold winds, and raw
matter being in the guts, the Egyptians did suppose it would help all cold
Agues, and did consecrate it to the sun, ^s Galen says: Also if it be
tempered and streined into white wine, To what purpose camomel serves.
and drunk of w^men, having the child dead within the body, it will cause
present deliverance, it does mightily cleanse the bladder, and is excellent to
be sodden in water to wash the feet: the oil is precious as is declared
hereafter.


Ioh. Hoppes be well-beloved of the beer brewers, how do the Phisicions say to
them?


Hum. There be which does cool, be called Lupilum, those that we have be
hot and dry, bitter, sower, hot, says old herbals. And Fucchius says:
Fucchi*
they cleanse fleugme and choler, and the water between the skin and flesh,
the sirupes will cleanse gross raw fleugme from the guts, and is good
against obstructions sodden. If the juice be dropped in the ear it takes the
stink away of rotten sores, the roots will help the liver and spleen, being
sodden, and drunk: the beer is very good for fleugmaticke men.


Io. What is Sage, for that I love well?


Hum. There be two kinds of sage: they be herbs of health, A wonderful gift
given to Sage.
and therefore they be called Saluia, this herb is hot and dry, and
provoke urine, cleanses the matrix, stops the blood in a wound. If it be
put in a pigge, it dries the humors, that would engender fleugme, it is good
against the paulsie: oftentimes eaten, or sodden in wine, it will help and
cleanse itch, scabs, and filth from the pudent and secret members. Aetius does
greatly commend this herb, and the excellent regiment of Salern, where it
says, Cur moritur homo, cui saluia crescit in horto, enquiring why men do die
that have Sage growing in gardens. But truly, neither Physic herb, nor
cunning, An in. 3.1, ^ap. sing.
can make man immortal: but assuredly Sage is wholesome for old folks to be put
into their meats, for it cleanses fleugme from the sinews, which fleugme will
relax the sinews: The wine of sage drunk upon an empty stomach, is wholesome
for fleugmaticke persons, or them which have the falling sickness or dropsy.


Ioh. What is Polopodie, that grows upon the Oak tree.


Hum. If this herb be sodden with Beetes and Mallows, Of polopodie.
in the broth of a hen, and drunk, it will loose the belly, and cleanse
fleugme: the root of this herb being dry, and beaten into fine powder, and
drawn into the nostrilles, helps a disease called Polipus.


Ioh. I have heard talk of Hoorehound, I would feign hear of his working.


Hum. It is a herb hot and dry, What diseases horehound helps.
if it be sodden with fair water* sugar or honey, and streine it, this drink
does cleanse the stomach from stinking fleugme, it is an excellent herb for
women, to cleanse their month terms, the water of this is good to help them
which have a moist rewme falling from the head, upon the lunges, being often
drunk: but it is hurtefull to the bladder and reins, the sirope thereof does
cleanse the kings evil: and also put into the ears, does greatly comfort the
hearing if the ears be troubled: and stamped with honey, and applied into the
eyes, it cleanses the sight.


Ioh. What is Verben?


Hum. Of verben and his properties.
It is called the holy herb, it dries and binds, if it be sodden with
vinegar, it helps a disease called saint Anthonies fire, oftentimes wa^hing
the pained place, the leaves of Uerben and Roses, and fresh swines grease
stamped together, will seace pain and grief in every wound, and will keep
wounds from corruption: it is good for people, that have the tertian, or
quartaine Agues, and thus says Dioscorides: Dioscorides.
moreover, he says the weight of a dram of this herb, with three halpenies
weight of Olibbulom, and put in nine ounces of old wine, tempered together,
and drunk forty days of this quantity fasting, it will help a disease,
called the kings evil, or pain in the throat.


Ioh. What is Rue, or herb Grace?


Hum. I tell thee, this herb is very hot and bitter, and does burn because
of his hotenes in the third degree: if a littie of this Rue be stamped, and
sodden with wine, and drunk, it is an excellent medicine, against poison and
pestilence, with Roses and vinegar, and Rue stamped together, Rue good against
poison.
and put in forred cloth or biggen, applied unto the temples of the head or
forehead, do cease grievous pains itn the head. And in like manner it healedh
the bitings of serpents or dogs stamped with vinegar: many nice people cannot
abide it, crying fie, it stinkes: The seed of this herb beaten in powder,
and put in fresh clarified butter, and pitch melted together, is good for them
to drink that are bruised.


Ioh. What is burnet?


Hum. It is of the nuture of five finger, dry and binding, and not moist, The
properties of burnet.
as many says: stamp it and put it to the eyes, does take away the dropping
and pricking, and does heal wounds, and is good to drink for the tercian
Ague.


Ioh. What is Dandilion?


Hum. It is trmperate, cold and dry: The virtues of dandilion.
with Roses and vinegar, tempered together, it helps the head in hot
diseases. The sowthistle called Soncus, has the same virtue, and so has
Suckery: if they be sodden, they lose the belly, and quenches heat which
burns in the stomach, and defends the head from hot smoking vapors, and
purges yellow choler, and rebateth venerous and fleshly heat, and is good to
be sodden and drunk in hoate burning Agues, though this herb be commonly
known, and counted of many as a vile weed: yet it is reported of Dioscorides,
to be an excellent herb.


Ioh. What is Spynnage?


Hum. An herb much used in meat, cold and moist, in the first degree, it
mollifieth and makes soft the belly, it is good for them that be hot and
dry, and ill for fleugmatike men.


Ioh. What is Cucumbers?


Hum. They be truly in the second degree, very moist and cold: The seeds be
good to be given in hot sickenesses: the powder of the said seeds, For what
purpose cucumber serves.
drunk in clean wine, is good against diverse passions of the heart: this
fruit will cause one to make water well, the root dried in powder, thereof
drunken in water and honey provoke vomit: if they be moderately eaten, they
bring good blood, tempered with honey, and annointe the eyes, that helps a
disease called Epinictidas, which troubles men with strange sightes in the
nights: Epinictidas.
the best of this fruit is, which bears the best seeds the savor of that is
not wholesome: mellons, citrons, pompons, and this kind of pepons or great
apples be much used in England, and are more common than profitable, because
they use to eat them raw. English men being borne in a temperate region,
inclining to cold, may not without hurt eat raw herbs, roots and fruits
plentiful, as many men, which be borne far in the South parts of the world,
which be most hot of stomach, therefore let them eat these fruits boiled
or baked with honey and pepper, and fennel seeds or such like, there be an
other hot kind of bitter cucumers which do purge.


Ioh. What is garlike?


Hum. Garlike is very hot and dry in the fourth degree: The properties of
garlike and his operation.
it troubles the stomach, it is hurtful to the eyes and head, it increases
drienesse, but it will provoke urine and is good to be laid upon the biting
of a snake, or adder, it is good for the emeroids applied to the sore place,
being first stamped, if it be sodden, the stink is taken from it, but the
virtue remains to be eaten against the coughes and pains in the lungs, it
cutteth and consumes corrupt fleugme, and brings sleep. It is not good for
hot men, nor women with child, or nurces, giving milk to children: but Galen
calls it the common peoples treacle, if sanguine men do eat much of it, it
will make them to have red faces, but it is a special remedy against poison.


Ioh. What is onions?


Hum. The diversity of onions and their properties.
They do make thin the blood, and bring sleep, they be not good for
chollericke men, the long onion is more vehementer than the round, and the red
more than the white, the dry more than the green, and the raw more
vehementer than the sodden, or preserved in salt, although they do cause
steep, very painful and troublous hoate in the third degree, and warm in
the stomach, cleanses the stomach, and brings good color unto the face,
and helps the green sickness, provoke urine, opens the emeroides. If
they be sodden in vinegar, and laid warm to them: peele off the rind, and
cut it at both the ends, and cast it into a fair warm water, and let it
lie an hour or two, and then slice it, this takes away the vehement
sharpness of of it. Rue, Salt, Honey, and one onion stamped together, is a
goodly plaster to lay upon the biting of a dog: leekes do purge the blood
in March, and pain the head, and be not greatly praised for their ill juice. A
doge says Dioscorides, the head being anointed with the juice thereof
keeps hair from falling: there is much variety of this onion amongst
writers, says Pliny, but this shall suffice.


John. What is Lettice?


Humfrey. It does mightily increase milk in women's breasts, The praperties of
lettice.
and therefore is called Lettice (as Martial says, first shall be given to
the virtue and power to increase milk in the breasts every hour, Lettice is
a herb cold and moist, and is comfortable for a hot stomach, brings
sleep, mollifieth the belly: the drier it be eaten the better it is: I mean
if it be not much washed in water, adding thereunto some clean Salle^ Oil,
Sugar, and Uineger, it abateth carnal lust: and much use of it dulleth the
sight, the seed of it is very precious (...) There is an herb called Rocked
gentle, which partly smells like a Fox, the which is very hot, an
encreaser of seed, which herb must always be eaten with Lettis. The root
thereof sodden in water, will draw broken bones, and will help the cough in
young children.


John. What be mintes?


Humfrey. The properties of mints.
Mintes be of two kinds, garden and wild mintes, they be hot unto the third,
and do dry in the second degree. Garden mint is best: the poulder of this
with the juice of Pomegranates, stops vomites, helps sighing, cleanses
hot choler: Three branches of this sodden with wine, does help repletion
drunk fasting. This juice tempered with good triacle, and eaten of children in
mornings, will kill worms, and stamped with salt, apply it to the biting of a
dog, and it will heal it: It is wholesome sodden with windy meats, and
sodden in posset ale with fennel, it helps the collicke, it increases
vital seed. It is not best for chollericke complexions, but good for
fleugmatike, and indifferent for melancholy: and it will stop blood, stamped
and applied to the place. The juice of mintes is best to mingle in medicine
against poison: the poulder of Mintes is good in pottage, to help disgestion,
and to make sweet breath.


John. What is fennel?


Humfrey. It has power to warm in the third degree, and dry, The properties
of fennel.
and makes sweet the breath: the seed eaten, oftentimes upon an empty
stomach, does help the eye sight: the roots clean washed be very wholesome
in pottage, and are good in tisants: the green or read tufts growing upon the
stalks, sodden in wine, pottage, or ale, helps the bladder, the reins, and
breaks the stone, increases milk in women's breasts, and seed of
generation: It is good for to use Endive or such like with it, because it is
very hot and good in Barbars ba^hs, washing water, and with balm, sauerie: It
is good to wash ones feet to bedward: the sirrope is very wholesome, it helps
a fleugmatike stomach.


John. What is Hisope?


Hum. An herb commonly known growing in gardens, and hot in the third
degree: it has virtues to make humors thin and warm: sodden with figs,
rue and honey, in clean water and drunk, it greatly helps the sickness in
the lungs, old cough, and rotten humors, dropping upon the lungs: sodden with
erius and grains of paradise called the Cardamon, it mightily purges and
brings good color. Figs, salt, Nitrum, and Isope, stamped together, and
applied to the spleen, helps it much, and takes away the water that runs
between the skin and the flesh, sodden with Oximel, it cleanses fleugme.


John. What is Sention?


Hum. It is of a mixed temperament, it cools and partly cleanses if it be
chopped and sodden in water, and drink it with your pottage, it will heal the
grief of the stomach, and purge it from hot choler: his down with saffron
and cold water, stamped and put in the eyes, it will dry the running drops,
and stamped plaster wise, it helps many grievous wounds.


Ioh. What is Pursleine?


Hum. Cold in the third, The operation of Purslein.
and moist in the second, if it be stamped with steeped barley, it makes a
goodly plaster to cool the head, eyes, and liver, in agues burning heat. To
eat of it, stops flixes, and quenches burning choler, and extinguish
venerous lust, and greatly helps the reins and bladder, and will kill round
worms in the belly, and comfort the matrixe against much fleugme. And the
juice is good to drink in hot fevers, it may be preserved with salt, and then
it is very good with roasted meats. Pliny says, it is supposed to make the
sight blunt and weak, further he says, that in Spain a great noble man,
whom he did know, did hang this pursleine root in a threede commonly about
his neck, which was much troubled, of a long sickness, and was healed.


Ioh. What is mugwort?


Hum. Mugwoort, and fetherfoy, The operation of mugwort.
and tansey be very hot and dry in the second degree: Muggewoorte, Spurge and
the oil of Almondes, tempered plaisier-wise, and applied cold unto the sick
pained stomach, will bring health. It is good in baths says Galen: it is
wholesome for women, it cleanses and warmeth, and comfort, and breaks the
stone. Pliny says: It is good against serpents, and wholesome for travailing
men, if they carry it, it comfort them from worms. Tansey does mightily
cast woormes from children, drunk with wine: A cold plaster stamped and
laid upon the belly of a woman whose child is dead within her, it will
separate the dead child from the living mother, causing her to neese with
betony leaves.


John. There is an herb commonly used to the great relief of very many
called Cabbage, is it so good as it is reported of?


Humfrey. Cabage is of two properties, The operation of cabbage.
of binding the belly, and making laxatiue: the juice of cabages lightly boiled
in fresh beef broth, is laxatiue, but the substance of this herb is hard of
disgestion, but if it be twice sodden, the broth of it will also bind the
belly, if it be tempered with alum. This herb has virtue to cleanse a new red
leprosy laid on the sore place in the manner of a plaster. But to conclude of
this herb, the broth of it has virtue to preserve from drunkenes, as
Aristotle, Rasis, and Auicen, Aristo. 3. perproble Aucen. 2
do report, eaten before drinking time. can. Rasis. 3. alman.



Ioh. What is Philopendula?


Hum. It is an herb hot and dry, if it be sodden in white wine and drunk. It
dries up windy places in the guts, Of philopenduall.
and cleanses the raines in the back and bladder.


Ioh. What is Agremonie?


Hum. Dioscorides says: that if this herb with swynes grease be stamped
together and laid upon an old rotten sore being hot, The operation of
Agremonie.
it has virtue to heal it: the seed of this herb drunk with wine, is good
against the being of Serpents, stopping of the liver, and bloody flix.


Ioh. Some say that the herb dragon is of great virtue.


Hum. The juice of it says Dioscorides: dropped into the eye, The virtue of
dragon.
does cleanse it, and gives much might unto the eyes of them which have dark
sightes, the water of this herb has virtue against the pestilence. If it be
drunk blood warm, with Uenice triacle, the savor of this herb is hurtful to
a woman newly conceived with child. Pliny says, that who so bears this
herb upon them, no venomous serpent will do them harm. This herb is hot
and dry.


Ioh. There is a very sweet flower called a Violet, is it so profitable, as it
is pleasant?


Hum. Simeon Sethi reports, that it does help against hot inflammations of
the guts, The virtue of Violets.
head, and stomach, if the cause be of burning choler. Either the water,
sirop, or conserve of the said Uiolets, either eaten or drunk, in the time of
any hot passion. But vndoubttedly, it offends the heart, because of the
coldness, the savor of the flowers be pleasant, the oil that is made of this
herb, has virtue to bring quiet sleeps to them which have grievous hot
pain in the head.


Ioh. What is the virtue of the pleasant white lilly?


Hum. Of white lilly and his operation.
Dioscorides says, that the oil of Lillies does mollify the Synewes and the
mouth of the matrixe, the juice of Lillies, Uineger and Honey sodden in a
brazen vessel, does make an ointment to heal both new and old wounds. If
the root be roasted and stamped with roses, it makes a healing plaster
against burning of fire: the same root roasted, has virtue to break a
pestilent sore, applied hot unto the sore place, and is dry in the first
degree. The Oil of water Lillies be moist, sufferent against all hot
diseases, to anoint the ardent places, and does reconcile quiet sleep, if the
forehead be anointed therewith.


Ioh. In the time of the pestilence, my wife makes me a medicin, of an herb
called Centauri, does she well or not?


Hum. Plini says, that the sirop of this herb drunk with a little vinegar,
and salt, does cleanse the body: Of the virtue of Centaurie.
the leaves and flowers be of great virtue, to be sodden and drunk against al
raw humors of gross fleugme, watery or windy: it does cleanse ^ruent or bloody
matter within the bodies of men or women. The powder of this herb is good in
pessaries, for women causing the dead child to depart from the mother, and is
wholesome against the pestilence, in the time of winter, and is hot and dry.


Ioh. We beautify and make pleasant our windows with Rosemarie, using it for
small other purposes.


Hum. Of Rosemarie.
Rosemarie is an herb of great virtue, hot and dry, sodden in Wine, and
drunken before meat, it does heal the kings evil, or pains in the throat,
as Dioscorides and Galen, says: the savor of it does comfort the brain and
heart: the flowers of Rosemarie is an excellent cordial called Anthos.


Ioh. Is Puliol royal, an herb of any value, or a weed of contemption?


Hum. The operation of Puliall royal,
It is an herb of much virtue and profit: hot and dry in the third degree.
Dioscorides says, if this herb be sodden with honey and Aloes, and drunk,
it will cleanse the liver, and purge the blood: most chiefly it helps the
lungs. Simeon Sethi says, if women drink it with white wine, it will provoke
and cleanse the terms menstrual, and is a very wholesome pot herb.


Ioh. What say thou unto mustard?


Hum. Plinius does greatly laud it, The operation of Mustard.
saying, that there is nothing, that does pearse more swiftlier into the brain
than it does. Honey, vinegar, and mustard, tempered together, is an excellent
Gargarisma, to purge the head, teeth, and throat. Mustarde is good against
all the diseases of the stomach or lunges, wind, fleugme, or rawnes of the
guts, and conduces meat into the body: provoke urine, helps the palsy,
wastes the quartane, dries up moist rheumes: applied plaster wise unto the
head. Honey, and Mustard helps the cough, and is good for them that have the
falling sickness, notwithstanding the common use of Mustard is an enemy to
the eye. Many more virtues have I read of Mustard, but the occasion of time
has unhappily prevented, not only my large description in this, but also in
many other simples, which hereafter, I intend largely to write upon it, if it
please God to permit me.


Ioh. They say that Buglos is very wholesome.


Hum. It is an herb most temperate between hot and cold, The virtue of
Buglos.
of an excellent virtue, a comforter of the heart, a purger of melancholy, a
quieter of the frenzy, a purger of the urine, wholesome to be drunk in wine, but
most effectual in sirup. Dioscorides and Galen does greatly commend this herb,
and that does daily experience well prove.


John. What is thy mind of sweet Basil?


Hum. This herb is warm in the second degree, The virtues of Basil.
having the virtue of moystnesse, and if it be sodden in wine with Spicknard,
and drunk, it is good against dropsies, winds, fleugme, coldness of the
heart, hardness of the stomach: the savor of Basil, does comfort the
brain, and heart, the use of this herb in meats, does decay the sight.


Ioh. The plain people of the country will say, that those flowers which be
pleasant in smelling, be oftentimes vnwholsom in working, the rose is pleasant
in sense, what is it in virtue?


Hum. It has an odor most pleasant, and has virtue to cool and bind. The
virtue (...) Roses.
The water is good to make Manus Christi, and many other goodly cordials, Roses
and vinegar applied unto the forehead, do bring sleep: conserve of Roses,
have virtue to quench burning choler, and to stay the rage of a hot fever,
Oil of Roses, Uineger, and the white of an egg beaten together, does not
only quench sacra ignis, but also bring a mad man into quietness, if his
foreheade be well anointed therewith, after the recept of Pills of Chochi,
in the time of the Pestilence, there is nothing more comfortable than the
savor of roses.


Ioh. What say thou of Sauerie?


Hum. It is hot and dry in the third degree, The virtue of Sauerie.
if the green herb be sodden in water or white wine and drunk, these be
his virtues to make the liver sort, to cleanse dropsies, cold coughes,
cleanses women's diseases, and separateth the dead child from the mother* as
Dioscorides and Galen says. Also Germander is not much unlike the virtue of
this herb.


Ioh. But for troubling of you, I would be glad to know your mind of Time, and
of a few other herbs.


Hum. It is vehement of heat with dryness in the third degree. The virtue of
Time.
Dioscorides says, if it be drunk with vinegar and salt, it purges fleugme,
sodden with honey or meide, it has virtue to cleanse the lunges, breast,
matrix, reins, and bladder, and kills worms.


Ioh. What say thou of Parsley and Saxifrage?


Hum. They have virtue to break the stone. Parslie is hot in the second
d^gree, The virtue of Parslie and Saxifrage.
and dry in the midst of the third. The seed drunk with white wine,
provoke ye menstrual terms, as Dioscorides says: also Smallage has the
like virtue.


Ioh. What is thy judgment of Liuerwort?


Hum. It has virtue to cleanse and cool. The virtue of Liuerwort.
Dioscorides says, it does heal the wounds of the liver, and quenches the
extreme heat thereof, tempred with honey, and eaten, does help a disease
called regius morbus, and pains of the thraote and lungs.


Ioh. What is Betonie?


Hum. They be of diverse kinds. The virtue of Betonie.
Leonardus Futchius does call the sweet Gilliflowers by the names of Betonie,
but the one seems to talk of that which is commonly known of the people,
called the land Betonie, which has the virtue to kill worms within the
belly, and helps the quartaine, cleanses the matrixe, and has the virtue
to heal the body within. If it be bruised, it is of great effect, if it be
sodden with wormwood in white wine to purge fleugme, and is hot in the first
degree, dry in the second.


Ioh. I have heard small commendations of Beetes.


Hum. They be of two kinds, The virtue of Beetes.
and be both praise worthy. Simeon Sethy, writes, that they be hot and dry
in the third degree, the white Beete is the best, they have virtue to cleanse,
as Niter has, but has evil juice. The juice of this herb with honey
applied into the Nose, do purge the head, it is a wholesome herb in pottage,
if it be well sodden, or else it is noisome to the stomach. If it be
perboyled and eaten with vinegar, it is good against the stopping of the liver.
Notwithstanding, the juice of this herb do stop the belly, being simply
taken.


Ioh. What is Maidenhaire?


Hum. It is an herb between hot and dry, The virtue of Maidenhaire.
if it be sodden in wine, it breaks the stone, it cleanses the Matrix,
brings down the secondes, as Dioscorides and Galen says, the best does grow
upon hard rocks.


Ioh. What is Melilot?


Hum. It has virtue to ripe, and is more hoter than cold, The virtue of
Melilot.
Mellilot, flax seed, Rose leaves, Campher, and woman's milk tempered
together, does make a goodly medicine against the hot inflammation of the eyes.
If this herb be drunk with Wine, it does mollify the hardness of the
stomach and liver, the most excellent plaster against the pains of the spleen
does Mesue describe, which is made of Melilot.


Ioh. Be pease and beans any thing beneficial to nature?


Hum. Beans be more groser and fuller of wind then pease be, The operation of
pease and beans.
and makes evil matter, except they be well sodden and buttred, and so
eaten, with the whitest and sweetest Onions that may be gotten. Because they
be hard of digestion: howbeeit, they do make fat, and partly cleanse, yet
they are not to be compared with tender white peason well sodden and buttered,
or else made in pottage with garden mints, and gross pepper, which have virtue
to cleanse the reins of the back and bladder. Lentilles be of the same
virtue. But Hutels and tares be melancholy.
Barlie being clean hulled and sodden with milk cleave water and sugar, makes
a very comfortable and wholesome pottage for hot choleric persons or young
people. And of this is much used in the north parts of England, and is called
big kele.


Ioh. What be the virtues of Leekes and roots of Radish, Turnips, Persneps,
Rapes or naues?


Hum. Leekes be evil, engender painful sleep: Leekes and their properties.
but eaten with honey, then they purge blood: but roots eaten raw, breeds
ill juice, therefore being first sodden, and the water cast away, and then
sodden with fat mutton, Of the virtues of Radish with other roots.
or tender fat biefe, those roots nourishes much. Rapes and Naues be
windy: Turnips, causes one to spitte easily that have corrupt stomachs, but
makes raw juice. Carets do expurse wind: Radish roots provoke urine, but
be very evil for fleugmaticke persons, having grief in their bones or
joints, and must be eaten in the beginning of the meal, as Galen says,
Galen de alimen.
but many do use them in the end of meals, and find ease, as sir Thomas
Eliot that worthy knight and learned man reports, in his book called The
Castle of health. And thus I conclude of those herbs and roots that I have
written upon. Herbs ingendereth melancholy.
Admonishing thee, that herbs, pulse and roots be all windy, engenderers of
Melancholy, and ingrossers of the blood, except Lettis, Bourage, and Purslain.
Therefore the gross binding together, and seething of herbs in brothes and
pottage, be more holsomer than the fine chopping of them.

Thus John I have declared unto thee, the virtues of certain herbs, which if
thou will follow, and observe my rules in them, I doubt not but thou shall
receive much profit thereby. I would have also taught thee some pretty ways
for distillation of waters, but am prevented therein, and I am glad thereof,
forasmuch as thou shall see very shortly, Vlstadius. Thesaurus Euonomii.
both Thesaurus Euonomi and Vlstadius, which be excellent learned men in the
science, wherein I am sure thou will much delight. For I ensure thee, the like
books never were set forth in our mother tongue, with the lively fashion of
the furnasses, and also of the Stillatories.


Ioh. What will digest or purge choler, fleugme and mela^cholie, provoke
sternutation, and stop flixes, tell me?


Hum. Things to digest choler.
Endive Purslein Poppie Sorrel Mercury Liuerwort Whey Tesants Tarmerindes The
four cold seeds of gourds and cucumbers Sanders Buttermilk or the milk which
comes of the pressing of chees
To purge choler.
Ma^na 6 drams Rubarbe two drams or 3, but put into infusio^ from v. to vii.
Pills of aloes Wild hops Syrrop of wormwood Syrrop of fumitorie Di^prunes.
The digester of phlegm.
Puliall Mints Bettonie Egrimonie Mugwort Honey Pepper Hysop Pimpernel Ieniper
beries Neppe Finkle Persely roots Smallage.
Purgers of fleugme.
Agaricke infused from two to five drams. Sticaus The myrabolanes of all the
kinds Polipody of the oak Centorie Horehound Maiden hair.
Good purgers of melancholy.
Eleberus Niger Capers Lapis Lazule Seen of Alexander Borage Hearts tongue Honey
sodden in sweet wine Sauorie Time Trosses of capers, of Coloquintida, and of
wormwood.
Good things to provoke urine.
Perslie Time Saxifrage Cassa Fistula Rams Radix The flesh of an Hare Pills
of Tycibenthen Maiden hair The berries of the Eglentine Broomeseede.
Comforters for the brain to smell upon.
Roses Uiolets Gilloflowers in Summer, but in Winter Cloves Spike Musk Amber
grace.
Things good to stop flixe.
Sinaber called dragons blood. Sloes or their decoction. Sinamom Bolearmoniak
Red wine Planton Olibanum Hard eggs. Hard cheese scraped into red wine, and
drink.
Things good to provoke sternutation or neesing.
Betony leaves Primrose roots moderatelye used Eleborus albus and Ginger.
Good comforters for the heart.
Musk Ambergrece Roses Pearls maces Diamuschi dulcis diambra. The flowers of
Rosemarie and Nutmegs. Spikenard Galanga.



Ioh. What be the virtue of Dates and Figs?


Hum. Seraphio says, that the dates which be preserved with sugar be good. Of
figs and dates.
The crude raw Date does califie the body, and does convert quickly into
choler it is not good for the heads of the hot people, ill for the throat,
Rasis in 3 alman. Hali^ in 5. Theori. Ra. Moses
and stops the liver, and makes the teeth rotten, but if they be clean
pilled and the inward rind taken away, they do greatly nourish and restore,
being sodden in stewed br^ath they be of diverse kinds in quantity and
quality, but generally hot and moist in the second degree. Hi. 2. can. c. ^0^.
Figs (as Hipocrates says) the best be white, the second be red, the third be
black, the ripest be the best, and amongst all fruits does most nourish,
provoke sweat, because it does purge ye superfluity of humors through the
skin, it does engender lice, they be hot in the first degree, and the new figs
be moist in the second, the seeds and the skin of the fig, be not greatly
commended: Figs and Almonds eaten of a fasting stomach, be very wholesome to
make the way of good digestion, but best if they be eaten with nuts. Figs, and
herb grace stamped together, be very wholesome to be eaten against the
pestilence: Roasted figs beaten together, and hot applied upon the pestilent
sore, does draw, mollify, and make ripe the sore. And to the lungs, liver and
stomach, figs be very comfortable, Galen de alimen. The operation of pears.
as Galen says.


Ioh. What be pears?


Hum. They be of diverse kinds, heavier than Apples, not good until they be
very ripe, unless they be tenderly roasted or baked, Black friars pear.
and eaten after meals. There is a kind of Pears growing in the city of
Norwich, called the black friars pear, very delicious and pleasant, and no
less profitable unto a hot stomach, as I heard it reported by a right
worshipful physician of the same city, called doctor Manfield, which said he
thought those Pears without all comparison, were the best that grew in any
part of England.


Ioh. What say thou of Apples?


Hum. Apples be very cold and windy, The operation of Apples.
hard to digest ingenderers of evil blood, hurtful to fleugmaticke people,
good to choleric stomachs, if they be through ripe, but best if they be
roasted or baked, and eaten with gross Pepper to bedwarde, they be of many
kinds, as the Costarde, the Greene-coate, the Pippen, the Queen apple, and so
forth. The distilled water of Apples, Campher, Uineger, and Milk, is a good
medicine to annoint the faces of children that have the small pockes: when the
said pockes be ripe, to keep their faces from eres: provided that the said
children have given them in their milk, saffron, or Methridatum, to expel the
venim and keep them from the air during the said sickness. A medicine for the
small pocks



Ioh. What be Peaches?


Hum. The leaves be hot, for if they be stamped playsterwise, and applied unto
the belly, they kill worms: The operation of Peaches.
The fruit is cold, and very good unto the stomach, they be good to be eaten
of them that have stinking breathes of hot causes: eaten of an empty stomach
which is Galens counsel, which says: if they be eaten after meat, they do
corrupt both in themselves and in the meats lately eaten: and they be binders
of the belly. But Quinces be most comfortable after meat, for they do enclose
the stomach, and do let vapors to ascend into the brain, and stops
vomets: they be wholesome for sick folks that be swelled in the bodies.
Eaten with the gross pouders of Gallanga, Spickanarde, Calamus, and Ginger,
and may be eaten before meat of the said sick patients, as well as after
meat. But much use of them, be not so profitable as delectable to the eaters
of them.


Ioh. What be Quinces?


Hum. The operation of Quines.
If thy stomach be very hot or moist, or thy belly laxatiue, then Quinces be
good to be eaten before meat, being roasted or eaten cold, and in this case
the tarter be the better, and Pomgranets be of the same virtue, Isaac in per.
^icu. di^.
as Isaac says: but eaten after meat they do enclose the stomach, and
moist the belly: they ought not to be used in common meats, the custom of them
hurts the sinews, but in the way of medicine they be excellent, and the
kores being taken out and preserved in Honey, or kept their musse lege, then
they may long continue to the use of rosting or baking, for they be perilous
to the stomach eaten raw. But preserved, they do mightily pruaile against
drunkenness, they be cold in the first degree, and dry in the beginning of the
second.


Ioh. What be Cherries?


Hum. The tarte Cherries undoubtedly be more wholesome than the sweet, and
eaten before meat, The operation of Cherries.
do mollify the belly, prepare digestion, and they be most excellent against
hot burning choler, they be good also after meat, and be of many kinds, as
black, red, and pale. The red Cherrie partly tarte, is best. Galen and Rasis,
greatly commend this fruit. Galen de alimen. Ra* lib. 23* cap.
In the country of Kent be growing great plenty of this fruit, So are there in
a town near unto Norwich called Ketreinham, this fruit is cold and moist in
the first degree.


Ioh. What be the virtues of grapes, rasins, prunes, barberies, oringes, and
medlers.


Hum. Hippocrates says, The goodness of Grapes.
that the white Grapes be better than the black, and wholsomer when they are
two or thee days gathered from the vine, then presently pulled from it: and if
they be sweet, Galen de alimen. 2. Rasis in 4. alman. ^0. cap.
they be partly nutratiue, and warm the body. And unto this agrees Galen and
Rasis, seeming to commend sweet grapes above dates, saying: although they be
not so warm, yet they do not stop the body, or make opilation as dates do.
They be wholesome to be eaten before meat, even as nuttes be good after fish.
Toward the South, and Southeast parts of the world, there be many growing in
diverse regions, whereof the wines be made. The farther from us, the hoter
wine: There be very good grapes growing here in England in many places, as
partly I have seen at Blaxhall in Suffolk, Blaxhall in Suffolk.
where sometime I was near kinsman unto the chiefest house of that town.
Raisins of the sun be very wholesome, and comfort digestion, but the stones and
rindes would be refused, and then they be good for the spleen and liver. Sweet
prunes bela^atine, but tart prunes be binding.
So be aligants. Rasis does much commend them, but undoubtedly the small rasins
be hurtful to the spleen. Prunes or damasens have virtue to relaxe the belly
if they be sweet and ripe, but they do norish very little, but quench choler,
Grapes, rasins and prunes, plumbs, and si^es, if they be sower, be all binders
of the belly, and so is the barberie called Oxiacantha, Oxiacantha. called the
Barbery.
and Oringes, except the said Oringes be condited with sugar, and then they be
good coolers against hot choler, whose rindes be hot and dry of nature. The
fruit called the Medler, Mespila. called the Medler.
is used for medicin and not for meat, and must be taken before meat, provoke
urine, and of nature is stipticke.


Ioh. What be Capers and Olives?


Hum. Fresh Capers be hot and dry in the second degree, The operation of Capers.
and eaten before meats do greatly comfort digestion, and be the best things
for the spleen, or to cleanse melancholy that can be taken. Preserved olifes in
salt eaten at the beginning of meals, do greatly fortify the stomach, and
relaxe the belly, cleanse the liver, and are hot and dry in the second degree.


Ioh. I beseech thee show thy opinion of the natures of some kind of flesh, and
first of the properties of beef.


Hum. I will not undertake to show mine opinion to thy request, but I will
declare the minds of some wise and learned men: and first of Simeon Sethi,
which says, Simeon Sethi. Ra. in lib. 2. ca. 3.
that the flesh of oxen that be young, do much nourish and make them strong
that be fed with them* but it brings melancholy, and melancholious diseases,
it is cold and dry of nature, and hard to digest, except it be of choleric
persons: but being tenderly sodden, it nourishes much. Much beef customably
eaten of idle persons, and nice folks that labor not, brings many diseases,
as Rasis says. Auicen in 2. lib. pri. cap. 15.
And as Auicen says, that the flesh of Oxen or Kine, be very gross,
ingendring ill iuise in ye body. Whereof oftentimes come to scabs, cankers,
biles, but unto hot, strong, choleric stomachs it is tolerable, and may be
used as we have the daily experience thereof. The broth wherein beef has
been sodden, Flixe.
is good to be supped half a pint every morning against the flixe of the
belly, and running forth of yellowe choler, if the said broth be tempered
with salt: mustard, Ueneger, or Garlic, etc. be commonly used for the sawces
to digest beef withal, for the said sawces do not only help disgestion,
but also defends the body from sundry inconveniences and diverse
sicknesses, as dropsies, quartains, leprosies, and such like. The gall of an
Ox or a Cow, Digestion. A medicine for the eyes.
distilled in the Month of June, and kept in a close Glass, does help to
cleanse the eyes from spots, if you put a drop of this water with a fether
into your eyes, when ye go to bed. The mylt of a Bull dried, and the powder
thereof drunk with red wine, will stop the bloody flixe. Light powdered
young beef, is better than either fresh or much powdered. In specially those
Cattle that be fed in fair and dry Pastures, and not in stinking fennes.

The great learned man Gesnerus, Conradus Gesnerus.
in his description of beasts, does write more of the virtues of Bulls,
Oxen, Kine, and Calves, than any other has done. And thus to conclude, the
flesh of the male beasts, is more better than the Female, and the gelded
beasts be more commodious to nature, than any of them. And the young flesh more
commendable than the old, for it is more moist, and a friend to the blood,
Hali. in. 5. The. ca. 4.
as Haliabas says, Roasted flesh does nourish the body much, for it is warm
and moist. Baked meats be very dry: Clean boiled meats, with wholesome herbs
and fruits, be excellent to comfort the body, if they be nutramentall flesh.
Calves flesh do greatly nourish and make good blood.


Ioh. Thou have said well of beef, but what goodness may be reported of
porke? I think very little or nothing.


Hum. There be many goodly commodities in the flesh of Bores, gelded swine and
pigges, for they be good for man's nature.


Ioh. For man's nature? that is marvel: The description of swine.
For how can those be good for man's nature, which be so vile of their own
nature? Their foul feeding of most stinking filth and carrion. The noisome
wallowing in the mire and dirt, the eating of their own pigges, and oftentimes
pulling children out of the cradle for their dinners, if the good wife be not
at home. Who is able to behold such noisome spirits or helhounds? Did not
almighty God command the Jews to eat none of them? and the Mahomets at this
day will kill that man that eats of their flesh, why should we then commend
them? for they are most vile.


Hum. All the ancient and wisest physicians that ever were in this world,
Horiba Corona
did all consent, that of al flesh, the flesh of young gelded swine, partly
salted or powdered, was ever a meat of the best nourishing moisture, and
colder than other flesh, for Isaac says, it is flesh very moist, Isacke
Galen in sec. comp. Cap. 2.
except it be the flesh of lambs, as Galen reports. Yet it is not good to
every complexion, nor every age, but unto youth and middle age. Whereas thou
have spoken against the vile nature of swine, calling them unreasonable, thou
do use more words than wit: for there is no beast that may be called
reasonable but man only. Beasts have no reason
And whereas God did prohibit the Jews to eat swines flesh, it was a figure
to abstain from unclean things: which I leave to the Theologians. The
Mahumites abhor swines flesh, because their drunken false prophet, and Psewdo
Apostle was torn and rent in pieces with swine, being drunken and fallen in
the mire. So the one must give credence to time, and to learned Physicians. The
blood of swine does nourish much, as it is seen in Puddings made with great
Otemeale, Puddings of (...).
sweet sewet, and Fennel or Annis seeds. Pigges be very moist, therefore
Sage, Pepper and Salt do dry up the superfluous humors of them, when they
be roasted. They be not wholesome to be eaten before they be three weeks old.
The Tripes and Guts be wholsomer, Ofswine.
and do nourish better than any other beasts guts, or in-meates. Bacon is
very hard of digestion, and much discommended, and is hurtful. Only unto a
hot choleric laboring body, the flesh of a Bore is more wholesomer than
the flesh of any Sow. The brains of a Bore, and his stones, or any part of
them stamped together, and laid warm upon a pestilente sore, in the manner of
a plaster, A plaster.
it will break it incontinent. Swines grease is very cold, and good to
annoint burning hot places of the body, or a disease called saint An tonies
fire: and thus much have I spoken of swine.


Ioh. I pray you tell me of the flesh of the Rams, Weathers, and Lambs, and
how profitable they are to man's nature.


Hum. Simeon Sethi says, Lambs flesh is partly warm, Simeon Sethi.
but superfluous moist, and evil for fleugmaticke persons, and does much
harm to them that have the dropsy, boneache, or a disease called Epiolus,
which is spi^ting of fleugme like glass. Therefore if lambs flesh were
sodden, as it is roasted, it would bring many diseases unto the body, without
it were sodden with wine, and some hot Groceries, herbs, or roots. When a
Wether is two years old, which is fed upon a good ground, the flesh thereof
shall be temperate and nourish much. Hippocrates says, Hip. in 2. pri. doc.
cap. 15.
that the lamb of a year old does nourish much. Galen seems not greatly
to commend Mutton, but that which is tender, sweet and not old, is very
profitable, as experience and custom does daily teach us. The dung, tallow and
wool, be very profitable in medicines, as Plini says: And Conradus
Gesnerus, de animalibus, De ali. lib tertio. 3.
and Galen in his third book de alimentis.


Io. What is the flesh of goats or kids?


Hum. They be beasts very hurtful unto young trees and plants: but Simeon Sethi
says, that kids flesh is of easy digestion, in health and sickness, they be
very good meat. They be dry of nature. Hippocrates says It behoneth that
the conseruers and keepers of health, in ter 12. doc. secum. Capi. 7.
do study that his meat be such as the flesh of kids, young calves that be
sucking, and lambs of one year old. For they be good for them that be si^ke,
or have evil complexions. Hali in quincte theori. Cadit. 2.
Haliabas does say, that the flesh of Kiddes do engender good blood, and is
not so fleugmaticke, waterie, and moist, as the flesh of Lambs. They remain
Kiddes for six Months, and afterward come into a grosser and hotter nature,
and be called Goats. The flesh of them that be geld^d is wholesome to eat, the
lungs of them eaten before a man do drink, does defend him that day from
drunkenness, as I have read in the reports of learned men. But the flesh of
the old he or male Goats be ill, and engender the Agues or Fevers. If the
urine of Goats be distilled in May with Sorrel, A good medicine.
the water distilled is not hurtful nor noisome, but whom soever use to drink
thereof two drammes morning and evening, it will preserve him from the
pestilence. The milk of Goats I will describe in the place of milk.


Ioh. What is the flesh of red and fallow Dear?


Hum. More pleasant to some, than profitable to many, as appears once a year
in the corn fields, the more it is to be lamented. Hippocrates. Simeon Sethie.
Hipocrates and Simeon Sethi, do plainly affirm the flesh of them to
engender evil iuise and Melancholy, cold diseases, and quartaines, the flesh
of Winter Dear, do less hurt the body, Rasis. ala. Cap. 3
than that which is eaten in Summer. For in Winter man's digestion is more
stronger, and the inward parts of the body warmer, and may easilier consume
gross meats than in Summer, as we see by experience. In cold weather and
frostes healthful people be most hungriest. The lungs of a Dear sodden in
Barlie water, and taken forth and stamped with Penedice and Honnie, of equal
quantity to the said lunges, and eaten in morninges, does greatly help
old coughes, and dryness in the lunges. There be many goodly virtues of
their horns, bones, blood, and tallowe.


Ioh. Auicen in 2. Can. cap. 146.
What is the properties of hares and conies flesh?


Hum. Auicen says, the flesh of Hares be hot and dry, Auicen in 2. Can.
cap. 46.
ingenderers of Melancholy, not praised in Physic for meat, but rather for
medicine. For in deed, if a hare be dried in the Month of March in an Oven or
Furnace, and beaten into powder, and kept close and drunken in mornings in
Bear, Ale, or white Wine: it will break the stone in the bladder, if the
paciente be not old. If childrens gummes be anointed with the brains of an
Hare, their teeth will easily come forth and grow. A medicine for bloody eyes.
The gall of an Hare mingled with clean honey, does cleanse waterie eyes, or
read bloody eyes. The flesh of Hares must be tenderly roasted, and well larded
and spiced, because of the grosnesse, but it is better sodden. The flesh of
Conies are better than hares flesh and easier of disgestion. But rabbets be
holsomer. And thus to conclude of Conneis, experience teaches us that they are
good, they be cold and dry of nature, and small ^^^tion is made of them,
among the ancient physicians, as Galen says. Galen in 3. de ali. cap. 1.
I need not to speak long of every kind of beasts as some of the beasts that
be in Hiberia like little Hares which be called conies.


Ioh. If the old and ignorant men of Connyes, which were seen in the nature
of many other beasts, that had dwelte in diverse places of England they should
have known them right well: and perhaps received of them as small pleasure, as
many husband men have found profit by them in their Corn. Now thou have well
satisfied me of the four footed beasts, which commonly English men fedeth
upon. Now I pray thee tell me, some of the virtues of fowls and first of
Cocks, Capons and Hens.


Hum. Auenz. lib. pri.
Chickens of Hens, says Auenzoar, is most commended, and most laudable of
any flesh, and nourishes good blood. It is light of disgestion, and does
comfort the appetite, cock chickens: be better then the hens the capon is
better than the Cock, they do augment good blood and seed, as Rafis
reports, Rafis in lib. 5. Astoris.
and experience proves in men, both whole and sick. An old Cock which is
well beaten after his feathers be pulled off until he be all bloody, and then
cut off his head and draw him, and seethe him in a close pot with fair
water, and white wine, Fenill roots, Burrage roots, Violet, Planten, Succory,
and Buglos leaves, Dates, Prunes, great Raysins, Maces, and sugar, and put in
the marow of a Calfe, and sanders. This is a most excellent broth to them that
be sick, weak, or consumed. The brains of hens, capons or chickins, be
wholesome to eat, to comfort the brain and memory. And thus to conclude these
foresaid fowls, be better for idle folks that labor not, then for them that
use exercise or travel, to whom gross meats are more profitable.


John. What are the properties of Geese?


Hum. Wild geese and tame, their flesh be very gross and hard of digestion,
as Auicen says: Auicen. in 2. Cano. Cap. 46.
The flesh of great fowls and of geese, be slow and hard of disgestion: for
their humiditie, they do bread fevers quickly, but their goslings or young
geese, being fat, are good and much commended in meats. And Galen says:
that the flesh of fowls be better then the flesh of beasts. Gal. in lib. 3.
de aliment.


Of great foul But undoubtedly goose, malard, pecocke, swanne, and every
foul haueing a long neck, be all hard of disgestion, and of no good
complexions. But if geese be well roasted and stopped with salt, sage, pepper,
and onions, they will not hurt the eaters thereof. There be great geese in
Scotland, which breeds upon place called the Basse. There be also Bernacles,
which have a strange generation as Gesnerus says: Gesnerus.
and as the people of the North parts of Scotland knows, and because it
should seem incredible to many I will give no occasion to any, either to
mock or to marvel. And thus I give warning to them which love their health,
to have these foresaid fowls somewhat poudred or stopped with salt, all the
night, before they be roasted.


Ioh. I pray thee tell me of the flesh of Duckes?


Hum. They be the hotest of all domistical, or yard fowls, and unclean of
feeding: notwithstanding, though it be ^ard of disgestion and marvelous hot,
yet it does greatly norrish the body and makes it fat. Hipocrates says:
they that be fed in puddels and foul places, Hip. in 2. can. ca. 46.
be h^rtfull: but they that be fed in houses, pens or coopes, Isack. in
vni. ca. 16.
be nutratiue, but yet gross, as Isack says.


Ioh. What be Pigions, Turtles, or Doves?


Hum. The flesh of Turtles be marvelous good, Auicen in can. de ca.
and equal to the best as Auicen says: They be best when they be young and
wholesome for flegmaticke people. Simeon Sithy says: the house dove is hoter
then the field dove, and does engender gross blood. The common eating of them
is ill for chollericke persons with red faces, for fear of Leprosy: therefore
cut off the feet, wings, and head, of your Pigions or Doves, for their blood
is that which is so venomous they be best in the spring time, and harvest. And
Isack says because they are so lightly converted into choler: Isaac. in lib.
di^ta. cap. 16.
they did command in the old time, that they should be eaten with sharp
Uineger, P^rslein, Coucombers, or Sitron, Roosted Pigions be best. Roasted
pigeons be ve^t.
The blood that comes out of the right wing, dropped into ones eye, does
mightily help the eye, if it swells or pricketh. And thus much have I spoken
of Pigions or Doves.


Ioh. What is the flesh of Pecockes?


Hum. Simon Sithy says: it is raw flesh, and hard of disgestion unless it be
very fat. But if it be fat, Hali. in 5. Retho. cap. 23.
it helps the plurisie. Haliabas says* that both swans. Cranes, Pecockes
(...) any great fowls, must after they be killed, be hanged up by the necks,
two or three days, with a stone weying at their feet, as the weather will
serve, and then dressed and eaten. Provided that good Wine be drunken after
them.


John. What is the flesh of cranes?


Humfrey Simeon Sethi.
Simeon Sethi says: their flesh is hot and dry, the young are good, but the
old does increase melancholy, they do engender seed of generation, and
being tenderly roasted, does help to clear the voice, and cleanse the pipe of
the lungs.


John. What is swanne?


Hum. Every gross foul is chollericke, hard of disgestion: the signets be
better than the old swans, if their galantines be well made, it helps to
digest their flesh.


John What is the flesh of herons, bittors, and shouellers?


Humfrey These fowls be fishers, and be very raw, and fleugmaticke, like
unto the meat whereof they are fed: the young be best, and ought to be
eaten with pepper, synnamom, sugar and ginger, and drink wine after them for
good digestion: and thus do for all water fowls.


John What be partriches, fesants, quails, larkes, sparrowes, plouer, and
black birds.


Hum. Partriches does bind the belly, and does nourish much. Auicen. Rasis in
3. al^. c. 10.
The cocks be better than the hen birds, they do dry up fleugme and
corruption in the stomach: a fesant is the best of all flesh, for his
sweetenes is equal unto the capon or partrich, but he is somewhat drier. And
Rasis says fesants flesh is good for them that have the fever ethike, Ra. in
lib. 4. affo.
for it is not only a meat, but a medicine, and does cleanse corrupt humors
in the stomach. Quails although they be eaten of many, yet they are not to
be commended, for they do engender agues, and be evil for the falling
sickness. For as Conciliatur says: of all fowls that be used for meats
it is the worst. Dioscorides says that larkes roasted, be wholesome to be
eaten of them that be troubled with the chollicke. Black birds taken in the
time of frost, The properties of small birds.
be wholesome and good of disgestion: the dung of black birds tempered with
vinegar, and applied unto any place that has the black morphew, or black
leprosy, ofttimes anointed with a sponge helps them. The flesh of plouers
ingenders melancholy: sparrowes be hot, and provoke lust: Pliny does
describe their properties the brains be the best part of them. Woodcockes be
of good disgestion and temperate to feed upon. All small birds of the field,
as Robbin redbre^^, Li^ettes, Finches, red Sparrowes, Gold w^nges, and such
like, if they be fat, they be marvelous good, and do greatly comfort nature,
either roasted or boiled, and thus do I conclude with thee of birds.


Ioh* I Heartily thank thee, gentle master Humfrey: for thy pains taking in
these thy rules unto me, concerning the proper use of beasts, and fowls in
meats. I would be glad to know the virtues of some fishes.


Hum. In many Islands of this world, nere adjacent unto the O^ient seas, the
people live there, most chiefly by fishes, and be right strong and sound people
of complexion, as Aristotle says: Consuetudo est tanquam altera natura,
Aristo. in pr^ble.
Custom is like unto another nature: but because I speak of fish, I will
divide them in three parts. First of the fishes of the sea, secondly the fish
of fresh running rivers, Of sea fish.
thirdly of the fishes in pooles and standing waters. The Sea has many gross
and fat fishes, which be noisome to the stomach, but the smaller kind of
fi^^es that feed about rocks and clear stony places, be more drier and less
of moistnes, then the fresh water fishes, and does engender less phlegm and
wind, by the reason of their salt feeding as Galen says: Galen de ^ue^.
they be the best fishes that feed in the pure Sea: and chiefest of all fishes
for the use of mankind. But Haliabas says: new fishes lately taken, are
cold and moist, and flegmaticke, but least of all the sea fish. Fishes that
swim in fresh clear Rivers, or stony places, where as the water is sweet,
being fishes that bear scales, be marvelous good. If they feed near unto
places where much filth is daily cast out, there the fish is very corrupt and
unwholesome, as the said Haliabas says: Fishes that do feed in fennes,
marshes, diches, and muddy pooles be very unwholesome, and do corrupt the blood
they be gross and slymy, corrupt and windy. But those fishes that be fed in
fair ponds, wherein two running waters may ensue, and whereas sweet herbs,
roots, weeds that grow about the banks, Best feeding for fish.
does feed the fishes those fishes be holsom. Galen says: Fish that is white
scaled, hard, as pearches, cheuens, ruffes, carpes, breames, roches, troutes,
etc. be all good. But vnscaled fishes, as eeles, tenches, lampries, and such
like be dangerous, unless they be well baked or roasted, and eaten with pepper,
ginger and vinegar: To labor soon after the eating of fish is hurtful. Galen.
And note this, that it is not wholesome traveling, or laboring, immediately
after the eating of fish, for it does greatly corrupt the stomach, and as
Galen says: the nourishments of flesh is better than the nourishments of
fish. And thus much generally I have spoken of fish.


John. And thus it seems by thy words, that great fish that be deuourers in
sea, Fat fish be gross food.
as Seal and Porpois, and such like, be unwholesome, and that the smaller
fishes, as codlings, whitings, plaices, smeltes, buttes, solles, pike, perch,
breame, roch, carpe, and such as do feed in clean stony waters: thou say
they be wholesome: Eeles, lampries, and other muddy fishes, thou do not
greatly commend. There be some kinds of fish soft and hard, which be the best?


Humfrey. If fish be soft, the eldest fish is the best: If fish be hard, the
youngest is best, for it is either soft or hard. The electing of fish.
Of hard fish take the smallest, of soft fish take the greatest: provided that
your fish be not very slimy: Auicen. cap. de piscibus.
thus says Auicen in his book of fishes.


John. I pray thee tell me some thing of shell fishes.


Hum. Crauises and crabbes be very good fishes, Crauises and crabs.
the meat of them does help the lungs, but they be hurtful for the bladder,
yet they will engender seed. If crabbes of the fresh water be sodden in pure
green oil olive: this oil dropped into the ear luke warm, does heal hot
burning obstructions, and stopping matter that hinders the hearing. As for
lempetes, cockles, scallaps, Galen in libra d^ alimento.
as Galen says: they be hard of disgestion, muscles and oisters would be
well boiled, roasted, or baked with onions, wine, butter, sugar, ginger, and
pepper, or else they be very windy and fleugmatike. Chollericke stomachs
may well digest raw oisters, but they have cast many a one away.


John. What is the virtue of oil?


Hum. Green oil of olives, is the mother of all oiles, which does draw into
her own nature the virtues of herbs, buddes, flowers, fruits, and roots.
Sweet sallet oil is wholesome to digest cold herbs, and sallets, tempered
with sharp vinegar and sugar. New oil does moist, and warm the stomach, but
old oil corrupts the stomach, and cleaves to the lungs, and makes one
hoarse. Oil of roses and sharp vinegar, tempered together, is good to anoint
the foreheades of them that are troubled with extreme heat or fransie, so that
Buglos be sodden in their posset ale, or else drink the sirops of Endive or
Buglosse. There be many goodly virtues in compounded oiles, both to callisie
and make hot. And also to cool the body when it is extreme hot, as the
great learned man John Meiua, has described in his Antidotarii.


John. Will thou be so good as to tell me the properties of water?


Hum. Water is one of the four elements, more lighter than earth, heavier
than fire and air. Galli. 3. deuic. in ^uili. 1. fen. 2.
But this water the which is here amongst us in Rivers, pondes, springs,
floods, and seas be no pure waters, What kind of waters are best.
for they be mingled with sundry aires, corruptions, grosenesse, and saltnes,
notwithstanding in all our meats and drinks water is used, and amongst all
living creatures can not be sorborne, both man, beast, fish, foul, herb, and
grass. Auic. lib. 1. fen. 3. de dispositionibus aquarum.
And (as Auicen says) the clay water is pure, for clay cleanses the water,
and is better than water that runs over gravel, or stones, so that it be
pure clay, void of corruption. Also waters running toward the east, be pure,
coming out of hard stony rocks, and a pint of that water is lighter than a
pint of the standing water of wells or pooles. The lighter the water, the
better it is. Also waters that are put in wine, etc. ought first to be sodden
ere it be occupied cold, and so the fire does cleanse it from corruption.
Standing waters, and water running near unto cities and towns, or marish
ground, woods, and fennes be ever full of corruption, because there is so much
filth in them of carrions and rotten dung, etc. Ice and snow waters be very
gross, and be hurtefull to the bodies of men and beasts. To drink cold water
is evil, for it will stop the body, and engender melancholy. Salt water
helps a man from scabbes, itch, and moist humors, it kills lice, and
wastes blood between the skin and the flesh, but it is most hurtful to the
stomach, but the vapor and smoke of it is good for them that have the
dropsy.


Ioh. What is Vinegar?


Hum. Uineger is cold and dry, and is hurtful for them that be melancholy,
The properties of vinegar
but when it is drunk, or poured upon an outward wound stops the blood: it
also kills hot apostumations of erisipilus, it is an enemy to the sinews,
Uineger and brimstone sodden together, is good for the Gout to wash it withal.
Uineger tempered with oil Olive, or oil of Roses, and sodden with unwashed
woll, helps a disease called Soda in the head, applied warm unto the place,
it does help hot diseases in the head called Soda, it is good in sauce for all
warm and moist men. Uineger with clean clarified honey penidies and fair
water sodden together, does greatly help the pain in the throat or lunges, or
stopping of the wind, and quenches hot diseases. And sharp vinegar mingled
with salt, and put upon the biting of a dog, does heal it: and against poison
it is excellent, chiefly to drink a little thereof against the pestilence in a
morning.


John What virtue has our common salt?


Hum. Rasis says, salt is hot and dry, Rasis in 3. aim^. cap. 17.

The virtue of salt.


Dioscorides says, salt has virtue to stop, to scour, and mundifie, and of
that mind is Oribasius saying: salt is compounded of matter ab^^ersiue and
stiptik, which matters be both binding and driyng moist humors, and is good to
powder fat flesh, both biefe and porke, and other fat meat: for it has
virtue to dry up superfluous humors, as water and blood, etc. But it is not
good for lean bodies, or hot complexioned people, for the much use of it
makes the body choleric, appear aged, and to be angry. The very use of it
is only to season meats, but not to be meat. Much good salt is made here in
England, as at Witch. Hallond in Lincolneshire and in the Shires near unto
Newcastel.


Ioh. What is honey, or the virtue thereof?


Hum. Auerrois in 5.
Auerrois says, honey is hot and dry in the second degree, and does
cleanse very much, and is a medicinable meat most chiefliest for old men and
women. Simeon Sethi.
For it does warm them and convert them into good blood. It is not good for
choleric persons because of the heat and dryness. They do greatly err that
say honey is hot and moist: but if it be clarified from the wax and dross and
kept in a close vessel, there is nothing that is liquid upon the earth that
remains longer. And this precious jewel honey, has been evermore praised
above sugar, for it will conserve and keep any fruit, herb, rote, or any other
thing that is put into it an exceeding long time. Marvelous is the work of
God in honey, being a heavenly dew, that falls upon flowers and leaves as
Auicen says, Anen. in. 2. Cano. Cap. 504.
and is neither the juice of leaves nor fruit, but only the heavenly dew.
Whereunto the Bees come in due time, and do gather the said honey, and lay it
up in store in their curious builded houses, God has ordained the Bees to be
an example unto us, both for love and working in the commonwealth.
whereas they dwell together in most goodly order. O Bees bees, how much
happier are you then any wretched man, which dwells never together in unity
and peace, but in continual discord and disquietnesse, as Virgil Virgilius.
says, En quo discordia ciues produxerit miseroses: Behold what discord
wretched citizens have brought forth. But now to make an end of the most
excellent virtues of honey, it is good in the meats of them which be
fleugmaticke. Honey newly taken out of their combs, be partly laxatiue, but
clarified honey does bind and dry up fleugme, and keeps the bodies of
fleugmaticke and old persons from corruption. The best honey is gathered in the
Spring time, the second in Summer: but that which is gathered in Winter is ill
and hurtful. One part of honey, and some part of water sodden together until
the froth be all scummed off, and when it is cold kept in a close stone pot,
this drink (says Galen Galen de tuen. sanitate Libra 4.
is wholesome for Summer, cleanses the lungs, and preserves the body in
health. Oximel simplex and compositum are made with honey, and so are many more
things which are of great virtue. Sugar the which is called mel can, honny of
the reed, being clean, and not full of gross pannell, does cleanse, and is
not so hot as Bees honey, and does agree with the stomachs of cholerike
persons. Haliabus in. 5. ^heo. Capi. 27.
Haliabas says it moves not the stomach to drienesse, and that the clean
white sugar not adulbrated, does nourish more than honny. Of Rosewater,
Pearls, and Sugar is made a goodly comforter for the heart, called manus
Christi.


John. What is the property of milk?


Humfrey Simeon Sethi.
Simeon Sethi says, that milk is of three parts: whey, curdes, and cream.
Whey is wholesome for to drink in Summer, specially of cholerike persons, it
cleanses the body. Milk of fat beasts does nourish more than the lean
beasts, and the milk of young beasts is better than of the old. And the new
milk is wholesomer than that the which has stood in the air, Rafis in 3
alman. Capit. 15.
as Rafis says. And also those beasts that are fed in dry pastures amongst
herbs, grass and flowers, having convenient water, their milk is very good.
Milk in the beginning of Summer is very wholesome. Milk not good for foul
stomachs.
In Winter it is unwholesome for fleugmaticke persons, or them which have
corrupt and foul stomachs. For if the milk be sower, it does engender the
stone in the reins or bladder. Hip. in. li. de air. and aqua.
Cowes milk is the thickest milk, and unctious or full of butter. But the
best milk that helps against consumptions, is woman's milk: the next is
goats milk, which goats milk rather nourishes too much, if it be taken
commonly. Sheep milk is not very pleasant unto the stomach. And note this,
that Milk is not wholesome to them which have pains in the head or teeth. But
the people that be brought up with milk, be fair colored, and healthful
bodies.

Isaac says, if honny and a little salt be sodden in the milk, then it is
very wholesome, and is not windy nor flegmatike. If mintes, bourage leaves,
rosemary flowers, honny suckles, and alittle Suar be laid in a basin, and
covered with a fair linen cloth, and milk the said basin full through the
cloth, and then let it stand all the night. This is pleasant to drink in the
morning upon an empty stomach, two hours before any other meat, Galen de
alimen.
it cleanses the rage of hot burning choler: and thus I leave off milk.


John What is butter?


Humfrey The operation of butter and cheese.
Butter is hot and moist: fresh butter is used in many medicines. New made
butter meanly salted, is good with bread, flesh and fish, it helps the
lungs, and purges the drienesse of the throat, and helps coughes most
chiefliest if it be mingled with honey or sugar. It is good for young children
when their teeth does grow or ache. Butter milk if you crumme new white
bread into it, and suppe it off, there is no milk nourishes so much, goats
milk excepted. Cheese if it be new it is indifferently well commended, but
hard salt cheese does dry the body, and engendereth the stone, as Isaac and
Auicene do say, Isaac. in 5. doc. cap. 15. Auicen in secur. ^^pit. 128.
and many other Doctors more do rather discommend it than praise it. When as
pottes or stones be broken, if hard cheese be steeped in water and made
soft, and grownd upon a Painters stone, it will join the broken pottes or
stones together again. By this I gather, that cheese will engender the stone
before any other meats. Therefore cheese should be made in Summer when the
cream is not taken from the milk. And Bittonie, Saxifrage, and Parcely
chopped together, be wholesome for to be mingled amongst the curdes. And thus
I do conclude with Haliabas, that old cheese is unwholesome.


John What be eggs?


Humfrey Galen says in his book of Simples, that eggs are no part of the
fowls, but a portion of the thing from whence it came. Simeon Sethi writing of
the diversity of eggs says the first property is in their substance, and
the second is in their time, either new laid or old. The third is in the
manner of their rosting, potching, or seething. New laid eggs of hens
potched and supped upon an empty stomach, does cleanse the lungs and the
raines of the back. Hard eggs are greatly discommended, unless it be to
stop flixes, but it were better for to seethe eggs hard in vinegar, and then
undoubtedly it will dry up the flixe of the belly. Fried eggs be very
hurtful for chollericke people, and them which have the stone. Duckes and
geese eggs be gross and noisome, but partrich, feasants and hens eggs,
ingendreth good blood.


John. What is the property of wine?


Humfrey Hipp. in 2. assor.
Hipocrates says of a customable thing comes less hurt, whereof I gather,
that they that drink Wine customably with measure, it does profit them much,
and makes good disgestion. those people that use to drink wine seldom times,
be di^^^^perated. Auaro. in 6. colig. Rasis in libra, 26. co^. ca. 1.
White wine if it be clear, (...) wholesome to be drunk before mea^^^, for it
pearseth quickly to the blad^er: but and if it be drunk upon a full
stomach, it will rather make opilation and stopping of the meserates, because
it does swiftly drive food down, before nature has of himself disgested
it. And the nature of the white wine is of least warmenesse. The second wine is
pure Claret, of a clear Iacinct or yellowe color. This wine does greatly
nourish and warm the body, and it is a wholesome Wine with meat, and is good
for flegmatike folk, but very unwholesome for young children, or them which
have hot livers, or pains in their head, occasioned of hot vapors or
smoakes, for it is like unto fire, and flax. The third is black or deep red
wine, which is thick, a stopper of the belly, a corrupter of the blood, a
breeder of the stone, hurtful unto old men, and profitable to few men, except
they have the flixe.

And for the election of wine (says Auicen) that Wine is best that is
between new and old, clear, declining somewhat to red of good odor, Auicen
in 3. prim. ^. doc. ca. 8.
neither sharp nor sweet, but equal between two, for it has virtue not
only to make humors temperate, warm, and moiste, but also to expel evil
matter, the which corrupted the stomach and blood. In the Summer it ought to
be delayed with pure clear water, as Aristotle says in his Problemes. And
note this, that in dry years Wines are best and most wholesome, but in watery
years, the grapes be corrupted, which wine does bring to the body many evil
diseases, as dropsies, timpanes, flixes, reumes, winds and such like, Galen in
reg. acu.
as Galen says. And thus to conclude of wine, almighty God did ordain it
for the great comfort of mankind, to be taken moderatly, but to be drunken
with excess, The heat of excess in drinking.
it is a poison most venomous, it relaxeth the sinews, brings palsy,
falling sickness in cold persons, hot fevers, fransies, fighting, lechery,
and a consuming of the liver, to chollerycke persons. And generally there is no
credence to be given to drunkards, although they be mighty men. It makes men
like to monsters, with countinaunces, like unto burning coals: It dishonors
noble men, and beggereth poor men: and generally kills as many as be slain
in cruel battelles, the more it is to be lamented.


Ioh. What is beer or ale?


Hum. Ale does engendre gross humors in the body, but if it be made of good
barley mualt, and of wholsone water, and very well sodden, and stand five or
six days, until it be clear. It is very wholesome, especially for hot
choleric folks, having hot burning fevers. But if Ale be very sweet and
not well sodden in the brewing, it brings inflammation of wind and choler
into the belly: If it be very sower, it fretteth and nippeth the guts, and is
evil for the eyes. To them that be very flegmaticke, ale is very gross, but
to temperat bodies it increases blood: It is partly laxatiue, and provoke
urine. Clean brewed beer if it be not very strong, brewed with good hops,
cleanses the body from corruption, and is very wholesome for the liver, it is an
usual or common drink in most places of England, which indeed is hurt and
made worse with many rotten hops, or hoppes dried like dust which comes from
beyond the sea. But although there comes many good hoppes from thence, yet
it is known that the goodly stilles, and fruitful grounds of England, do
bring forth to man's use, as good hops as grows in any place of this world, as
by proof I know in many places of the country of Suffolk: Whereas they brewe
their beer with the hoppes that grows upon their own grounds: And thus to
conclude of ale and beer, they have no such virtue nor goodness as wine has,
and the sur fetes which be taken of them, through drunkenness, be worse then the
surfetes taken of wine. Know this, that to drink ale or beer of an empty
stomach moderatly hurts not, but does good. But if one be fasting, Auicen.
11. ter tra. ii. capitu. 8. Anero in com^n. Rasis in 4. alm. cap. 5.
hungry, or empty, and drink much wine, it will hurt the sinews, and brings
crampe, sharp agues, and palsies, as Auicen. Auerois and Rasis say.


Ioh. What is bread?


Hum. The best Bread is made of clean sweet wheat which grows in claie
ground, and makes but little branne when it is ground, light leauened, meanly
salted, and the bread to be baked in an oven not extremely hot, for burning of
the bread, nor les then mean h^t, for causing the bread to be heavy and raw,
the lighter the bread is, and the more full of holes, Auerrois in quint. Col.
it is the wholsomer, as Auerrois and Rasis says. And also bread must neither
be eaten new baked, nor very stale or old, Rasis in. 30. Alman cap. 3.
for the one causes dryness, thirst, and smoking into the head, troubling the
brains and eyes through the heat thereof: The other dries the body and
brings melancholy, humors, hurting memory. The best bread is that which is
of a day old, and the loves or manchets may neither be great nor little, but
mean, for the fire in small loves dries up the moistnes or virtue of the
bread, and in great loves it leaves rawnesse and grosnesse. Read Galen in the
properties of bread: Sodden bread, Galen. 1. aliment. Cap. 2.
which be called simnels or cracknelles, be very unwholesome, and hurts many
one: Rye bread is windy and hurtful to many, therefore it should be well
salted and baked with Annis seeds, and commonly crustes of bread be very dry
and burns, they do engender melancholy humors. Therefore in great men's
houses the bread is chipped and largelye pared and ordynarily is made in
brewesse, and sosse for dogs, which will help to feed a great number of
poor people, but that many be more affectionate to dogs then men: Barley
bread does cleanse, cool and make the body lean.


Ioh. What is rise?


Hum. There be many opinions in the virtue thereof, but I shall stay my self
with the judgment of Auicen: Auic. in 2. cap. 500.78.
Rise says he, is hot and dry and has virtue to stop the belly, it does
nourish much, if it be sodden with milk, but it ought to be steeped in water
a whole night before: if blanched Almondes be stamped and with Rosewater
streined into them, and sodden with cowes milk, it is very nutrimentall.


Ioh. What be almondes?


Hum. The bitter Almondes be hotter then the sweet Almondes. Dry Almondes be
hurtful, the milk of moist Almonds, wherein burning steel is quenched,
stops the flix: To eat almondes before meat, preserves against drunkenes.
Of walnuts.
Walnuts be wholesome when they be new, to be eaten after fish, for they hinder
engendring of fleugme. Simeon Sethi says they are hot in the first, and dry
in the second degree, not wholesome before meat, Plin. in lib. 22. cap. 8.
Pliny speaking of Metridatis the great king that Pompius, found of his own
hand writing, that two nuttes and two figs, and twenty rewe leaves stamped
together with a little salt, and eaten fasting, does defend a man both from
poison and pestilence that day. Of filberds.
Filberdes and hazle nuttes, be hard of disgestion, ill before meat, hurtful
to the head and lunges, if they be roasted and eaten with a little pepper, they
will help the running and distillation of rumes. Of chestnuts.
Chesnuttes if they be roasted and eaten with a little honey fasting, they help
the cough, if they be eaten raw, although they greatly nourrish the brdy, yet
they be hurtful for the spleen and fill the belly, full of wind. Of nutmegs.
Nutmegges be very good for cold persons, comfort the sight and memory,
Auicen. cap. de nuce.
as Auicen says: but without doubt Nutmegges do combust or burn sanguine
men, and dry up their blood: and thus much have I spoken shortly of the virtue
of nuttes.


Ioh. What be cloves, galangell, and Pepper?


Hum. They be hot and dry, and as Rasis says: Rasis in ^^. 4. (...)
do comfort cold stomachs: and make sweet breath, and is good in the meats
of them that have ill disgestion. Black pepper is hoter then long pepper, and
does mightily warm the body, the grosser it is eaten with fish or fruit,
Isaac in par^i di^^u^.
the better it provoke urine, it is hot and dry, in the fourth degree,
therefore they do err that say pepper is hot in the mouth and cold in the
stomach. Although pepper be good to them that use it well, yet unto
artificial women that have more beastlines then beuty and cannot be content
with their natural complexions, but would feign be fair: they eat pepper,
dried corn, and drink vinegar, with such like bagage, to dry up their blood,
A practice
and this is the very cause that a great, number though not all, fall into
weakness, green sickness, slinking breathes, and oftentimes sudden death.


John. What is sweet Callamus odoratus?


Hum. An excellent sweet root and profitable for men, if the poticaries keep
it not until it be rotten, it is hot and dry in the beginning to the mides
of the second degree, it has power to cleanse, to dry to waste al winds within
the body without hurt. Galen does greatly commend the savor of it. They that
drink of this root sodden in wine, shall have remedy of the white morphew,
and recover good colors. And this have I proved, it helps crampes and
sickness in the sinews, being drunk in wine, sodden with sage, it helps
the spleen, the liver and raines, and will cleanse the secret terms of women,
and augmenteth natural seed.


Ioh. What is ginger?


Hum. It is hot in the third degree and moist in the end of the first if it be
vncollered. Auerrois. in. 5. coll.
White and not rotten it is very good, most chiefly if it be conserved, and
green as Mesua says: it makes warm a cold stomach, and consumes winds,
helps evil disgestion, and makes meat go easily down into the stomach.


Ioh. What is Setwall?


Hum. Hot and dry in the second degree, and is good, Mesua in 4. distin.
if the powder thereof be drunk, is most of effect against the pestilence,
except Methridatum: It is good against poison, wind chollericke, and cold
passions of the heart, and does restrain vomites. The weight of eight grains
does suffice to be drunk in ale or wine upon an empty stomach.


John What is sinamon?


Humf. Dioscorides says there be many kinds of sinamon, but generally their
virtue is this, to help dropsies, winds, or stopping of the liver, and is
hot and dry in the third degree.


John What is Cassia Fistula, Seneca, and Rewbarb?


Humfrey Cassia Fistula, if the cane be heavy, and the Cassia within black
and shining, that is good Cassia, if this be drawn new out of the cane half
an ounce or more at one time, and mingled with sugar, and eaten of a fasting
stomach in the morning it has power to purge choler, to cleanse the raines
of the back it will fret and consume the stone, it purges very easily, and is
pleasant in taking, and may be taken of children, weak women, and sick men,
in the time of their fevers, the access of their fittes excepted. Reubarbe
does purge yellow choler by himself, two or three drammes may be taken or a
little more, so that there be a dram of Spikenard or Sinamon put unto it. In
Summer to drink it with whey, in Winter with white wine: but the clean
yellowe rubarbe sliced, and put into infusion all the night with whey, white
wine, or endive water, and streyne it in the morning, does greatly purge the
blood and liver: three or four drams with Spikenard a dram or more. Seeny
Alexandria, if it be sodden in the broth of a cock or a hen, does purge
the blood and melancholy, very gently and comfort the heart. One ounce of
the clean small leaves of seeny without cods or stalks, half a quarter of
one ounce of ginger, twelve cloves, finkle seed two drammes, or else two drams
of Sinamon, tartar, half a dram, beaten al together in powder: these do purge
the head mightily to be taken before supper, the weight of one dram in a little
white wine.


Ioh. I would be glad to learn the virtue of Aloes.


Hum. There be two kinds of Aloes, one is named Succo trina, which is like a
liver, clear, brittle, bitter, colored between red and yellow, this is best
for medicines. A little of this being tempered with Rose water, being put unto
the eyes, helps the dropping and watery eyes. Also it is put in many
excellent medicines laxatiue, as saffron, myrrh, aloes, mingled together. In
the form of pills, is the most excellent medicine against the pestilence, as
it is written in this book following. Honey and aloes mingled together, do
take away the marks of stripes and also does mundifie sores and ulcers, it
does cleanse the abundance of choler and fleugme from the stomach. It is not
good to be taken in Winter, for Auicen does forbid it, Auicen in li. de sim.
but in the spring time or harvest, the powder thereof. The weight of a french
crown mingled with the water of honey or mead, Aloc^ caablin.
and so drunk in the morning, it does cleanse both choler and fleugme. There
is another gross aloes which is good for horse tempred with ale, and ministered
as well to other great beasts as horses, the weight of half an ounce: and thus
much have I said of aloes: but if aloes be clean washed, it is the wholsomer,
many unwashed aloes will cause emerodes.


Ioh. Is the saffron that grows in England as good as that, that come from
the other side of the sea?


Hum. Our English honey, and saffron is b^tter than any that comes from any
other strange or foreign land. But to thy question of saffron, it has virtue
either in bread or pottage, to make the heart glad, it warmeth the body, it
preserves from dru^kennes, drunk in ale or wine provoke acts venerous,
iuduceth sleep, purges urine. Myrre, Pillule Ruff.
aloes and saffron, make an excellent pill against the pestilence, 2. penny
weight of saffron powder, roasted with the yolk of an egg very hard, and the
said yolke beaten in powder, 12 grains drink in mornings is good against the
pestilence: saffron, planten, and iuory sodden. The decoction drink helps
the yellow iaundeys, it is dry in the first degree, and has virtue to
restrain.


Ioh. We plain men in the country dwell far from great cities, our wives and
children be often sick* and at deaths door, we can not tell what shift to
make we have no acquaintance with the apothecaries, commonly we send for aqua
vitae or malmesey whatsoever our diseases be, these be our common medicines, or
else we send for a box of triacle: and when these medicines fail us, we cause a
great posset to be made, and drink up the drink: think thou these medicines
to be good?


Hum. For lack of medicine God helps the people oftentimes by miracle, or
else a great number of men should perish. But because the almighty God has
covered the whole face of the earth with many precious simples, whereof rich
co^positions be made, therefore be neither so rude nor barbarous to think
these medicines good that thou have rehearsed, for all diseases, although not
hurtful to some: but because many do receive more mischief than medicine in
counterfeite triacles, I shall rehearse unto thee what Valerius Cordus and
others do write upon the virtue of the precious triacle called Methridatum.


Ioh. I would be glad to hear of that precious triacle and his virtues.


Hum. This excellent triacle Methridatum is next in quality and virtue to
Theriaca, and so differ but little, but only Theriacha is a little hotter and
stronger against venom of snakes, adders, and serpents. It helps all pains
of the head of men or women if it be come of cold, most chiefly of mela^cholie
and fear. It helps megrime, falling sickness, and all pains of the forehead,
dropping of eyes. It helps toothake, pains of the mouth, cheeks, if it be
put in manner of a plaster, or else anoint the pained place. It helps pains
of the throat called Squinancie, and also cough, appoplexia, and passion of the
lunges, and many grievous dolors and pains within the body, drunk with the
decoction of the flowers of Pomgranats or Plantine, it helps and stops
flixes in the Ilias and long guts winds or collicke. The extention or cramps be
helped very much with this Methridatu^, drunken with stilled waters, palsies,
sickenesses in the midriffe, the liver, reins and bladder be cleansed thereby
it provoke the menstrual terms in women, being drunk with posset ale. If
Isop or Germander be sodden in the said ale, it is excellent against the
pestilence or poison, if it be drunk but a little quantity thereof, according
to the disease, strength or age of the person. It is very good against the
stone, or for women which have a new disease peraccidents called the green
sickness, there is nothing better against the biting of a mad dog, than to
drink of this, and to anoint the wound. If it be given in drink to any sick
body a little before the access or coming of the old fittes of quotidians,
tercians, or quarteins, so that it be drunk with wine temperately warmed. Of
the excellent triacle called Mithridatu^.
This Methridatum is a medicine of no small price: Democrates has a goodly
composition of it: an other excellent composition is of Cleopatre, as Galen
writes. An other, and the most excellent is the description of Andromachus,
physician unto king Nero, but the chief father of this act, was king
Mithridatus, the noble king of Ponthus, after whose name it is called.


Ioh. Indeed this is an excellent medicine, but I pray thee where shall I buy
it?


Hum. The blind (fellow John) do eat many a fly, and the plain meaning man
is often deceived. There is no trust in some of the Apothecaries, for although
the usurpation of quid pro quo is tolerable, for their Succidanes, yet to
abuse their simples or compounds, it is not only theft to rob simple men, but
also murder to kill the hurtlesse.


Ioh. Of late time we have been so afflicted with sundry sickenesses and
strange diseases, that in many places we could get no physicians to help us,
and when men be suddenly sick, 200. miles from London, Cambridge, or Oxford*
it is too late for the patient to send for help, being infected with the
pestilence. I pray thee tell me some good regiment for me and my family, if it
please God that it may take place.


Hum. I shall be glad forasmuch as thou have taken pains to hear me all this
while, to teach thee a pretty regiment for the pestilence.


Ioh. Read it fair and softly, and I will take my pen and write it.


Hum. Certainly the occasion of this most fearful sickness comes many
ways, as the change of the air from a good unto an evil quality, taking his
venomous effect of the vital spirits which incontinent with all speed
corrupts the spiritual blood. And suddenly (as it were) an unmerciful fire,
it quickly consumes the whole body oven unto death, unless the wholesome
medicine do prevent and come to the heart, before the pestilent humor. And
because it is a very strong sickness, it is requisite to have a strong curing
medicine. For weak things will not preuail against so strong a matter.
Therefore I pray you note these six sayings, as air, diet, sleep, or watch,
quietness, or trouble, and finally medicine. First, walk not in stinking mists,
Good air.
nor by corrupt marrish ground, nor in extreme hot weather, but in fair clear
air upon high ground in sweet fields or gardens, having fire in your chamber,
with sweet perfumes of the smoke of Olibanum, or Beniamen Frankensence, being
cold weather. And in hot weather, roses, willow branches sprinkled with
vinegar, and often shifting the chamber is wholesome, fleeing the South wind.
Secondly, diet, moderate eating meat of good digestion, as all that have pure
white flesh, both of beasts, and fowls, good bread of wheat, partly leauened.
Eat no raw herbs, purslein, Lettise, Young lettise
young Lettish, or sorrel, except with vinegar. Drink of clear thin wine, not
changed and use often times vinegar with your meats, and mingle not fish and
flesh together in your stomach, and to drink a tisant of barley water, rose
water, and sorrel water, between meals is good, eight spoonfuls at once.
Thirdly, beware you sleep not at noone, it brings many sicknesses, Noone
sleep
and gives place to the pestilence, and abateth memory. For as the marigold is
spread by the day, and closed by the night: even so is man of nature disposed,
although through custom otherwise altered unto great damage and hurt of body.
Eight hours sleep suffiseth well to nature, Sleep.
but every complexion has his proper qualities, to sleep upon the right side
is best, evil upon the left, and worse upon the back. Fourthly, use moderate
exercise and labor for the euacuation of the excrements, Exercise.
as swift going up hills, stretching forth arms and legs, lifting weightes
not very ponderous, for by labor the first and second digestion is made
perfect, and the body strengthened, and this is a mighty defense against the
pestilence, and many mo infirmities, whereas through idleness be engendered all
diseases both of the soul and body, whereof man is compounded and made.
Fifthly, above all earthly things, mirth is most excellent, Mirth.
and the best companion of life, putter away of all diseases: the contrary in
plague time brings on the pestilence, through painful melancholy, which
makes the body heavy and earthly. Company, music, honest gaming, or any
other virtuous exercise does help against heaviness of mind. Sixthly,
medicine, the party being changed in nature and condition, trembling or
burning, vomiting with extreme pain in the day, De signis pestilentialis.
cold in the night, and strange imaginations, etc. Apt to sleep, when these
signs do appear, give him medicine before xij. hours, or else it will be
his death. Take therefore with all speed, sorrel, one handful stamped with Rue,
Enulacampana, Oringe rindes, Citron seeds, the great thistlerootes, Geneper
berries, walnuts, clean picked, of each one ounce, stamp them all together,
then take pure sharp vinegar, a quarter of a pynt, as much buglesse water, as
much white wine, and temper your said receytes with these licours. Then put in
two ounces of pure Methridatum and romachi, which is an excellent triacle,
Methridatum Andromachi*
and two drams weight of the powder of pure Bolearmein, mingle them all
together in a very close vessel, and give the pacient a spoonefull* or more
next his heart, and etfsoones as much more, and let them that take this, not
sleep during twenty hours: or else take pure triacle and setwel mingled in
posset ale, made with white wine, wherein sorrel has boiled a good draught,
and let an expert Surgeon let the pacient blood upon the middle vein called
Mediana, Mediana Basilica.
or the heart vein: Basilica a good quantity according to the strength and
age of the pacient, except women with child, and children. For the retaining
the said blood, would all turn to venom and incurable poison: And note this,
that blood be let upon the same side that the sore does appear. If any
appear for many causes, and sleep not viij. hours after, and use this most
excellent pill oftentimes. Pillule pestilentialis, Ruffi.
Take pure aloes epatik, and myrre, well washed in clean water, or rose water,
of each 2. drams, and one dram of the powder of saffron, mingled with a little
sweet wine, and tempered in a very small vessel upon the coals until it be
partly thick, or else incorporate altogether in a mortar, then roll them up in
small round pills, use to swallow half a dram of these pills two times a week in
the pestilence time a mornings, three hours before meat. Another medicine:
tormentill gentian, setwell, of each one dram, spikenarde drams 2. nasticke
drams 3. bole armin drams 8. give 2. drams to the patient, or any that fear
the plague in the water of Scabeas, or Carduus Benedictus, then drink the
broth of a chicken, or pure wine to ripe the sore, roast a great onion, take
out the core, put in triacle, and warm apply it to the place, three or four
times renewed warm: and oil Olive, black soap, sour leaven, lilly roots,
of each like quantity boiled together, put in the inice of Rue, and make a
plaster, this will break the said sore: Capons grease, yolks of eggs, swines
grease, barlie flower, inseede in powder, incorporated together will make a good
healing plaster. Emplastrum diachilon, magnum descriptione filij Zacharia does
resolve and quench the hot ulcer. But in the time of the plague trust not
vrines.


FINIS.
The Epilogue.
HEre I have presented unto thee (gentle reader) a simple Government of health,
beseeching thee most heartily for to accept it as an argument of my good will,
as one unfeignedly that greatly do covet the good estate, and happy health of
mankind, which by daily casualties, surfets and age do decay, and fall into
many grievous and painful sicknesses. For which cause, although perhaps I
cannot in all points answer to thy request, in this little Regiment: yet I
shall desire thee to accept me among the fellowship of the botchers, which do
help to repair things that fall into ruin or decay: Even so be the
practitioners of physic, no makers of men, but when men do decay through
sickness, then the counsel of the Physician, and the virtue of medicin is not
to be refused, but most lovingly to be embraced, as a chief friend in the
time of adversity: if thou read this little book, and observe it, I trust
it will pay as much as it does promise. And because I am a young man, I would
not presume to take such a matter in hand, although the words be few, but
did consiliate and gather things together, which of my self I have practiced,
and also read and noted in the works of Hippocrates, Galen, Auicen, Pliny,
Haliabas, Auenzoer, Rasis, Dioscorides, Leonhardus Futchius, Conradus Gesnerus,
etc. And thus I leave thee to the company of this my little book, wishing
thee health, and all them that shall read it.

William Bullein.


