A new book Entitled the Government of Health, wherein is uttered many
notable Rules for man's preseruacion, with sundry symples and other matters,
no less fruiteful then profitable: colect out of many approved authors.
Reduced into the form of a Dialogue, for the better understanding of
thunlearned. Whereunto is added a sufferain Regiment against the pestilence.

By William Bulleyn.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneth saint
Martins. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

QVE TANT IE PVYS

T. H.

To the right vvorshypfull Sir Thomas Hilton, Knight, Baron of Hilton, and
Captain of the King and Queen's majesty's castle of Tinmoth. William Bulleyn,
wishes increase of worship and health.
QVINTVS Curcius, ye famous writer of the great Battayles that King Alexander,
the son of Phillippe of Macedone, had against the most noble, and rich King
of the Medes and Persians, called Darius (right worshipful sir) declares that
when one Philippe the Physician unto the said King Alexander, and his most
trusty subject. By sudden chance, the king fell sore sick, to the great
heaviness of all his royal army, at which time with all speade, this physician
did prepare a medicine, most excellent for his sovereign Lord, whom he so
dearly loved, to this end, that the great virtue thereof might prevent his
present sickness, and imenint danger: but malicious spite, that wretched
enemy which never slepeth but watches ever, to bring virtue and good fame
to destructio^^ Immediately before this gentle Philip did present him self
unto the king with his medicine: Letters were sent to king Alexander
co^teining, that the said Philip wa^ corrupted so with money from king Darius,
that he had (...) most deadly poison and incurable venyme into Alexanders
medicine. The king perusing the letters, kept them secret until he had
drunk his medicine, and immediately he took his physician by the hand, and
delivered him the letters, that he might read the^ having in him so great
confidence, that he did in no manner of case mistruste him. The cause why I have
alleged this most worthy prince king Alexander, and his excellent phisicio^
Philip, is to declare the great trust in the one, and the fidelity in the
other, not forgetting the shameless conditions of the flattryng Parisites,
which ever wrlketh with two faces in one hood, bearing fire in the one hand,
and water in the other: sowers of discord, reapers of mischief: which be
always enemies unto the disciples of Philippe, whose venomous stynges can not
hurt them, which ever have in store the precious Jewel of patience, and arm
them selves to do good to every good man, for the preservation of their lives,
by the true rules of the government of health, which here I am so bold to
present unto your worship. For where as there lacks government in a common
wealth, the people do eftsoon fall into ruin. The ships that lacks good
governance, oftentimes be cast away upon sands and rocks. And therefore
there is nothing under heaven, that has life, but if it lack good
government it will quickly fall into utter decaie. For like as the creature of
all things, have formed the bodies of al me^ into the goodliest shapes of
every living thing that ever was, or ever shall be: Eue^ so he has ordained for
man: herbs, fruits, roots, seeds, plants, gu^mes, oils, precious stones,
beasts, fowls, fishes, for the preservation of health, to be moderatly used
with discretion, which preserves the body in good estate, without whose
virtues the bodies can not live, for they be the noryshers of life. But
misusing or abusing them, brings to the body many diseases, as rumes,
catores, dropsies, impostumes, gowtes, flixes, opelations, vertigos, blyndnes,
ruptures, fransies, with many moonoysome diseases, which comes through the
corruption of meats and ill air. For what avails riches, honors, costly
buyldinges, fair apparel, with all the pomp of this world, and to be
honored of the people, and in the mean time to be eaten with worms in the
breaste or in the belly, consumed with agues, turmented with gowtes, sorenes,
boneache. etc. Well I think, an hole Codrus is better than a sick Mydas.
Codrus. Midas.
And seeing that to possess health is better then to govern gold, in so much
that health makes men more happier, stronger and quieter then all manner of
riches, lacking health: as example. Great princes, noble me^, men of great
substance, when they be wrapped and enclosed with many and sundry
sickenesses, and in dailye dangers of death, in their extreme pains and
passions, they do more greatly coueit one drope of health then a whole tun of
gold, criyng out for the help and counseile of the physician. Whom Jesus
Sirack, Cap. 38.
in his godly book did counsel allwyse men to honor, and whom the almghtie
God, did create and ordeine for the infirmity of mankind, and also medicine
for his help, and that no wise man should despise the^. Therefore yet again
(right worthy Knight) I shall most humbly desire you, to except the good will
of him, which wyssheth the years of your prosperous life and health, Nestor.
Galen. Arganto^.
to be equal to Nestor, Arganton, and Galen. Whose lives were long, healthful
and happy. And thus wyshing the daily increase of your worship, with continual
health, to gods pleasure: who ever be your guide and governor, Amen. Your
worships always to command.

William Bulleyn.

CVrsed be Bachus, the father of dronkenes,
Founder of lothelie lust and lechery,
Thy servants twain, be inte^perau^ce and idleness
Which gentle diet and sobernes do defy,
but sobernes, does live, when glotony does die.
Though ba^kettes does abound, eyes for to please,
Ouercharging the stomach, brings small ease.
THe abundance of wine, and lust of meat,
Feasting in the day, and riot in the night,
Inflameth the body with unnatural heat.
Corrupts the blood, and abateth the sight,
The synewes will relaxe, the Artears have no might
Apoploxia and Vertigo, will never fro the starte,
Until the vital blood, be killed in the heart.
O Happy is poverty, with good governance,
Which of fine fode has no great plenty,
Nature is suffised, with things suffisaunce
But poisoned, with floodes of superfluity,
Consider your food, in the time of poverty,
Example to Diogmes, sitting in his tonne,
Was well pleased, with reflexcion of the sun.
Beasts and fowls, of nature ravenous,
Infieldes and forestes, seek their adventure,
Upon their prays devouring most odious,
Consuming by glottonie, many a creature,
Yet each of them, according to their nature.
Can purge their Cruditie, with casting venomous
Man through replecion, is in danger parelous.
Man's nature does weke^, as this world does wast
As things engendered, corrupting by time,
Your life is present, but death makes haste,
Festinate by surfite, I tell you in ryme,
Example to the epicures, rotten into slime,
As gods word and storis, the treuth to tell,
That vnsatiat glottons shall fast in hell.
TRuly to wise men, this is the chief medicine,
Moderate diet, with temperat travel,
good air in sweet fields, when ye son does shine,
Fliyng stinging mistes, that the life will expel,
Digestion of stomach, they shall feel full well.
And to shake of anger and passions of the mind,
Thus quietness of conscience the happy man shall find
We know each one, and se by experience,
That men shall waste and physic fade,
What is man? when he is in most excellence,
^one fallen to duste, and sleapeth still in shad,
^lowers, leaves, and fruts, grows i^ somer most glad,
^ut from their branches, as it is daily seen,
^re beaten down with wind when they are fresh and grene
Son moan and stars, with heavenly influence,
The earth does garnishe with flowers fresh of hew,
The trees spring, with fruit of their benevolence,
^e rain norisheth, ye sweet felds with silver drops new
^^e lelie, read rose, and flowers pale and blewe.
^orue and cattelle and every thing temporal,
^e not these gods giftts? for these our lives mortal
But to know these creaturs is a gift most excellent
Complexions hot or cold, moist or dry,
And to whate nature they be convenient.
Hippocrates and Gallene, in their time did try.
Dioscorides and Auicen, with Plini would not lie.
Aristotle the philosopher in learning most excellent
So be many men now in this life present.
TO them I bend my knee with dew reverence,
As one unworthy their fotesteppes for to kiss,
Iacking no good will confessing my negligence,
Though many will judge, my intent amiss.
Pouring water in the sea, where aye plenty is.
But of your worship to whom I present this gift,
Except it better the^ nothing to make a simple shift.
I pray you read this government short I will it make
Between one called John, and Humfrey the wise,
When you are at leisure in your hand it take.
Though it lack eloquence, yet do it not despise,
I will assite no author, which have written lies.
And still will submit my self unto the learned judge
And forse not of the ignorant which at my traue^ grudge
Esse cupis sanus sit tibi parca manus,
Pone gule metus, etas vt sit tibi longa.
FINIS.
To the gentle Reader.
HEre I do present unto thee (gentle Reader) a simple Govern me^t of health,
beseching thee most heartely for to except it as an argument of my good will,
as one vnfaye^dly that greatly do couit the good ^ate and happy health of
mankind. Which by daily casualtis, surfaites and (...): do decay, and fall
into many gre^^^us and painful sickenesses. For which cause although perhaps
I can not in (...) points answer to thy request, in ^^is little regement: yet
I shall desire ^ee to except me among the feloweshyp of the botchers, which do
help to ^^paire things that fall into ruin or ^ecay. Even so be the
pratiscio^ers of ^^isicke, no makers of men, but when ^^en do decay through
sickness, ^^^en the counsel of the Physician, and (...) virtue of medicine,
is not to be re^^sed, but most lovingly to be embraced as a chief friend in
the time of a ^^uersitie, if thou read this little hoo^^ and observe it, I
trust it will pay much as it does promise. And because I am a young man I
would (...) presume to take such a matter in (...) although the words be
few, but (...) consiliat and gather things together which of my self I have
practiced and also read and noted in the works Hypocrates, Galen, Auicen,
Plinii, H^lyabas, VVenzoar, Rasis, Dioscorid Leonhardus Fucchius,
Conradus Gesnerus. etc. And thus I leave the to the company of this my little
book, wisshyng thee health, and all them that shall read it.

William Bulleyn.

The contents of this book of the government of health.
THe Epistle. Verses in Meter against surfeting, commending moderate diet.
Verses in the praise of the book. A preface to the Reader. Of the Epi^urs life.
Fo. i. ^^eliogabalus court fit for Epicures. Fo. ibid. ^aly gods plaged. Fo.
ii. ^utes of inordinate banquets. Fol. eod ^arietie of opinions, fo. iii (...)
objection against phi^^cke. fol. eod. ^^od, autour of phi. fo. eo ^^od ordained
herbs for ^^elth of men. fol. eod ^^he praise of phi. fo. iiii. ^diffinition
of phi. fo. v ^^ndry sects of phisiti^ns. fo. vi. Phisike divided into v.
parts. fol. vii The description of the.4 complexions. fo. ix The description
of the.4 Elements. fol. x Creatures co^pou^d of mo elements the^ one. fo. eo
Elements fel^e and not seen. fo. xi The.4. complexions divided into.4.
quarters of the year. fo. eod Metals and medicines be known. fol. xii The
bringing up of children. fo. xi^i^ Best time to provide for age. fol. xv The
description of the.4 humors. fol. xvi Men hot, but vvomens tongues hoater.
fo. xix Al things brings their apparel with him, man only except. fo. eod
A diffinicion of members. fo. xx Muskels and glandens flesh. fo. eod A part,
called by the name of the whole. fo. xxi What anotomy is. fo. eo Four
things conside red in the body of man. fol. eod Of openyng the veins, and
blud letting. fo. xxiii Against dropsy. fo. xxiiii Helping the Eme. fo. eo.
Thernia excellent Triacle. fol. eod Capers good. fo. xxv Miracle healpeth when
phisike fails. fo. eod Time for all things fo. 27 Of blood letting. fo. 28.
Usurpation. fo. xxviii Morning best to let blud fol. eod Of meats and medicin^
fo. eod Best time to purg. fol. 3^ Vomites and their profits. fo. eo^ Custom
in vomityng evil. fol. eo^ Of bathinges and their properties. fo. eo^
Discommodities by common hot houses. fo. xxx^ Before bathing use goo^^
ointments. fol. eo^ Perilous to bath upon a^ empty stomach. fo. eo^ Of nesynge.
fo. ^o^ Of suppositers. fol. eo^ Boxing good for the body. fo. eo^ Of
glisters. fol. eo^ Manipracticioners. fo. 3^ Beasts and birds use pr^ning.
etc. fol. eo^ Hot water vnholesom^ fol. xxxi^ Frication holesom. fo. e^^
Combing the head. fo. eo Cutting of here and paring nails. fo. eod
Consideration to be had in eating. fo. eod A cause why the soul de parts
from the body. fo. 34. To eat both flesh and fish together hurts the
flegmatike. fol. eod Diverse sorts of meats corruptes the body. fo. 35 Good
diet prolongeth life. fol. eod What meats does cause good blood. fol. 36 To go
to bed with empty stomach hurts. fo. eo An order in dieting. fo. 37 An order
for them that the sick. fo 38 Of syrrops and drinks. fol. eod (...) the
complexion is, so (...) desires. fol. 39 Moderate walk after meat profits.
fo. eod To healpe disgestion by diverse ways. fol. xl. A note which be the
most holesomest airs to dwell in. fo. xli What airs corrupts the blood.
fol. eod Corrupt air brings sundry diseases. fo. xlii Fervent prayer unto
god does mitigate his wrath fo. eod Svvete aires to be made in time of
sickness. fo. eo What sitation is best for an house. fol. 43 Pleasant people.
fo. eod Moderate exercise a souerain thing. fol. 44 What profit comes by
exercise. fo. eod Use makes labor easy. fol. eod Idleness the mother of
mischief. fo. 45 Of exercise before meat. fol. eod Of sleep and vvakinge. fo.
46 To sleep after dynner hurts. fo. eod To sleep on the right side best.
fo. 47 Lodging to be kept clean. fol. eod To sleep in felds is hurtful. fo.
48 The cause of the stone. fo. eod Remedies for the stone. fol. eod Of vrines
with the colors thereof, and the judgments. fol. 49 Contents in vrin be the
chief things to know diseases by. fo. 50 Of stoles and the judgment of the
colors thereof. fo. eod Of doctor diet, quiet, and meriman. fo. 51 Better to
lack riches the^ to want quietness and mirth. fo. eod Many apt similituds for
the same. fol. eod Pore men's pleasure. fo. 52 The torments of the mind. fo.
eod Thought kills many fol. eod Ire is a grievous passion Fol. 5^ Devils
incarnat. fol. eod A good face in a glass fo. eod Better to be spited the
pitied in some case. fo. e^^ The virtues of worm vvode. fol. 5^ The property
of Annsede. fo. eo^ The virtue of mouse-eare fo. 5^ Of chikvvede. fo. eo^ The
properties of sorell. fo. eod The properties of plantayne. fo. 57 Of camomel
and his property. fo. 58 Of sage and his property fol. eod Of Polipodio and
his property. fol. 59 Of horehounde and his properties. fol. eod Of veruen and
his properties. fol. 60 Of Revv or herb grace. fol. eod The properties of
Burnet. fol 61 The properties of Dandelion. fol. eod Of spinach. fol. 62 Of
covvcumbers. fo. eod Garlyke and his propertye. fol. 63 Of oynions. fol. eod
^^ettyse and his property fol. 64 Myntes and their propertyes. fol. 65 Fennel
and his properties. fol. 66 Isope and his operation. fol. eod Sencion and his
operaration. fol. eod Percelye and his operation. fol. 68 Mugvvorte and his
propertye. fol. eod Of Cabbage. Fo. ibid Philopendula and his operation. fo.
eod Agremoni and his operation. fol. eod Of Dragon. fol. eod The virtue of
violets. fo. e Of the white lillye and his operation. fol. 70 Centorye and of
his virtue. fol. eod Rosemary and of his. fo. eo Peniroyall and his operation.
fol. eod Of Mustarde and his operation. fol. eod The veru of buglas. fo. eo The
ver. of Basil. fol. eod Roses and his vert. fo. 73 Sauery and his ver. fo. eo
Time and his ver. fol. 74 Persely, saxifrage, and their operations. fo. eod
Lyuervvorte and his operation. fo. eod Bitonye and of his virtue. fol. eod
Betes and his virtue. fo. 75 Maydenheere and his virtue. fo. eod Melilot and
his vert. fo. 76 Peace and beans, and their operation. fol. eod Of hutles and
tares. fo. eo Lekes and their propertyes. fol. 77 Of Radyshe and other rotes.
fol. eod Herbs ingendreth melancholye. fol. eod Good things to digest
cholere. fo. eod To purge choler. fol. eod To digest fleum, fo. eod To purge
fleume. fo. e^d To purge melancholye. fo. eod To provoke urine. fo. eo
Co^fortes for the brains to smell on. Fo. ibid Things good to stop the
flixe. Fo. ibid Good things to provoke nesyng. Fo. ibi. Good things to
comfort the heart. Fo. 18. Fygges and dates. Fo. ibi Of Pears. Fo. ibid The
Friars pear. Fo. ibi Of Appels. Fo. ibi A medicine for the small pockes. Fo. ibi
Of peaches. Fo. ibi Of quinces. Fo. ibid Of Chyries. Fo. 83 Of Grapes. Fo. ibid
Svvete prunes laxatyue. Fo. 84 Of Barbaries and Med^ers. Fol. eodem Of Capers.
Fol. eodem Of Biefe. Fo. 85. Remedy for the flix. Fol. ibi How to healpe
Disgestion. Fo. ibid A medicine for the eyes. Eo. 87 Porke and his operation.
Fo. 87 The discriptio^ of swine Fo. ibi Beasts have no reason. Fo. ibid
Buddynges of Swine. Fol. 88. A plaster for. s. Anthonies fire. Fo. ibid Of
Rams, vveathers, and lambs. Fo. ibid Of Read and Falovve deares flesh. Fo.
89 Of hares and conyes, and their properties. Fo. 91 A medicine for bluddye
eyes. Fo. ibid Of Cocks, hens, and capons. Fo. ibi Of Geese. Fo. 92 The
properties of great Fowls. Fo. ibid Of the flesh of Duckes. Fol. 94 Of
Pygeons and Doves. Fo. ibidem Of the flesh of Pecocks. Fo. 95 Roasted Pygeons.
Fo. ibid Of the flesh of Cranes. Fo. ibid O^ Svvannes flesh. Fo. 9, Of
Herons, Bitters, or shouels. Fo. eod Of Partriches, Fesantes, and Quayles. etc.
Fo. eo The properties of small birds. Fo. 98 The operation of fishes. fol. eod
The best feadynge for fish. fol. 99 Sone labor after eating fish hurterh.
fol. 100 Fat fish gross. fol. eod The election of fish. fo. eo Crauises and
crabs. fo. eo Of oil. fol. 101 Of Water. fol. 102 What kind of water is
best. fol. eod Of Vinegar. fol. 103 Of common salt. fo. eod Of honye. fo. 104
Bees example to us. fo. 105 Of milk. fo. 106 Milk not good for full
stomachs. fol. eod Of Butter and Cheese. fo. 107 Of Eggs. fo. 108 Of Wine.
fol. 109 Heat of excess in drinking. fo. eod Of beer and ale. fo. 1^^ Bread
of all sorts. fo. 11^ Of Rysse. fol. 1^^ Of Almonds. fo. eo^ Of VValnuts. fol.
11^. Of phylberdes fo. eo^ Of Nutmegs. fo. eo^ Of Cloves, galingale, an^ Peper.
fo. eo^ A practice. fo. 1^^ Of Calamus. fo. eo^ Of triacle. fo. 12^ Of
Methridatum. fo. 1^^ Of Safron. Fo. 1^^ A regiment of the pesti^lence. fo. 12^
Good air. fo. eo^ None sleep. Fo. eo^ Of sleep. Fo. eo^ Exercise. Fo eo^ Of
mirth. Fo. 12^ Signs of the pestilenc^ Fo. eo^ Methridatum androm^^chi. Fo.
eo^
FINIS.
John. OF all pleasures and pastymes my think there is none like unto good
chere, The epicure desires too live al together in belly chere.
wh^t should man do but pass a way the time with ^ood fellows and make merry,
seeing ^e have but a time to live, cast away ^re, wherefore is meat and bellies
or^eined but the one to serve the other* ^e flesh that we daily increase is
our ^wn. Abstinence and fasting, is a mighty ^^emy and nothing pleasant to me,
^d be used of very few that love the^ ^lues, but only of beggars, and coue^us
sparers, which do spare much ^d spend little.


Humfrey. Know well your goodly expense of time, I wys it is no ^eruayle,
although you make ^ur belly your God: and boste of (...) You se that al lusty
reuilers, and ^ntinuall banquet makers, come to great estimacion, as example to
Varius Haelyogabalus, which was daily fed with many hundredth fisshes and
fowls, and was accompanied with many brothels, baudes, harlottes, and
glottons, and thus it does apeare by your abhorring virtue, that of right you
might have cleamed a great office in Haeliogabalus court, Heliogabalus court
^it for belly gods.
if you had been in those days, but you have an infinite number of your
conversation in these days, the more pity.


John. What good sir, I require not you^ counsel, I pray you be your own^
caruer, and give me leave to serve my fantasy. I will not charge you, you ar^
very ancient and grave, and I ar^ but young, we be no matchis.


Humfrey. GOod counsel is a treasure (...) wise me^, but a very trifle to^
fool, if thou had seen those things which I have seen, I know, thou
would not be such a man, nor thus spend thy time.


John. What haste thou seen, that I have not seen?


Humfrey. I Have seen many notable and grievous plages, which have fallen upon
greddy gluttons, as ^asting their substance, The just reward of belly gods.
disfor^ing their bodies, shorting their ^leasau^t days, and in this point ^o
conclude with thee, where as ^lotony remains, from thence (...) moderate diat
banyshed: and ^ose bellies that follow the lust ^f the eyes (in meats) in
youth, ^all lack the health of all their ^odies, in age if they live so long.


John. My think thou canste give good counsel, thou semest to be seen in
ph^^sicke. I pray thee is it so great hurt (...) delight in plenty of
bankettes?


Humfrey. SIr, The fruits of inordinate ba^quets.
if it will please you to be somewhat attentive, I will te^ you. It is ye very
grain whero^ co^mith stinking vomettes, save faces, dropsies, vertigo, palseis
obstructio^s, blindness, flixes, applexis, caters and rewmes. etc.


John. IS it true that you have said to me?


Humfrey. VVOulde to God daily ex^perience did not try i^ I do perfectly
know it. An^ once thou shall be a witness ther^ of, if thou come to age.


John. THen I beseech thee gentle fren^ Humfrey, declare to me, why the^ is
such division among phisicions?


Humfrey. THou see, Variety of opinions among me^.
among the Theologia^s there is much variety, and yet but one troth. Discordes
^e soon known of Musicians, and the Phisicions be not igno^aunt of the
general natures of ^inges. No division is although (...) do so apeare: for
rege^ts, place, ^ge, time, and the present state of ^ans nature must be
observed, not the old rules in all points. ^or man's nature is sore altered and
changed, into a vyler sort ^an it was wont to be.


John. ^Ome do report that men of great estimacio^, Anobie^tion against
physic.
say: what needs physic, ^is but an invention only for money, ^e see (say
they) who lives so well, as ^ey which never knew physic, and ^euill as these
pothicary men?


Humfrey. MAny men be more rich the^ wise, and more esteemed, for titles of
their honors and worships, then for any other virtue or cunning, such men in
some points be more ingratifull to natural remedies then dogs: which can
elect or choose their vomitting gras, or birds, which ca^ chose gravel or
stones for their casting. But to conclude with the^ in this matter. God the
author of physic.
Plini the great^ clarke, have a thousand reasons to prove them folishe that
will obiecte against Physic. The ines^imable goodness of god ordained herbs
for the healh of man.
And the author of al things did well fors^ and know, what was good for man's
nature, when he stretchi^ out so large a co^pas round about the earth with ye
noble planette^ and signs, and their courses, in^fluences and heavenly
qualities and garnisshed the earth wit^ fruits, herbs, flowers, leaves
grains, oils, gums, stones, for man's comfort and help, and ordained the
physician for to help man. Thus the almyghtye have done says Solomon. Solomon
And in recompense, God has not appointed the phisicions to be rayled upon,
Eccle. 36.
or despised, but honored and rewarded: yea, esteemed of princes. And seeing
good nature and wise men be on my side: I forse not of other men's fantasies,
with whom neither good wisdom, nor good nature is guide.


John. Why is phiscke of such great authority? or has it ben in estimation
among old fathers? May that be proved of thy part?


Humfrey. Yes that I can.


John. IF thou can bring in any reueren^ fathers that loved physic: I will
no^ despise, but greatly esteem it, and desyr^ counseile in demau^ding of a
few que^stions. The praise and exele^cie of physic.



Humfrey. Physic has been in so hye an estimacio^, that ye gentilles did all
consent, it came from the immortal gods. Moises.
The Hebrews did well know it, as Moises in the most ancient book, called
Genesis primo, does discribe the work of the almighty God: Adam.
of herbs, fruits, and plants, that Adam might teach the virtues of the^ to
his children. Jesus Sirack. cap. xxxviii.
Jesus Sirack which was endued with ye spirit of god, have left a laud
behind him greatly commendinge Physic amongst the divines of the Hebrews.
Diodoro. Test. Ovid. Metamor
Mercuri amongst the Egiptians, Ouide does greatly commend Apollo, the
inuenter of herbs, when they were almost out of ^emory, he revived their
vertes, and taught their nature to ^hers that followed him. After ^at came in
Aesculapius, which ^d many most excellent cures. and chiron, Chiron centaurus.
the instructor of Achil whose name can never die as ^^ge as the herb
centauri, gro^eth upon the earth, which is ^led after his name. Podalirius
Podalirius and ^echaon, Machao^.
were two brethren in (...) time of the battle of Troy, ^^iche were excellent
phisicio^s, ^^d be greatly commended of Ho^^re, who was more excellent the^
^^ppocrates, Hippocrates.
in the I Will of Coose: ^ose works will never die, for brought in physic, and
dige^^ it into fair books, for man's ^at health. Gallenus.
Then came Gallene, (...) unknown to all wise and ^^ned phisicions. I could
rehearse many moo, but this sha^ suffice to prove physic to be (...) great
authority among old^ fathers.


John. I Pray thee friend Humfrey, what physic: I would be glad to learn
some of thy knowledge, for thou have good order in talking, and seem to be
g^ded of authority. Therefore I am so that I have co^tended with thee: I pr^ y^
be not angry, with my former tal^


Humfrey. HIppocrates in his book of wi^des or blastes, Hippocrates in lib.
defla.
says yt phisic^ or medecin, is but a putting the body which it lacks, or
(...) king from the body things (...) perfluous. A diffinitio^ of physic.
And although o^ life be short, yet the art of (...) sick is long, because
great n^ bres of things be in it, and (...) quireth much study, labor a^
^actise, Hippocrates in primo
and first of all, it requi^th much conte^placion or know ^dge, in studying
good books, which is called Theoricha. Aphoris.
Seco^d^ the very effect of contempla^on or study, Theoricha.
is practica or actiua, which is doing of the things, at learning have
taught as ^pairing, amending, or preser^ing, the bodies of men, women and
children. etc.


John. It seems to be a goodly science.


Humfrey. HErodotus says: Herodotus
they greatly err that call it a science, for is an excellent art in doing of
no^^ble things. And science is but (...) know things. There is also this
excellent art sundry sects (...) phisicions, Emperici
some be called Em^^rici, who suppose that only ex^^rience does suffice, and
so by use and experience do take i^ hand to heal diseases, not knowing the
cause of the said diseas^ or sickness. Philinus
Philinus was one (...) that sect at the first beginning Then followed
Serapion, serapion.
and after that ye Apolonis. Apolonii.
And then cam^ Glaucius Menadotus Sextus. etc. Another kind of phisicions, be
called Methodici, Methodici.
which neither observe time, place, age, state, no^ condition: and think
them things of small profit, but only the^ respect is to their disease:
the^ love not long study in physic and are greatly deceived, because they
would build without foundation: and have the frute^ before they have planted
ye trees These men's cures be but b^ chance medly. One Sirus began this,
Asclepiades.
which received certain rules of Asclepiades. The chief ^este sect of
Physicians called Dogmatici. Dogmatici.
These be the wise me^ ^hiche set not the carte before ^e horse, nor the
roots of the ^ees upward. They do pru^ently consider the change of ^ans
nature, ye dwelling place, ^e alteration of ye air, the time (...) the year,
the custom of peo^^e, the manners of diseases, the ^shion of men's diete. And
this ^ey will prous by true argu^entes and reasons, and will be ^ry careful
for their patientes. ^he disciples of those me^, be the ^st scollers, therefore
I counsel ^ee Ihon to love well Hippocrates ^e prince of Phisicions,
Hippocrates.
which ^gan the best manner to give ru^s to all the lovers of physic. ^f this
writes Gallen, much lau^^g Hippocrates and his followers, ^d in these days
Leonhardus Futchius, Matheolus. etc.


John. Saying thou have spooken of sondrie parts of Phisicions, I pray thee
what parts be there of physic?


Humfrey. TRuly there be five things to be noted in physic, Gallen de
elemen. de temp. de facul.
as. v. principal parts, as Gallen says: in lib. de Elementis. The first is
to consider the nature of man's body. Physic divided into five parts.
The second is, to keep the body in health, and to defend it from sickness
and infirmities. The third is, to know all the causes, rules, and seeds,
whereof the sickness does grow. The.iiii is Crises or judgment of the disease
of things present, past and to come. The fifth is the best and most
excellent, for it shows the manner of healing, dietinge, fasshion, order, and
way to help the sick body, and preserve the same, as long as man does
remain in the state of life.


John. THou have spoken of the parts of physic, what is the form manner or
distribucion thereof?


Humfrey. IT is distributed in three forms one is natural, Gal. lib. 3. de
temp. cap. 4.
another unnatural, ye.iii. against nature. The first is, by those things
whereof ye body is co^pact, co^stituted or made, as Gallen says: in his.iii.
book of his Te^pramentis. Cap. 4. The second is called not natural, as meats
or things to preserve the body in health, they be not called unnatural,
because they be against the body, but because the rasshe ^akynge, or glotonus
vsinge of them, may bring many things ^o the utter destruction of the body.
The third, be things against nature, which does corrupt the body or
poisone nature, whereof Gallen writes. Galle. in lib. 2. The rap. metho.



John. Now thou have taught me short rules of the parts and forms
physical, I pray the show me some pretty rules of the complexions of men, and
that I may aptelie know them with their properties, elements, temperamentes
and humors.


Humfrey. Upon my lute some time, to recreate my self, I join with my simple
armonie, many plain verses. Among all other one small song of the four
complexions, will thou hear it take that chair and sit down and I will
teach thee my song


John. I thank thee.


Humfrey. The bodies where heat and moister dwell,
Be sanguen folks as Galen tell,
With visage fair and chekes rose ruddy:
The slepes is much, The description of the sa^ guene pe^^sons.
and dreams be bluddy.
Pulls great and full, with digestion fine,
Pleasantly concocting, flesh and wine,
Excreme^tes abou^dant, with anger short,
^aughing very much and finding sport,
Drine gross, with color read:
Pleasant folks at board and bead.
Where cold with moistur prevails much
Fleumatike folks be always such,
Fatues, The description of the sle^ matil^e persons.
softnes here plain and right,
Narrow veins and collar whyt.
Dull of wit, no heart to bold,
Pules very slow, disgestion cold.
Sleping over much, vryne gross and pale,
Spittell whit and thick, thus ends the tale.
Collar is hoot, and dry as fire,
^enis of limbs and puffed with ire.
Costisse belles, with litte sleep,
Dreams of fire, The description of the colericke.
or wounds deep.
Sallowe coulered, or tawnie read,
Feding on salt meats, and crustes of bread,
Voice sharp, and quickenes of wit,
Vryne yellowe and saltnes of spit.
Pulses swyft, and very strong,
Cruel countenance, not anger long.
Melancoly is cold, and very dry.
As here in ryme his signs will try,
Hear plain, The description of Mela^coly.
and very thyn,
A lean wretch, with hardness of skyn.
Collar whitlie, or like to lead,
Much watthe, and dreams of dread,
And stif in folyshe fantasy,
Disgestion slow, and long angry.
Fearful of mind, with watrie spitle,
Seldom laughing, and pulls little.
Vryne waterie, and very thyn,
The cold earth, to him is kyn.

John. THis is a good song, and I will learn it, for though it seem not very
pleasant, yet I perceive it is profitable. Now thou have spoken of the singes
of the.iiii. complexions, I pray the teach me shortly, how to know the
elements.


Humfrey. THey be ye four beginners unmingled and vntempored, Hippocrates de
Element. Auic. in cauteca.
from whose mixtures every corporal thing has his substance.


John. What be ye parts? I pray the tell me*


Humfrey. Four, the one is earth the heuiest matter and grossest, The
description of the.iiii. Elements.
which is cold and dry, and melancoly. And the other is water, which is
lighter and most subtle then the earth, and of nature is cold, moist, and
flegmatike. Galen. in li. 8. decr.
Then is air more purer and lighter then water, and if it be not altered with
any other strange cause, it is hot and moiste and sanguen: Then fire is most
light, pure and clear, a clarifier and a clenser of all the other eleme^tes,
when they are corrupted, and is of his own nature hoot, dry, and collericke.
And of these four Elements, both man, beast, fysshe, foul, herb, stone,
metal, have their propre workyng, not of one of the Elements alone, but of
al: some more and some less, according to their natures.

Hippocrates says: Hippocrates in lib. de na.
after the soul is gone from the body, the body does return to the first
matter whereof it was made: And to conclude, all things that be made upon
earth, shall return unto the earth again in time.


John. Why might not men, beasts, fyshe, or foul, herb, or tree, be of one
element as well as of four? I pray you tell me.


Humfrey. No, for Aristotel says: Deus et natura nihil agunt frustra. God and
nature has done nothing in vain. ^turs com^^ded ^ore e^eutes (...) one.
And if any thing upon the earth sencible were of one element: no sickness
could hurt it, nor disease corrupt it, but every thing living upon the
earth, seeing it has had beginning, it must needs have ending, to who^ these
four complexio^s does belong, if they do greatly abound or disminish, or
withdraw their virtues with quantities or qualities.


John. MAy a man see any of the Elements.


Humfrey. THe thing which men do see, be none of ye four Elements: not earth,
but earthie, not water but waterie, not air, but airie, not fire, but fiery.
But the things which man do feel, Elen felt and seen.
be the four Elements, as earth, air, fire, and water. And these be ye
uttermost simples of complexions, diversely and specially, alone of them
selves, or mingled with other, taking sundry and diverse effects, manners,
conditions, forms and qualities, both in man and beast, and every living
thing, sensible and insensible.


John. What is the co^plexions of the four quarters of the year, and names
of the signs?


Humfrey. THe spryng time when blood does increase: Hippocr. in lib. de Natura
humana.
Summer when read collar does rewle: Heruest when collar aduste, or melancoly
does reign. Winter when fleme does abound in full strength. Winter. Spryng.
Summer Harvest.
It is called winter from the.xii. day of December, unto the tenth day of
March. This season is cold and moiste, it is called spring time, from
the.xii. day of March, and ends about the.xii. day of June. So^mer begins
about the.xii. day of June, and ends about the.xii. day of September. Autumn
or Heruest, begins about the.xiii. day of September, and ends about
the.xi. day of December. Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, be winter signs.
Aries, Taurus, and Gemini, be signs for the spring. Cancer, Leo, and virgo,
beo the signs for So^mer. Libra, Scorpio, and Sagitari, be the signs for
Harvest. And ye sun goes through all these.xii. signs in xii. months. And
the Moon goes.xii. times through each of the forsayde signs ones in the
year, and do take sundry effects in man, beats, and fruits, in the said
signs: hot or cold, moist or dry.


John. What be the complexions of medicines?


Humfrey. THose things that overcomes and govern the body, as purgacions,
expulciues. etc. These be called medicines, Auic. in pri. can.
and those things that norysheth and augmenteth the body, be called meats.
For the complexions of meats and medicines, be known by their tastes, as
coldness, hootnes, Meats and medicine be known by tasting
moistnes, Drynes, bitterness, saltnes, swetenes, fatnes, sharpenes, stiptick,
and clammy. And because thy request is, to have prescribed unto thee, but only
a little government of health: I will show unto thee another of my little songs
in plain meter, how thou shall know meats and medicines, by their tastes.


John. THat is my chief desire, I will bear thee, say on.


Humfrey. Cold quenches the collers pride,
Moist humecteth, Cold. Moiste. Salt.
yt which is dried,
The flowing moister, be proffe I try,
Is wasted of humors, hot and dry,
The subtle fode, that is persing quick,
The clammy meats, makes it thick,
Bitter things, cleanse and wypith often,
And expelslem, and makes soft.
Salt dries, and resolves fleme tough,
Fat norisheth, and make subtle enough.
Stiptick or rough taste on the tongue,
Binds and co^fouteth appetite long.
Sweet things in clensing, is very good
^t desolueth much, and norisheth blod.
These things well used, nature wilplease
But abusing the^ beastly, bri^geth disease.

John. ^N good faith, me think thou say (...) well, for there apere perfect
reasons in ^hese thy pretty rules. Now thou have declared unto me, the signs
of complexions of men: with the way and ^pte knowledge of meats by their
astes, I would feign learn, shortelye ^he tempramentis and complexions of
mankind.


Humfrey. THere was never no discrete, nor wise phisicio^, that either feared
God or pitied mankind, or loved his own honesty: would take in hand either to
prescribe diet, or to minister medicine to any body, before be well did
consider, and wisely weye with him self, the temprament, mixture or complexion
of mankind. First whether he were hoote or cold, moist or dry, fat or
lean, or indifferent between them both.

Tempored by health, or distempored by sickness, Auic. in pri. tract.
cantico. Gal. lib. 1. cap. 2. li. 2. cap. 3. li. 4 cap. vlti. Sim. med.
as the extremities of hootnes, coldness, moistnes, and drienes. Therefore John,
these things may not be forgotten, you must note also the four ages of
mankind, and first the tender state of children, which begins at the birth,
and so continues until fiftene years next after their said birth: Their
tempramentes or complexions, be hoote and moiste, very like unto the seed
whereof they be procea^ed, then next unto childhode or innocent age. Youth which
is the second part of life, begins to ^eigne, his temprament or complexion
has rather more fyrie ^eate, then perfect natural heat, and this second age,
continues or ten years, Gal. lib. 5. Aphor. common. 9.
as Galen says: ^ell, in this two first states of yfe, let al natural
fathers and mo^ers bring up their youth, set GOD before their eyes, An ernest
brief exhortacion for ye bringyng up of youth.
for they ^aue no small charge committed unto them, that must give ac^mpte to
God, how they have brought up their children: and they (...) in these years
do spare cor^^ction, truly be grievous enemies unto their children, and at
last shall be recompensed with shame, when they shall se misfortune and
wretchedness, fall upon the fruits of their own seeds. For me^ have small
profit of their corn, which be choked and overcome with thistels, bryeres,
and brakes, which were not weeded in time, much less of their children,
which have received neither correction nor honest learning in due season. If
ye kepers of gardens be careful over their late sowe^ seeds, and tender
herbs, which are in danger to be destroyed of every froste: What should
good fathers and mothers do for their children, whose tender and youthful
years be carried away, and ouerco^med of every foolish fantasy, and it is no
me^^uayle. But this shall suffice for the wise, and smally profit the fools,
but to my matter which I took in hand, I will return unto the third age of
mankind, which is called the lusty state of ^yfe, and begins at.xxv. years
and continues unto, xxxv. This age is hoote and dry, and very collericke,
Galen. in lib. Simp.
as Galene says: This part of life is subject, to many burning and extreme
fevers, and ^oote ulcers: therefore it is necessary to know this temprament or
complexion, which is called collericke, as plainly may appear by age,
strength, diet, urine. etc. This is the best time for mankind to travel in,
with godly exercise in science, art, and profitable trauelles in his
vocation, puttinge in practice, the virtues which he has learned in youth,
for this is the summer part of life, wherein all goodlye fruits (...) florishe
in every good ocupacio^* This is the very heruest, The best time to provide
for age.
to ga^ the precious corn, and fruit (...) their labors against the cold
storms and cloudie days of their aged winter, wherein the body shall be weak,
and the eyes sygh^ decay, and the hands trimble and therefore it is not
comelye (...) see the state of age, without rest which in the time of youth,
di^ honestly travel. For there is (...) grace given to many creature^
unreasonable, both beasts and fowls, to make provision before hand, what is
then to be required of men reasonable, as follows in these verses.

THe bird in time her nest can make,
The be will buyld his house full (...)
The Crane with stone in foot will wake,
The Cony will carue under the mine,
The Squirel in trees her nuts can keep,
Against cold winter to feed and sleep,
And should not man well foresee,
In youth to know his old degree.
THen from.xxxv. or few years following, the lusty branches of youth, begin to
abate his pleasant leaves, flowers and fruit by little and little will decay,
raw ^humers, crampes, dropsies, quaterns, mela^coly, will then draw nere. The
riots, surfittes, sore labors, bearing of extreme burdens, wrestlings, acts
venerus with the abuse of youth, will then spring forth, to the detriment of age
and sudden decay of life, in especial of drunkardes.


John. What be the places of blend, Collar, Fleume, and Melancoly? Natural or
unnatural. Thou haste not made a particular distinction of their proper
places, but generally thou have spoken well in thy song.


Humfrey. THere are also other discirptions of the four humors, very necessary
to be known, and their places where as they dwell within the body, and first of
blood, as Galen says: in his first book of effected places, blood (says
he) that is in the pulsis, does greatly differ from the blood of the veins,
for the blood of the pulsis is thinner, yeallower and hotter, and this blood,
may be called the governor of life. The spring and fountain of the blood
general is in the liver, (...).
which serves every vain of blood, and this blood in culler is very read.
Flewme. is white, and is engendered in the stomach, and at length by the virtue
of natural heat, pure fleaine is turned into blod. There be also watery, slimy
glassy, gross, salt, sower, thick, hard, binding, and extreme cold fleames,
which in deed be unnatural, that be engendered through surphets, coldness or
idelnes, bringing to the body many noisome diseases. There is also collar,
which is yellowe, whose place in the body is ye gall, which comes of the
clensing or puryfying of blood: and this collar is clear, hot and dry, and
the co^forter of decoction. Grene collar, or collar myngled with fleame, be
unnatural, melancoly natural, in the spleen is nothing but the sex degrees,
or heavy residentes of the blood, the natural mela^coly is known by his
blacknes, the unnatural comes of the burning of collar, and is lighter and
hoter, brown of color, sower of taste, and puts the body in great
danger: as madness, black gaunders, continual fevers, and sudden deadly
diseases. Therefore my friend John, remember this short discriptio^ of humors,
as the words of Galen and Auicen, say. Auicen. in li. can.



John. Thus I have heard thy several placinge of the four complexions of
blood, Choler, Fleume, and Melancoly, and is there any distinct hootnes,
coldness, moistnes, and drienes, in any other creature besides man: tell me.


Humfrey. NOt only in manne, but in beasts, fyshe, foul, serpe^ts, trees,
herbs, mettels. And every thing sensible and insensible, according to their
natures, and be equally myngled or tempered togeter, which is called mean
te^peraunce, or else exceadeth in degrees, which is called intemperaunce, hot
and moiste, may be compounded together, so may cold and dry, hot and dry,
cold and moiste, Galen. in lib. 4. de tempor.
example. A choleric man, hot and dry: a Fleumaticke man, cold and moist.
etc. Of herbs, as hisope and rewe, hot and dry, purssen and coucumbers, cold
and moist. etc. But tempramentes or complexio^s of men, beasts, and trees, be
some hoter, some colder, according to their natures. As a lion is hooter then a
choleric man: pepper is hoter the^ cloves. And though there be degrees in
more hotnes or more coldness, yet they are called but hot or cold, as men
after labor or travel, they will say they are hoote, but the fire which
people warm the^ at, is hotter. Also there be things repugnaunt to
tempramentes, as moiste and drienes together, heat and coldness together, as
fire to be cold, or the water of his own nature to be hot, which water
peraccidence of the fire is made hot: and fire quenched by the water. And
every thing exceading greatly with distemperaunce or wanting temperaunce or
complexion, do eftsoon come to an end, as men by extreme sickenesses, surphets
or wounds, or finally age, lackinge natural virtue. Of heat and moistnes of
trees and herbs, from whom iuce and sap is withdrawn, these things of
necessity must needs die, Galen. in lib. 4. de tempor.
and come to corruption, as Galen and Aristotel says.


John. Whether be men or women of coldex complexion? Arist. de Gene.



Humfrey. AVicen says: Auicen.
like as men be hot and dry, so be women cold and moiste.


John. YEa but Lucian says: they be perelous hot of their tongues and full of
venim: though I am no physician, yet can I make a dissciption of that member,
for I am oftentimes stinged with it, Whether this be true let y^ married judge.
I would to God they had been wormed when they were young, but when they are
old, they are past all cure, but the best medicine y^ I have, is a gentle
herb called rewe, which I am never without great store.


Humfrey. Mankind was borne naked to this end, eueri thing bringyng his
aparel with him saui^g man.
that he might clothe him self with other creatures: which he brought not in
to this world with him, as cloth, lether, harnes made of iron, for his defense,
because he is ye chief creature. But horses of nature have hard ho^es, lions
sharp teeth, purpintyns sharp pricks which is their continual and natural
armor, as things ever prepared to debate and strife and, by no art can scant
be tamed. The Rose as pleasauntly as she does appear, Muskels and glandens
flesh
and as swetely as she does smell, spring not further without a great number of
sharp pricks. Therefore it is tolerable for men to bear with them whom
nature has sealed and marked for his own. With that humor most chollerick,
disgresse from this thy communicacion, and let us talk of things more
profitable, for in dead this is pleasant to no man.


John. Seeing thou will not discribe me thi^ particular members, of which w^
have spoken, I would be glad to know the parts of mankind, with a short^
description of his members.


Humfrey. MEmbers be simple and also compounde, the simples be ten in
number, the cartilages, the gristels, the bones, veins, and synewes arteries,
pannicles, lygamentes, cords, and the skyn. Members compounded, A diffi^^cion
of members
be those that be joined and builded together of simple members as the hands,
face, fete, liver, and heart, and so compounded members, be made of simple.
Some of the compounded members be called principalles: as the heart from whence
the arteries springes, the brain, from whence the sinews springes, the liver
which is the well of the blood, from whence ye veins do spring, and the
stones of generation from whence the sede of life do spring: but those
compounded members that be principal. Be all the other members except the
simple as ye nose, the ears, the eyes, the face, the neck, the arms and
legs, and the brains and chief substance of our flesh, be compounded
members of sinowes, Muskels and glandens flesh
and covered with panackles, which be of a synue nature, but that sinews give
felyng to all the whole body: even as the artiers gives spiritual blood from
the heart to every member. The whole body is covered with filmes and skynnes.
Out the head springs hard matter issuing from the places called ye pores, to
pourge vapors and smoke from the brain, which asce^deth out of the stomach
into the head, and is cleansed through Pia matter, called the tender coueringe of
the brain or spirits animal. And therefore as some parts of ye body being
divided in sonder, be each like unto the other, and yet called by the name of
the whole, as for example. When the bones be broken in sonder, or the flesh
cut in to diverse pieces, or ye blood poured into sondrie vessels. A part is
called by the name of ye whole and not ye whole by the part.
A piece of flesh is still called flesh, a fragmente of a bone, is called a
bone, and a drop of blood is called blood: Even so an hand, arm vein, or
such like vnseparate parts being divided into pieces or called by the name of
pieces, and not by the name of ye whole part (as is before.) But my friend
John, to make a large discriptio^ of Anatomy, it were to long for ^e, but
shortly I will say some thing. And first of the definition thereof is, wha^ the
body of a dead man or woman, is cut and opened and the members divided, or for
the^ want of dead bodies to read good books as Galen, What annothomie is.
Auicen. etc. And it behooves the^ that cutteth a dead corpse, Four things
considered in the body of man.
to note four things. First the nutramentall members, as the liver with the
veins: the second is, the members spiritual, as the heart with ye artiries,
the third is the animal members, Example.
as the head, brains, and sinews. The fourth and last, be exereme^tes of the
body, as arms, legs, skyn, here. etc. Of these said members, with the
boones, is all the body compounded. And like as every tree and herb, have
their roots in the earth, and their branches springs upward, even so the
roots of mankind, have the beginning in the brain, and the senewe and
branches grows downward: in the which brain, dwells the virtues of
imagination, fantasy, memory. etc. And these animal virtues, be placed as it
were heavenly above all the members, communicating their heavenly influences,
down unto the heart, as to a prince, or chief reuler within the body, which
gives life to every part thereof. Thou shall consider, that the heart was the
first yt received life from the spirits, and shall be the last yt shall die.
Note also, that as, there be noble senses given to the body, as seeing, hearing
smelling tastinge, feling: eue^ so nature has four principal virtues. First
Attractiue, the second Rete^tiue, the third Disgestiue, the fourth Expulsive.
Attractiue is that by the which every part of the body draws the fode of
life, and serves the virtue disgestiue, and ye Retentiue do hold the meat
until it be ready to be altered and changed. Disgestiue do alter, and makes
the food like unto the thing ye it nourishes, as fleme, blood. etc. Expulsive
do separate them from the other, the good from ye bad. Thou ought also most
chiefly to learn the knowledge of the veins, and for what sickness, they
must be opened, and what medicines, either in sirops or pills thou must use.
And first mark this figure of the Anatomy here present before thee, with the
heavenly signs, because I have not painted at large the several parts of the
said Anatomy.

THe middle vain of the forehead is good to be opened against Megrim,
forgetfulness, and passions of the head. And they that be leaten blood of this,
or any other vain, must first have their head purged with pillule Chochi
Rasis, or some purgation, but first use things to extenuate matter, as
syrruppe of Buglosse. etc.

Against Leprosy and deafnes. Let blood the two veins behind the eartes, and
use the said pills or else pillule Aurea Nicholai or Arabice, or confectio
Hameth minor.

Against replexion or to much blood, or blood in the eyes, flowyng in the
head, open the temple veins called Artiers, for they be ever beatynge. And
use too pourge with pillule Artritice, Nicholai or puluis ad epithema Hepatis.

Against Squina^ce, stopping the throat, and stoppynge of the breath: Let blood
the veins under the tongue. And for this use Philoniu^maius Necholai. and
Gargarismes, pillule Bechie, and oximel Simplex.

Veins called Originales, open not without great counsel of a learned
Physicion, or cunnyng Chirurgio^. They be in the neck, and have a great course
of blood, that governs the head, and the whole body.

Against short wind, and evil blood, aproching to the heart, and spitting
blood. Open the vain called Cordiaca, or heart vain, in the arm. Use
things to extenuate, as Aromaticum, Chariophillatum Mesue, serapium ex
Absin^hii in cold time, serapium Boraginis ^^hote time, and pillule stomochi.

Against palsy, yellow Iaundies, burning heats, and apostimations of y^ liver.
Open ye liver vain upon the right arm. Take Serapium ex endive. Diamargariton
frigid^ Auicenni.

Against dropsy, Dropsy.
open the vain between the belly and the branch, the right side against the
said dropsy. And the left side against the passions of the milte, but be not
rash, unless ye have the counsel of one well seen in the Annothomie. Use
pillule Hiere cum Agarico.

Against the stoppinge the secret terms or fluxions of women, Helpyng the
Emorodes.
or helpinge the Emorodes and purging fores. Open the vain called Sophane
under the ancle. Theriaca is an excelent triacle.
Theriaca Andromachi. Pillule Mastichine, Petri de Ebano.

Within.xx hours after one is infected with the pestilence coming suddenly. Open
the vain between the wrest of the foot, and the great to. Use Serapi^^
Cichorii, and Pillule pestilentialis Ruffi.

Against stinking breath. Open the vain between the lip and the chin. Use
for this Catharicum imperialie. Nicho. Alexandri.

Against the toothake. Open the vain in the rofe of ye mouth. And first purge
with pillule Choci Rasis, or with pills of Mastike.

Against quartens, Use to eat Capers, and take Pillule Jude Haly or pilluled^.
lapide Lazule.
tercions, and pains of the leftside. Open the spleen vain, commonly called
ye low vain, with a wide cut, and not deep: For Chirurgio^s nisely pricking
or opening vayns, with little Scarisfa^^^ons, does let out good pure blood, and
still retain, gross, cold, and dry earthly matter, to the great hurt of their
pacientes. And albeit, many more veins might hear be spoken of: and their
vtilities, yet this shall well suffice by Gods grace to keep al people in
health, that upon just cause, have these veins opened. Except old men, women
with child, and children under xiiii. years of age, or men after diverse
agues. For blood letting, will then engendre perilous palsies, as very
excellent phisicions have well declared. And after one be infected with the
pestilence xxiiii. hours, before he have received medicine, Miracle helps,
but no medicen in this case.
or blod letting, miracle helps him, but truly no medicine have virtue to do
it.


John. THis same figure although it apereth in many books. Yet very few do
understand it in all points, such be y^ secret works of nature. And where as
thou have well spoken of some veins, and apt medicens for the body: I would
feign se the true form and shape of the bones.


Humfrey. OH John, it were a long time to declare ye singular members with the
compoundes, as Galen do in his book of the parts and boones. It requires
only one work, but I have taken in hand to teach the but a Government of
health: Not withstandinge at thy request, I will show unto the a proportion of
the boones, no less true, than new, which is the very timber, or posts,
whereupon our frail flesh is buyldyd, beginning in our mothers wombes, and
endinge in earth the mother of all things. And as the noble Prince Auicen
affirmith, ye number of al y^ bones, be CC.xliiii. beside Sisamina, and Os
Laud.




John. THou haste spoken of the opening of veins, and medicines convenient to
cleanse the blood, with the figure of boones, but thou have not spoken of
convenient time when to let blood, nor of the state or adge of the^ whose
veins should be opened. Therefore I would be glad to learn not only time of
blood lettinge, but also, of purging the belly vomites, bathinges: ne^inges,
and rubbinge of the body. etc.


Humfrey. EVery thing haithe his time conueniente and must be done with
sobber discression, Time for althinges
and not with rash ignora^cie, which killethe an infinite number. Therefore the
cause must be known and the time observed, as Gallen writes in the
co^mentary of the Afforismes, Hipp. in. 1. Affor. 3.
of Hippocrites, many bodies be extinguished by sodeyn death in whom is
extreme fulness, or abundance. For abundance (...) blood or any other humer
says A^ristotle, Aristo. in pri. prob. 56.
is the cause of many sickenessis, and those men that uses much glottonie
in winter shall be apt to receive many diseases in the spring time. Auice. in
2. pri. doc. 2. Cap. 6.
Therefore when the body have extreme heat, fulness of veins, flushing with
sudden redenes in the face, gross and read vryne, and such burninge heat in
the night that let the sleep. etc: then it is time to euacuate the body,
with some purgation, blood letting, or abstinence as the strength and adge of
the paciente will serve. For many diseases, he helped by discrete blood
lettinge, as Plurice^, hoote fevers. Gallen. in lib. de ^lobothomia.
Frenyces, repletion, or surphytes taken with ouermuche eating or drinkinge, as
Gallen says, The letting of blood dryethe up the superfluous moister of the
belly, helps memory, purges the blader quieteth the brain, warmeth the
marie, opens the orga^s of hering, helps disgestio^ inducith sleep, etc.
Rasi. in 4. alman. cap. 14.
Unto this agrees Rasis, saing it helps greatly against leprosies
squinancis. Appoplexis, pestilencis. etc. But old men, children or women with
child, ought not to be let blood, nor also those people that dwell in cold
regions may not be let blood, because the blood is the chief warmer of
nature: ye people that dwell in hoote regions, if they be letten blood, it will
dry there bodies, for blood is the chief moister of nature. Therefore, is ye
heat of somer, and the coldness of winter, forbidden to open vains, or let
blood, exept for a stripe, or sudden chance, Rasi in 4. alime^. Ca. 14.
as Rasis says the spring of ye year is ye chief time t^ let blood in ye right
arm, or right foot, the middle vain.
in the vain called Median^ Which vain must be opened as^ well at other times
in the beginni^g of sicknesses, as hot fevers, and pleurices, etc. As basilica
should be opened in ye middle or toward the end of a sickness. Purgations ought to
be ministered with great discrecion, and not rashely to be taken, for every
trifle as thou haste hard me speak of blood lettinge. So observe the self
same rules in purgation, as time, person, Hip. in. 3. ^ri. doct. (...). cap.
quality, or quantity. For Hippocrates says, without doubt it is needful
to purge the superfluity of ye body. As if blood do abou^de to take things
to purge blood. If steame be superfluous, then take things to cleanse his
superfluity. If collar be to arde^t hot, use things to extinguishe, If
mela^coly be to extreme then taste things to bring him into a mean.
Vsurpatio^ in medicin be evil.
And not to purge one humer with the medicines of an other, but to take them in
dew ^rder and aptenes. For the said humers as Valarius cordus, Mesue, and
Nicholas, teaches the manner of making of the most excellent purgations with
there qua^tities. And as in blood lettinge sleep must be avoided for viii. or
xii. In the morning is best to let blood, evil toward night.
^oures after them: so when your ^urgations be taken, air is to ^e avoided and
to be kept close ^or ii. or iii. days or more, as the ^alice of the disease,
or power of he purgations be, and the coun^yll of Rasis must be followed. Rasi
in 4. alman. ca. 15.
Which says oftentimes to take ^urgations or lax^tiue medice^s does make the
body weak, and apt to the fever ethicke, and specialye in very lean or
weak persons they yt be very fat have small gutes and veins, purgatio^s be
very noisome unto the^ But strong bodies having large vessels, may sustain
purgatio^s without any hurt, but strong purgations, either in pills or
potio^s, if they any thing do excede be very hurtful: therefore, y^ doces or
quantities, may not exceade. And also they must be made as pleasant as art
can do them, onles they offend the stomach. Meats and medice^s ^^eith not
except pills before supper.
Hippocrates gives counsel that men should not mingle medicines with meat,
but to take them three or four hours before meat, or else so long after. Onles
they be pills called Antecibum, which may be taken at the beginning o^
supper, or else Pilli chochi, a little before sleep, two hours after supper.
Time to purge.
The best time of purgacio^s is in the spring time, as the docters does
affirm: the apt days and signs are commonly known in the English
Almanackes, calculated into english? As in the writings of master Leonarde
Digges, Digges Kenningham.
and of William Ke^nyngham, a learned student both in Astronomy and Physic,
with many mo^ good men that takes pains to profit ye common wealth. There is
another manner of purging of the body by vomet, Vomites and there profits.
for it cleanses from ye midrife upward, if they have large breasts, and be
collericke persons. It is good against dropsies and leprosies, and better in
summer the^ in winter, Hip. Se^tin. 4. Aphoris.
as Hippocrates says: and holsomer one hour before supper then at any other
time, and not to be used as a custom: Costome to vomit weakeneth the stomach.
for the custom of of vomittes hurts greatly the head and eyes, and make
the stomach so feeble, that it will scant bear any meats or drinks, but
estsones cast them up again. They which have narrow throtes and breasts, and
long necks, vomites be neither apt nor good for them. Auicen. in. 4. pri.
cap. 13.
And Auicen says: that vomites ought to be twyse in the month for the
conseruacion of health, but that which is more does hurt the body. Of bathes
and there propertes.
There is an other kind of the clensing of the body by sweeting, as with hoote
drinks, warm clothes, perfumes made of Olibalu^ brimstone, niter. etc. There
is also bathes and sweetinge in hoote houses for the pockes, scurffe, scabbes,
hemerodes, piles, which hoote houses has the virtue of helping the said
diseases. The disco^moditie of common hot houses.
But if any that be of an whole temperat complexion do sweet in dry hoote
houses, it does them much harm: as hyndrynge their eye ^ightes, decaying
their tethe, hur^ing memory. The best bathing ^s in a great vessel, or a little
close place with the euapuration of diverse sweat herbs well sodden ^n water,
which have virtue to ^pen the poores softly, letting out feeble and gross
vapers, which ^ieth between the skin and the ^^eshe. To use oynteme^tes
after bathings is good.
This kind of bathinge is good in the time of Pestilence, or fever quartein:
in the end of the ^athes, it is good to anointe the ^ody with some sweet oil,
to mo^ifie and make soft the synewes. And thus to conclude of bathing, ^t is
very wholesome, so that it be not done upon an empty stomach, To bathe upon
an empty stomalie is perilous.
palseis may come there by, or to take sudden cold after it, there follows
an other purgacion, called nesing or sternutacion which is benificiall for the
body if it be used upon an empty stomach. Of nesing
Twyse or thrice in a morning with a lefe of Bittony, put into thy nose, it
helps memory, good against opilation, stopping, and obstructions:
Suspositers be good for weak people or children, Of suppositers.
made with Hieria Picr^ and honey, made in the length of a finger: Soringe does
much good to the body.
Scarifiyng or boxing, as Gallen says: applied unto the extreme parts, as
the legs, and the arms, does great help unto the body, in drawing watery
humor away from the body, but boxing is not good for the breast, applied
thereto in hot fevers, is ^aungerous. I will speak more of Glisters in my book
of healthful medicines
Glisters made ac^ording to art, be good for them ^hiche be to weak to take
pur^ations. The manner of the said Clisters, because they be not here (...) be
spoken of at large, I entend ^y Gods grace to set forth in my ^ext book of
Helthful medicines. Purgacions venerus, Many practicioners of acts venerus.
there be (...) many practicioners thereof, that I need to write no rules: ^ut
this, that effectio^, lust, and fan^asie, have banished chastity, te^^raunce,
and honesty.


John. ^Laine people in the country, as carters thresshers, ditchers,
colliers, and ^owmen, use seldom times to wash ^eir hands, as appears by
their filthy ^s, and as very few times comb their ^ads, as it is seen by
floxe, neites, ^ese, feathers, straw, and such like, which hangs in their
^eares. Whe^er is wasshing or co^bing things to decorate or garnishe the body,
or (...) bring health to the same?


Humfrey. THou see that ye dear, ^es^es and birds, use frictious and
pruninge the^ selves
horse, or cow, will use friction or rubbing the^ selves against trees both
for their ease and health. Birds and hawks, after their bathing will prune
and rouse them selves upon their branches and perkes, The profit which comes
in washing, the hands with cold water.
and al for health. What should man do, which is reasonable but to keep him
self clean, and often to wash ye hands, which is a thing most comfortable
to cool the heat of the liver, if it b^ done often, the hands be also the
instruments to the mouth and eyes, with many other things commonly to serve
ye body. To was^ the hands in cold water is very wholesome for the stomach and
liver, but to wash with hot wate^ engenders rumes, Hot water is unwholesome to
wash hands in
worms and corruption, in the stomach, because it pulls away natural
heat unto the warmed place, which is washed. Fricatio^ is holsom for the body.
Frication or rubbing the body, is good to be done a morninges after the
purgation of the belly with warm clothes, from the head to the breast, then to
the belly, from the belly to the thighs, legs, and so forth. So that it be
done downwarde, it is good. And in dry folks to be rubbed with the oil of
camomyll. Coming the head
Coming of the headde is good a morninges, and does comfort memory, it is
evil at night and open the pores. Cuttinge of hear and paring of nails be
comely for men
The cutting of the here, and the paring of the nails, clean keeping of ye
ears, and teathe, be not only things comely and honest, but also wholesome
rules of Physic for to be superfluous things of thexcrementes.


John. THe chief thing that I had thought to have demanded, and the very
mark that I would have the to shote at, is to tell me some thing of dietinge
my self with meat and drink, in health and sickness.


Humfrey. THere is to be considered in eating and drinking, A consideration to
he had in eatinge and drinking
the time of hunger or custom, the place of eating and drinkinge, wheit be
cold or hoote, also the time of the year, whether it be Winter or Summer:
Also the age or complexion of the eater, and whether he be hoole or sick: also
the things which be eaten, whether they be fish or flesh, fruits or herbs.
Note also the co^plexions and tempramentes of the said meats, hoote or cold,
dry or moist, and most chiefly, mark the quantity and so forth. And like as
lamps does consume the oil, which is put unto them, for the preseruacio^ of
the light, although it cannot continue for ever: so is the natural heat which
is with in us preserved by humiditie and moistnes of blood and fleame, whose
chief engenderer be good meats and drinks. As Auicen says deethica. When
natural heat is quenched in ye body, the^ of necessity, the soul must
depart from the body. For the worckeman can not work when his instrumente is
gone. A cause why the soul departs from the body.
So the spirits of life, can have no exercise in the body when there is no
natural heat to work upon. Without meat says Galen: it is not possible for
any man to live, either whole or sick, and thus to conclude, no vital thing
lives with out refection and sustenaunce, whether it be animal reasonable, or
animale sensible, without reason or any vital thing in sensible, both man,
beast fisshe, and worm, tree, or herb. All these things be newtrified with
the influence or substance of the four Elements or any of the^.


John. Well Humfrey thou know well my complexion and disorder of my diat,
what remedy for me? that have lived like a riyotter.


Humfrey. I Know it well thou art flegmatike, To eat both fish and fleashe
together hurteh y^ flematick
and therefore it is long or thy meat is disgested. When thou doste eat fyshe
and flesh together, it does corrupt in thy stomach and stink, even so does
hard chese and cold fruits. And old poudred meats, and raw herbs engender
evil humers, so y^ diversity of quality, and quantity of diverse meats,
does bring much pain to the stomach, and does engendre many diseasses, as
thou maste read in the first book of Galen: Galen.
iuueme^tis membrorum. c.iiii. And the Prince him self says in iii. pri.
Hipocrites.
doc. ii. Ca. vii. Saing nothing is more hurt full then diverse meats to be
joined together. For while as the last is receiving, the first begin to
disgeste. And when the table is garnished with diverse meats, some roasted, some
fried and baken, some warm, some cold, some fyshe, some flesh, with sundry
fruits and salletes of diverse herbs to plese thine eye, remember with thy
self that the sight of them all is better, To feed of diverse sorts of meats
corrupts the body.
then the feding of them all. Consider with thy self thou art a man and no
beast, therefore be te^paret in thy feding and remember the wise words of
Salomo^. Be not gredie says he in every eating, Eccl. 37.
and be not hasty upon all meats. For excess of meats, brings sickness,
and glottonie comes at the last into an unmeasurable heat. Through surphite
have many one perished, A good diet prolongeth life.
but he that diateth himself temperatly prolongeth his life. Therefore gross
fyshe, lambs flesh, the in meats of beasts, raw herbs, pigs brains, and
all slimie meats, be evil for the: but late suppers is worste of all: But
specially if they be long, for it causes paynful nights to follow. But Galen
says in his book De ethimia the meats which be without all blame, be those
which be between subtle and gross. Good bread of clean wheat, flesh of
capons or he^nes, phesantes and patriches, pigions, and turtill doves, black
birds, and small field birds, roasted veale, or boiled motton: What kinds of
meats does cause good blood.
These do engender good blood says Galen. Note also that any other meat
that thou do eat at supper, although it seem repugnant to aflegmatike
stomach, if thou sleep well after it, and feel no pain, thou mayeste use it as
a meat necessary. And when thou canste not sleep well, if the defaute came
through meat, mark yt meat or drink, although it appear plesa^t, refuse it
as an enemi. And whereas thou have used evil diete as a custom in abusinge
time, quantity and quality, be little, and little, bring thy self into good
order and to time, both for thy brekfastes, dinner and supper. Provided always
to eat good things, but not many things. For like as repletio^ or
abou^dau^ce of meat is an enemy unto the body, and the soul, and brings
sudden death: What hurt comes of an emty stomach when ye go to bed
even so is emptines a shorter of time, aweker of ye brain, a hinderer of
memory an increaser of wind, collar, and melancolye. And oftentimes to many,
brings sudden death also except nature have some thing to work upon, as I
did tell the before: use some light things at breckfast of perfect disgestion
within iiii. hours after that receive thy dinner, obseruinge the good order of
diete, drinkinge wine or beer oftentimes, and little atto^s, A order of dieting
eschewing great draughtes of drink, which is used amongst beasts, and
mingle thy meat with mirth, which is ever the best dishe, at the board, and
be thankful to God. And so leave with an appetite, passinge the time wyslie
between dinner and supper, with exercise, labor, study or pastime, unto
the^de of vi. hours and then begin thy supper, provided that it be shorter
then thy dinner, eating thy meat be little and little: for gredye and sudden
eatinge is hurtful to nature, as Galen says in his diatory, Galen me trite.
Note also, that thou may eat more meat in winter then in so^er, because
thy natural heat is enclosed with thy body in winter, but vniuersalie sprede
in so^er. Also Collericke men may as lightely disgeste biefe, baken, venison.
etc. With as much speade and little hurt as the flegmatike man may eat, rabit,
cheke^ and partriche, The melancoly.
etc. But the melancoly man through the coldness of the stomach have not that
strength in the stomach as he have pro^ptnes in will, to eat things warm and
moiste be good for him. The sanguine.
The sanguine man is not so swyfte in this disgestion, as the hoote collerike
man is. But notwithstanding, he has good disgestion through the humiditie and
warmnes of blood, and coueteth to eat sweet things, which greatly agment yt
blood: therefore sharp saucis made with vinegar, onnions, and barbaries be
wholesome. Purslen, sorrel, small fishes that fedith upon the stones in fair
running waters, cucombers and pure frech wine partly delayed ^ith water, be
good for the said ^anguine men: to keep them from ^uch increase of flesh.


John. THou have showed unto me, a very discrete and wholesome order of diet
^articular to my self, and partly to other complexio^s: but what rule or pre^y
Government is for sick folks?


Humfrey. THey that be sodeinlye vexed with sharp sicknesses, An order for the
di^tinge of such as be sick of sharp fevers.
must ^aue thin dietes, with water ^ruell, thyn mutton or chickens ^ottage
without any fat or thick^es, violet leaves, endive leaves, and such like
cooling herbs, and ^t their drinks be made of Te^ntes, thus do to them that
have ^ote harp sickenesses, occasio^ed of choler. And also cold si^pes of
endive, violets, sugar, ^ater, and vinegar, sodden together be very wholesome.
But if sicknesses be long of continuance, their diet must be the thicker, and
their meats made the stronger, specially if their diseases be cold: with the
flesh of cocks, capo^s, temperate wine, stewed brothe, with holsom herbs, as
buglos, burrage, basel, parcely, and fyncle roots, with some maces, daits,
damask prunes, raysins of the sun, Of siroppes and drynkes
and such like. Siropes of Isope and siterion, provided yt they neither take
meat nor medicine immediately before or sone after their fittes. Possitale with
clarified herbs, excepted, which they may take, for their comfort,
according to the estate of their disease, for such as be sick, must have
meat, contrary to their complexion. For they that be cold, must have hot
meat, and medicines. And they that be dry, must have moiste things. But they
that be hoote must have cold things, for the ardent heat of the fire is
quenched with the moistnes of ye water, and so the quantity of one quality,
overcomes the quality of an other. And in deed, physic says, the bodies
that be hoote, must be fed with things like, as they that be moist, with
moist things to preserve their moistnes. They that be hoote, with hoote
things to preserve their heat, and such like. But when they do exceade in
heat, cold, moist or dry, then let the qualities of moistnes, be te^pered
with ^rienes, As the complexion is so man requires.
and the coldness with warm^es. For like as man deliteth in ^hinges of like, as
the collericke man, collericke things, even so do beasts, and fruits, as the
Colloquintida, which is bitter, deliteth in bitter ground. Hot spices deliteth
to grow in hot ground, and every fruit and herb does delight in the thing
that is of likes even so does man in his food. But in all things let him beware
of distemperaunce, surfites or replecion, rear suppers and dronkenes.


John. But if a man feleth great grief after meats or drinks, what way is
there then for to help him?


Humfrey. Use walking up and down, The. iii. doctrine, The. vii. chap. Moderat
walk after meat profits.
and perhaps that will disgeste, as Auicen says: And Ras^^ says, to walk
a hundredth paces after meat, is wholesome, for it comfort disgestion,
provoke vryne, and gives one power and strength of stomach (...) eat his
supper. But the coun^aill of Galene, Gallen. in, 6. de accedenti and morbo. 1.
cap.
must here be obser^ed. Which says: there is no ^eate but it will corrupt
or ^inke, if the body be cast into a ^^dayne heat, by strong travel ^ne after
meat, which corrup^^on of disgestion, is the mother ^f all diseases, and the
beginner ^f all infirmities, Auice. in 13. theo. 3. tracte. 3. cap.
as Auicen re^orteth: And if you se this will ^ot help to disgeste your
ingor^ed full stomach, then provoke our self to sleep liyng upon our right
side, leaning toward our breast and belly, laiyng your ^arine hand upon your
breast, as ^uerois says: To healp disgestion by diverse ways.
the power of disge^ion is made strong when a man sle^eth. For natural heat yt
is dra^e^ inwardly with warmnes, or ^eat has power to digest. But sleep ease
you not, provoke vo^mit or fast it out, and this is the counsel of many
learned men For it is no marvel althoug^ many meats corrupts one man,
Hipo. in secondo prim. doc. 3. ca. 6 Hec signa declar^nt.
which be of sundry and d^^uers workinges in the stomach, liver, and veins,
for the qualities does hinder nature as much as the quantities. And take heed,
these signs and evil tokens, be not found in you. The pains of all your
members with idelnes and wearines, to go or move your body. Sudden great
blusshynge or readnes in your face, veins swelled and puffed up, read vryue,
and gross skine, extended or stretched out with fulness, like a blown bladder
and full pulses, small desire to meat, ill rest and grief in sleep, seming in
sleep to bear some intolerable burdeyne, or dreamyng to be specheles, these
be the evil and dangerous tokens of repletio^. And of this I give you
warning, for it has slain as many by abundance, as hunger has killed
through scarcity.


John. I Have heard say that wholesome air is a great comfort to man's nature,
but corrupt air does much harm. I shall require you therefore to tell me of
the good and the bad air, that I may learn to use the good, and refuse y^ bad.


Humfrey. GAlen in lib. de Sectis. says: A wise phisicio^ ought to know the
natures of men, of waters, of air, of regions and dwellings, generally,
particulerly to thy self, being a natural English man of birth and education:
this land is very temporat. How be it, our dwellinges in this la^d, be
variable as fennes, marisses, wodes, heythes, valleis, playnes, and rockie
places, and near the sea side. Note which be the most holsomst ayers to dwell
in.
But the said Galen gives counsel in his regiment of health, saying: a good
air which is pure and wholesome is that, which is not troubled in standing
waters, pooles. Therefore maris grounds and places, where hemp and flax, is
rotten, and dead carions be cast, or multitudes of people dwelling to together,
or houses environed with standing waters, wherinto iakes or sinkes, have issues,
or wallowing of swine, what airs corrupts the blood.
or cario^ vnbruied or foull houses, or such like places be dangerous,
corrupts the blood, which is worse then enfectio^ of meat, for ye prince
says, that al places of concauetes, as fellers, voltes, holes of minerals
where mettels be dug, or houses, or walls, joined together, where as ye
sun with reflection beats in with sudden heat, whose absence brings cold.
This air is distempered, but plesaunt clear air, sweet gardens, goodlye
hills, in days te^perat when one may se far of. Corrupt air brings sundry
diseases.
These be good also, there be certain stars called infortunates, in their
exal^acion, whose influence brings corruption to creatures, rot and
pesti^ence to men and beasts, poisoning waters, and killing of fish, blasting
of fruit in trees, and corn in the ^ields, infecting me^ with diverse ^iseases,
fevers, palses, dropsis, ^ranses, falling sickenesses, and eprosis. Fervent
prayer unto God, does mi^tigate h^^ wrath.
Against ye said influe^ces ^l christen men must pray to god (...) be their
defense, for they be gods ^^strume^tes to punishes earth. Example, we have of
mortal pestilence, horrible fevers, and sweeting sickness, and of late a
general fever, that this land is often greatly plaged withal. The^ one must
make a fire in every chymnay within thy house, Sweet air to be made in ye
time of sickness
and burn sweet perfumes to purge this foul air, and now in conclusion to
answer thy question, for the health of dwelling. Auicen says: to dwell upon
hills is cold. And in valleis comprised with hills, is hot. Upon a hill side
against the north, is cold and dry. Toward ye west, gross, and moist, very
subtle toward the East. And clear and warm toward the South. And Rasis
says: in his first book Afforien. A man dwelling nere the Sea side, or great
waters, can not live long, nor can not be without weakness of members, or
blindness, but the best^ building of a house, Situacio^ best for a house.
is upon a dry ground, and a hill toward the west side, and south west.
doors, and windows open toward the east, and north east, having nere unto ye
said house, sweet springs of running waters. From stony or chaukye ground,
which is both pleasant and profitable to the house. For Hippocrates says in
his book of air and water: the second chapter. Cities and towns, which is
placed toward the east, be more surer, then the towns builded toward the
north, for temperat air or wind, and sickenesses be les. And in the said
book, Auicen greatly comme^deth pleasant rivers running toward the rising of
the sun, the dwellers in such places says he, Pleasant people.
be fair and well favored: smothe skynned, clear and sharp voices, and thus
to conclude with thee, this shall suffice at this time, what and where, good and
pleasant dwelling is. Note also, that thou must observe air in sickness, as
thou must do meat in sickness, cold sicknessis, warm air, dry sicknessis,
moiste air, and so in the contraries to them that be sick, and they that be
hole, air of like quality is most wholesome, they that have long sickeness is,
change of air is a great help, both in fevers, dropsies, falling
syckenesses and rumes.


John. I Have found very much disquietnes in my body, when my servant and
labouryng family, have found ease, and yet we are partakers of one air.


Humfrey. THe cause why thy laboring servants in the field at plough,
moderate exercise a souera^^ thing.
pastures, or wood, have such good health, is exercise and labor, and thy
disquietnes comes partly of Idleness, and lack of travel, which moderatly
used, is a thing most soueraint to nature.


John. I pray yt tell me some thing of exercise.


Humfrey. THe well learned man Fulgentius, Fulgen. in lib. 2.
says: that exercise is afile and chaufer of the heat natural, which
chasseth away sleep, What profit comes by exercise.
and co^sumeth superfluous strength. Of the natural virtues, redeamynge of
time, enemy unto Idleness, dew unto young men, joy of old me^, and to say ye
truth: he which does abstein from exercise shall lack ye joys of health, and
quietness, both of body and mind. And Galen says: in his regiment of health,
if we will keep perfect health, We must begin of laborrs and moderat travel and
then to our meat and drink, and so for the to sleep, and this is the cause
why haukers, shooters, hunters, and plowmen, and gardeners, etc. have so good
dysgestyon and strength of body. Who be stronger armed men then Smithes,
because of the exercise of there arms: stronger boddyed, then carpenters,
which lifts great blocks, and masons which bears great stones, not only
in there youth, but such men will take marvelous traueles in age which to Idle
people seems very paynefull, Use meketh labor esy.
but unto them selves that travel no pain but pleasure, because of custom.
These people can disgeste gross meats, eating them with much pleasure, and
slepinge soundlye after them, whereas the idle multitudes in Cities and noble
men's houses, great nombers for lack of exercise does abhor meats of light
disgestion and dantye disshes, marye in dead they may be very profitable to
phisicions. But if travel be one of the best preserver of health, so is
Idleness the distroyer of life, Apho.
as Auerdis writes, and Hippocrates saying every contrary is removed and
helped by his contrary, as health helps sickness, exercise puts away
Idleness, Idelnes the mother of al mischief
etc. But every ^ight mouinge or soft walking may not be called an exercise
^s Galen says, therefore tennis, ^ansinge, runninge, wrastlinge ^idinge upon
great horses, or^eyned, as well for the state of ^ennes health, as for
pleasure, whereunto it is now converted, rather to the hurt of many then the
profit of few, exercise does occupye every part of the body, quycken the
sprytes, purge the excrenentes boythe by the raynes, and gutes, therefore it
must be used before meat, Exercise before meat.
for if strong exercise be used inmediatlie after meat, it conueyeth
corruption to each part of the body, because the meat is not disgested, but
when thou seste thy water, After meat appears some what citiene or yellow
then may thou begin exercise, for disgestion is then well. But sick
folks, leene persons, young children, women with child may not much travel.
The exercise of dice, cards, fighting, drinking, knauishe raling, of bauderye,
and such like: rather may be called an exercise of deuels, then of men. And
thus to co^clud with Salomo^, quam pretiosus sit sanitas thesa^^^s.


John. AFter paynfull labor and exercise, or disquietnes of the mind, there
was never thing that have done me so much comfort as sleep have done.


Humfrey. AVicen says, Auicen in can. Of sleep and waking.
that sleep is the rest and quietness of the powers of the soul, of mouinges
and of sensis, without the which man can not live. And trewly sleep is nothing
else but an Image or brother to death, Tulli. in lib. de seen.
as Tulli says. And if by imagination thou ^idest perseue sleping and waking
wayed in the balance together, there thou should see them equal in weight,
Arist. in lib. de so.
for Aristotle says that man do sleep as much as he do wake. But this is to
be considers in sleep, that natural heat is drawn inwardely and disgestion
made perfyte, the sprites quieted and all the body comforted, if the true
order of sleep be observed in six points. First a quiat mind without y^
which either there is no sleep, or else dreadful dremes, turmentinge the
sprittes. Secondly the time of sleep, which is the night, or time of most
quyat sylens, for the day slepes be not good, most chieflye soon after
dinner, except to sick persons or young Children, in there times convenient.
Thyrdly, the manner of sleep, Sleep after dinner not helhtful.
that is to eschew the lyinge on the back, which brings many grenous
passions, and kills the sleper with sodden death. To lie upon the left side
is very evil in the first sleep, but tolerable in the second, but the most
suerest way to make the digestion perfect, is to lie upon the right side,
with one of the hands upon the breast Forthly sleep have the quantety which
must be meene, Sleep on the right side is best.
for superflous sleep makes the sprytes gross and dull, and decays memory,
six or eight hours will suffice nature. For like as much watch dries the
body, and is perilous for fallinge sickness, Gal. sen. 1. terap. ca. 6.
and blindness: even so to much sleep is as perilous, for extremes be ever ill.
Fyftlye in the time of cold fevers, the patient must not sleep until the
trimbling fyt be paste, for then the hot fit that follows will be extremer
than any other fit, and hard to help, note forthermore yt those bodies that
be full of hot inflammations sleep not well, therefore thye must use things to
extenuat and to make cold, as Tizantes and cold Siruppes, or gentle purging
from the belly and liver, or finallye to have the median vain opened according
to time, state, and age. Sixthly the chamber must be considered that it be
clean, sweet comely, clothes fyt for the time of the year, and the age of the
people and to keep the hedde warm, is very holsom, for in sleep natural heat
is drawn into the body for the brain of nature is cold and moist. Thy
lodging must be kept clean.
Windows in the south part of the chamber, be not good, it is best for them
which have cold reumes, dropses, etc. To lie in close loftes, and for dry
bodies to lie in lewe chambers, and in ye time of the Pestilence, often chyfte
chambers is healthful, ^yinge upon the ground in gardens, Note that sleapeers
in fildes in harueste shall be in dannger of quartens in winter.
under trees, or nere unto stinking pryuies be hurtefull to the body, and this
shall suffice for thine instruction of sleep, provided that thou duste not
long ^etayne thine vryn. For fear of the stone, and pain in thy ^aynes.


John. THere is nothing which I more fear then the slone, for my father was
sore vexed therewith, what shall ^ mark in mine vryne.


Humfrey. AMong all mortal diseases, ye stone is the greatest, a pre^enter of
time, a deformer of man, and the chief wekener of the bo^y, and a grievous enemy
to the ^ommon wealth. How many noble men and worshipful personages has it
slain in this realm: The cause of ye stone
many one, which comet^ of hot wynes, spices, long ban^ quettes, repletio^s,
fulness, costi^nes, warm kepinge of ye back salt meats. etc. The remedy
whereof is in all points contrary to these causes, remedies for y^ stone
small wines, te^perat beer, or ale, no spices, but hol^ some herbs, as time,
percilly faxifrage. etc. Light meals, mo^ chiefly the supper, no baken, no^
rostid thing, but only sodde^ meats, and often times to rela^^ the belly
with Cassia fistula, new drawn from the Cane, with sugar and to eschew salt
meats and not to keeps ye back warm the stone is often found in young
children, which comes of the parents, and oftentimes in old folk. Which
stones be engengendred as I have said: besides milk, fruits, herbs,
saltfyshe, and flesh, hard chese. etc. Now mark well this lesson followyng,
for thine urine.


John. THat shall I gladly, read but softly and I will write thy words.


Humfrey. FIrst in urine.iiii. things Mark
Thus said Actuarii the good clarke, Four things noted in vrines.

^uller regentes and contents therein.
Substance gross, thick or thyn.
^ fair light, an vrinall puer,
Then of thy sight, thou shall be suer.
^uller of bright gold or gilte, Golden urine.

^s health of liver, heart and mylte.
^ead as chery, Read urine.
or safron dry,
^xcesse of meat in him I spy.
^uller grene, or like dark read wine,
^r resembling the liver of a swyne. Grene urine.

^s adustion with fiery heat
^urning the liver and stinking sweat
^addy culler or black as incke, Couller like lead.

^eath draws near as I do think.
^xcept the terms which women have,
Or purging black collar, which many do save
Culler gray as horn, (...)
or clear as water,
Is lack of disgestion says mine auther.
Vrin like flesh broth is very good, (...) like (...) be ^^^h.

Begins disgestion and norishe blood.
Subcitrine and yellow be vrins next best,
Bread and flesh will well digest.
The vrin that is white and thick, (...) ^^^ite and (...) v^in ^^^ite and
(...) vrin. (...) ^^we (...).

Is ever Called flegmaticke.
Melancholy water is white and thin,
The red and gross is Sanguin.
Yellow and thyn, spring from the gall,
Wherein holler rules all.
The swelling liver and brains blouddy,
Causes Circle thick with culler ruddy.
But when Circles be thyn and red, ^^^esar (...) no^^^

Choler grave the right side of the head.
If ledden Circles swim on the brink,
It is falling sickness as I do think.
When Oil in vrin does apeer, (...) in (...).

Resolutio pinguis draws near.
When Oil apeere in fevers hot,
Dissoluinge the body, (...) ^^^oti^^^ ^^^s ter (...) ^^^rcit. (...) ^^^ravel
(...) ^^^n.
causes ablote.
But of Periotides, thou felst no pains,
This Oil Pronogstick, consuming raynes.
The gravel red declares for ever,
In dry backyd men duble tertian fever.
When golden gravel aperyth alone,
It hurt the raines but is no stone.
When grauel is of couller whight,
Stone in the bladder works spite.
Contents like small thrides or heers,
Through heat and drienes y^ body weers. Co^tents in vrin be the chief things
to know diseases.

Consumtion, scabbe, small sport and lust,
Is wha^ many heers be mingled with dust.
In the bottom of vains, or vessels great,
^ieth stoppi^g matter like bran of wheat.
Wherein contents are, like skales of fish
As apereth in the chamber dishe.
These signify fevers, and ethickes old,
Or skabs, which the bladder do infolde.
Whight froth swymi^g, comes of wind,
The yelow froth, is of Iaunders kind.
Thus of vrins I do conclude,
With words of truth, but meter rude.
Here is also a little of ye signs of the excrementes of the belly.

Our filthy dunge, and fex most vile,
The dregs of natures fode, Many cullers in one stole be evil.

When they be diverse coullerid made
The singnes be never good.
If the siege be like unto the meat,
New drawn into the mawe, singns of Crudite and wind.

Or fleting with flem or burbles great.
The body is wyndy and raw.
The yelowe does from choler cum, Collerick signs.

The grene is burnt adust,
The black and leady, Signs deadly.
be deadly signs,
That flesh will turn to duste.
The excreme^t that is in ye iackes cast, Oil excrements signify co^sumsion
except the cause be of fat meats.

If it have oil or fat,
Consuption of body than begin,
The chiefest sign is that.
The prive soft well compacte,
Made in the acusiomed time,
Is ever good and the hard is ill,
And thus I end my ryme. Stools soft and hard.


John. ONs I fell into a great sickness, and hitherto I am skant recovered of it,
the surfite was so great, but cousaill was given me, that I should not stay my
self upon the opinion of any one physician, but rather upon three, then said
I: to retain three at once, requiquireth great charge, for those men to whom
lives be committed, ought liberal rewards to be given. Then said my friend,
they are good gentlemen and no great takers. What be their names said I? he
answered saying: The first was called doctor diet, Diet. Quiet. Mexima^
the second doctor quiet, the third doctor merry man. I did write their names,
but yet I could not speak with them.


Humfrey. HEtherunto I have said something that shall well suffice for the to
know doctor diat, as for quiet, and merry man, they lie in no phisicions
hands, to give, but only in Gods. It were better to lack riches, the^ to
want quietness and mirth.
For small it helps to any man, to have honor, riches, fame, conning. etc.
And in the mean time, to want quietness, and mirth, which be the chief
friends. Tendrist nuryshes, holsomest phisicio^s, most plesaunt musicions, and
friendliest companions, to nature, pleasant birds singing in the branches, be
more happier then ravening Cormerantes, and gready hawks, which with pains
inchaseth their prais. The quiet la^bes be ever happier in their kind, then ye
gredy rauining foxes, wolves and lions, Many apt similitudes or mettophers.
which never cese, vexing them selves, to kill living things for their fode. The
poor oyster, lurking under the rock, or sand, which is never removed of
strong ebbes nor fluddes, is farther from travel and continual pains, then
the horrible whale, most fearful to fishes. The low shrubs, or bushes growyng
nere to the ground, be ever in more sauegarde then the lusty high florishyng
trees, spread with pleasant branches, which be subject to every strong wind.
The poor boots in harbor, be in less peril then the fikle rich ships,
tossed up and down on the cruel fluddes. What shall I say: but this, that ye
miserable ragged beggar called Irus, was more happier in his poverty with
quietness and mirth, then was the glotonus beast, and mo^sterous man king
Sardanapalus, with all his golden glory court of ruffians, and Curticens with
Came to an end most shameful. Diogenes, I warrant you was not inferor to
Alexander, in the state of Happiness, and have left as great a fame behind him,
saving that Alexander, was a more cruel murderer then Diogenes a chaste liver.
The pleasure of poor me^.
In deed ye poor sylly shepehard, does pleasantly pipe with his sheep, when
mighty princes do fight among their subjects, and break many slepes in
golden beds, wha^ bakers in bags, and brewers in bottels, do snorte upon hard
straw, fearing no sudden mishappe. The great pains and secret grieves that
disquieted minds, do daily sustain, be not much unlike unto the
infernal turmentes, The turments of the mind
that the wicked do feel: Physic unto an extreme troubled mind (say what
they list:) helps as little, as to aplye a plaster to the breaste, or
head, of a dead body, to reuocate the spirits of life or soul again. The
syckenes of the body must have medicine, the passions of the mind, must have
good counsel. What pleasure has a condemned man in music, or a dead man in
physic? Through thought many are ^ylled.
Nothing at all God knows. Oh how many men have been cast away by
thought, and most for loss of estimacion, and some of other affections of
the mind, as inordinate love, or couetyng things that they can not get, Ire
is a grievous passion.
or optaynynge those things that they can not keep, or ire of other men's
prosperity or. good hap. Tul. in tuscu^. li. 3 Ovid. in lib. 2. metha.
As Tully says: Ouide, as fine in Poetry, as Apelles was in paintyng,
discribeth this vile passion of Ire, with a pale face, lene body, skoulyng
look, gnasshing teeth, venym tongue, collericke ^tomacke, tongue full of
poison, ^ngratefull, seldom smiling, ^ut at mischief, outwardly ap^earynge
as it were quiet, in^ardly the serpent gnaweth, fret ^eth and deuoureth. etc
These me^ be evils incarnat, Devils incarnat.
begi^ning hell in his life, most enemies to them ^lues, and if they did
behold them ^lues in a glass in the time of ^eir tempests, A good face in a
glass.
should nottheir ^untenaunces, be more feare^^ll to the^ selves then their
Ire, hurteful to others? yes, and perhaps make the^ staring made, in seeing such
a devils image, therefore let wise me^ be of this mind. First to think that
they would heue no man be Irefull against them or disdain them, even so let
them do to others. Secondly let them think, ^eter to be spited then pitied in
some casis.
it is better to be spited, then pitied, for every prosperus felicite, has
his enemy wating upon him. The fool hates the wise. The wise man, pittieth the
fool: well couit rather to be spyted then pitied, the wrech enuieth the worthy
man, and so forth: Only except aduersite, and extreme misery, al prosperus
me^ have enemies, let this suffice, and consider what Galen says, Galen. de
rege^ sani libr. 1.
that immoderat I reful motions, cast the body into a choleric heat, whereof
comes fevers, and all hot diseases dangerous to the body, In come^. 32 septi.
problem.
of this writes Petrus de eba^o. The passion of the mind called dread or
fear, is when the blood and sprites be drawn inwardlye, and makes the
outward parts pale and trimblinge ^o this, by sides pitiful experie^s,
Haliabas, Galen, and Aristotel do wit^es the same. Hali. in. 5 theo. ca.
vltimo. Ga. 1. qui. de acc. and morbo. c. 6. Ari. 10. proble.
The suddayn passion of joy, or gladness, is clean contrary to fear. For the
heart ^endeth fourth ye spiritual blood, ^hyche in weak persons, the art can
never recover again ^ut death incontinent, as Galen ^yth, and as we may se by
ex^erience: As in the metinge of ^en, and there wives, Children and there
parents, which either ^y prison, or banyshment, were ^ythoute al hope, ever to
se each ^ther, and in joy of metynge the delating, and spreding of ye heart
blood, have cast the body into swoninge. And thus my friend John I do
conclude upon certain affections of the mind, wisshing doctor diat, quiat and
merry man to help the, when thou shall need. For mirth is beloved of musicions,
Hudson.
plesante birds and fisshes as the Dolphin. What is mirth honestly used? an
image of heaven. A great lordshippe to a poor man, and preserver of nature, and
Solomon says. Eccl. c. 30
Non est oblectatio super cordis gaudium, etc. And yet I say.

THe Ireful man is ever a thall,
The joyful mind is happest of al.
Zele burn like flames of fiere,
When honest mirth, have his desire.
Love well mirth but wrath despise:
This is the counsel of all the wise.

John. I Would very feign know the natures of sorten simples, and first what is
worm wood.


Humfrey. A Common known herb it is of diverse kinds as Po^ticum. Romanum,
etc. It is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree, and it is very
bitter, and being ^ried, keeps clothes from wor^es and mothes, and the
sirope ^hereof, The virtues of wormwood.
eaten before wine, pre^erueth men from dronkennes, ^f it be sodden in vinegar
it will ^elpe ye sores that bredes in the ^ares, being laid warm upon ^t, is
good to be drunk against Appoplexia, and Opthalmia. Which is (...) sickness of
the eye, is greatly ^elped with the wormwood, Auic. li. 2. Sim. 2.
if it ^e stamped and made luke warm ^yth rosewater, and laid upon ^he eye,
and covered with a clean ^yked walnut shel, the sirope hel^eth the bloody
flixe, it does ^elp a cold stomach if it be dronke ten days together, every
morninge two sponfull of the sirope, is good against the dropsy, every day
drunk, two ounces fasting, and thus says Auicen, figs, cocle, wormwood,
nitur, stamped together, and made in a plaster, is good against the disease of
the splen, and also kills worms in the bellye, used in the foresaid manner,
one drame of the powder may be drunk at once in wine, it haith many moo
godly virtues.


John. What is yt propeties of Anes seeds.


Humfrey. IT is much like unto fenel sede, and is called Roman fenel, that is
warm and sweet, and hot in the second, Gal. de sim.
and dry in the third degree, the new seeds is ye best. It ingendereth vital
sede, opens the stoppinge of the raynes and matrixe, being drunk with
Tysantes, or clean temperate vine.


John. What think thou of mouse ear?


Humfrey. AN herb comenlye known, cold and moiste in the first ^egre, as
Gallen says, the decoc^ion of this herb sodden in wa^er with sugar, is good
against ^he falling sickness, being often ^imes drunk, and put a lefe thereof
unto the nose it will provoke ster^utation, or nesinge which won^erfullie does
cleanse the vayns.


John. (...) would feign know what is Chyken ^ede?


Humfrey. Almost every ignorant woman does know this herb, but their be of
it diverse kinds, they be very good to keep wou^des from impostumations, The
operation of chiekin wede.
stamped, and applied unto them, and draws corruption out of wou^des, and
sodden with vinegar, does drove fleume out of the head, if it be often warm
put into the mouth and spit it out again. In this same manner it helps the
teath, and soden in wine and so drunk, it will cleanse the reigns of the back.


John. What is Sorrel, might I know of the and the property thereof?


Humfrey. THy Coke does right well know it, The properties of Sorrel.
and all they that make grene sauce, but ye description I leave to Dioscorides,
and Leonard futchius, not only in this herb, but in all other, and to tell
tell thee the virtue I will, it is cold and dry in the second degree, it
also stops: it is like on diue in property, because it over comes choler,
and is much commended, it helps the yelow iaundis, if it be dronke with
small wine or ale, and also quenches burning fevers: to eat of the leaves
every morning, in a pestilence time is most wholesome, it they be eaten fasting.
This herb does Dioscorides, Galen, and Auicen, greatly commend, besides the
great learned men of this time.


John. What is Planten, or Waybrede?


Humfrey. THe greater Planten is the better, The properties of plantain^
it has seven great veins, it is cold and dry, the seed of it, dronke
with read wine, stops the bloody flixe: the roots sodden and drunk in
wine, stops the bloody Flixe: the roots and leaves being sodden with
sweat water, and with Sugar or borage water, and given to him that has an
Ague, either tertian or quartaine, two hours before his fit: prove this, for
thus have I helped many, it is very comfortable for children that have great
Flixes and Agues and is a friend unto the liver, this herb is greatly
praised of the Doctors.


John. What is Camomill, and the operation thereof?


Humfrey. THis herb is very hot, it is drunk against cold winds, and raw
matter being in the guts, the Egiptians did suppose it would help all
cold Agues, and did consecrate it to the sun, To what purpose camomell
serves.
as Galen says: Also if it be tempered and streined into white wine, and
drunk of women, having ye child dead within the body, it will cause present
deliverance, it does mightelie cleanse the bladder, and is excellent to be
sodde^ in water to wash the feet: the oil is precious as is declared
hereafter.


John. HOppes be well beloved of the beer brewers, how do the Phisi^ions
say to them?


Humfrey. THere be which does cool, be called Lupilum, those that we have be
hot and dry, Fucchi.
bitter, sower, hot, says old herbals. And ^ucchius says: they cleanse fleume
and ^holer, and ye water between the skin and flesh, the sirupes will cleanse
gross raw fleume from ye guts, and is good against obstructio^s sodden. If
the juice be dropped in the ear, it takes the stink away of rotten sores,
the roots will help the liver and spleen, being sodden, and dronke: the beer
is very good for flegmatike men.


John. What is Sage, for that I love well?


Humfrey. THere be two kinds of sage: A wonderful gift given to Sage.
they be herbs of health, and therefore they be called Saluia, this herb is
hot and dry, and provoke urine, cleanses ye matrix, stops the blood in a
wound. If it be put in a pigge, it dries the humors, that would enge^der
fleume, it is good against the palsy: oftentimes eaten, or sodden in wine, it
will help and cleanse ytche, scabs, and fylth from the pudent and secret
members. Aetius does greatly commend this herb, and the excellent regiment
of Salern, where it says Cur moritur homo, cui saluia crescit in horto,
enquiryng why men do die that have Sage growyng in gardens. But trewlye, An.
in. 3. 1 cap. sing.
neither Physic, herb, nor running, can make man immortal: but assuredlye
Sage is wholesome for old folks, to be put in to their meats, for it cleanses
fleame from the senewes, which fleame will relaxe the synewes: The wine of Sage
drunk upon an empty stomach, is wholesome for flegmatike persons, or them
which have the falling sickness or dropsy.


John. What is Pilopodie, that grows upon the Oak tree?


Humfrey. IF this herb be sodden with Beetes and Malowes, Of polopodie.
in the broth of a hen, and drunk, it will loose the belly, and cleanse
fleume: the root of this herb being dry, and beaten into fine powder, and
drawn into the nose thrilles, helps a disease called Polipus.


John. I Have heard talk of Hoorhounde, I would feign hear of his workyng.


Humfrey. IT is a herb hot and dry, if it be sodden with fair water, What
de ^eases hor ^^^und^^^peth.
sugar or honey, and streyne it, this drink does cleanse the stomach from
stynkynge fleume, it is an excellent herb for women, to cleanse their month
terms, the water of this, is good to help them which have a moist reume
falling from the head, upon the lunges, being often drunk: but it is hurtful
to the bladder and raynes, the sirope thereof does cleanse the kings evil:
and also put into the ears, does greatly comfort the hearing if the ears be
troubled: and stamped with honey, and applied into the eyes, it cleanses the
sight.


John. What is Verben?


Humfrey. IT is called the holy herb, Of verb^ and his properties.
it dries and byndeth, if it be sodden with vinegar, it helps a disease
called saint Anthonies fire, oftentimes washing the pained place, the leaves of
Verbe^ and Roses, and fresh swynes grease stamped together, will seace pain
and grief in every wound, and will keep wounds from corruption: it is good
for people, that have the tercian, or quartaine Agues. And thus says
Dioscorides: Dioscorides.
moreover, he says, the weight of a Dram of this herb, with three half
penyes weight of Olibbulom, and put in nine ounces of old wine, tempered
together, and drunk forty days of this quantity fasting, it will help a
disease, called the kings evil, or pain in the throat.


John. What is Rewe, or herb Grace?


Humfrey. I Tell thee, this herb is very hot and bitter, and does burn
because of his hotenes in ye third degree: if a little of this rewe be stamped,
and sodden with wine, and drunk, it is an excellent medicine, against poysone
and pestilence, with roses, and vinegar, and rewe stamped together, Rue good
against poison.
and put in forred clothe or biggen, applied unto the temples of the head or
forehead, do seace grievous pains in the head. And in like mauer it heals ye
bitinges of serpents or dogs, stamped with vinegar: many nyce people cannot
abide it, cryinge fie, it stinkes: The seade of this herb beaten in powder,
and put in fresh clarified butter, and pitche melted together, is good for
the^ to drink that are bruised.


John. What is burnet.


Humfrey. IT is of the nature of five finger, The properties of Gurnet.
dry and byndyng, and not moist, as many says: stamp it and put it to the
eyes, does take away the dropping and prickyng, and does heal wounds, and is
good to drink for the tercian Ague.


John. What is Dandilion?


Humfrey. IT is temperat, The virtues of Dandelio^
cold and dry: with Roses and vinegar, tempered together, it helps ye head
in hot diseases. The sowthistle called Soncus, has the same virtue, and so
has Suckery: if they be sodden, they lose the belly, and quenches heat
which burns in the stomach, and defends the head from hot smoking
vapors, and purges yelow chouller, and rebateth venerous and fleshelye heat,
and is good to be sodden and drunk in hoate burning Agues, though this herb
be commonly known, and compted of many as a vile weed, yet it is reported of
Dioscorides, to be an excellent herb.


John. What is Spynnage?


Humfrey. AN herb much used in meat, cold and moiste, in the first degree,
it mollifieth and makes soft the belly, it is good for them that be hot and
dry, and ill for flegmatike men.


John. What is Cowcumbers?


Humfrey. THey be trewly in the second degree, very moist and cold: The
seeds be good to be given in hot sicknesses: the powder of the said seeds,
For what purposes co^co^ber serves.
drunk in clean wine, is good against diverse passions of the heart: this
fruit will cause one to make water well the root dried in powder thereof dronken
in water and honye, provoke vomit: if they be moderately eaten, they bring
good blood, tempered with honey, and anointe the eyes, that helps a disease
called Epinictidas, Epinictidas.
which troubles me^ with strange sightes in the nights: the best of this
fruit is, which bears the best seeds the sauoure of that is not wholesome:
mellons, citrons, pampans, and this kind of pepons or great apples be much
used in England, and is more common, then profitable, because they use to eat
them raw. English men being borne in a tempered region, enclining to cold,
may not without hurt eat raw herbs, roots and fruits plentiful, as many
men, which be borne far in the south parts of the world, which be most
hot of stomach, therefore let them eat these fruits boiled or baken with
honey and pepper, and fencle seeds or such like, there be an other hot kind
of bitter cucombers, which do purge.


John. What is Garlic.


Humfrey. Garlic is very hot and dry in ye fourth degree: The properties of
Garlic and his operation.
it troubles the stomach, it is hurtful to the eyes and head, it increases
drie^ies, but it will provoke urine, and is good to be laid upon the by^inge
of a snake, or edder, it is good for the emeroides applied to the sore place,
being first stamped, if it be sodden, the stink is taken from it, but the
virtue remains to be eaten against the coughes, and pains in the lunges, it
cutteth and consumes corrupt fleume, and brings sleep. It is not good for
hot men, nor women with child, or Norces, giving milk to children: but Galen
calls it the common peoples treacle, if sanguin men do eat much of it, it
will make them to have read faces, but it is a special remedy against poison.


John. What is Onions?


Humfrey. THey do make thin the blood, The diversity of Onions and their
properties.
and bring sleep, they be not good for collericke men, the long onion is more
beheme^ter then ye ^ounde, and the read more then ^he white, the dry more then
the grene, and the raw more then the sodden, or preserved in salt although
they cause sleep, very paynfull and troublous hot in the third degree, and
warm in ^he stomach, cleanses the stomach, and brings good color to the
face, and helps the grene sickness, provoke urine, ^pened the emoroides. If
they ^e sodden in vinegar, and laid ^arme to them: pele of the rind and cut
it at both the ends, and cast it into fair warm wa^er, and let it lie an
hour or two, and then slice it, this takes away ^e veame^t sharpnes of it.
Rue, ^alte, honey, and one onion sta^ped to ^ether, is a goodly plaster to lay
upon y^ biting of a dog: leekes purges the blood in march, and payneth the
heed, and be not greatly praised, for their i^ juice Adoge says, Dioscorides,
the head being anointed with the juice thereof keeps hear from fallinge:
thereis much variety of this onyon amongst writers says Plini, but this
shall suffice


John. What is Lettise.


Humfrey. IT doothe mightylye increase milk in women's breasts, The properties
of Lettise.
and therefore is called lettisse, as Martial says, first shall be given to the
virtue and power to increas^ milk in the breasts every hour^ lettis is an
herb cold and mois^ and is comfortable for a hoate stomach, brings sleep,
mollifieth the belly: the drier it be eat the better it is, I mean if it be
not much washed in water, adding clean sallet Oil, Sugar, and vinegar to
it, it abateth carnal lust: and much use of it, dulleth the sight, the seed
is precious against hot diseases dronke with tisans: There is an herb called
Rocked gentle, which partly smells like a Fox, which is very hot, an
increaser of sede, which herb must always be eaten with Lettis. The root
there of sodden in water, will draw broken boones, and will help the cough in
young children.


John. What he Myntes?


Humfrey. MYntes be of two kinds, The properties of mintes.
garden and wild Myntes, they be hot unto the third: and does dry in the
second degree. Garden Mintes is best: ye powder of this with the juice of
Pomgarnites, stops vomits, helps sighi^g, cleanses hoate choler. Three
branches of this sodden with wine, does help repletio^ drunk fasting. This
juice te^pered with good triacle, and eaten of children a morninges, will kill
worms, and stamped with salt, apply it to yt biting of a dog, it will
heal it: It is wholesome sodde with wyndy meats, and sodden in posset al^ with
fenill, it helps collike, it increases vital sede. It is not best for
chollericke complexions, but good for flegmatike, and indifferent for
melancoly: and it will stop blood, stamped and applied to the place. The
juice of Mintes is best to mengle in medicine against poison: the pounder of
Mintes is good in pottage flesh, sodden with Oximel, it cleanses fleume.


John. What is Sention?


Humfrey. IT is of a mixed temprament, it coleth and partly cle^seth if it be
chopped and sodde^ in water, and drink it with your potage, it will heal ye
grief of the stomach, and purge it from hoate choler: his down with saffron
and cold water, stamped and put in the eyes, it will dry the running drops,
and stamped plaster wise, it helps many grievous wounds.


John. What is Pursleyn?


Humfrey. Cold in the third, The operation of Purslein
and moiste in the second, if it be stamped with steped Barley, it makes a
goodly plaster to cool the head, eyes, and liver, in agues burninge heat. To
eat of it, stops Flixes, and quenches burning choler, and extingwysh
venerus lust, and greatly helps the raynes and bladder, and will kill round
worms in the belly, and comfort the matrix against much fleume: And the
juice is good to drink in hoate Fevers, it may be preserved with salt, and
then it is very good with roasted meats. Plini says: it is supposed to make
the sight blunte and weak, further he says: that in Spain a great noble
manne, whom he did know, did hang this Pursleyn root in a threede commonly
about his neck, which was much troubled, of a long sickness and was healed.


John. What is Mugwort.


Humfrey. MVgworte and Fetherfoy, The operation of Mugworte.
and Tansey, be very hoate and dry in the second degree: Mugwort, sporge and
oil of Almondes, tempered plaster wise, and applied cold to the sick pained
stomach, will bring health. It is good in bathes says Galen: it is wholesome
for women, it cleanses and warmeth and comfort, and breketh the stone. Plini
says: it is good against serpents, and wholesome for trauelyng men, if they
carye it, it comfort them from worms. Tansey does myghtely cast worms from
children, dronke with wine: A cold plaster sta^ped and laid upon the belly of a
woman whose child is dead within her, it will separate the dead child from
the living mother, causing her to niese with Betony leaves.


John. THere is an herb commonly used to the great relief of many called
Cabage, is it so good as it is reported of?


Humfrey. CAbage is of two properties, The operation of Cabage.
of bynding the belly, and making laxatiue: the juice of Cabages lightly boiled
in fresh bief broth, is laxatiue, but the substance of this herb is hard of
digestio^, but if it be twyse sodde^, the broth of it will also bind the
belly, if it be tempred with Allu^. This herb has virtue to cleanse a new
read Leprosy, laid upon the sore place in the manner of a plaster. Aristo. 3.
perproble Auecen. 2 can. Rasis. 3. ^lman.
But to conclude of this herb, the broth of it has virtue to preserve from
dronkenes, as Aristotle, Rasis, and Auicen, does report, eaten before drinking
time.


John. What is Philopendula?


Humfrey. IT is an herb hoate and dry, Of philopendula.
if it be sodden in white wine and drunk, it dries up windy places in the
guts, and cle^seth the raines in the back and bladder.


John. What is Agremonie?

DIoscorides says: The operation of Agremonie.
that if this herb with swynes grease be stamped together, and laid upon an
old rotten sore being hot, it has virtue to heal it: the sede of this herb
drunk with wine, is good against the biting of Ser^entes, stopping of the
liver, and bloody flixe.


John. SOme men say that the herb Dragon is of great virtue.


Humfrey. THe juice of it says Dioscorides: The virtue of dragon.
dropped into ye eye, does cleanse it, and gives much might unto the eyes of
them which have dark sightes, the water of this herb has virtue against
the pestilence. If it be drunk blud warm, with venis triacle, ye savor of this
herb is hurtful to a woman newly conceived with child. Plenij says, that who
so bears this herb upon them, no venomous Serpente will do them harm. This
herb is hot and dry.


Ihon. THere is a very sweet flower, called a violet, is it so profitable, as
it is pleasant?


Humfrey. SImeon Sethi reports, The virtue of Violet
that it does help against hot inflammations of the guts, head and stomach,
if the cause be of burning choler. Either the water sirrope, or concerue of
the said violets, either eaten or drunk, in the time of any hot passion. But
undoubtedly, it offends the heart, because of the coldness, the savor of the
flowers be plesaunte, the oil that is made of this herb, have virtue to bring
quiet slepes to them which have grievous hot pain in the head.


Ihon. What is the virtue of the pleasant white Lilly?


Humfray. DIoscorides says, that the Oil of Lillies doothe mollifye the
Sinnewes and the mouth of the Matrixe, Of white lilie and of his operation.
the Iuse of Lillies, vinegar and Honnye, sodden in a brazen Vessel, does make
an ointment to heal both new and old wounds. If the root be roasted and
stamped with Roses, it makes a healing plaster against burning of fire: the
same rote roasted, has virtue to break a Pestilence sore, applied hoate unto
the sore place, and is dry in ye first degree. The oil of water Lilies be
moiste, sufferent against all hoate diseases, to anointe the ardent places, and
does reconcile quiet sleep, if the forehead be anointed therewith.


John. IN the time of the pestilence, my wife makes me a medicine, of an herb
called Centauri, does she well or not?


Humfrey. PLini says: Of y^ virtue of Ce^taurye.
that the Sirupe of this herb drunk with a little vinegar and salt, does
cleanse the body: The leaves and flowers, be of great virtue, to be sodden and
drunk against al raw humors of gross sieume, watery or windy: it does cleanse,
cruent, or bloody matter within the bodies of men or women. The powder of this
herb is good in pessaries, for women, causing the dead child to depart from
the mother, and is wholesome against the pestilence, in the time of winter, and
is hot and dry.


John. We beutifie and make pleasant our wyndowes with Rosemary, vsyng it
for small other purposes.


Humfrey. ROsemary is an herb of great virtue, Of Rosemarye.
hoate and dry, sodde^ in wine, and dronke before meat, it does heal the
kings evil, or pains in the throat, as Dioscorides and Galen says: the
savor of it does comfort the brain and heart: y^ flowers of Rosemary is an
excellent cordial called Anthos.


Ihon. IS pulial royal, an herb of any valewe, or a wede of contemption?


Humfrey. IT is an herb of much virtue and profit: The operation of Puliall
royal.
hot and dry in the third degree. Diascorides says, if this herb be sodden
with honnye and Aloes and droncke, it will cleanse the liver, and pourge the
blood: most chiefly it helps the lunges. Simeon Sethi says, if women drink
it with white wine It will provoke and cleanse the terms menstrual, and is a
very wholesome pot herb.


Ihon. What say thou unto Muslarde.


Humfrey. PLinius does greatly lawd it, The operation of Muster
saying, that there is nothing, that does pearse more swiftlier into the
brain then it does. Honey, vinegar, and mustarde, tempered together is an
excellent gargarisma to purge the head, teethe, and throat. Mustarde is good,
against all the diseases of the stomach or lunges, wind, ^leume, and rawnes
of the guts, and conduces meat into the body: provoke urine, helps the
^alsye, waisteth the quartaine, ^rieth up moiste rumes: applied plaster wise
unto ye head. Honey and mustard helps the cough, and is good for them that
have ^he fallinge sickness, notwithstanding the common use of mustard is an
enemy to ye eye. Many more virtues have I read of mustarde, but the occasion
of ^ime has vnhappilye preuened, not only my large discriptio^ (...) this:
but also in many other ^mples, which heareafter, I entende largely to write
upon if, it please God to permit me.


John. They say that Buglos is very holsom.


Humfrey. IT is an herb most temperate between hoate and cold, The virtues
of ^uglos.
of an excellent virtue, a comforter of yt heart, a purger of Melancoly, a
quieter of the Frencie, a purger of the urine, wholesome to be dro^k^ in wine,
but most effectual in sit (...). Dioscorides and Galen, doet greatly commend
this herb, and that does daily experience well prove.


John. What is thy mind of sweet Basell*


Humfrey. THis herb is warm in the sconde degree, The virtues of ^asell.
having the virtue of moistues, and if it be sodd^ in wine with Spicenarde, and
dronke it is good against dropsyes, winds, fleume, coldness of the heart,
hardness of the stomach, the sauoure of Basil, does comfort the brain, and
heart, the use of this herb in meats, does decay the sight.


Ihon. The plain people of the country will say, that those flowers which be
pleasant in smellinge, be oftentimes unwholesome in working, the rose is
pleasant in sense, what is it in virtue?


Humfray. IT has an odor most plesa^t and has virtue to cole and bind. The
virtue of Roses.
The water is good to make Manus Christ, and many other goodly cordialles,
Roses and vinegar applied unto the foreheade, do bring sleep: conserve of
Roses, have virtue to quench burning choler, and to stay the rage of a a hoote
fever, oil of Roses, Vinegar, and the white of an egg, beaten together, does
not only quench sacra igms, but also bring a mad man into quietness, if
his foreheade be well anointed therewith, after the recept of Pills of chochi,
in the time of the pestilence, there is nothing more comfortable then the
savor of Roses.


John. What say thou of Sauery.


Humfrey. IT is hot and dry in the third degree, The virtue of Sauery.
if the green herb be sodden in water or white wine and drunk, these be his
virtues to make the liver soft, to cleanse dropsies, could choughes, cleanses
women's diseases, and seperateth the dead child from the mother, as
Diascorides and Galen* says, also Germander is not much unlike the virtue of
this herb.


John. But for troublinge of you, I would be glad to know your mind of
Time, and a few of other herbs.


Humfrey. IT is vehamente of heat with dryness in the third degree. The
virtue of time.
Diascorides says, if it be drunk with vinegar and salt, it pourgeth fleume,
sodden with honny or meide, it has virtue to cleanse the lunges, breaste,
matrix, rains and bladder, and kills worms.


John. What saiste thou of Parslye and Saxifrage?


Humfrey. THey have virtue to break the stone, Parslye is hot in the second
degree, and dry in the midst of ye third. The virtue of Persly and saxifrage
The sede drunk with white wine, provoke the menstruall terms, as
Diascorides says: also smalledge has the like virtue.


John. What is thy judgment of Liuerworte?


Humfrey. IT has virtue to cleanse and cool. The virtue of liuerwort.
Dioscorides says, it does heal the wounds of the liver, and quenches the
extreme heat thereof, tempered with honnye and eaten, does healpe a disease
called regius morbus, and pains of the throat and lunges.


John. What is Bettony.


Humfrey. THey be of diverse kinds Leonardus futchius doothe call the sweet
Gilliuers by the names The virtue of Betony.
of Bettonye, but the one seems to talcke of that, which is commonly known
of the people, called the land Bettony, which has the virtue to kill worms
within the bellye, and healpeth the quarteine, cleanses the matrixe, and has
the virtue to heal the body within. If it be bruised, it is of great effect,
if it be sodden with worm wodde in white wine, to purge fleume, and is hot in
the first degree, dri in the second.


John. I Have hard small commendations of Beetes.


Humfrey. THey be of two kinds, and be both praise worthy, The virtue of
Betes.
Simeon Sethi, writes that they be hoate and dry in the third degree, ye
white Beete is ye best, they have virtue to cleause, as niter has but has
evil Iuse, the iuse of this herb with honnye applied into the nose, do pourge
the head, it is a wholesome herb in pottage, if it be well sodden, or elsse it
is noisome to thee Stomach. If it be parboyled and eaten with Vinegar, it is
good against the stoppinge of the liver. Notwithstanding the iuse of this
herb, do stop the belly, being simply taken.


John. What is Maiden hear?


Humfrey. IT is an herb between hoote and dry, The virtue of maiden hear
if it be sodden in wine, it breaks the stone, it cleanses the Matrixe,
brings down the secondes, as Diascorides and Galen says, the best does
grow upon hard rocks.


Ihon. What is Mellil^t?


Humfrey. IT has virtue to ripe, The ver* of melilot
and is more hotter then cold, Mellilot, flex seed, Rose leaves, Ca^pher and
woman's milk tempered together, does make a goodlye medicine against the hot
inflammation of the eyes. If this herb be droncke with wine, it does molifye
the hardness of the stomach and liver, the most excellent plaster against
the pains of the splen, does Mesue discribe, which is made of Mellilotte.


Ihon. BE pease and Beans, any thing beneficial to nature?


Humfrey. Beans be more groaser and fuller of wind then pease be, Thoperation
of pease and Beans.
and makes euel matter, except they be well sodden and buttered, and so eaten,
with the whitest and swetest Onions that may be gotten. Because they be hard
of disgestion: how be it, they do make fat, and partlye cleanse, yet they
are not to be compared with tender white peasen well sodden and buttred, or else
made in pottage with gardein mintes and gross pepper, which have virtue to
cleanse the raines of the, But Hu^tels and ^tares be Melancholy.
back and bledder. Liutelles be of the same virtue. Barlye being clean
hulled and sodden with mylcke clean water and sugar, makes a very comfortable
and wholesome pottage, for hoate chollericke persons or young people. And of
this is (...) ^che used in the North parts of England, and is called bigg
^ele.


John. What be the virtues of the leekes and roots of Radishe, Turnips,
Par^neps, Rapes or Naues?


Humfrey. LEekes be evil, Leekes and and their properties.
engender painful sleep: but eaten with honey, then they purge blood, but
roots eaten raw, breadeth ill ^uice, therefore being first sodden, and the
water cast away, Of the virtues of radish with other rotes.
and then sodden with fat mutton, or tender fat bief, these roots
norysheth much. Rapes, and Naues, be wyndy: Turnips, causes one to spitte
easily that have corrupt stomakes, but makes raw iuce. Carettes do expulse
wind: Radish roots provoke vryne, but be very evil for flegmaticke
persons, having grief in their bones or joints, and must be eaten, in the
beginning of the meal, as Galen says, Galen de alimen.
but many do use the^ in the end of meals, and find ease as sir Thomas Eliot
that worthy knight and learned man reports in his good book called the
Castle of health. And thus I do conclude of those herbs and roots that I
have written upon. Herbs in ge^dereth melancholy.
Admonisshyng thee, that herbs pulls, and roots be all wyndye, enge^derers of
melancholy, and in grossers of the blood, eccept lettis, bourage, and
purslen. Therefore the gross binding together and seething of herbs in brothes
and pottage, be more holsomer then the fine choppynge of them. Thus John I
have declared unto the, (...) virtues of certain herbs, which if thou will
follow, and ^serue my rules in the^, I doubt (...), but thou shall receive
mutch ^rofyt thereby. I would have al^ taught the some pretty ways or
Distillation of Waters, but ^n prevented therein, Vulstadius.
and I am ^ad thereof. Forasmuch as thou ^alt se very shortly, Thesaurus Euono
mij.
booth The^^urus Eu^nomi and Vlstadius which be exelent learned men in (...) yt
Science, wherein I am sure you wylt much delight. For I ensure the, the like
books never were setfurth in our mother tongue, with the lyuelye fashion of
the furnasses, and also of the Stillitories.


John. VHat will digest and purge choler, Fleume, and Melancoly, provoke
ernutacio^, and stop Flixes, tell me?


Hu^fry. Things to digest choler. ENdsue, Purslein, Poppy, Sorrel, Mercury,
Lyuerwort Whaye, Tesantes, Tarmeryndes The four cold seeds of gourdes and
Cucu^bers. Sanders, Buttermilke, or the milk which comes of the pressing of
the chese.
Topurge choler. MAanna. 6. ora^mes. Rubarbe.ii. dra^mes or.iii. but put into
in fusion from.v. to.vii. Pills of aloe Wild hops, Syrrup of wormwode.
Syrrupe of s^mitory. Diaprunes.
The disgester of fleume. PVulyall, Myntes, Betony, Egrymony, Mugw^rt, Honey,
Pepper, Hysoppe, Pimpernel, Ieniper berri^ Neppe. Finkel, Persely rotes,
Smallage.
Purgers^^ fleume A Garick infused from.ii to.v. drammes Sticaus, The
myrabolanes of all the kinds. Polipody of y^ oak. Centory. Horhound, Maiden
here.
^ood ^^rgers Mela^choly. ELeberus Niger. Capers, Lapis Lazule. Seen of
Alexander. Borage, Hearts tongue, Honey sodden in sweet wine Sauory, Time,
Trosses of cappers, of Coloquintida, and of wormwod.
Good things to provoke drine. PEruye, Time, Saxifrage, Cassa fistula. Rams
Radix, The flesh of an hare, Pills of Tyribenthen. Maiden hear The beris of
the Eglentyn. Bromseede.
Comforters for ye brain to smell upon ROses, Violettes, Iellouers, in summer,
but in winter Cloves Spike, Musk. Amber gres^e.
Things good to stope flire Sinaber called dragons blud. Sloes or there
decoction. Sinamom. Boolearmoniak. Red wine. Planton. Olibanum. Hard eggs.
Hard chese scraped in red wine and drink.
Things good to provoke starnutation or ^^eesing. Belony le^^ primrose ro^^
moderately^ ^sed. Eleborus al^ and Ginge^^
Good co^fortters for ye heart Muscke. Ambergre^^ Rosis, Per^ Maces.
Diamuschicis diambra. The floure^ Rosemary (...) Nutmegge Spiknard. Galanga.




John. What be the virtue of Dates Figs.


Humfrey. SEraphio says, Of figs and dates
that the Da^^ which be preserved with su^^ ^ee good. The crude raw Date
^othe califie the body, and does ^onuert quickly into choler, it is not good
for the hedes of the hot people, Rases in. 3 alman. Halia in. 5 Theori. Ra.
Moses.
ill for the throat and stops the liver, and makes the ^eeth rotten, but if
they be clean ^illed and the inward rynde taken away, they do greatly
norrishe, and ^estore, being sodden in stewed ^rothe they be of diverse kinds
(...) quantity and quality, but ge^erally hoote and moist in the se^ond
degree. Hi. 2. can. c. ccviii.
Figs as Hippocra^es says, the best be white the se^ond be red, the third
be black, the ^ipest be the best and amongst all ^rutes does most norishe,
prouo^eth sweat, because it does purge superfluity of humers through skin,
it does enge^der lice, they ^e hot in the first degree, and the ^ew figes be
moist in ye second, the seeds and the skyn of the Fyg, be not greatly
co^me^ded: Figs and Almo^des, eaten of a fasting stomach, be very holsom to
make the way of good disgestion, but best if they be eaten with nuttes. Figs
and herb grace, stamped together, be very wholesome to be eaten against the
pestilence: Roasted Figs beaten together, and hot applied upon the pestilence
sore, does draw, molifie, and make ripe the sore. And to the lunges, Galen de
Alimen.
liver, and stomach, figs be very comfortable, as Gale^ says.


John. What be Pears?


Humfrey. THey be of diverse kinds heuier then Appels, The operation of Pears.
not good until they be very ripe, onles they be tenderly roasted or baken,
and eaten after meals.

there is a kind of pears, growing in the City of Norwich, called the black
friars pear, Black friars pear.
very delicious and pleasant, and no less profitable unto a hoote stomach,
as I hard it reported by a right worshipful Physician of the same City, called
doctoure Ma^feilde, which said he thought those Pears without all comparison,
were the best that grew in any place of England.


John. What say thou of Appels.


Humfrey. APples be very cold and winedy, The operation of Apples.
hard to digest ingenderers of evil blood, hurtful to flegmaticke people:
good to choleric stomachs, if they be through ripe, but best if they be
roasted or baken, and eaten with gross pepper to bedwarde, they be of many
kinds, as the Costard, the grene coat, the pippe^, the queen apple, and so
forth: The distilled water of apples, Campher, vinegar, and milk, is a good
medicine to anointe the faces of children yt have the small pockes: when the
said pockes be ripe, to keep their faces from eres: provided that the said
children have given them in their milk, saffro^ or Methridatum, A medycin for
the small pockes.
to expel the venim and keep them from the air, during the said sickness.


Ihon. What be Pechis?


Humfrey. THe leaves he hoate, for if their be stamped in plaisterwyse and
applied unto the belly, The operation of Peache^
they kill worms: The fruit is cold, and very good to the stomach, they be
good to be eaten of the^ that have stinking brethes of hot causes: eaten of an
empty stomach which is Galens counsel, which says if they be eaten after
meat, they do corrupt both in them selves and the meats lately eaten: and
they be bynders of the belly. But Quinces be most comfortable after meat, for
they do enclose the stomach, and lets vapers to ascend into ye brain, and
stops vometes: They be wholesome for sick folks that be swelled in the
bodies. Eaten with the gross pouders of Gallanga, Spickanarde, Callamus, and
Ginger, and may be eaten before meat of the said sick pacientes, as well as
after meat But much use of them, be not so profitable as delectable, to the
^aters of them.


John. What be Quinces?


Humfrey. IF thy stomach be very hoate or moist, The operation of Quinces.
or thy bellye laxatiue then Quinces be good to be eaten before meat, being
roasted or eaten cold, and in this case the tarter be the better, and Pomgranets
be of the same virtue, as Isaac says: Isaac in. perticu. die.
but eaten after meat they do enclose ye stomach, and moist the belly, they
ought not to be used in common meats the custom of them hurts the
sinnewes, but in the way of medicine they be excellent, and the cores being
taken out and preserved in honnye, or kept their musse lege. Then they may
long continue to the use of rosting or baking, for they be perelous to the
stomach eaten raw. But preserved they do mightily preuail against
drouckennesse, they be cold in the first degree, and dry in the beginning of
the second.


John. What be Cherris?


Humfrey. THe tart cheries vndubtedly be more holesomer then the sweet, The
operation of Cheries.
and eaten before meat, do mollify the belly, prepare disgestion, and they be
most excellent against hot burninge choler, they be good also after meat,
and be of many kinds, as black, red, and pale. The red chery partly tarte,
Galen de alimen. Ra. lib. 23 cap.
is best. Galen and Rasis, greatly commend this fruit. In the country of Kent
be growing great plentye of this fruit. So are there in a town near unto
Norwich called Ketreinham, this fruit is cold and moiste in the first degree.


John. What be the virtue of Grapes, Rasins, Prunes, Barberies, Oringes, and
Medlers?


Humfrey. HIppocrates says: The goodness of Grapes.
that the white Grapes be better then the black, and holsomer when they are
two or three days gathered from the vine, then presently pulled from it: Galen
de alimen. 2. Rasis in. 4. alman. 20 cap.
And if they be sweet, they be partly nutratiue, and warm the body. And
unto this agrees Galen and Rasis, seems to commend sweet grapes above
Daites, saying: although they be not so warm, yet they do not stop the
body, or make opilatio^ as Daites do. They be wholesome to be eaten before meat,
even as nuttes be good after fisshe. Toward the southe, and southeaste parts
of the world, there be many growing in diverse regions, whereof the wynes be
made. The farther from us, the hoater wine: There be very good grapes growyng
here in England in many places, as partly I have seen at Blaxhall in
Suffolk, Blaxhall in suffolk
where sometime I was nere kinsman unto ye chefest house of that town. Raisins
of the sun be very wholesome, and comfort disgestion, but the stones and
rindes would be refused, and then they be good for the spleen and liver. So be
aligantes, Rasis does much commend the^, Sweet Prunes be laxatiue but tarte
prunes be bindinge.
but undoubtedly the small rasins be hurtful to the spleen. Prunes or damasins
have virtue to relaxe the belly, if they be sweet and ripe, but they do norysh
very little, but quench choler. Grapes, rasyns and Prunes, Plu^mes, and Sloes,
if they be sower, be all bineders of the belly, and so is the barbarye called
oxiaca^tha and Oringes, Oxiacantha. called the Barbery.
except the said oringes be condited with sugar, and then they be good coolers
against hoate choler, whose rindes he hot and dry of nature. The fruit
called the medler, Mespila. called the Medler.
is used for medicine and not for meat, and must be taken before meat
provoke urine, and of nature is stipticke.


John. What be Capers and Olives?


Humfrey. Fresh Capers he hot and dry in the second degree, The operation
of Capers.
and eaten before meats do greatly comfort disgestion, and be the best
things for the spleen, or to cle^se melancholye that can be taken. preserved
Olifes in salt eaten at ye beginning of meals, do greatli fortify the stomach
and relaxeth the belly, cleanses the liver and ^^e hoate and dry in the
second degree.


John. I Beseech the show the opinion of the natures of some kind of flesh,
and first of the properties of Beef.


Humfrey. I Will not undertake to show mine opinion: to thy request, but I will
declare the minds, of some wise and learned men: and first of Simeon Sethi,
Simeon Sethi.
which says, that the flesh of Oxen that be young, do^ much nourish and make
them strong that be fed with them, but it brings melancholy, and
Melancholius diseases, it is cold and dry of nature, and hard to digest,
except it be of choleric persons: but being tenderlly sodden, it
nourishes Much biefe customably eaten of idle persons, and nice folks that
labor not, brings many diseases, Ra^in lib. 2 cap. 3.
as Rasis says. And Auicen says that the flesh of Oxen or Kine, Auicen in
2. lib. pri. cap. 15.
be very gross, ingendringe ill iuse in the body. Whereof oftentimes come to
scabbes, cankers, biles, but unto hot strong, chollericke stomachs it is
tolerable, and may be used as we have the dailye experience thereof. Flixe.
The broth wherein beife has been sodde^, is good to be supped half a pint
every morning against ye flixe of the bellye, and runninge forth of yellowe
choler. If the said broth be te^pered with salt: Mustard, vinegar or garlic
etc. Be commonly used for the sawses to digest biefe withal, ^isges^io^
for the said sauces do not only help disgestion, but also defendefendeth the
body from sundry inconuenie^ces, and diverse si^kne^ises, as drop^ies, quartens,
leproses, A medicine for y^ eyes.
and such like. The gall of an Ox or a cow, distilled in the monthe of June,
and kept in a close glass, does help to cle^se the eyes from spots, if you
put (...) drop of this water with a fether into thy eyes, when ye go to bed.
The milte of a Bull dried, and the powder thereof droncke with red wine, will
stop the bloody flixe. Light poudered young Beef, is better then either
fresh or much powdered. In specially those Cattle that be fed in fair and
dry Pastures, and not in stinckinge fennes.

The great learned manne Gesnerus, in his discriptyon of Beasts, Conradus
Gesnerus*
does write moore of the virtues of bulls, oxen, kine and calves, then any
other has done. And thus to conclude, the flesh of the male beasts, is more
better then the female, and the gelded beasts be more commodyous to nature,
then any of them. And the young flesh more commendable then tholde, for it is
more moist, and a friend to the blood, Hali. in. 5 The. ca. 4.
as Haliabas says, Roasted flesh, does nourishe the body much, for it is
warm and moist. Bake^ meats be very dry: Clean boylde meats, with wholesome
herbs and fruits, be excellent to comfort the body, if they be nutramental
flesh. Calves flesh do greatly nourrish and make good blood.


Ihon. THou haste said well of Biefe, but what goodness may be reported ^f
Porke, I think very little or no^hinge.


Humfray. THere be many goodly commodities in ye flesh of bores. ^elded swine
and pigges, for ^hey be good for man's nature.


Ihon. FOr man's nature? that is maruel^ For how can those be good for ^anues
nature, The description of swyne.
which be so vile of their own nature. There soul feding (...) most stinking
filth and carrion. The ^oysome wallo winge in the mire and ^urt, the eating of
their own pigges, and oftentimes pulling children out (...) the Cradle, for
there dinners, if the ^ood wife be not at home. Who is a^le to behold such
noisome spirits, ^r hell hounds: did not almighty God ^ommaund the Jews to
eat none of them? and the Machomites at this ^aye, will kill that man that
eats of their flesh, why should we then com^e^d them? for they are most vile.


Humfrey. ALl the aunciente and wisest phisicions that ever were in this world,
^^oriba Corona
did all consent, that of all flesh, the flesh of young gelded swine, partly
saulted or poudered, was ever a meat of the best norishinge moister, and
colder then other flesh, Isacke Galen in sec. comp Cap. ii.
for Isaacke says, it is a flesh very moiste, except it be the flesh of
lambs, as Galen reports. Yet it is not good to every complexion, nor every
age, but unto youth and middle age. Whereas thou haste spoken against ye vile
nature of swine, calling them unreasonable, thou do use more words then wit^
for there is no beast, Beasts have no reason.
yt may be called reasonable? but man only. And whereas God did prohibit the
Jews to eat swines flesh? it was a figure to abstain from unclean things:
which I leave to thee Theologians. The Mahumites abhor swines flesh, because
there droncken false prophet, and Psevvdo Apostle was ^orne and rent in pieces
with wine, being dronken and fallen in the mire. So the one must give ^redence
to time, and to learned Phisicions. The blood of swine ^othe nourrishe much,
puddyng of swine.
as it is ^eene in puddinges, made with ^reate Otmeale, sweet sewet, and
^^nnel, or Annes seeds. Pigges ^e very moist, therefore Sage* Pepper and
Salt, do dry up ^^e superfluous humors of them, when they be roasted. They
^e not holsom to be eaten before ^hey be three weeks old. of swine.
The ^ipes and guts be holesomer, and does nourish better then any ^ther
beasts guts, or in meats. Bakon is very hard of disgestion, and much
discomme^ded, and is hurtful. Only unto a hoate chollericke labouringe body,
the flesh of a Boore, is more holsomer then the flesh of any sow* The
brains of a Bore, and his stones, or any part of the^ sta^ped together, and
laid warm upon a pestilence sore, in the manner of a plaster, A plaster.
it will break it incontinent. Swines grease is very cold, and good to
annointe burninge hot places of the body, or a disease called sancte
Anthonies fire, and thus much have I spoken of swine.


John. I Pray you tell me of the flesh of the Rams, weathers, and Lambs and
how profitable they are to man^ nature.


Humfrey. SImeon Sethi says, La^bes flesh is partlye warm, Simeon Sethi.
but superfluous moist, and evil for ^^egmatick persons, and does much harm
to the^^ that have the (...), bonache, or a disease called Epiolus, which is
(...) of fleame like glass. Therefore if lambs flesh were sodden; as it is
roasted, it would bring many diseases unto the body, without it were sodden
with wine, and some hot grosseries, herbs, or ^ootes. When a weather is two
years old, which is fed upon a good ground, the flesh thereof, shall be
temperate and nourrishe much. Hip. in. (...) pri. doc. cap. 1^.
Hippocrates says, that the lamb of a year old, does no^rishe much.
Galen seems not greatly to commend Motton* but that which is tender, sweet
and not old, is very profitable, as experience and custom, does dailye teach
us. The dounge Tallowe and woll be very profitable in Medicines, as Plinii
says: And Conradus Gesnerus, de animalibus, De ali. lib tertio. 3.
and Galen in his third book, de alimentis,


John. What is the flesh of Gotes or kids.


Humfrey THey be beasts very hurtful unto young trees and pla^ts, but Simeon
Sethi says, that kid^ flesh is of easy disgestion, in health and
sickness, they be very good meat. They be dry of nature. in ter. xii. doc.
sec^. Capi. vii.
Hipocrates says. It behooves that the conceruers and kepers of health, do
study that his meat be such, as the flesh^ of kiddes, young calves, that be
suckinge, and Lambs of o^^ year old. For they be good for them that be
sick, Hali in quincte theori. Capit. 2.
or have eue^^ complexions. Haliabas does say, that the flesh of Kiddes do
engender good blood, and is not so ^legmaticke, watery, and moiste, as the
flesh of Lambs. They remain Kiddes for six months, and afterward comes
into a greaser, and hotter nature, and be called Goats. The flesh of them
that be gel^ed..ias holsom to eat, the l^^ngs of them eaten before a man do
^^inke, does defend him that day from drunkenness, as I have red in the
reports of learned men. But the flesh of the old (...) or male gotes be il,
and in^ender the Agues or fevers, I^ ^he urine of goats be stilled in May with
sorrel, A good ^medicen*
the water di^^illed is not hurtful nor noy^o^, but whomesoeuer use to drin^ke
thereof two drammes morn and eueninge, it will preserve him from the pestilence.
The milcke of Goats I will describe in the place of milk.


John. What is the flesshes of Read and fallowe Dear?


Humfrey. MOre pleasant to some, the profitable to many, as appears once a
year in the cor^^^ fields, Hippo. Simeon Sethi.
the more it is to be lamented. Hippocrates and Simeon Sethi, do plainelye
affirm the flesh of them to engender evil iuse, and Melancholye cold
diseases and quarteins, the flesh of winter dear, Ras^. ala. Cap. 3.
do less hurt the body, then that which is eaten in Summer. For in Winter
man's disgestion is more stronger, and the inward parts of the body warmer,
and may easerlye consume groose meats, then in Summer, as we see by
experience. In cold weather and frostes healful people, be most hungriest.
The lunges of a dear sodden in barlye water, and taken fourth and stamped with
penedice and Honye of equal quantitye to the said lunges, and eaten a
mornings, does greatly healpe old coughes, and dryness in the lunges.

There be many goodly virtues of their horns, bones, blood and tallowe.


Ihon. What is the properties of Hares and Conies flesh? Aui. in. ^. Can.
cap. ^46.



Humfrey. AVisen saiethe, the flesh, of Hares, Aui. in. 2. Can. cap. 46.
be hoote and dry^ ingenderers of Melancholye not praised in Physic for me
(...) but rather for medicine. For indede, if a Hare be dried in the month of
March in an Oven or furneyse, and beaten into powder, and kept close, and
drunk a morninges in Bear, Ale, or white Wine: it will break the stoane in
the bledder, if the paciente be not old. If childrens gummes be anointed with
the brains of an Hare, their teethe will easelye come forth and grow. The
gall of an Hare mingled with clean honey, A medice^ for bloudi eyes.
does cleanse waterye eyes, or read bloudye eyes. The flesh of Hares must be
tenderly roasted, and well larded and spiced, because of the grosenesse, but it
is better sodden. The flesh of Conies are better then hares flesh, and easyer
of disgestion. But rabbets be holsomer. And thus to conclude of Connies,
experience teaches us, that they are good, they be could and dry of nature,
and small mention is made of them, among the ancient physicians, Galen in.
iii. de ali. Capi. ^.
as Galen says. I need not to speak very long of every kind of beasts
as some of the beasts that be in Hiberia like little Hares which be called
Conies.


John. If the old and ignoraunte men of Connyes, which were seen in the
nature of many other beasts, that had dwelte in diverse places places of
England then should have known them right well: And perhaps received of
them as small pleasure, as many husband men have found profit by them in
their Corn. Now thou haste well satisfied me of the fo^r foted beasts,
which commenlye English men sedeth upon. Now I pray thee tell me, some
of the virtues of souls and first of Cocks, Capones and Hens.


Humfrey. CHickens of Hens, says Auenzoar, Auenz. lib. pri.
is most commended, and most laudable of any flesh, and nourrisheth good
blood It is light of disgestion, and does comfort the appetite, cock ^
chickens, be better then hens, the capo^ is better then the cock, ^^^ do
augmente good blood and feed, Rasis in lib. 4. Afforis.
as Rasis reports, and ^xperience proves in men, both ^^ole and sick. An
old Cock which is well beaten after his ^ethers be pulled of until he be
^^ll bloody, and then cut of his ^ead and draw him, and sethe ^im in a close
pot with fair ^ater, and white wine, Fenyll ^ootes, Burrage roots, Violet,
^lanten, Succory, and Buglos ^aues, Dates, Prunes, great Raysins, Mates, and
Sugar, and ^ut in the mary of a Calfe, and ^anders. This is a most excel^nt
broth to them that be sick, ^^eake, or consumed. The brains ^^hennes, capons
or chekens, be ^^olsome to eat, to comfort the ^raine and memory. And thus to
^onclude these forsaide fowls, (...) better for idle folks that labor. not,
then for them that use exercise or travel, to whom gross meats are more
profitable.


John. What is the properties of Gese?


Humfrey. VVylde gyse and tame, their flesh be very gross and hard of
disgestion, Auicen. in 2. Cano. Cap. 46.
Auicen says* The flesh of great fowls and of gese, be slow and hard of
disgestion: for their humiditie, they do bread fevers quickly, but their
gooslynges or young gese, being fat, are good and much commended in meats.
And Galen says that the flesh of fowls be better then the flesh of
beasts. Galen in lib. 3. de alimen.


But undoubtedly gose, mallard pecocke, Of great fowls.
swane, and every foul having a long neck, be all har^ of disgestion, and of
no good co^plexions. But if gese be well ro^ted and stopped with salt, sage,
^epper, and onions, they will not ^urte the eaters thereof. There be great gese
in Scotland, which ^redeth upon a place called the Basse. There be also
Bernacles, which have a strange genera^ion as Ges^erus says: Gesnerus.
and as the people of the North parts of Scotland knows, and because (...)
should seem incredible to mani I will give none occasion to any, ^ither to mock
or to marvel. And thus I give warninge to them which love their health,
(...) have these foresaid fowls somewhat poudred or stopped with ^alte, all the
night, before they be roasted.


John. I pray the tell me of y^ flesh of Duckes?


Humfrey. THey be the hoatest of all domestical, or yard fowls, and unclean
of feeding: notwithstanding, though it be hard of disgestion and marvelous
hoate, yet it does greatly norrishe the body and makes it fat. Hip. in 2.
can. ca. 46
Hippocrate says: they that be fed in puddels and foul places, be
hurtful: but they that be fed in houses, pens or coopes, Isack. in. vni.
ca. 16.
be neutratiue, but yet gross, as Isack says.


Ihon. What he Pigio^s, Turtles or Doves?


Humfrey. THe flesh of Turtles be marvelous good, and equal to to the best
as Auicen says: Auicen. in can. de ca.
They be best when they be young and wholesome for flegmaticke people. Simeon
Sethi says: the house dove is hoater then the field dove, and does engender
gross blood. The common eating of them is ill for chollericke persons with
read faces, for fear of Leprosy: therefore cut of the feet, wings, and head,
of your Pigio^s or Doves, for their blood, is that which is ^o venomous: they
be best in the spring time, and heruest. And Isaac says, Isaac. in lib.
dicta: Cap. 16.
because they are so ^yghtly converted into choler. They did command in the
old ^ime, that they should be eaten with sharp Vinegar, Pur^leyn, Coucombers,
or Sitron. Roosted Pigions be best. Roasted pigions be best.
The blood that comes out of the right wynge, dropped into ones ^ye, does
mightily help the eye, if it swells or prieketh. And thus much have I spoken
of Pigeo^s, or Doves.


Ihon. What is the flesh of Peacoches?


Humfrey. SImeon Sethi says: it is a raw flesh, and hard of disgestion,
onles it be very fat. But if it b^ fat, it helps the Pluresie. Haliabas
says: Hali. in. 5. Retho. cap. 23.
that both Swannes Cranes, Pecockes, and any great fowls, must after they b^
killed, be hanged up by ye necks two or three days, with a stoon^ waiyng at
their feet, as ye weather will serve, and then dressed and eaten. Provided
that good wine be dronken after them.


John. What is the flesh of Cranes?


Humfrey. SImeon Sethi says: Simeon Sethi.
their flesh is hoate and dry, the young be good, but the old increases
melancoly, they do engender seed of generation, and being tenderly roasted,
does help to clear the voice, and cleanse the pype of the lunges.


John. What is Swan?


Humfrey. EVery gross foul is chollericke, hard of disgestion: the Signetes
be better then the old Swa^nes, if their Galantines be ^ell made, it helps to
disgeste their flesh.


John. That is the flesh of Herons, Bytters, and Shouellers?


Humfrey. THese fowls be fisshers, and be very raw, and flegma^icke, like
unto the meat whereof ^hey are fed: the young be best, and ought to be eaten
with pepper, Synnamon, Sugar, and ^inger, and to drink wine after you ^or good
disgestion: And thus do for all water fowls.


John. What be partriches, Fesants quails, Larkes, Sparrowes, Plouer, and bla^
Eirdes?


Humfrey. PArtriches does bind she belly, Auicen.
and does norryshe milch^ The Cocks be better then t^ Hen birds, Rasis in.
3. alm. c. 10.
they do dry ^ffeume and corruption in the sto^macke. Feesantes, is the best
o^ al flesh for his swetnes, is equa^ unto the Capo^ or Partriche, b^ he is
somewhat drier. Ra. in lib. 4. affo.
And Ra^ says: Feasantes flesh is goo^ for the that have ye fever Ethik^ for
it is not only a meat, but medicine, and does cleanse corru^ humers it the
stomach. Quail altough they be eaten of man^ yet they are not to be comende
for they do engender aguwes, be evil for the falling sickenesse^ For as
Conciliatur says: of al^ fowls that be used for meats it is the worste.
Diosco.
Dioscorides says: that Larkes roasted, be wholesome to be eaten of them that be
troubled with the chollicke. Black birds taken in the time of frost, be
holsom and good of disgestio^: The properties of small birds.
The donge of Black birds tempered with vinegar, and applied to any place that
have the black Morphewe, or black Leprosy, often times anointed with a
sponge does help the^. The flesh of Plouers does engender melancoly.
Sparrowes be hoote, and provoke venus or lust: Plinii. lib ii. Cap. 36.
Plinii does discribe their properties: ^he brains be the best part of
them. Woodcockes be of good di^gestion and temperate to feed upon. All small
birds of ye field, ^s Robbin read breast, Lynettes, Finches, red Sparrowes,
Gold wings, and such like, if they be fat, they be marvelous good, and
does greatly comfort nature, either roasted or boiled, and thus do I conclude
with the of birds.


John. I Heartily thank thee, gentle master Humfrey: for thy pains taking in
these thy rules unto me, concerning the proper use of beasts, and fowls, in
meats. I would be glad to know the virtues of some fyshes?


Humfrey. IN many Ila^des of this world, nere adjacent unto the occiente seas,
the people live there, most chiefly by fish, and be right strong and sound
people of complexion, as Aristotel says: Aristo in proble.
Consuetudo est ta^quam altra natura. Custom is like unto another nature, but
because I speak of fish, I will divide them in three parts. First of the
fisshes of the sea, secondly the fish of fresh running rivers, Of sea Eishe.
thirdly of the fishes in poles and standinge waters. The Sea has many gross
and fat fysshes, which be noisome to the stomach, but the smaler kind of
fishes yt feed about rocks and clear stony places, be more drier and less
of moistnes, then the fresh water fish, and does engenderles fleume and wind,
by the reason of their salt feding as Galen says: Galen d^tuen,
they be the best fishes that feed in the pure sea: and chiefest of all
fisshes for the ^se of mankind. Hali. in quin, the^ Capit. 25.
But Haliabas says: new fish lately taken, is ^olde and moist, and
phlegmatic, but lest of all the Sea fysshe. Fysshe that swymmeth in fresh
^leare Ryuers, or stoony places, where as the water is sweat, ^eynge fysshes
that bear scales, he meruaylous good.

If they feed near unto places where much filthe is daily cast out, there
the fisshe be very corrupt and unwholesome, as the said Haliabas says: Fyshe
that fedeth in fennes, marisces, diches, and moddie pooles, be very unwholesome,
and do corrupt the blood, they be gross and slymy, corrupt and wyndie. But
those fisshes that be fed in fair pondes, wherein two running waters may
ensue, Best feding for fish.
and where as sweat herbs, roots, weeds, that grows about the banks,
does feed the fisshe: those fisshe be wholesome. Galen saieth^ Fisshe yt is white
skalled, hard. As perches, Cheuiens, Ruffes, Carpes, Breimes, Roches, Troutes
etc. be al good. But vnskaled fisshes, as Eales, Tenches, Lampreis, and such
like, be dangerous, onles they be well baken or roasted, and eaten with
pepper, ginger, and vinegar: And note this, To labor sone after theatyng of
fish, is hurtful. Galen.
that it is not wholesome traueling, or labourynge, immediately after the eatinge
of fysshe, for it does greatly corrupt the stomach, and as Galen says:
the nourryshementes of flesh is better then the nourrismentes of fyshe: And
thus much generally I have spoken of fish.


Ihon. ANd thus it seems by thy words that great fisshe that be deuourers in
sea, Oil far, fish be groos^ fode.
as Seal and Purpos, and such like, be unwholesome, and that the smaller
fisshes, as Codlinges, Whitinges, Places, Smeltes, Buttes, Solles, pike Perch,
Breime, Roche, Carpe, and such as fedeth in clean stony waters: thou sayste
they be wholesome, Eales, Lampreis, and other muddy fysshes, ^hou do not
greatly commend.

There be some kinds of fysh soft and hard, which be the best?


Humfrey. If fysshe be soft, the eldest fyshe is the be best: The electiu^ of
fish.
If fyshe be hard the youngest is best, for it is either soft or hard. Of hard
fish take the smallest, of soft fysshe take the greatest: Provided that your
fyshe be not very slimy, and thus says Auicen in his book of fysshes. Auicen
cap. de piscibus.



Ihon. I pray the tell me some thing of shell fysshes?


Humfrey. CRauises and Crabbes, be very good fysshes, Creuises and crabs
the meat of them does help the lunges, but they be hurtful for the bladder,
yet they will engender seade. If Crabbes of the fresh water be sodden in pure
grene Oil olive: this Oil dropped into the ear luke warm, does heal
hoate burning obstructions, and stoppinge matter that hinders the hearing. As
for lempetes, Cockles, Galen in libra de a limento.
Scallapes as Galen says: they be hard of disgestion, muskels and oisters
would be well boiled roasted, or baken with onions, wine, butter, sugar, ginger,
and pepper, or else they be very wyndy and flegmatike. Chollerick, stomaks may
well digest raw oisters, but they have cast many one away.


Ihon. What is the virtue of Oil?


Humfrey. Green oil of olives, is ye mother of all oiles, which does draw
into her own nature the virtues of herbs, buddes, flowers, fruits, and
roots. Sweet sallet oil is wholesome to disgeste cold herbs, and sallets,
te^pered with sharp Vinegar and Sugar. Auerdies comes oil in quinto de ouis.
New Oil does moist, and warm the stomach, but old Oil, corrupts the
stomach, and cleueth to the lunges, and maheth one horse. Oil of Roses and
sharp vinegar, tempered together, is good to anointe the fore heads of them
that be troubled with extreme heat or fransie, so that Blugose be sodden in
their posset ale, or else drink the syrrupes of Endive, or Buglos.

There be many goodly virtues in compounded oiles, both to calife and make
hot: And also to cool the body when it is extreme hoote, as the great learned
man John Mesua, has decribed in his Antidorarii.


Ihon. VVilt thou be so good as to tell me the properties of water?


Humfrey. Water is one of the four elements, Galli. 3. de uic. in. aui. li.
1. fen. 2.
more lighter then earth, heuier then fire and air. But this water which is
here amongst us in Rivers, Pondes, springes, What kind of waters is best.
floudes, and seas: be no pure waters, for they be mingled with sundry airs,
corruptions, grosenesse, and saltnes: notwithstanding in all our meats and
drinks water is used, and amongst all living creatures can not be forborne,
both man, beast, fish, foul, Auice. lib 1. fen. 3. de dispositionibus aquarum.
herb, and grass. And as Auicen says, the claye water is pure, for cley
cleanses the water, and is better then water that runs over gravel, or
stones, so that it be pure cley, void of corruption. Also waters runnynge
toward the east, be pure, coming out of hard stonye rocks, and a Pint of
that water is lighter then a pynte of the standing water of wells, or pooles.
The lighter the water, the better it is. Also waters that is put in wine. etc
ought first to be sodde^ or it be occupied cold, and so the fire does cleanse
it from corruption. Standing waters and water running near unto cities and
towns, or marish ground, wodes, and fennes be ever full of corruption, because
there is so much filthe in them of carions and rotten dunge. etc. The hyer it
water does faule, then the water is. Yse and snow waters be verygrose, and be
hurtful to the bodies of men and Beasts. To drink cold water is evil,
for it will stop the body, and engender melancholye. Salt water helps a
man from scabbes, iche, and moiste humors, it kills lice, and wastes
blood between the skin and the flesh, but it is most hurteful to the
stomach, but the vapoure and smoke of it is good for them that have the dropsy.


John. What is Vinegar?


Humfrey. Vinegar is cold and dry, The properties of Vinegar.
and is hurtefull for them that be melancholye, but when it is drunk, or
poured upon a outward wound stops the blood It also kylleth hot
apostumations of erisipilus, it is an enemi to the sinowes. Vinegar and
brimstone sodden together, is good for the Gout, to wasshe it withal. Vyneger
tempered with oil Olyfe, or oil of Roses, and sode^ with unwashed wol,
helps a disease called Soda in the head, applied warm unto the place, it
does help hoate diseases in the head called Soda, it is good in sauce for all
warm and moist men. Vinegar with clean clarified honye penidies and fair water
sodden together, does greatly help the pains in the throat, or lunges, or
stoppyng the wind, and quenches hot diseases. And sharp vyneger mingled
with salt, and put upon the biting of a dog, does heal it: and against poison
it is excellent, chiefly to drink a little thereof against the pestilence in a
morning.


John. What virtue has our common salt?


Humfrey. RAsis says, Rasis in. 3. alman. Capit. 17.
salt is hot and dry, Dioscorides says, salt has virtue to stop, to scour,
and mundifie, and of that mind is Oribasius, The virtue of falt
saying: salt is compou^ded of matter abstersive and stiptik, which ^atters be
both binding and driyng moist humors, and is good to powder fat flesh, both
bief and porke, and other fat meat: for it has virtue to dry up superfluous
humors, as water and blood. etc. But it is not good for lean bodies, or hot
co^plexcioned people, for the much use of it makes the body cholerike, appear
aged, and to be angry. The very use of it is only to season meats, but not
to be meat. Much good salt is made here in England, as at ^itch, Hollond in
Lincholnshire and in the Shiles nere unto new ^astell.


Ihon. What is honye, or the virtue thereof?


Humfrey. AVerrois says, Auerrois in. 5.
honye is hoa^ and dry in the second degree, and does cleanse very much,
and is a medicinable mea^ most chiefliest for old men and women. For it does
warm them and convert the^ into good blud. Simeon Sethi.
I^ is not good for choleric persons because of the heat and dryness. They do
greatly err that say honey is hot and moiste: but if it be clarified from his
wax and dross and kept in a close vessel, there is nothing that is liquid
upon the earth that remains le^ger. And this precious jewel honey, has ever
been more praised above sugar, for it will co^serue and keep any fruit, herb,
rote, or any other thing that is put into it an exceadynge long time.
Marvelous is the work of God in honye, being a heavenly dew, that falls
upon flowers and leaves as Auicen ^aieth, Auen in. 2. Cano. Cap. 504.
and is neither the juice of ^eaues nor fruit, but only the ^eauenlye dew.
Whereunto the Sees comes in due time, and ^ather the said honye, and lay it
^p in store in their curious buil^ed houses, whereas they dwell ^^gether in
most goodly order. god has ordained ye Sees to be an example unto us, both
for love and worcking in the common wealth. Virgilius
O Sees bees, how happyer are you more then many wretched men, ^hyche dwells
never together (...) unity and peace, but in con^nuall discord, and
disquietnes ^s Virgill says. En quo discor^a ciues produxerit miseros.
Be^olde what discord wretched Citizins have brought forth. But now to make
an end of ^e most excellent virtues of ^onye, it is good in the meats (...)
them which be flegmatike. Honey newely taken out of their combs, be partlye
laxatiue, but clarified honey does bind and dry up fleum, and keeps the bodies
of flegnatike and old persons from corruption. The best honey is gathered in the
spring time, the second in somer, but that which is gathered in winter, is
ill and hurtful. One part of honey, and some part of water sodden together
until the sroth be all scomde of, and when it is cold kept in a close stone
pot, Galen de tuen, sani Libra. 4.
this drink says Galen is wholesome for summer, cleanses the lunges, and
preserves the body in health. Oximel simplex and compositum be made with
honye, and so be many mo things which be of great virtue. Sugar which is
called Mel can, honey of the reed, being clean, and not full of gross pannell,
does cleanse, and is not so hoate as Bees honye, and does agree with the
stomachs of choleric persons. Haliabas in. 5. theo. Capi. 27.
Haliabas says it moves not the stomach to drynes, and that the clean white
sugar not adulbrated, does nourishe more then honye. Of Rosewater, Pearls,
and sugar is made a goodly comforter for the heart, called Manus Christi.


Ihon. What is the property of milk?


Humfrey. SImeon Sethi says that milk is of three parts: Simeon Sethi.
whay, curdes, and creme. Whay is wholesome to drink, in Summer, specially of
choleric persons, it cleanses the body. Milk of fat beasts does nourish
more then the lean beasts, and the milk of young beasts is better then of
the old. And the new milk is holesomer then that which has stand in the
air, Rasis in. 3 alman. Capit. 15.
as Rasis says. And also those beasts that feadeth in dry Pastures amongst
sweet Herbs, grass, and flowers having conueniente Water their milk is
very good. Milk in the beginning of Somer is very wholesome. Milk not good
for foul stomakes
In winter it is unwholesome for flegmaticke persons, or them which have
corrupt and foul stomachs. For if the milk be sower, it dooet engender the
stone in the raynes or bladder. Cowes milk is the thyckest mylcke, and vnctius
or full of butter. But the best mylcke that healpeth agaynst^ Consumptions,
Hip. in. li de air. et aqua.
is womannes mylcke. The next is Goats milk, which Goats milk rather
nourishes to much, if it be taken commonely.

Shepes milk is not very pleasant to the stomach. And note this, that
Mylcke is not wholesome to them which have payns in the Head or teeth. But the
people that be brought up with mylcke, be fair colored, and healthful
bodies.

Isaac says, if Honye and a little salt be sodden in the milk ^hen it is
wholesome, and is not wyndye nor flegmatycke.

If mynts, burrage leaves, rosemarye flowers, honye suckles, and a little Sugar
be laid in (...) Basone, and covered with a ^ayre lynnen clothe, and milk he
said Basin full through he clothe, and let it stand all ^yghte. This is
pleasant to ^rynke in the morning upon ^n empty stomach, two hours before
any other meat, it cleanses the rage of hoate burning Chollere, Galen de
alimen.
and thus I leave o^ milk.


Ihon. What is butter?


Humfrey. BVtter is hoate and moist fresh butter is used in many medicines.
The operation of butter and Cheese.
New made butte^ meanelye salted, is good wit bread, flesh, and fisshe, it
healpeth the lunges, and purges the dryness of the throat, and helps
coughes most chieflyest if (...) be mingled with honey or sugar. It is good
for young children when their teeth does grow o^ ache. Buttermilke if ye
crumm^ new white bread into it, an^ suppe it of, there is no milk norisheth
so much, Goats mylk excepted. Cheese if it be new it is indifferentlye well
commended, but hard salt Cheese does dry the body, and engendereth ^he
Stone, Isaac in. 5 doc. ca. 15. Auicen in secun. capitulo. cxxviii.
as Isaac and Auicene says, and many other doctors mooe do discommende it
then praise it. When pottes or stones ^ee broken, if hard Cheese be steped in
water and made soft, and ground upon a Paynters Stone, it will join the
broken Pottes or Stones together again. By this I gather, that Cheese will
engender the Stone before any other meats. Therefore Cheese should be made in
Somer when the cream is not taken from the milk. And Bittony, Saxifrage, and
Parcelye, ^hopped together, be wholesome to be mingled amongst the cu^ds, and
thus I conclude with Halia^as, that old chese is unwholesome.


John. What be Eggs.


Humfrey. GAlen says in his book of Symples, that Eggs is n^ part of the
fowls, but a portion of the thing from whence it came. Simeon Sethi writing
of the diuersitye of Eggs, says, the first propertyes is (...) their
substance, and the second is in their time, either new laid or old. The
third is in the manner of their rosting, potchynge, or seethinge. New laid
Eggs of Hens potched and supped, upon an emptye Stomach, does cleanse the
Lunges and the raynes of the back. Hard Eggs be greatly discommended,
unless it be to stop flixes, but it were better to seath Eggs hard in
vyneger, and then undoubtedly it will dry up the Flyxe of the beallye.
Fried Eggs be very hurtefull for Choleric people, and them which have
the Stone. Duckes and Gees Eggs be gross and noisome, but Partriche,
Feasauntes, and Hens eggs, ingendreth good blood.


John. What is the property of wine.


Humfrey. HIpocrates says of a customable thing comes less hurt, Hipp. in
ii. aphori
where of I gather, that they that drink wine customablye with mesure, it does
profit them much, and makes good disgestion. But those people that use to
drink wine seldom times, be distemperated. White wine if it be clear, Auero
in 6. colig. Rasis in libra, 26. ^on. ca. 1.
it is wholesome to be dronk before meat, for it pearseth quickly to the
bladder: but if it be drunk upon a full stomach, it will rather make opilation
and stoppynge of the meserates, because it does swiftlye drive fode down,
before nature has of him self disgested it. And ye nature of white Wine is of
least warmenesse. The second Wine is pure Claret, of a clear Iacinct, or yelow
color. This wine does greatly nourryshe and warm the body, and is a wholesome
wine with meat, and is good for flegmatike folk, but very unwholesome for
young children, or them which have hoate livers, or pains in their head,
occasioned of hoate vapors, or smokes, for it is like unto fire, and flax.
The third is black, or deep read wine, which is thick, a stopper of the
belly, a corrupter of the blood, a breader of ye stone, hurtful to old men,
and profitable to few men, except they have the flixe. And for the election
of wine says Auicen: that wine is best that is between new and old, Auice^
in 3. prim. 2. doc. ca. 8.
clear, declining somewhat to read of good odoure, neither sharp nor sweet,
but equal between two, for it has virtue not only to make humors
te^perate, warm, and moist, but also to expel evil matter, which corrupted
the stomach and blood. In somer it ought to be delayed with pure clear
water, as Aristotle says in his problemes. And note this, that in driyeres,
wines be best and most wholesome, but in watery years, the grapes be corrupted,
which wine does bring to the body many evil diseases, as dropsies, tympanes,
flixes, reumes, wyndes and such like, as Galen says. And thus to conclude of
wine, Galen in. reg. a^^.
almighty god did ordeine it for the great comfort of mankind, to be taken
moderatly, but to be dronken with excess, The heat of excess in drinking.
it is a poison most venomous, it relaxeth the senewes, brings palsy,
falling sycknes in cold persons, hoate fevers, fransies, fyghtinge, lechery,
and a consuming of the liver, to chollerycke persons. And generallye there is
no credence to be given to dronkards, although they be mighty men. It makes
men like unto monsters, with co^tinaunces, like unto burning cooles: It
dishonors noble men, and beggereth poor men: and generally kylleth as many
as be slain in cruel battailles, the more it is to be lamented.


John. What is Beer or Ale?


Humfrey. ALe does engendre gross humors in the body, but if it be made of good
barley malte, and of wholesome water, and very well sodden, and stand five or
six days, until it be clear. It is very wholesome, especially for hoate
chollerycke folks, having hoate burning fevers. But if ale be very sweet and
not well sodde^ in the brewing, it bring thin flamation of wind and choler in
to the belly: If it be very sower, it fretteth and nepeth the guts, and is
evil for the eyes. To them that be very flegmaticke, ale is very gross, but to
temperat bodies it increases blood: It is partly laxatiue, and provoke
urine. Clean brewed Bear if it be not very strong, brewed with good hoppes,
does cleanse the body from corruption, and is very holsom for the liver, it is
an usual or common drink in most places of England, which in dead is hurt
and made worse with many rotten hoppes, or hoppes dried like dust which
comes from beyond the sea. But although there comes many good hoppes from
thence, yet it is known that the goodly stilles, and fruteful grounds of
england, do bring forth to ma^s use, as good hoppes as grows in any place of
this world, as by proof I know in many places of the country of Suffolk:
Where as they brewe their bear with the hoppes that grows upon their own
grounds: And thus to conclude of ale and beer, they have no such virtue nor
goodness as wine have, and the surphetes which be taken of them, through
dronkenes: be worse the^ the surphetes taken of wine.

Know this that to drink ale or beer of an empty stomach moderatly hurts
not, but does good. Auicen. ^^ter tra. ii. capitu. 8. Auero in comen. Rasis
in. 4. alman. Capitu. ^.
But if one be fasting hungry or empty and drink much wine, it will hurt the
synewes, and brings cra^pe, sharp agues, and palseis, as Auicen, Auerois and
Rasis says.


John. What is bread?


Humfrey. THe best Bread is made of clean sweet wheat which grows in
claie ground, and makes but little bre^ne when it is ground, light leuened,
meanelye salted, and the bread to be baken in an oven not extremely hoate, for
burning of the bread, nor les then mean hot, for causyng the bread to be
heavy and raw, the lyghter the bread is, and the more full of holes, it is y^
holsomer, as Auerrois and Rasis says. Auerrois in quint. Col.
And also bread must neither be eaten new baken, nor very staile or old, for
the one causes drienesse thirst and smoking into ye head, Rasis in. 30. Alma^
cap. 3.
troubling the brains and eyes through the heat thereof: The other dries the
body and brings mela^coly, humers, hurting memory. The best bread is that
which is of a day old, and the loves or manchets, may neither be great nor
little, but mean, for the fire in small loves dries up the moistnes or virtue
of the bread, and in great loves it leueth rawenes and grosenes. Galen. 1.
aliment. Cap. 2.
Read Galen in the properties of bread: Sodden bread, which be called symnels
or cracknelles, be very unwholesome, and hurts many one: Rye bread is wyndy
and hurtefull to many, therefore it should be well salted and bake^ with Annis
seeds, and commonly crustes of bread be very dri and burns, they do enge^der
melancoly humers. Therefore in great men's houses the bread is chipped and largeli
pared and ordynarely is made in brewes, and sosse for dogs, which will help
to feed a great number of poor people, but that many be more affectionat to
dogs then men: Barley bread do cleanse, cool and make the body lean.


John. What is Rise.


Humfrey. THere be many opinions in the virtue thereof, but I shall stay my self
with the judgment of Auicen: Aui. in. 2. Can. cap. 500. lxxviii.
Rise says he, is hot and dry and has virtue to stop the belly, it does
nourrishe much, if it be sodden with milk, but it ought to be steped in water
a whole night before: if blaunched Almondes be stamped and with Rose water
streined into them, and sodden with cowes milk, it is very nutramentall.


John. What be Almondes?


Humfrey. THe bitter Almondes be hoatter then the sweet Almo^des. Dry Almondes
be hurtful, the milk of moiste Almondes, where in burning stele is quenched,
stops the flix: To eat Almondes before meat, preserves against drinkenes.
Of Walnuttes.
Walnuts be holsom when they be new, to be eaten after fish, for they hinder
engendring of fleume. Simeon Sethi says they are hot in the first, and dry
in the second degree, not wholesome before meat, Plinii in Liber. 22. Capitu, 8.
Plinii speakinge of Metridatis the great king that Pompius, found of his
own hand writing, that two nuttes and two figs, and twenty rewe leaves
sta^ped together with a little sail, and eaten fasting, does defend a mam both
from poison and pestilence that day. Philberdes and haste nuttes, Of
Philbardes.
be hard of disgestion, ill before meat, hurtefull to the head and lu^ges, if
they be roasted and eaten with a little pepper, they will help the running and
distillation of rumes. Chestnuttes if they be roasted and eaten with a little
honey fasting, Of chestnuttes.
they healpe the coughe, if they be eaten raw, although they greatelye
nourryshe the boedy, yet they be hurtful for the spleen and fills the
bellyful of wind. Nutmegges be very good for cold persons, Of nutmegges.
comfort the sight and memory, Auicen Capit. de nuce,
as Auicen says but without doubt Nutmegges does combuste or burn sangwin
men, and dry their blood: and thus much have I spoken shortly of Nuttes.


John. What be Cloves, Galangell, and Pepper?


Humfrey. THey be hoate and dry, and as Rasis says: Rasis in li. 4. acho
does comfort cold stomakes: and make sweat breath, and is good in the meats
of them that has ill disgestion* Black pepper is hoater then long pepper, and
does mightily warm the body, the grosser it is eaten, with fisshe or fruit,
the better it provoke urine, it is hoate and dry, Isaac in parti diebus.
in the fourth degree, therefore they do err that say pepper is hoate in the
mouth and cold in the stomach. Although pepper be good to them that use it
well, yet unto artificial women that have more beastlines then beuty and
cannot be content with their natural complexions, but would feign be fair:
they eat peper, dried corn, and drink vinegar, with such like bagage, to
dry up their blood, A practice
and this is the very cause that a great number though not all, fall into
weakness, green sickness, stinkinge brethes, and oftentimes sudden death.


Ihon. What is sweet Callamus odoratus?


Humfrey. AN excellent sweet root and profitable for men, if the poticaries
keep it not until it be rotten, it is hot and dry in the beginning to the
mids of the second degree, it has poor to cle^se, to dry, to waste all
winds with in the body without hurt. Galen does greatly commend the sauoure
of it. They yt drink of this root sodden in wine, shall have remedy of the
white morphew, and recover good collers. And this have I proved, it helps
crampes and sickenessis in the senewes, being drunk in wine, sodden with
sage, it helps the spleen, ye liver and raynes, and will cleanse the secret
terms of women, and agmenteth natural seed.


Ihon. What is Ginger?


Humfrey. IT is hoote in the third degree, Auerrois in. 5. coll.
and moiste in the end of the first if it be vncollered. White and not rotten it
is very good, most chiefly if it be conserved. And grene as Mesua says: Mesua
in 4. distin.
it makes warm a cold stomach, and consumes winds, helps evil
disgestion, and makes meat gooe easelye down into the stomach.


John. What is Setwall?


Humfrey. HOate and dry in the second degree, and is good, the powder thereof
to be drunk is most of effect against the pestilence except: Methredatum: It
is good against poison, wind chollericke and cold passions of the hearts, and
does restrain vometes. The weight of eight granes does suffice to be drunk in
ale or wine upon an empty stomach.


John. What is Sinamon?


Humfrey. DIoscorides does say: there be many kinds of Sinamon, but
generally their virtue is this to help dropsies, winds or stopping of the
liver, and is hoate and dry in the third degree. Ihon. What is Cassia
fistula, Seneca, and Rewbarbe?


Humfrey. CAssia fistula, if the Caane be heuie and the cassia within black
and shining that is good cassia, if this be drawn new out of the caane half
an ounce or more at one time, and mingled with sugar, and eaten of a fasting
stomach in the morning it has power to purge choler, to cle^se the raines of
the back it will frete and consume the stone, it purges very easily, and is
pleasant in taking, and may be taken of children, weke women, and sick me^, in
the time of their fevers, ye access of their fyttes, Of ^^barbe and his
operation.
eccepted. Rhabarbe do purge yellowe collar by him self, two or three drames may
be taken or a little more, so that there be a drame of spicanarde or sinamon,
put unto it. In summer to drink it with whay. In winter with white wine: but
ye clean yellowe rubarbe sliced, and put into infution all the night with
whaye, white wine, or Endive water, and streyne it in the morning, does
greatly purge the blood and liver, three or four drames with spicanarde a
dram or more. Seen Alexandria, if it be sodden in the broth of a cock or a
hen does purge the blood and melancoly, very gently and comfort the heart.
One ounce of the clean small leaves of seen without codes or stalks, half
a quarter of one ounce of ginger, twelve cloves, finkle seed two drames, or
else two drames of sinamon tartar, half a drame, beaten all together in
powder: These do purge the head mightily to be taken before supper, ye
weighte of one drame in a little white wine.


John. I would be glad to learn the virtue of Aloes?


Humfrey. THere be two kinds of aloes, one is named Succotrina, which is like
a liver, clear, brittle bitter, collered between read and yellowe, this is
best for medicines (...) little of this being tempered with Rose water, being
put unto the eyes, helps the droppyng and watery eyes. Also it is put in many
excellent medicines laxatiue, as safron, myrre, aloes, mingled together. In the
form of pills, is the most excellent medicine against the pestilence, as it
is written in this book following. Honye and aloes mingled together, do take
away the marks of stripes and also does mundify sores and ulcers, it does
cleanse the abundance of cholere, and fleume from the stomach. It is not good
to be taken in winter, Auice^ in li. de sim.
for Auicen does forbid it, but in the spring time, or harvest the powder
thereof. The weight of a french crown mingled with the water of honey or meade,
and so droncke in the morninge it does cleanse both choler and flewme. Aloes
cabalin.
There is an other gross aloes which is good for horse tempored with ale; and
ministered as well to other great beasts as horses, the weight of half Anounce,
and thus much have I said of Aloes, but if aloes be clean washed, it is the
holsomer, many vnwasshed Aloes will cause emeroydes.


John. IS the Safron that grow in England as good as that, that come from the
other side of the Sea?


Humfrey. Our English honey, and Safron is beter the^ any that comes from
aniother strange or foren la^d. But to thy question of Safron, it have virtue,
either in bread or potage, to make the heart glad, it warm the body, it
preserves from dro^knes, dronke in ale or wine provoke acts venerus,
inducith sleep, Pillule ^^uffe.
purges vryn. Mirh a loes and saffro^, makes an excelent pil against yt
pestilens, two penny waght of safron powder roosted with the yolke of an egg
very hard, and the said yoke beaten in powder, twelf graynes drink a morninges
is good against the pestilence, Safron, planten, and Iuiry sodde^. The
dicoction drink helps the yellow Iaunders, it is dry in the first degree
and have virtue to restrain.


John. We plain men in yt country dwell far from great Cities, our wives and
children be often sick, and at deaths door, we can not tell what shifte to
make we have no acquantance with y^ a apothicaris, commonly we send for
aqua^titie or mamsey what so ever out diseases be, these be our common medicine
or else we send for a box of triakle, and when these medicines fail us we
cause a great posset to be made, and drink up the drink: think thou these
medicines be not good?


Humfrey FOr lack of medicine God helps the people oftentimes by miracle, or
else a great number of men should pearish. But because the almightye God has
covered the whole face of the earth with many precious simples, whereof rich
co^possions be made. Therefore be nether so rude nor barbarous to think these
medicines good that thou have rehearsed, for all diseases, although not hurtful
to some: but because many do receive more mischief then medicine in
counterfaite treacles. I shall rehearse unto thee what Valerius Cordus and
other, does write upon the virtue of the precious triacle called Metridatum.


John. I Would be glad to hear of that precious triacle, and his virtues.


Humfrey. THis excellent triacle Methrid^tum is next in qualitye and virtue to
Theriaca and do differ but little, but only Theriacha is a little hotter and
stronger against venyme of Snakes, edders, and serpents. It helps all
pains of the head of men or women if it come of cold, most chiefly of
melancholye and fear. It helps megreme, falling sickness, and all pains of
the forehead, droppynge of eyes. It helps tothe-ach, pains of the mouth,
chekes, if it be put in manner of a plaster, or else anointe the pained place.
It helps pains of the throat called Squinance, and also coughe, appoplextia,
and passion of the lunges, and many grievous dollers and pains within the body,
dronk with the decoction of the flowers of pomgranetes or planten it helps
and stops flixes in the Ilias and long gutes winds or colic. The
extention or cramps be helped very much with this Metridatu^ dro^ken with
stilled watters. Palses, sickenessis in the midriffe, the liuerrayns and
bledder, be cleansed thereby, it provoke the menstruall terms in women being
drunk with possit ale. If Isope or ierma^der be sodden in the said ale it is
excellent against the pestilence, or poysone. If it be drunk but a little
quantity thereof, according to the disease, strength or adge of the person.
It is very good against the stone, or for women which have a new disease
peraccidentes called the grene syckenes, there is nothing better against the
bitinge of a mad dog then to drink of this, and to annoint the wound. If it
be given in drink to any sick body a little before the access or cominge of
the cold fyttes of cotidians, tercians or quartens, so that it be drunk with
wine te^peratly warmed, Of the exsilent treacle called Methridatum.
this Methridatu^ is a medicine of no small price, Democrates has a godly
composition of it, an other excellent composition is of Cleopatre as Galen
writes. An other and the most excellent is the dyscryption of Andromachus
physician unto king Nero, but the chief father of this act, was king
Methridatus the noble king of Po^thus after whose name it is called.


Ihon. In deed this is an excellent medicin, but I pray thee where shall I buy
it*


Humfrey. THe blind (fellow John) do eat many af^ye, and the plain meaning
man is often disceiued. There is no trust in some of the Poticaries, for
although the usurpation of quid pro quo is tolerable, for their Succidanes
yet to abuse their simples or compou^des, it is not only theft to rob simple
men: but also murder to kill the hurtlesse.


John. OF late time we have been so afflicted with sondrye sickenesses and
straung diseases that in many places we could get no phisicions to help us, and
when men be suddenly sick CC. miles from London, Cambridge or Oxforde, it is
to late for the paciente to send for help, being infected with the pestilence.
I pray the tell me some good regiment for me and my family, if it please God
that it may take place.


Humfrey. I Shall Be glad forasmuch as thou have taken pains to hear me all this while, to teach thee a pretty regiment for the pestilence.


John. Read it fair and softly, and I will take my yenne and write it.


Humfrey. CErtainly the occasion of this most fearful sickness comes many
ways: Oiffinici^^ epidimi^ Gall.
as the change of the air from a good unto an evil quality, taking his
venomous effect of the vital spirits, which incontinent with all speed,
corrupts the spiritual blood. And suddenly (as it were) an unmerciful fire,
it quickly co^sumeth the whole body even to death, unless the wholesome
medicine do prevent and come to the heart, before the pestilent humor. And
because it is a very strong sickness, it is requisite to have a strong curing
medicine. For weak things will not prevail against so strong a matter.
Therefore I pray you note these six saiyngs, as air, diet, sleep, or watch,
quietness or trouble, Good air
and finally medicine. First walk not in stinking mistes, nor by corrupt
marris ground, nor in extreme hoate wether, but in fair clear air upon high
ground in sweet fields or garde^s, having fire in your chamber, with sweet
perfumes, of yt smoke of Olibanium, or Beniamen Frankensence, being cold
wether. And in hoate wether, Roses, willowe branches sprinkled with vinegar,
and often shiftinge the chamber is wholesome, fleing the South wind. Secondly,
diat, moderate eating meat of good disgestio^, as all that have pure white
flesh, both of beasts and fowls, good bread of wheat, partly leuened. Eat
no raw herbs, Yo^g lettis
Pursten, Lettis, young Lettis, or sorrel, except with vinegar. Drink of
clear thine wine, not changed and use often times vineiger with your meats,
and myngle not fish and flesh together in your stomach, and to drink a
tisant of barley water, rose water, and sorrel water, between meals is good,
eighte sponefulles at ones.

Thirdly, Noone sleep.
beware you sleep not at none it brings many sicknesses, and gives place to
the pestilence, and abateth memory. For as y^ marigold is spread by the day,
and closed by the night: even so is man of nature disposed, although through
custom otherwise altered unto great damage and hurt of body. Sleep.
Eight hours sleep, suffyseth well to nature, but every complexion has his
proper qualities, to sleep upon the right side is best, evil upon the left,
and worse upon the back. Exercise.
Fourthly, use moderat exercise and labor for the euacuation of the
excrementes, as swyfte going up hills, stretching forth arms and legs,
De^ue^da sanitate. Gall.
lifting wayghtes, not very ponderous, forby labor the first and second
digestion is made perfect, and the body strengthened, and this is a mighty
defense, against the pestilence, and many mo infirmities, whereas through
idleness be engendered all diseases both of the soul, and body, where of man
is compounded and made. Fifthlye, Mirth.
above all earthlye things, mirth is most excellent and the best companion
of life, putter away of all diseases: the contrary in plage time brings on
the pestilence, through painful mela^colike: which makes the body heavy and
earthlye. Company Music, honest gaming, or any other virtues exercise does
help against heaviness of mind. Sixthly medicine, the party being changed in
nature and condition, trimbling or burning, vomiting with extreme pain in the
day, Designis destilenci^^lis.
cold in the night, and strange imaginacions. etc. Apt to sleep, when these
signs do appear, give him medicine before.xii. hours, or else it will be his
death. Take therefore withal speed, Sorel, one handful sta^ped with Rewe,
Enulacampana, Oringe rindes, Sitron seeds: the great thistle rotes, Geneper
beries, walnuttes clean piked, of each one ounce, stamp them all together,
then take pure sharp vinegar, a quarter of a pint, as much ^uglosse water,
as much white wine, and temper your said receites with these licoures. Then put
in two ounces of pure Methridatum andromachi, Methridatu^ andromachi.
which is an excellent triacle, and two drams weight of the powder of pure Bole
armein, mingle them al together in a very close vessel, and give the pacient
a sponefull or more next his heart, and eftsoon as much more, and let them
that take this sleep not during twenty hours: or else take pure Triacle and
set well mingled in possit ale made with white wine, wherein sorrel have boiled a
good draught, and let an expert Surgeon let the pacient blood upon the middle
vain called Mediana, Mediana Basilica.
or the heart vain: Basilica a good quantity according to the strength and age
of the paciente, except women with child, and children. For the retaining the
said blood, would all turn to venym and incurable poison: And note this, that
blood be letten upon the same side that yt sore does appear. If any appear for
many causes, and sleep not.viii. hours after, and use this most excele^t pille^
often times. Pillule Pestilencialis. Ruffi.
Take pure aloes epatik and myrre, well washed in clean water, or Rosewater, of
each two drammes, and one dram of the powder of Saffro^, mingled with little
of sweet wine, and tempered in a very small vessel upon yt coals, until it be
partly thick, or else incorporat al together in a mortar, the^ roll them up in
small round pills, use to swalowe half a dram of these pills two times a weke in
yt pestilence time a morninges.iii. hours before meat. An other medicen,
tormentil gentian setwell of each one dram, spicenarde drams.ii. nastick
drammes three, bole armen drams, viii. give two drames to yt patie^t or any
that fear the plage in the water of Skabeas, or Cardus Benedictus, then drink
the brothe of a chicken, or pure wine, to ripe the sore, roste a great onion,
take out the core, put in triacle, and warm apply it to the place three or
four times renewed warm. And oil Olive, black soap, sour leaven, Lilly
roots, of each like quantitye boiled together, put in the ioyse of Rue, and
make a plaster, this will break the said sore, Capo^s grese, yolks of eggs,
swines grease, barlie flower, linsede in powder, encorporated together, will
make a good heling plaster. Emplastrum diachilon, magnum discriptione filii
Zacharia does resolve: and quence the hot ulcer. But in the time of the plage
trust not vrins.


Again to the gentle Reader.
THe swift (runner in his raze, gentle Reader) in a stobby or rockye ground is
in danger ef^sones to stumble or faule, where as the goer fair and softly in
the smothe path is safe. Even so, because I have had no co^ferrence with
others, nor long time of premeditatio^ in study, but with speade have
co^ciliated this small entitled Government of health, it can not be, but many
things have missed in the print, as in folio.iii. the.xviii. line, read sighe
for fight, i^. fol. lx. the second page.xi. line, read Olibanum for Olibulom:
and in the end of the Epistle to the reader, there is imprinted Wenzoar, for
Auenzoer, and in fol. lxvi. line.xv. leave out because. And thus to conclude, I
will by Gods grace join another book, called the Healthful medicines unto
this Government, and at the next impressio^ such amends shall be made, that
both silable and sentence shall be diligently kept in true order to thy
contentacion, God willing, who ever keep the in health. The first of March, the
year of our salvation. 1558.

William Bulleyn.


