ITINERARIVM TOTIVS SACRAE SCRIPTVRAE. OR, The Travels of the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, Judges, Kings, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, as they are
related in the Old and New TESTAMENTS. With a description of the Towns and
Places to which they traveled, and how many English miles they stood from
JERUSALEM. Also a short Treatise of the Weights, Moneys, and Measures mentioned
in the Scriptures, reduced to our English valuations, quantity, and weight.

Collected out of the Works of HENRY BVNTING, and done into English by R.B.

LONDON, Printed by ADAM ISLIP, 1636.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR HENRY MOVNTAGVE Knight, Lord chief Justice of
the Kings Majesty's BENCH.
IT is a true saying of the Philosopher (Right Honorable, and my very good
Lord) that there is nothing wherein there is life, but it has either motion or
action; and such is the condition of man, that a greater measure of both is
imposed upon him, to humble him, than upon many other creatures: The whole
course of his life being compared unto a Pilgrimage, in which state a man can
presume upon no certain continuance. For as a Traveler that intends to
finish his journey, stays not in his Inn, but desires more to be upon his
way, than in his bed: so it is with man, who cannot possess himself in rest,
from the time of his birth until his death, and oftentimes is troubled with
needless, and unprofitable Labors, to attain unto his ends; which got, both
they and he, perish. Let Alexander that great Emperor, be a president of this;
who with much Labor, having got a great estate, enjoyed it but a short time:
and you may read in this Treatise, with what intolerable pains Antigonus
Epiphanes endeavored to establish his kingdom to him; and yet in the end
purchased little but a lamentable death. There is none of the Patriarchs,
Princes, Judges, Kings. Prophets, Apostles, or others mentioned in the
Scriptures, that could make evident in the whole course of their life, any
better than a laborious and tedious Pilgrimage. With what pains did Abraham
wander from Chaldaea, into the land of Canaan? How was Moses tormented in the
Wilderness? almost to the loss of his soul; but absolutely never to come
into the promised land. And for David, how miserably lived he, when he could
not trust his own friends? this is the state of man, and to say truth, he
differs in little (beside reason) from other creatures; and that either locked
up in silence, or not expressed in some memorable action, makes him so much the
more capable of misery: being only able to distinguish of joy and fear. And
that these things may be the more apparent, I have endeavored to collect out
of the Works of others, this Treatise, wherein is briefly described the Travels
of all the Prophets, Princes, etc. together with the condition of Cities,
Countries, Islands and other memorable places, as they are mentioned in the Old
and New Testaments. All which, that I might express that duty which has a
long time lien concealed, I have wholly dedicated to your LL. service: humbly
entreating your favorable acceptance of my pains; that so being shrouded
under your Ho. protection, they may the better withstand the adverse opinions
of such as please to censure them.

At your Hon. service, R.B.

The Preface to the Reader.
IT has always been held a matter worth note (gentle Reader) even to the
best Divines, to have the Typographicall description of the towns and places,
as they are mentioned in the Scriptures; and so much the rather, because by
comparing the actions of men with the beginnings and endings of Cities, they
might the better understand the Prophets, and perceive the wonderful
providence of God; who by his omnipotency so disposes of Estates, that such
Cities and Nations which have been mighty and ruled upon the earth, with
great power, notwithstanding on a sudden, and by unexpected events, have been
utterly subverted and overthrown. Now that these things might be more
apparent, I have in as good and brief a method as I can, gathered out of
sundry Authors, the particular description of the Cities, Towns, and places,
as they are mentioned in the Scriptures; where they stood, under whose command,
at what time they grew mighty, and how lost and decayed.

To this also I have added a particular narration of the Travels of all the
holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Princes, Judges, Kings, Emperors, our blessed
Savior, and his Apostles: to what towns they traveled, what memorable
actions they did in those places; with a short Chronology of the times: that
so by comparing this discourse with any text of Scripture, you may perceive the
time when those accidents happened. All which things (I am persuaded) will
prove no less pleasant than profitable, and will give a great light to the
understanding of the Bible. But if you question with me, How it is possible
that I should come to the knowledge of those things, considering that Babylon,
Niniuey, Jerusalem, and most of the Cities of the Holy Land, are long since
wasted and decayed? to this I answer; therein consists the greatness of the
Travel, because I have been constrained to use the help of many Authors, who
amongst other long and learned discourses, have here and there glanced at the
actions that were done in the land of Iudaea: amongst which are Strabo, Jerome,
de Locis Hebraicis, Pliny, Liuie, Plutarch, and many others, who have
described in the actions of the Persians, Chaldaeans, Graecians, and Romans,
the state of the Jews as it stood in those times, with the Description of the
Cities, and towns. And Saint Jerome, who lived in that country, took a great
deal of pains to rectify these imperfect discourses which more obscure
authors have labored in, and left to future ages; that so those which would,
might by their diligence, and care make them useful to inform their
understanding, both concerning the state of the Jews, and the obscure meaning
of some of the prophesies.

Also the situation and destruction of Jerusalem, a thing pleasant and
profitable to know, and no whit unworthy your consideration. How all or the
most part of the Towns, Cities, Countries, Nations, Islands, Seas, Deserts,
Mountains, and most memorable places, are situated from it; how many miles
English they stand distant, what memorable actions have been done in them, and
for the most part where they stood, and how they are at this day.

Besides (to make this a perfect work) you shall find after the end the old
Testament, and before the beglnning of the new; a discourse concerning the
weights, measures, and moneys which are mentioned in the Scriptures, reduced
unto our valuation, how they were current among the Jews, how with other
people, nations, and countries: by which means that necessity of commutatiue
Justice, for which moneys were principally invented, will be apparent; and by
this means you shall perceive what equality there is and has been used
amongst Nations, for the ordaining of measures and moneys: by which you may
perceive, that this universe being compared together, seems but one large and
spacious Empire, howsoever under diverse governments.

Again, the perigrination of our Savior, the manner of his wonderful
nativity, his long and tedious journies, the condition of his estate whiles he
was upon the earth, and (as near as can be guest) at what time he did most of
his miracles; how he behaved himself when he was betrayed, with a description
of the manner of his death: and the Travels of Peter, Paul, and many other of
his Apostles after his death. All which things I have with much labor compiled
together for your profit, and expect nothing in recompense for my pains, but
your love. And so I commit you to God

Yours, R.B.

A BRIEF DECLARATION of Geometrical Measures.
A Degree of the Heavens is 15 Germane or Dutch miles; one minute is one
quarter of a Dutch mile: so that four minutes makes a Dutch mile.

A Dutch mile is four thousand paces: Diversity of Miles.
the Spanish miles be very near so long as the Dutch. A French mile is two
thousand paces: a Walloon or Italian mile is a thousand paces; so that four
Walloon miles make a Dutch mile.

The word mile is derived from the Latin word Mill; for one thousand paces
make a Wallon mile, as Gualtherus H. Reuius writes.

Of Stades or Furlongs,
THis word Stadium in Latin, in English a Furlong, is a measure of ground,
whereof there be three sorts, Italicum, Olympicum, Pythicum. That of Italy
contained 625 feet, which is 125 paces, half a quarter of an Italian mile. The
second sort was of the hill Olympus in Greece, where was a game or prise kept
by the Princes and Cities of Greece every fifth year, in the honor of
Hercules, who first began it. This measure of ground Stadium Olympicum
contained 600 feet, that is, 120 paces. The third kind of stade or furlong
contained 1000 feet, which is 200 paces; whereof happily arose the difference of
Pliny and Diodorus Siculus in describing Sicily.

Fifteen Dutch miles make a Degree, What a Furlong is.
and a Degree of the heavens answers to 480 furlongs upon earth; whereby it
is manifest that 32 furlongs is a German or common Dutch mile.

One minute equalleth eight Furlongs, which make an Italian or Wallon mile, the
fourth part of a Dutch mile. Two minutes of the heavens or sixteen furlongs
make a Dutch mile. Four half of a Dutch mile. Three minutes equal 24 stades or
Furlongs, which make three quarters of a Dutch mile. Four minutes equal 32
furlongs, that is to say, a German or Dutch mile.

The holy Evangelists, S. Luke, ca. 24. ver. 13. and S. John, ca. 11. ver. 8.
reckon the way by Furlongs. S. Luke says the Town Emaus was distant from
Jerusalem sixty Furlongs: and Saint John says Bethania was 15 Furlongs distant
from Jerusalem. Whence it appears, that Emaus was distant from Jerusalem
almost two Dutch miles, seven Wallon miles and a half; and Bethania almost
half a Dutch mile, which is a mile, a half, and half a quarter.

Josephus writes, That Mount Olivet was distant from Jerusalem five Furlongs,
that is a little more than half a quarter of a Dutch mile, which is half an
Italian mile and half a quarter. The same Josephus says, That the circuit of
the city of Jerusalem was 33 Furlongs, a Dutch mile and half a quarter. Others
say it was four miles in compass, which being understood of Italian or
Walloon miles, make little or no difference, seeing it is but the half of a
half quarter of a Dutch mile.

Strabo writes, That the city of Babylon was 380 Furlongs in circuit, that is
twelve Dutch miles. The circuit of Samaria was twenty furlongs, that is half a
Dutch and half a quarter, which is two Italian miles and a half.

How the Romans measured their miles.
THe Romans measured their miles by paces, which they call Passus, and that
kind of measuring is done after this manner; Four barley corns laid long-waies
one by the other make the breadth of a finger, four fingers broad make the
breadth of an hand, four hands broad make the length of a foot, which measure
is now extant; five feet make a Geometrical or great pace; one hundred twenty
five such paces are a Furlong; eight Furlongs are one thousand paces or Wallon
mile; two thousand paces are a French mile.

Ex granis quatuor formabitur vnus.
Est quater in palmo digitus, quater in pede palmus,
Quinque pedes passum faciunt, passus quoque centum
Viginti quinque stadium dant: Sed milliare
Octo dabunt stadia; duplicatum sit tibi Leuca.
Four thousand paces are a Dutch mile, I mean a common Dutch mile, whereof
fifteen are reckoned to a degree of the heavens; for the Switfer miles are
commonly a quarter of a Dutch mile longer than common Dutch miles. But through
this book by miles we understand common Dutch miles, whereof four thousand
paces make a mile.

Whosoever will understand S. Ierom well, de locis Haebraicis, must mark whether
he reckons by miles or by stones: the miles specified by him are Wallon miles,
whereof four make a Dutch mile as aforesaid: the stone whereof he writes
(whereby also they did measure and divide the way) are reckoned six to a Dutch
mile.

To the end that all men that have any little understanding in Geometry and
Cosmography may make the Tables, and cast them, and at their pleasure enlarge
or diminish them; I have here for their direction set down the longitude and
latitude of the most principal towns: the former number show the degrees and
minutes of the longitude, the later numbers declare the degrees and minutes of
the latitude.

Long. Latit. SIdon 67.51 33.^0 Tyrus 67.00 33.23 Zarepta 67.10 33.28 Kedes
67.14 33.00 Chabul 67.04 33.04 Rechob 67.13 33.14 Abela Betha macha 67.20 32.59
Senim Vallis 97.01 32.58 Carmel 66 35 32.50 Cana mayor 67.13 33.24 Cana minor
67.52 32.48 Nazereth 66 56 32.42 Tabor 66.45 32.38 Capernaum 66 53 32.29
Bethsaida 66.51 32.29 Corazim 66.53 32.29 Tyberias 66.4^ 32.27 Magdalum 66.48
32.28 Dora 66.25 32.08 Caesarea S^ratonis 66.19 32.25 Lydda 65.43 32.06 Ioppen
65.40 32.05 Messada castellum 66.21 31.47 Maetum lacus 66.36 32.25 Sunem 66.33
32.33 Naim 66 35 32.33 Napthalis 6^.06 32.57 Bethoron superior 66 00 32.14
Bethoron inferior 65.54 32.00 Gazar 66.10 32.20 Bethsan 66 41 32.23 Endor 66.26
32.27 Megiddo 66.02 32.32 Thebetz 66.30 32.25 Aphec 6.28 32 32 Gilim 66.25 32
22 Alexandrium 66.23 32.11 Thirzo 66.20 32.13 Zilo 65.58 31.58 Beseck 66 34
32.24 Michmas 66.06 32.04 Samaria 66.22 32.19 Nobe 65.45 32.03 Gazeron 65.45
31.59 Emmahus 65.54 31.59 Jericho 66.10 32.01 Aialon 65.56 31.56 Anathot 66.01
31.57 Gibea Saulis 66.57 31.55 Kiriath-jearim 65.58 31.55 Jerusalem 66.00 31.55
Bahurim 66.03 31.56 Ephraim 66.08 32.00 Gilgal 66.12 32.01 Esthaol 65.36 31.54
Timnah 65.48 32.03 Zarea 65.51 31.55 Gedor 65.44 31.59 Modin 65.45 32.01
Bethania 66.01 31.54 Bethlehem 65.55 31.51 Debir 66.10 31.58 Iarmouth 65.37
31.51 Azecha 65.51 31.54 Lachis 65.51 31.49 Eglon 65.50 31.48 Makeda 65.49
31.52 Libna 95.49 31.50 Debir 65.32 31.46 Bethsur 65.47 31.48 Kechila 65.38
31.47 Maresa 65 42 31.54 Maon 65.38 31.41 Carmel 65.40 31.44 Ziph 65.38 31 43
Arah 65.45 31.37 Hebron 65.33 31.45 Gerer 65.37 31.42 Kades barnea 65.22 31.29
Adar 65.12 31.32 Carcaha 65.06 31.30 Hasmona 65.00 31.30 Bethsemes 65.55 31.55
Beersabah 65.31 31.40 Siclag 65.15 31.37 Ecron 65 ^0 31.58 Azotus 65.35 31.00
Astalon 65.24 31.52 Gath 65.23 31.48 Gaza 65.11 31.40 The towns lying on this
side of the river Jordan. Dan 67 25 33.08 Ior ^ons 67 31 33 07 Caesarea
Philippi 67 30 33.05 Seleucia 67.17 32.50 Eruptio fluvij ex Samachoniride
palude 67.11 32.44 Capernaum 66.53 31.29 Eruptio fluvij e mare Genezareth 66 43
32.21 Ephion 66.42 32.20 Ennon 66.40 32.16 Gamala 66.55 32.25 Salem 66.37 32.18
Chrit torrens 66.16 31.57 Ostia Iordanis 66.17 31.54 Engedi 66.22 31.43 Zoar
vel Sagor 66.17 31.38 Eruptio Zered 66.19 31.34 Towns standing beyond Jordan.
Mirba 66.50 32.20 Astharoth 67.00 32.26 Astaroth 66.57 32.23 Gadara 66.48 32.23
Machanaim 66.44 32.19 Iaczar 66.39 32.12 Hesbon 66.28 32.05 Iabes 66.55 32.21
Ramah 66.51 32.20 Nobach 66.38 32.16 Iachsa 66.28 32 02 Aroer 66.30 32.00
Macherus 66.23 31.56 Minith 66.36 32.66 Midian 66.30 31.55 Didon 66.32 32.06
Punuel 66.39 31.18 Edrei 66.15 32.21 Abela Vinearum 67.00 32.23 Philadelphia
67.10 32.22 Pella 67.03 32.20 Phiala fons 67.43 33.05 Betharan 67.30 32.08
Pisgamons 66 26 32.01 Abarim montes 66.29 31.58 Towns in Egypt. Memphis 61.50
29.50 Heliopolis 62.15 29.59 Tanis 63.30 29.50 Taphnis 62 30 31.00 Any 60.30
30.10 Alaxandria 60.30 31.00 Mercurij ciuitas magna 61.40 28.55 Mercurij
ciuitas parua 61.00 30.50 Delta magnum 62.00 30 00 Xois 62.30 30.45 Busitis
62.30 30.15 H^sinoe 63.20 29.10 Solis fons 58.15 28.00 Journies out of Egypt.
Raemses 63.00 30.05 Pihachiroth 62.50 29.40 Mara 63.35 29.50 Elim 63.45 29.50
Iuxta mare 63.55 29.45 Paran promontorium 65.00 29.00 Daphea 64.14 29.46 Alus
64.30 29.46 Raphiddim 64.40 29.53 Sinai mons 65.00 30.00 Hazeroth 65.50 30.14
Zephor mons 65.54 30.50 Mozeroth 64.18 39.04 Hasmona 65.09 31.30 Gidgad mons
65.30 30.20 Iothabatha 65.30 26.40 Habrona 65.30 29.40 Hesion Gaber 65.30 29.20
Sin 66.00 29.56 Hor mons 66.00 30.25 Salmona 66.25 30.40 Phunon 66.30 30.54
Oboth 66 50 31.04 Ieabarim 67.00 31.18 Zered rorrens and vallis 66.44 31.20
Didon Gad 66.48 31.32 Almon diblathaim 66.48 31.24 Chedemoth solitudo 66.56
32.00 Beer puteus 66.50 23.00 Marthana Solitudo 66.49 23 00 Nathaleel 66.40
00.23 Bamoth vallie 66.30 32.00 Towns in Arabia Petraea. Petra 65.40 31.18
Paran 94.30 30.04 Midian 65.30 29.15 Hesion gebar 65 35 29.00 Elana villa harla
velelath 95.35 29.15 Ostia Nili. Canopicum 66.50 31.05 Bolbithinum 61.30 31.05
S^benniticum 61.45 31.05 Pathmiticum 91.35 31.10 Mendesium 62.45 31.10
Pelusiacum 63.15 31.15 Thon 63.00 31.30 Sirbonis lacus eruptio 65.45 31.50
Sirbonis lacus 63.30 31.10 Idem 63.45 31.10 Ciuitas Pelusium 36.25 31.20
Rhinocorura 94.40 31.10 Some other great Towns. Babylon 76.00 35.00 Antiochia
60 30 33.35 Damascus 68.55 33.00 Palmira 72.40 35.10 Vr chaldeorum 78.00 39.40
Ecbathana 88.00 37.45 Rages in Media 93.40 36.04 Sula in Persia 83.00 34.15
Persepolis 91.00 33.20 Heccatompilon in Parthia 96.0 37.50 Zaba in Arabia
foelix 97.00 13.00 Meroe 61.30 16.25 Haram in Mesopotania 75 15 36.10 Hircania
98.30 40.00 Ciraenae 50.00 31.20

The description of the City of Jerusalem, as it was before Titus Vespasian
destroyed it.
THe most holy and beautiful city of Jerusalem, was twice destroyed; first by
Nebuchadnezzar, the most puissant King of Babylon, who did utterly beat down
and overthrow the City, burning the costly Temple, which King Solomon had
built. After that, Zorobabel and the high Priest Joshua, when they returned
from the captivity of Babylon, re-edified and built again both the City and
the Temple, in the year before the birth of Christ, 535. But the second temple
which was built after their return, was neither so fair, nor so great as the
first; for it was twenty Cubitus, is a foot, and an half, six hand bredths,
four and twenty fingers broad, being in former times the fourth part of the
height of a man: Cubitus, a cubando, the arm tbat men use to lean upon, from
the elbow to the hand. Victru: lib. 3. Call. Lexicon.
Cubits lower than the former. After that, King Herod, 17 years before the
birth of Christ, caused the said Temple to be broken down again (as Josephus
says) and erected another new Temple in place thereof, which nevertheless was
not like the first temple that Solomon builded, as touching the greatness; but
it was exceeding fairly decked and adorned with gold and silver, so that in
regard of the beautifulness thereof, it was a wonder unto all that came to
Jerusalem. Which Temple (40 years after Christ's death and Ascension) was also
utterly destroyed by Titus, the son of Flavius Vespasian the Emperor.

I will describe the form of the City Jerusalem, as it was before it was
defaced by Titus, the son of Vespasian; and therewithal I will show, how the
costly Ornaments, which Solomon placed therein, stood: for, seeing that the two
brazen Pillars and the great Molten sea, were not therein, when our Lord Jesus
Christ lived upon earth, being broken down by Nabuchadnezzars soldiers, it is
therefore necessary and very requisite to be known how they stood, and to the
end that the Reader may be fully satisfied, I will also first declare the city
of Jerusalem as it was in those days, with the chiefest Places, Walls, Towers,
Gates, Houses, Castles, Fountains, Hills, Valleys, and all the principal
things therein.

How the City Jerusalem is situate, and stands distant from Germany.
THe Town of Neurenberch is situate in the middle of Germany, or near
thereabouts, and Jerusalem is distant from Neurenberch five hundred Which make
2000 miles English.
miles: but if you will travel to Venice, and from thence to Jerusalem, it is
five hundred and fifty Which make 2200 miles.
miles.

The situation of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem was four square, Of the situation of the Mountains whereon
Jerusalem stood.
and situated upon four mountains, viz. Mount Sion, Mount Moriah, Mount
Acra, and Moun Bezetha.

Mount Sion was the highest of all, and lay within the city of Jerusalem
toward the South, whereon stood King David's house or the castle of Sion, and
the uppermost town.

Mount Moriah, whereon the Temple stood, with other excellent buildings and
Towers, was on the East side of the city, within the Walls.

Mount Acra, whereon the lower town was built, stood Westward in the city,
where Annas, Caiphas, Pilot, Herod Agrippa, Bernice, Helena, and other Kings
and great Princes dwelt.

The holy City of Jerusalem may in this manner be briefly described.
THe most holy and beautiful City of Jerusalem (if any would consider the
three principal parts of the World, The description of Jerusalem.
Europe, Asia, and Africa) stood in the midst of the World, upon most high
mountains and rocks, like an earthly Paradise, a lively figure of the
everlasting City of God. This City, being the metropolitan or principallest
City of the Jews, stood in the Tribe of Benjamin; at the first it was called
Salem, that is, Peaceable: when Melchisedech, the Priest of God, reigned
therein, which he also built after the Deluge (as Josephus and Egisippus
write.) But at that time, it was not very great; for it stood only upon Mount
Sion. Mount Moriah, where Abraham would have offered his son Isaac, stood
without the City, and after that they took it into the City, as when time
serves it shall be declared.

After the death of Melchisedech, unto whom Abraham paid the Tithes of all his
goods, the Iebusites dwelt in the City of Jerusalem, and had the dominion of
it, and all the land thereabouts in their subjection, called the City Iebus,
after their name; which name was held a long time, as we read in Iosuah the
10. Iud. 10. and 2. Samuel, 1. But at the last Ioab, King David's General of
his Army, won it, and drove the Iebusites out of it, and called it Jerusalem,
that is, a sight or vision of Peace. It has also other names in the holy
Scripture, for in Esaias 29. it is called Ariel, that is, Gods Lion, and mount
Libanus. Because it was made of the Ceder trees which came ^ut of Mount Libanus.
The Prophet Ezechiel 23. calls it Ahaliba, my fixed Pauillion or Tent, that
is, a City wherein God had placed his own habitation.

The circuit and bigness of the City Jerusalem.
THe City of Jerusalem was four square, and in circumference three and thirty
Which make four English miles and one furlong.
furlongs, as Josephus writes, which three and thirty Furlongs make somewhat
more than a Dutch mile. Some write that it was four miles compass about, yet
these were not Dutch miles, but Wallon or Italian miles: for four such Italian
miles are a Dutch mile.

Of mount Sion the higher City.
MOunt Syon stood Northwards in the City Jerusalem, and was much higher than
all the other Hills that were therein, therefore it was called Sion, that is, a
watch Tower* because from thence one might see the Holy land, and all the
countries thereabout: upon this Hill, the upper City was built, which in the
Scripture is called the City of David, because David wan it from the Iebusites,
and beautified it with many goodly houses, and fair and costly buildings: but
especially with his house of Cedar wood, which he termed the castle of Sion,
which stood Westwards at the corner of the Hill, looking into Bethlehem
Southwards. In that house David dwelt, and therein committed adultery with
Berseba the wife of Vriah the Hittite; whose house also with the place of
diverse privy Councellers and officers, stood upon the said Hill, not far
from the Kings Palace, as Josephus writes.

Beneath King David's house, upon Mount Sion, within a Rock, there was to be
seen the sepulcher or vault wherein King David, Solomon his son, and other
succeeding Kings of Judah, were entombed and buried.

Upon mount Syon also (toward the East) King Herod had a Garden of pleasure,
not far from the Fountain called Silo, Nemiah 3. and there also stood the
Tower of Silo, whereof Luke in the 13 chapter makes mention.

Josephus (in the wars of the Jews, his first book, and sixteenth chapter)
says, That King Herod under whom Christ Jesus was borne, had two fair and
strong houses or Towers, which he set and made in the upper part of the City
Jerusalem, upon mount Syon, which were in a manner comparable with the Temple
for beautifulness, which he called after the name of his friends; the one
Caesarea, for Caesar the Emperors sake; and the other Agrippa, according to the
name of the noble Roman Marcus Agrippa, that married the daughter of Augustus
Caesar.

This may suffice to declare the situation of the upper City, which stood
upon mount Sion, and contained in circuit fifteen furlongs, which is about
half a mile. This uppermost City, in the sacred Scripture is called the City
of David, it was also cal-Millo, that is, fullness or plenty, for in it there
was no want, but abundance of all things.

Of the steps which descended down from the city of David unto the lower
City.
MOunt Sion, whereon the upper city of Jerusalem did stand, was such a high
hard hill, and so steep, that no man could climb or ascend unto it by any way
or means but only one, that is, by steps; for in the middle thereof there was
a great pair of stairs made, which descended from David's City unto the lower
City, That is, 26 yards in height.
into the valley or dale of gates, called Thyroreion, which stairs were 780
foot * high, as Johannes Heydonius writes; and beneath in the valley of
Thyroreion, over against the valley of Cedron, at the foot of the stairs stood
a gate, which was called the gate of Sion; and they which went up to mount Sion
must pass through that gate, and so up those stairs: but it is thought
nevertheless, that in some other part of the hill there was some winding or
other oblique way made, by which, horses and chariots by little and little
might ascend.

Allegorical or Spiritual significations of mount Sion.
SIon in Hebrew signifies a sure hold or goodly aspect; for that from the top
thereof a man might have seen all the land lying thereabouts; and was a type of
the highest heavens, or habitation of Almighty God, from whence he beholds
all things upon earth; from which throne and heavenly habitation he descended
into this lower Jerusalem, and became our Redeemer and Savior, that so we
being purged by his blood, from all our sins and imperfections, he might
bring us into that heavenly Jerusalem which is eternal glory.

Of Mount Moriah on which the Temple stood.
MOunt Moriah stood Eastward within Jerusalem, which was a most hard stony
hill, from whence toward the rising of the Sun, men by stairs might easily
descend; but round about on the other three sides it was steep and
vnapprochable, like a stone wall: yet it was not so high as Mount Sion, howbeit
it was exceeding high, extending and reaching 600 foot in height: and on the
top thereof was a very fair plain, like unto that of Mount Sion, whereon in
times past Abraham builded an Altar, and would have offered his son Isaac for
a Sacrifice, Genesis 22.

At which time, when Abraham obeyed the commandment of God, intending to have
offered his son Isaac upon the Hill, and thereon had made an Altar, then the
said Hill lay without the City: but long time after, about the space of 850
years, when King David had conquered Jerusalem, and driven thence the
Iebusites; to enlarge the City, he compassed in Mount Moriah and Mount Acra
with a wall, upon which there stood many goodly buildings. And amongst other
things worthy observation, upon this Mount stood the Barn or Threshing floor
of Or Arauna.
Arafna the Iebusite, wherein King David built an Altar, offered burnt
Offerings, and besought the Lord that the Angel of God (whose hand was
stretched over Jerusalem, holding a bloody sword, and had smitten the City
with the pestilence) might cease from punishing the same, and the plague
ceased. On the same place where the Barn of Arafna the Iebusite stood, King
Solomon also did build the Temple, 1. Paral. 23. 24. Joseph. Antiq. Iud. lib.
23. 24.

An Allegorical or Spiritual interpretation of Mount Moriah.
MOriah is as much to say, as The Lords Mirrhe, and signifies our Lord Jesus
Christ, which is the true Mirrhe and sweet smelling Sacrifice unto God; a
steadfast Rock, an immovable Foundation, whereon Gods Church and the members
thereof are built, Esaias 28. Matt. 16. Upon this Rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Moriah is also expounded
to be Cultus and timor Domini, the worship and fear of God; and that in the
same place the figurative service of God should begin and continue until the
coming of Christ.

The description of the Temple of Jerusalem.
THe Temple stood upon Mount Moriah, was fairly built, and artificially
contrived, of white Marble stones, which were so well conjoined or closed
together, that a man could not see or perceive the junctures or crests of them:
and the inner Walls of it were made all of Cedar wood, carved with the
similitude of Angels, Cherubins, roots of Palm trees, and with flowers of
diverse kinds, gilt all over with pure gold, and set with precious stones;
insomuch that all parts of the upper roof within the Temple, did shine with
the luster of it. The pauement thereof also was plated all over with fine Gold;
so that all the Temple within, both above, under foot, and on every side and
corner thereof, was gilt clean over: but without it was of smooth polisht
white marble stone, excellently beautiful, and fair to the eye, That is, a
hundred cubits, which make fifty yards English; so that the Temple was fifty
yards long, fifty broad, and sixty high.
much resembling the color of any Pearl, Unit or Margaret. It was in length a
hundred else, in breadth a hundred else, and in height a hundred and twenty
else, as Josephus writes in the old acts and wars of the Jews, in his
fifteenth book and fourteenth chapter.

The roof thereof was made of thin planks of Olive wood, all covered over with
plates of gold: it was adorned with sharp and plain spikes of gold, lest birds
should defile it with their doung. When any man traveled to Jerusalem, and saw
the temple far off when the Sun shined thereon, the white marble stones and
the golden roof thereof; did cast such a light and reflexing brightness from
them, that it did make the beholders eyes dark and blind with looking upon it.

Within the Temple there was the most sacred Quire, which stood at the West end
thereof, the which Quire was formed four square, that is, twenty else broad,
long, and high. This Quire was called the Holy of Holiest, wherein it was
lawful for no man to enter, but the high Priest, and he also but once in a
year, which was on the Feast day of the Propitiatory Sacrifice, to appease
Gods wrath. In the middle part of the Quire there stood two Cherubins, made of
Olive wood, covered all over with fine gold, whose Faces and Forms were like
unto young Children; the height of them was ten else; each of them had two
wings, which were five else broad; they stood one right against the other, so
that with the innermost wings they touched together, and the uttermost sides of
the wings touched the sides of the Quire: their faces looked wards the East: in
the middle under the wings of the Cherubins was placed the Arc of the
Covenant; but after the Babylonian captivity the Ark of the Covenant stood no
more there; for then the Holy of holiest was empty, and nothing seen in the
second Temple but the two Cherubims, as is aforesaid. The wall of this Quire
was of pure gold, excellent fair and curiously graven: In this wall of the most
holy quire there was a gate made all of gold which had two leaves or little
doors that opened and shut, very curiously embossed; through which doors men
went into the most holy Quire, where the Lord did answer by Vrim and Thummim;
there the Cherubims stood, and before that gate there did hang a rich Veil or
Curtain which was made of fine silk, wouen very artificially, wherein there
was wrought the picture of the Cherubims, with Needle-worke of diverse colors.
This was the same Veil which at the passion of Christ did rent in sunder from
the top to the bottom; to show that then Aarons Leuiticall Sacrifices were
abolished, and now every man may freely approach (through the mercy of his dearly
beloved Son) unto the presence of Gods heavenly Throne.

Before the most sacred Quire there was builded toward the East a place within
the Temple containing forty Else in length, twenty in breadth and thirty in
height, closed up on both sides with golden walls, which was called the Holy
place or Sanctuary of the Temple, wherein no man might enter but only the
Priest, when he offered Incense, and prayed unto God. In the middle of that
Holy place there stood an Altar, covered with plates of gold; near unto which
the Angel Gabriel appeared unto Zacharias, and brought him the glad tidings,
That Elizabeth his wife should bear him son whose name should be John, who
should prepare the way of Christ. At the South end of this Altar upon the one
side stood the holy Candlestickes, and at the other end on the other side stood
a golden Table whereupon the Show bread was set. And in this holy place there
stood ten Tables more for the meat Offerings, and ten golden Candlestickes
more, which were beautified with Lamps, Lillies, and other fair flowers. The
opening doors whereby men went into the Holy place were also very rich and
costly, made of gold, with carved Cherubims, Palm trees, and broad flours
thereupon. And before those doors also there were hanging vailes or curtains,
very curiously wrought. On both sides of the Temple there were certain Walks or
Galleries, which were three stories high one above an other, and on the right
side there stood a pair of turning stairs, by the which men went up to the
Chamber of the Temple, and there all the small Vessels and other things
belonging to the Temple were kept. The roofes of these Galleries were all
plated over with gold, but that part was somewhat lower than the principal
part of the Temple. The Windows of the Temple were wide within and narrow
without. The gates of the Temple were made of pure gold, five and twenty Else
high, and sixteen Else broad; but especially the gate that stood Eastward in
the Temple was exceeding high, which in the second Book of Kings, cap. 25. is
called the High gate: and as Josephus says, the said gate was 90 Else high,
the doors whereof were forty Else long and twenty Else broad, gilt all over,
and richly embossed, beautified with Cherubims and precious stones. The wall
before this gate toward the East was pure gold, embost and curiously engraven
in manner of Vines, with great golden leaves as big as the stature of a man,
whereon there did hang the picture and form of grapes, which were made of fine
Crystal. Within that high gate also there did hang a Veil or Curtain as long
and broad as the gate within: This Veil was made of a piece of Babylonian
Tapistry, wonderfully wrought, and made of Silk, beautified with diverse
colors, of Scarlet, Purple, and Velvet; and as Josephus writes, the Sphere of
the heavens was wrought therein, but the twelve Signs were not, and when the
wind blew, the Veil did move like a Vane.

Of the Porches or open Courts of the Temple.
BEfore the high gate of the Temple toward the East there were three Porches
or Courts open without roofes, which were made all of polisht stone with fair
marble pillars, beautified with all kind of colors, in which Porches men
praised and served God.

The first was called the upper Porch, where none but the priest might enter
when he offered and served God; which porch stood next unto the high Quire. The
second was called Solomon's Hall or Porch; there the people used to pray, and in
that court our Savior Christ preached, John 10. The third porch King Herod
built, adding that thereto for the heathen people which also came unto Jerusalem
to pray.

These three porches went four square round about the Temple, as the Temple it
self was, and between these porches there were also spaces left, supported
with pillars of marble, and close above the head for men to walk under when it
rained, which were all made of Cedar and Cypress wood, and of marble stone
beautified with gold. But toward the East, right over against the high Quire
of the Temple, there the Porches were broadest and greatest.

Here gentle Reader you must note, that as often as in the Description of the
Temple I speak of certain Else, you must not understand such Else as we use
here in our Country, but only of the Geometrical else or elbowes, which are
called Cubits, being the length of one foot and a half or six hands in breadth,
and two such Else or Cubits do contain three foot, which make a yard of our
measure.

The first Temple, which King Solomon built, had but two Porches, as also the
second Temple which Zorobabel and Ioshuah or Jesus the son of Iozedeck made
after the captivity in Babylon; but that was twenty cubits lower, and enclosed
about with two porches also. But King Herod Ascalonita the great King of the
Jews, son of Antipater Idumaeus, 16 years before the birth of Christ pulled
down that Temple, and built a new Temple up from the ground, which was like to
Solomon's Temple, but that it had three porches: for Herod built the third Porch
to the intent that the heathen people might pray therein, as a sanctuary for
pilgrims and strangers, as Josephus writes, Antiq. Iud lib. 21, ca. 14. and de
Bello Iudaeo, lib. 6. ca. 6. Item Egesippus, lib. 1. cap. 35, 36. But some do
think, which is more likely, that the said Herod did but repair and add
buildings to the second Temple.

And where Josephus, lib. 2. contra Appionem, writes of four Porches, whereas
principally there were but three; it is to be understood that Solomon's Portch
was made with a wall in the middle thereof, wherein on the North side the
Jewish women that were unspotted or undefiled used to pray; and on the other
side (being South) the Jewish women who also according to the Law were
unspotted, prayed; as Josephus says, lib. 6. cap. 6. de Bello Iudaeo.

A particular description of the three several Porches or Courts belonging to
the Temple.
IN the upper Porch which stood right over against the high Quire in the
Temple, there was an Altar of brrasse proportioned four square, consisting of
twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, extending to ten cubits
in height, beautified with golden horns, whereon they used to offer burnt
sacrifices of Oxen, Sheep, Turtle Doves, Calves, and other things. Also in
times past there stood the great molten Sea made by King Solomon, and the two
brazen Pillars which were made with knobbes, Pomegranats, and Lillies, very
costly and most artificially done; and ten Kettles upon Treuets; but those
kettles and pillars with knobs and pomegranats, and the great molten Sea made
by King Solomon, were carried away by Nabuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and
broken in pieces; after which captivity they were never seen more in the
Temple, for there were no more made. But the Altar of Brass with the great
horns, whereon they offered oxen, sheep and Doves, was made again and stood
there, as I said before, by which there stood diverse Tables whereon they killed
their Offerings. In this Court also there was a goodly Fountain, with the
Water whereof they used to wash the blood of the beasts out of the Temple. For
there were certain holes and gutters between the marble stones, whereby the
water ran under the earth, and through the earth was conveyed in a pipe into
the Lake Kidron. In this Court Zacharias the son of Barrachias was killed,
between the Temple and the Altar, Mat. 23. And Zacharias the high priest the
son of Ioiadah was stoned to death, 2 Chronicles. 24. It was compassed about with
a great wall made of Marble stone of diverse colors, wherein there were diverse
doors to go out out and in, decked with lofty towers and pleasant walks made
of Cedar wood, resembling our ancient Cloisters. But principally toward the
East it had a great gate of seventy Else or cubits high and twenty five broad,
all covered over with gold (as Josephus writes) standing always open, without
any doors to shut, that every man might look into it when the Priest served
God. If any man offered any thing, he brought it to the Priest before the gate,
but might not go in himself. Jeremy, Chap. 26 and 36, calls it the New gate.
Here also was the Chapel of Gemaria the son of Saphan, in which Chapel
Baruch read the book of the Prophet Jeremy to the people, Jeremy 36. And when
the Sun was in Capricorn it shone right in at that gate, and through the
high Quire of the Temple to the Holy of Holiest (as Josephus writes.

Of the second or middle Court called Solomon's Porch.
THis Court was something lower than the other, for from it to the uppermost
they went by certain steps, and in the tenth of John is called Solomon's Porch;
which (as Josephus writes) was parted in the middle with a Wall, wherein on
the North side the Jewish women that were clean and undefiled used to pray, and
on the South the men, according to the Law Masculi enim ab austria muliere a
septentrione dominu^ innocarunt.
: But no unclean person, or stranger, or heathen, might enter therein; for on
the East side thereof, before the steps whereon men ascended into the said
porch, there stood a portall curiously made of marble stone, and between it
stood pillars of marble, whereon was engraven in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and
Idumaean Tongues, this sentence, Omnis alienigena accidens ad habitaculum
Domini moriatur; That is, If any stranger go into the house of God he shall
surely die. And Herod also caused to be hanged over the Eastern gate by which
they came into this Court, a golden Sword, with this Inscription, Peregrinus si
fuerit ingressus moriatur; That is, If a Stranger be so bold to enter, let him
die. So as no Stranger or Heathen might go into Solomon's Porch upon danger of
his life. Here Simeon took the child Jesus in his arms and said, Lord let
now thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation, etc. At the same time also the Prophetess Anna the daughter of
Phaneul, of the tribe of Ashur, made a notable prophecy of the child Jesus to
all the people of Israel, Luke 2. and after Jesus was baptized, in this place
he taught, wrought miracles, and did many worthy and memorable actions. The
Apostles also commonly met together in this court, and here the Holy Ghost
descended upon them. Here stood the Treasury which Heliodorus thought to have
robbed, but was prevented by the Angel of God, 2 Mac. 3. This was the same
Treasury wherein the poor widow cast the two mites, whom Christ commended for
the same as appears Mark 12. Upon which S. Ambrose says, Deny not to cast two
mites into this Treasury, that is, Faith and Grace, since by them thou shall be
made capable of a celestial kingdom; neither flatter thy self with thy riches,
because thou can give more than the poor, for God respects not how much, but
with what devotion thou give thy reward, Amb. li. de Viduo, and Epist. li. 9.
Ep. 76. And here Christ absolved the Adulteress that was accused to him, being
sorry for her offense; saying, I came not to condemn, but to save sinners that
repent. Upon which S. Chrysostom says, Although thou art a publican, yet thou
may be made an Evangelist; though a persecuter of the Church, yet an Apostle;
though a thief, yet of the city of Paradise; though a Magitian, yet thou may
worship God: for there is no sin so dangerous but repentance may obtain pardon.
Not far from this Treasury there stood certain galleries curiously adorned with
marble pillars, the root whereof was plaited with silver and gold, and was
close above the head, that when it rained, men might walk under them dry, and
indeed did much resemble our ancient Monasteries. The doors of these walks were
covered over with gold and silver; so also was that high gate whereby men went
Eastward into Solomon's porch, and was 50 cubits high, and the doors forty, as
Josephus writes.

Of the third Court or porch, wherein the heathens used to pray, commonly
called the Hall of the Gentiles, or outward Court.
THis court was not built by the kings of Israel, but by Herod, when the rest
of the Temple was re-edified, some sixteen years before the birth of Christ,
and about six and forty before he began to preach, John 4. It was so spacious
and sumptuously built that it amassed the beholders, containing an hundred
cubits in breadth, and seven hundred and twenty cubits in length, lying Eastward
toward the brook Kidron: the pauement was of marble of diverse colors, like
the other Courts, the walls with the marble pillars were five and twenty cubits
high, and the Walks about it very curiously made were thirty cubits broad.
This was called Vestabulum Gentium, where the heathens as well as the Jews
might enter and pray. Out of this place Christ drove the Buyers and Sellers,
overthrew the tables of the Money changers, and the seats of those that sold
Doves, Io. 2. Mat. 21. And it stood something lower than Solomon's Porch.

All these three Courts were enclosed within high walls and walks, resembling
our Cloisters, where round about the Temple, at every corner of which stood
very high Towers, whereon when the Sabbath day came, one of the Priests over
might went and sounded a Trumpet, to signify that the next day was the Sabbath
(for then there were no bells.) The wall of this uttermost Court (as Josephus
writes) was in height (reckoning from the bottom to the Valley of Kidron)
four hundred cubits, and adorned with goodly Towers, upon the Pinnacles of
which were built Summer houses and fair Walks, from whence men might see into
the Temple, and clean over the Town. These were called the Pinnacles of the
Temple, and were so high, that when one looked down from them into the valley,
their eyes dazzled in such manner that they could not see, as Iosep. writes, li.
Antiq. 15. ca. 14. Upon one of these Pinnacles the Devil carried our Savior
Christ saying, If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down, etc. Mat. 4.
And James the son of Alphaeus, by the commandment of Annas the high Priest,
was from thence thrown into the valley of Cedron, and falling upon a Fullers
instrument died, Ios. Ant. 20, ca. 8. etc. The gate toward the East was thirty
cubits high, and had doors opening two ways, 15 cubits broad (as Ios. writes)
made of pure brass that shone like gold and silver, artificially made, and
cunningly imbossed, insomuch as it was called the beautiful gate of the temple:
as Pet. and Io. was going into the temple by this gate they healed a man that
had been borne lame from his mothers womb, Acts 3.

When a man went Eastward the Gates were one higher than another. The first
gate or the gate of the Heathens Court was thirty Cubits high. The second that
entered into Solomon's Porch was 50 cubits: the third which went into the highest
and last court was 70 cubits: and the great high gate of the temple was ninety
Cubits high, so that every gate of the Temple was twenty Cubits one higher than
another: And in these gates there were benches made for men to sit on. There
were many other Gates and doors on both sides, some sixty, some twenty Cubits
broad, all almost made of pure gold, and of such weightinesse, that (as
Josephus writes in his second book to Appius) two hundred men could scarce
open and shut them. Egisippus writes, That Vespasian coming before the Temple
to assault it, commanded his Soldiers to burn one of the golden Gates (which
then was shut) that so he might overcome the same, and with strong hand carry
away a most glorious Victory. For it was wonderfully fortified both by Nature
and Art; it had deep Ditches, lofty Towers like unto Castles of defense; and
moreover, compassed about with Bulwarks and strong walls, insomuch that it was
not possible to be won but with extreme difficulty and great labor. When the
Gate was fired, the gold that ran from it was in great abundance: and by this
means the Conquest was made easy.

This shall suffice to have spoken of the Buildings of the Temple.

The Allegorical or Spiritual meaning of the Temple.
THe terrestrial Temple built by Solomon was partly a Figure of our Savior
Christ, and partly of his Church. For when the Son of God suffered the Temple
of his holy body to be destroyed, and was risen again from the dead, John 2.
Then he raised up to us the Christian Church, which is the true spiritual
house and Temple wherein God dwells, 1 Cor. 6.

The mystery of the white Marble.
CHrist is the right white Marble stone which is without spot, And there is no
deceit found in his mouth, Esaias 53. Ioh. 8. this stone the Builders refused,
but God chose it out as most precious, and made it the head of the corner, that
we like living stones might be built upon it, Esaias 21.8. 1 Pet. 2.

The mystery of the Gold.
THe Gold and precious stones in the Temple signified the Deity of Christ; for
in him dwelt the fullness of the Deity (...), wholly and absolutely; and in him
was contained the Fountain and treasure of all wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.

The mystery of the Cedar wood.
AS the Cedar, Cypres, and Olive wood was neither subject to putrefaction, nor
possible to be devoured with worms; so the humane nature of Christ was subject
to no corruption, no putrefaction, Psalm. 16.

The mystery of the Cherubims.
THe Temple also is a figure of the heavenly glory, and of everlasting life to
come, where the Angels and Cherubims being engraven and pictured to the image
of man, do represent the congregation of the blessed Angels and Saints, who in
presence of the Lord sing a continual Te Deum laudamus, Apoc. 4. The two
Cherubims placed upon the Mercy seat in the holy Quire, signify the old and
new Testament, which contains the Doctrine of Christ: and as their wings
touched one another, so the old and new Testament were joined together, the end
of the one, the beginning of the other: the one continued to the end of the
first world, the other shall continue to the end of the second; both had
relation to Christ, to whom the ministry of God was committed.

The mystery of the golden Door of the Temple.
CHrist is the door of life by which we must enter into eternal happiness, Ioh.
10.14. the two doors signify a twofold knowledge before we can enter into this
gate; that is, of his Person and Office.

What the Veil of the Temple signified.
THe Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ hanging upon the altar of the Cross, is
the true Veil that is put between God and us, shadowing with his wounds and
precious blood the multitude of our offenses, that so we may be made acceptable
to his Father, Heb. 10.

The mystery of the Arc of the Covenant.
THe Ark of God made of Sittim wood, wherein was kept the pot of Manna, Aarons
Rod, and the Tables of the Commandments, Exodus 25. Heb. 9. represent as well
our Savior Christ, as the hearts of the Faithful: for as in Christ's breast was
contained the doctrine both of the Law and Gospel, so likewise is it in the
Faithful, though not in that measure. He was the true Manna that descended
from heaven to give light unto the world, John 6. The Tables of the Law move us
to mutual love and new obedience. Aarons Rod flourishing with blossoms
signifies the sweetness of the Gospel, and the glory of our high Priest Jesus
Christ of whom Aaron was a Type.

The mystery of the golden Altar.
THe sacrificing altar in the Sanctuary of the Temple, whereon were four
golden horns, being made partly of Sittim wood, and partly of Gold, compassed
about with a Crown of gold, represent the unity of the Humanity and Deity in
our Savior. For as the wood, naturally incorruptible, was beautified with
refulgent gold; so the Humanity of Christ, not capable of any putrefaction,
Psalm 16. being adorned with Celestial glory of the Deity, personally united
to the Divine Nature, ascended up into the Heavens, and there sits at the
right hand of his Father, crowned with a crown of majesty in eternal happiness,
Psa. 8.

The mystery of the golden Candlesticks.
THe golden Candlestick with six branches and seven lights, signifies Christ
and the Ministers of the church. Christ the foundation is the chief Priest and
Light of the world, illuminating us to eternal life, Ioh. 1. The Doctors and
Teachers of the church are the branches by whom Christ inlightneth his church
with the sound and incorruptible doctrine of the Gospel, Apoc. 1. Neither ought
they to be separated from Christ, but by the light of their doctrine and
sincere conversation be a lanthorn unto our feet, Psalm. 119. that so their
works may return to his glory and the good of his church. And as all the
branches were united into the body of the Candlestick, so every Minister and
faithful child of God ought to be united into the body of Christ, without any
schismatic dissension or separation. The flowers and lillies denote the
ornaments and graces of the holy Spirit, which Christ has bountifully bestowed
upon his Ministers. The Lights and lamps do admonish all godly Ministers to a
diligent care, lest the light of Gods divine word should either by men's
traditions, or carnal and philosophical opinions, be either diminished, or by
little and little abolished: but as often as such things happen, with the
sincere doctrine of the Gospel to be purged and preserved.

The mystery of the golden Table.
THe golden Table whereon the Show bread stood, being compassed about with a
precious crown, signifies the ministry of the Gospel. For the bread that is
set before us is Christ that Bread of Life which descended out of heaven, John
6. and he by the ministry of the twelve Apostles is mystically offered unto us
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that whosoever eats thereof as they
ought might have eternal life. The Frankincense that stood by the bread
admonishes us, that earnest prayers and godly actions are to be used in the
time of the administering of the Lords supper. For as Macarius says, If the
devil was as strong as mountains, yet at the prayers of the Saints he melts
as wax before the fire. And S. Cyril says, That Christ is the Table upon which
the bread of life is set, whereby all the Faithful are nourished unto eternal
life. And the Crown about this Table is the goodness and mercy of God, whereby
we are crowned and brought to eternal happiness. S. Ierom says, That this
Table was a figure of the table and the supper in the kingdom of God, Luke 2.
The Shewbread upon the table is the Son of God, which gives life unto the
world, John 6.

The mystery of the golden Vine and the Crystal grapes.
THe Vine in the East part of the temple made of shining gold, fitly resembles
our Savior Christ, who compared himself unto a Vine, and the Faithful unto
the branches, saying, I am the true Vine, and whosoever is ingraffed into me
shall have eternal life, Io. 15. The Crystal grapes do denote the doctrine of
the Gospel, and the works of the Faithful, which are faith, love, hope,
charity, patience, prayer, and works of grace, all which do inhere unto such
as believe.

The mystery of Oblations and Sacrifices.
ALl the Oblations and Sacrifices of the old Testament were Types and figures
of our Savior, That as they were slain for the performance of the ceremonial
law; so Christ for the salvation of man was slain and made a free will
Offering; by whose blood and mediation the sin of man is pardoned, and he made
capable of eternal life, Esaias 53. John 10. Heb. 9, etc.

The mystery of the upper Court.
THe upper Court was a figure of the spiritual Priesthood of Jesus Christ, who
has made us all Priests and Kings, and has beautified us with his guiltless
death, 1 Pet. 2

The mystery of the Fountain and molten Sea standing upon twelve Oxen in the
uppermost Court.
THe molten Sea and Fountain was a figure of Baptism and that living water
issuing from the wounds of Christ, whereby we are washed from all our sins;
the Lavor of regeneration, whereby we are made capable of eternal life; that
Well of water, whereof if we drink we shall never thirst. The twelve Oxen
represent the twelve Apostles, whose voice have gone through the world
(according to that in the Corinthians) and have carried the sea of Grace
through all the parts of the earth. Of which Water (says S. Augustine) if thou
drinkest but one drop, it is more effectual to quench the thirst of worldly
and insatiable desires, than an Ocean of earthly waters.

The mystery of the middle Court.
Solomon's Court, wherein Christ taught, and in which the Jews used commonly to
pray, was a figure of that Church which should be gathered from amongst the
Jews. For from thence he indeauoured first to assemble and gather together a
Christian congregation, according to that which he spoke to the Canaanitish
woman, Mat. 15. I am sent only to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel.

Of the outward Court of the Gentiles.
THis Court signified, That the Gentiles also should partake of the sheepfold
and congregation of Christ, and be members of his holy Church; according to
that of John 10. I have yet other Sheep which I must also bring hither, that
so there might be one sheepfold, one Pastor, etc.

Of the rest of the memorable Buildings standing upon mount Moriah.
Having thus described the temple, together with the several courts and
ornaments, al which did typically represent Christ and his church, I will now
proceed to the rest of the buildings standing upon mount Moriah. The first and
most memorable was the house of Solomon, which stood just against the Temple
upon the South: it shined so with gold and silver, and was so stately and
sumptuously built, that when queen Saba came to Jerusalem she stood amassed to
see it. There belonged to it diverse Courts and Walks, in one of which the
Prophet Jeremy was prisoner, Ier. 37. Over against this he made the Judgment
hall, in which he placed the Ivory Chair spoken of 1 Kin. 10. He built by
that another house for his Queen, she that was daughter of Pharaoh, 1 Kin. 7.
But when Nebuchadnezzar conquered Jerusalem, all these together with the Temple
were burnt and utterly defaced.

Of the Poole of Bethesda.
Upon the North lay that sheepfold o^ sequestered place called Bethesda, Ioh. 5.
which has five porches or Xenodochius, as some would have it: here Cattle
came to drink, and the Priests used to wash their Sacrifices; because no
unclean beast might come within the Temple, nor any thing that was foul or
spotted be offered upon the Altar. The water was of reddish color, and ran
into that place in great abundance, and therefore it was called the house of
effusion or pouring out. This was the place into which the Angel of God
sometimes descended and troubled the water, after which whosoever stepped in
was presently cured: and here our Savior Christ healed the man that had been
diseased 38 years, Ioh. 5. This place was made by King Hezekiah, who caused the
water of the uppermost poole, which was called Gihon, not far from mount
Calvary, to be conveyed by pipes and passages through the earth, into the lower
city called Acra, and so fell into this place, for which cause it was called the
lower poole. The Allegory or mystery hereof is, That every one of Christ's
Sheep ought to be washed in the poole of his blood, before they can be made
fit sacrifices to enter into his Temple or church, 1 Io. 1.

Of the tower or castle called Antonia.
THis castle, as Iosep. has it, lib. 6. de Bell. cap. 6. stood between two
Courts of the Temple at the North-West corner; at first built by the Machabees,
and called by the name of Baris: but after, King Herod taking affection to that
place, bestowed great cost upon it, walled it about, built up sumptuous towers,
and made it very strong; then gave it the name of Antonia, in favor of Antonius
that noble Roman; which Augustus a long time sustained after their decease.

Of the Hall called Coenaculum Anguli.
THis house stood upon an angle or cantle of the hill, and was therefore called
Coenaculum Anguli: it was very large and spacious, and within had a great hall,
whereof Nehem. cap. 3. makes mention: and here, as some think, our Savior
Christ ate the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples; but I rather think it was in
the suburbs.

Of the Tower Ophel or the dark Tower.
Near to the valley of Cedron toward the East, not far from the Temple, and
near the castle Antonia, there was builded a lofty and strong tower or palace
called Ophel, that is, a place of darkness: it was a very sumptuous thing.

Of Hamea, or the Tower of the Centurions.
IN the town wall between the sheep gate and the dung gate, stood this castle
Hamea or Centurion, taking the name a Centenario numero, i. the number of an
hundred, and was upon the East side of the city, near to the sheepfold or
poole Bethesda, Neh. 3.12. Here the Centurions commonly kept watch.

Of Mount Acra and the buildings upon it.
MOunt Acra (as is aforesaid) stood upon the West side of Jerusalem; it was a
very high mountain, and took that name from the Greek word Acra, a sharp or
high hill. It was much higher than mount Moriah in times past, till Simon,
Judas Machabeus brother, caused it to be cut lower, to make it equal in height
with mount Moriah. Between these two hills lay the valley Cedron, which was in
profunditie 400 cubits. Upon this Mountain another part of the city was
builded, being strongly fortified and richly adorned with sumptuous houses, of
which David and Solomon were the principal founders; and was called the lower
city, or the daughter of Sion. It was so beautiful, that some hold (of which
number are Egesippus and Eusebius) that it exceeded the rest of the city. Here
stood the house of Helena Queen of the Adiabenors, near about the midst of it,
as Iosep. observes, Li. Bell. 7. cap. 13. which Queen being converted to the
Jewish Religion, built her an house in this City, that she might pray in the
Temple. Here stood the houses of her sons Monobazius and Grapta: here stood
the houses of the high priests Annas and Caiaphas, not far from the valley
Tyropae; King Herod also that wicked man, who caused the innocent Children to
be put to death, built him an house here, near about the place where the
Machabees in times past had a Castle; (for they built two, one in mount Moriah,
another in this Mount.) That in mount Moriah was after called the Castle of
Antonia, and stood right against the Temple, as is aforesaid. And this being
very sumptuously built, and a Royal seat, was after the death of this Herod a
Palace for his Successors Archilaus and Herod Agrippa. Not far off he caused
two fair Theaters to be also built; the one in honor of the Emperor
Augustus; and this on the one side joined to a tower called Acropolis (which
was built by Antigonus Epiphanes, on a purpose to place a Garrison in, to keep
the Jews in bondage; which Judas Machabeus afterward made leuel with the
ground) and on the other side toward his own Palace. It resembled a
Semicircle, made all of white Marble fairly polished, the building somewhat
low; within full of high banks one rising above another like Scaffolds, so
that the whole multitude might easily hear or see whatsoever was said or done.
It was curiously beautified with gold, silver, and many goodly pictures; but
amongst the rest, the battles which the Emperor Augustus had won against
his people were lively pourtrayed. To this place as well Jews as Gentiles
resorted to see Interludes and Plays acted. The other was an Amphitheatre, and
stood upon the South side of the house: it was built round in a whole circle,
compassed about with high walls large and spacious. Here they used to fence and
to fight both on horseback and in Wagons. And in the fifth year, in honor of
Augustus, the circensian games, according to the Rites of the Gentiles, were
very sumptuously performed. On the South side of this Amphitheater, stood queen
Bernice house, Sister to Agrippa junior: it was a very fair and sumptuous
Building little inferior to King Herod's. This stood in the market place, and
so all along were very sumptuous and stately Pillars. Here Agrippa himself
had also an house, and over against that upon the North stood the Judgment
hall, where the Sanhedrim or the Council of the seventy Elders used to meet,
to hear and determine of men's causes. To this place Christ was brought when
they asked him if he was Christ, Luke 22. Here were the Apostles whipped, Acts 5.
and close by this stood the house of Pilat the Praetor, fairly glistering with
gold, in which house all the Roman Pretors and Presidents for the most part
had their residence: and here our Savior Christ was whipped, crowned with
Thorns, and spit upon. Not far off from this Pretors house stood the
Chancerie, or rather as we term it the Treasury, a stately and magnificent
house, curiously built, and appointed only to lay Records and common
Chronologies in. Here also the Officers of the town gave in their accounts,
and Creditors entered their debts. This was utterly destroyed by Vespasian. Thus
much for the Buildings on this Mount.

Next, the market place was a thing very memorable, and was so large and
spacious, that in the time of the Wars many great battles were fought there,
as Josephus says. In this market place, close by Pilats house stood a high
seat or Tribunal made of fair stone curiously wrought, and for the eminence of
it called in the Chaldaean tongue Gabatha; and because it was built of stone
the Grecians called it (...): the Latins, Lapidanium; and with us it might be
termed an heap of stones * (for so the word signifies) Here Pilat taking
water washed his hands before the people, Or a well wrought stone
and said, I am innocent of this man's blood: At which they cried, His blood be
upon us and our children. And after by Gods appointment, according to their own
wish fell upon them; for in the same place and close by the same Seat it happened
that Herod wanting money, demanded of the Jews so much out of their Treasury
(which they called Corban) as would pay for the making of a Watercourse (for he
assayed to bring water into the City from a Fountain, some two hundred
furlongs off it) but the Jews supposing it a needless work, not only denied
him, but gave many outrageous and spiteful speeches, tumultuously flocked
about him, and with great clamors pressed upon him even as he was in his seat:
wherefore perceiving the danger, and to prevent mischief, he sent to his
soldiers to apparel themselves like Citisens, and under their gowns to bring
with them a dagger or poniard, and mingle themselves among the multitude; which
they did, observing who they were that made the greatest uproar; and when Herod
gave the sign, fell upon them with their ponyards, killing a great multitude.
The rest seeing this massacre, suspecting treason amongst themselves, fell one
upon another; and many for fear of loss, or to avoid future danger, killed
themselves. In this very place also, Florus General of the common soldiers,
within few years after, upon a small occasion, made another cruel massacre
and much more barbarous than the former: for he spared none, the best of them
he caused to be whipped to death, or else crucified and put to the sword; and for
the Vulgar spared neither woman nor child. So that within the compass of one
day there died of this obstinate and wicked Nation above seven hundred and
thirty. This outrage was so cruel, that all strangers which inhabited within
the town pitied their misery; but especially Queen Bernice, who being partly
frighted with their shreeks, partly moved to commiseration through the
extremity of their affliction, endangered her life to present her self before
Florus, and upon her knees besought him to take some mercy and pity of them,
and withdraw his hand of vengeance from the blood of the guiltless. But the
fury of the Roman soldiers was so fierce, and the resolution of Florus so
unremovable, that neither her tears nor the present calamities could persuade
him. But as in such Vprores it commonly happens, she with the rest was in
danger of her safety, and was constrained the next night, for the preservation
of her estate to keep a strong watch, lest the Roman soldiers should have done
her some violence. Thus we may see a just revenge of a perjured and stif necked
people, and that in the place where the offense was committed, though at least
eight and thirt^ years after.

In this market place Agrippa had built a Gallery all of marble, from his own
house to the Judgment hall; it was covered above, and made with diverse and
sundry rooms for men to walk in, all burnished with gold, and called by the
name of Xiston, as Josephus has it. Here Agrippa after this cruel massacre
made an Oration to the people (Queen Bernice standing by him) to this effect;
That they should forbear to raise any more commotions against the Romans, and
to banish the Seditious out of the city, for that they saw their cruelty;
Iosep. lib. de Bell. 2. Egesip. lib. 2. cap. 8. To this Gallery there joined a
bridge which past over the valley of Cedron to the Temple. And amongst many
other fair and sumptuous Buildings that were upon this place, there were the
Colleges of the Pharisees, Sadduces, and the Synagogues and Schools for the
instruction of Youth, which were dispersed here and there among other stately
buildings; and this was called the lower Town.

Of the Valley of Cedron.
Between ths lower City and the Temple there was a deep Valley, extending it
self from the gate of Benjamin through the middle of the City, to the gate of
Sion. From this Valley they ascended into either mountains, (that is, Mount
Acra, and Mount Moriah) by certain steps or stairs. These two hills (as is
before said) were joined together with a bridge; and this Valley passing
between them, was called by Zephaniah, cap. 1. Machten. In which place above
all the rest of the Cities dwelt Merchants, and such as used commerce and
trade, as appears in the eleventh verse of his prophecy; Howl ye
Inhabitants of the low place, for the company of the Merchants is destroyed:
all they that exchange for silver are cut off. Upon which place of Scripture
the Chaldaean Paraphrase reads it thus Howl ye inhabitants of the valley
Cedron. Josephus, in tit. Bell. 6. cap. 6. and libr. 6. cap. 7 calls this
valley by two names; one Machten, from the profunditie; the other Cedron, from
the obscurity: for so the name signifies; and whosoever looked down into it
from the Temple, fogs and mists seemed to lie in the bottom of it, like a
cloud of darkness, such was the depth of it. There was another valley which
lay between mount Sion and these mountains, called by the name of Tyrexdon.

Of the Mountain Bezetha.
THis place lay Northward in Jerusalem, and between it and the former hills
were deep ditches cast; it had two Towns standing upon it, divided with two
walls, and was commonly called the Suburbs; the name of the one, which lay
nearest to mount Moriah, was called the second city; the other that lay upon
the North, was called Neapolis or the new town. In the second dwelt Hulda the
Prophetess, and Zacharias the father of S. John Baptist, 2 Kin. 22.2. 2 Chr.
34. Nehem. 3. Joseph. li. 10. c. 5. It was adorned with many fair and
sumptuous buldings, among which was that princely house of Herod Ascalonites
that great and mighty King of the Jews, in whose time our Savior Christ was
born. This house was sumptuously built, supported and adorned with pillars of
polisht marble, and so spacious, that in one room thereof there might stand a
hundred tables. The hall also was very great, and richly gilded with refined
gold intermixed with silver: about it were many pleasant and delectable walls,
goodly gardens and fountains for pleasure: it was compast with a wall of polisht
marble 30 cubits high. And (as Valerius writes) in that house Herod caused
Christ to be mocked, put a long white garment upon him in contempt, and so sent
him to Pilat. Here also was a prison, in which Peter was kept when the Angel of
the Lord delivered him, Acts 12.

Of the town Neapolis, or the New City.
THis lay without the walls of the city, and became inhabited by reason of the
great concourse of people that flocked thither (for in times past there were no
inhabitants) and stood upon the North side of the hill. Here dwelt the
Christians and other laborers and strangers: and by all likelihood it seems
that the house of Mary the mother of John syrnamed Mark stood here, which
because of the continual resort of the Apostles thither, was called the house
of the Church. Hither Peter resorted when he was delivered from the hands of
Herod, by the Angel: for thus says the Text, Acts 12.9. That when Peter had
past the first and second watch he came to the Iron gate which led into the
City, and lo it opened of it self. And from thence he went to the house of
Mary the mother of John, surnamed Mark. Here also (in my opinion) Christ
celebrated the last Paschall Lamb, because after supper he went into the
mount of Olives, for this lying unwalled, lay open for them to go and come at
their pleasure. But afterward in Herod Agrippa's time, it was begun to be
compassed in with a wall, and before it could be fully finished, the Angel of
the Lord struck him, and he died miserably. Here also stood the Monuments of
John Hircanus the high Priest, and of Alexander, King of the Jews, as it
appears in Josephus, libr. de Bello, 6. cap. 6. The tops of the houses in the
City of Jerusalem were flat, and covered with fair and plain roofes,
compassed about with battlements; upon which they used to leap, dance and
banquet, and such recreations as they observed upon their festival days were
there celebrated. And thus much shall serve to have spoken of the mountains or
hills whereon Jerusalem stood.

Of the Walls that compassed the City.
THis City of Jerusalem was so strongly fortified by nature on every side,
except the North, (for it stood upon high rocks and cliffes) that it seemed to
be invincible. And that that side might be the better strengthened, they
compassed it in with three walls, and these so strong, that when Vespasian the
Emperor and his army invaded the city they had much ado to conquer them. The
first of these walls was that which Agrippa built, and it compassed in
Neapolis, otherwise called the new town. At the Northwest end of which Wall,
was built an exceeding high Tower of very fair Marble stone; so high, that
standing on the top thereof, a man might see from thence to the Sea, and into
Arabia, and the uttermost bounds of Iudaea. This Tower was called Psephina.

The second wall was that which divided the two Suburbs, wherein there stood
14 towers and gates. This King Hez^kiah built, 2. Chr. 32. in a corner of
which, between the West gate and the Valley gate, there stood a high Tower,
wherein all the night great fire was made, which cast a light a great way off
round about; so that travelers passing toward Jerusalem, where guided by it
in their way. Of this light we read in Nehem. cap. 3.

The third wall compassed in the Temple and all the lower city; in it was
sixty Towers, but the chief of them stood in the East Angle, between the
dung gate and the gate of the valley, which was called Hananiel, and
signifies, The grace and gift of God. This is much spoken of in the Scripture:
upon this wall King Herod the Ascalonite built three fair Towers; one between
the Garden gate and the old gate, which he called Hippicum, in honor of his
father Hippicus; the other Phaselum, in honor of his brother Phasilus; and the
third Mariamne, after his wives name, who notwithstanding he caused innocently
to be put to death. These three gates were built of polisht Marble. Pliny and
Strabo says, That this was the fairest and most spacious city of the East; and
for the munition and fortification almost invincible. The walls of it were all
of white polisht marble, some 25 or 30 cubits high: the stones were 20 cubits
long, 20 broad, and 5 thick, so closely joined that the junctures could scarce
be perceived. Many of the Towers also were made of such stones; but those of
the Temple exceeded the rest; for they were 25 cubits long, 12 broad, and 8
thick, as Josephus witnesses, lib. Ant. 15. ca. 14. and de Bell. Iud. li. 6.
ca. 6. which things being rightly considered, we may easily perceive that these
walls were very difficult to be destroyed: Neither were the ditches of less
strength that went about the Town; for they were cut out of hard stones, at
least forty cubits deep, and two hundred and fifty cubits broad, which were
impossible to have been won, if God had not helped and assisted the Romans,
filling up those ditches with the bodies of those that died of the plague and
famine within the town.

Of the gates of Jerusalem.
IT had twelve gates to go out and in: Upon the East side lay five, the first
of which was the Fountain gate, which was so called of the Fountain Siloah.
And this stood close by the gate of mount Sion. In which Fountain, the man that
was borne blind washed himself at the commandment of our Savior, and had his
sight restored, Ioh. 9. and at this gate Christ came riding in upon an Ass,
when he came from Bethania, on Palm Sunday.

2 The Sheepe-gate, which was so called of the multitude of sheep that were
driven in by it, to be offered in the Temple (for it stood hard by the temple.)
Right before this gate stood mount Oliuet, some half an English mile and a
furlong from Jerusalem, Eastward. By it stood the Garden called Gethsemane,
where Christ was taken, and led into the city through this gate; to be offered
up like an innocent sheep, for the sins of the whole World.

3 The Dung-gate: this took the name from a dunghill, because the rain water
coming with great power through the City, washed nway the filth, and with
great violence, carried it through this gate into the poole Cedron. Not far
from this gate was the water gate, and stood a little within it.

4 The Valley-gate, which took the name of the valley Iehosaphat, and lay not
far from the other gate. Hereabouts also stood the Dragon gate.

5 The Horse-gate, and stood just in the joining of the East and North part of
the City: it took the name from the Kings horses, as appears, Ier. 31. Neh.
3.

The gates upon the North.
6 The corner gate which stood Northwest, 2. K. 14. 1. Chapter 26. Ier. 31. Zach.
14.

7 The Benjamin-gate, so called because men by this gate went to the borders of
Benjamin: in this gate the Prophet Jeremy was prisoner, Ier. 37.

8 The Ephraim gate, by which they went to the borders of Ephraim.

The gates upon the West.
9 The Raine-gate, so called because the rain water clensing the streets,
carried away all the filth, and so past through this gate toward the West, and
there thrust it out of the City, Neh. 12.

10 The Garden-gate, before which the garden stood wherein Christ was buried.

11 The old gate: before this, Mount Caluarie stood, whereon Christ was
crucified.

12 The fish gate, so called because of the Sea fish that came in by it: it was
also called the Brick gate. Here the Prophet Jeremy broke an earthen pitcher,
Jeremy 19. and out of this gate they went to Bethlehem. But on the South side
there were no gates, for there mount Sion stood, which was so high and steep
that no man could go up upon it.

Of the gates within the City.
THe gate of Sion, the water gate; of which two I have already spoken. The
middle gate, whereof Jeremy speaks, cap. 19. and it is thought it stood in
the middle of the city, in the valley Cedron, not far from the Tower called
Mariamne. The Iron gate, which opened of it self, when the Angel led Peter
out of prison, Acts 12. this stood in the City walls, passing from one suburb
into another: all these gates stood within the city. And thus much shall
suffice to have spoken of the portraiture of it.

Of the Springs, Valleys, Fountains, and other memorable places as they were
situated near to the City, and how to the four parts of the World.
IN the next place it rests to show what things worthy memory were about,
and stood near to the City: the first of which was the brook Cedron, which
sprung out of a hill not far from it upon the South, and with great
swiftness ran through the East part of the city, and so between Jerusalem and
the mount of Olives, to the valley gate of Iehosaphat: thence passing through
the cliffes of mount Oliuet, it ran directly East till it came to the dead Sea;
which brook in the Summer time was most commonly dry. The water of it was
something black, which color the valley Iehosaphat (which was very fertile)
gave it; and from thence it was called Nigrescens torrens, a blackish stream.
This is mystically spoken of, in 2. Sam. and Psa. 100. where it is said, He
(that is, our Savior Christ) shall drink of the brook in the way: which he
fulfilled when he made satisfaction for our sins by his death and passion, as
it appears in the 69 Psalm. Save me o God, etc. Into this brook ran the water
of Silo, and that which came out of the temple.

Of the mount of Olives and Bethania, which signifies a house of mourning.
THese two, the one lay upon the East, the other Southwest, about half an
English mile and a furlong from Jerusalem. Of Bethania you may read in Nehemia.

Of the hill Gihon.
GIhon stood before Jerusalem on the West side, right against the fish gate and
the old gate, 2. Chr. 22. Here King Solomon was crowned, 1. Kin. 1. Not far
from this stood the mount Golgatha, where Christ was crucified. From whence may
be observed, That as Solomon upon that hill was crowned King, so Christ upon
this was crucified; our Savior and the true Solomon, that made everlasting
peace between God and us.

From this mount Gihon sprung the Fountain Gihon, and thereabouts also was the
Fullers field, 2. King. 18. 2. Chron. 33. In which place Senacharib and other
the Princes and Ambassadors of the King of Assyria, spoke blasphemous words
against the Lord, wherefore he slew 185 thousand of them, as appears in the
2. King. 19.

Of the valley of the son of Hinnon.
THis valley lies behind the city of Jerusalem Southward on the left hand as
they went from Jerusalem to Bethelem. In this valley the Jews set up an Idol
of copper like a King, which they called Moloch, that is, a King of Idols. This
Copper Idol stood with the arms stretching out, and under it there was a great
fire, whereby the Image showed fire-redde: and besides that, the more to honor
it, they made a great fire between two walls, which burnt for his sake: and
through this fire the Idolatrous Priests cast living children into Molochs
burning arms, which he with his arms red hot burnt to death. And in this
manner the Jews offered their own children to the Idol Moloch: and when they
did it, they made a great noise and cry, and beat upon a drum, that the
fathers when their children were offered, should not here them cry, by reason
of the great noise of Drums. This valley was called the valley of Tophet; for
Tophet signifies a Drum. This was a most gross and fearful Idolatry, and
therefore Christ likened this valley of Hinnon to hell fire; for he called it
Gehenna, Mat. 5. That the Jews should keep themselves from this monstrous
Idolatry, God made a law, That if any man were taken committing this kind of
Idolatry, he should forthwith be stoned to death, and not suffered to live,
Leuit. 18. and 20. The valley of Gehennon is oftentimes named in the holy
Scriptures, Josh. 15. Nehem. 11.2. Paral. 28.33. Ier. 7. Ierom writes, that
here by this Idol Moloch in the valley of Hinnon, there was a Wood; for the
water ran out of the Fountain Siloah along by it, and made the valley moist.

Of the field of blood, called Hakeldama.
THis field of blood, which was bought for thirty silver pence, for the which
Judas betrayed our Savior Christ, lay not far from the valley of Hinnon,
Southward by the city of Jerusalem, as Ierom writes.

Of the hill Hameskita, or offense and stander.
THis hill lay Southeast, not far from Jerusalem, something wide of mount
Oliuet; so that there was but one Valley between them, and was not altogether
so high as it. Also upon this hill King Solomon in his old age suffered his
wives or concubines to make Idolatrous Temples, wherein he and his wives
worshipped Idols.

Of the destruction of this famous City of Jerusalem by TITUS VESPASIAN.
THus have I briefly set forth the dignity, situation, and curiosity of the
buildings of Jerusalem; together with the richness of the Temple, and
sumptuousness of the houses: now it rests to describe unto you, the manner and
means how this famous City was destroyed; surely a thing worthy wonder
(according to that in Jeremy) Whosoever shall hear of it his ears shall
tingle. And that it might be the more famous, and the Christians within it
might take notice of the near approaching desolation, there were diverse strange
accidents happened, and visions seen. As first, about some four years before,
the river Jordan was turned out of her course, and was brought into the City
Pella: a while after that, for a year together, there hung a Comet like a
flaming sword over the City: And in the night there was seen a light in the
Temple: And in the day when they were at sacrifice, a Calfe brought forth a
Lamb. Then about the middle of the night, the Eastern gates of the Temple
opened of their own accord. In the skies were seen armies of men fighting,
and Horses and Chariots running too and again. And at last there was heard a
terrible voice in the temple, uttering these words, Migremus hinc; that is, Let
us go hence. And that there might be a general Proclamation of this sad and
cruel desolation, through the whole city, one Ananias the son of Jesus, a
man poor and impotent, upon the Feast of the Tabernacles, ran through all the
streets of the City, and crying, O, a voice from the East, and a voice from
the West, a voice from the four winds, a voice over Jerusalem and the Temple,
a voice over the Bridegroom and the Bride, and a voice over the whole
multitude of this City. And although he was whipped, and imprisoned, and cruelly
handled, yet so long as he lived, he would not cease to utter these words,
which by some were judged to foretell the horrible desolation which after happened.

For Titus Caesar son of Flavius the Emperor, about seventy years after the
Nativity of our Lord, and about eight and thirty after his ascension, utterly
overthrew it even to the ground, about the first day of the month of April,
and within a year after these signs. For he taking advantage of the three
factions which at this time swaied in Jerusalem: One of Eleazer the Priest the
son of Simon; the other of Zilotus the chief Prince which held the Temple;
and the third of Johannes Giscalenus a cruel fellow, which had the command of
the inferior City; besieged it, and made this a fit opportunity to further
his enterprises, whiles the seditious and factious people, little regarding
their own safety, gave way by their evil and intestine wars, to what he
intended, weakening themselves much more by their continued slaughters, than the
enemy by his invasion. Insomuch as the whole city, and Temple was filled with
dead bodies; common insolences, and public rapines were ordinarily amongst
them: some set fire of the City, others dispoiling the Temple, a third sort
killing the Priests even as they were at sacrifice, al places full of dead
bodies; and to this, to add a greater measure of misery (without any regard
at all to their future defense) set fire of the storehouse, wherein the corn
lay for the sustentation of the City, and consumed that in one day which had
been long a gathering: by this means it came to pass, that they were sorely
afflicted with the pestilence through the corruption of the air, and with
famine, for want of Corn. All these things notwithstanding (such was the
cruelty, obstinacy, and perverseness of this people) could not restrain
them from violating the most sacred and holy things of the Temple: insomuch as
Johannes Giscalenus had a full determination to have destroyed it, but that he
was prevented by the Romans.

About this time was the feast of the Passover, and it fell upon the
fourteenth day of April, being the Sabbath; to the celebration whereof, there
resorted to Jerusalem, about three hundred thousand Jews. These the enemy gave
way to enter into the City; but considering their present necessity for want
of victuals, upon a sudden drew up their forces, and so straightly beleagered
them that all this huge multitude was (as it were) imprisoned within the walls,
where partaking of the former misery, they either died by the plague or famine.
Whence may be perceived the marvelous providence of God, that even on the same
day, and in the very same place, where but eight and thirty years before our
Savior Christ suffered, the authors of such cruelty suffered a most just and
severe revenge, Now as the army of the Romans lay upon the North of the City,
Titus drew out a band of six hundred horse to ride about, to behold and view
the walls of the Town: but as he was in this manner wondering at the
sumptuousness of the City, the Jews in great multitudes slipped out at a
posterne gate, and set upon him so fiercely, that they endangered his person,
being without armor; and had he not with great difficulty broke through them,
and recovered the Tower of the Romans, he had been there slain. But
presently upon this seeing the danger, he besieged the City in three parts;
himself as the Emperor of the army, built a castle about some two furlongs
from the City, just against the Tower Psephina. Thc other part of the army was
entrenched right against the Tower Hippicus not far from the Garden of the
resurrection. And the third part had their Castle in the Mount of Olives, some
five furlongs or thereabouts from the City. Then did he build Bulwarks, make
Engines, and wonderful devises, for the battering of the Walls; and combining
himself with some of the Jews, upon the seventh day of the second month,
which answers to the month of May, with great difficulty and much labor
entered the first Wall which lay upon the North, and won Mount Bezitha and
Neapolie. Upon the twelfth of the same month (which was the Sabbath day) he
entered the second wall, which divided the suburbs: but this was again the same
day recovered by the virtue of the Jews, so that the Jews were constrained to
fight upon the Sabbath day, according to the prophecy of our Savior Christ,
Matt. 24. But after upon the sixteenth of this month of May, the Romans again
recovered this wall and kept it in their own custody.

Within a while after in the month of June (about this time the famine growing
intolerable within the town) Titus in the space of three days, compassed in
the whole city of Jerusalem with a Wall, and upon that set Towers and Castles,
lest any of the Jews should fly to save themselves. Thus was the prophecy of
our Savior Christ fulfilled, Thy enemies shall compass thee about and hem
thee in on every side. Josephus was now in the City, and walking upon the
Walls, earnestly entreated the Jews to desist, and no longer to oppose the
Romans, but this was so hateful a speech to many, that they began to fling
darts at him. And although at this time the extremity of the famine was so
sore, that many dyed for want of sustenance, yet all persuasions were in vain;
and such was the calamity, that as well those as went out, as those that
continued in the City, were in like danger of their lives; for they were
either slain by the enemy, or else by the pestilence and famine; common
injuries, and unmerciful outrages still attending upon war.

Their misery did rather increase, then at all lesson it self; for the
jealousy of treason, the hope of riches, and the madness of the seditious,
distracted the minds of the Citizens with continual fears, and filled the
streets full of murder and daily spectacles of lamentable tragedies: The
markets were unfrequented with Corn, the victuals, with violence consumed and
taken from the true owners. And if it chanced that some one had more than would
serve his turn, though he dwelt in a fair and stately building, yet the
remotest room and most unfrequented he made his tabernacle, and that little
which was left, with great parcimonie he consumed, together with his life, till
both were ended. Those that were Fathers and Senats of the people (though
before served and attended with reverenced and great state) in this consusion
was glad of a small morsel, though with much contention. The wife was not
ashamed to take away the meat from her husband, nor the children from their
parents, nor the mothers from their infants: And if it happened that in any house
the seditious seemed to smell food, with violence they took it, ransackt the
rooms round about, whiles the master thereof was made a laughing stock and
mournful spectator of those mischiefs. But according to the condition of
soldiers, whose natural disposition is to be violent, without any regard
either of sex or kindred, committed daily outrages. So that here you might have
seen the mothers weeping over their dying infants, whiles their husbands were
massacred in the streets by the seditious.

The increase of days were the increase of torments, and the daily want of
such as were in power being unaccustomed to such evils, caused them to invent
new means to satisfy their desire, and practice unusual torments, for no
other purpose but to find out sustenance: yea, such was their insatiable
thirst of blood, that they spared not him whom but now gave them all he had,
and least he should live to cumber the city, either hang him up by the heels
till he died, or else pulled out his entrails with a sharp iron. Those that
went out in the night time when the Romans were asleep, to gather herbs, the
seditious would meet and with violence take what they had got from them: and
though with tears and lamentations, and prayers upon their knees, they
entreated but for one part, a small moitie of that which a little before they
had got with danger of their lives, yet they would not give it them, and escaped
fairly if they went away with life. These insolences were committed by the
common soldiers, upon such as were of the meaner sort of people. But for the
rest that were either honorable or rich, they became a prey to the Captains and
Commanders, some accused as traitors, and that they would have betrayed the
City to the Romans; others as fugitives, that they would forsake the City;
most under pretense of one crime or other, dispoiled of that they had. And they
whom John had thus oppressed, were entertained of Simon, and whom Simon had
injuried, they were entertained by John; both drunk the blood of the miserable
Citizens like water: So that the desire of rule was the cause of their
dissension, the concord of their evil and cruel actions.

There was an infinite number that perished in this city by famine, insomuch
as houses were filled with the bodies of infants and children. The Angle gate
was thrust full of dead corpse. The young men that remained, walked up and
down the City like Images of death. The old men were destroyed by the
pestilence, the contagion of which disease taking away their senses, they
became mad. And of such as died among the seditious, their wives or kindred
had not room nor time to bury them, but as they were putting them into the
grave they also dyed. Yet for all this, amongst this miserable society, there
was no weeping, no complaining, no deploring of their necessities, for the
violence of the famine having dried up their radical moisture, the fear of
grief was taken from them: and such as had most cause to lament, and were most
pricked with the sting of sorrow, before they could utter their grief died,
the beholders not shedding a tear: so that through the whole city there was a
still silence, and a thick mist of death, and destruction did fully possess
the same.

But the seditious were much more cruel than these were oppressed with
calamity and sorrow; for some opened the graves of the dead, and taking out
their bodies thrust them through with their swords. Others to try the
sharpness of the edge of their weapons would fall upon those that were yet
alive, and when they had slain them, go away laughing at their pleasure. So
that as Josephus says, there was scarce any mischief under the Sun, but was
both practiced and tolerated in this City. To conclude, by sedition the
Romans conquered the City, and sedition conquered the Romans.

All love and modesty, through this extreme and intolerable famine, became
utterly extinct, and the dearest friends would kill one another for a crust of
bread; the fairest Lady commit open adultery for a little sustinance. Their
food was extraordinary, and such as men did loath and hate: Some would feed
upon snailes and worms, others of old hay chopped small; many ate corn either
vnground or made into bread: some plucked the meat from the spit raw, others
with their teeth gnaud off the leather off their shields: And that very mouth
which cried, Crucify him, crucify him, let his blood be upon us and our
children, was constrained to feed upon three sorts of dung, that is to say,
Doves dung, Oxens dung, and Man's dung. Moreover, many were constrained for
mere necessity, to feed upon the dead bodies of such, as a little before
dyed, partly by famine, partly by the pestilence. And to conclude, for very
madness eat up their gold: for some of them being taken as they were flying
for their safety by the Romans, in their excrement was found gold, of which the
soldiers hearing, and supposing that all the Jews had been full of gold,
through covetousness of that gain, in one night killed 2000 of them, and ripped
up their bellies; And had not Titus Caesar by a severe Edict, forbidden these
cruel and unheard of slaughters, there had been many more slain.

To make an end of this unheard of famine, I will repeat one memorable example
our of Josephus, of an outrage which a mother committed even upon her own
son. There was a woman of the inhabitants beyond Jordan, whose name was
Marie, of the stock of Eliazer, and of the Town Bethezor, which signifies the
house of Hissop; she was of a noble and rich family, and amongst others, went
to Jerusalem in hope of safety, where she was likewise oppressed with the
misery of this siege; for as soon as she had brought all her riches and
substance into the City, which she had before beyond Jordan, this famine
growing greater and greater upon the inhabitants. The seditious perceiving that
this woman was well furnished both with riches and sustinance, on a sudden set
upon her house, dispoiled her of her substance, took away her sustinance, and
utterly deprived her of all means to live. She being pricked with the misery
and calamity of the times, saw it little prevailed to strive, wherefore with
tears, upon her knees she entreated that she might have but some small part
of that they had taken from her, to maintain her self and her son with life;
but the seditious gave little ear to her entreaties: wherefore being moved to
extreme anger she daily cursed with contumelious words those barbarous
villains, that had thus robbed her of all her means: but when she saw that
neither anger nor entreaty could procure mercy, and through the Town not one
morsel of food was to be found, partly pressed with an extreme necessity,
partly with a furious rage, beyond all nature and compassion, laid violent
hands upon her own son, and accounted an untimely death more honorable,
than that he should live to be a prey to the seditious, or a slave to the
Romans.

The body of this infant she roasted and eat: the soldiers of the Town being
pressed with hunger, smelling the meat, supposing that as in former times, they
should have found plenty, with violence broke in upon her, and look what she
had provided greedily consumed, and compelled her to fetch the rest; which she
did, and when they were well satisfied, she showed them the head and feet of
her son: which they perceiving, loathing the inhumanitie of the fact, with
dejected countenance departed. This famine was so extreme, that one measure of
grain was worth a talent, that is, 600 crowns. But the Romans all this while
did abound with plenty of all things, and to vex the Jews they showed them the
great abundance of their store, for the neighboring provinces sent them
supplies.

After this famine, there followed an extreme plague, procured partly through
the stanch of the bodies that lay unburied, partly by the multitude of the
massacres that daily happened, that (as Egisippus writes) within the compass of
eleven weeks, there were carried out by one gate of the City, 111000 dead
bodies; yet could they not empty the City, but that they were constrained
either to bury them at the public charge, or else cast them over the walls into
the ditches of the city: which when Titus saw, and that the putrefaction of
the bodies swam upon the brim of the ditch (for it was full with dead
carcasses) fetching a deep sigh, and lifting up his hands to heaven, he said,
God is my witness, this is not my fault, but the punishment of God upon them.

The city being thus pestired with sedition, famine, pestilence, and war, was
made now a ready prey to the Enemy: and that they might make a final end of
their miseries, Titus caused the engines of battery to be brought against the
walls; and upon the first day of the fourth month (whicn answers to our June)
he took the third wall which lay upon the North. Upon the fourth of June after,
though with great labor, he took the Tower of Antonia, and in it placed a
Garrison. Upon the seventeenth day of the fourth month, which was a fast to
the Jews, Josephus going up to the top of that Tower, made an Oration to
Giscalinus and the rest, to dissuade them from their rebellion, and cease to
oppose the Romans, but this little prevailed. Upon the twentieth day of July,
the Jews burnt a part of the Porch of the Temple toward the North, not far
from the Tower of Antonia, lest that the Romans having got that Hold, should
with the greater facility have conquered the Temple also. Two days after, the
Romans destroyed the whole Porch with fire, and the Jews helped to pull it
down with their hands: this was none of the three Porches but a bulwark of
the Temple. Upon the 25 day of July the Jews filled the Porch toward the West
with pitch and betume, and then made as though they meant to fly and leave the
city, which some of the Romans perceiving, without any command of their
Captains, put scaling ladders to the Tower, and began to assault it, but when
they were most busy, the Jews of a sudden put fire to the pitch, and burnt
them most miserably; insomuch as Titus pitied them to see their extremity,
although they were such as did contrary to his command. Upon the last day of
this month they took the North gate, which lay toward the rising of the
Sun, and close by the brook Cedron; rhis they burnt down with fire. Upon
the third of August, Titus commanded to fire the gate of the Temple, that was
all covered over with gold and silver, by this gate the Romans made a breach
into the Temple, which ere this had been profaned by the Jews: whiles this
gate was a burning, the Jews stood astonished, and not one of them resisted
the Romans. Caesar and all his army labored three days to quench this fire,
after which he called a council to determine what he should do with the
temple, it was so rich and sumptuous, that he would feign have left it as an
ornament for the Roman Empire. But the Jews having got a little breathing,
made new incursions upon the Romans, by which means they could not determine
thereof. The 6 of August, the soldiers of Titus, without command of their
Captains, fired the Temple, just upon that day which Nebuchadnezzar before
time had destroyed it, as Josephus witnesses, li. de Bell. 6. c. 26.27. Caesar
would feign have saved this Temple for the sumptuousness of it, and beckoned
to his soldiers to have quenched the fire, but they, partly pressed on with a
desire of wealth, partly being pricked on with a fury and madness, gave no ear
to his speeches, but committed most cruel massacres, without either regard of
age or sex: So that the cries of the slaughterd, the sound of the Roman
trumpets, the fierce resistance of the seditious, and the fire furiously
burning, represented a most horrible spectacle: The ground below was covered
with dead bodies, many in desperation threw themselves into the fire, 6000 were
burnt in the same gate, whither they fled for refuge, and the priests most
cruelly massacred as they were in the Temple. This was the end of the Temple of
Jerusalem, the mirror of the world, being consumed and spoiled with fire and
sword.

After these things, upon the bridge that passes from the temple over the
valley into the lower town, Titus made a speech by an interpreter, to the two
seditious Captains, gently entreating them to leave off their rebellion, and
he would spare the City and commit no more outrages, and such further requests
as they desired should according to reason be granted them; but if they would
not embrace mercy and cease their violent resistance, they must expect no
manner of compassion, but the very law of Arms. This they contemned and made
but a mock of Caesar for all his offers; whereupon in a great rage he gave
the signal to his soldiers, and they went through all the City and set it on
fire. The next day they won the lower City, and with fire and sword consumed
the place where the records lay, the Court and all the Princely buildings,
until they came to that stately house of Helena, which stood in the midst of
Acra, all the houses near being filled with the bodies of the dead, and the
streets horribly defiled with the blood of those that were slain. Within a
short while after, Johannes Giscalinus was taken alive and committed to prison.

The inferior City being thus taken and destroyed, about the 16 day of
August, Caesar began to build his engines, and batter the walls of the upper
city, which within the space of 18 days after with extreme labor and skill,
he laid flat with the ground, (as Josephus says.) And upon the 7 of
September, with great facility he conquered the city, the Jews of their
own accord descending from the Towers: and the Romans set upon the walls
their ensigns, with a great acclamation, and wasted all the city with fire
and sword, sparing neither men, women, nor children.

The 8 day of the month of September, the whole City was destroyed, and not a
stone left upon a stone but laid level with the ground, only the three Towers
that were built by Herod, which were of shining Marble ( viz. Hippicus,
Phaselus, and Mariamne) that future ages seeing the excellency of those
buildings they might judge of the statelines of the rest. But these also were
after destroyed by Adrianus Caesar.

There died by the famine and pestilence an innumerable number, by fire and
sword ten hundred thousand: 2000 were found that either killed themselves, or
one killed another, 7900 were taken captives; of these, all the seditious
thieves that accused one another, were slain by Frontonius Caesar, Titus freed
many, 7000 were sent into Egypt, with extreme labor to consume and die, the
properest and most able were reserved for triumph, many were distributed
through the provinces, some were slain by the sword, and by beasts for public
spectacles, and those that were 16 years of age and under, together with many
other, Caesar sold under the crown, at thirty for a silver penny; that as
Christ was sold for thirty pence, so thirty of them should be sold for a penny,
With the riches of this town Caesar triumphed, rode into Rome with two golden
Chariots, built the Temple of Peace, and there put all the plate which he found
in the temple of Jerusalem. After all this, for a full determination of those
evils, the two seditious captains Johannes Giscalenus and Simon the son of
Giora, were put to most cruel deaths. Thus may we see the grievous punishment
of the obstinat and ambitious, which God permitted to fall upon them for their
unthankfulness and cruel tyranny.

How the city of Jerusalem after this destruction by Titus Vespas. was utterly
beaten down and defaced by Aelius Adr. Caesar, which he re-edifying, called it
after his own name Aelia.
THe city of Jerusalem being thus laid leuel with the ground, for the space of
sixty years lay desolate, a receptacle for thieves and murderers, a fit place
for Wolves and wild beasts, which resorted thither to feed upon the dead
bodies. And now time consuming their flesh, left their bones and skuls to lie
upon the earth as in a Charnell house. Thus it continued until one Benchochab
(which signifies the Son of the Stars) born in the town of Bethcoron not far
from Emaus, professed himself to be the Messiah or Christ. The Jews supposing
this to be true, because of that saying of Numb. 24. There shall a Star rise
up out of Jacob) assembled themselves to the number of many thousands and
followed him, with great tyranny and cruelty spoiling the Holy Land, and
through all the country of Iudaea committing many outrages and massacres. Thus
they continued for the space of eighteen years, at the end of which time
Adrianus Aelianus the Emperor hearing of those insolences, levied an Army and
sent them into Judea, under the government of Julius Seuerus, who in a pitched
field near to Bethcoron and not far from Emaus conquered this Benchochab or
Pseudo-Messiah, and with him slew five hundred thousand Jews that were
deceived by his persuasion. Now when they went to seek for the body of this
Deceiuer amongst the Dead (as says Talmudista) he was found lying with an
horrible Serpent about his neck; intimating how God rejected him that would
seem to imitate his Son; for even as the Serpent deceived our first Parents, so
this Benchochab deceived the Jews, and for this cause they called him Bencozba,
that is, The Son of Lying. The number of the Jews which in the time of this
war were slain amounted to 500000 men, besides many others that perished by
pestilence and famine. This war happened 64 years after the destruction of
Jerusalem.

After this second desolation of the Jews, at the command of the Emperor (that
there might be a final extirpation of the ancient city of Jerusalem, and that
the words of our Savior might be fulfilled, Lo, there shall not be a stone left
upon a stone, Mat. 24) the ruins and foundations thereof were dug up, the
stones broken in pieces, the ground left desolate, and the mountains are now
become barren and ouergrown with brambles: And that the name thereof might
utterly be forgotten, and as it were rooted out of the earth, he set up a new
town not far from the hill Gihon and Golgotha where Christ was crucified;
which after he had adorned with many goodly buildings, he called it by his own
name, Aelia. In the place of the Temple he set up a Church in the honor of
Jupiter and Venus. Just in the place where the holy Altar stood, he erected his
own image upon a marble pillar, which continued until Saint Hieroms time. At
Bethlehem he erected the Image of Adonis, and to that he consecrated at Church.
Upon the gates of the City he cut Hogs in marble, in contempt of the Jews.
Then did he abjure them, That they should not come within the walls of the
City, nor set foot upon the ground near Jerusalem. This being done, (as Dion
says) he dedicated it to the honor of Jupiter Capitolinus; and only made it
free for Christians and such like to be in it. This town at this day we call
Jerusalem, although it be situated in another place, and called by another
name.

Future Ages calling the actions of precedent times into question, pulled a great
contempt upon this Town, and so much the rather, because Infidelity and other
heathenish profaneness was cherisht within this city. So that that which a
little before was set up in honor of the Emperor Aelianus, is now grown into
contempt. Wherefore Helena the mother of Constantine the Great having command of
that Empire, to give some satisfaction to the universality, caused those
profane Temples and Idols to be abolished, and in their places erected others.
Upon mount Golgotha the church called Golgothanus; upon the mount of Olives one
in the place of the ascension of Christ: and Constantine her son richly adorned
the Sepulcher, and over it built a stately Temple all of polisht marble, richly
gilt with gold, so that to this day it remains as the chief ornament of the
town. In this man's time the Jews with great boldness indeauoured to rebuild
the Temple just in the place where it stood before: but at the commandment of
the Emperor they were repelled, and in recompense of their presumption had
their ears cut off and their noses slit, because they had ears and would not
hear, neither obey the commandment of our Savior.

But as the Emperor was religious, and endeauored to support Christianity, so
his successor Iulianus was as full of impiety and profaneness; who that he
might frustrat the prophecy of our Savior, That Jerusalem should never be
built again, in contempt caused the Jews to assemble together, and with all
expedition restore it to its former glory, giving the uttermost of his help to
their endeauours. But as they were seriously laboring in this work, of a
sudden there came a great earthquake, and look what they had built was by that
quite ouerturned; then fire came out of the earth and from heaven, which
destroyed both the matter and the Workmen. And that the Jews nor any
Philosophers might impute it to a natural cause, there was seen in the heavens
a bloody cross, and upon their clothes crosses shining like stars, which the
Jews could by no means wipe off. Yet this little prevailed: a second time they
attempted, and as before, a second earthquake happened, with a storm of wind,
which came with such extreme violence, that all the stuff which they had
heaped together for this purpose was utterly blown away and destroyed. So that
of force they were constrained to leave off, and acknowledge, That Christ, whom
their Forefathers had crucified, was the true Messiah. Greg. Nazianzen and
Hierome report, That nevertheless the Jews even to this day, although it cost
them much money, come yearly to the place where Jerusalem stood, and upon the
day of the destruction thereof weep over it. Such was their affection unto this
City.

But these evils were purged with a sudden invasion (for no crying injuries nor
profane insolences against God pass unpunished, but that then or soon after
a just revenge falls upon them) for Cosroes Emperor of the Persians, whose
impudency and impiety was so great that he would be worshipped as a god,
about the year of our Lord 615, besieged this town, took it, and put to death
90000. Christians, carried the Patriarch thereof, together with many others
away captive. But Heraclius the Emperor to punish him for his pride and
cruelty set upon Persia, and with fire and sword destroyed the country not far
from Nineueh, conquered his chief captain Razetis in a set battle, won the
city of Nineueh, and went away with an honorable victory. Seroes also, the
only begotten son of Cosroes, but a little before inuading the kingdom, killed
his father in prison, restored the Patriarch and the rest of the Captives which
his father had taken, to Heraclius: and about the seventh year after he had
warred upon Persia, he returned to Aelia with great pomp.

Not long after, in the year 637, Haumar the chief Prince of the Saracens,
which was the third from Mahomet, with a great Army afflicted Syria and Iudaea,
conquered these Countries, and in his victories used great tyranny and
cruelty. Within two years after, he won Aelia, which had maintained a long
and sharp siege; neither would Zacharias the Patriarch give it up, til he was
compelled thereto by extreme famine, and soon after died with grief.

Thus this town continued for the space of 450 years in the hands of the
Saracens. Then in the year 1012, Caliphas Sultan of Egypt won it, beat down
the walls, destroyed the Temple which the Emperor Constantine had built, and
made havoc of al things. Presently upon this, the Turks that came out of
Scythia by the Caspian mountains, won the city, and drove thence the Saracens.
Thus we may see that the Saracens and Turks, though they were both of one
religion, yet for the country of the Jews fought one against another, and
compelled the Christians to pay them Tribute for the fourth part of the city,
wherein the Sepulcher of our Lord stood, being again restored by the Emperor
Constantine after the destruction of Caliphas.

The Christians being weary of this tribute, and of the oppression of the
Infidels, became suitors to Pope Urban the second of that name, for their
delivery; who in the year 1094 assembled a Council at Clearemont in France,
and by the instigation of one Peter the hermit, stirred up the hearts of diverse
Christian princes and great Lords to make a croysado; so that 10000 brave and
well mounted soldiers went into the Holy land, and for a token of their war
bore red crosses upon their arms.

In the same year there was a great blasing star seen in the West, and
after that followed a great plague for the space of two years through the
world: this nevertheless hindered them not in their designs, but that they
went their intended journey, won the City of Aelia from the Saracens, delivered
the Christians from their bondage and tax, and chose Godfrey of Lorrain Earl
of Bullion King thereof, whom they anointed in the Temple of the holy
Sepulcher; but he refused to be crowned with a Crown of gold, saying, That it
ill beseemed him to be called King of Jerusalem, (the true King whereof was
Christ) or to sit crowned with gold, in the place where he was crowned with
thorns that was the Son of the everliving God: and then chose Arnolphus of
Rhodes Patriarch.

In the month of October the same year, a blasing Star of marvelous
bigness appeared toward the South: it seemed to be like a wauing sword,
foreshewing no doubt the destruction of all those that went about to
re-establish this earthly Jerusalem. Immediately after the Feast of the
Nativity of Christ, all the Christians of the East countries upon Candlemas
day came out of Syria, but especially out of Antiochia, to Jerusalem, and in
the Temple of the holy Sepulcher consecrated their Bishops and Chorasters, and
with one consent sung Illuminare Jerusalem. They took also all the Cities,
Castles, and Villages, and over them set Bishops; created four Principalities,
one at Jerusalem, another at Antiochia, a third at Edissa, a fourth at Tripoly.
Also certain Earledomes and Baronies, as at Brito, Zidon, Caesarea, Galilee,
Ioppa, and Ascalon. All these were appointed to pay tribute to the King of
Jerusalem. All this was done in the year of our Lord, 1099.

No sooner were these news published to the world, but there was an universal
croysado through all Christendom, for the conquering and winning of the rest of
the holy land, but before they could get thither, they were either slain by
the Grecians and other nations, or else died through famine and thirst: so that
in them was fulfilled the prophecy of Zacharias, cap. 12.3. where it is said,
It shall happen that I will make Jerusalem an heavy stone for all people all
they that lift it up shall be torn, though all the people of the earth be
gathered together against it. And verse 9, And in that day I will seek to
destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.

This year 1100 died Godfrey King of Jerusalem, of a fever, upon the ^8 day of
July, when he had reigned scarce a year, and was buried in the temple of mount
Calvarie.

After him succeeded his brother Baldovin the first of that name, and second
King of Jerusalem. This man reigned 18 years in Jerusalem, and being overcome
by Caliphas Sultan of Egypt, after the loss of thirteen thousand Christians,
he had much ado to escape with life. Within a short time after he died
without issue.

Baldwin the second succeeded his uncle, and was the third king of Jerusalem.
He began his reign Anno 1118. This man overcame the Turks: and the King of
Damascus had issue only one daughter, named Milesent, whom he married to the
Earl of Angiers, and gave with her the kingdom of Jerusalem, and died without
heir male, in the year 1131.

Fulco in right of his wife succeeded his father in law, and was the fourth
King of Jerusalem. This Fulco was brother to the King of England, he reigned 13
years, fought many worthy battles against the Turks, put 3000 of their men to
the sword, took many of them prisoners and carried them to Jerusalem. After
that, as he was hunting the Hare by Acon, riding speedily, he fell from his
horse and was sorely bruised, whereof he died, and left two sons called
Baldwin and Almerick.

Baldwin the third was the fifth King of Jerusalem, and succeeded his father.
He won the city of Ascalon, he rebuilt the town of Boza, (which had been
destroyed) placed there certain Knights Templers, he lost the City of Edissa
to the Saracens, where many Christians were cruelly slain. And having reigned
19 years he died without issue.

After him succeeded his brother Almerick, as was the sixth king of Jerusalem.
In the time of this king the Sultan of Egypt gave a great overthrow to the
Knights Templers; which he seeking to revenge, invaded Egypt with a great army,
besieged the great city of Alcaire, but to small purpose; wherefore returning
back to Jerusalem, he shortly after died, when he had reigned 12 years: he left
behind him three children, a son called Baldwin, and two daughters, Sibilla
and Isabella.

Baldwin the fourth succeeded his father, and was the seventh king of
Jerusalem; who abusing his government was struck with leprosy, with the
contagion of which disease he died miserably, in the 25 year of his age, having
reigned 13 years. Baldwin the fifth of that name, the only begotten son of his
sister Sibil, by his consent was chosen his successor, a youth of 9 years old,
his fathers name was William Mountferrat, earl of March, who dying, his mother
married one Guy Earl of Lusignan, to whom Baldwin committed the protection of
the kingdom and of his young kinsman till he came to man's estate. But this young
man within 7 years after the death of his uncle, died sitting at his table, not
without suspicion of poison. Guy his protector, by the persuasion of his wife,
and at the instigation of the Ierosolimits, took upon him the government: but
Raimond Earl of Tripoli was his great adversary, for that Baldwin 4. for his
exceeding pride, at the instigation of that Guy had displaced him of all his
Offices and titles in the commonwealth. These two striving for the kingdom, it
happened that Guy was charged with his kinsmans death, under which pretense
Raimond made war against him. During these troubles, Saladine Sultan of Egypt
taking advantage of this opportunity, made war upon them both, and with great
facility conquered the kingdom and destroyed Jerusalem.

In this year 1187, there happened so great an Eclipse of the Sun, that at
noone day the Stars were plainly to be seen. Soon after this, Raimond and
Guy were both taken prisoners, and thirty thousand Christians cruelly put to
the sword. After this, the Saracens sacked the Town, threw the Bells out of
the Steeples, made stables of the Churches; only the Temple on Mount Golgotha
stood untouched: for the Turks and Saracens honor Christ as a great Prophet.

And thus the new kingdom of the Christians in Jerusalem ended, which was upon
the second day of October, in the year 1187, after it had continued in their
possession 88 years. During the continuance of this kingdom there were many
horrible visions and strange Signs and Wonders seen both in Heaven, on earth,
and in the air; foreshewing (no doubt) that God was not well pleased with
their actions which sought to restore that kingdom of Jerusalem. For, My
kingdom (says Christ) is not of this world.

And although after that, there were many Kings that by all possible means
endeauored to recover and restore the same, and for that purpose have leauied
many great Armies, and undertaken many tedious journies; yet all their counsels
and determinations came to nothing, for that God so often as they undertook
any such expedition, either stayed their Armies, oppressed them with war, or
else plagued them with famine, in such an extreme measure, that with very
hunger they have bin constrained to eat their Horses.

Frederick Barbarossus may be an example of these calamities; who with a great
army making an expedition to Jerusalem, as he was traveling through Asia
minor, his horse started and flung him into the river, where he died miserably
ere he could be saved. Many other Princes, besides in the like enterprise came
to the like ends; for they were either destroyed by the Barbarians, with the
loss of thousands of their men cruelly slain, or utterly destroyed with
unnatural diseases or untimely deaths.

Now when the Emperor Frederick the second of that name had beseeged and
brought to great misery the Sultan of Egypt, and the Knights Templers had done
the like to Damieta; Corderio the Sultans son beat down the walls of
Jerusalem, and had it not bin for the great lamentations and ernest entreaties
of the Christians, he would have destroyed the city; but for their sakes he
left standing Solomon's Temple, and the Temple of the holy Sepulcher; for at
this time Christians inhabit in them.

Within a while after, about the year 1228, Frederick the second of that
name, Emperor of Rome, went to the holy land with a great army, and came to
Ptolomais, otherwise called Acon, where staying a while, he made a league with
the Sultan of Egypt for ten years, regained Jerusalem without drawing sword,
and was there crowned in the year 1229, keeping at that time in Jerusalem a
royal Easter. This man fortified the Christians with a garrison, rebuilt
Nazareth and Ioppa, and so returned into Italy.

In the year 1246, Cassanus King of the Tartars being persuaded by the Sultan,
with a great army invaded Iudaea, won Jerusalem, caused the Christians to be
cruelly slain, beat down the holy Sepulcher even to small pieces, and left
but little standing. It was after this destroyed by Tamerlaine King of the
Tartars, and by Mahomet the second of that name, Emperor of the Turks. But
the Monks had leave to build up the holy Sepulcre again, for the which they
paid to the Sultan or his Deputy a yearly tribute.

In the year of our Lord 1516, Selymus Emperor of the Turks, about the twenty
fourth day of August, near to Damascus overcame Campson Gaurus Sultan of Egypt
in a cruel War, and put to death many thousands of his men; and the Sultan
himself seeking to save his life by flight was miserably slain. This Selymus
conquered the Holy Land, Syria, Damascus, and all the Countries thereabouts;
and as he went through Iudaea, leaving his Army at Gaza, with a few of his
Soldiers he went to Jerusalem, that he might see with his eyes that place
which was made so famous by the ancient Writers, and was so often mentioned in
the Old and New Testament. But when he came he found nothing but a ruinate and
waste place, barren and rude to look upon, inhabited by a few poor
Christians, and they also held in great contempt and bondage, paying a great
tribute to the Sultan of Egypt, for their liberty and the holy Sepulcher, as P.
Iouius writes. But after that Selymus in that place had done his Offerings and
Sacrifices to his god Mahomet, seeing the Priests and Christians pressed with
extreme poverty, out of his singular mercy and compassion gave them a large
and sumptuous gift, when he had stayed but one day and one night in the Town.
The next morning before day he went with all expedition to his Army at Gaza,
and from thence into Egypt, where he besieged the great and famous city
Alcaire, and in the year 1517 took it, conquered all the country, utterly
extirpated the Sultan, and went away with an honorable victory and rich booty.
From this year even till now, the town of Aelia or Jerusalem is under the
jurisdiction of the Turks. Thus may we see how often, and with what miserable
calamities this city has bin afflicted, even since the first destruction by
Vespasian; which makes evident the great judgment of God not only upon the
Jews, but also upon the earth where they inhabited, for their infidelity and
unmerciful cruelty.

The description of Jerusalem and the situation thereof as it is now in these
times.
THe former incursions and common desolations leaving this town ruined and
spoiled for want of inhabitants, it became a desert and forsaken place; only
some few Christians, either out of the zeal of religion, or for vulgar
ostentation, to show that there had bin a town, dwelt there: and thus it
continued until the year 1542. at which time Solomon the great Turk, either
in respect of the strength of the place, or in hope of profit, or else to get
himself a name, with great cost and labor re-edified it, set up many stately
buildings and sumptuous houses, beautified it with two costly Temples, the one
the Temple of Solomon, and the other the holy Sepulcher; enlarged the extent
thereof, and seated it upon high hills. After all this, compast it about with a
spacious and thick wall, and upon that placed many strong and stately towers,
wherein there stands eight gates, viz. the fish gate, the Old gate, S. Stephens
gate (so called because they say S. Stephen went out by that gate when he was
stoned) the Angle gate, the Dung gate, the Sheep gate, the Golden and Fountain
gates. Thus the ancient city, and that which the Emperor Adrian built, being
both destroyed, in another place is set up again. So that between both, this
new city stands, and the first city begins to be again inhabited.

Of the Temple of the holy Sepulcher.
THis Temple lies upon the West within this new town, at first fairly built
by the Emperor Constantine, but destroyed by Caliphas Sultan of Egypt: then by
the Emperors of Constantinople rebuilt, which continues to this day. It is
round in the proportion, adorned with 79 pillars 30 foot long; the widenes by
the Diameter (besides the pillars) is 73 feet, leaded above, and upon the top
of the roof stands a Lanthorn, by which the light comes in: this Lantern
is very curiously glased. In the middle stands the holy Sepulcher. To this
joins the Church in mount Golgotha, and serves in stead of a Quire. It
stands something lower, but all under one roof. The place where the holy
Sepulcher stands is four square, eight foot long and eight broad, hewne out
of a rock, and covered with marble; there is a little door in the East part
of it, very low, by which men go into it, and within that the Sepulcher it self
stands upon the North side, made of gray marble, three handfuls high, and
eight foot long. There are no windows for light to come to it, but over there
hangs continually nine lamps burning, whereby it receives light. The vault of
this Sepulcher is divided with a wall; the outward is both of the same
proportion and length as the inward, but that which is without seems to be an
entry to the inner cave where Christ was buried: and there (as some say) even
to this day is found a piece of the stone which the Angel rolled from the
grave before the resurrection; the other part of the stone (howsoever it came
there) lies upon mount Sion. But some think that the Armenians carried it
thither, because upon it they have built an Altar. In this inner cave there
hangs nine lamps to give light unto them that enter in by the East; so that in
the inner and outer Vault there stands eighteen Lamps. The Mount whereon
Christ was crucified seems to stand upon a rock of stone, whitish and
something blushing. It is distant from the holy Sepulcre 130 foot. The place
where the Cross stood was an hard rock, eighteen steps in the ascent, and
answers to nine and twenty feet. The hole where the Cross stood is about the
roundnesse of a man's head in latitude; and if a man might believe the Monks
thereabouts, they say also that in that place is to be seen the color of our
Saviors blood even to this day. Upon the left hand of this there stands an
Altar made of marble, and over that a sumptuous Chapel paued and covered with
polisht marble, gilt and adorned with refulgent gold, the walls whereof are very
curiously wrought and gilded. In the Church upon mount Golgotha they also show
part of a pillar naturally black, spect with red spots, where they say Christ
was whipped, and make the Vulgar believe that these specks are the drops of blood
that fell from him. The other part of this Colume was carried to Constantinople,
as it was thought. In this church Godfrey first Christian King of Jerusalem,
and the rest of his successors lie buried.

Of the Temple of Solomon as it is at this day.
THis Temple lies toward the East, and was built by the Christians just in
the same place where the former Temple stood at the time when this City was
rebuilt and enlarged. The body thereof is very high and spacious, and built of
polisht marble, adorned with most exquisit and curious workmanship, very
artificial and glorious both within and without, insomuch that the polished
stones cast a singular beautiful and resplendant luster. Above it is covered
with lead, and was built up at the cost and labor of the Grecians; in the roof
whereof the Turks place an half moon, as they usually do in all such
churches wherein they come and have authority. The Turks and Saracens have
this Temple in great reverence and devotion, they adorn it (according to their
custom) with diverse artificial pictures and emblems. They will suffer no
Christians to enter into it, nor any Jews upon pain of death. And if it
happens that at any time they go into it, they first wash themselves with water
very clean, then put off their hose and shoos, and so go bare foot. This Temple
they call the holy Rock, and in the body thereof there hangs 700 lamps which
burn night and day. In the midst hereof there stands a certain little rock
every where indented with iron, near to which not any of the Saracens or
Infidels dare to approach or touch, although there come many very far to
visit it: for they believe that there were many memorable and worthy things
done in that rock: they think that Melchisedeck the first Priest of the great
God offered bread and wine upon it, Genes. 14. and that here the Patriarch
Jacob saw the Ladder which reached from heaven to earth, Genesis 28. which indeed
happened not in Jerusalem, but in Bethel, as the Scriptures witness. Further
they believe, that upon this stone David saw the Angel of the Lord standing
with a shaken sword when he struck the city with the pestilence, 2 Samuel 24. and
that the Priests of the old Testament offered upon this stone their sacrifices
to the Lord, which were devoured with fire from heaven. All which things do
utterly differ from holy Scripture.

The Jews also are of opinion, That the prophet Jeremy about the time of the
captivity of Babylon, in this stone hid the Ark of the Covenant, until such
time as the Lord brought the people back again from the captivity. Which is
contrary also to the books of the holy Scripture; for, 2 Match. 2. it is said,
it was hid in the mount Nebo, where Moses stood when he saw the whole land of
Canaan. Also the Turks say that Christ sat upon this stone when Simeon took
him in his arms and blessed him. Here also he sat in the midst of the Doctors
when he was but twelve years of age, Luke 2. which also differs from the
Scripture; for this was not the body of the Temple, but in the middle court or
Solomon's porch, which sometimes was taken for the Temple, because it joined to
it. And diverse circumstances of the Scripture do seem to make this evident,
because here Christ taught, and here the people usually met together, as
appears, Josh. 10. and Psalm. 72.

About the Temple of Jerusalem there is a fair Plain much resembling our Church
yards, all paued with marble stone. To this there is adjoining a fair Church
covered with lead, and was sometimes called Solomon's porch; but after the
Christians had won Jerusalem they gave it the name of S. Mary's. The Turk
keeps burning in this daily 800 lamps, and it is much greater than that of
Solomon's Temple. The Sultan of Egypt also about an hundred years before, built
a little Church or Moscho close by Solomon's Temple, wherein are continually
burning 88 Lamps. There is a vault under the Temple of the blessed Virgin
Mary, of such an extraordinary greatness that 600 horse may easily be placed
in it. And thus we may see the Temple of Solomon and city of Jerusalem not only
to be in the power of the Turks, but also profaned with the blasphemous
doctrine of Mahomet. And also we may here behold the abomination of desolation
standing in the holy place where sometime was the Ark of the Covenant, Dan. 9.
Mat. 24. and the prophecy of Jeremy is fully finished, ca. 19. This place
shall be unclean like unto the place of Tophet, where they did sacrifice to the
Host of heaven, and unto other strange gods.

Of other buildings within the city of Aelia, which is now called Jerusalem.
MOunt Sion is placed toward the South of Jerusalem, where even at this day the
Monks undertake to show the ruins of David's Tower, the sepulchers of the Kings
of Israel, and many other holy places. But P. Orosius and other Historians
write, How in the time of Adrian Caesar there happened a great earthquake in
such a terrible manner, that the mountain of Sion with the sepulcher of David
fell down and were utterly defaced. Further all true Historians do write, That
Adrian the Emperor did so much deface the City, that he left not a stone
standing upon a stone, nay not a whole stone, but all were broken into small
pieces; and yet notwithstanding pilgrims are so mad and blind, that they go
thither with great pains to seek those holy places, where when they come, with
the expense of a great deal of time, in recompense of their pains are made a
laughing stock to the Kings of Jerusalem, and find nothing but feigned and
supposed holy places and buildings: since the words of our Savior manifest,
That there shall not be a stone left upon a stone which shall not be broken to
pieces. And Borchardus the Monk says, That the Romans caused the Temple and
other princely buildings, together with the mountains, to be thrown down and
cast into the valleys, with which being filled, there remains not so much as
an Emblem of the old City. From whence may evidently appear, That those
places which are now shown to Pilgrims by the Monks of Jerusalem, are merely
suborned and feigned, on purpose to deceive them and get their money. They are
very simple therefore that go to Jerusalem seek their salvation in such
places. And as for the Sepulcher (as is aforesaid) the Tartars beat it all in
pieces; so that this monument of our Lord is not to be found upon the earth.
Wherefore our Savior Christ is no more to be sought among the dead, but in the
sacred monument of his holy word, for there he has promised to make evident
his divine presence, etc.

Of the Sects that are in and about the Temple of the holy Sepulcher.
IN and about the church which is built over the holy sepulcre upon mount
Calvarie, there are at this day many of diverse nations and countries which
inhabit, of diverse opinions and Religions. And although they differ in material
points of their faith, yet would they be al Christians: of which number there
are some Latins, Greeks, Abissines, Armenians, Gregorians, Nestorians,
Surians, and Iacobins.

The Latins for the most part are such as we call Franciscan Monks,
Obseruants, or Friars. Latins.
These have the keeping of the holy Sepulcher, and look to it very diligently;
where sometimes they make a certain number of Knights of the noble Order of S.
John's Templers, with many ceremonies and great solemnities. These Knights are
girt with a sword all gilt, hanging in a red velvet girdle; a chain of gold is
put upon them worth about 100 Hungarian ducats, at the end whereof there hangs
a Jerusalem Cross of gold. This kind of cross also they are permitted to
wear upon their arms and clothes; then have they a pair of gilt spurs with
velvet tyings. But before they are admitted into this order, they must swear
upon the holy Sepulcher to maintain and defend the doctrine of the Pope.

The Grecians that are there be also Monks, Grecians.
and do inhabit within the Temple of the holy Sepulcher; but they have the
keeping of the place where our Savior Christ was crucified, and differ from the
Romanists. For they believe first, That the holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father and not the Son. Secondly, they give the Sacraments in both kinds;
thirdly, they hold not the Pope to be head of the Church; fourthly, they deny
Purgatory and prayer for the dead; fifthly, they sing Mass in their own
language that every man may understand it, but they observe seven Sacraments as
the Romanists do. They teach men to pray to and call upon Saints, they yearly
observe two strict fasting days, and eat no flesh upon Saturdaies.

The rest of the Grecians that are through the East parts leave marriage free,
as well for the Clergy as Laity, and condemn the Latin Priests because they
marry not. They allow no graven images in their Churches, but in some places of
their Churches they have fair painted pictures hanging. They approve not the
Pope, but have a Patriarch for their high Bishop, which Patriark is greatly
reverenced, and much honored in Constantinople.

Abissines.
The Abissins be such as are of Prester John's government: their complexion is
brown, their habitation is in the Temple upon mount Calvary, on the East side
of the Church door: They also approve not the Pope, but allow Priests to mary,
and give the sacrament in both kinds; yet there are many sects and opinions
among them, forbearing those meats forbidden in the old Testament: they
circumcise both male and female, which the Jews do not; they observe our
Saturday for their Sabbath; they baptize their children with fire, of which I
will speak more hereafter, in the description of the town of Saba.

Armenians.
The Armenians are Christians, and come out of Armenia; their dwelling is in a
Chapel upon mount Sion near to Saint James his church; they deny the Pope to
be head of the Church: they minister the Sacraments in both kinds; their
Priests marry; they forbear the meats forbidden in the old Testament. They
have a kind of custom, to whine and cry by the graves of the dead; upon
Twelfth day they keep a great feast, and the next day begins their Lent, which
they keep strictly, and eat neither eggs nor fish, nor any living thing during
that time: They observe Wednesdayes and Fridayes; they preach, sing and say
their Service in their own tongue; they deny prayer for the dead, and
Purgatory; they all wear hats with blew hat-bands.

Gregorians.
The Gregorians are Christians that dwell by the great city of Trapezunta upon
the Euxinian Sea. Their Priests marry, but if their wives die they must not
marry again. They dwell in Jerusalem, in the Church upon mount Caluarie,
where Christ after his resurrection showed himself like a Gardner unto Marie
Magdalen.

The Nestorian heretics, Nestorians.
who now are found in great numbers in Niniuie, which at this day is called
Mossell, and in other places thereabout; do yet hold the heresy of Nestorias
there master, and teach, That Christ had two natures, and that he has two
persons, and that Marie was not the mother of God, but that she bare Christ who
was man only: about their Hats they were flesh colored hatbands. Some of
their Priests are found to dwell in the Temple of mount Caluarie.

The Surians follow the Grecian Christians, Surians.
touching the most of their opinions; they respect not much their religion; for
in regard of their poverty they are forced to work for day wages under the
Turks. Some of them also dwell in Jerusalem in a church called S. Marks, which
stands in the place of the house where John Mark dwelt, where the Apostle
Peter knocked when the Angel led him out of prison.

The Sect of the Iacobins are resident in a Chapel which stands behind the
Sepulcher. Iacobins.
They take that name of Jacob the Heretic, who was a Disciple of the
Patriarch of Alexandria; they are wavering and unconstant among themselves, and
are here and there found in Iudaea, Egypt, and Barbary, divided into many
Sects; for some of them hold with Eutichus and Macharus, who ascribe one nature
to Christ, which is the Godhead, and deny the manhood. Some of them circumcise
their children, some baptize them with fire, and make a cross upon their
faces. Of this fiery baptism you shall read more hereafter in the
description of the City of Saba.

Hereby you may note, how the temple of the holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem is
filled with many Sects, who altogether give and pay tribute to the Emperor of
the Turks; whereby you may see that Christ will be no more sought in the holy
Sepulcher, but rather in the holy Evangelists, where he suffers himself to
be found by all those that seek him with a pure heart.

Of the Sects of the Jews.
IN these our times the Jews do inhabit in Jerusalem, and are divided into
many sects, that is to say, Pharisees, Saduces, Essaes, Genisteis, Morboneis,
and Meristeis. The Pharisees took that name from the interpretation of the law,
and is derived from the Hebrew word Parasch, which signifies to expound: so
that Pharasei is as much to say as Doctor or expounder of the law: they approve
of Moses and the Prophets; they hold the immortality of the soul: but of
Christ and the principal parts of his Doctrine, of the law, of sin, and of
ceremonies, they have many ungodly opinions and expositions. They feign that
the law was instituted by God for outward discipline; that sin is only
outward transgression and the violating of men's traditions: they hold there is
no original sin, but that men may perform the Law, and merit everlasting
life; besides many other things, as washings, fastings, offering gifts in the
Temple, and such like ceremonies; of which there is no commandment extant in
the Scripture. Read Mat. 3.59.12.5. etc. Mar. 2.3.7. etc. Ioh. 3.7.8. etc.
Acts 15.23. etc.

The Saduces give themselves an honorable title, being derived from Zedukim or
Zeddikim, calling themselves just, from the word Zadok, He was just, and by
Amphetresim is not improperly derived from Dicaioo, or Dicaios, signifying
justus: and by Prothesin in Latin, Iudex a Judge. So that Zaddik or Zadducaeus
signifies a just Judge, which would judge all others, but they themselves were
without offense: Thus the worst men got the best names. They only allow the
five books of Moses; they dream the Messiah should be an earthly king; they
believe the souls of men to be mortal, and to perish with their bodies; they
do not believe the resurrection, nor that there are either Angels, Spirits, or
Devils.

The Essaes had rather be called Studients, taking their name from Asa, under
which title they would seem to reprehend, and amongst other things avoid the
profane liberty of the Saduces and approve not the arrogant dissimulation of
the Pharisees; but that they teach more divine and profitable precepts. These
live (...) Monastical life, unmarried; their goods are common; for the most
part they practice physic: in their assemblies, the ancientest o^ them read
some part of Moses law, or some of the Prophets; all of them both young and old
at certain times of the day, say prayers. They have no new kind of doctrine,
but embrace the Priesthood of Moses: They dwell in the deserts and utmost parts
of Iudaea near to the lake Asphaltites, and in the garden of Balm near
Jericho, where the ancient Prophets Elias and Eliseus had their schools, whose
disciples were called the children of the prophets. These three sects began in
Judas Macchabeus time Joseph. l. 3. c. 18.

The Genisteis are said to be those that do certainly affirm, that they are of
the posterity of Abraham, although they have lost their genealogies, and
cannot prove it. These call themselves great and noble, and are of the stock
of those that in the captivity of Babylon married the wives of other nations:
of which you may read in Nehem. So that they are half Gentiles, half Jews,
and account themselves to be of the Nobility.

The Morboneis very solemnly observe the Saboth, which many others that are
flatterers of the Turks and Saracens do not: there are a great company of
these; for almost all the Jews do very superstitiously celebrate the Saboth:
and therefore they take their name partly from a Multitude, and parley from
Usury; for Merebech in Hebrew signifies a multitude, and Tarebah Usury.

Meristeis are those Jews that divide the Scripture, and say the Prophets
spoke not all with one spirit; and what they list they make Scripture, and what
they list they leave out: and therefore the Grecians call them Meristein, which
signifies to divide.

There are also others in these our times that are Jews too, but they are
called Samaritanes, which only approve of the Mosaicall law, and reject the
rest of the Scriptures and Prophets. These are so called from Keeping: for this
word Schamar properly signifies to preserve or keep a speech in heart, and
has therefore a certain congruitie and consonance with the Latin word Sermo:
so that Schamar in Hebrew, and Sermo in Latin, are much what of one
signification.

But all the Jews, except the Saduces have one faith; they think they may
fulfill the commandments, and by their own works be justified and purchase
eternal life. They deny the Trinity and Christ, and do believe that their
Messiah is yet to come, and shall bring them back again into the land of
Promise.

Of the Saracens and Turks which inhabit in Jerusalem: of their faith and
religion.
THe Saracens are a people of Arabia the stony; of the posterity of Ishmael
the son of Abraham, which he begat of Hagar. From whence they are rightly
called Agarins, notwithstanding they had rather be called Saracens. Others
call them Saracens, a Saraca, which is a part of Arabia the stony. It seems
therefore that these people took their name from a principality; for Sarar in
Hebrew is the same that Principatum gessit is in Latin, or if you will,
Principatum obtinuit, which signifies (to obtain Principality.) And therefore
the Saracens, or Sarazens, may be said Princes or Captains, whose
Principality extends it self far and near: but Agarins signifies
Peregrinators; for Gor or Gar is as much to say as a Pilgrim.

These people combined themselves with Mahomet that false Prophet, borne of
obscure parentage: his fathers name was Abdiminech, of his wife that was of the
family of Ishmael, or of the Saracens, borne in Arabia the stony, (and as it is
expressed in their Alcaron) upon the xxj. day of September, according to our
account, about the year of Christ 570. he took his name from a tumultuous
confusion: for hamah signifies tumultuatus est, he has been tumultuous; And
Hamam, tumultuando disturbauit, He divided by contention. From hence Maimo
signifies tumultuor, A contender, and Maiomai, concitor, a rebel. From whence
may be gathered, That Mahomet is an ominous and seditious name. Whiles he was
in his infancy he lived with his father; after, being of a prompt wit, he
served one Abdomoneplis a Merchant, in whose service conuersing with Christians
and Jews, he got a smattering knowledge of the old and new Testament, and many
acquaintance; amongst which was one Sergius an Arian Monk, a man very well
affected of this Abdomoneplis. Abdomoneplis died, and by the persuasion of this
Monk, Mahomet married Cadican his wife, although she was fifty years of age,
and by her had great riches: she soon after also died, and left Mahomet all
that she had. He on a sudden, being lift up to this height of substance, grew
very ambitious (for he was naturally proud, wrathful, a thief, a whoremaster,
a most impudent adulterer, and whersoeuer he came made havoc of all things.
(This man by the help of the Sarazens and others, affected the kingdom of
Arabia, which within short time after he obtained, entering Mecha the chief
city thereof, upon Thursday the fifteenth of July, Anno Dom. 622. and by the
help of two Jews and this Sergius, wrote that blasphemous Law of the Alcoron,
falsely professing himself to be a Prophet, and began cruelly to oppose
himself against all neighboring nations and cities.

The Alcaron takes the name from Splendour or Brightness; for All in the
Arabicke, is as much as Karan in the Hebrew, and that signifies to shine or
cast forth a brightness. This Alcaron contains a blasphemous and detestable
law, written in the Arabian tongue without any order or color of knowledge,
teaching manifest lies, and execrable blasphemies against God; and for the most
part, the pleasures and delights of this world: for he does deny that there is
one eternal essence of the Deity, and the holy Trinity; our Savior Christ
they one while call the Son of God, and another while, the Soul or Spirit of
God. They deny his Deity, but say, that he was a holy man, borne without a
father, of the chaste and incorruptible Virgin Marie. And although he was before
all beginning, yet they believe that he was not begotten, but created before
all other essential creatures, by the eternal God. Also they say he was not
crucified, but some other in his place; and therefore the salvation of man not
to consist in the merits of Christ, but in our own proper works. And that the
Jews might embrace the Alcaron, they retain Circumcision, which is commonly
done when the children are thirteen years of age; about which time, Ishmael
was circumcised. They forbear the meats forbidden in the Law; they have many
wives at one time; they tolerate a bil of Divorce, and affirm that after the
resurrection men may have many wives, and with them banquet, surfeit, and use
pleasant recreations, with diverse such errors and vain trifles, which for
breuities sake I omit.

That he might the better persuade men to embrace and believe these his lies,
and blasphemous doctrines, he very cunningly seemed to confirm them with many
false and fained miracles: and amongst the rest this was one: Having taught a
white Dove to fetch corn in his ear, whiles he was preaching to the people,
it chanced she came and sat upon his shoulder, and putting her bill into his
ear according to her accustomed manner, he persuaded the people that it was
the spirit of God, which delivered him the words of the Law. A Bull also,
taught after the same manner, at his voice came before him, and kneeling down
did him reverence, with the Alcaron tied upon his horns; which he affirmed was
come from heaven and brought that new Law. Then did he make diverse horns of
gold and silver, and filling them full of milk hid them in the earth: after
which, in a great assembly he caused the same places to be opened, and told the
people that these signified plenty and abundance, to all such as kept and
observed that Law: But the violaters thereof should be punished with death.
Together with many other such like idle and foolish miracles, (which would be
too tedious to recite) that he might make the people believe that it came from
God. And being afflicted with the falling sickness, gave it out, that then
the Angel Gabriel told him the Law, making this likewife a means to further
his designs: but after, viz. upon the eighth of June, Anno Dom. 632. and in
the sixty one year of his age, he died miserably of this disease, after he
had reigned in Mecha ten years; and Enbubizer or Abubachar his father in law
succeeded him in the government, who built in his honor a Church, and in that
put his sepulcher, both stately and sumptuous.

The Turks also embrace this doctrine, and joined their forces with the
Saracens: They extended their Empire under Mahomet the third, into Asia,
Europe, and Africa. They derive their name (as I suppose) from Cruelty; for
Turca signifies A cruel destroyer, or an armed enemy, being derived from the
Hebrew word Tarach, that is, to effect his purpose. From whence they are not
improperly called of the Graecians (...) to vex and make weary; or else from
the Hebrew word Tachaera, which signifies a shield; and from the Greek word
(...) and (...), to put on a shield, and to arm themselves: for the Turks are
armed enemies, and destroyers of the whole world: And by Ezechiel are called
Gog and Magog, cap. 38. and 39. of Magog which was the son of Iaphet, Genesis 10.
and as some think inhabited the North parts of the world. Pliny places them in
Bospherus, Cimmerius, Scythia, etc. which lies toward the East. But indeed
they have often changed their residence, and have come into Persia, Armenia,
Syria, Palestina, Arabia, and cruelly destroyed them, until they had conquered
Constantinople, and got a great part of Europe; and have infected the minds of
all the inhabitants in those parts with their manners, slaughters, and rapines,
according to that blasphemous Law of the Alcaron. They first afflicted those
parts about the year of our Lord 760. Constantius Copronius, being then the
Emperor of Rome; since which time they have conquered a great part of the
World.

A Relation of the Trauells and Peregrinations of the Saints and holy
Patriarchs, as they are severally mentioned in the first Book of MOSES.
And first of the first man, ADAM.
ADAM the first man, took his name from Adamah, which signifies red earth,
because he was made of the red slime of the earth. Therefore the Latins
derive Homo from Humo; also the Graecians from (...), which signifies the
earth. But when man was laid open to all calamities, miseries, yea and death,
the Hebrews called him Enosh, which signifies, a mortal and miserable man: for
this attribute to man agrees with the word Nosch, which signifies to be sick
of a deadly disease. There are some that think that man was made in Syria
near to Damascus, because there is found much red earth. Others say near to
Hebron a city in the Tribe of Judah, and there also lies buried; for in a cave
near that place, lies much red earth, which the inhabitants even to this day
show unto Pilgrims: but this is nothing to the purpose, since we know that man
was first created, and then brought into Paradise, Genesis 1. and 2.

Of Paradise.
PAradise, which in Greek is (...), and in Hebrew Pardes, signifies a pleasant
Garden plentifully furnished with fruitful trees, but principally Myrtle
trees, which bears a kind of berrie of a very delectable taste: for this
Hebrew word seems to be a compound, that is, of Parah, which signifies to
fructify, and Hadas, a myrtle; of the fruit of which tree, there is made a
certain wine called myrtle or mulberrie wine: the mystery hereof is, that
Christ is that tree of life, that fruitful and pleasant myrtle, whereby we are
raised up unto eternal life, Genesis 2. Apoc. 22. Mat. 11. Luther calls
Paradise in his discourse of Germany, a pleasant Garden, Eccl. 2. Munster, an
Orchard: and in the Bible it is called Eden, a place plentifully furnished with all things necessary for the procuring of pleasure and delight. The Grecians
call it Hedone, which signifies an extraordinary delectable and pleasant place;
for in it there was great abundance of all things, as well of trees, fruits,
herbs, and sweet smelling flowers, as of beasts and fowls of the heaven. Into
this place God put man, to dress it and keep it: But where it stood, and
whether it be now upon the earth, there are diverse opinions: the Romanists
hold, that it is placed in the East without the Tropicks: others would have it
under the Equator, because it is a very temperate region: but experience tells
us, that there it is very hot and scorching: others think it stands upon the
top of a high mountain, free from all the violent motions and impressions of
the air, in which place they hold Aenoch and Eliah are yet living: there are
others that assign the whole East part to be Paradise, and that there were
some peculiar places most fruitful, of which they think was Syria, Damascus,
Arabia Foelix, Egypt and Iudaea, in which part man was put. They also say, that
the tree of Knowledge stood upon Mount Caluary, near about that place where
Christ was crucified, so that he made satisfaction for sin in the same place
where sin was first committed. And this I hold to be the better opinion; and
that it remained till the deluge, kept in the custody of Angels, at Gods
appointment, and by the flood, together with other creatures, was abolished.

And for that saying of our Savior to the thief upon the cross, This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise, is not to be understood of the earthly
Paradise, but of the heavenly, the place of the blessed angels and saints,
where God with his divine majesty fills them with the light of
righteousness, and quickneth them with eternal life. This place Paul calls the
third heaven, and that heavenly Paradise of which the earthly Paradise is a
type, 2. Cor. 12.

Of the four Rivers that watered Paradise.
THe four Floods of Paradise, were, Pison, Gihon, Hidekel, and Euphrates, Genesis
2. There was but one Fountain of all these floods, and this was in Paradise it
self, which in those times was divided into four streams. But as by the
Flood all the face of the earth was changed, so likewise were these rivers, and
their Fountains and Channells altered from the places where at first they were;
notwithstanding, in memory of them, there remains some relics, though
perhaps not in the same place, nor springing out of one and the same Fountain,
as they did before. And as the Mediterranean sea, the gulf of Arabia, and many
other Meeres and Lakes, before the Flood, were not, but (by the general
consent of all learned men) happened by that huge inundation; the same may be
said of these Rivers.

The head, or beginning of the River Pischon or Pison, is 4800 miles Eastward
from Jerusalem, and is like unto an arm of the Sea, some 12 or 16 miles over,
and for that cause it takes the name from Posch, that is, increasing, or, of
an extraordinary greatness: from hence the Grecians call it Phuson, because it
diuides it self into diverse Riuolets or Streams. It compasses in Hauilah, it
divides that part of the world which we call India, into the outward and
inward: and there is called Ganges, taking that name from an Ethiopian King
called Gange, as Swydas says. Some say it is unknown where it first rises:
others say it rises in Scythia, and waters all the neighbor countries as it
passes along, as Nylus does, and so being dispersed into 30 channels, divides
India with one of them: the narrowest place of Ganges is 8 miles over, and the
shallowest 100 foot deep, it brings forth Dolphins, Crocodiles, and diverse
other creatures.

Solinus and Strabo says, That the River Tygris rises in Armenia, a very
fair and clear Fountain; it is distant from Jerusalem six hundred miles
toward the North: it runs with such an exceeding swiftness, that fishes
cannot swim against it, and passes through the lake of Arthusia, without
once mingling it self with the water: and for this cause it is called Tigris,
which signifies, a dart, and a beast of extraordinary swiftness and cruelty.
This River running from toward the North and the rising of the Sun, it
compasses in Mesopotamia, and passes by the borders of Media and Assiria, and
after that of Chaldaea and Arabia, it there receives in the River Hydaspis,
and so joining with Euphrates, falls into the lake of Persia. The Hebrews
called this River Chidikill from Chadad, which signifies acute, and Kalal,
light, for it is a swift running stream: from hence the Graecians call it
(...); the Latins, Celer; the Germans, Ein Zelter, which signifies with us, a
horse swiftly running; for it passes away swifter than an arrow out of a bow.
Going toward the East, some 36 miles from the ancient Babylon, it runs
through a town called Bagedeth, bordering upon Turkey and Persia, and from
thence toward the latitude, to a town called Argentaratus, where it changes
the name to Tigris; in that place it runs so extreme swift, that it will
make a man's head dizzie to look upon it.

Strabo says, the River Euphrates rises out of a mountain in Armenia, called
Nipha, some 300 miles from the City of Jerusalem toward the North, watering
Mesopotamia and Chaldaea, and passing through the midst of that flourishing
City Babylon, diuides it into two parts; and after passing through, and
fructifying Arabia, it joyneth with the Flood Tigris, and falls into the
Persian gulf. Semiramis Queen of the Assyrians and of Babylon, built a bridge
over the narrowest place of this River, being some three quarters of a mile
over. The Hebrews call this River, Parah, because it fructifieth; and from
thence the Grecians call it (...), or (...), to bear fruit; the Germans,
Fruchter, which in English is, fruitful or pleasant: And therefore Saint
Ambrose says, it is derived from Euphranein, that is, from rejoicing; For that
ouerflowing the Fields, it causes them the next year to flourish with all
kind of fruit and pleasant flowers. The water of this river is very foul and
dirty, so that it is unfit to drink: according to that of Jeremy, cap. 2. What
avails it thee to go into Assyria, that thou might drink of the water of
Euphrates? If a man takes this water in a vessel, and let it stand but two
hours, the dirt and sand will lie at the bottom thereof two inches thick.
Therefore the inhabitants near about it, are wont to take a great pot that
holds a good quantity, whereinto putting water, they let it stand till all
the filth be sunk to the bottom, and so they clear water to drink.

Nilus takes the beginning from a certain mountain in Mauritania the lower,
not far from the Ocean, and issues from a Lake which they call Nidiles, and
partly from other Lakes, and is increased with the snow waters falling from the
mountains of the Moon in Africa, 3200 miles from Jerusalem toward the
South. Some think it took the name from Nileus a certain King therabouts.
Others, from the soil which it yearly brought down in the stream, whereby
all Egypt is made fruitful; from whence some think it was called Seruious
Nilus, for that it brings down new mud with it. The Hebrews call it Gihon,
because it breaks out of the earth with great violence. This River comes
through the deserts of Aethiopia, and so with great violence comes into Egypt,
where it is divided into seven streams, and in times past had seven gates, the
names of which were, Canopicus, or Heraclioticus, Bolbitinus, Sebiniticus,
Pharmiticus, Mendesius, Taniticus, and Palusinus. The two outward gates of
which, viz. Canopicus, and Palusiacus, were 160 miles a sunder. Appianus says,
There are two other gates called Tineptimicus, and Diolcus: This ninth gate is
divided at a city and place called Delta, taking the name from the likeness
that it has to the Greek letter so called. So that Nilus is divided into nine
gates, by which nine gates it falls into the Mediterranean Sea. There are many
that think, that Paradise was only in Egypt, and that then it had only but
four streams, and that at the Flood it was confused into nine, and they would
seem to prove their opinion out of the 31 chapter of Ezekiel, where he
calls Egypt a garden of pleasure. But this differs from the description of
Moses, for it is not situate in the East, but rather the South from Jerusalem,
and far distant from the two Eastern Rivers, Euphrates and Hiddikel, by
which the holy Scriptures do principally denote Paradise. Wherefore it may be
concluded, that Egypt was only a part of Paradise, not Paradise it self: And
that this River was one of the Rivers, not all, the streams of which River at
some times of the year, viz. in the Summer Solstice, when the Sun is near
the Dogge-starre, begins to swell and ouerflow the banks, by reason of the
melting of the snow which lies upon the mountains of the Moon, and so drown
all the places near unto it, through the land of Egypt, leaving behind it
certain slime and mudde, by which it comes to pass, that the Country is very
fruitful, and serves them in steed of rain, at which time of the year (for
this happens once every year) the people and inhabitants of the Country
retire themselves to their Towns, Cities, and Castles, situated upon Rocks,
Mountains, and high grounds, from whence it happens, that they sustain very
little discommoditie or loss, by any such inundation. They also keep little
boats, whereby they pass from one place to another, because all their
passages and foot paths are then drowned with waters. There are many pretty
observations which the people of Egypt were wont to take notice of in the
rising of this water, for they had certain staves whereby they measured the
deapth of it, if it rose but to twelve cubits (which is six yards in height,
they then stood in fear of great famine, so also if it was but thirteen, for
then the water was not deep enough to make the ground fertile: but if it rose
to fourteen or fifteen, then they were in great hope, and did not doubt of a
fruitful year: and if to sixteen, they then greatly rejoiced at their
prosperity, and kept banquets and feasts, and were assured that the succeeding
year would be very plentiful: but if it rose above, they laid a side all
signs of joy, and lived very sparingly, and with great sorrow; this great
inundation of waters foreshewing scarcity, and want, and famine, and
pestilence, and death. And thus Nilus yearly, every year is to them in stead
of rain, for Egypt is without rain.

In Autumn, at such time as the Sun going out of the last face of Libra,
enters into Scorpio, the waters of Nilus by little and little retire
themselves into their banks, and the earth becomes quite uncovered of water:
about which time, the Country being exceeding hot, the earth is presently made
dry in all those places, so that in the month of October, they may both till
and sow their Land. In this river the Crocodile and the Ichneumo breed, of the
nature of which two, you may sufficiently read in Gesner. There also breeds
the Pelican, of which Saint Ierom says, there are two kinds, one that lives
upon the water, an other that lives upon the land: these birds as some affirm;
kill their young ones upon their beak, and then leave them lying in their
neast for three days; at the end of which time, the female grievously wounds
her self upon the breast, and pouring her blood upon her young ones, reuiues
them again. This bird may very well be a type and figure of our blessed
Savior, who shedding his precious blood upon the cross for our sins, after
the third day rose again, and that he might restore us to life that be dead in
sin, pours out his blood upon us, whereby we are made capable of eternal
life.

Of the place where Adam and Eua dwelt after the breaking of the commandment,
Genesis 3.
ADam and Eua, being driven out of Paradise, dwelt at Damascus, 160 miles from
Jerusalem, as Munster and others write: the Townes-men of Damascus, at this day
show the place where Cain slew his brother Abel, and it is well to be believed
that this City receives her name thereby, for Damascus signifies
bloud-shedding or a place which has drunk up blood.

Of the place where Cain dwelt.
CAin after he had slain his brother Abel, dwelt in the land of Nod, a land of
fear and disquiet, in the Town of Hanoch, and as some think, it was the same
place where Babylon (after Noes Flood) was built, being four hundred and
eighty miles from Jerusalem Eastward.

Of the place where Noah dwelt.
NOah signifying quiet and rest, dwelt in Armenia, six hundred miles from
Jerusalem Northward, hard by Mount Ararat, upon which Mount, the Arc, (after
the Flood) stayed it self, Genesis 8. Ptolomeus names These high Hills in
Armenia Gordes, which are always covered with snow, and no man may get upon
them.

Sem.
SEm who in the holy Scriptures is called Melchisedeck, that is, a King of
righteousness, dwelt in the City of Jerusalem, which as then was called
Salem, that is, a City of peace.

Nimroth.
NImroth was the first Prince and regent upon earth, and built Babylon, which
is six hundred and eighty miles from Jerusalem Eastward. Strabo writes, That
in Babylon there was an old four square Tower built of brick, four hundred
and sixteen else high That is, 200 yards high.
, and each side thereof four hundred and sixteen else broad: This without
doubt was a piece of the Tower of Babylon, the top whereof should have
reached up to Heaven, Genesis 22.

Babel or Babylon signifies a confusion, because in that place God confounded
the workemens tongues, when they built the Tower of Babylon.

The Travels of Abraham.
1 ABraham went out of his own Country of Vhr in Chaldaea, to the City of
Haran in Mesopotamia, which is 376 miles.

2 Erom Haran, by Gods commandment he went to Sichem, which is four hundred
miles.

3 From Sichem he went to the Plain and wood of Mamre to the Hill between
Bethel and Hay, which is 28 miles.

4 From thence he went into Egypt, traveling Southward 240 miles.

5 Out of Egypt he went again into Canaan, to the hill that lies between
Bethel and Hay, which is 240 miles, Genesis 13.

6 From thence he went to the Plain of Mamre near Hebron, 32 miles.

7 From the plain of Mamre, he went to Dan, which is 124 miles and there
overthrew the four Kings which had taken Lot prisoner, Genesis 14.

8 Then he pursued the enemy for the space of 80 miles to Hobam in Phoenicia,
which lies in the left side of Damasco, Genesis 14.

9 From Phoenicia, he went to Sodom, wnere Melchisedech met him, which are 160
miles, Genesis 14.

10 From Sodom, he went back again to the plain of Mamre, which are 40 miles.

11 From the Plain of Mamre, he went to Gerer, which is six miles, where his
son Isaac was borne, Genesis 20.21.

12 From Gerar, he went to Beersaba, which is 12 miles, where he took an oath
of King Abimilech.

13 From Beersaba, he went to mount Moriah, which is 40 miles, where he would
have offered his son Isaac, Genesis 22.

14 From mount Moriah, he returned again to Beersaba, which is 40 miles.

15 From Beersaba, he and his wife went to the plain of Mamre by Hebron, which
is 16 miles, and there they died and were buried, Genesis 23. and 25.

So that all the Travels of the Patriarch Abraham, were 1794 miles.

Now follows the description of the Towns and places.
THe Town of Vhr in Chaldaea, where Abraham was borne at this day is called
Orchae, (as Petrus Appianus writes) and is distant from Jerusalem 624 miles
Eastward. It seems, it either took that name from light or fire, or else
from divine worship, for there they used to offer many burnt offerings, but at
that time they committed idolatry, for which cause Abraham went from thence,
perceiving that the Chaldeans took the fire for their god, because fire came
down from Heaven and consumed their offerings. Learned men therefore are of
opinion, that the Chaldaeans in the town of Vhr, worshipped the fire for their
god.

Haran or Charan, that is, Wrath.
HAran is the chief city in Mesopotamia, where Abraham for a time dwelt with
his father Thara. There the rich Roman Crassus with his army was overthrown by
the Parthians, and is distant from Jerusalem 440 miles North-Eastward, taking
its name from the water Charan which runs through it. But at this day the
city is called Ophra, lying eleven days journey from Mossel or Nineueh, as D.
Leonard Ronwolfe writes, who in Anno 1575, upon the thirtieth of January was
in that town. Ophra or Haran is a fair city well inhabited, and indifferent
great, compassed about with walls and towers, richly furnished with
merchandise, but especially with fair couerlets of diverse colors, that are
made therein.

There is likewise great trade and trafique for diverse kinds of wares brought
thither by Caravans, which are great numbers of camels, horses, and other
beasts, that carry great burdens, with many men to conduct them, which traffic
and travel from one city to another.

This city in times past belonged to the Parthians, even then when Crassus the
rich Roman, fifty three years before the birth of Christ, robbed the temple of
Jerusalem, and of those holy relics bare away to the value of six tuns of
gold. For which God punished him openly; for upon the sixth of June after, he
was by the Parthians ouerthrown hard by Haran in Mesopotamia, and there taken
and slain. The Parthians pouring molten gold into his mouth, said, Drink now
thy sill (thou greedy Wretch) of that which thou so long have thirsted after,
for with this thou may fill thy greedy throat.

In this overthrow were slain thirty thousand Romans, and by that means the
city of Haran returned again under the Parthians.

After that, the Persians took it; but now it is under the Turk.

In this city of Haran at this day there is to be seen a Well of very clear
water, at which Rebecca gave drink to Eleazer Abraham's servant, and to his
Camels, Genes. 24.19. This Well by the townsmen is called Abraham's well: there
also Rachel, Labans daughter, first spoke with the holy Patriark Jacob, who
turning the stone off from the Well, gave her sheep of the water to drink.

This water has a very pleasant taste, and is a notable Type of holy Baptism;
for like as the holy Fathers took their wives by this well, so Christ receives
his holy congregation by the Well of Baptism, in his Word and holy Sacrament.
This is the right Well of Israel, which flows into everlasting life.

The city of Haran (now called Ophra) lies from Nineueh 232 miles Westward.

Sichem, a Shoulder.
SIchem is a town in Samaria on the borders of Ephraim, lying on mount Garizim,
36 miles from Jerusalem Northward. It takes the name (as Phil. Melancthon
writes) from the place whereon it stands, like a shoulder; for Sichem
signifies a shoulder.

Of this town I will speak more at large in the new Testament, for that by it
Christ spoke with the Samaritan woman, Ioh. 4.

In this town Dina Jacobs daughter was ravished, Genesis 34. and there the bones
of the Patriarch Joseph were buried, Ios. 24.

Abimelech for spite and upon no occasion utterly destroyed the town, and
having razed it to the ground, sowed it with salt, Judge. 9 But Jeroboam King of
Jerusalem built it up again and dwelt therein, 1 Kin. 12.

It was a free town, whither a manslayer might resort that had killed any man
by chance, and save himself, Ios. 20.

Mount Garizim, whereon the town of Sichem stood, was a piece of mount Ephraim.

Tanis, in Hebrew Zoan; an Inn or house of Harbor.
TAnis or Zoan was the chief city in Egypt, where Pharaoh in Abraham's time
kept his court, as we read in the thirteenth Chapter and fourth book of Moses,
and Psalm. 58. and lies 232, miles from Jerusalem Southeastward: four miles
from Tanis stood the kingly town of Memphis, which was likewise built before
Abraham's time; but at that time it was not so famous as Tanis, for there is not
one word spoken of Memphis in the books of Moses. But when time serves I will
speak more of these two places.

Of the Mount between Bethel and Hay.
THis hill is 4 miles from Jerusalem upon the North, lying between the 2 towns
of Bethel and Hay, and is called mount Ephraim; where Abraham at his return out
of Egypt the second time set up his Tabernacle, of purpose to be conversant
with Melchisedeck who dwelt in Jerusalem; and with him gave thanks to God for
the singular favors that he had showed toward him, in delivering his wife Sara
from the hands of Abimelech King of Egypt, who would have ravished her, and as
he feared, endangered his life. In this place Lot separated himself from
Abraham, and went to dwell in Sodom.

Of the Plain or Oak of Mamre.
THe Plain of Mamre stood a mile from Hebron toward the East, and distant from
Jerusalem 22 miles South-eastward. In this yally there was a fair and pleasant
wood, where a certain young man called Mamre dwelt. This man was brother to
Escal and Aner, mentioned by Moses, Genes. 14. who according to the custom of
gentlemen with us in these times, built up his house near to a pleasant Wood
or bottom, which as some think was called after his name Mamre. Others, (of
which opinion is Ierom) of Aelon, which signifies a valley or tree (an Oak
tree, says he.) But Joseph and Aegesippus call it a Terebinth tree, which
both summer and winter bears green leaves like a Palm tree, the sap or
juice whereof is very good for medicine. Abraham dwelling near to this tree,
being entertained by the three Brothers as a stranger, grew into such favor
and familiarity with them, that he converted them from Paganism, and taught
them to know the true and everliving God. To gratify which great favor, they
aided him in his War against the four Kings that had taken Lot prisoner, and
gave him free liberty to inhabit in, and use the Plain thereabouts for his
cattle: before whose door (as some Authors affirm) this Terebinth or oak tree
stood, and so continued from the beginning of the world, till the time of
Constantine the Great, it being lawful for none to cut a bough of it, or touch
it with a hatchet, because it was in those days accounted a holy tree, and
visited by diverse strangers: and then Helena caused a fair church to be built
in that place; and so much the rather, for that Abraham sitting under that
tree, the three Angels appeared unto him in the similitude or likeness of men,
Genesis 8.1, 2. And some are of opinion, That because of this, the Jews offered
Incense to their gods, and committed idolatry upon high mountains and under
green trees, Ezekiel. 16. There was also a double Cave made of white marble, which
as Josephus says, was very fair and beautiful to the eye, and curiously
wrought and polished; wherein Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with their Wives
Sarah, Rebecca, and Leah were buried: and as some think was that cave which he
purchased of the Hittites, Genesis 23.34. But that Adam and Evah lie buried in the
same place, seeing there is no warrant for it in the holy Scriptures, I let it
pass; because whatsoever has not authority of Scripture to prove it, may as
easily be contemned as allowed. But Abraham's sepulcher in Ieroms time was to be
seen, being old and decayed.

Of Hebron.
THis City was not only a Kings Seat, but a Priests also, being built not long
after the Flood, and some seven years before that City of the Egyptians called
Zoan or Tanis, Numb. 13. and was placed upon a goodly high mountain very
pleasant and delectable. It takes the name from Chabar, which signifies to
accompany; and from thence, Chebron, or Hebron, A pleasant and delectable
society. It was a metropolitan city in the tribe of Judah, and after called
Kiriatharba, as it appears in Ioshuah, 14. taking that name from Arba the
chief Governor of that City. This man was one of the Anakims, and a very
mighty Prince. Others there are that say, the city being divided into four
parts was thereof called (...): for Arba signifies a quaternion, from the Rote
Raba four square. It was first built by Heth, the son of that cursed Canaan,
whose posterity (the Hittites) inhabited in it; and such was their
hospitality, that they entertained Abraham, being a stranger and traveler.
These people dwelt Here also dwelt Sisai, Abiman, and Thalmas the sons of Anak.
there until Ioshuahs time; and then one Hoham was King thereof, who with
other Kings opposing the Children of Israel, was by them slain, and had their
country wasted and destroyed. This town was after made a town of refuge, and
belonged to the inheritance of Caleb, and was together with Mamre in the tribe
of Judah, Ios. 20. Here David was first anointed King, and reigned therein for
the space of 7 years, 2 Samuel 5. But this town by the injury of time and
oppression of the enemy is now become desolate, only some few old relics are
to be seen, to show there had bin a town there. Nevertheless there is a town
not far from it which retains the name, placed in a very fruitful valley
called Mamre to this day. Here while it was under the jurisdiction of the
Christians, stood a Cathedral church, and a Bishops See; but the Turks have
turned it into a Mosko, or one of their churches. Into this place they will not
suffer any Christian to enter. The inhabitants take upon them to show unto
strangers many things, as the vault or cave wherein Abraham was buried, the
place where Cain killed Abel, the Well where Adam and Eva wept seven years for
the death of their son; with many such like fables which are to no purpose,
seeing they are not warrantable by Scripture.

Some bows shoot Eastward from this place is the field of Damascus, where the
red earth lies whereof they feign man to be made. It is naturally tough, and
may be wrought like wax or pitch. There is also that is white of the same kind,
and this is conveyed to many places by the Saracens, and sold at dear rates.
They use it either for the teering of Sepulchers, or to mingle with salves and
unguents.

Of Gerar.
GErar is the uttermost town in the land of Canaan, and lies between the
deserts of Sur and Cades, Genesis 20. Here King Abimelech kept his court at such
time as Abraham came thither; and here Isaac was born, Genesis 21. It takes the
name from Gor, which signifies a Pilgrim or Traveler, and did well agree with
the condition of the ancient patriarchs that sometime lived there, because for
the most part they were like Pilgrims and wayfaring men, Genesis 47. It lay six
miles from Hebron Southwest, and from Jerusalem 30, upon the territories of the
tribe of Judah.

Of Beerazaba.
BEerazaba is a town situated upon the utmost bounds of the Holy land, forty
miles from Jerusalem Southwestward, and is derived from Berr and Shebuah, and
signifies the Well of covenant: for Abraham having dug a Well near to this
place, Abimelech King of Gerar entered into league with him, and his posterity
Isaac also renewed this league in this place, as appears, Genesis 21. It is now
called Gallim or Giblin by the Jews. In S. Hieromes time it was a great town.

Of Moriah.
Upon this Mount Abraham would have offered his son Isaac, and stood not far
from Salem or mount Sion, where Melchisedech dwelt. They were so near, that
Melchisedech upon the tower of Sion might easily see the Angel that spoke with
Abraham, when he renewed the covenant with him concerning his seed and
posterity: and is derived from Mor or Marar, which signifies bitter Myrrh,
because, as Gregorius says, the Church is ever subject to affliction, For all
they that will serve God and live religiously must suffer persecution, Mat. 16.
2 Timothy 3. and Iarr, which signifies to fear.

How Abraham may be typically apprehended.
ABraham signifies The father of a multitude, from Ab, pater, a Father; Ram,
excelsus, Mighty; and Hamon, multitudinis, Of a multitude. Not in regard of the
Jews only, but all those that in succeeding times shall be ingraffed into the
Church, and partake of everlasting life through the mediation of Christ Jesus
the promised seed, Gal. 3. Ephesians. 1. Acts 3. and is a Type and figure of God
the Father; for as that Abraham was the father of many, yet had but only one
son; so although God be the father of all nations, yet had but one only son,
Jesus Christ, begotten of his own essence from before the beginning of the
world. And as Abraham so loved God, that for his sake he would not have spared
his only son; so God so loved Abraham and the World, that he gave his only
begotten son to die for the salvation of their souls.

The Travels of Lot.
LOt traveled with Abraham from Vr in Chaldaea, to Haran in Mesopotamia, which
is 336 miles, Genesis 12.

2 From Haran they traveled to Sichem in the land of Canaan, being 400 miles.

3 From Sichem they traveled through Morae, to the hill lying between Bethel
and Hay, which is 24 miles.

4 From the hill between Bethel and Hay, they went into Egypt, which is 240
miles, Genesis 13.

5 From Egypt they went into the land of Canaan, to the hill lying between
Bethel and Hay, where Abraham had dwelt before, which is 240 miles, Genesis 13.

6 From the hill between Bethel and Hay Lot separated himself from Abraham, and
went to the town of Sodom Eastward, which is 28 miles, Genesis 13.

7 In the town of Sodom Lot was taken prisoner, he and all his household, and
led away to the town of Dan, which is 32 miles Genesis 14.

8 And when Abraham had delivered him out of the hands of his enemies, and
pursued them, he returned with him from Dan to Hobam in Phoenicia, lying on the
left side of Damascus, being 80 miles.

9 From Phoenicia Abraham came again with Lot to Sodom, which is 160 miles.

10 Lastly, when the Lord had determined to rain fire and brimstone on Sodom,
Lot according to his commandment went thence to Zoar a little town near
adjoining, where being drunk with Wine he committed incest with both his
daughters; but after coming to the knowledge of his offense, he was so sore
afflicted in his conscience, that with extreme grief he died. Luther says that
Abraham took him to Hebron with him to comfort him, and that there he died.
Hebron is 36 miles from Sodom.

So all the travels of the Patriarch Lot were 1652 miles.

The Description of the Towns and places where he traveled. And first of
Sodom.
THe cities that were destroyed with fire and brimstone from heaven were four
in number, that is, Sodom, Gomorah, Adama, and Zeboim, lying 24 miles from
Jerusalem South-eastward, where now the dead sea runs. The fifth was the city
Bela, called also Zoar, which was spared for Lots sake, and distant from Sodom
two miles. This, Lot accounted but a little City; but there are that say it was
a very spacious and princely place, near to which his wife for her
disobedience was turned into a pillar of salt, and not far off he committed
incest with his two daughters. And although Luther be of opinion, that that
also within a while after was burnt, yet this cannot be certainly proved,
especially because it remains even to this day, situated both in the ancient
place, and called by the ancient name; unless some new City has been lately
built in the same place, and is now called after that name, which I cannot
think to be true. Sodamah signifies a Mystery; Gomorah, a Faggot of Thorns;
Adamah, Red earth; Zeboim, Fertile and Pleasant; Zoar, The burning of Baela;
for in ancient times it was called Baela. It is the received opinion, that the
country wherein these five rich and opulent cities stood was called Pentapolis.

Of the Lake or dead Sea, called Asphaltides.
IN the very same place where these Cities were burnt and destroyed, there is
at this day to be seen a Lake about 36 miles long, and in some places six, in
others eight and 12 miles over. It boileth with pitch and brimstone, and in
some places passes by the name of the salt sea, and in others, the dead sea,
because of the noisome and venomous air that rises out of it, insomuch as the
very birds that fly over it fall down dead, and if a beast do but drink of it
mixed with water, it makes him incurably sick. It is of a wonderful nature, for
whatsoever heavy thing you fling into it will not sink, but swim upon the top,
be it either iron, lead, copper, or any other weighty matter. Of which
Vespasian the emperor having notice, to make experience of what he had heard,
made a journey of purpose to see it, and with him took certain condemned men
who for their offenses had deserved death; these he manacled, and where he
thought it to be deepest caused them to be thrown in; but they rose up again
with such violence as if some storm or tempest had sent them up. The water
thereof changes three times a day, and shines against the sun with diverse
colors, casting out fire and great cakes of pitch much resembling Bulls without
heads, and of that quantity. This pitch is good for diverse things, as to calk
ships, to lay upon cables, and to use in medicines; wherefore such as come to
this sea and know the nature of it, have certain Skifs and instruments
wherewith they draw these cakes of pitch to their ships, to which it cleaves
so fast, it being naturally tough, that being brought to land they cannot get
it off again but by the help of urine. Upon the banks thereof grow trees that
bear fruit of diverse kinds, as apples and such like; which are fair and
pleasant to the eye, but if you either touch or open them you shall find
nothing but dust.

Brittenbacchus says, In this place the Serpent Tyrus (whereof they use to
make treacle) is found. It is a little serpent about half a cubit long, and a
finger thick, being of diverse colors, and is so venomous, that where it biteth
there is no remedy, unless by cutting off the member. The head of it is rough
and hairy, and there seems to lie upon the tongue of it, if it be angry, a
fiery flame. The same Author says, That a little from Zoar, between this Lake
and the mountains of Engedi, the pillar whereinto Lots wife was turned, is yet
to be seen shining like salt. The furthest part of this sea Northward lies 14
miles from Jerusalem: toward the East the river Jordan runs into it.

The travel of the two Angels that led Lot out of Sodom.
THese two Angels having spoken with Abraham in the valley of Mamre near
Hebron, forthwith went to Sodom some 40 miles distant from that place, where
Lot having entertained them into his house, by their help was delivered,
together with his wife and two daughters, from that miserable desolation of the
Sodomits.

Of Lots two Daughters.
LOt escaping this desolation, and seeing a president of Gods judgment fallen
upon his wife for her disobedience, fearing that he should not continue safe in
Zoar, left that and turned aside into the wilderness, and continued there
among the mountains, although the Lord had promised him safety in this town:
wherefore continuing in a Cave in the Wilderness, the eldest of his daughters
losing her husband in this destruction, supposing that all men had been
destroyed from off the earth, counseled her sister to commit incest with her
father. Lot being now oppressed with care, by reason of the former calamities,
gave himself at the inticement of his daughters, to drink Wine, insomuch as
with the excess he became drunk: at which time not being himself he begat by
his two daughters two sons: the eldest had a son whom she called Moab,
which signifies The begotten of his Father; whereby the impudency of this
woman is laid open to the World, in that she was not ashamed of her sin. Of
him came the Moabites, and dwelt upon the North side of the lake Asphaltides,
some 32 miles from Jerusalem. The youngest daughter had a son, which she called
Ben-ammy, that is, The son of my people; for although she bare him with great
shame, yet she dwelt among the people of God. Of him came the Ammonites that
dwelt beyond mount Gilead, threescore miles from Jerusalem Northeastward.

Of the four Kings that took LOT prisoner.
THe first of them was called Amraphel King of Shinear or Babylon, the son of
Ninus and Semiramis, as some think, and is called sometime by the name of
Berosus, sometime Ninus. He kept his court at Babylon in Chaldea, which is 680
miles from Jerusalem Eastward. This Ninus is called Amraphel, because of the
notable victories that he won, and the number of countries and provinces he
conquered.

The second was Arioch or Arius his son. He was thus called because of his
courage and cruelty in war; for Arioch signifies A mighty roaring Lion; Arius,
Mars. This man during the life of his father was created king of Lassir, that
is, Assiria, for so it is called in the Chaldaean tongue; the chief city
whereof is Nineueh, and lies from Jerusalem Northeastward six hundred eighty
four miles.

The third was Keder-laomer King of the Elamites in Persia, 1200 miles from
Jerusalem toward the East. This Prince had a great command in that country.
Keder signifies an Ornament or Crown; Laomer, Well deserving.

The fourth was Thideall King of the Nations. He kept his court in Damascus,
the Metropolis of Assyria, some 160 miles from Jerusalem Northward. Thideal
signifies An exalted Lord; of Alah, that is, To be lifted up.

These four kings were confederats, and bent their expedition principally
against Astaroth and Kiriathaim, which they took, and spoiled all the Country
round about with fire and sword: and their Armies being retired from the
spoil, met in the valley of Siddim (where now the dead Sea runs) and there
pitched their tents. In this place after a cruel and sharp war, they conquered
the five Kings of that beautiful and pleasant soil of Pentapolis, (for so it
was called because of those five cities that were in it) where among others
they took Lot captive with all his substance.

Of Astoroth.
AStoroth seems to be the city of Venus, because the citisens thereof
worshipped her: for Astoroth is a goddess of the Sidonians, and is compounded
of Ash, which signifies a company of stars, and Tor, placed in order. The
Syrians call Venus Ashtoroth. This town lay in the land of Gilead, and
belonged to the half tribe of Manasse beyond Jordan, 56 miles from Jerusalem
North-Eastward. In this city the four Kings of the East conquered the giants
of Karnaim, that were mighty princes and commanders there, when they made war
against that and Kiriathaim. Not far from hence also in the land of Ham there
dwelt certain Giants called Zusim, of Zus and Hamah, which signifies to stir
up commotion. These were very great strong and stately people, and had the
command of all the Countries thereabouts, which they held in great fear, and
were conquered by the four Kings.

Of Kiriathaim.
KIriathaim was a City in the tribe of Reubin beyond Jorden, Ios. 13. 22 miles
from Jerusalem toward the East, and so called because it was divided into many
parts and divisions. The heathens corruptly call it Carthage. The Hebrews derive
it from Kiriath, which signifies a city, and Emah, Terror. Here dwelt the
Emims, a grave and fearful people; for so their name signifies.

Of Hazezon Thamar.
THis City took the name from a Palm tree, or a Palm bank. Of this kind
of wood the Israelites made their arrows, and therefore derive it from Charar,
which signifies to shoot; and Thamar, a Palm Tree. This City stands upon
the bank of the dead sea, twenty miles from Jerusalem North-East, upon a very
fruitful soil, where was found plenty of Palm trees and precious balsam: and
by some called Engedi, or the Lambs Well; being derived from Ein and Gedi,
which signifies Fontem haeduli lactantis, that is, The Well of a sucking lamb
or goat. Not far from hence stood the Cave where David cut off the outward lap
of King Saul's garment, 1 Samuel 24.

Of the plentiful valley Siddim.
THis valley stood there where now the dead sea runs, and took that name
from the fertility of the soil, and seems to have some affinity with the
Hebrew word Sadel, which signifies a field, partly arable, partly pasture and
meadow, furnished with trees, herbs, and orchards. In this place stood diverse
Wels of Bitume, from whence the inhabitants fetched caement to build their
houses with; but after for their wickedness (which was so great, as it appears
in Genesis 18. that the cry thereof ascended into heaven) the Lord did grievously
punish them, first with war, by which the inhabitants were destroyed: and after
that, with fire and brimstone from heaven; so that (as is aforesaid) this
goodly valley is nothing but a stinking lake.

The Travels of the Egyptian maid Hagar.
AFter Sara had preferred Hagar to that high grace as to make her equal with
her self, she growing proud thereof, contemned her Mistress, and in
recompense of that favor carried her self very presumptuously toward her;
which Sarah seeking to restrain, offered to her son hard measure; which
Abraham (upon her complaint) winked at: Whereupon Hagar, partly oppressed with
grief, partly with envy, privily stole away from her mistress, and went from
the valley of Mamre near Hebron, to the Well of life sixteen miles Southward,
Genesis 16. and it is to be thought that her journey tended toward Egypt,
which was her native country. For this Well lay directly in the way as they
went down into Egypt. This flight of Hagar without doubt did greatly trouble
Abraham's house, and put him and his wife into a great sorrow and fear, lest
she should destroy her self and the infant, or fall into some other danger.
Wherefore that God might make evident the exceeding care he had of them, he
sent an angel unto Hagar, and willed her to return unto her master: which
Angel some think was the son of God, for he was called by the name of Jehovah,
Genesis 16. which name was not communicated to any created Angel. Whereupon
Hagar, according to his commadement, went back again to her mistress Sarah
into the valley of Mamre, 16 miles, Genesis 16.

From Hebron Hagar went with her mistress to that kingly city Gerar, 6 miles,
Genesis 20.

At Gerar she and her son Ismael were put out of her masters house, and going
in the way that leads into Egypt, they lost themselves in the wilderness of
Beersaba, after they had traveled 12 miles from Gerar: where oppressed with want
both of water and other necessaries, she feinted and her son also; wherefore
she laid him under a tree, and about a bows shoot off sat down and wept,
expecting nothing but death. As she was in this misery, God heard the voice
of the child, and sent an Angel unto her saying, Fear not, for I will make
of thy child a great Nation. And God opened her eyes, and lo, close by her
there was a Well, so she went and filled her bottle, and gave her boy drink.
At this time Ismael was 15 years of age; So God blessed the child, and he
became an Archer, and lived in the wilderness.

From thence she and her son went into the wilderness of Pharan, 80 miles, where
Ismael married an Egyptian, Genesis 21. So all the travels of Hagar the Egyptian
maid were 132 miles.

Of the Fountain of Hagar, which is also called the Well of Life.
THis Well lies between Bared and Kades-Bernea, 10 miles from Jerusalem
toward the South. Some call it the Well of the Living and Seeing, because God
did there look mercifully upon Hagar when she fled from her mistress. Here
Isaac dwelt and had his two sons Esau and Jacob, Genesis 26. Afterward it
was called the Well of the living God, and seems mystically to represent
Baptism, the lavor of grace and regeneration by the operation and special
working of the Spirit: for the Church (like Hagar with her son Ismael)
traveling through the wilderness of this world, is pressed with a multitude of
sins; and seeing her own misery, finds no remedy but by faith in Christ
Jesus, to be delivered from so heavy a burden: wherefore they joining together
in prayer, crave the merciful audience and gracious assistance of God, That it
would please him of his goodness to refresh them with the water of life, the
doctrine of grace, that so they may be made capable of eternal glory. For
Hagar signifies a Pilgrim, and Ismael, a godly and good man whom the Lord
hears: Who traveling together with his mother the Church in this world,
fights against the enemies thereof, and shoots the arrows of faith against
all infernal and cruel beasts. For Schamah signifies, He has heard; and El,
The almighty God, who mercifully hears the fervent prayers and petitions of
the Just; according to that of S. James, cap. 5.15.

Ismael was born An. mundi 2035. Abraham being then 86 years of age. He was
circumcised at 13, he went from his father at 15; he was at Abraham's funeral
being 89 years of age: he died when he was 137 years of age, fifty years
after the death of Abraham, and left behind him twelve sons as Jacob did,
which were the Princes of their families, as was his. Of which the Apostle Paul
has an excellent Allegory; Abraham had two sons, one by the bondwoman,
another by the freewoman: he that was of the bond woman was according to the
flesh, but he that was of the free woman was by promise. By which things
another thing is meant; for the one, which is Agar of mount Sinai, gendereth
unto bondage: for Agar or Sinai is a mountain in Arabia, and answers to
Jerusalem that now is; and she is in bondage with her Children: but Jerusalem
which is above is free, for it is written, Rejoice thou Barren, etc. Wherefore
we are no more of the bond woman (which is the Law) but of the Free, not by our
own works or righteousness, but by fairh in Christ, who makes us heirs of
that heavenly Jerusalem.

Where Ishmael dwelt.
PAran a city of Arabia the Stony, stood 104 miles from Jerusalem Southward,
and takes the name from fertility; for Purah with the Hebrews signifies a
fruitful root. From this Metropolitan town, the desert of Arabia the stony
near Cades takes name: of which mention is made, Number. 13 and 14. Deuteronomy. 1.
Genesis 14.21. Abac. 3. and is called the desert of Pharan. Here Ishmael that
excellent Archer and hunter dwelt, after with great power and strength he had
conquered all the neighboring princes and people thereabout. His posterity
also inhabited these parts, and after his name were called Ismaelites, some
eighty miles from Jerusalem toward the South. These people were excellent
soldiers, and of noble courage; their principal delight was shooting, and
therein they exceeded others; living for the most part by hunting and pillage,
and so they continue to this day. The Saracens who likewise had their abiding
in those parts were derived from that family, though they had rather take their
name from Sara, and from thence Saracens: These are of the opinion of the Turks.

The Travels of Eleazer the servant of Abraham.
AFter Eleazer had sworn to his master to take a wife for his son Isaac of the
generation of his fathers, he went from the valley of Mamre near Hebron, to
Haran a City of Mesopotamia, 468 miles off, and there made a Contract with
Rebecc^ the daughter of Bethuel, and sister of Laban, whom he took along with
him and returned to his master. So that his journey to and again was 944
miles. These things happened in the year of the world 2089, and before Christ
1879, Isaac then being forty years of age.

This Eleazer was Steward of Abraham's house, and borne at Damascus the chief
City of Syria. He was so called, because God was his help: Eleazer being a
compound word of El and Ezaer, which signifies Almighty God the helper. From
whence we may perceive that God is the keeper of the poor, and a ready helper
in time of tribulation; according to that in the Psalms, All they that know
thee trust in thee; because thou, O Lord, hear their prayers, and bring
them out of trouble.

Rebeccha, as it should seem, took her name from the expectation of Eternal
life* for Rebechan in Hebrew does denote such a woman, which expects a free
delivery frrom all calamity, and an inheritance of eternal life. Therefore
Rebeccha is a notable type of the Church of God, which is the Spouse of Christ,
shadowed in Isaac; as shall hereafter be more plainly manifested.

The Travels of the Patriarch Isaac.
ISaac being young, went with his father Abraham from Berzeba to mount Moriah,
where his father would have offered him unto God, as the Lord commanded him,
which is forty miles, Gens. 22.

2 From thence with his father he returned again to Berzeba, which is forty
miles.

3 From Berzeba he traveled with his father to Hebron, by the plain of Mamre,
which is 16 miles.

4 From the plain of Mamre Isaac traveled Southward, to the fountain of life,
which is 16 miles, and there he dwelt, Genesis 24.

5 From thence he returned back again to his fathers burial, who was laid in
that double cave in Mamre, which is 16 miles.

6 From thence he returned back again to the Well of life, where he dwelt; 16
miles.

7 From the Fountain of life, he went to Gerar, which is 8 miles; where
Abimelech seeing the beauty of his wife Rebeccha, would have ravished her, and
for fear she told him that she was his sister, Genesis 26.

8 From Gerar Isaac went Westward to the valley of Gerar which is 8 miles, and
there he caused the Well to be dug up again, which the inhabitants had
stopped up, Genesis 26.

9 From thence he went to Beersaba, which is four miles; where the same night
the Lord appeared unto him, and said, I am the God of thy father Abraham, fear
not, for I am with thee and will bless and multiply thy seed for my servant
Abraham's sake, Genesis 26.

10 From Beersaba he returned again to Hebron by the plain of Mamre, which is
16 miles: here Abraham, Sarah, and Rebeccha, died, and were buried, Genesis 35. So
all the travels of the Patriarch Isaac, were one hundred forty eight miles.

The typical signification of Isaac.
THe name of Isaac is derived from laughter: for Zakah in Hebrew is as much as
quod risit is in Latin, which signifies that he laughed; and from hence
Zechock signifies a Laughter, and Isaac, mirth, or one that rejoices with
mirth. This name was given to him by God before his nativity, Genesis 17.18.
There were seven that were named by God before their nativity, viz. Ishmael
Genesis 16. Isaac, Genesis 17. Cores or Cyrus King of the Persians, Esa 44. Sampson,
Judge. 13. Iosia King of Judah, 1. Kings 13. John Baptist, and Jesus Christ the
son of God, Luke 1. of whom Isaae was a notable type. For Christ is our true
rejoicing, the laughter, mirth, and delight of the whole Church of God. Abraham
upon the day of the nativity of Isaac made a great feast, to which, no doubt,
he called many godly men, and perhaps some of the Patriarchs: for there was
then living Sarag, Arphaxad, Salah, Heber, Thamar, and Sem, the son of Noah,
who also had a certain knowledge of Gods promise to Abraham, and that of the
seed of Isaac should come the Savior of the world.

And as Abraham when he would have offered his son unto the Lord, carried
the fire and the sword; but Isaac the wood upon which he should be slain and
burned (O miserable sight, especially to a father, to see his only son and
heir, which was miraculously begotten, even then when he was without hope of
issue, burnt to ashes before his face? this was on mount Moria^ a little from
Salem or Jerusalem) even so our Savior Christ, for the sins that man commits
and carries about him, bore upon his shoulders the wooden cross whereupon he
was offered an^ acceptable sacrifice to his father, that so by his mediation
and satisfaction we might receive pardon for them: And this was likewise done
upon mount Caluarie, a little from Jerusalem. And as the Lord provided another
sacrifice for Abraham, that so he might save his son, which was, a Ram
tied and entangled in thorns: so God provided a sacrifice for the salvation of
the world even Jesus Christ our mediator, who is that immaculate and precious
Lamb of God; whose head being crowned with thorns, and hanging upon the
cross, by his precious death opened unto us the door of eternal life, and
made us capable of everlasting happiness, John 19. 1 Peter 1. Such was the
love of Abraham, a father unto God; such the love of God, a father unto man:
that they spared not their only sons, the one typically to represent the
other. The other, that is, the only begotten son of God, to dye effectually
for Abraham, Isaac, and all mankind, Ioh. 3. Genesis 22.

The Travels of the Patriarch Jacob.
FRom Beersaba Jacob went to Bethel, which is 48 miles and there he saw a
Ladder that reached down from heaven, whereby the Angels ascended and
descended Genes. 28.

2 From Bethel he went to Haran in Mesopotamia, which is 432 miles; where he
married Leah and Raehel, Genesis 28.

3 From Haran in Mesopotamia he went to mount Gilead, which is 380 miles: and
when Laban pursued him (at the commandment of the Lord) he made a league with
him, Genesis 31.

4 From mount Gilead he went to Mahanaim, which is 16 miles, and there he met
with the Angels of God, Genesis 31.

5 From Mahanaim he passed the water and went to Penuel, which is four miles,
and there wrestled with the Angel of God, Genesis 32.

6 From Penuel he went to Succoth, where he pitched his Tents, 2 miles, Genesis
33.

7 From Succoth he passed the river of Jordan, and went to Sichem, not far
from Salem (about eight miles) where his daughter Dinah was ravished, Genesis 33.

8 From thence he went to Bethel, which is eight and twenty miles, Genesis 31.

9 From Bethel he went to Bethlehem Euphrata, which is twelve miles; in which
way Rachel died, and was buried not far from Bethlehem; then Jacob went
forward, and set up his Tents near to the Tower of Eder, a mile from Bethlehem
toward the South, Genesis 35.

10 From Bethlehem Euphrata and the Tower of Eder, he returned again to the
valley of Mamre near Hebron, to his father Isaac, which is 20 miles, Genesis 35.

11 From Hebron he went to Beersaba, which is 16 miles, Genesis 38.

12 From Beersaba, he went to the Town of Any a little off Egypt in the land
of Gossen, which is 168 miles, where Joseph his son gave him honorable
entertainment, Genesis 46.

13 From Any he went to the city This was the chief City of Egypt.
Zoan, which is also called Tanis, 28 miles, where he was presented to K.
Pharaoh, Genesis 47.

14 From Tanis he returned to Any, which is 28 miles, and there he dwelt and
dyed in the land of Gossen, Genesis 49.

The Description of the Towns and places to which Jacob traveled.
Of Bethel.
BEthel was a Town in the Tribe of Benjamin, eight miles from Jerusalem toward
the North, and signifies The house of God. In times past it was called Luz: but
Jacob seeing in that place the vision of the Ladder, with the Angels ascending
and descending upon it, and because there the Lord renewed the covenant with him
concerning his seed, and the coming of Christ; he therefore called it Bethel.

Afterward, Jeroboam having unlawfully usurped the kingdom of Rehoboham, caused
a calfe to be set up there: for which cause it was then called Bethauen, which
signifies the house of sin and abominable offense. Vatablus is of opinion,
that there are two Bethels, one in the tribe of Benjamin, the other in the
tribe of Ephraim, both not far from Hay: but if this should be granted, then
these two towns should stand within two miles one of the other, which seems
very absurd; therefore I dare boldly affirm, that there was but one Bethel,
which stood upon the borders of Benjamin and Ephraim, both tribes bordering
upon the South side of the town of Luz, Josh. 16. and 18.

This town of Bethel was at first in the Suburbs of Lue, until the division
of the tribes; for then both these Tribes of Ephraim and Benjamin, ending in
that place, so much increased this town, that they became both one city, and so
were called Bethel, Ie. 28. and 35. Josh. 7. and 18.

From hence there is a twofold mystery to be apprehended: the first, of Jacob,
whose sleeping in this place upon a stone, caused this City or Town to be
built, and to retain the name of Bethel, that is, The house of God. So
whosoever seeks to have eternal life, must rest upon that corner stone Christ
Jesus, the son of the everliving God, and by faith be incorporated into the
Church, which is the house of God, of which Christ (the Anointed of the Lord)
is both King and Priest for ever. Secondly, as Jacob resting upon this corner
stone, saw the Angels ascending and descending from heaven unto earth; so by
this incorporation into the body of the Church (of which Christ is the head) by
Faith and Baptism, our souls are made capable to ascend into that heavenly
Tabernacle, which he has prepared for all those that believe: according to
that in John 14. I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the
father but by me only. And whosoever is assured of this ladder (that reaches
from heaven unto earth) may well say with Jacob, surely the Lord Jesus Christ
is in this place; here is nothing but the house of God, and here is the gate of
heaven; as Christ himself testifies in the tenth of John, I am the door, and
whosoever enters not by me, etc. So that Christ is the head of his Church, the
ladder that ascends into heaven, and the door whereby we may enter into
eternal life.

Of Gilead.
THis land of Gilead was a country that lay between Jordan and the mountain
of Gilead, or rather between the sea of Galilee and the mount Gilead, sixty
miles from Jerusalem toward the Southeast: for the mountains of Gilead,
beginning at mount Gilead, extended thence unto Arabia the stony, and separated
the country of Israel beyond Jordan, from the country of the Amonites. But
that part which lies between the Sea of Galilee and Ammon, is properly called
Gilead; for when Jacob and Laban made a covenant either with other, in the
mount Gilead, they gathered a heap of stones, and making a banquet eat
together upon it, Genesis 13. and from thence, that mountain and all the country
thereabouts took the name, For Laban in the Syrian tongue is called IEGAR
SAHADVTA, the heap of covenant. But Jacob in the Hebrew language called that
mountain together with all the Country thereabouts, Galeed or Galaad; the
heap of testimony: for Gal signifies a heap or grave, and Galal, He rolled,
or he thrust into a round heap. From whence the Greek word (...), to roll,
and (...), a circle, is derived: Also Edah signifies testomonie with the
Hebrews, being derived from Id which signifies testaetus est, that is, he
bears witness; and from hence (...) amongst the Grecians is derived, which
signifies, a witness. This land of Gilead was very fertile and pleasant,
being adorned with many Castles and strong Cities: And in this country the
Prophet Eliah was taken up into heaven in a fiery Chariot, 1 Reg. 17.2 Reg. 2.
The Graecians call this, Decapolin, from ten cities that are strongly built in
that country, Marc. 7.

Of Machanaim.
MAchanaim was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Gad, near to the flood
of Jordan and Iaboch, forty four miles from Jerusalem toward the Southeast,
and situate in the land of Gilead beyond Jordan; being so called of the
Patriarch Jacob, because there he saw the Tents and Army of Angels, which he
understood to be his assistants against his brother Esau, whom he feared,
Genesis 31. For Chana signifies Castrametatus est, that is, the Tents are
measured out* from whence Machanaim is the proper name of a place, being
derived from two Tents of Angels which appeared to Jacob, That they might
defend him in his journey; For the Angels of God compasses them about that
fear him, Psalm. 33. and therefore Jacob with great joy brake out and said, The
tents of God are here, and called it Machanaim. This was assigned to the
Leuits, Josh. 21. and here David was received when he fled from his son
Absalon, 2 Samuel 17. Here Jacob wrastles with the Angel, Genesis 32.

Of Pnuel or Penuel.
THis Town was upon the East side of Jordan, close by the mouth of the river
Iaboch, in the tribe of Gad* forty miles from Jerusalem toward the Southeast;
and is derived from Panah and El, which signifies, He beheld the Almighty God
face to face, and for that cause he called it Penuel or Pnuel, which is, the
face of God, Genesis 32. The Tower of this Town was destroyed in Gedeons time,
Judge. 8.

Of Succoth.
THis is a town beyond Jordan, not far from Penuel, in the tribe of Gad, 40
miles from Jerusalem toward the Southeast. Here Jacob set up his tabernacles
and continued for a while; from whence it borrowes the name. For Sachach,
signifies A covering, and from thence it is called Succha, and (...) with the
Greeks, which signifies, A shield, covering, defense, or tabernacle: Of this
town there is mention in Josh. 13.2 Chr. 4. Gedeon caused the Citizens of this
town of Succoth to be torn to pieces with thorns, Judge. 8.

Of Salem.
SAlem is a town of the Sichamites, lying toward the East side of the river
Jordan, and in the midst of the tribe of Manasses, forty miles from Jerusalem
toward the North, not far from Sichem, where Dinah, Iocobs daughter was
ravished, Genesis 33. and 34. in Aenon near to this place John Baptist baptized,
and signifies, A City of Peace and integrity.

Of Bethlem Euphrata.
THis town was distant from Jerusalem toward the South, six miles; it was
situated in a pleasant and fruitful country, and from thence took the name:
for Bethlachem, is called The house of bread; Euphrata signifies, fruitful,
being derived from Parah, that is, to fructify; and Both signifies a house,
from the affinity that it has to Banah, that is, to build: so that
Baithlaechem does denote unto us The house of bread, and other fruits and meats
that are fit to be eaten. Here was Christ the son of God borne, that bread of
life, of which whosoever eats shall live eternally, Io. 6. And here David was
the second time anointed King, 1 Samuel 16. Of this town you may read more in
the second of Luke.

Of Rachels grave.
ABout a mile from Bethlem toward the North, Rachel the wife of Jacob was
buried, over whom he set a stately sepulcher made of twelve marble stones, or
Pyramides: these stones are seen to this day upon the right hand of the way,
as you go from Bethlem to Jerusalem: and from thence all the land thereabouts
is called the land of Rachel. For when Herod killed the innocent children, all
the inhabitants thereabouts wept, and would not be comforted, Matthew. 2. Ierem.
31

Of the Town of Aeder.
THis was a watch Tower of the Bethlamites, about a mile from Bethlem toward
the South, and was so called from the flocks of Sheep that resorted thither:
for Migdal signifies a Tower, and Aeder a flock or heard: for thereabouts were
very fertile pastures. Here the Angels told the sheepheards of the nativity of
Christ, lying at Bethlem in a manger: and in the place of that tower there was
a Church built, which in Ieroms time was called Angelus ad Pastores, because
the Angels there appeared to the sheepe-heards. Here Jacob dwelt for a time,
and in this place Reuben lay with Billah his wife, Genesis 36.

Of Gosen and Any.
GOsen was a very delectable and fruitful country in the land of Egypt, the
Metropolitan whereof was Any, two hundred miles from Jerusalem toward the
Southwest: in this City Jacob dwelt.

The typical signification of the Patriarch Jacob.
Jacob signifies, a supplanter, and was a type of Christ, who is that
supplanter of Satan, and by his death has broken his head in pieces. Again,
he is the type of a Christian man: For as he wrestling with the Angel,
obtained a blessing; so every good man continually striving with perseverance
in prayer, shall at length obtain an everlasting blessing: for, for this cause
was Jacob called Israel, that is, the Prince of God, in that he prevailed with
God: so all those that believe in Christ, are called Princes of the kingdom of
heaven: because by his mediation they have prevailed with God, and are made
partakers of eternal life.

Jacob had two wives, Leah and Rachel; Leah signifies, wearied, and was a type
of the old Mosaicall Church: for that was oppressed and wearied with the laws
of Moses, and brought forth Priests, Levites, Kings, and warlike Princes, by
which the people of the Jews became oppressed and wearied by extreme labors,
and at length were miserably extinguished: for as it is in the 15 of the Acts
of the Apostles, The law of Moses was an intolerable and troublesome burden.
But Rachel signifies a Sheep, and is a type and sign of the Church of God in
the New Testament, as Christ himself speaks in the tenth of John, My sheep
hear my voice and follow me, and I will give them eternal life.

Sheep are naturally patient and peaceable; so all such as are of Christ's
Church, seek after patience and peace. Leah was nothing so fair, but much
more fruitful: Rachel was nothing so fruitful, but a great deal fairer. Leah
was the mother of Benjamin which signifies sorrow: Rachel of Joseph, who was a
type of Christ.

Of the Travels of Esau.
ESau traveled from mount Sier in Mesopotamia, to the town of Pnuell or
Penuell, eighty miles to meet his brother Jacob: where the singular civility
and humility of Jacob toward him, is worthy observation. For he first sent
to meet him, then he did him obedience to the ground seven several times, and
so saluted him, saying, Lo, these are the children which God of his grace have
giving his servant. From whence it may be gathered, That it becomes every man
(if it be possible) to win his enemy to peace and concord rather by humanity
and humility, than by force: for Esau seeing this kind of reverence, though
before he had a full determination to do him violence, yet now he comes to
meet him, embraces him, takes him about the neck, begins to weep, and
kisses him, yea such was their love, that they both wept with joy, Genesis 35.

After, Esau returning, went home to Sier back again, eighty miles: these
things happened in the year of the World 2206; when both brethren were about 89
years of age, and in the year before Christ 1762.

Of mount Sier.
MOunt Sier where Esau and his posterity dwelt, is forty miles from Jerusalem
toward the South, and was so called of Sier, the King or Lord thereof, of whom
came the Horrites; who being driven thence by the fourteen sons of Esau,
into Arabia the stony, where they continued, Genesis 36. It was called Edom of
Esau, and then, Idumaea, Genesis 25. and the inhabitants thereof Edomites, or
Idumaeans.

The typical meaning of Esau.
ESau signifies a Factor, and was so called from rednes: The enemies of the
church coloring themselves red with the blood of the godly: For as Rebecca had
in her womb two sons, that is, Esau and Jacob; one elected, the other
reprobated: so in the Church there are found two sorts of people, good and
evil; some are wicked and impious, contemners of Gods word, and persecuters of
the Church; as after, the posterity of Esau was. But there are others that are
the faithful children of God, that hope through the mediation of our blessed
Savior, to be made heirs of everlasting happiness, and be crowned with him
in his kingdom with the crown of Glory. So that here the saying of our
Savior may be verified; the first shall be last, and the last shall be first.
for Esau was the eldest, yet lost his birthwrite; and Jacob was the youngest,
yet got the blessing.

Of the Travels of the Patriarch Judah.
IVda traveled from Sichem, where Jacob dwelt, and went to the town of
Odulla, some forty and four miles, where he was married to the daughter of one
Chananei whose name was Schuah which signinifies, A happy Savior, by her he
had two children in that place, viz. Ger and Onan.

From thence he went to Timnah to sheare his sheep, six miles: and as he
turned aside out of the way, he committed incest with his daughter in law,
Thamer, when she was about 26 years of age.

Afterward he went twice with his brethren into Egypt, to buy corn at Zoan,
where Joseph at that time was; for the famine was very great round about. So
that reckoning his journey twice two and again, it amounted to eight hundred
twenty and two miles; for Zoan was 208 miles from Hebron where Jacob and his
sons dwelt.

Lastly, he returned again with his father and his brother into Egypt, two
hundred and eight miles. These things happened in the year of the world 1239.
and before Christ 1729.

The description of the Towns and places to which the Patriarch Judah traveled.
Of Odullam.
THis was a town in the tribe of Judah, eight miles from Jerusalem toward the
South-west, and signifies The testimony of the poor: being derived of Ed,
which signifies a testimony, and Dallimo, such as are called poor. Here David
hid himself from the fury of Saul in a cave, 1 Samuel 22. Ierom knew this
town, and says that it was a village. This was a type of the faithful, who
being still subject to the calamities and miseries of this world, and
persecuted for righteousness sake, are glad with David to seek holes and
caves to defend them from their wicked persecuters.

Of Thimnah.
THimnah is a City in the borders of the Tribe of Judah, and Dan, situated in
mount Ephraim, six miles from Jerusalem toward the Northwest, and signifies a
perfect and fully finished City; being derived from Thamam, that is, fully and
absolutely finished; for it was adorned with many very fair and spacious
buildings, set up by Iosuah: for in his time it was a fair and large City,
and at such time as the children of Israel invaded Canaan, he had much ado to
win it: Therefore the children of Israel for his great valor, and to manifest
their thankfulness toward him, they gave it to him and to his posterity for
ever; and here he lies bured, Iosuah 24. Here Sampson married his wife, and by
the way killed the Lion, mentioned in the 14 of Judges. This is ^ type of the
Church, wherein Christ Jesus the true Iosuah is the head, illuminating the same
by the bright shining beams of his Gospel, the luster whereof has gone
throughout the whole World.

Of the Travels of the Patriarch Joseph.
WHen Joseph was sent from Hebron by his father Jacob, he went to Sichem to
seek his brothers, 60 miles, Genesis 37.

2 From thence he went to Dothan, four miles, where by his brothers he was
thrown into a Pit, and after sold to the Ishmalites, Genesis 37.

3 From Dothan he was carried to Tanis in Egypt, and there sold to Potipher,
Pharaohs chief steward, 272 miles.

4 From Tanis he went to meet his father in the land of Gosen, which is 28
miles, Genesis 46.

5 From thence he turned back again to Tanis, and presented his father and
brethren unto Pharaoh, Genesis 47. which is 28 miles.

6 From thence he went back to Any to see his father, who now was sick unto
the death, there receiving his blessing, he closed his eyes, which was 28 miles.

7 From thence he returned back again to Tanis, which is 28 miles.

8 From Tanis he went back to Any, with a great company of horses and
chariots, preparing an honorable funeral for his father, Genesis 15. being 28
miles.

9 From Any he went to Atad which lies upon the further side of Jordan toward
the East; which is 240 miles, where he made a great lamentation for the death
of his father 7 days, Genesis 50. The reason why Joseph went thus far about, was,
because he went with such a company toward Hebron, that the Idumaeans,
through whose country he should have gone, would not suffer him to pass that
way, standing in fear of his power.

10 From Atad he went to Hebron the Metropolis of the tribe of Judah, near to
which stood the double cave in the veil of Mamre, where Jacob was buried,
which was 40 miles, Genesis 50.

11 From thence to Heliopolis, a city of the Egyptians, where Joseph set up a
stately Academy for all Egypt, which was accounted 200 miles.

12 From thence he went to Tanis or Zoan, which was the chief defense and
Metropolitan city of all Egypt, being accounted 6 miles.

So all the Travels of the Patriarch Joseph was 1962 miles.

A description of the places and cities through which Joseph traveled.
Of Dothan.
DOthan was a City in the tribe of Manasseth, forty and four miles from
Jerusalem toward the North, and distant six miles from Tiberias toward the
West, and signifies A commandment, being derived from Dothor Dathath, that is,
he commands or ordains. Here Joseph was thrust into an empty ditch, and
sold to the Ismaelites, Genesis 37. Here Elias the Prophet being besieged by the
Syrians, showed to his servant the host of Angels that defended him with the
Chariots of fire, etc. 2 Kings 16. Here Holiphernes was slain, who had pitched
his tents against Bethulia: for Dothan is a City which at this day remains
at the foot of the Mount of Bethuell, being situated in a fertile and
pleasant place, compassed about with fair vines, olives, and pleasant medows,
where the inhabitants do show that ancient ditch wherein Joseph was cast, when
his brothers sold him to the Ishmaelites, according to that of Solomon, One
generation passes, and another comes, but the earth indureth for ever.

Of Heliopolis, or the City of the Sun.
THis City is called by the Prophet Esaias Ca. 19. Irheri, which signifies The
City of the Sun, and is derived of Ir and Cheres which signifies The
brighnesse of the Sun, and is distant from Jerusalem 224 miles toward the
Southwest, six miles and a half from Zoan or Tanis. This was a goodly City,
and in times past the Kings of Egypt have in that place kept their Courts and
places of residence. Here was a flourishing Academie, wherein was taught
Astronomy, Cosmographie, and many other liberal arts and sciences, with great
care and diligence, but principally divinity (as Munster says) being adorned
with many benefits and privileges: for it was thought that the Patriarch
Joseph was the first founder of it, and taught there, Genesis 47. Here dwelt
Dionisius the Areopagit, a studient of Athens, who at such time as our Savior
Christ was crucified, at noone day (the Moon then being in the full) seeing
the Sun totally darkened, said to this master Apollophan, Either the God of
nature suffers, or the fabric of the world is dissolved. The said Dionisius
was afterward converted by the Apostle Paul, in the city of Athens.

Of Goraen Atad.
THis town or corn floor was beyond Jordan, not far from Bethabara, 16 miles
from Jerusalem toward the Southeast, (Here Joseph and the rest of the
Aegiptians, bewailed the death of Jacob) and took the name from thorns and
briers that compassed it every where about.

The interpretation or allegory of the Patriarch Joseph, and of his life.
Joseph was a type of Christ diverse ways: for as Joseph's coat being of diverse
colors, was dipped in the blood of Goats, so Christ being very God, taking
upon him the humane nature, and sprinkled with the blood of his stripes and
wounds (being the lamb of God slain for the sins of the world) was also
made changeable and of diverse colors. Again, as Joseph was sent by Jacob to
seek his brethren: so Christ was sent by God his father to seek the lost
sheep of Israel, which according to the flesh, were his brethren, Mat. 15. And
as the brethren of Joseph were so great enemies to him, that it was not
possible for them to dissemble their hatred toward him, but that both in words
and deeds, they must needs express their bitterness, (envy being the common
companion of virtue) so the Jews, the brethen of Christ, to whom the knees of
all things both in heaven, in hell, and in earth bow, persecuting him with
taunts, mockes, and stripes, yea, unto death, because he professed himself to
be a good man, and the son of the everliving God.

And as the Ismalites and Midianites, to whom Joseph was sold by Judah, was of
the stock of Joseph, the one being derived from Ismael the son of Abraham by
his maid Hagar, the other of Midian the son of his second wife Keturah: So
Christ was sold by Judas his disciple, to the Jews his kindred according to
the flesh, if you respect the nation. The difference was in the price; Joseph
the type being sold but for twenty pieces of silver, Christ the substance sold
at thirty.

The end of the book of Genesis.

Of the Travels of the Prophet Moses, and the children of Israel out of Egypt.
IN the year of the world, 2412, and before Christ, 1554, Moses (being then
about forty years old) fled out of Egypt into the land of Midian, 180 miles,
where he married Ziporah, the daughter of Riuel, Exodus 3.

2 From thence he went to Mount Sinai or Horeb, 64 miles, Exodus 3.7.

3 From mount Horeb, he returned to Midian to his brother, 65 miles, Ex. 4.

4 From Midian he went to Thanis in Egypt, 180 miles Ex. 12.13.

5 From thence he went with the children of Israel to Raemses, 48 miles, Ex. 12.

6 From Raemses, he went to Succoth, 8 miles, Ex. 13. Number. 3^

7 From Succoth he went to the wilderness of Etham, eigh^ miles.

8 From Etham he came to Hahiroth, which lies right against Baal-zephon, 16
miles, Number. 3.

9 From Hahiroth, they passed through the middle of the red sea, and traveled
three days through the wilderness of Etham resting themselves at Morah, which
is 40 miles: There Mose^ threw a piece of wood into the water being bitter, and
presently it became sweet as soon as the wood was thrown in. Exodus 15. Number.
33.

10 From Marah he went to Elim, where there stood 12 wels of water, and 70 palm
trees, which is 8 miles, Ex. 16. Nu. 33.

11 From Elim they went toward the South, 6 miles, and rested themselves by the
red sea, Number. 33.

12 From the red sea they went to the wilderness of Zin, where it rained Manna
from heaven, which is 16 miles, Number. 32.

13 From the wilderness of Zin they went to Daphca, which is 12 miles, Number. 33.

14 From Daphca they went to Alus, which is twelve miles, Number. 33-

15 From Alus they went to Raphidim, being 8 miles: there Moses struck the
rock, and presently water issued forth, Ex. 27.

16 From Raphidim they went to mount Sina, which is eight miles: there God gave
the Commandments, Ex. 19 and 20.

17 From Sina they went to the Graves of Concupiscence, because there the
children of Israel murmured against God for flesh, and lo it rained Quails
into the camp: which is 8 miles, Nu. 11

18 From the Graves of Concupiscence they went to Hazeroth, which is 8 miles,
there Miriam (Moses sister) was struck with leprosy, Number. 12.

19 From thence they went to Rithma, which is eight miles, Number. 33.

20 From Rithma they went to Rimon-Parets, which is six miles, Number. 33.

21 From Rimon-Parets they went to Libanon, which is six miles.

22 From Libanon they went to Rissa, which is 6 miles, Nu. 33

23 From Rissa they went to Kehelatha, 6 miles, Number. 33.

24 From Kehelatha they went to the hill of Sephar, which is 4 miles.

25 From the hill of Sephar they went to Harada, four miles and a half, Number.
33.

26 From Harada they went to Maceheloth, 4 miles, Nu. 33.

27 From Maceheloth they went to Thahath, 4 miles, Nu. 33.

28 From Thahath they went to Thara, 4 miles, Nu. 33.

29 From Thara they went to Mithka, 4 miles, Number. 33.

30 From Mithka they went to Casmona, 8 miles, Nu. 33.

31 From Casmona they went to Moseroth, 32 miles, Nu. 33

32 From Moseroth they went to Bneiaecon, 24 miles.

33 From Bneiaecon they went to mount Gidgad, twenty miles.

34 From mount Gidgad they went to Iotbatha, 24 miles, Number. 33.

35 From Iotbotha they went to Ebrona, 20 miles, Nu. 33.

36 From Ebrona they went to Eziongaber, 28 miles.

37 From Eziongaber they went to the Wilderness of Zin-Kades, 48 miles.

38 From Zin-Kades they went to mount Hor, as God commanded, 48 miles, where
Aaron died.

39 From mount Hor they went to Salmona, 28 miles.

40 From Salmona they went to the town of Phunon, twenty miles.

41 From Phunon they went to Oboth, 24 miles.

42 From Oboth they went to Igim upon the hill Abarim, 16 miles.

43 From Igim they went to Dibon Gad, 16 miles, there is the water Sarum, Number.
31.33.

44 From Dibon Gad they went to Almon Diblathaim, 16 miles, Number. 33.

45 From Almon Diblathaim they went to the hill Abarim, 16 miles.

46 From the hill Abarim they went downward over the River Arnon, to the field
of the Moabites, to the town of Iachra, 16 miles, where Moses overcame Sehon
King of the Ammorites, with all his camp. Number. 21. Deuteronomy. 2.

47 From Iacra they went to Hesbon, 4 miles, which Town Moses won from the
King of the Ammorites, Number. 21. Deuteronomy. 2.

48 From Hesbon they went to the town of Iaezer, which Moses won, 8 miles,
Number. 21. Deuteronomy. 2.

49 From Iaezer they went to Edrei, 12 miles: there Moses overthrew King Og
with all his army at Basan, Number. 21. Deuteronomy. 3.

50 From Edrei they went to mount Libanus, 56 miles, which Moses won. Number. 21.
Deuteronomy. 3.

51 From mount Libanus they returned back again to the field of the Moabites,
40 miles, by which field lies the high hill Pisga, where Moses died, Deuteronomy. 34.

So all the travels of the Patriarch Moses were 1424 miles.

The description of the towns and places by which Moses traveled with the
children of Israel.
Of Midian.
MIdian was a metropolitan city of the Midianites, near to the Red sea, some
160 miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and signifies a measure, being
derived of Madad, which signifies, He has measured. Here Iethro (Moses father
in law) dwelt. In this town the Kings of Idumaea kept their court, 1 Reg. 11.
There was also another city of the same name, that stood near to Arnon, some
24 miles from Jerusalem toward the East; so that the Midianites had their seat
partly near the red sea in Arabia Paetrea, and partly upon the confines of the
Moabites, taking their beginning from Midian the son of Abraham which he had
by his wife Kethura, Genesis 25.

Of Horeb.
HOreb is a mount of the Midianites, and is sometimes called by the name of
Sina. It lies 420 miles from Jerusalem toward the South. In this place God
appeared to Moses in a flame of fire, Ex. 3. And as Bernard Britenbach says,
In this place there is a chapel built, called the Church of S. Mary in the
bush. In this Chapel there is a place showed where God spoke with Moses, Ex.
3. but how true that I leave, because there are many Churches built by Monks,
for no other purpose but to deceive travelers and pilgrims of their money.

Of Raemsis.
THis is one of the strong cities which the Israelites built for Pharaoh, and
is a metropolitan city in the land of Gossen, 174 miles from Jerusalem toward
the Southwest, and signifies Joy and delight, being derived of Raam and Sus,
that is, To leap for joy.

Of Pihachiroth.
THis was a certain Plain lying between two hills near to the Red sea, and was
called Pinaehiroth, which signifies, a mouth cut or carved out; where the
Children of Israel pitched their tents. Here Pharaoh invaded them when they
went out of Egypt, taking opportunity of the place: for they having on either
side of them an high mountain, before them the red sea, and behind them a
cruel and mighty tyrant, to the judgment of man had no means to escape. But
the Lord to express the mightines of his power, and that the Children of
Israel might know who it was that delivered them, made them a passage, and led
them under the conduct of Moses through the red sea; in that very place
drowning their enemies, which had thought to make a prey of them. A little from
this place the temple of the idol Baalzephon is to be seen

Of the Red sea.
THe Red sea is 160 miles from Jerusalem Southward, betwixt Arabia and Egypt,
and as some are of opinion, it takes the name of the red scales that grow
therein, wherefore in Scripture it is also called the Scaly sea. Some say it
takes the name from red sand that lies on the shore, cast up by the sea.
Others say, tha^ the redness thereof happens because of the shadow cast into
the water by the mountains thereabout. The vulgar are of opinion, that it is
naturally red by reason of the water; but it is not so, because it is like the
water of the Ocean, clear and salt. Strabo, li. 16 observes, that this sea
was so called from Erithraea, and thence Mare Arithraeum; because the word
Erithraeum in Greek signifies red or purple: the Latins call it Mare rubrum,
and we, the red sea* This Erithrae was son to Perseus and Andromada, who
sometime^ dwelt in the Island of that sea. It is also called the Arabian gulf
running from the South to the West; and by the Hebrews, Iamsuph, a scaly sea:
all which names are at this day used: at the vtmos^ bounds hereof are seen the
admirable works of Pharaoh Meco, who would have brought this Sea to the river
Nilus, that so he might have sailed thence into the Mediterranian Sea: But this
work he could not finish, being opposed by the wise men of Egypt. Here also
grows certain trees that are as red as Brasill wood.

Of the mystery of the red Sea.
AS Moses led the children of Israel through the red Sea, and delivered them
from the bondage and captivity of the Kings of Egypt; So Jesus Christ the
Son of God, by his precious blood, has delivered us from the house of
bondage, and the tyranny of Satan: and as Pharaoh and all his host was there
drowned; so the sin of Adam, Death, and the Devil, in that sea of Christ's
blood is utterly drowned, and we delivered from the pit of hell.

Of Baal-Zephon.
THis was an Idol erected by the Egyptians near to the shore of the Red Sea,
and is called Baal-zephon, that is, the Lord of defense and watchfulness,
because as they thought, he resisted fugitive servants, as Fagius and other
Hebrews observe: being derived from Baal, which signifies, a Lord, and Zapha,
that is, That has seen, or, to behold and see. The temple of this Idol stood
close by the shore of the Red sea, upon a high hill, very curiously wrought, so
that the children of Israel going through the same, could not choose but see it,
yet nevertheless they went securely, when Pharaoh and all his host were
drowned, notwithstanding, that their God of defense was so near them.

Of Marah.
THis is a place in the Desert, which took the name of bitterness, distant
from Jerusalem 160 miles toward the Southwest. Here Moses made the water sweet
by throwing in wood: The mystery whereof is, when Adam and Euah had eaten of
the forbidden fruit, they brought bitterness through all the World, yea, the
bitterness of sin and death: but God showed unto Moses another tree, that is,
our Lord Jesus Christ, who being thrown into the waters of bitterness,
afflictions calamities, miseries, yea, and the death of the Cross, for our
sakes and sins underwent the curse of the Law; that so taking away the
bitterness, we might be made capable of that sweet and delectable place of
eternal life.

Of Elim.
THis was the sixth resting place of the Israelites in the desert, 120 miles
from Jerusalem toward the Southwest; and is derived from Aial, which signifies
a Heart, a strong and swift Creature, of which it seems there were great
multitudes which resorted to this place to drink: and from thence it is called
Elim. Here stood 12 fountains and 70 Palm trees.

Of Sin.
THis was a thorny place in the desert, 156 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Southwest. Here it rained down Quails and Manna from heaven; being a type of
our Savior Jesus Christ that heavenly Manna which raises us up unto eternal
life, Ioh. 6. and is derived of Manah, which signifies to distribute; and
therefore Man or Mannah signifies a distributive gift, or meat fallen from
heaven distributiuely. Sin signifies a thorny place, from Zemeh, which
signifies a bush: for Christ flourishes in the midst of his enemies as a Lilly
amongst thorns, Can. 2. Psalm. 10.

Of Raphadim.
RAphadim was a place where the children of Israel pitched their tents in the
desert, not far from mount Sinai, 132 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Southwest; and signifies a Grass bench strewed with sweet herbs and flowers:
being derived from Raphad, which is as much to say in our Language, as To make
a bed or place for one to lie down on. Here Moses struck the rock, out of which
water issued, Exodus 17. which was a type of that spiritual Rock Christ Jesus,
1 Cor. 10. who being struck with the staff of the curse of the Law, out of
his precious wounds and side sent forth that Water of life which runs into
eternal happiness. In this place the children of Israel fought against the
Amalekites, and overcame them, Ex. 17. and here Iethro came unto Moses, where
according to his counsel there were seventy Elders chosen over the people, Ex.
18. This was a fruitful and pleasant place.

Of Mount Sinai.
SInai is 120 miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and because in that place
there are many bushes and thorns, it is called Sinai: for Senaeh signifies a
Bush. Here the Law (which we call the ten Commandments) was given; and not
unfitly, because like thorns they prick and vex the hearts and consciences of
wicked men. It is also called Horeb, or Chareb, which signifies a place made
dry. Bernard Breitenbacchus and many others in the month of September 1483,
went purposely to see this mountain, and with great labor ascended to the top
thereof; for (as he says) it is a great mountain, and of an extraordinary
height; in the lower part round, in the upper part divided into two tops or
mountains, one standing toward the West, the other toward the East. That toward
the West is called Horeb, that to the East, Sinai. And from these two it is
sometimes called Horeb, sometimes Sinai, being both one hill of the base. Between
these there lies a fair and spacious Plain, in the middle whereof (and as it
may be thought in the midst of the mountain) there stands a monastery, near
to which there is adjoining a very pleasant Garden and Orchard, plentifully
furnished with Date trees, Fig trees, and many others very profitable and
pleasant; where in ancient times were many Monks that continued there. But it
happened that a certain number of Pagans, in hope to find some booty, came from a
haven of the red sea, called Thor, and upon a sudden broke in upon them, and
put forty of them to the sword; from whence it was ever after called the Abbey
of the forty Martyrs. Now it remains desolate, few or none inhabiting there,
only two Monks of S. Katharines Order, and these are also grievously troubled
with the incursions of the Arabians. The orchard also is destroyed with locusts
and the ground become barren. In this orchard there stands a little chapel,
in which there is a cave where S. Onuphrius the Anchorist lived.

At the foot of Mount Sina upon the North, stands the monastery of Saint
Katherin, of which the Emperor Justinian was the first founder: it is
compassed about with a wall; close by it stands a goodly Orchard furnished
with diverse trees, of fruit pleasant and delightful; in that there stands a
goodly fountain which waters all about it. In this place there are a great
number of poor Monks, which get their living by their hands, in the desert
thereabouts. They say that here stood the golden calfe spoken of in the 32 of
Exodus. And they show a round stone lying there, where they say Moses broke the
two Tables that were given him by God. To pilgrims also they show the tomb of
Saint Katherine, standing upon the right side of the Quire, with certain other
relics of hers. Upon the left side of the quire, there stands a little door
by which you enter into a place called the Chapel of Saint Marie of the Bush,
where they show the place of the Bush in which God appeared unto Moses: And to
give grace unto their superstitions, there may none enter into that place, but
he must put off his hose and shoes. There is another place, where they say
God commanded Moses to bring up Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu with him, and the
seventy Elders; with many other superstitious chapels, which would be too
tedious and frivolous to recite. Not far from this there stands also a Mosko
of the Sarazens, full as fair and spacious as that of Saint Katherines, to
which there is adjoined a certain Turret: hither the Arabians and Sarazens do
also often come to visit Saint Katherine.

At the ascent of the Mount Horeb, near to the Monastery of saint Katherine,
there stands a fountain of very clear water, in the likeness of a bow,
made of stone, reaching from the one side of it to the other; and stands like
unto an arch or gate. A little above that, at the foot of Mount Horeb, is to be
seen the cave where Eliah rested when the Lord spoke unto him, 1 Reg. 19.
Something above that, the cliffe of the rock where Moses stood by Gods
appointment, when he past by, and he saw his back parts, Ex. 33. A little
beyond that, is the top of Mount Horeb, where is built a little chapel that
has an iron door, the keys of which are in the Monks custody of the Abbie
of saint Katherine. In this place they say Moses received the two tables of
stone, wherein the ten Commandments were written by the finger of God. Ex. 34.
There is none that enters into this Chapel but with great reverence, bare foot
and bare legged, and casting themselves upon the earth, kiss it. About
fifteen paces from this, they show the Cave wherein Moses fasted forty days
and forty nights, Exodus 24.34. A little above that, there is a Moske, to which
there daily resorts Arabians and Saracens in honor of Moses, whom they
reverence as a Prophet. Between these there lies a Well of cold wholesome
water, which is called Moses Well. Here seems in times past to have been
some Monastery; for there are diverse ruins of walks and buildings to be seen.
This mountain is round, and difficult to ascend: it is 7000 steps to the top,
and from thence the red sea and the arm thereof (where Pharaoh was drowned when
he followed the children of Israel) may easily be discerned.

Mount Sina is much higher than this, and lies two days journey from the Red
sea: Upon the top whereof are many rocks and great stones. From thence you may
see sundry places, as, a mountain lying in Thebaidaes, the great haven of the
red Sea, the Desert of Elim and Sur, with many others. The deserts round about
take the name from the height thereof; and are called, The deserts of Sina.

Of the Graves of Concupiscence.
THese Graves are 112 miles toward the South from Jerusalem, where the
children of Israel lusting after meat, were fed by the Lord with Quails; and
for their disobedience died miserably. It was also called Tabarah, which
signifies an inflammation; being derived from Baar, to burn, because here the
wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, and he struck the uttermost parts
of their Tents with fire from heaven, and consumed them, Numb. 11.

Of Hazeroth.
THis is a place in the desert, some 32 miles from Jerusalem toward the South,
the name thereof being derived from Chazer, which signifies, a Cave, about the
mouth whereof there grows long Grass: And therefore from hence Chazer is
also taken for Grass. Here Miriam the sister of Moses and Aaron was struck
with leprosy.

Of Rithmah.
RIthmah takes name from Juniper; for Rothaem in Hebrew signifies Juniper. It
is distant from Jerusalem 112 miles toward the Southeast. Here the children of
Israel pitched their Tents, Number. 33. and here it is very likely the Angel of
the Lord appeared to the prophet Eliah, and brought him meat and drink.

Of Rimmon Parez.
IN this place the children of Israel the 16 remove made their abiding, being
108 miles from Jerusalem toward the South-East. Here it is thought the
children of Israel found great store of Pomegranats, whereof division was made
amongst them. For Rimmon is as much as a grained apple or a Pomegranat; and
Parez, He has divided.

Of Libnah.
LIbnah is the 17 place where the children of Israel stayed, and was so called
of the abundance of Frankincence that was found there; for Libnah signifies
white Frankincense. This is 104 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest.

Of Rissa.
Here the children of Israel pitched their Tents, being about 100 miles from
Jerusalem toward the Southeast; it took the name from the fruitfulness and
abundance of flowers and herbs that grow there; and is derived from Rasa,
which signifies to make moist, for there were usually exceeding pleasant and
sweet dewes

Of Chehelah.
CHehelah was the nineteenth place where the children of Israel made their
abiding in the desert, being 92 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest, Number.
33. and signifies a Congregation or Church, being derived from Rahal, that is,
He has assembled. This was a type of the Church, where all the Elect and
faithful people of God travel through the wilderness of this wicked world.

Of Saphar.
SAphar is a mountain in the desert of Arabia Petraea, 88 miles from Jerusalem
toward the Southwest. This was the twentieth Remove; the name of the place
being so called partly of their tents, partly of the roundnesse of the
mountains.

Of Harada.
HArada was full of wild beasts, which struck the people into a mighty fear;
so called as being derived from Charada, which signifies terror or trembling.
Here the children of Israel stayed the 21 time, it being 80 miles from
Jerusalem toward the Southwest.

Of Thahath.
THis is a certain valley 68 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest, and is
derived from Tachath, which signifies a ceriain Plain or low place.

Of Maceheloth.
THis was the 22 abiding of the Israelites, being 72 miles from Jerusalem
toward the Southwest. Here a congregation of the tribes of Israel was called;
for Maccheloth signifies a congregation or meeting together. Sometimes it is
taken for the Church, being derived from Rahal, i. He assembleth together.

Of Tharah.
THis was a memorable place in the Wilderness, where the Israelites had a
breathing time: for now growing near to the borders of the land of Canaan,
after so many journies they began to rest themselves, because of the wars
they were shortly to undertake. And it is derived of Roah and Tarah, which
signifies a breathing time. Here was the 24 mansion of the Israelites.

Of Mithca.
HEre was the 25 mansion of the Israelites, being but 56 miles from Jerusalem
toward the Southwest, in the utmost borders of the land of Canaan, and no doubt
took the name from the delightful and pleasant taste of Grapes: For Mitka
signifies the same that Mithetk, that is to say, sweetness and pleasantness.

Of Cades Barnea.
CAdes Barnea a city of the Idumaeans (being derived of Kadas and Barah, that
is, A holy place) is forty miles from Jerusalem toward the South: from this
place Moses sent spies into the land of Canaan, who brought of the fruit of the
Land, but all of them discouraged the people, only Caleb: wherefore they
murmured, and the Lord was angry, and would not suffer them to enter into the
land of Promise: So turning their journey, they went to Exeongaber, 148 miles,
so that they traveled in the desert 40 years, before they could enter into
the land of Promise. Of this you may read, Genesis 14.16.20. Number. 13.27.33.34.
Deuteronomy. 1. Psalm. 29. Ezech. 47.

Of Chasmona.
IN this place the children of Israel set up their tents, a little before they
sent spies into the land of Canaan: it is not far from Cades Barnea toward the
South. For the twelve Spies were not sent from the City of Cades Barnea, but
from their Tents; and of this still distribution, or sending, (for one out of
every Tribe was chosen) it took the name. For Casmona signifies, a still
distribution, being derived of Chasca and Manah, he stilly distributed.

Of Moseroth.
MOseroth was the 27 mansion of the children of Israel in the wilderness, and
distant from Jerusalem 72 miles toward the South, where the Lord caused them
to return back for their murmuring, toward the South, that so they might
live just forty years in the wilderness, Number. 14.33. This place seems to
take the name thereof from Traditions, for there Moses repeated to the
Israelites the Law of the Lord: and for this cause their tents were called
Moseroth, which signifies Traditions, and is derived of Masar, that is, to
Preach.

Of Benei Iaacon.
THis was the 28 mansion of the Israelites, so called because there their tents
were fairly set up, with pleasant walks and places about them: for Benei
Iaaecon signifies a Building or fair walk; being derived of Bana and Akah,
that is, He has set up an house: and was 96 miles from Jerusalem Southward,
Number. 33.

Of Hor Gidgad.
AT this mountain the children of Israel stayed a while, because it was a
fertile and pleasant place, as Moses himself witnesses. It is 112 miles from
Jerusalem toward the South; being derived of Harar, a Mountain, and Glebam, a
Plough, Plin. l. 20 cp. 20.

Of Iotbatha.
THis was the 30 mansion of the Israelites in the wilderness, being 132 miles
from Jerusalem toward the South, and took the name from the pleasantness and
fertility of the wilderness; being derived of Iatab and Batha, A certain good
and pleasant wast or wilderness.

Of Arbona.
THis place being very discommodious and no whit profitable, the children of
Israel were constrained to remove their tents with great weeping and
lamentation: for Arbona being derived from Abar and Naha, signifies partly to
remove, and partly to weep.

Of Aezion Gaber.
THis was a town of the Idumaeans, near the red sea, 148 miles from Kades
Barnea, and 174 miles from Jerusalem toward the South. Here the Israelites set
up their tents, and here Solomon made his Navy which he sent to Ophir to fetch
gold, 1 Kings, 9. This city no doubt took the name of the strength and
multitude of trees, whereof these ships were built; for they were very fair
ships, and of excellent workmanship. Aezion Gaber signifies A strong tree;
being derived of Ez and Gaber, that is, A Tree of strength.

Of Zin-Kades.
THis was a great Wilderness lying between Ezion-Gaber and Kades-Barnea,
being 184 miles in length, abounding with thorns and high mountains. Upon the
North side thereof lay mount Seir, and Kades-Barnea, and toward the South the
red sea. It was called Paran and Zin, of the abundance of thorns that grew
there; for Zin, of Zanan, signifies a sharp thorn; Zinnim, full of thorns; and
Kadesh, Sanctity or holiness. Here Moses and Aaron having struck the rock
twice, at length it brought forth water: but for their murmuring and
incredulity God would not suffer them to go into the land of Canaan. This lay
120 miles from Jerusalem toward the South.

Of the mountain Hor.
HOr is a mountain of the Idumaeans, 88 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Southeast, and is derived of Harar, which signifies a great mountain: here
Aaron died. The King of the Canaanites which dwelt toward the South, in a town
called Arad, upon the borders of Iudaea and Arabia Petraea, hearing that Aaron
was dead, invaded the Jews with a great army, discomfited them, and took some
of them captives. But after, the Israelites to revenge this injury, took and
destroyed diverse cities which belonged to the Canaanites, and put the citisens
to the sword. This country is called Chormah, which signifies a curse or
desolation.

Of Zalmona.
THis was a place in the desert of Zin-Kades, where the Israelites pitched their
tents, being 80 miles from Jerusalem to the Southeast; and took the name from
shades or little sheds under which the Israelites dwelt: for Zalmona seems a
compound of Zel and Mun, which signifies a shady place, and seems to have
affinity with Manah, to distribute here and there.

Of Phunon.
THis was a city of the Idumaeans, situated in the wilderness of Arabia
Petraea, 64 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southeast; and takes the name from
a fair and flourishing city. For Panan in Hebrew signifies an high pinnacle,
from whence one might see all parts of the world. Here Moses set up the brazen
Serpent.

Of Oboth.
THis was the 37 mansion of the Israelites in the wilderness, and was 56 miles
from Jerusalem toward the Southeast, and signifies a serpent called Python.
Here the Arabians received an answer from the Devil by way of conjuration.

Of Igim.
THis was the 38 Mansion of the Israelites; so called because of the multitude
which were assembled near to a mountain called Abarim, 52 miles from Jerusalem
toward the Southeast; for Igim signifies a Congregation.

Of Dibon Gad.
THis was the 39 station of the Israelites in the desert, being 52 miles from
Jerusalem toward the Southeast, near to the flood Zared, bordering upon the
Idumaeans and Moabites, running from thence into the red sea, and as it seems
takes name from descending into a strong place.

Of Almon Diblathaim.
THis place stands beyond the red sea, some 40 miles from Jerusalem toward the
East; and takes name from a Frail of dried figs; from Alam signifies, he
has hidden; and Debeleth, A Frail of dried figs. Here was the 40 mansion of
the Israelites, and lay close by the river Arnon, Number. 21. and 23.

Of the mountains Abarim.
THese mountains lay 32 miles from Jerusalem toward the East, and takes the
name from Passing along; for Abar is as much to say as He went along. Between
these mountains and the lake Asphaltites, near to the Eastern river of the
Dead sea, the Moabites inhabited.

Of Iahza.
THis was a city of the Levits the sons of Merar, in the Tribe of Benjamin, 24
miles from Jerusalem Eastward, Ios. 21. here Moses overcame the King of the
Ammonites, and put them to death, Number. 21.

Of Chezbon.
THis was the Metropolis of Sehon King of the Ammorites, who held the country
beyond Jordan; and because he would not suffer the children of Israel to pass
through his Dominions, therefore Moses made war upon him, put him to death,
and gave all his country to the tribes of Reuben and Gad. This was a fair
town, and after fell to the Levits, Number. 21.33. Deuteronomy. 1.2. etc. and took its
name from Cheschebon, which signifies An artificial understanding: for
Chaschaf is as much as excogitavit, that is, he has found out; and Cheschaef
is, An artificial and ingenious Work.

Of Iaezir.
IAezir was a city of the Priests in the Tribe of Gad, 36 miles from Jerusalem
toward the East, and in Ieroms time was a smal^ village, and signifies, The
Lord is my help; being derived of Iah, that is, The Lord God; and Ezaer, The
helper.

Of Edrie.
THis is a city in the country of Gilead, beyond Jordan and the Galilean sea,
32 miles from Jerusalem South-Eastward near the lake of Gaderin; where Og the
King of Basan was overcome by Moses; and after fell to the Tribe of Manasses,
Number. 21. Ios. 13. Deuteronomy. 13. S. Ierom says, That in his time this town wa^
called Adar. Og signifies a Cook, or one that baketh bread upon coals.
Aedriae signifies an heap of bright clouds; being deriue^ of Adar and Hi, that
is, a clear heap.

Of Astoroth.
THis was a metropolitan City of Basan, four miles distan^ from Edri, and 56
from Jerusalem toward the Southeast. I^ stood beyond Jordan, and belonged to
the half tribe of Manasses of which you may read before in the travels of Lot.

Of Pisgah.
THis was a high mountain in the plain of the Moabites, against Jericho, 240
miles from Jerusalem Eastward. It took the name from the cities Pisgah and
Nebo, and therefore is called sometimes Pisgah, sometimes Nebo. Here Moses died.
Nebo signifies a city of the Prophets: Pisgah, The top of a hill.

The Travels of the Prophet Balaam.
THere are many which think that this Prophet Balaam was of the posterity of
Nahor the brother of Abraham, and an inhabitant of the city of Charan in
Mesopotamia, Genesis 11. Josephus says he dwelt near to Euphrates: and S. Ierom,
in a City called Phatura, of which there is mention, Number. 22. and signifies an
obscure Prophet, or oracle which interprets. For Pathar with the Hebrews, is
the same that He has interpreted, is with us.

Wherefore this Prophet traveled from Pithora or Phatura in Mesopotamia, to
Abel or the plain of Vines, where his Ass spoke, Number. 22. which is 400 miles.

From thence he went to the land of the Moabites, 40 miles; where in the mount
of Peor he blessed the children of Israel.

So all the travels of this Prophet were 440 miles.

Of the Plain of the Vines.
THere is often mention of this place in the Scripture; and for the fertility
of the country, and plenty of sweet Wines, there was a beautiful city built,
called Abel, of the Vines; some 56 miles from Jerusalem South-Eastward; and was
placed just in the way as they went from Mesopotamia into the country of the
Moabites. Whereby it appears, that near to this place the Ass spoke to
Balaam, Numb. 22. In S. Ieroms time there was found a little Village so called,
where there was great plenty of Vines. Here Ieptha overcame the Ammorites, and
made a great slaughter, Iud. 11.

The Travels of that noble Captain IOSHVAH.
IOSHVAH and Caleb traveled with Moses from Raemsis out of Egypt through the
Red sea, and came to Kades-Barnea, 26 miles.

From Cades-Barnea they were sent forth with other Spie^ to the land of Canaan,
Number. 13. and went out of the wilderness^ of Zin and Paran, and came to the
town of Rechob in Galile^ 140 miles.

From thence they went to the town of Hamath in Syria which was after called
Antiochia, 188 miles.

From Hamath or Antiochia they returned again to Hebron 304 miles, where upon
the side of the river Escol they cut off^ bunch of grapes, with the stalk,
which was as much as both the^ could bear upon their shoulders, Number. 13.

From Hebron they returned again to Kades-Barnea, twent^ miles. There all the
people murmured against Moses, Number. 1^ Hereby it is to be seen, that the
Spies in forty days trauelle^ 648 miles in the land of Canaan, that is, every
day 16 miles and little more.

After that, Ioshuah and Caleb traveled with Moses and the chi^dren of Israel
to Ezeon-Gabir, and from thence to the town o^ Iahza, 464 miles.

From Iahza they past through two kingdoms to mount Lib^nus, 80 miles.

From mount Libanus they returned again into the Land o^ Sittim, that lay by
the hill Pisgah in the field of the Moabite^ 80 miles.

From the land of Sittim they past through the river of Iord^^ and came to
Gilgal, 6 miles, where Ioshuah pitched his Camp, Number. 21. Ios. 4.5.

From Gilgal he went to Jericho, 2 miles: there he assailed the town with the
sound of basins, and won it, Ios. 6.

From Jericho he went to Ai, being 4 miles, and took and burnt the whole town,
Ios. 7.8.

From Ai he returned to Gilgal, 4 miles, and there upon the hill of Ebal he
built an altar unto the Lord, and there were the blessings and cursings
pronounced, Ios. 8. Deuteronomy. 27.

From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, twelve miles. There the Sun stood still
during the battle against the three Kings, Ioshuah 10.

From Gibeon he went to Ajalon, 2 miles, here the Moon stood still, Ios. 10.

From Ajalon he went to Aseka, 4 miles: there it hailed upon the enemies that
fled before Israel, Ios. 10.

From Aseka Ioshuah returned again into the Camp at Gilgal, 20 miles, Ios. 10.

From Gilgal he went to Makeda, where he hanged the five Kings, Ios. 10.

From Makeda he went to Libna, 2 miles, and took the town, Ios. 10.

From Libna he went to Lachis, 8 miles.

From Lachis he went to Eglon, 8 miles.

From Eglon he went to Hebron, which is sixteen miles, Ioshuah 10.

From Hebron he went to Debir, a mile, Ios. 10.

After that, Ioshuah with one continued War won all that part of Iudaea which
lay toward the South, bordering Eastward upon the Dead Sea, Southward upon
Cades-Barnea, Westward upon Asdod and Gaza, and Northward upon Gibeon and
Gilgal: This circuit of land contains about one hundred fifty and six miles.

From Gilgal Ioshuah went out with his army about 22 miles, to the river of
Merom, where he slew the rest of the Kings of the Canaanites in a memorable
battle, Ios. 11.

From the river of Merom Ioshuah chased his enemies and followed them to Sidon,
which was 612 miles, Ios. 11.

From Sidon he went again to Hazor, 32 miles, which town he burnt, Ios. 11.

After that, Ioshuah at one time won all the towns in the Holy land which lay
Northward in the lands of Samaria and Galilea, from Gibeon to mount Libanus,
and from the river of Jordan to the great sea, called Mare Mediterranean; which
countries in circuit contain 280 miles.

After that, Ioshuah returned again to his camp at Gilgal, which lay 72 miles
from the town of Hazor, where he made a division of the land amongst the
children of Israel, Ios. 14, 15.

From Gilgal he went to Shilo, 12 miles, where he made an end of dividing the
land, Ios. 18.

From Shilo he went to Timnah Sera, eight miles, and there he dwelt; for the
children of Israel gave him that town for his own inheritance, Ios. 19.

From Timnah Sera, Ioshuah not long before he died came to Sichem, forty
miles. There he assembled all the tribes of Israel, Ios. 24.

From Sichem he returned again to Timnah Sera, 40 miles, where he died and was
buried, Ios. 24.

So all the travels of Prince Ioshuah were 2392 miles.

The description of the several towns and places to which Ioshuah traveled.
Of Rechob.
THis was a city of the Levits in the tribe of Ashur, 100 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North, Number. 13. and signifies a broad street, being derived from
Radhab, that is, To extend out in length.

Of Haemah or Chaemah.
THis was a city of the Levits in the Tribe of Nepthaly, and was 100 miles from
Jerusalem, upon the utmost bounds of the holy land, at the foot of Antilibanus,
Number. 11.34. Ios. 19. derived from Chamah, that is, furious, or burning with
anger.

Of Gilgal.
THis was a town between Jordan and the city Jericho, 12 miles from Jerusalem
Southeastward; where the children of Israel having past the river of Jordan,
first made war upon all the Nations of the land of Canaan. Here they solemnised
the first paschal Lamb. After they came into this land, Manna ceased, because
they then ate the fruits of the country. Here Ioshuah taking 12 stones out of
Jordan, pitched them up for a memorial. Here the tabernacle of God stayed for a
time, which was the reason that afterward the Israelites committed idolatry in
this place, Ios. 4.5. Hos. 2.4.9. Amos 5. Near to this place, Ehud the third
Judge of the Children of Israel received gifts of them to carry to Eglon King
of the Moabites dwelling at Jericho, where he killed him with a knife. Here
Saul was the second time confirmed King of Israel, 2 Samuel 10. and as it seems
takes name of Roundnesse, Ioshuah at this time building his tent in a circular
fashion: for Galal signifies a round wheel or Tent, compassed about with
Ditches and bulwarks.

Of Jericho.
THis is a city in the tribe of Benjamin, two miles from Jordan and six from
Jerusalem Southeastward. Ioshuah overcame this with the sound of horns or
trumpets, Ios. 26. Heb. 11. Here Christ restored the blind man to sight, Mat.
6. converted Zachaeus Luke 19. and was called the city of Palms, by reason of
the great plenty of Palms that grew there. You may read more of this
hereafter.

Of Hai or Ai.
HAi is a Town in the tribe of Benjamin near to Bethel, toward the East,
where Abraham dwelt, Genesis 12. Ioshuah won this town, Ios. 7.8. it was so
called of a Prophet that dwelt there, and signifies, To be placed upon a
heap: for Ai signifies A heap, lying partly equally, partly unequally. The
ruins of this town were scarce to be found in S. Ieroms time.

Of Gibeon.
THis was a Metropolitan city in the Tribe of Benjamin, the inhabitants whereof
became petitioners to Ioshuah for peace Ios. 9.10.18. 2 Samuel 21. Afterward it
was given to the Priests. It is derived of Gibeah or Gibeon, which signifies a
curled hill. It was situated on a mountain four miles from Jerusalem toward
the North. Here stood the tabernacle of the Covenant, and the brazen Altar.
Here Saul was first made King of Israel. Here he put the sons of Abimilech the
priest to death, 1 Samuel 12. Here Ioshuah overcame the five Kings of the
Ammorites. Here the Sun stood still. Of this you may read more hereafter.

Of Ajalon.
THis was a city of the Priests in the tribe of Dan, four miles from Jerusalem
toward the Southeast, and takes the name from a Hind; for Aialah signifies
an Hind, a beast very strong and swift. Here the Moon stood still. Here
Jonathan tasted honey, contrary to his fathers command, for which he was judged
to die, 1 Samuel 14.

Of Azeka.
AZeka was a city of the Ammorits in the tribe of Judah, eight miles from
Jerusalem toward the West, near to Odullam, where David killed Goliath; and as
it seems takes the name from Munition, or a place compassed about with an
hedge; being derived from Itsek, he hedged about. This was a fair city in
Saint Ieroms time.

Of the valley of Achor.
THis valley is distant from Jerusalem 12 miles, and not far from Jericho and
Gilgall toward the North, taking name (as it seems) of Achon that Thief
mentioned in Ioshuah, who was stoned there; from whence it is called Achor,
which signifinifieth Trouble, because of the terrible words that Ioshuah spoke
unto him there. You may read of this, Hos. 2. Esaias 25. Ios. 11.15.

Of Makedah.
BEtween Elewtheropolin and Bethlehem this town stood, being in the tribe of
Judah, some 8 miles from Jerusalem, toward the West, and takes the name of a
flower that hangs down the head, being derived of Kadad, which signifies to
hang down. Here Ioshuah hanged the five kings of the Ammorites, which he had
formerly conquered, Ios. 10.

Of Libna.
LIbna is a city belonging to the Levites in the tribe of Judah, and is
situated between Eglon and Makeda, ten miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northwest, where the 14 King that Ioshuah conquered kept his court; and takes
the name from the abundance of frankincense that is found there: for Libonah
signifies white frankincense. Zenacharib besieged this city. Some say it
takes the name from the Hebrew Laba, which signifies White Bricks; because
there is found much matter whereof such kind of bricks are made.

Of Lachis.
LAchis is a city in the tribe of Judah, and lies between Eleutheropolin and
Hebron, 20 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest, and 2 miles from Rechila
toward the North, Ios. 15. 2 Chr. 11. and takes the name from Walking; being
derived from Ialach, which signifies, He has walked. Ioshuah took the King
of this City and put him to death: and Zenacharib King of the Assyrians
besieged it, but to little purpose.

Of Eglon.
EGlon was a city in the tribe of Judah, 12 miles from Jerusalem Southward.
Ioshuah took the king of this city and hanged him. It takes the name from
Aecael, signifying a Calfe.

Of Debir.
DEbir was a city of the Levites, 22 miles from Jerusalem toward the South,
and almost half a mile from Hebron toward the Northwest. Athniel the brother
of Caleb won this town, wherefore he gave him his daughter Archsa to wife.
Formerly it was called Kiriath-Sepher, i. A city of Scribes and Students; for
it was consecrated to learning. From hence it was called Debir, which signifies
an oracle, or an holy altar; because the Lord there by his priests that were
assigned for that purpose, did foretell and prophecy of things to come: being
derived from Debar, that is, He has spoken.

Of Asdod or Azotes.
THis was a city of the Philistines, situated upon the shore of the
Mediterranean sea, in the tribe of Dan, and 22 miles from Jerusalem toward the
West. This town was conquered by Ioshuah, Ios. 11. 1 Reg. 5. it was also taken
by Psamniticus King of Egypt, in Manasses time, as Herodotus says, it is now a
little town, and is called Azotus. In times past it was a fair city, and took
name from the fire of love; being derived of Esh, which signifies a fire: and
Dod, beloved.

Of Gaza.
GAza was a fair city of the Philistims, upon the shore of the red sea, some
24 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest, and signifies a strong town,
being derived from Gazez, To confirm. Sampson being enclosed within this
town, took away the gates and bars thereof, and laid them at the foot of
mount Hebron, Judge. 16.

Of the river Merom.
THis was a lake not far from Dotham, some 4 miles from Tiberias Westward, and
44 miles from Jerusalem toward the North; and is so called from the deepnesse
of it, being derived of Rom, which signifies it was high, and Marab, bitter;
whence Merom, a high bitter water. Here Ioshuah overthrew the Kings of the
Canaanites, Ios. 11.

Of Sidon.
SIdon takes the name of Zod, which signifies, He has hunted, and was a
famous mart town in Phoenicea, being a place situated at the foot of that high
hill Antelibanus, near to the shore of the Mediterranean, 16 miles from
Jerusalem Northward.

Of Libanus.
THis is a mountain of an extraordinary height, some 104 miles from Jerusalem
Northward, looking into Syria and Phoenicia. From thence the river Jordan
takes the beginning, being so called of two springs or wels, that is, Ior, and
Dan, rising from the bottom of this hill. It seems to take the name from the
abundance of flowers and variety of sweet smells or dewes that are there; and
also of frankincense or gum Olibanum found upon it: it is a very fruitful
place, full of springs and wholesome herbs, so that no serpent will abide in it:
it is divided into two parts, the one lies near Sidon Westward, called
Antelibanus; the other toward Damascus upon the East, and is only called
Libanus. It is so high that it serves for a sea mark, and so much the more
remarkable, for that (as some say) snow lies continually upon the top of it,
so that a far off it seems white.

Of the river Jordan.
Jordan is a pleasant sweet river watering the holy land (whereof you may read
before.) It is named Jorden at Caesarea Philippi, a little from the foot of
Antelibanus, 104 miles from Jerusalem Northward: it passes through the lake
Samachoniten, and dividing it into two equal parts; from thence running through
a great part of Galilee, it falls into the sea Tyberias, and there as it were
divides it into two parts, it waters that part of Iudaea called Samaria; and
about Easter, which is the beginning of that harvest, it flows over the
banks, and fructifies many countries lying near it: at length it falls into
the lake Asphaltites and there ends, about 14 miles from Jerusalem Eastward.
So that from the first beginning of this River, to the end of it, is 92 miles.
It is called Palah by the Hebrews, which signifies swift and hidden; because
it rises from a certain well or pit called Phiala, which is always full of
water, but from whence it springs is unknown. Ioshuah about Easter passed
upon dry ground through this river, even then when it was fullest of water,
Ios. 3. So did Eliah and Elisha, 2 Reg. Here Naaman the leper washed himself, 2
Reg. 5 Here Christ was baptized by S. John Baptist, Mat. 3. Luke 3.

Of Hazor.
THis was a town in the upper Galilee, belonging to the tribe of Nepthali: it
was the chief Hold and city of the king of the Canaanites, being distant from
Jerusalem 80 miles toward the North. This Ioshuah destroyed with fire and
sword. Deborah also the Prophetess besieged it, took it, and put Iabin the
King thereof to death. In times past it was a very strong city, as the ruins
thereof testify.

Of Siloh.
SIloh the city and house of God, was situate on a high mountain in the tribe
of Ephraim, 4 miles and somewhat better from Jerusalem toward the North. Here
the Arc of the Covenant continued from the time that the Israelites first
entered into the land of Canaan, till Eli the Priest fetched it thence; in whose
time it was taken by the Philistims, and he for very grief therefore fell down
and brake his neck against a stone, 1 Samuel 4. The inhabitants hereabouts show
the ruins of a certain sepulcher standing upon the top of this mount, where
they say Samuel was buried: but that cannot be true, for he was buried at
Ramath, which now is called Arimathea. Therefore it seems to be either the
ruins of Elies sepulcher, who died miserably in that place; or else of the
House of the Lord, which many years past stood there. Schiloh signifies Happy
and peaceable, being derived from Schalah, that is, to live at ease and in
peace.

Of Timnah.
Of this you may read in the Travels of IVDAH.

The type and mystery of IOSHVAH.
IOshuah and Jesus is all one in signification, that is, Savor, or a Defender;
and did typically represent our Savior Christ; that as this Ioshuah brought the
children of Israel through Jordan into the land of Canaan, so Jesus Christ the
true Ioshuah and Savior of the world; through that Jordan of Baptism brings
us into that place of Promise, Eternal life.

Where the one and thirty Kings dwelt, overcome and slain by IOSHVAH, Ios. 10.
AS the Prophet Moses won all the land upon the one side of Jordan, so Ioshuah
won all the Country on the other, from the town of Baalgadan, beginning at
mount Libanus, not far from Mount Hebron, till you come to the town of
Caesarea Philippi, and to the hill Seir, where sometime Esau dwelt: all which is
160 miles long, and 28 or 32 miles broad.

The first King that Ioshuah overcame, dwelt in Jericho.

The second King held his court in Ai.

The third King dwelt in Jerusalem, and was called Adoni-Zebec, that is, a Lord
of Righteousness. This King Ioshuah hanged at Makeda, Ios. 10.

The fourth King, called Hoham, dwelt at Hebron, and was likewise hanged at
Makeda, Ios. 10.

The fifth King, called Percam, dwelt at Iarmouth in the tribe of Judah, 20 miles
from Jerusalem Westward.

The 6 King, called Iaphia, dwelt at Lachis, 2 miles from Iarmouth Southward.
He was also hanged at Makeda, Ios. 10.

The seventh King dwelt at Eglon, called Debir, and was also hanged at Makeda.

The 8 King was called Horam, and held his princely seat in the tribe of Dan,
in the town of Gezer, 16 miles from Jerusalem westward: whom Ioshuah slew with
all his men, Ios. 10.

The ninth King dwelt at Debir.

The tenth King held his court at Gerar in the tribe of Judah, 14 miles from
Jerusalem Westward.

The 11 King dwelt at Harma in the Tribe of Judah, which is upon the borders of
Arabia deserta not far from Ziclag, 40 miles from Jerusalem Southwestward: this
town in times past was called Zephal, that is, a watchtower, because it stood
upon a hill. But when the children of Judah had overthrown the whole army of
the Canaanites, they called it Haram, a Curse, Iud. 1.

The 12 King dwelt at Arat, 22 miles from Jerusalem Southward, which was a
town of the Ammorites, and took the name from the Asses that were in great
troops within the woods thereabout. It lay in the tribe of Judah.

The 13 King dwelt at Libnah in the tribe of Judah.

The 14 King dwelt at Odullam.

The 15 King dwelt at Makeda. In this town Ioshuah hanged five Kings, Ios. 10.

The 16 King dwelt at Bethel.

The 17 King dwelt at Tapnah, not far from Jordan and Jericho, 12 miles from
Jerusalem Northeastward.

The 18 King dwelt at Hepher, 6 miles from Jerusalem Northward; part of this
town was allotted to the tribe of Zabulon. Jonas the Prophet was borne in this
town, 2 Reg. 14. and is 4 miles distant from the town of Nazareth Southward.

The 19 King dwelt at Apheck, 44 miles from Jerusalem Northward, and 2 miles
from Iesreel. There also the Ark of the Lord was taken, and there also the
sons of Eli the high priest were slain, 1 Samuel 4. This town was in the half
tribe of Manasses.

The 20 King dwelt at Lazaron, 18 miles and a half from Jerusalem
Northwestward, not far from Ioppen and Lidda.

The 21 king dwelt at Nadan, 14 miles from Jerusalem Northwestward.

The 22 King dwelt at Hazor.

The 23 King dwelt at Simron, which town was allotted to the tribe of Zabulon,
Ioshuah 14. It lies sixty eight miles from Jerusalem Northward, not far from
the town of Nazareth in Galilee.

The 24 king dwelt at Achsap, 88 miles from Jerusalem Northward; which town was
allotted to the tribe of Aser.

The 25 King dwelt at Tanaach, 44 miles from Jerusalem: this town belonged to
the Levits, and stood in the tribe of Manasses, 6 miles from Iesreel Southward,
Ios. 21.

The 26 King dwelt at Megiddo, 44 miles from Jerusalem Northward, scarce 4
miles from Taanach. By this town of Megiddo Josias King of Judah was ouerthrown
by Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, 2 Reg. 23. In the travels of Josiah King of
Judah I will speak of this town more at large.

The 27 King dwelt at Kades, Ios. 19.21.

The 28 King dwelt at Iaknedam, 27 miles from Jerusalem Northward, being upon
the Mediterranean sea. This town was allotted to the Tribe of Zabulon, and
given to the Levits, Ios. 21.

The 29 King dwelt at Naphet Dor, which town lay upon the sea coast between
the hill Carmel and the town of Cesarea Stratonis, 48 miles from Jerusalem
Northward.

The 30 King dwelt at Gilgal, between Jericho and the River Jordan, and was the
first King that Iosuah overcame and slew al his host.

The 31 King dwelt at Thirtza, in the Tribe of Manasses, 24 miles from
Jerusalem. In this town Jeroboam, and after him all the Kings of Israel kept
their courts, before Samaria was built.

THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The Travels of Caleb and Athniel.
CAleb and Athniel with all the Children of Judah, went from Judah to Beseck, 44
miles, where they took King Adoni-Beseck prisoner, and cut off his fingers and
toes, Judge. 1.

From Beseck they went to Jerusalem, 44 miles, which they took by force and
burnt it, Judge. 1.

From Jerusalem they went to Hebron, 22 miles, which they took, and slew the
Giants that inhabited therein, Judge. 1.

Not far from Hebron lay the town of Debir, which Athniel won, and therefore
Caleb gave him his daughter Achsa for his wife Judge. 1.

From Debir they went to Zephat, 16 miles, which town they won, Judge. 1.

From Zephat they went to Gaza, 4 miles.

From Gaza they went to Ascalon, 6 miles, Judge. 1.

From Ascalon the went to Hebron, 14 miles.

From Hebron they went back again to Debir, where Athniel dwelt, 12 miles.

So all the travels of Caleb and Athniel were 132 miles.

The Description of the Towns and places to which they traveled.
Of Beseck.
BEseck was a metropolitan city of the Canaanites, near to the water Merom,
where Adoni-Beseck kept his Court, 44 miles from Jerusalem toward the North,
and took the name of Desaeck, or Beseck, which signifies lightning. Of this
King you may read, Judge. 1.

Of Zephah.
THis was a town upon the borders of the tribes of Judah and Simeon, not far
from Siclag, Ios. 15. It takes the name from Zaphah, which signifies a
watchtower: and was also called by the sons of Judah, (who destroyed all the
country) Chorma, which signifies a Curse, or a desolat place. To the citisens
hereof David sent gifts, 1 Samuel 36.

Of Gaza.
OF this town you may read more hereafter in the Travels of the Arc of the
Covenant.

The typical signification of CALEB.
CALEB signifies An hearty man, or, A man after Gods own heart, loving his
Neighbor with all his heart. For Col is as much as Omnis, which signifies All;
and Cala, He forgiueth all; and Leb or Lebbah signifies an Heart, the seat
and fountain of all life. So that Caleb seems to take his name from a singular
hearty affection, whereby he forgiueth his neighbor. For as this man being of
a noble resolution and courage, in the 29 year of his age won Hebron a strong
City, and put to death the three sons of Anak, terrible Giants: so Christ the
Son of God, that so loved the world that he gave himself for it, with a more
than humane resolution conquered hell, and those three mighty Giants incident
unto it, the sons of Satan, Sin, the World, and Death.

Of Athniel.
IN the year of the World 1503, and before Christ, 2565, Ioshuah died: after
whose death, Caleb and Athniel judged Israel; about which time the Israelites
committed idolatry, and worshipped Baal and Asteroth: wherefore the Lord
suffered them to fall into the hands of Chushan Rishathaim King of Mesopotamia.
But because of their oppression they cried unto the Lord, and he stirred up
Othniel the younger brother of Caleb, who in the year of the world 2512
conquered Chushan, delivered the people, and governed Israel 40 years, Judge. 3.
Athniel or Othniel signifies the god of time, being derived of Aeth, that is,
an Age: and is a Type of Christ, who is the God of time; and in his due time
conquered the world, and Satan the prince thereof, thereby delivering the
poor afflicted members of his Church out of his miserable servitude and
bondage: for which cause God has made him judge over it, and given him fell
power and authority to rule and govern it.

The Travels of Ehud the third Judge of Israel.
EHud was the son of Gira of the Tribe of Judah, and dwelt in the City of
Jericho or of the Palms. He was a valiant and resolute man, lame of his right
hand, Judge. 3. and to the judgment of man not fit to be a Captain, being so
infirm. Yet it happened that this man growing in favor with Eglon King of the
Moabites, who at this time kept his Court in Jericho (which town he had but
eighteen years before conquered) took opportunity by the Children of
Isreal's coming to Gilgal (for they came thither to offer to the Idol, and to
bring gifts of the king) to present these presents unto him; and because of his
former familiarity, was admitted to speak in private with him in his summer
parlour; where as he was talking with him, he thrust him into the belly with a
short knife: and locking the door he fled back to Seirah, and told the children
of Israel what he had done. From thence they presently went to Ephraim, there
blew the trumpet, and set upon the Moabits and put them to the sword, Judge. 3.

The Travels of Ehud.
EHud went from Jericho to Gilgal, 2 miles.

From Gilgal he went to Jericho, 2 miles.

From Jericho he went to mount Ephraim, 6 miles.

From Mount Ephraim he went to Jorden, 4 miles, where he overthrew 10000
Moabites.

So all the travels of Ehud were 14 miles.

Of Mount Ephraim.
THis mountain is about 8 miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and extends
it self in longitude to the city near the Mediterranean sea, called Ioppa,
which is distant from Jerusalem 20 miles toward the Northwest.

The Travels of the sons of Hobab the Kenite.
THe sons of Hobab the Kenite ( Moses brother in law) were from Jericho to Arad
a City in the tribe of Judah, situated in the desert toward the South, Number. 10.
Judge. 1. 44 miles.

Of Arad.
ARad is a city in the Tribe of Judah, 22 miles from Jerusalem toward the
South, taking the name of a multitude of asses that were found thereabouts in
the desert, and is derived from Arod, which signifies a wild Ass, a rude
creature.

The Travels of Iael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, who killed Sisera the
Captain.
FRom Arad she and her husband went to the plain of Zaaenaim, and dwelt
there, near to a Town called Kades, a Town of refuge of the Levites, in the
Tribe of Nephthali, 166 miles, there she killed Sisera. This town lies 92
miles from Jerusalem toward the North.

Of Deborah and Barak.
DEborah was the wife of Lapidoth, and dwelt under a palm tree between Bethel
and Ramath, in mount Ephraim, eight miles from Jerusalem toward the North: the
inhabitants thereabouts show this tree even to this day. Barak the son of
Abineam a noble Captain, lived in her time at Kades, a city of refuge
belonging to the Levites. She succeeded Ehud, in An. man. 2632, and before
Christ, 1336, years.

The Travels of Deborah and Barak.
BArak went first from Kades Naphtaly to the Palm tree, where Deborah dwelt,
which are 84 miles,

From thence he went with Deborah back again to Kades, which are 84 miles.

From Kades with 10000 men, they went to the hill Thabor, 36 miles. Here (as
Josephus writes, lib. antiq. 4.) there fell such a shoure of rain and hail
upon the enemies of the Israelites, that through the extreme violence thereof,
they were dispersed: and Sisera their captain constrained to leave his
chariot, and to save himself by flight, never staying till he came to the
Tabernacle of Iael, the wife of Hebar the Kenite, situated in the valley of
Zaaenaim, 36 miles from the foot of the mountain Thabor: where being asleep,
by reason of his great journey, Iael struck a nail into the temple of his
head, so he died.

From thench Barak pursued the enemies with great slaughter, to Haraseth of the
Gentiles, a City in the upper Galile, near to the lake of Samachoniten, 28
miles. This city is 80 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, Joseph. Ant.
lib. 5.

From Haraseth, he went to the plain of Zaaenaim, where he found Sisera slain
in the tabernacle of Iael, as Deborah the prophetess had told him.

From thence Barak with all his army went to Hazor, where Iabin king of the
Canaanites kept his court, and of a sudden conquered the city, and put to
death all the inhabitants, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 5.

Of Thabor.
THabor is a round and high hill, situated upon the borders of the tribes of
Issacher and Zabulon, 56 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and extends
it self to the river Kison toward the South, and takes the name of light or
a pure air, being derived of Bo, To go and come; Tebuah, To bring forth
fruit, and To give light. For this mountain Thabor, by reason of the purity
of the air, is wonderful fertile and fruitful: There was also a town at the
foot of it called by the same name. Here the king^ of the Midianites, Zeba and
Zalmuna were slain by Gideon.

Of Hazor.
THis is a great city in the tribe of Nepthali, 80 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North, which Ioshuah destroyed with fire and sword; so did Barak
also: The ruins of this city is to be seen to this day.

The Mystery of Deborah.
THe word Deborah signifies, a Be, and is a memorable type of the Church. For
as a Be in all her actions sounds pleasantly; so the members of Gods Church
in all their actions sing and sound forth the praises of God, or by continual
prayers implore his aid and assistants; with the Be sucking from the flowers
of the holy Scriptures, the sweet and acceptable doctrine of faith, by which
the hope of everlasting life is strengthened in us, with the sting of Gods word
repulsing all vain delusions and idle imaginations, (the temptations of the
Devil) and those waspish affections of cruel and wicked men; according to that
of Ecclesiasticus, The Be is but small, yet brings forth most pleasant
fruit, and presents unto man many memorable instructions. And as Plato says,
The King of Bees, although without a sting, yet rules and governs his
Commonwealth with great severity and justice. So Christ the head of the
Church, though he be a delectable Savior of souls, and without any sting of
bitterness, yet does he rule and govern it with singular justice and
sincerity.

Of Barak.
AFter Deborah was appointed Judge of Israel, she ordained Barak for her
chief Commander or Captain. He takes his name from Thunder and Lightning;
typically representing the glory of Christ Jesus, as chief Captain of the
Church, who with the thunder of the Law, and the bright shining glory of the
Gospel, destroyed the enemies thereof; and by the hosts of Angels and Saints
at the end of the World, will cast them down with thunder and lightning into
that bottomless pit, there to remain for ever.

Of the travels GIDEON.
DEborah being dead, Zaeba and Zalmuna (Kings of the Medianites) cruelly
invaded the Land of Iudaea; but the Lord taking compassion upon his People,
sent them a helper, one GIDEON the son of Ioas, of the family of Abiezer, who
was borne at Ophra or Ephron, a City in the Tribe of Manasses, not far from
Mahanaim on the East side of Jordan, some four and forty miles from Jerusalem
toward the North-East; and signifies, a Rooter out; from GADA, That is, He
has rooted out. This man at the appointment of the Lord, took upon him the
charge of the people, and at Ophra, which signifies, Dust, he destroyed the
Idol Baal, pitching up in that place an Alter to the Lord: wherefore he was
after called Ieru-Baal, taking that name from Revenge, because he had destroyed
the Idol. He began to rule in Israel in the year of the World, 2672, and
before Christ 1296.

From Ophra Gideon went to Harad, which stands in the half Tribe of
Manasseth, where he blew the Trumpet. From this place he sent back 22000 of his
army, because the Lord had so appointed. But the Midianites hearing of this
preparation, provided a great host, and pitched in the valley of the hill
Moreh: so Gideon taking only 300 with him, went over Jordan, and came to the
town of Iesrael, (for Josephus says) 16 miles from Harod, where he gave the
Midianites a wonderful overthrow, Judge. 7. he also took there two princes,
Oreb and Zeb, and returned to the river Jordan, where he put them to death.

From thence he went to Succoth with his army in expectation to have refreshed
themselves, but the inhabitants shut him out of the town, and gave him many
despightfull words. This town lay close by Jordan, and here Jacob sometime
pitched his Tent.

From thence he went to Penuel, which is two miles; there also they used him
unkindly and gave him bad language.

From thence he went to Nobach with his army, which is two miles.

From thence he went to Iagbetha, which is 4 miles, where he conquered Zaeba
and Zalmuna, Kings of the Midianites, who thinking themselves secure, made no
preparation for war, till they were besieged. This was a memorable battle,
and here the two Kings were put to death.

From thence he followed the enemy with a great slaughter to Carkor which is
four miles.

From thence he went back to Succoth, which is 8 miles: here he put the
inhabitants of this Town to the sword, and all the Elders and Princes he tore
to pieces with thorns, because they had formerly denied him entrance into the
city.

From thence he went to the Castle of Penuel, which is two miles, and utterly
destroyed it, even to the ground, and put all the inhabitants to death because
of their mocks.

From thence he went to Ophra, four miles, where gathering together all the
gold which he had taken from the Midianites, he made a rich Ephod, Judge. 8.

From Ophra he went to Sichem, where his son Abimalech was borne, which is
10 miles.

From thence he returned back to Ophra, which is ten miles, and there he died,
after he had judged Israel 10 years.

So all the travels of Gedion were 82 miles.

The Description of the Towns and places to which GEDION traveled.
Of Iesreel.
IEsreel was a fair City situated upon a hill, near to the flood Kison,
bordering upon the Tribe of Isacher, 48 miles from Jerusalem toward the North;
and signifies the seed of God, being derived from El and Dara, the seed of the
Almighty God. There was another of this name in the tribe of Judah, Ios. 15. In
times past this was only the seat and chief abiding place of the Kings of
Israel. For Ahab and Iesabel kept their Court there, and Ioram their son,
whom Iehu overcame: and here Iesabel was eaten up of dogs. At this day this
fair city has in it but thirty houses; and is called by the inhabitants of
the holy land Sanatham, being situated at the foot of the mountain Gilboah
Westward: in it there is a Watch tower, upon the top whereof you may see
through all Galile to Carmel, and the mountains of Phaenicia, also to mount
Thabor, and the mountains beyond Jordan called Gilead. Of this Town you may
read, Ios. 17.19. 2 Samuel 2.

Of Nobach.
THis was a city beyond Jordan, and stood in the half Tribe of Manasses, 38
miles from Jerusalem Northeastward. In times past it was called Kenah, but
after, Nobach Prince of the half Tribe of Manasseh had conquered it, he called
it Nobach, Number. 23. and signifies, a Prophet, being derived of Nabah, or
Nabach, he has prophesied, or cried out.

Of Iogbeha.
THis town was built by the children of Gad, and lies beyond Jordan, 34 miles
from Jerusalem Northeastward, and takes the name from the height of the place
where it stands; being derived from Gabah, which signifies, it excels in
height. Of this you may read, Judge. 8. Numb. 32.

Of Karkor.
KArkor is a city in the half Tribe of Manasseh, and is situated beyond
Jordan, some forty miles distant from Jerusalem Northeastward; and takes the
name from Kir, which signifies he has destroyed, or subverted the walls, for
here the two Kings Zeba and Zalmuna were taken. Saint Ierom says in his book
de locis Hebraicis, That in his time it was a fair Town.

The typical signification of GEDION.
THis Gedion (whose name signifies to root out) destroyed and subverted the
enemies of the Jews: so Christ has destroyed the kingdom of Satan, and
daily rooteth out all his impious and wicked members, which are enemies to his
Church.

The Travels of Abimalech the sixth Judge of Israel.
GEDION being dead, Abimalech his son went from Ophra to Sichem, which is ten
miles, and there was chosen by the citizens to succeed his father in the
government.

From thence he went back to Ophra, which is ten miles, and there put to death
his 70 brethren, all sons of Gedion, but by diverse concubins; for God
permitted Bigamie, but did not command it.

From Ophra he went ten miles into the land of Sichem, and there was chosen
King, about the year of the World 2712.

From Sichem (which was the seat of the kingdom) he went to Ophra being ten
miles; there he judged Israel three years.

After that, he went the third time back to the Sichemites, which is 10
miles; but they breaking promise with him, for very madness he caused the
city to be destroyed, and salt to be sown in the place, that so ever after it
might become barren, accursed, and uninhabitable.

From Sichem he went with his host to Thebets or Tebez, which is two miles,
where he was mortally wounded by a woman that flang a stone upon him at the
siege of that town, whereof he died, Judge. 9.

So all the Travels of Abimelech were 52 miles,

Of Thebez.
THis was distant from Sichem two miles Northward, and from Jerusalem 38, it
took the name from Bitzah, which signifies, a deep pond.

Abimelech took his name from an hereditary kingdom, or rather because he
obtained the kingdom over Israel, after his father; and is as much to say, as,
My father is a King; because good Princes differ little from good fathers: for
Maelaech with the Hebrews signifies a King; Malechah, a Queen, and Malchech,
a kingdom. So that this name Abimelech properly signifies, a King, or one
that is a father of his people.

Of the flight of Iotham which was the brother of Abimelech.
IOtham signifies, a perfect and swift man, being derived from Iatham, that
is, perfect and swift. This man at such time as Abimilech put to death the rest
of his brethren, to save his life fled to Mount Carizin, where he propounded
the riddle mentioned, Judge. 9. And after, from thence he went to Beerah, where
he hid himself from the fury of Abimelech. All this was, 44 miles.

Of Mount Gerizim.
GErizim or Garizim was a mountain in the kingdom of the Samaritans, and
extended it self in the longitude as far as Jericho near to mount Hebal. In
these two mountains the blessings and the cursings were recited, of which more
shall be said hereafter; and it takes the name from the felling down of trees,
being derived from Garaz, which signifies, to cut or to fell down: here Christ
spoke with the Samaritan, John 4.

Of Beerah.
BEerah was a Town in the Tribe of Judah, ten miles from Jerusalem Westward.
Near to this City Judas Machabeus fought a memorable battle against
Bacchides and others, whom he conquered. It takes the name from a clear Well,
being derived of Beer, that is, he has made clear.

Of Thola the seventh Judge of Israel.
In the 3 year of this man's rule, Hercules king of the Argiues, (famous for
his twelve labors) began to reign Macrob. lib. 1.
THola takes his name from a red worm, or purple color, which color is
proper to Princes. He succeeded Abimelech in the government of the Jews, and
began to rule An. mun. 2715. and 1253 years before Christ. His fathers name
was Puah of the Tribe of Issacher. He dwelt in Samir a city of Mount Ephraim,
not far from Jericho, twelve miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and there
he was buried, as you may see, Josh. 15.

Of Iair the eighth Judge of Israel.
In the 10 year of this Judge, An. mun. 2747 and before Christ 1221, Hercules
died and Priamus king of Troy began his reign, which he lost forty years
after.
IAir succeeded Thola, and began his government in the year of the world, 2738,
and 1230 years before Christ. He took his name from the singular worth and
noble disposition that was in him. This Iair was one of the tribe of Manasseh,
he was lame of both his feet, and was a man of great estimation among the
Jews, for there were thirty Castles and Towns that were called after his
name, Judge. 10. Number. 32. Deuteronomy. 3. Ios. 13. 1 Chr. 1. He dwelt at Kamon a town
in the Tribe of Gilead, some 48 miles from Jerusalem toward the North-East.

The travels of Ieptha.
IEptha was borne at Mizpah in the Land of Giliad, and being driven into exile
by his brothers, he fled into the Land of Tob, 48 miles from Jerusalem, Judge.
11.

From thence he returned to Mizpah, 48 miles, and there was chosen Prince, and
began his government Anno mundi, 2760, and before Christ, 1208 years, Judge. 11.

From Mizpah he went with is army against the Ammonites to the City of Aroer,
where he put them to flight, which is 26 miles, Judge. 11.

From Aroer he pursued the enemies to Minneth, which is 8 miles, Judge. 11.

From Minneth he went to the plain of the Vines, which is 24 miles, Judge. 11.

From Abel or the Plain of the Vines he went to Mizpah, where he offered his
daughter for a sacrifice to the Lord, Judge. 11. At that time he and the
Ephramites got a memorable battle, in which were slain 22000, Judge. 12.

So all the Travels of Ieptha were 322 miles.

Of the Cities and places mentioned in his Travels.
Of Thob or Tob.
THob or Tob to which Ieptha fled, is in the half tribe of Manasses beyond
Jordan, not far from the mountain of Antilibanus, 104 miles from Jerusalem
Northeastward: this was a very fair and plentiful country, and therefore
called Thob, being derived from Thobah which signifies, Good and Rare.

Of Mizpah.
MIzpha was a City in land of Gilead in the half Tribe of Manasses, 18 miles
from Jerusalem Northeastward, and signifies a Watchtower, of Zaphah, to look
out. In this town Gideon dwelt, and after him, Samuel. It was afterward
destroyed by Judas Macchabeus: you may read more of it, 1 Samuel 7.10. Ier.
40.41. Josh. 8. 1 Reg. 15. 2 Chr, 6. Nehem. 3.

Of Aroer.
THis was a city of the Moabites, beyond Jordan, near the river Arnon, and
fell to the tribe of Gad, Josh. 12.13. Deuteronomy. 2. and takes the name from
Turpentine, being derived from Arar, that is, He has destroyed and rooted out;
and was so called, because Ieptha won a memorable battle near to this place,
Iud. 11. This is often mentioned in the Scriptures. There was another town of
this name close by Damascus.

Of Minueth.
IN S. Ieroms time (40 years after Christ) this town was called Menneth of
Mercury, which the Syrians call Meni, from Manah to distribute; being a town
of Merchants which disperse their commodities here and there; and stood beyond
Jordan in the Tribe of Reuben, 32 miles from Jerusalem toward the East.

Of the Plain of Vines.
Of this you may read more in the Travels of Balaam.

Of the death of Ieptha.
THis Ieptha was a famous Captain, and from thence took his name; for Iepthach
signifies, To make him an open way with the sword, being derived of Patach, To
open; and after he had judged Israel six years, died: the manner of whose
death is diversely reported; some say, that because he performed not his vow
effectually, therefore God struck him with a grievous ulcer, so that as he was
passing from city to city, in every place he left a member. Others say, that
he died in the city of the Gileadites, and that in memory of his singular
actions and noble exploits, which by Gods especial aid he achieved, his body
was cut into pieces, and into every city of Gilead a member sent, and there
buried; which, as I take it, is the better opinion.

Of Ebzan.
EBzan was the tenth Judge of Israel, and succeeded Iepthah; he began his
government in Anno mundi 2666, and before Christ 1402. He was a Bethlamite of
the Tribe of Judah; and as the Hebrews think, Boez, the grandfather of King
David. he had thirty sons and thirty daughters, and lived to see them all
married, and took them home unto him into his own family, (which doubtless
was a great blessing of God) and from thence took his name; for Ibsan, or
Abezan, signifies, the father of a flock, or multitude. He lived, dwelt, and
was buried in Bethlem Judah, Judge. 12.

Of Elom.
IN the year of the world 2773, and before Christ 1195. In the 5 year of this
man's rule the Trojan war began, Ann. mundi 2777, before Christ 1190.
Elon the eleventh Judge of Israel began to rule, and dwelt in Aialon in the
Tribe of Zabulon, who after he had governed ten years dyed, and was buried in
the same town. There was another city of the same name in the Tribe of Dan,
some four miles from Jerusalem toward the West; where at the prayer of Joshua
the Sun stood still.

Of Abdon.
ABdon the twelfth Judge of Israel succeeded Elon; In the 5 year of this man's
rule Troy was taken.
and began to rule Anno mundi 2782, and before Christ 1185. He dwelt in the
Tribe of Ephraim in a mountain of the Amalakites, 16 miles from Jerusalem
Northwards. He ruled full eight years and then died, and was buried in
Pirithon. Abdon signifies, a servant: for he was a good Prince, but that in
obeying others he lost himself. This Abdon was a great man, had forty sons,
thirty of which he saw married; and for his greater honor, had his Chariot
drawn with 70 Asses: for they used them as we do Horses.

The travels of Sampson.
SAmpson was borne in the city of Zarea, and brought up in the Tents of Dan and
Estahol, Iud. 13. From thence he went to Timnah, which is twelve miles; there
he fell in love with Judah the daughter of a Philistine, Judge. 14.

From Timnah he went back to his father to Zarea, and revealed his affection;
which is 12 miles.

He and his father went back again to Timnah to see the maid, and by the way as
he went he killed a Lion; which is twelve miles, Judge. 14.

From thence he returned back again, which is 12 miles, Iud. 14.

Within a while after, Sampson and his friends went again to Timnah, and by
the way he found Honey in the Lion that he had slain, and gave it to his
friends to eat; and when he came to the Philistines house he propounded the
Riddle, whereof you may read, Judge. 14. These things happened in Anno mundi
2791, and before Christ 1176, at which time he succeeded Abdon in the rule of
the Jews.

From thence he went to Ascalon a city of the Philistines, and killed thirty
of their men, and took away their garments; which is 24 miles.

From thence he returned back again to Timnah, and delivered the Philistines
which had unfolded the Riddle, those change of garments, Judge. 14.

From thence (being angry that his wife had disclosed the riddle) he returned
to Zarea to his friends; which is 12 miles, Iud. 14.

Within a while after, when his anger was over, he returned back to his wife
to Timnah, which is 12 miles, it being then wheat harvest, and carried with him
a Goat, that so he might be merry, and be reconciled to her: but her father
shut him out of doors (because he had married his wife to another man,)
wherefore he took a company of Foxes, and tying them tail to tail, put
firebrarnds to their tails, and turned them into the wheat of the Philistines,
and they set fire of all the Wheat and Vines, and Olives thereabout, Judge. 15.

From thence he went to a cave in the rock Eta, and there dwelt, which is 12
miles, Judge. 15. At the rock Eta Sampson was bound with two new cords, by the
Israelites, and from thence led to Ramah Lehi, which is six miles, where he
killed 1000 Philistines with the jaw bone of an Ass, that he found in the way.

From thence he went to Gaza a city of the Philistines, which is 42 miles: here
he carried away the gates of the city.

From Gaza he carried these gates with the posts to the top of a hill near
Hebron, which is 20 miles, Judge. 16.

From Hebron he went to the river Sorecke, where he dwelt with Dalilah the
Harlot, and by her was deceived and taken of the Philistines, which are 12
miles.

Being taken of the Philistines he put out both his eyes, and bound him in
chains, and led him from thence to Gaza, which is 32 miles: there they brought
him into the house of their god Dagon, to make them sport; but he pulled down
the house, and a multitude of them were slain, where he also died, and was
buried in the Sepulcher of Manoah his father, between Zerea and Esthaol, 28
miles from Gaza, and almost 20 from Jerusalem toward the West. This was in the
year of the World 1811, and before Christ, 1157.

So all the Travels of Sampson were 240 miles.

The description of the several Towns and places to which SAMPSON traveled.
Of Zarea.
THis is a city in the tribes of Judah and Dan, near the river Soreck, and
takes the name from a Cole or Leprosy; being derived of Sarag, that is, He
was Leaprous: it stood 18 miles from Jerusalem Westward.

Of Esthaol.
THis was a Town in the Tribe of Dan, two miles from Zarea, and stood near
the River Sorecke, some 20 miles from Jerusalem toward the West; and takes
the name from a Woman, and Fortitude; for Isca signifies a woman, and El, or
Ol, strong, or powerful. Here Sampson was brought up. In S. Ieroms time this
was called Asto, not far from whence Sampson lies buried.

Of Timnah.
You may read of this in the travels of Judah.

Of Ascalon.
THis was a city of the Philistines, situated upon the shore of the
Mediterranean sea, some 30 miles from Jerusalem Westward, and to this day
retains the figure of half a circle: it takes the name from an ignominious
fire, being derived of Esh and Kalon, an ignominious light.

Of Gaza.
Of this Town you may read in the travels of Ioshuah.

Of the River Sorek.
THis was a very pleasant river, upon the bank whereof grew great plenty of
Vines and Palms, from whence it seems to have taken the name; for Sorek in
Hebrew signifies, a Myrtle branch, which brings forth a pleasant berrie
whereof excellent Wine is made. It takes the beginning at a fountain in the
tribe of Judah, some 12 miles from Jerusalem toward the West, where there is a
very fertile valley, in which Dalilah that betrayed Sampson dwelt: and from
thence it runs through the land of the Philistines, and falls into the
Mediterranean sea.

Of the rock Eta.
IN this rock there was a cave wherein Sampson dwelt, as in a strong tower: it
stood in the Tribe of Judah, near to the river Sorecke, 12 miles from Jerusalem
toward the West, and seems to take the name from Fowls; for before that
Sampson inhabited there, a multitude of fowls bred upon it, and therefore it
was called Eta; for Aith signifies, a Foul. This rock growing to decay, was
repaired again by Ierobaham that idolatrous King of Israel.

Of Sampson.
SAmpson, or Schimpson, according to the Hebrew text, takes his name from the
Sun: for Schaemaes in Hebrew signifies the Sun, and seems to have some
affinity with Hercules, which signifies, The glory of the air, for what can
be said to be the glory of the air, but the Light of the Sun, without which
it would become exceeding dark? wherefore as some think, this Sampson was the
true Hercules; and those noble exploits that he did, the Graecians attributed
to their Hercules.

The typical signification of SAMPSON.
HE typically represents Christ diverse ways; first, in his person, he was a
mighty man; secondly, in his profession, he was a Nazarite; thirdly, in his
calling, he was a Prince and Judge; fourthly, in his manner of living, for he
went from place to place, to revenge himself upon the enemies of Gods people
the children of Israel; and in his death: even so our Savior Christ is that
strong man, who being mightier than the Devil, has dispossessed him of his
tyrannical jurisdiction over the souls of mankind; has taken away those
gates of death, by his mercy opening unto us the door of life, that so being
set at liberty from that hellish imprisonment, we may be made partakers of
everlasting happiness: he was also a Nazarite even from his mothers womb,
borne and bred there, tying himself to a vow of bondage, that we might be made
free: he is a Prince for ever, and a Priest after the order of Melchisadeck:
during the continuance of his life in this veil of misery, his chiefest
actions were to go from place to place, to teach, to do good, and to rescue
and relieve the poor distressed members of the Church, who lay miserably
afflicted under the hands of Satan; healing some, relieuing others, and
bringing a third sort into the state of grace: so that as Sampson delivered the
Israelites from the bondage of the Philistines; Christ our Prince and Judge
delivers his from the slavery of Satan: by his death saving more souls,
than in his life. And thereby pulling down the strong buildings (the temptations
of Satan) has laid them leuel with the ground, that they shall never be
restored again. And lastly, after this life ended, he shall be our Prince and
Judge, and bring us to that place of promise prepared for us in his everlasting
kingdom.

The travels of the Spies of the Danites.
SHortly after the death of Sampson, the Spies of the Danites went from Zarea
and Eastaol to mount Ephraim, to the house of Michah, which is 24 miles, Judge.
18.

From thence they went to Lais, which is a hundred and four miles, Judge. 18.

From thence they returned to Zarea and Esthaol, which is 126 miles, Judge. 18.

So all their travels were 244 miles.

Of Lais.
LAis was a city situated at the foot of mount Libanus, some 104 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North; and was sometimes called Belenus: this, because it
stood so far from aid, was quickly conquered by the Danites, and by them
utterly destroyed: it signifies, a roaring or devouring Lion. But after being
rebuilt by the Danites, they called it Dan, and the Canaanites l^sem Dan: being
derived of Laeschaem, which signifies, a Lion.

The travels of the Danites.
THe army of the Danites went from Zarea and Esthaol to Kiriathiearim, and
there pitched their tents, which is 16 miles, Judge. 15.

From thence they went to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micha, and took his
carved Image and his Leuite from him, which was eight miles, Judges 15.

From thence they went to Lais, 104 miles.

So all the Travels were 128 miles.

Of Kiriath-jearim.
KIriath-jearim was a city of the Levits in the tribe of Judah, upon the borders
of the tribe of Benjamin, about a mile from Jerusalem Westward. It sometime
belonged to the Gibeonites, Ios. 9. and signifies a city of the desert or
woods; being derived from Kiriah, which signifies a city, and Iaar, a wood or
Forest. Here stood the arc of the Covenant, after it had bin in the land of
the Philistines seven months, and stood in the house of Abinadab, whose son
Eliazer (because he was of the family of the Levites) by consent of the
children of Israel was consecrated priest thereof to attend and keep it: here
it remained 48 years, till David fetched it thence with great joy, 1 Samuel 7.
and 2 Samuel 6. 1 Chr. 14. Here Saul was anointed King by Samuel: here the
company of the Prophets (that is, the scolers of the Wise) came down from the
more eminent places where the ark of God was, with holy songs and instruments
of music, and the Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, and he sung and praised
God with them. They called this the Hill of God, because the Arc of the
Covenant stood in it, 1 Samuel, 10. Here Jonathan the son of Saul thrust out a
garrison of the Philistimes, which held this town in subjection, 1 Samuel 14.
Near to this place was the valley Rephaim or of the Giants; where David won a
memorable battle against the Philistims, and pursued them with great slaughter
even to the plain of Perizim, 2 Samuel 15.

The Travels of the Leuite, whose Concubine the Inhabitants of Gibeon most
wickedly abused.
THis Leuite dwelt in Ramath in mount Ephraim, from whence he went to Bethlehem
Judah, which is 16 miles, to fetch back his concubine, or rather his wife; which
was the daughter of a certain citizen in Bethlehem; but a bond servant not
free; such they called concubines, because they had neither the honor to be
mistress of the house, neither could their posterity inherit in lands or
goods of their father, although before God they were lawful wives, Judge. 19.

From Bethlehem they returned back again on foot to Jerusalem, which then was
called Iebus, because the Iebusits inhabited there. Which is 6 miles, Judge. 19.

From thence they went to Gibeah, not far distant from the city Gibeon, where
after Saul kept his Royal seat, 1 Samuel 22. Here the Gibeonites abused the
Levits concubine. Which was almost 4 miles.

From thence he went home to his own city Ramath in Mount Ephraim, and there
cut the dead body of his wife in 12 parts, and sent them throughout all the
tribes of Israel. Which is 8 miles.

So all his travels were 34 miles.

Of Ramath.
THis was a city in Mount Ephraim, some 8 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North, and signifies a high and lofty City; being derived of Rom, that is, It
was high. This town Baesa King of Israel would have fortified and repaired,
after it had bin decayed; but he was hindered by Benhadad King of the Syrians,
that he could not finish what he had begun. There were many towns and Cities
of this name; as Ramoth where Ahab dwelt, 1 Reg. 22. Ramathaim Sophim, or
Arimathia, where the prophet Samuel dwelt, 1 Samuel 1. and there where the Ark of
God stood, not far from Gibeah, was called Ramah also, Judge. 19. There was
another Ramath in the tribe of Nepthali, Ios. 19. all of them being so called
because they stood upon very high mountains.

The Travels of the Children of Israel when they fought against the Benjamites.
FRom Mizpah in the land of Gilead, where they appointed to meet (for in the
enemies land they could not assemble themselves) the whole army of the
Israelites went to the Ark of God in Shilo, which was about 48 miles.

From thence they went with their army to Gibeah, where they lost 22000 of
their men, which is 2 miles.

From thence they returned to Shilo, and entreated God for aid which was two
miles, Judge. 20.

From thence they went the second time to Gibeah, and entered battle again
with the enemy; but because they trusted in their own strength, therefore in
this second expedition there were slain 18000 of their men. Which was two
miles, Judge. 20.

From thence the whole Army of the Israelites returned back again, and before
the Lord in Shilo lamented the overthrow they had twice sustained, and with
earnest prayers implored his aid, that they might obtain the victory. Which
was 2 miles, Iud. 20.

From thence they returned the third time to Gibeah, and there with great
expedition renewed the war; and because they trusted in God, and not to their
own strength, they put to the sword 25000 of the Benjamits, and won a notable
victory, Judge. 20. which was 2 miles.

Having taken and burnt the city of Gibeah with fire, they returned back unto
the town of Shilo, which is two miles: and there before the Lord they began to
lament the calamity of the tribe of Benjamin, saying, Wherefore has this
thing happened, that one of the Tribes should be rooted out before thee, Judge. 21.

From thence they went to Iabes in Gilead, and besieged and took it, and
destroyed it to the ground, which is 52 miles.

From thence they returned back again to Shilo, and with them brought 400
maids, which they gave to the Benjamites to be their wives, Judge. 21. Which
was 52 miles.

So all the travels of the children of Israel were 164 miles.

Of Iabes.
THis was a city in the land of Gilead, 52 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northeast; the inhabitants whereof buried the bones of Saul and Jonathan his
son, 1 Samuel 31. it is derived of Iabesh, which signifies a dry city.

Here ends the book of IVDGES.
The travels of ELIMELECH, and his wife NAOMI.
ELIMELECK and his wife went from Bethlehem Judah, into the Land of the
Moabites, where he died, which is 40 miles.

From thence she returned with her daughter in law Ruth, to Bethlehem Judah,
where Boez married Ruth, which was forty miles.

So their Travels were 80 miles.

The first Book of SAMVEL.
The Travels of HANNA, the mother of the Prophet SAMVEL.
HEr husband Elkana and she went from Ramathaim Sophim in mount Ephraim, to
Shilo, the house of the Lord, which was 12 miles; where by earnest prayers she
obtained of the Lord a son, 1 Samuel 1.

From thence she returned back again to Ramathaim Sophim, and there Samuel
was borne, 1 Samuel 1. which was 12 miles.

From thence she went to Shilo, to present her son before the Lord, and he
remained therewith Eli to serve God all his life, 1 Samuel 1. which is 12. miles.

From Shilo she returned back again to her house, and bare Elkana a son and
two daughters more, which is 12 miles.

So all her travels were 48 miles.

Of Ramathaim Sophim.
THis City stood in mount Ephraim not far from Lidda and Ioppa, some 16 miles
distant from Jerusalem Northeastward; and was sometimes called Ramah. Here
Joseph (whose addition was Arimathia) dwelt, that demanded the body of our
Savior to bury in his own sepulcher. It seems to be called Ramathaim Sophim
(which signifies, the high places of the prophets) because there was an Academy
or public school of Prophets which served for the whole land, in this city.
At this day it is called by the name of Ramath, having some affinity to the
ancient name Ramah.

How the Ark of God was borne from place to place, after it was won from the
children of Israel by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4.5.6.
THe two sons of Eli the Priest, Hophney and Phineas, carried the Ark of the Lord to Ebenezer, which signifies, the stone of my help; which was 42 miles,
and is not far from Aphec, some 48 miles from Jerusalem Northward. Here the
Ark of God was taken, and Hophney and Phineas died: old Eli also broke his
neck at this time, about the 98 year of his age, and the fortieth of his
rule; for he ruled from the time of Sampson until then, 1 Samuel 4. This happened
Anno mundi 2850, and before Christ 1117. The prophet Samuel succeeded him in
the government of the church, and ruled 40 years.

From Aphecke the Philistines carried it to Asdod or Azotus, and set it in the
temple of their god Dagon, but the Idol fell down in the night, and was broken
to pieces before the Ark of the Lord, 1 Samuel 4. which was 160 miles.

From thence to the city Gath, which was 4 miles.

From Gath to the sea town Gaza, 12 miles.

From Gaza to Ekron, 32 miles.

From Ekron, they placing it upon a new cart drawn with two new milch Kine, it
was brought back again to Bethsemes, which was 12 miles.

From thence it was carried to Kiriath jearim, and placed in the house of
Abinadab, where it was kept until David's time, who fetched it thence to
Jerusalem with great joy, about the year of the world 2900, and before Christ
1068, which was two miles.

So all the while the Arc was from Shilo, it was carried hither and thither
some 276 miles.

Of the Towns and places to which the Ark of the Lord was carried
Of Aphek.
THis was a city of Samaria, allotted to the half tribe of Manasses, some half
a mile from Israel toward the South, and 44 miles from Jerusalem Northward. It
signifies an impetuous or violent act; being derived of Aphak, which is as
much as, He works violently, or offers violence. In this city Benhadad
king of the Syrians going from one place to another to hide himself, was at
length constrained to fly to Ahab King of Israel, to save his life and crave
his aid, 1 Reg. 20.

Of Asdod, Ascalon, and Gaza, you may read before.

Of Gath.
THis was a haven town situated upon the banks of the Mediterranian sea,
distant from Jerusalem 34 miles toward the West. It seems to take the name of
the abundance of Vines that grow thereabouts; for Gath signifies a press, or
such an instrument wherewith grapes are pressed. This was Goliahs country. Here
Achis, to whom David fled, governed, 1 Samuel 21.27. and it is very like that all
the Kings of this city were called Achis, as sometime the Emperors of Rome were
called Caesar's. There were other Kings of the Philistines that were also called
by this name.

Of Ekron.
THis also was a city of the Philistines not far from the Mediterranian sea, and
near to Asdod, some 16 miles from Jerusalem Westward. At this day it is but a
small town, and called by the name of Accaron, having some affinity with the
ancient name Ekron. The inhabitants of this town worshipped Baalzebub for
their god. It takes the name from Extirpation, or such a town as Penitus
distruit, Has rooted out even the foundation; being derived of Akar, which
signifies, To extirpate.

Of Bethsemes.
THis was a city of the Levits in the tribe of Judah, Ios. 15.21. 4 miles from
Jerusalem Westward; and signifies, the house of the Sun. Of this you may read
more, before.

The Travels of the Prophet Samuel.
SAmuels mother brought him from Arimathia to Shilo, being 12 miles, where he
was to serve the Lord God all his life.

From Shilo Samuel went to Mizpa in the land of Gilead; 48 miles. Here Samuel
called a congregation, and made a solemn sacrifice unto the Lord, of a sucking
lamb; and the Lord at the same time thundered from heaven, and dispersed the
army of the Philistines, so that they fled, 1 Samuel 7.

From Mizpa he went to Arimathia, 56 miles: There he dwelt, and built an altar
unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.

From thence he went yearly to Bethel, 16 miles, 1 Samuel 7.

From Bethel he went to Gilgal, 2 miles, 1 Samuel 7.

From Gilgal he went to Mizpa in the land of Gilead, 36 miles 1 Samuel 7.

From Mizpa he went again to Arimathia, 56 miles. Thither came unto him the
Elders of the children of Israel, desiring him to choose them a King, 1 Samuel 8.

Therefore he went out of the town of Arimathia, about 16 miles, to Ramath,
which lies in the land of Ziph not far from Bethlehem Euphrata, and there
Samuel anointed Saul the son of Kish to be their King, 1 Samuel 10.

From Ramath he went to Gilgal, 16 miles. There he offered, and showed Saul
what he should do, 1 Samuel 10.

From Gilgal he went to Mizpah in the land of Gilead, 36 miles: there Saul by
casting of lots was chosen King, 1 Samuel 10.

From Mizpa he returned to Arimathia, 56 miles, 1 Samuel 10.

From Arimathia he went to Beseck, about 44 miles, where Adoni-Beseck was
taken, whose fingers and toes the children of Israel cut off. There Samuel and
Saul caused an army of men to issue out against the children of Ammon, 1 Samuel
11.

From Besecke, Samuel and Saul passed over Jordan to Iabes in Gilead, 16 miles,
and there overthrew Nahas King of the Ammonites, and all his host; which done,
Samuel said unto the soldiers, Let us now go unto Gilgal, and there renew the
Kingdom.

From Iabes in Gilead he went to Gilgal, 36 miles. There Saul was placed in his
Throne royal, 1 Samuel 11.

From Gilgal Samuel went to Arimathia, which is 20 miles.

From Arimathia he went again to Gilgal, 20 miles, and there he sharply rebuked
King Saul, because he had offered a Sacrifice contrary to his command, 1 Samuel
13.

From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, 12 miles, 1 Samuel 13.

From Gibeon he went to Arimathia, 12 miles.

From Arimathia he went to Gilgal, 20 miles; there rebuked king Saul, because
he did not wholly destroy the Amalekites; and Samuel himself hewed the body of
Agag King of the Amalekites in pieces, 1 Samuel 16.

From Gilgal he went to Arimathia, 20 miles.

From Arimathia he went to Bethlehem, 16 miles, and there he anointed David
King, 1 Samuel 16.

Then he returned again to Arimathia, 16 miles, where he died and was buried, 1 Samuel 28.

So all the travels of the Prophet Samuel were 364 miles.

Of Arimathia, Mizpa, Ramath, and the rest of the towns mentioned in his
Travels, you may read before.

The Typical signification of Samuel.
SAmuel is derived of Shemuel, that is, desired of God. And was a Type of God
the Father: for as Samuel anointed David, so God anointed his beloved Son with
the oil of Gladness and of the Spirit, Psalm. 45. Esaias 61.

The Travels of King SAVL.
SAVL went from the town of Gibeon to mount Ephraim, four miles, to seek his
fathers Asses, in An. Mundi 2870, and before Christ 1908.

From mount Ephraim he passed through the land of Salisa, to the borders of the
town of Salem, 12 miles.

From Salem he went to the land of Gemini in the tribe of Benjamin, 16 miles.

From the land of Iemini he went to Rama, 4 miles; there by Samuel he was
anointed King, 1 Samuel 10. This town lay not far from Bethlehem, and close by
it lay Rachels grave. There certain men met with Saul in the borders of
Benjamin at Zelach, and showed him that his fathers Asses were found, which was
about a mile from Jerusalem.

From thence Saul went about two miles to Zilzah; there three men met him (that
traveled to Bethel) and gave him two loaves of bread, 1 Samuel 10.

Then he came to the mount of God, which is the town of Kiriath-jearim; there a
company of Prophets met him and prophesied; then the spirit of God came upon
Saul, and he began to prophecy: which was about six miles from Bethlehem.

From Kiriath-jearim he went again to Gibeon, which is four miles, 1 Samuel 10.

Then he went again from Gibeon to Gilgal, and there he offered, and Samuel
showed him what he should do: which is 12 miles, 1 Samuel 10.

From Gilgal he went to Mizpa in the land of Gilead, 36 miles where he was
chosen King.

From Mizpa he went again to Gibeon, 48 miles.

From Gibeon he went to Beseck, 40 miles; there he gathered certain soldiers
and led them against Nahas King of the Ammonites, 1 Samuel 11.

From Beseck he went with his army to Iabes, 16 miles; there he overthrew Nahas
with all his host.

From Iabes in Giliad he went to Gilgal, 36 miles. There he was placed in his
princely seat, 1 Samuel 11.

From Gilgal he went to Michmas, 4 miles: there he sent 3000 men out of Israel,
to his son Jonathan to Gibeon.

From Michmas he went to Gilgal with his army, 4 miles. There he offered, for
which Samuel rebuked him, 1 Samuel 13.

From Gilgal he went to Mount Benjamin, about 12 miles, not far from Gibeon.

From Gibeon he went to Michmas, 8 miles. There Jonathan overcame the army of
the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14.

From Michmas Saul followed the enemy to Ajalon, 12 miles. There he would have
slain his son Jonathan because he had eaten a little honey, 1 Samuel 14.

From Ajalon he went to Gibeon, 4 miles, where he kept court

From Gibeon he went to the land of the Moabites, 28 miles; which he overcame,
1 Samuel 14.

From the land of the Moabites he went into the country of Ammonites, 40
miles; which country he overcame, and took in all their towns.

From the land of the Ammonits he went to Gibeon, 60 miles, 1 Samuel 15.

From Gibeon he went into the land of Edom, or Idumaea (as it is commonly
called) 40 miles, and overcame all the country.

From Idumaea he returned again to Gibeon, 40 miles.

From Gibeon he went with an army about 600 miles, to Zoba in Armenia, which he
overcame, 1 Samuel 14.

From the kingdom of Zoba he returned to Gibeon, 600 miles.

After that, he went out against the Philistines, 12 miles, and as the history
shows, Saul had wars with the Philistines during his life, 1 Samuel 14.

From the Philistines he returned again to Gibeon unto his palace, 12 miles.

From Gibeon he went into the wilderness of Sur, 160 miles; there he overcame
the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15.

Also he overcame the whole country, from the town of Peluso to the red sea,
which is 92 miles.

From thence he went again into Jury, to the town of Carmel, 140 miles, 1 Samuel
15.

And from thence he went unto Gilgal, 32 miles. There the Prophet Samuel
rebuked him, because he did not wholly destroy and consume the Amalekites: and
there Samuel hewed the body of Agag King of the Amalekites into small pieces, 1 Samuel 15.

From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, 12 miles.

In the 11 year of Saul, An. M. 2881, and before Christ 1807, David being then
about 20 years of age, was anointed King by Samuel. Within a while after, Saul
was vexed with an evil spirit: then David played unto him upon the harp, by
which he was eased. Soon after he went forth with his Army toward Socho and
Asecha, which was some 8 miles distant from Gibeah. There David killed that
famous champion Goliath, 1 Samuel 15.

From thence the Israelites followed the chase of the Philistines to the valley
and river Soreck, 4 miles; and thence unto the gates of their cities, that is,
to Ekron, which is eight miles; to Ascalon, 20 miles; From the place where
David killed Goliath.
and to Gath, which was 24 miles, all the way putting the Philistines to the
sword. So that there died in this fight 30000 of them, 1 Samuel 17.

Then they returned back again, and spoiled and burnt the Philistines tents,
where they found great riches. 24 miles.

From Socho and Aseka he returned again to Gibeon, 8 miles: there the women
came out of all places in the town dancing, and with loud voices singing, Saul
has slain a thousand, but David ten thousand, 1 Samuel 18.

From Gibeon he went to Arimathia, 2 miles, minding to kill David; and came to
Naioth in Ramoth, where Samuel and David were: but the spirit of God came upon
Saul, and he prophesied, falling down upon the ground before Samuel and David,
all that day and the nightensuing, 1 Samuel 19.

From thence he returned again to Gibeon, 12 miles: there he thought to have
killed his son Jonathan with a spear, because he excused David. There also he
caused 85 priests to be put to death because the high priest Abimilech at Nob
had given David of the Show bread to eat, and had delivered him Goliahs sword,
1 Samuel 21.22.

From Gibeon he went to the Leviticall town Nob, 12 miles, where he spared
neither man nor woman, young nor old, no not the innocent children, but put them
all to the sword, and wholly destroyed the town, 1 Samuel 12.

From the town of Nob he returned to Gibeon, 12 miles.

From Gibeon he went to the wilderness of Moan Southward, 20 miles.

From the wilderness of Moan he returned again to Gibeon, 1 Samuel 23. which
was 24 miles.

From Gibeon he went to Engedi, where David in a cave cut off a piece of his
garment, which was 24 miles, 1 Samuel 24.

From thence he teturned again to Gibeon, 24 miles.

From Gibeon he went to Ziph, 22 miles, and as he lay asleep upon the hill
Hachila, David came secretly into the Camp, and took his cup and his spear
from his head, and would not kill him, 1 Samuel 26.

From the hill Hachila he returned unto Gibea, 22 miles.

From thence he went to fight with the Philistines at mount Gilboa, 40 miles.

From mount Gilboa, having changed his apparel, he went to Endor, which was 4
miles: There he asked counsel of a witch, and the Devil appeared unto him in
the likeness of Samuel, 1 Samuel 28

From thence he returned again to mount Gilboa to the camp 4 miles, and the
next day he fought against the Enemy, in which battle his three sons were
slain, and he himself put to flight, 1 Samuel 31. 1 Chr. 11.

From mount Gilboa he fled 8 miles to Bethsan, where he killed himself, 1 Samuel
31. 1 Chr. 11.

From thence the body of Saul was brought to Iabes in Gilead, where it was
buried, 2 Samuel 31. 1 Chr. 11.

So all the travels of Saul were 2428 miles.

The description of the towns and places to which he traveled.
OF Gibea, Salem, Ramath, and Iabes, you may read before, being memorable
places to which Abraham, Ioshuah, and the children of Israel traveled.

Of Bethsaliza.
THe land of Salisa, with the city Bethsaliza, was situated in mount Ephraim 8
miles from Jerusalem toward the Northwest. This was also called Baalsalisa, 2.
King. 4. and signifies the Trinity, being derived of Schillesch, to make
threefold.

Of Michmas.
THis was a city in mount Ephraim, in the borders of the tribes of Benjamin
and Manasses, not far from Jericho, some ten miles from Jerusalem toward the
North. Near to this City, Jonathan and his armor bearer put the army of the
Philistines to flight, 1. Sam. 14. you may read of this town in Esd. 2. Isa.
10. This was a strong city of the Moabites, and seems to take the name of
Kemosch, or Chamos, which was a god which they worshipped in their banquets and
meetings for mirth: as Bacchus sometime was amongst the Romans. To this Idol
Solomon built a temple, 1. Reg. 11. Ier. 48.

Of Zoba.
THe Kingdom of Zoba, which Josephus calls Sophenam, was in Armenia, near to
the mountains Antitaurus and Masius, 600 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North, extending it self on both sides of the River Euphrates. It was a very
large fruitful and pleasant country, wherein inhabited many Kings. This place
Saul conquered, and David retained it, 1 Samuel 14. 2 Samuel 8. And signifies An
aspiring Kingdom; being derived of Zabah, He has aspired.

Of Carmel.
CArmel was a City in the tribe of Judah, situated in a fertile mountain some
eight miles from Hebron toward the East, but twelve miles from Jerusalem
toward the Southwest, in the wilderness of Moan, where that foolish and
covetous fellow Nabal dwelt. There is likewise another Town called by the same
name in the tribe of Issacher, not far from Ptolomais, which is upon the
shore of the Mediteranian sea, 64 miles from Jerusalem toward the North,
standing upon a promontory which extends it self into the Ocean; of which
you may read, Ios. 19. Ier. 46. In this city the Prophets Elias and Elizeus
dwelt, who put the Priests of Baal to death in that place, 1 Reg. 18. 2 Reg. 4.
Carmel signifies Spike, or a fertile field bringing forth Vines, herbs, and
diverse kinds of flowers and fruits; and is often times used for a pleasant place,
Esaias 29.32.37. Ier. 24. There are a sect of Monks that of this mountain are
called Carmelits, who built for themselves an Abbey there close by the Church of
S. Mary's, about the year of the world 5170, and in the year of our Lord 1170.

Of Azekah.
AZekah and Socho were two towns in the Tribe of Judah, eight miles from
Jerusalem toward the South-west. Of these you may read before.

Of Nobe or Nob.
THis was a City of the Priests in the Tribe of Benjamin, where Abimelech
High Priest of the Israelites dwelt. Who at such time as David fled from Saul,
he gave him of the Shewbread, and the Sword that he took from Goliath. For the
which cause Saul commanded fourscore and five Priests to be slain, and the
City with all the Inhabitants thereof to be put to the sword, 1 Samuel cap. 22.
At this day (as Bernard Brittenbacchus says) it is called Bethenopolis, and is
in the way between Jerusalem (from whence it is distant some sixteen miles
toward the Northeast) and Dyospolim. It takes the name from Naba, which
signifies, He has prophesied. Of this you may read, 1 Samuel 20.21, 22. and
Esaias 10.

Of Maon.
THis was a town in the wilderness of Iudaea, some 24 miles from Jerusalem
Southward, near Ziph and Carmel, where Saul had besieged David and all his
men, and would have either put them to the sword, or taken them captives. But
the Philistines on a sudden invaded the land, so that Saul was constrained to
leave the siege to oppose their incursions. It takes the name from a fruitful
habitation and a firm and safe mansion, 2 Samuel 23 Ios. 15.

Of Engedi.
THis was a castle or town situated in a mountain near to the shore of the
Dead sea, a little beyond Sodom, six miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast,
and in the tribe of Judah, Ios. 15. In times past it was a fruitful place both
of vines and other fruits: there also grew a kind of balsam. But Cleopatra in
the time of Mark Anthony brought the roots of it into Egypt, and there made a
pleasant garden, where now Christians inhabit. There are yet some small stalks
here and there of this Balsam to be found upon this hill Engedi, but the
Saracens do not regard it, neither dwell any Christians near to dress it, so
that it grows to decay. Engedi signifies the fountain or well of a Goat or
Lamb. These mountains are very high, and of a wonderful nature; in some
places great ragged rocks appearing, in others plain and fruitful valleys:
insomuch as they are fearful and horrible to strangers that behold them.

Of Ziph.
THis was a Town in the Desert of Ziph, placed in a certain mountain not
far from Hebron, in the Tribe of Judah, some 22 miles from Jerusalem toward
the Northeast, Josh. 15. Unto this desert (near to this city) David often times
resorted, and at last was betrayed by the inhabitants of this town. It seems
that the Town and Wilderness took that name of the abundance of pitch that
was found in it; for Zaephaeth in Hebrew signifies Pitch.

Of Gilboa.
THis was a mountain in the tribe of Manasse, near to Sichem and Apheck, 40
miles from Jerusalem toward the North; it extends 8 miles to the city
Bethsan, and two miles toward the North to mount Hermon. It seems to take the
name from the bubling forth or springing up of water: for the river Kison
begins at the foot of this mountain, and diuides it self into diverse parts
until it comes to the hill Hermon, and then it runs into two principal
streams, the one passes toward the East into the sea of Galilee; the other to
the West toward Carmel, and so into the Mediterranian sea. There be some that
are of opinion, that neither rain nor dew falls upon this hill, because when
Saul was slain David cursed these mountains, saying, Let neither rain nor dew
fall upon you, o ye mountains of Gilboa, because the strong men of Israel were
slain there, 2 Samuel 1. But this was but a figurative speech, whereby David
would express the greatness of his sorrow: for Borchardus the Monk speaking
of this mountain, says, That as he was ascending upon it, there was such a
violent shower fell, that he was wet through his clothes, and the waters in
great abundance ran into the valleys. And in the year of our Lord 1283,
sleeping upon this hill on the Eve of All Saints, there was a great dew fell
upon his clothes: only some parts of it were very stony and barren, as are
many other mountains in that country.

Of Endor.
THis was a town in the tribe of Manasses, near the river Kison, Ios. 17.
where Saul asked counsel of a witch, 1 Samuel 28. It seems to take the name
from a fountain of durance; for Dor signifies he has made sure. It is distant
from Jerusalem 44 miles toward the North. In S. Ieroms time this was but a small
village.

Of Bethsan.
THis was a city in the Tribe of Manasses, between Bethulia and the sea of
Galile, some 44 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, Josh. 17. It takes the
name from a Churchyard, or a place of rest: for Beth signifies, a house; and
Iaschan, he has slept. Here Saul killed himself, and the Philistines cut off
his head and set it upon the wall of this city. Afterward, about S. Ieroms
time, Ptolomie called this Scythopolis. You may read in the second book of
the Macchabes, how it was the town of the Scythians; for the Scythians which
dwelt some 800 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, came with a great army
into the Holy land, and by force won this city, and dwelt there: of whom it
was called the Scythian town. Joseph. in lib. 2. de Bell. Iud. cap. 18.
remembers a strange accident that happened near this town; for the Jews
besieging it, there were of their own nation that dwelt within the city, who
(that they might make a private gain) took wages of the Scythians, to oppose
their brethren and countrymen: by which means the Scythians got the better.
But after a while, the Scythians considering that the number of the Jews were
great, and fearing some sudden insurrection or innovation, gave them warning to
depart and leave the town: they, though with great grief, as being pressed with
a twofold necessity, (their own wants and the hatred of their kindred) did
so, relying merely upon the courtesy of strangers. But about some two days
after, in the night time the inhabitants of Scythopolis breaking out of the
city vnawarres, fell upon them, and in recompense of their kindness put to
the sword some thirteen thousand: many slain unawares, some as they were
eating, and most in their sleep. After they had committed this massacre, they
compassed about the wood where they were, took away all their substance, and
suffered not a man to depart alive. Wherefore one Simon the soon of a certain
ancient and noble Citizen, called Saul, perceiving their present misery, and
that there was no hope to escape iminent death and utter ruin, in a cruel and
desperate manner, breaks out into these words: O miserable wretch that I am,
that against my own conscience have lift up these impious hands against my
country, committing daily massacres to pleasure them, who at this day lay
violent hands upon all we have; die therefore, thou that art thus profane, and
with thine own hands make an end of thy wretched life, since thou do not
deserve to die honorably in the face of the enemy, but wretchedly in a corner,
and for thine own offense. So soon as he had ended these words, he turned him
about with a fierce countenance, and falling upon his father, mother, wife, and
children, put them all to the sword; after, burnt his goods; and to make an end
of the tragedy, ran himself upon his own weapon. These things happened but a
little before Vespasian came into the land of Iudaea. At this day this City
Sythopolis is called after the ancient name Bethsan.

The typical representation of SAVL.
SAul if it be properly taken, does sometime signify, a Grave or Sepulcher,
and sometimes Hell; being derived from Scheuol, which may be taken for both. As
therefore Saul persecuted innocent David, with an inueterate malice, even unto
the death; so the sons of Satan (evil and wicked men) persecute Christ and
his members, with an immovable malice, sparing neither Prophets nor Apostles,
neither such as are religious, no nor Christ himself; but with cruel torments
put them to lingering deaths, till they be utterly exryrpate (as they think:)
and then wanting objects to satisfy their savage minds, they follow their
own devilish councels, till with Saul they come to desperate ends. Schaul, or
Saul, if it be taken in the better part, signifies, He has desired, or called.

The Philistines travels from their Camp to Michmas.
THe Philistines encamped themselves at Michmas, upon Mount Ephraim, some ten
miles from Jerusalem Northward: and out of the Philistines camp there issued
three armies to spoil the country.

The one marched toward Ophra, and went from Michmas to Salem, 28 miles.

From thence they went to Ophra, 4 miles.

The second went from Michmas to Bethoron, 8 miles.

The third went from Michmas to the valley of Zeboim, eight miles. So all the
Travels of the Philistines were 58 miles.

Of Zoboim.
THis valley is not far from Jerusalem in the Tribe of Benjamin, Nehem. 11.

The travels of Jonathan, Saul's son.
Jonathan went from Gibeah to Kiriath-jearim, which was two miles, where he
drove the Philistines out of their camp, 1 Samuel 13.

From thence he went back again, two miles.

From thence he went to Michmas, which is 8 miles, and there by the help of
his Armor-bearer he gave the Philistines a great overthrow, 1 Samuel 14.

From thence he followed the enemy to Aialon, which is 12 miles; there his
father would have put him to death because he had tasted a little honey, 1 Samuel
14.

From Aialon Saul and his son Jonathan returned to Gibeah his own city,
which was two miles.

From Gibeah he went with his father to Socho and Asecha, which was 8 miles:
where after David had slain Goliath (for that singular virtue and heroical
spirit which Jonathan saw in him) he loved him as he did his own soul, and
preferred him before his own life and honor, 1 Samuel 18.

From thence he went with his father to Gibeah, some 8 miles, where women with
great mirth and joy met him, saying, Saul has slain his thousand, and David
his ten thousand: for which cause Saul out of mere envy (for then he did not
know that he had been anointed by Samuel) would have slain him and his son
Jonathan also for excusing him, 1 Samuel 18.19.

From Gibeah Jonathan went into the desert of Ziph, some 22 miles, to comfort
David: there they swore a solemn oath of mutual friendship, to continue as
long as they lived, 1 Samuel 23.

From thence Jonathan returned, which was 22 miles, 1 Samuel 23.

At last he went to the wars with his father to mount Gilboah, 40 miles: there
he, his father, his brothers Abinadab and Melchisuah were slain. So all the
travels of Jonathan were 126 miles.

The travels of Abiather, Abimelechs son.
WHen Doeg the Idumaean, at the command of Saul, had slain the Priests of the
Lord, this Abiather the son of Abimelech the high Priest, fled to the Wood
Hareth, not far from Kegilah, some 20 miles, and came and told David of all
that had happened, 1. Sam. 22.23.

Of Kegilah.
THis was a City in the Tribe of Judah 4 miles from Hebron toward the East,
and 20 from Jerusalem toward the Southwest. From which town David drove away
the Philistines that had besieged it, 1 Samuel 23. You may read of it, Josh. 23.
Nehem. 3. In S. Ieroms time it was but a small town, where the inhabitants
show to strangers the Sepulcher of Abacuck the Prophet. Not far off toward
the West lies Hareth, that wood when David was when Abiather came to him.
Kegila in Hebrew signifies, a Tent.

The travels of King David.
David was anointed King by Samuel, when he was 20 years old, Anno mundi 2881,
and before Christ 1807. Within a while after, he was sent by his father Isay or
Iesse, to Gibea, of Saul, which was eight miles; there he played to Saul upon
the Harp, 1 Samuel 16.

When Saul went out with his Army against the Philistines, David returned back
to Bethlehem his own country, which was about eight miles. There he fed his
fathers sheep, 1 Samuel 17.

From thence he went to Socho and Asecha, and killed Goliath, which was four
miles.

From thence he carried the head of Goliath to Jerusalem, which was 8 miles.

From thence he went with king Saul to Gibeah, which was 4 miles.

From Gibeah he went 12 miles into the land of the Philistines: and to perform
the promise which he had made, put to the sword 200 of them.

From thence he returned and brought their forskins unto Saul, in recompense of
which noble exploit he was married to Saul's daughter, which was 12 miles.

A while after he made an incursion upon the land of the Philistines, and in a
sharp and cruel war got a famous victory, and returned with glory to Gibeah,
which was at the least 24 miles.

But when David perceived that Saul went about to take away his life, and that
(he was so narrowly pursued) he had no way to escape, but to be let down by a
cord through a window: he made have and went from Gibeah to Arimathea, where he
complained unto Samuel of the injuries of Saul, and laid before him in what a
miserable condition he was, and to what straits brought. Wherefore Samuel to
comfort him brought him to Naioth; which seems to be so called, of the fair
situation and pleasantness of the place: for Mabah signifies, a laudable and
comely place: this was a College of such as were professors of that sacred
study of divinity. Now Saul hearing that David was in this place, came with
some of his servants on purpose to make him captive. But at the sight of Samuel
he began to sing Psalms and Hymns after the manner of the Prophets.

From thence David returned back unto Gibeah, some 12 miles, where at the stone
of Ezel (not far from Gibeah toward the South) Jonathan went to David, and
counseled him to depart with all speed, for that his father meant evil
toward him. So they took leave either of other with tears, 1 Samuel 20. Ezel
signifies an Angle, as was a stone full of angles or corners.

From thence he went to Nob, which was 12 miles.

From thence he went to Gath a city of the Philistines, where he feigned
himself mad, because of Achis whom he feared, 1 Samuel 21. which was 24 miles.

From thence he went to the cave of Odullam, which was 24 miles, and thither
resorted unto him many of his kindred, and such as were indebted and in danger,
to the number of 40 persons. In this place he wrote the 57 and 142 Psalms, as
may appear by their titles.

From thence he went to Mizpah, in the land of the Moabites, where at this time
the King kept his court; and there he carefully commanded his friends and
followers to his safe protection, till such time as the fury of Saul was
assuaged, 1 Samuel 22.

From thence by the council of the Prophet Gad he returned by the wilderness
of Hareth, to Kegila, and rescued it, 40 miles. Here Abiather the Priest came
to him, 1 Samuel 23.

From thence fearing the coming of Saul, he went into the wilderness of
Ziph, whither Jonathan came to him, 1 Samuel 22. which was 4 miles.

From thence he went to the town of Moan, which was four miles.

From thence he went to the hold of Engedi, which were 36 miles.

From thence he went six miles to Carmel in Iudaea, where he determined to
have destroyed Nabal for his churlishness, 1 Samuel 25.

From thence he went to Hackilah, 2 miles.

From Hackilah he went to Gath, where Achis king of the Philistines kept his
court, which was 16 miles. This Achis was very courteous and bountiful minded,
he entertained David, and gave him freely the city of Ziclag to inhabit in, 1 Samuel 27.

Wherefore David went thence to the town of Ziclag, which was 12 miles, 1 Samuel
27. and there inhabited one year and seven months.

From thence David went often toward the South, and made incursions upon the
Amalekites, wasting and destroying their land which lay in the Desert of Sur,
about 80 miles distant from Ziclag, and a hundred and twenty miles from
Jerusalem toward the South-west

From the Desert of Sur he returned back again unto Ziclag which was 80
miles, and sent part of the prey which he had gotten, to the King of the
Philistines; of which you may read more 1 Samuel 27.

From Ziclag David went with the army of the Philistines to fight against Saul,
88 miles, even to Sunem: for the Philistines pitched between Iezreel and
Sunem, 1 Samuel 28.29.

But because the Princes of the Philistines durst not trust him, therefore by
the consent of Achis their King he returned back to Ziclag, 88 miles, 1 Samuel
29.

Whiles David was gone with the Philistines to fight against Israel, the
Amalekites invaded Ziclag, took it and burnt it with fire, and carried away
Ahinoam and Abigal (David's wives) captives. Wherefore when David came to Ziclag
and perceived what had happened, with all speed pursued the enemy; and in the way
as he went he found an Egyptian, who a little before, the Amalekits had left
there, because he was unable to follow them. This Egyptian guided David to the
tents of the Amalekits, who suspecting no such evil, were making merry with
the booty that they had taken. But David with the rest of his company so
manfully behaved themselves, that they gave the Amalekites a sudden overthrow:
and as it often happens to such as are negligent and careless, he took away
from them their former booty, and put most of them to the sword. This battle
was fought some 8 or 12 miles from Ziclag, as by the circumstance of the
history may appear.

From this slaughter he returned back to Ziclag, which is 12 miles, and
repaired it; to every neighboring city sending a part of the prey. Here he
had certain intelligence of the success of the Israelites in their wars
against the Philistines, and of the death of Saul and Jonathan, which he
bitterly lamented, 1 Samuel 30. 2 Samuel 1. These things happened in the 10 year
after Samuel had anointed David King.

From Ziclag he went to Hebron a metropolitan City of the tribe of Judah,
being a town of refuge belonging to the Levites, which was 16 miles.

At this time David was about the age of thirty years, and was anointed King
by the Tribe of Judah, in the year of the World 2891, and before Christ 1077.
Here he kept his Court seven years and six months. From hence also he sent
messengers to Iabes in Gilead, 44 miles, to signify his gracious acceptance of
that favor which they showed unto Saul, in burying of his body there, 2 Samuel
1. 1 Chr. 12.

From Hebron David went to Jerusalem, 22 miles, which then was called Iebus,
being possessed of the Iebusites; but he won it with strong hand, and thrust
them out of it; and in mount Sion set up the city Millo, which was after called
the city of David, and signifies, A place of plenty. He began his reign in
Jerusalem in the 38 year of his age, and 7 of his reign. In this place also he
set up his house made of Cedar wood, of which Hyram King of Tyrus sent him
great plenty from Mount Libanus, distant from thence, 104 miles, 2 Samuel 5. 1
Chr. 12.

From thence he went to the valley of Rephaim, some 3 miles from Jerusalem in
the way that leads to the city of Bethlem, where he fought a memorable fight
against the Philistines, and overcame them; for which cause it was also called
Baal-Perizim, because by the help and assistance of God he had conquered the
army of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 5.

After he had dispersed the enemies, he returned to Jerusalem which is 4 miles.

The Philistines came the same year into the valley of Rephaim again, and
pitched their tents within three miles and a half of Jerusalem: and the Lord
gave David a sign, that when he heard a noise in the mulberry trees, he
should set upon the enemy; so David went forth, and close by the town of Gaeba
and Kiriath-jearim, about two miles from Jerusalem Westward, he set upon the
enemy and gave them the second overthrow, 2 Samuel 5. 1 Chr. 15.

From thence David followed the enemy to Gaza, which was 18 miles, 2 Samuel 5. In
the 10 year of his reign from his first beginning in Hebron. David assembled
all the Princes, Priests, and chief men of Israel, to the number of 30000,
which inhabited from Sechor till you come to Chaemah, a city of Nepthalie, at
the foot of mount Libanus, even 163 miles off. These men assembled themselves
in the city of Jerusalem, and from thence they with David went to
Kiriath-jearim, which was about a mile, to fetch the Arc of the Covenant from
thence into the city of David. 1 Samuel 6. 1 Chr. 14.

From Kiriath-jearim David and all his train returned back again to
Jerusalem, which was about a mile; and they placed the Ark of the Lord in a
new cart, and caused it to be drawn with Oxen, which turned out of the way to
the threshing flower of Nachon, where Vza rashly and inconsiderately touching
the Ark of God, contrary to the Divine Law, was presently slain by the Lord
in the way, and that place was called Paeri-Vza, that is, The breach of Vza.
For he was not of the Tribe of Aaron, to whom it was only lawful to touch the
Arc, and therefore the Lord struck him that he died miserably: wherefore David
being terrified by this example of Gods severity, would not that day bring the
ark of the Lord into Jerusalem, but carried it to the house of a certain
Nobleman called Obed-Aedom a Gittite, who dwelt not far from Jerusalem; but
when it was told David, that the Lord blessed the house of Obed-Aedom and all
his family, because the arc was there; David went from Jerusalem with a great
multitude of people, to the house of Obed-Aedom, who (as is said before) dwelt
not far from Jerusalem, (yet there are some that say he was an excellent
musician in Jerusalem, and dwelt in Mount Acra, that is in the lower city) and
from thence David fetched the Ark of the Lord into the upper city, which stood
upon mount Sion; but I hold the other opinion to be the more probable.

When the Arc was carried by the Priests, David girt himself with a linen
Ephod, (which kind of garment the Priests of the inferior order used to wear)
and danced before it, singing Psalms and hymns to the praise and glory of God,
and with great state brought it to the city of Jerusalem with the sound of
Trumpets and instruments of music, and placed it in the middle of the
Tabernacle, which they had curiously erected in Mount Sion in the upper city,
which was also called the city of David. This happened in the tenth year of his
reign; at which time, Michal, Saul's daughter despised him in her heart, and
laughed at him: but God gave her a due recompense, as you may read, 2 Samuel 6.
and him a just reward; for he promised by the Prophet Nathan, That of his
posterity and blood, the King of Kings, and Savior of the world should be
borne.

In the year following, David invaded the land of the Philistines; and the city
of Gath, which with strong hand he won: this was 34 miles from Jerusalem.

From thence he returned back to Jerusalem, 34 miles.

In the twelfth year of his reign he afflicted the Moabits with cruel war, and
destroyed two of their armies with the sword, and the rest of the multitude
made tributarie; which was 24 miles, 2 Samuel 8. 1 Chr. 19.

He returned thence to Jerusalem with great triumph and joy, 24 miles.

In the 13 year of his reign, Anno mundi, 2903, and before Christ, 1065, he
made an expedition unto Zoba, which Josephus calls Sophenam, and is in
Armenia, near to Masia or Mount Taurus, 600 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North, of which you may read before. David in this place won a memorable
battle against Hadad-Ezer the King thereof, near to the river Euphrates; he
took 700 horse and 20000 foot, burnt their chariots, took 100 castles,
conquered all the Towns and Country round about, and went away with a great
booty, as well of Gold as silver, brass, and other things; which brass for
the excellency thereof was like unto gold, and (as Josephus says) afterward
Solomon made the molten sea of it. When Gadarezer King of the Syrians (he that
built that famous city of Damascus) heard of the overthrow of Hadad-Ezer, he
sent a great army to his aid; which King David near to the river Euphrates
smote with the sword, so that 20000 of them were slain, and he carried away a
glorious victory, extending his government from Jerusalem 600 miles toward
the North, that is, into Armenia, and beyond the river Euphrates, and made
these two nations tributary unto him, 2 Samuel 8. 1 Chr. 19.

After David had won these 2 memorable victories near Euphrates, he went
thence with all his army toward the South, and invaded the land of Syria; in
which journey Ioram the son of Tohi King of Antiochia (which city at this
time was called Hemath) met David with gifts and presents in the name of his
Father, returning him many thanks because he had destroyed the common enemy
Hadad-Ezer, and by strong hand subdued and quelled the fury of that mighty
tyrant, who was also a trouble and vexation to the Kingdom of Antiochia. David
entertained this message kindly, and thankfully received his gifts, (which was
of gold, silver and fine brass) and so gave Ioram an acceptable dispatch, and
from thence with his army went to Damascus, the Metropolitan city of Syria,
where in the valley of salt he got a great victory, in which 18000 Syrians were
slain, and soon after the City of Damascus taken; in which David placed a
garrison, and compelled them to pay tribute, 2 Samuel 8. This was distant from
the kingdom of Soba 520 miles.

From Damascus he went with his army into the land of the Ammonites, 100 miles
in the way that leads out of Syria to Jerusalem, all which he conquered, and
all the cities and towns thereabouts, and compelled them to pay tribute, 2 Samuel 8.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, which was 60 miles, and all the booty
that he had gotten in his journey he dedicated unto the Lord, 2 Samuel 8.

A while after, he with his army made an incursion into the land of Idumaea,
and compelled the inhabitants to pay tribute. Moreover, he destroyed the city
of Midian the Metropolitan of that country, of which you may read before: it
was distant from Jerusalem 160 miles toward the South. So that the extent of
David's kingdom from the North to the South, was 800 miles, even from the
kingdom of Soba to the Red sea: and from the East to the West 120 miles; from
Tyrus and Sydon reaching to Damascus. Thus by the singular blessing of God he
obtained a spacious and powerful Empire, 1 Samuel 8. 1 Reg. 11. 1 Chr. 19. He
made his expedition into Idumaea about the 14 year of his reign.

From Midian in Idumaea, he returned with great glory and praise to Jerusalem,
which was 160 miles.

In the 14 year of his reign, and in the year of the world 2904, and before
Christ 1064, Nahas King of the Ammonites died, and Haron his son succeeded
him: this man contemptuously abused the messengers of David, 2 Samuel 10. and to
justify that injury he gathered an army out of Soba, Siria, and Mesopotamia,
even a mighty Host, to oppose David; who in the 15 year of his government met
him with his Army at Helam, some twenty miles from Jerusalem where he obtained
a notable victory, and destroyed 700 chariots, and 40000 horse, 1 Chr. 20.

David after this, with great applause of the people was entertained into
Jerusalem, which was 20 miles distant, where being puffed up with prosperity, he
forgot his former piety and sanctity, and by degrees fell into unlawful
actions and unjust desires: whence it happened that soon after he committed
adultery with Bathseba: and after that, to hide his fault, caused her husband
to be slain. This was kept secret, till the Lord by Nathan sharply reprehends
him, lays before him what he was and what his present estate is, from whence
that came, and then concludes, that he is most unthankful, careless, and
negligent toward God and man, in committing those insolences; neither left he
there, but told him that God would severely punish him for his offense, which
after happened as you may read, 1 Sa. 11.12.14.17. David being nipt in his
conscience with this sharp reprehension, fell into great lamentation, the
extremity of whose passions may very well appear in the poenitentiall Psalms
which at this time and soon after he wrote, and left to future ages.

After this, about the end of Summer he gathered an army, and went into the
land of the Ammonites, some 64 miles, where he took the Metropolitan city,
(which at that time was called Rabba, because of the multitude of citizens that
were in it; but after being restored by Ptolomeus Philadelphus King of Egypt,
he called it after his own, Philadelphia) and there took the crown from the
head of the king of the Ammonites, which weighed a Talent of How much this was
you may read after in the quantity of weights.
gold, being (as Josephus says) richly adorned with fair Sardonicke stones,
of which you may read in 2 Samuel 12.

From thence he returned back to Jerusalem, which is 64 miles, where he
married Bathseba, and by her had four sons, Simeon, Sobab, Nathan, and
Solomon, 1 Chr. 3. Soon after this, Ammon defloured his sister Thamar: not
long after that, his son Absalon killed his brother Ammon, being then about 18
years of age; which David took so hainously, that he would not suffer him to
come into his sight for three years, 1 Samuel 13. Then Ioab by the subtlety of
the woman of Tekoa, reconciled him to the king his father: yet nevertheless,
he came not to his court of two years after. This Absolon was a goodly man,
affable, for which cause enen at that time the people began to affect him.

Afterward in the year of the world 2950, and before Christ 1408, Absolon
being then about 25 years of age, moved sedition against his father. A matter
remarkable, that although he had slain his own brother, being disgraced and
absent from the Court almost five years, yet within short time after, he so
strongly united the affection of the people to him, that he constrained David
(standing in fear of his greatness, all his former acts and worthy victories
notwithstanding) to forsake his own city, and for safety to fly to the mount
of Olives, being three quarters of a mile from the city.

There he stayed a while to see the condition of the tumult, but necessity
constrained him to take his way to Bahuzim. And as he was going, Zimri the
son of Gesa of the house of Saul, cursed him, every man's enemy then making
himself apparent when he is in adversity, and his best friends commonly
forsake him.

From thence he went to Jordan, 14 miles, where the Priests Jonathan and
Ahinaaz brought him certain intelligence of that wicked and perverse council
of Achitophel, a man in those times famous for his wisdom, but perfidious in
his actions, as commonly such are that hope after honors, or seek to benefit
themselves by innovation and change.

After he had intelligence hereof, he went over Jordan with those few men that
he had, and with all possible speed went to Bethabara, some 16 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North-East. At this place Ioshuah led the children of
Israel through Jordan on dry ground, Ios. 3.4. and here John the Baptist
taught, and baptized Christ. Mat. 1. and Luke 3.

From thence he went to Makanaim, which is twenty eight miles, where he sent
forth his army by bands against Absolon, who at this time had assembled a great
host near the Wood Ephraim, not far from that place where Ioshuah won a
memorable battle against the Canaanites: and that the place might be made
more famous, David's men, though few in number, gave Absalon and his host as
great. Thus Absalon being left in danger, to save himself fled: but in his
flight the hair of his head being long, and blown with the wind, took hold
of the branch of a tree, by which he hanged between heaven and earth, as
unworthy of either: and Ioab, who but a little before was his friend, in that
very place with three darts put him to death, a just end for so unjust a man. 1 Samuel 18.

David notwithstanding took the death of Absolon marvelous heavily, till by
Ioab he was recalled from that grief; and then in the company of Barzillai,
and of his son Chimea, of Mephiboseth the son of Jonathan, and Zeba his
servant, Shimei also that before cursed him, (who to leave a memorable token of
a base Sicophant) after this victory came first down to crave pardon for his
offense, with many others, went along with him from Makanaim to Bethabara,
which was 28 miles. To this place there came a great multitude of people to
meet David, 2 Samuel 19. This Barzillai was one of the eighteen that held the
principality of the city of the Giliadites, and had a son called Chimea,
whom David took with him to Jerusalem, that he might make evident his
thankfulness toward him for that courtesy which he had received of his
father.

From Bethabara David passed Jordan, and went back to Gilgal, which was 4
miles, 2 Samuel 19.

From thence he went to Jerusalem, which was 12 miles, in the same year that
he was exiled by his son, which was about the 13 year of his reign. The
next year Saba the son of Bicri, taking example of Absolon, and observing the
mutabilitie of the peoples affections, moved a sedition against David, but Ioab
his captain overcame him, 2 Samuel 20. After this, there followed three years of
famine. About the end of the third year of famine, and in the 34 year of his
reign, David went to Iabes Gilead, which was 52 miles, to fetch the bones of
Saul and Jonathan, to bury them in the sepulcher of his fathers, 2 Samuel 21.

From Iabes in Gilead, David brought the bones and relickes of King Saul and
Jonathan his son, to Gibeah of Saul, which was 52 miles, and there he
honorably buried them in the Sepulcher of his father Kish. 2 Samuel 21.

From thence David returned to Jerusalem, which was 4 miles.

In the 35 year of his reign he went forth to fight against the Philistines,
near to the Leuiticall town of Nob, or Nobe, which is 12 miles from Jerusalem,
upon the borders of the countries of the Philistines, in the tribe of Dan.

From thence he returned back again to Jerusalem, which is 12 miles.

So all the Travels of David were 3904 miles.

The Description of the places to which David traveled.
OF the cities of Socho, Asekah, Gibeon, Gibeah of Saul, Nob, Ziph, Moan,
Engaedi, Arimathea, Gath, the Cave of Odullam, Kegila, Paran, Apheck, and
Makanaim, you may read before in the travels of Saul, and the Judges of Israel.

Of Ziclag.
ZIclag was a town in the kingdom of Judah, near to the river Besor, 40 miles
from Jerusalem toward the Southwest; not far from Gaza, a city of the
Philistines. In Saint Ieroms time it was but a small town, 1 Samuel 27.

Of Sur.
SVr is a desert in the wilderness of Arabia Petraea, extending it self from
the utmost borders of Iudaea, to the Red Sea, even unto Egypt: and signifies,
a Bulwark, or place of defense; and is derived of Schor, which signifies, To
see, or contemplate: because from Bulwarks men may see into neighboring
countries. This was a place of defense of the Egyptians, Genesis 16.20.25. Ex.
15. 1 Samuel 15.17.

Of Sunem.
THis was a city in the tribe of Issacher, 48 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North, not far from Naim, where Christ raised the widows son to life, Luke
7. So did Elizaeus the Prophet also, 2 Kings 4. And seems to take the name of
a Purple or Scarlet color; being derived of Schanah, which signifies, He has
changed and interated a color.

Of Gazer.
GAzer is a town lying upon the borders of the Philistines, not far from
Ekron, 16 miles from Jerusalem Eastward. Of this you may read before.

Of Sichor.
THe river of Sichor was in the desert of Sur not far from Rhinocura (of which
it took the name) and runs thence into the Mediterraneam Sea: from whence
also it is called the river of Egypt, 1 Chronicles. 13. It is 72 miles from
Jerusalem Southwestward. Of the Hebrews it is called Schichor, or Siohor,
because of the blackness of the water.

Of Bahurim.
BAhurim was a town in the tribe of Benjamin, a mile and something more from
Jerusalem toward the Northeast. To this place Phaltiel followed his wife
Michael, 2 Samuel 3. Here also Shimei cursed David, 2 Samuel 16. At this time it is
a fair castle strongly fortified, standing in a high place. Near unto it in
the valley just in the Kings way, there is a stone called Bohen, taking that
name of Bohen the son of Reuben, and is of an extraordinary greatness,
shining like unto marble of this you may read in the 15 of Ioshuah, Bahurim or
Bachurim, signifies, A city of electors, being derived of Bachar, To elect or
choose.

Of David's name.
David is as much to say as, my dear, my beloved, my chosen one: being derived
of Dod, which signifies, a friend, or beloved. For which cause, he was said to
be a man after Gods own heart.

How David was a type of Christ.
David represented Christ diverse ways, First, in his name, (he was beloved) so
God testifies of Christ, This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased.
Secondly, in the place of his birth, he was borne at Bethlem, so was Christ.
Thirdly, in his employment, he was a shepherd; so was Christ: I am the true
Shepherd; for a good Shepherd gives his life for his Sheep, etc. Fourthly,
in his music; David was cunning upon the harp, and by that comforted the
afflicted spirit of Saul: so Christ by the music and harmony of his doctrine
(the glad tidings of salvation) comfort the afflicted members of his Church.
Fifthly, David got his glory and preferment by the death of Goliath: so Christ
was glorified by conquering Death and the Devil. Sixthly, David was persecuted
by Saul, and pursued from one place to another, so that he had not where to
hide his head with safety; so Christ was persecuted by his own countrymen the
Jews, shut out from the society of man; and as he said, Mat. 8. The Foxes have
holes, and the Birds have nests; but the Son of man has not where to hide his
head. Seventhly, in the dangers that David sustained, by Gods providence he was
mercifully delivered: so Christ was enclosed and in danger of the Jews at
Nazareth, Luke 4. in Jerusalem; in the Temple also. Ioh. 8. but he escaped them
al, because then his time was not come, Io. 7.8. Eighthly, as Absolon rebelled
against David, being his father; so the Jews rebelled against Christ, although
he was their Creator: according to that of Esaias 61. I have fed and brought up
children, but they have forsaken me. Ninthly, as David fled to Mount Olivet for
refuge, being brought to a straight; so Christ upon Mount Olivet (his heart
being pressed with an intolerable agony) fled to his Father by prayer, for
comfort in that extremity. Tenthly, as all the friends and familiars of David
forsook him at such time as Absolon rebelled against him, and followed him
with persecutions, mocks and taunts; so Christ at such time as Judas betrayed
him into the hands of the Jews, was forsaken of all his followers, and many of
those which a little before he had done good unto, mocked and derided him as he
was upon the Cross. Lastly, as David was restored, notwithstanding the former
miseries and troubles, to his ancient glory and eminency; so Christ after he
had suffered the due punishment for sin, death, and (before that) extteame
misery; yet at length conquered both, and by his divine power restored
himself to his former estate, eternal glory.

The Travels of ABNER, one of Saul's Captains.
He went with King Saul from Gibeah to the Wilderness of Ziph, which was 22
miles. Here he was rebuked by David for his negligence.

From thence he returned to Gibeah, 22 miles, 1 Samuel 31.

From thence he traveled to the hill Gilboa, where Saul killed himself, 40
miles.

From thence he went to Machanaim, where he made Ishbosheth (Saul's son) King,
who kept his court there seven years; 16 miles. 2 Samuel 2.

From thence he went to Gibeon, where he slew Asahel, Ioabs brother, in
battle. Which was 44 miles, 2 Samuel 2.

From thence he went over Jordan to Bythron, 28 miles.

From thence he went back to Machanaim, 16 miles, 2 Samuel 2

Lastly, he went thence to Hebron to David, and made a Covenant with him; where
he was treacherously slain by Ioab: and was 68 miles.

So all the travels of Abner were 256 miles.

Of Bithron.
BIthron or Betharan was a town beyond Jordan in the tribe of Gad, some 28
miles from Jerusalem Northeastward, lying between Dibon and Jordan. It takes
the name from a House of singing; being derived of Both, which signifies a
House; and Ron, He sung joyfully.

The Travels of IOAB.
IOAB David's Captain was the son of Zerviah, David's sister: for he had two,
Zerviah and Abogale; Zerviah had Ioab, Abishas, and Asael. Abigal had only
Amasa, all which were great men in King David's time. Now when Ioab heard that
Abner had brought down his army to Gibeon, he went from Hebron thither, which
was 24 miles: and there his brother Asahel was slain, 2 Samuel 2.

From thence he went to Bethlehem, 16 miles, where he buried his brother, 2 Samuel 2.

From thence he returned to Hebron, 20 miles. Here under the gates of the city
he traitorously killed Abner, 2 Samuel 3.

From thence he went with David to Jerusalem, where he won Sion, and drove
thence the blind and the lame, being 82 miles.

From thence he went with his Army against the Ammonites and Syrians, whom he
conquered in a cruel fight, 60 miles, 1 Samuel cap. 10.

From thence he returned back to Jerusalem, 60 miles.

From thence he went with David into Idumea, 160 miles from Jerusalem
Southward; there he won the town of Midian, and conquered the Idumaeans or
Edomites, 2 Samuel 8.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem with his Army, being 160 miles.

From thence he went and besieged Rabba the metropolitan city of the
Ammonites, being 64 miles from Jerusalem North-Eastward. Here Vriah was slain,
2 Samuel 11.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem with K. David, 64 miles

From thence he went into the kingdom of Gesur, which lies beyond Jordan upon
Mount Libanus, by the town of Caesarea Philippi, some 80 miles from Jerusalem
Northeastward. This country was called Trachonites. From this land Ioab
brought Absolon again to Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 14.

From thence he returned back again with Absolon to Jerusalem, 88 miles.

From thence he went with David (when he fled from his son Absolon) to
Machanaim, being 44 miles. Not far from hence he slew Absolon, 2 Samuel 18.

From thence he came again with King David to Jerusalem, 44 miles, 2 Samuel 10.

From thence he went to Gibeah, where he killed Amasa, which was 4 miles.

From thence he went to the town of Abel-Bethmaacha in the tribe of Nepthali,
being about 88 miles. This town he straightly besieged.

From thence he went again to Jerusalem, 88 miles.

Afterward he went, as David commanded him, to number the people at Aroer a
town beyond Jordan, which was 24 miles, 2 Samuel 24.

From thence he went to Iaezer, which is 16 miles.

From thence going through the land of Gilead, and passing by the territories
of the lower country of Hadsi, he came to the town of Dan, near to the place
where the fountains of Jordan are which is accounted 116 miles.

From thence he went to that famous mart town Sidon, which was 24 miles.

From that great town Sidon he went to the walls of Tire, to which place great
multitudes of ships resorted; which was sixeteene miles.

From thence he went toward the South til he came to the city Beersaba, which
was the utmost bounds of the Holy land Southwestward, and was reckoned 132
miles.

From thence he returned back to Jerusalem where he delivered to David the
number of those that were chosen soldiers, 2. Sam. 24. but the Lord struck
the country and city of Jerusalem with a great plague, because he did contrary
to his command, 2 Samuel 24.

So all the travels of Ioab were 1348 miles.

The description of the places to which he traveled.
MAny of those cities mentioned in the travels of Ioab, are already described
and set forth; therefore I account it needless in this place again to repeat
them, but only such towns as yet have not bin mentioned.

Of Gesur.
GEsur was a country near to Caesarea Philippi, in the land of Basan beyond
Jordan, near Libanus, in the Tetrarchie Trachonitides, 88 miles from Jerusalem
Northeastward. With the King of this country Absolon remained in banishment for
3 years space, after he had slain his brother Ammon; and with us may be termed
the valley of Oxen, 2 Samuel 13.

Of Hadsi.
THe lower country of Hadsi stood near to the city Corazin in the half tribe
of Manasses, 52 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast, and signifies a new
land; being derived of Chadasch, that is, New.

Of the fountain Rogel.
THis was near Jerusalem Eastward; to which place Jonathan and Ahimaas (David's
intelligencers) brought him news of Absalons counsels and intentions, 2 Samuel
17. It seems that travelers usually washed their feet in it, from whence it
was called the Well of feet; being derived from Raegael, signifying a Foot.
Near to this place was the stone Zochaeleth, where Adoniah (at such time as he
affected the kingdom, contrary to his fathers liking) called an assembly and
made a great feast, 1 Reg. 1.

The Travels of Baena and Rechab.
THese two went out of the tribe of Benjamin over Jordan to Machanaim, 40
miles. There they murdered their master king Ishbosheth in his chamber as he
lay upon his bed, and after cut off his head.

The head they brought to King David to Hebron, 68 miles. But David was not
pleased with their treachery, wherefore he caused them both to be put to
death.

So their travels were 108 miles.

The Travels of Absalon.
ABsalon was borne in Hebron, and went with his father to Jerusalem, 22 miles,
2 Samuel 13.

From thence he went to Baalhazor, 8 miles, where he caused his brother Ammon
to be slain.

From thence for fear of his father he fled into the land of Gesur, 88 miles,
2 Samuel 14.

From thence he came back with Ioab to Jerusalem, which was 88 miles, 2 Samuel
14.

From thence he went to Hebron, 22 miles, and made himself King, and rebelled
against his father.

From thence he went back again to Jerusalem, which is 22 miles. There he lay
with his fathers Concubines, 2 Samuel 16.

From thence he pursued his father to Machanaim, 40 miles, and there was hanged
by the hair in an oak tree, where Ioab put him to death, 2 Samuel 18.

So all the travels of Absolon were 290 miles.

Of Baal-hazor.
IN this city Absolon made a great feast for his sheepe-sherers, and invited
all his brothers to it, where he caused Ammon to be slain, because he had
abused his sister Thamar. It lies in the way some 8 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North-East, as you go to Jericho, near to mount Ephraim, 2 Samuel 13.
and is derived of Baal, which signifies a Lord or husband; and Chazir, a Den or
cave.

Of the name ABSOLON.
ABSOLON signifies a Father of peace, although he was the author of all
discord and sedition against his father.

The Travels of the wise woman of Thecoa.
THis woman went from Thecoa to Jerusalem, 8 miles; and spoke with King David;
and with her sweet words she persuaded him that he would recall his son out
of exile, who then remained in Gesur, 2 Samuel 14.

Of Thecoa.
THecoa was a city in the tribe of Judah, some 8 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Southeast: near this city Iosaphat by prayer and the sound of Trumpets,
without drawing sword, got a memorable victory; and for that cause it
signifies the sound of a Trumpet. In this place the prophet Amos dwelt, and
there lies buried; whose sepulcher was to be seen 400 years after Christ, as
S. Ierom observes. It was from Bethlem Judah 6 miles. Near to Techoa was the
lake Aspher, where Jonathan and Simon (Judas Machabeus brothers) pitched their
tents, 1 Match. 9. Of this city you may read, Ier. 6. Am. 1. 2 Chr. 11.

Of ACHITOPHEL.
THis perfideous and wicked man was borne in the town of Gilo, not far from
Hebron and Debir in the tribe of Judah, Ios. 15. 2 Samuel 15. 20 miles from
Jerusalem Southeastward; who when his counsel would not take place, he went
home to his own house, and there desperately hanged himself.

The Travels of wicked Shimei,
SHimei went from Bahurim (where he cursed King David) to Bathabara upon the
river Jordan, which was 18 miles; where he got pardon of David, 2 Samuel 19.

From thence he went back with King David to Gilgall, four miles, 2 Samuel 19.

From thence he went with King David to Jerusalem, 12 miles, 2 Samuel 19.

From thence he went to Bahurim, 3 miles.

From Bahurim King Solomon sent for him again to Jerusalem, 3 miles. There he
was constrained to build him an house, and not to depart thence upon pain of
death, 1 Reg. 2.

But Shimei transgressing this commandment of the king, went to Gath a city of
the Philistims, 12 miles.

From thence he returned back again to Jerusalem, 12 miles, where he was
slain by the command of King Solomon, in the third year of his reign, 1 Reg. 2.

So all the travels of Shimei were 104 miles.

The Books of Kings and Chronicles.
Of ABISHAG the Virgin that lay with David.
THis Maid was accounted the fairest in all Israel, for which cause she was
brought to Jerusalem for King David, that she might lie with him in his old age
to procure heat: she was born at Sunem, a town some 44 miles from Jerusalem, 1
Reg. 1. Of Sunem you may read before in the travels of David and Saul.

The Travels of King Solomon.
SOlomon the son of David King of Israel entered upon the full government of the
kingdom of Israel, An. mundi 2931. and before Christ 1037. when he was about
20 years old. After, he went from Jerusalem to Gilgal, 4 miles, and there
offered upon the altar which Moses had made, 1000 burnt offerings, 1 Reg. 3. 2
Chr. 1.

From thence he went back to Jerusalem, which was 4 miles, and built a Temple
to the Lord in mount Moriah, 1 Reg. 6. This was begun about the fourth year of
his reign, and 480 years after the children of Israel came out of Egypt, in the
month Ziph, which answers to our May. So that the Temple began to be built
in Anno mundi 2934. and before Christ 1034. To the building whereof Hiram King
of Tire sent Cedar trees from Mount Libanus, 120 miles, to Jerusalem, 1 Reg. 5.
2 Chr. 2. This Temple Solomon within plaited over with pure gold, and set with
precious stones, and finished it in the month of November, about the eleventh
year of his reign, 1 Reg. 6. The dedication whereof was about the twelfth
year of his reign, and in the 32 year of his age, Anno Mundi, 2942, and
before Christ, 1026. The Temple being finished, he began to build his own
house, which was 13 years a building, and was finished about the 44 year of
his age, and in the 24 of his reign, 1 Reg. 7.8.

After 20 years, in which time he had finished the house of the Lord, and his
own house in Mount Sion; that he might manifest his thankfulness to the King
of Tire, he went to Cabul a city in the tribe of Ashur, some 80 miles
Northward, where he gave to the aforesaid Hiram 20 towns or cities, with all
the country round about: wherefore King Hiram called this Cabul, that is,
Displeasant and dirty, 2 Reg. 9. You may read of Cabul, Ios. 19.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, 88 miles.

From thence he went to Hazor, and restored the city, which was 44 miles.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, 44 miles.

From thence he went to Megiddo, which is not far from Iesreel in the tribe
of Manasses, 44 miles from Jerusalem toward the North. This city Solomon
fortified, 1 Reg. 9. and Josiah King of Judah a long time after was there
wounded to death, 2 Reg. 9.

From Megiddo he returned to Jerusalem, 44 miles.

After that Pharaoh King of Egypt had conquered Gaser, and destroyed it with
fire, he gave it to his Daughter the Wife of Solomon, who rebuilt it. This
town was situated in the tribe of Ephraim, 28 miles from Jerusalem Northward,
1 Reg. 9.

From Gaser Solomon returned back again to Jerusalem, being 28 miles.

From thence he went to the higher Bethoron, which he fortified; and stood
twenty eight miles from Jerusalem Northward; 2 Chr. 8.

From thence he went to the lower Bethoron, 16 miles from the upper toward the
South, 1 Reg. 9. 2 Chr. 8.

From the lower Bethoron he went to Jerusalem, which was 8 miles.

After, Solomon built the city Belath, which was 12 miles from Jerusalem
Northwestward, 1 Reg. 9. 2 Chr. 8.

From thence he returned back to Jerusalem, 12 miles, and it is very like that
Solomon often visited those towns that he had built and restored.

From Jerusalem he went to Hemath (afterward called Antiochia) which was 320
miles, and compassed it about with a wall, fortified it, and afterward
constrained all the kingdoms thereabout to be obedient to his government, 2
Chr. 8.

From thence he went with great state into the kingdom of Zoba, which is 600
miles, and fortified all the great cities and castles of that country, that
with the greater facility they might oppose the invasions of neighboring
countries.

From thence he returned to that famous city Thamar, which was also called the
city of the Palms, 400 miles: this he rebuilt and fortified, 1 Reg. 9. 2 Chr.
8.

From thence he went to Jerusalem, which is 388 miles.

From thence he went to Ezeongaber near the Red sea in the country of
Idumaea, where he built a company of stately ships, and sent them to India to
fetch gold, which was 176 miles from Jerusalem Southward, 1 Reg. 9.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, which is 176 miles. But of his great
prosperity and abundance of riches he grew proud, (for he excelled all the
Kings near him) and gave himself to unlawful pleasures; he took unto him
300 Concubines, and 70 wives, by whose persuasion he began to worship the gods
of the Gentiles, which idolatry was evil in the sight of the Lord. And after
he had reigned forty years (which was about the sixtieth of his age) he died,
and was buried by his father David in Mount Sion the city of David, An. mundi
2770, and before Christ 998.

So all the travels of Solomon were 2544 miles.

The description of the places to which he traveled.
Of Gazer you may read before in the travels of David.

Of Bethoron.
THe upper and the lower Bethoron were two Cities in the tribe of Ephraim,
built by Saaerah the daughter of Ephraim, 1 Chronicles. 7. The inferior Bethoron
was not far from the Castle of Emmaus, 8 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northwest. The superior was 20 miles distant toward the North. These towns
Solomon repaired. Near to the lower Bethoron the Lord put the enemies of
Ioshuah to flight with thunder and hail, Ios. 10. Here also Judas Machabeus
overcame the army of Antiochus 1 Mac. 3. Here also he put Nicanor to death, 1
Mac. 7. and signifies A white house; being derived of Beth, which signifies an
house; and Chor, he has made white.

Of Baaelath.
THis is a city twelve miles from Jerusalem Northwestward, in the tribe of Dan.
This city Solomon repaired at such time as he fell in love with many women:
from whence it seems to take his name: for Baaeleth signifies, his beloved
Lady.

Of Thamar.
THamar, Tadmor, or Palmira, stood partly in the desert of Siria, and partly in
a fruitful soil; being compassed about on the one side with a Wood, on the
other with fair and pleasant fields. It was the Metropolitan city of all
Syria, not far from Euphrates, some 388 miles from Jerusalem Northeastward;
and as Pliny says, lib. 5. cap. 25. Although it lay betwixt two mighty
Empires, Rome and Parthia, yet it was subject to neither; fairly situated, a
free city, adorned with fair and sumptuous buildings, and contented with their
own government. The wildernesses called after this towns name, Palmarnae, or
the deserts of the Palms, extend themselves to Petra the metropolitan city of
Arabia Petraea, and to the borders of Arabia foelix, one days journey from
Euphrates, two from the upper part of Syria, and six from Babylon, as Josephus
observes, Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 5. This city Solomon made tributary to him, and
fortified it with strong walls, 1 Reg. 9.

Of Ezeongaber you may read before.

The Typical signification of Solomon.
SOLOMON is as much as Frederick in High Dutch, which signifies a Peacemaker;
being derived of the Hebrew word Schelomoh, or Schalom, to bring glad tidings
of peace. Typically representing Christ the Prince of peace, who has
reconciled us with his heavenly Father, and merited an eternal place of peace
and happiness for all such as trust in him, Esaias 9. And as Solomon built up
the Temple of the Lord with great majesty and glory; so Christ has built up
that heavenly Temple the Church of God, and adorned it with the gifts and
graces of his holy Spirit, in this world, that so it might be capable of
eternal glory in the world to come, 2 Cor. 6.

The Travels of Solomon's Ships.
THis Navy of Solomon's went unto Ophir, that is India, which was accounted from
the Mart town 4800 miles.

From India they returned back again, 4800 miles: so all their travels were
9600 miles.

This journey was finished in 3 years to and again; so that every year they
went 3200 miles, and brought home plenty of gold silver, precious stones,
Ebony, etc.

Of India.
MOses called this country Havilah, Genesis 2. and Ios. li. Antiq. 8. c. 7. Ophir:
which name (says he) it took of two brothers so called, which inhabited and
governed that country all along the river Ganges. But more modern writers
derive it from Indus a river passing through it. It is a spacious and fruitful
country, pleasant to inhabit; and as Pomponius says, has in it 5000 cities,
being divided into two parts, the outward and inward.

The Travels of the Queen of Saba.
FRom Saba in Ethiopia she came to Jerusalem, 964 miles.

From Jerusalem she returned back again, which was 964 miles.

So all her travels were 1928 miles.

Of Aethiopia.
THis Country by the Hebrews is called Chus, of Chus the son of Cham, who was
the son of Noah: and after, Aethiopia, (ab astu torrida) because of the great
heat wherewith oftentimes the habitable land and people, as also the
wilderness were sorely scorched and burned: for it is situated in the third
part of the world called Africa, lying under the torrid Zone, and the Equator,
which two by common experience are found to be extreme hot.

Of Saba.
SAba is a metropolitan city in Ethiopia, lying beyond Egypt, 846 miles from
Jerusalem toward the South: and took the name from a certain precious stone
called Achates, wherein might plainly be discerned in certain distinct colors,
the rising of fountains, the channels of rivers, high mountains, and sometimes of
chariots and horses drawing them. It is reported, That Pyrrhus King of the
Epirots had one of them, wherein was lively represented the nine Muses, and
Apollo playing on the Viol, portrayed by natural stains and colors, so
artificially, as if they had bin don by some curious workman. Of this stone you
may read more in Pliny, li. 37. ca. 1.10. It was first found in Achates a
river of Sicilia, whence it took the name. Afterward in India and Phrygia, and
of the Hebrews was called Schaeba or Saba. In this city that Queen dwelt who
came to hear Solomon's wisdom, and gave him for a present 120 talents of pure
gold, which at 3 pounds an ounce comes to 270000 pounds sterling. Afterward
Cambyses King of Persia overcame it and all the country round about it, and
after his sisters name called it Meroes. It is a stately city to this day,
situated in a plain country, and compassed about with the river Nilus like an
Island, being now called Elsaba, having some affinity to the ancient name Saba.

The Inhabitants of this town go naked, all but their privy parts, which they
cover either with Silk, Cotton, or some more costly matter; and are of a
black color, which as some think, happens by reason of the extreme heat. The
land also is maruellously scortched, and turned in many places to sand and
dust. So that the country is thereby wonderful barren.

About Meroes or Saba, which is made fruitful by the inundation of Nilus, there
is found plenty of salt, brass, iron, and some precious stones. Their sheep,
goats, oxen, and other cattle are of less stature than in other Countries.
Their dogs are very fierce and cruel.

In times past there were mighty princes that had the government and command
of it, and the Country round about it. But after (as Pliny says, lib. 6. cap.
29.) it was in the jurisdiction and government of Queens, who for their noble
resolutions and courage were called Candaces. One of which name in Tiberius the
Emperors time was famous, both for the extent of her dominions (in which she
exceeded all the rest of her predecessors) as also in regard of her manly
presence and noble spirit. The Eunuch which Philip baptized, Acts 8. was
Treasurer or Chamberlain to this Queen: and it is to be thought, By him the
doctrine of the Gospel of Christ was first made known in Saba, and in the
country of Aethiopia; which afterward was more largely propagated and
dispersed by the Evangelist S. Matthew, who taught there.

This city lies to the longitude of 61 degrees and 30 scruples, and in the
elevation of the Pole Artick to the latitude 16 degrees and 25 scruples. So
that it seems the inhabitants have two winters and two summers, or rather a
continual summer, because their winter is much hotter than our summer. But when
the Sun attaineth to the 15 degree of Taurus and Leo, and in the Dog days,
it then lies perpendicular over that country, and neither their bodies nor
houses give any shadows.

In the 61 of Esaias it is said, They shall come from Saba, and bring gold and
frankincense to praise the Lord. From whence some some have concluded, That
those wise men which came unto the child Jesus, and brought Gold,
Frankincense, and Myrrh, were Aethiopians, and came thence. But this agrees
not well with the words of Matthew, ca. 2. where it is written, That the wise
men came out of the East, that is, from the rising of the Sun, to Jerusalem.
For Saba, according to our Sauiors words, Mat. 12. lies toward the South; for
he says, The Queen of the South (that is, of Saba) shall come forth in the day
of Judgment against this generation, and condemn it, for she came from the
end of the world to hear the wisdom of Solomon, etc. But if Saba lie upon
the South, as here it plainly appears, then it must needs follow they came
not thence, but rather from Persia, which from Jerusalem lies Eastward. For at
Susa the metropolis of that country, there was an Academy for the whole
kingdom; in which were chiefly studied Divinity, the Mathematickes, and
History. So that it is likely, by their Art they might attain to the knowledge
of this divine Mystery, and from thence come to Jerusalem, which was 520 miles
Eastward. Therefore this place of the Prophet Esaias is rather to be referred to
the propagation of the church through the whole world, where some of every
nation shall bring presents unto the Lord.

There is also another Saba in Arabia Foelix, so called from Zaeba the son of
Chus, the son of Cham, the son of Noah; and it is distant from Jerusalem 1248
miles toward the Southeast. In Hebrew it signifies the city of Drunkenness, or
of Mirth; but with the Syrians, Antiquity. Some would have it in the Arabian
tongue to signify a Mystery. But S. Ierom interprets it, To sound their
conversion. It is the metropolitan City of Arabia Foelix, and by Strabo, lib.
6. called Meriaba, being situated in a high and pleasant mountain full of
fruitful trees.

There inhabiteth in it the King of that country (a mighty Prince) his
Governors, and most of such as have authority under him. The land is called the
Kingdom of the Sabaeans, but generally, Arabia Foelix, because of the
fertility of the place; for it yields twice every year great plenty of
Frankincense, Myrrh, Cinnamon, Balsam, and other odoriferous herbs. The tree
out of which this Myrrh comes is five cubits high, hairy, and full of
prickles, and when you cut the bark there comes forth a bitter gum,
wherewith if you anoint a dead body, it will continue long without rotting. The
frankincense also that is found there, droppeth from Cedar trees like a glewie
substance, and so congealeth into a Gum. This happens twice every year, and
according unto the season it changes color: in the Spring it is red, in the
Summer white. This is the best Frankincense in all Arabia Foelix. Through the
whole country there is a very delectable smell, by reason of the Myrrh,
Frankincense and Cinnamon that is found in it; insomuch that if the wind
blows amongst the trees it carries the smell unto the red sea, and they that
sail can easily discern the sweetness of the air. There is gold also found
there, very fine and pure, insomuch as for the goodness of it, it is called
Arabian gold. The Phoenix is found there, of which there is but one in the
world. Pliny, lib. 9. cap. 35. describes her to be as big as an Eagle, with a
list of feathers like gold about her neck, the rest are of a purple color;
therefore from Phoenicea and the purple color of her wings she is called
Phoenix. She has a tuft of feathers upon her head like unto a crown. She
lives 660 years, at the end of which time she builds her a nest of Cassia,
Cinnamon, Calamus, and other precious Gummes and herbs, which the Sun by the
extremity of the heat and the wauing of her wings fires; and she taking
delight in the sweetness of the savor, houers so long over it, that she burns
her self in her own nest. Within a while after, out of the marrow of her
bones, and the ashes of her body, there grows a worm, which by little and
little increases to some bigness, and after to a purple bird. Then her wings
extend themselves to a full greatness, till such time as she comes to be a
perfect Phoenix.

This Bird does lively represent our Savior Christ, who only and alone is the
true Messiah, and through whom we must expect everlasting life, who in the
fullness of time offered himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross, sustaining the
punishment for sin at the time of his Passion, putting on a purple robe, being
all be sprinkled with his own blood, Ioh. 19. And as the Phoenix is burnt in
her own nest, so likewise was he consumed in the fire of Gods wrath,
according to that in the 22 Psalm. My heart is become like melting wax in the
midst of my body. And as the Phoenix of it self begets another of the
same kind; so Christ by the power of his Deity raised up his body from the
dust of the earth, and ascended up into heaven a glorious body, to sit at the
right hand of his father in that everlasting Kingdom of glory.

Thus (gentle Reader) I thought fit to describe unto you these two towns, that
when you shall read of them in the holy Scripture (the one being in Aethiopia
toward the South, the other in Arabia Foelix, and called Seba) you might
discern the one from the other: of both which there is mention in the 72
Psalm, The Kings of the Sea and of the Isles shall bring presents; the Kings
of Saba, and Seba, shall give gifts.

The Travels of King Pharaoh out of Egypt, when he overcame the Town of
Gazer, 1 Reg. 9.
IN the 16 year of King David, Anno mundi, 2906, and before Christ, 1602,
Chabreus King of Egypt, began to reign, and reigned 56 years, Diod. lib. 2.
cap. 2. Herodotus calls this man Chephrines, in his second book; and
Eusebius, Nepher Cherres. He went from Memphis the chief City of Egypt, with
a great army, 268 miles, even unto the tribe of Ephraim, and there took
Gazer, a City of the Levites, and burned it with fire, 1 Reg. 8. Ios. 21.

After he came to Jerusalem, which was 28 miles. And this city which he had
thus destroyed he gave to his daughter, the wife of Solomon, 1 Reg. 9.

From thence he returned to Memphis in Egypt, 244 miles.

So all the Travels of King Pharaoh were 244 miles.

Of Memphis.
MEmphis is a great city in Egypt, where commonly the kings of that country
keep their Courts; and lies from Jerusalem 244 miles South-westward. This
city was built a little before the flood, but repaired and enlarged by a king
called Ogdoo, who in love of his daughter (after her name) called it Memphis.
You may read of it in the ninth of Hosea, called there by the name of Moph;
for thus he says, The people of Israel are gone out of the land of Ephraim,
because of their Idolatry, into Egypt: but Egypt shall gather them up, and
Moph (that is, Memphis) shall bury them. Moph, or Mapheth in this place
signifies, A prodigious wonder: but the rest of the Prophets call it Noph, for
the fertility and pleasantnes of the country, as you may read, Esa. 19. The
Princes of the Zoan are become foolish, and the Princes of Noph (or of Memphis)
are deceived. See also Ierem. 2.44.46. Ezech. 30. in which places you may find
it called after this name. Zoan is the city Tanis, where Moses wrought all his
miracles: But Noph, or Moph, is this Memphis; a beautiful town, large and
spacious, situated in the strongest and profitablest place in Egypt; divided
into two parts by the river Nilus, so that any kind of commodities or
merchandise might with ease be brouht thither by water: for which cause the
kings of that country (for the most part) kept their abiding there. Strabo
says lib. 17. That upon the East part of this city there stands a Tower or
Castle called Babylon, built by certain Babylonians, who leaving their own
country, by the permissions of the kings of Egypt dwelt there: in after times
there was placed a garrison in it, one of the three which were for the defense
of Egypt, and by Ptolomy was called Babylon, through both which, viz. Memphis
and Babylon, Nilus passed; the one standing upon the East side, the other upon
the West. Zoan or Tanis stood about some four miles from this town, and was a
fair and spacious city also, situated toward the South upon the East side
of Nilus, to which the kings of that country often resorted, and Heliopolis,
anothet fair city, stood some six miles off that toward the Northeast. All
these four towns were so wonderfully inhabited (by reason of their pleasant
and profitable situation) that in process of time they become all one city;
and in this age is called Alcaire, containing in circuit 60 miles: so that it
seems to spectators to be like a country replenished with nothing but fair
houses, goodly churches, and strong towers; exceeding all the rest of the
cities of Egypt, as well for the beautifulness of the place, as the extent and
largeness of it. It is reported, that in the year of our Lord 1476, there was
such an extreme pestilence in it, that there died 20000 a day, from whence may
be gathered, how infinitely it is peopled. Near to this town stood the
Pyramides, which are held to he one of the wonders of the World (as Strabo
says, lib. 17.) the height of one of them was 625 foot, and square on each
side 883 foot; it was twenty years a building, a hundred thousand workmen
employed about it: whence it may be easily gathered, how hard and difficult it
was in those times to get stone (it being for the most part brought from
Arabia) and at what an excessive charge they were that set up them.

Of Gazar.
This City is described in the Travels of Solomon.

The Travels of Hadad King of Idumaea.
WHen David conquered Idumaea, Hadad the King of that country with some few of
his courtiers, being then but young, fled from Midian to Paran the Metropolitan
City of Arabia Petraea, which was 84 miles, 1 Reg. 11.

But because he thought himself scarce safe in that place, he fled thence to
Cheopes, that impious and tyrannical King of Egypt that built the greatest of
the three Pyramides at Memphis. He (hating King David) gave him kind
entertainment, assigned him a part of the Kingdom of Egypt to dwell in, and
after married him with his sister Tachpenes, by whom he had a son called
Genubath, who was brought up in Pharaohs, or King Chopes court, where he
continued all the life of David, being 27 years; which was 120 miles.

David being dead, he returned into his own kingdom of Idumaea, which was 200
miles.

From thence he went to Damascus, which was 240 miles, where he was created
King of the Syrians by Reason and other fugitives, which had conspired against
Solomon, by which means he grievously troubled that Kingdom, and became an
utter enemy to the Israelites all the life of Solomon. And of him is the
original and stock of the Kings of Syria. So all the travels of Hadad were
644 miles.

Of Midian and Paran you may read before: in the one dwelt Iethro, Moses
father in law; in the other Ishmael, that being the chief city of his
dominions, as you may read, Genesis 21. Ex. 2.

Of Reason, Solomon's adversary.
AFter David had conquered Hadad Ezer king of Zoba, Reason his chief captain
gathered up his dispersed soldiers of his army, and fled from him to Damascus,
which was 120 miles, and besieged it: the Citizens whereof (when neither David
nor Solomon could suppress his rebellion) entertained him for their King,
which principality he held.

The Travels of the Kings of Israel; and first of JEROBOAM.
THis man was the son of Nebat, and borne at a town called Zared, not far
from Bethlehem Ephrata; some eight miles from Jerusalem: from whence he came
to Solomon, who made him captain, that he might collect the tribute of
Manasses and Ephraim, 1 Reg. 11. which was eight miles.

From Jerusalem as he went to Shilo (which was four miles) he met the Prophet
Ahijah the Shilonite, who told him that he should be King of Israel, 1 Reg. 11.

From thence he went to Memphis in Aegipt, which was 224 miles, (because
Solomon sought his life) where he remained with Sesak king of Egypt, all the
life of Solomon. Eusebius calls this King Osochores, who that same year
succeeded Macrenius (Solomon's father in law) in that government.

From thence he returned to the town of Sichem in Israel, which was 280
miles, where the Israelites made him chief captain, against Rehoboam,
Solomon's son. Wherefore Jeroboam the son of Nebat, began to reign over
Israel, An. mundi, 2971, and before Christ, 997, and reigned 22 years, 1 Reg.
12. His first seat was at Sichem, which he repaired and enlarged.

From Sichem (in the first year of his reign) he went to Penuell, and there
set up many fair buildings, which was twelve miles, 1 Reg. 12.

From Penuel he went 24 miles to the town of Bethel, where he caused a golden
Calfe to be set up, for the people to worship.

From thence he went to Thirza, which is 16 miles. This city he built, and
there kept his court, 1 Reg. 14.

From thence he went to the mount Zemaraim, which is mount Ephraim, 18 miles;
where he had a great battle with Abia king of Judah, and lost 500000 of his
soldiers, all chosen men of Israel, 2 Chr. 13. verse 17.

Having lost this battle, with all possible speed that he could, went thence
to Thirza, which is 18 miles: there the Lord struck him with a grievous
disease that he died miserably, 1 Reg. 14. 2 Chr. 13. So all the Travels of
Jeroboam first King of Israel were 623 miles.

The Description of the towns and places to which JEROBOAM traveled.
Of Zemeraim.
THis was a certain Plain in mount Ephraim, eight miles from Jerusalem
toward the North, near to the town of Bethel in the Tribe of Manasses: for
mount Ephraim is divided into diverse parts and Tribes. It seems to take the
name of certain trees that abound near that place, whereon cotton wool
grows: for Zaemaer signifies, Wool, which by little and little, upon such
trees does increase and grow to perfection.

Of Thirza.
THis was a fair and beautiful city, situated in a high and pleasant
mountain, in the Tribe of Manasses, some twenty four miles from Jerusalem
toward the North. In this place, the kings of Israel used to keep their
courts, until Samaria was built. It was so called because of the excellency
and delectablenesse of the place: for Thirza does denote, An acceptable and
thankful city; being derived of Razah, he receives thankfully.

Of the years of the iniquity of Israel.
THe years of the iniquity of Israel (mentioned in Ezekiel. 4.) is to be
accounted from that day wherein Jeroboam first erected the golden Calves:
wherefore the greatest part of the first year of the iniquity, agrees with
the second year of Ieroboams reign. From whence may be gathered, that from
that time, till the destruction of Jerusalem by Nabuchadnezzar, were 390 years
full ended.

Of Ieroboams wife Queen of Israel.
She went from Thirzo to Zilo, which was about 24 miles; there she asked
counsel of Ahijam the Prophet, concerning her son Abia, for he was sick: but
he told her heavy tidings, 1 Reg. 14.7.

Wherefore being pensive and troubled in her mind, she returned back again to
her husband to Thirzo, which was 24 miles, 1 Reg. 14. So these two journies
were 48 miles.

The journey of the man of God which came out of Judah.
THis man of God (as Josephus writes, lib. Ant. 8.) came from Jerusalem to
Bethel, which was eight miles; and was called by the name of Iadon, which
signifies, the Judge of the Lord. When he came thither, he reproved Jeroboam
with an extraordinary spirit: of whom you may read more, 1 Reg. 13. But being
deceived, as he was returning a Lion met him in the way, where he was slain,
and after buried in a sepulcher in Bethel.

The Travels of NADAB, the second King of Israel.
NAdab, or Bonifacias succeeded his father Jeroboam in the Kingdom of Israel,
and was anointed while he was yet living; a liberal and free-hearted Prince.
He began to reign in the second year of Asa King of Judah, Anno mundi 2992,
and before Christ 977. He reigned during the life of his father a year and
somewhat more: but when he had reigned two years, he went from Thirza with a
great army, to the city of Gibithon, which was 36 miles: this town he
besieged very straightly, but at length was slain by one of his captains called
Baesa; so he lost both his life and kingdom in that place, 1 Reg. 15.

Of Gibithon.
THis was a city of the Levites in the Tribe of Dan, not far from Ekron in
the land of the Philistines, 16 miles from Jerusalem toward the West, and
signifies, a Royal or lofty gift.

The Travels of Baesa King of Israel.
BAesa is as much to say, as, An industrous and promt man in doing any thing.
This may having slain his Master Nadab near unto Gibithon, usurped upon the
Kingdom of Israel about the end of the third yearo of Asa King of Judah, and
began his reign Anno mundi 2992, before Christ, 974, and reigned over Israel
almost 24 years, two of which he reigned with his son, 1 Reg. 15. He went
from Gibithon to Thirza, 36 miles, where he utterly rooted out the whole
stock and family of Jeroboam. After, falling into Idolatry he was sharply
reprehended for it by Iehu the Prophet the son of Hanani; of whom you may read
more, 1 Reg. 15.

From Thirza he went to Ramah, which is 16 miles, this town he built and
fortified it very strongly, 2 Chr. 29.

But when he heard that Benhadad King of Syria had invaded Israel, he left his
building at Ramah, and with all possible speed that he could went to Thirza,
where he died and was buried, 1 Reg. 15. 2 Chr. 16.

So all the Travels of Baesa were 68 miles.

Of Ramah.
Of this City you may read before.

Of Ella or Elah King of Israel.
ELah signifies, a cruel man. This was the son of Baasha King of Israel, who
was crowned King (his father yet living) about the beginning of the 26 year of
Asa king of Judah; at such time as Benhadad king of Syria invaded and wasted
Galilee. He reigned two years, one of them during the life of his father; the
other alone in Thirza, at the end of which he was slain by Simri his servant,
1 Reg. 15. 16.

Of Zimri King of Israel.
SImri signifies a singer, and was a captain over king Elahs chariots; he
reigned 7 days in Thirza, in which time he put to death and utterly rooted out
all the posterity of Baasha: and then Omri besieged the City so straightly that
he had no hope to escape; wherefore he set the city and palace on fire, in
which he also perished, 1 Reg. 15. 16.

The Travels of Omri King of Israel.
OMri signifies, a soldier, or one that deserves his pay. He was made King
by the Israelites in his tent, while he was at wars near to Gibithon: from
whence he went to Thirza, which was 36 miles, and besieged the same upon the
very day that Simri had put the posterity of Baasha to the sword, and took it.
He began to reign in Thirza Anno mundi 3017, and before Christ, 951, and
reigned over Israel 12 years, the first six of which was in Thirza, the latter
six in Samaria, 1 Reg. 16.

From Thirza he went to mount Semer, six miles, there Omri built Samaria, and
made it the seat of his kingdom. He went thither about the seventh year of
his reign, 1 Reg. 16. So these two journies were 42 miles.

Of Samaria.
SAmaria the chief seat and Metropolis of Israel, was built by Omri in mount
Semer, 32 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and took that name of Semer
who was Lord of that mountain, of whom K. Omri bought it for two talents of
silver, which amounts to 1200 crowns. In this city 14 Kings of Israel kept
their Courts, viz. Omri who was the first founder of it, Ahab, Ahasia, Iehoram,
Iehu, Ioachas, Ioas, Jeroboam, Zacharias, Sallum, Menahem, Pekahia, Pekah, and
Hosea, who was the last of the Kings of Israel that reigned in this city, and
lost it, together with his liberty. Of all these Kings there were but five
that died naturally, for the Lord being moved to wrath by reason of their
impiety and idolatry, either gave them up into the hands of foreign enemies,
or by civil war amongst themselves they cruelly murdered one another, until
such time as the Assirians destroyed the land, and led the people captive. Thus
the Lord punished with a sharp and severe punishment, this obstinat nation,
because they contemned the admonitions and doctrines of the Prophets, amongst
which Elias and Elizeus were the chief. So that although Samaria was a fair
and beautiful city, and the country for that cause was called the province of
Samaria; yet notwithstanding, that great God the Judge of all things, for the
iniquity of the people caused this fair City to be left desolate, the
inhabitants of the land to be dispersed, and the earth for want of due usage to
lie as a wilderness, 2 Reg. 17. This city in the old Testament (according to
the Hebrew phrase) is called Shaemaer of Schomron, which signifies, To keep,
or a Tower of strength. You may read of this, 1 Reg. 2. 2 Reg. 1. 7. The
Greeks and Latins call it Samaria, which signifies, The castle of Jehovah,
or of God. You may read more of this in the second Volume.

Of Hiel that built Jericho again.
AFter the death of Omri King of Israel, when Ahab his son began to reign,
Hiel a very rich man in the town of Bethel (that he might leave behind him an
eternal memory of his name) went to Jericho which had bin formerly destroyed
by Ioshuah the son of Nun, and had lien wast for the space of 536 years, where
contrary to the commandment of the Lord, and curse of Ioshuah, he caused the
said city to be rebuilt, (such was the impious security and incredulity of
this man) but the Lord was angry with him, and he struck all his children that
they died. The eldest son called Abiram, at the laying of the foundation, and
his youngest son called Segub, at the hanging on of the gates, Ios. 6. 1 Reg.
16.

The Travels of King Ahab.
AHab went from Samaria to the hill Carmel, where Elias put to death the
Priests of Baal, which was about 32 miles, 1 Reg. 18.

From thence he went to Iezreel, which is sixteen miles, there he told his
wife how Elias had put the priests of Baal to the sword, 1 Reg. 18.

From Iezreel he went again to Samaria, 18 miles, where being pressed with a
hard siege by Benhadad King of Syria, he broke out of the city for his better
safety, and by Gods great providence and assistance he assailed the Syrians,
put a great multitude of them to the sword, the rest fled, and he went away
with a noble victory, as the Prophet of the Lord had formerly told him, 1 Reg.
20.

From Samaria he went with his army to Napheck, which was 14 miles, where he
renewed a second battle, and therein had good success, so that he took
Benhadad alive, and put to the sword, 100000 Syrians.

In this place the Prophet of the Lord reproved him for his ingratitude and
obstinacy; wherefore Ahab being angry, he went from Apheck to Samaria, which
was eight miles, 1 Reg. 20.

From Samaria he went io Iesreel, 16 miles, where that perfidious Queen
Iesabel caused Naboth to be put to death, and took possession of his Vineyard,
1 Reg. 21.

From Iezreel he went to Ramoth Giliad, 24 miles; and there in a fight that he
had against the Syrians was so sore-wounded with an arrow, that he was
constrained to leave the battle, 1 Reg. 22.

And as he went back again to Samaria, which was 24 miles, he dyed of his
wound. Of this man you may read more, 1 Reg. 21. 22.

So all the Travels of Ahab were 152 miles.

The Description of Carmel, Apheck and Ramoth, you may read before.
Of Iesreel.
IEzreel is a city in the Tribe of Issachar, situated upon a rising ground,
some 48 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, where Ahab sometimes kept his
court. Here Noboth the Israelite dwelt; an honest and religious man, one of
good esteem and authority, that feared God, and would not suffer the
inheritance of one Tribe, to be transferred to another; because God had
commanded the contrary, Nu. vlt. For which cause he would not sell his vineyard
to Ahab, wherefore Iezabel (that wicked woman) to satisfy the Kings desire,
caused him to be stoned. Iezreel signifies, The seed of God, being derived of
Sera, Seed, and El, the Almighty God. Though in former times this has bin a
fair town, yet at this day, there is not past 30 houses in it, and is called
Charity; standing at the foot of Mount Gilboah: they show at this day the field
of Naboth the Iesrelite, lying toward the West, as you go into the city, a
little before you come at it: This town stands upon a fair prospect; for
you may see from thence, through all Galile, to Carmel, the mountains of
Phoenicia and Mount Thabor; also from Mount Gilead, by Jordan and Mount Salem
[where John baptised] near by Mount Hermon, upon the North side of Mount
Gilboah, there lies a fair and plain way to the city Iezreel; by which Iehu
came, when he made wars upon Iehoram King of Israel: of which you may read
more, 2 Reg. 9. It stood not far from the river Kison, as you may read, Ios.
17.19. 1 Samuel 2. 1 Reg. 4. 18.

Of Ahaziah the son of Ahab.
AHaziah was crowned king of Israel during the life of his father: a cruel and
wicked man, he began his reign in the 17 year of Iosaphat king of Judah, Anno
mundi 3049, and before Christ 919, about such time as Ahab went down to Ramoth
Gilead to recover it from the Syrians: within a while after the death of his
father, he fell through the lattice window, in his upper chamber which was in
Samaria: of which hurt he died. Of this you may read more, 1 King. 1.

The Travels of Iehoram King of Israel.
IEhoram succeeded his brother Ahazia in the kingdom of Israel; who began his
reign in the 18 year of Iosaphat King of Judah, and as Josephus says, li.
Ant. 9. about the fifth year of his reign, went from Samaria to Jerusalem,
which was 32 miles. There he told Iosaphat how the king of Moab had rebelled
against him, therefore desired him to go along with him to the war, 2 Reg. 3.
Then Iehoram and Iosaphat, and the King of Edom, went from Jerusalem, and
compassed about through the wilderness of Idumaea, by the space of seven
days: so that they and their army for want of water, had almost perished: but
at the prayers of the Prophet Elisha, they were miraculously preserved. At
length they came to Petra the Metropolitan City of the Moabites, and is
distant from Jerusalem 172 miles, which they took, and consumed it with fire
and sword, 2 Reg. 3.

From the city of Petra, Iehoram King of Israel, returned back to Samaria,
which was 104 miles: where within a while afrer, he was so sorely besieged by
Benhadad, king of Syria, that the famine grew very great within the town,
insomuch as a certain woman eat her own child, 2 Reg. 6.

From Samaria, he went to Ramoth in Gilead, with his army, which is 24 miles,
where he was overcome by Asahel King of the Syrians, and wounded even to the
death, 2 Reg. 8.

From the fight of Ramoth Gilead, he was carried in his chariot back to
Iezreel, which was 24 miles, where he lay to be cured of his hurts. But Iehu
one of his chief Captains, rebelled against him, and as he was in his
Chariot, shot an arrow, and wounded him the second time, whereof he died in
the field of Naboth the Iezrelite, 2 Reg. 9. So all the Travels of Iehoram were
356 miles.

The Travels of Iehu King of Israel.
IEHV signifies, A constant man in himself, and was the son of Iosaphat, the
son of Nimschi, he was anointed King of Israel in the castle at Ramoth in
Gilead, by Elisha, Anno mundi, 3063, and before Christ, 905: he reigned 28
years, 2 Reg. 9.

From Ramoth in Gilead, in his Chariot he went to Iezreel, which was 24 miles;
where in the field of Naboth the Iezrelite he killed Iehoram with an arrow. And
when he came to the gates of the city, he caused Iezabel to be thrown from a
tower, whom he trampled under his horse feet: And after in that same place she
was eaten up with dogs. Then he sent messengers to Samaria, commanding the
Samaritans, that they should put to death the 70 sons of Ahab, which they
immediately did, and sent their heads unto him in baskets, 2 Reg. 10.

From Iezreel he went to Samaria, which is 16 miles. In that journey he caused
to be slain by his ministers, the 42 brothers of Ahaziah king of Judah, near
to the well which was beside the house where sheep was shorn. And when he
came to Samaria, he caused all the posterity of Ahab to be utterly destroyed
and rooted out. And to conclude the tragedy, by a cunning policy, put to death
all the priests of Baal, 2 Reg. 10. So all the travels of Iehu, were 40 miles.

Of Iehoahas King of Israel.
IEhoahas was the son of Iehu, and succeeded his father in the Kingdom of
Israel: he began his reign in the 33 year of Ioas King of Judah, in the year
of the World, 3091, and before Christ, 876: he reigned over Israel 17 years.
God stirred up against this wicked King, Asahel King of the Syrians, who with
10000 foot and five hundred horse, besieged Samaria very strongly; put to the
sword many of his subjects, and got many cities and towns from him, as the
Prophet Elisha had before told him, 2 Reg. 8. 13.

The Travels of Ioas King of Israel.
IOas succeeded his father Iehoahas, and while he was yet living was anointed
King of Israel, in the 37 year of Ioas King of Judah, and reigned two years
with his father, after his death 15: so all the reign of Ioas, was 17 years.
This man was a great soldier, and went from Samaria with an army against the
City of Apheck, which was 14 miles: there he smote the Syrians, and in three
several battles carried away the victory: recovering the Cities which his
father Iehoahas had lost, according to the prophecy of Elisha, 2 Reg. 17.

From Apheck he returned to Samaria, which was fourteen miles.

From thence he went with his army to Bethsemes, in the land of Judah, where in
a sharp and cruel war, he conquered Amasia, and took him alive, 2 Reg. 14.
which was 32 miles.

From Bethsemes, he went to Jerusalem, and carried the King thereof with him
captive, which was 4 miles. He won the city, and broke down the Walls of it,
from the gate of Ephraim till you come to the Angle gate, four hundred cubits
in length, 2 Reg. 14.

From the City of Jerusalem, Ioas the conqueror returned to Samaria, with the
spoil of the temple, and of the Kings house, with many captives, and a great
prey, which was 32 miles: where at the end of the seventeenth year of his
reign, he died, and was buried. In this man's time, Elisha the Prophet died, 2
Reg. 13. 14.

So all the travels of Ioas were 96 miles.

Of Bethsemes.
Of this City you may read before.

The Travels of Jeroboam the second of that name King of Israel.
THis Jeroboam succeeded his father Ioas in the Kingdom of Israel, and began
his reign Anno mundi, 3123, and before Christ, 845, which according to the
text of the Bible, happened about the 15 year of Amasia King of Judah, and he
reigned 41 years, 2 Reg. 14. He kept his court at Samaria, where the Prophet
Jonas told him, that he should recover not only the towns and cities of the
land of Israel that had been lost, but also the cities of Hemeth and Damascus:
Wherefore he gathered a great army out of the city of Samaria, and went thence
unto Hemeth or Antiochia in Syria, which was 248 miles. This City he
conquered, and all the country thereabout; so that he recovered all the
ancient Towns and Cities that belonged to David and Saul, even from Hemeth in
Syria, to Soba in Armenia, with all the Cities, Towns, Castles, and Countries,
near adjoining to them, 2 Reg. 14.

From Hemeth or Antiochia, he went to Damascus, which is 140 miles. This city
he also took, and all the country of Syria round about, he made tributary to
him, 2 Reg. 14.

From Damascus he went to the Red sea, even 320 miles: and also recovered all
the South part, which in times past belonged unto the kingdom of Israel, 2
Reg. 14.

After this, he returned to Samaria his own country, which was 192 miles:
where, in the 41 year of his reign, he died, and was there buried. After his
death, the kingdom of Israel was oppressed with tyranny, until it was
destroyed by foreign nations: and for the space of 12 years there was no King
that succeeded him. In the reign of this king (a little before his death)
there happened an horrible earthquake; of which you may read Amos 1. which
without doubt did foreshew some eminent changes that should happen in that
kingdom, as did afterward, Zac. 41.

So all the travels of Jeroboam, (the second of that name) were 900 miles.

Of Zachariah King of Israel.
Twelve years after the death of Jeroboam, Zachariah his son began his reign
in Israel, in the 38 year of Azaria king of Judah, which was Anno mundi, 3975,
and before Christ, 793: he reigned six months, and then was miserably slain
by Sallum his friend, 2 Reg. 15. Joseph. lib. Antiq. 9.

Of Sallum King of Israel.
SAllum began to reign after he had slain Zachariah, in the 39 year of
Azariah King of Judah: and when he had reigned scarce a month, he was slain
by Menahem, losing his life and kingdom together, 2 Reg. 15.

The Travels of Menahem.
MEnahem was borne in Thirza, in the Tribe of Judah; who began to reign in the
same year that he slew Sallum: he reigned ten years, 2 Reg. 10.

From Thirza he went to Samaria with his army, which was six miles: where
(having slain Sallum his Lord and King) he usurped upon the kingdom, 2 Reg. 15.

From thence he went to Thipsa; which is six miles. This town he cruelly
destroyed with fire and sword, and all the towns thereabout, because they
refused to open their gates unto him.

From Thipsa this cruel tyrant went back again to Samaria, 6 miles, where he
grievously afflicted the children of Israel ten years. Wherefore the Lord
being offended with him for his exceeding cruelty, stirred up Phul Belochus
King of Assyria, who came from Babylon to Samaria, being 624 miles, and put
King Menahem to such an exceeding great straight, that he was constrained to
buy and procure his peace with What this was in our money you may read after in
the quantity of moneys.
1000 talents: which money being received, he suffered him to enjoy his kingdom,
and returned back unto Babylon with all his army, 2 Reg. 15.

So all the travels of King Menahem were 18 miles.

Of Thypsa.
THis was a town near to that kingly city Thirza, situated in the tribe of
Manasses, 24 miles from Jerusalem Northward. But because the inhabitants
thereof denied to open their gates to this cruel tyrant Menahem, therefore he
utterly destroyed it even to the ground. Thipsa signifies, The Paschal Lamb,
or a Passover; being derived of Pasach, He passed by.

Of PEKAHIA King of Israel.
PEkahia reigned two years after his fathers death; at the end of which term
he was slain by Pekah the son of Remalia, who succeeded him in the government.
Joseph. lib. Antiq. 9. says, That this murder was done at a banquet.

The Travels of PEKAH King of Israel.
PEkah the son of Remalia began to reig^^ in Samaria, Anno mundi 3189, and
before Christ 779. in the 52 year of Azariah King of Judah, and reigned over
Israel 20 years, 2 Reg. 15. 16.

From the city of Samaria he went with Resin King of Syria to Jerusalem, which
was 32 miles, and besieged it, but could not take it: nevertheless he overcame
Ahaz King of Judah in a great battle, and put to the sword in one day above
12000 soldiers that bare armor. In this war were taken 200000 women, children
and maids, all which he carried Captives to Samaria, 2 Reg. 16. 2 Chr. 28.

From Jerusalem he returned to Samaria with a great booty, which was 32
miles, and at the command of Obed the Prophet set at liberty all his captives.
After, about the end of the 20 year of his reign, he was slain by Hosea his
chief captain, who succeeded him in the government, 2 Reg. 15.

So all the travels of Pekah were 64 miles.

Of HOSEA the last King of Israel.
HOsea began to reign in the fourth year of Ahas king of Judah, Anno mundi 3209,
and before Christ 759. He kept Court at Samaria, and was a cruel and wicked
King. Wherefore God stirred up Salmanasser Emperor of the Assyrians, who about
the end of the 7 year of his reign came to Samaria and besieged it for the
space of 3 years: at the end of the third year with great labor he won it and
all the country round about; so that he took King Hosea prisoner, and led him
together with a great multitude of the Jews (amongst which were Gabriel and
Raphel the friends of Toby the elder) thence to Niniveh captives, being 652
miles. From Niniveh he sent them to a place called Rages in Medea, being 752
miles, and in that country peopled many towns and cities with them; so that
there were many of the Israelites led into captivity above 1396 miles, for so
many miles is Rages and the Cities of the Medes from Jerusalem Northeastward.

This captivity of the ten Tribes happened An. mundi 3227, and before Christ 741.

OF the cities of Rages and Niniveh you may read in the travels of Toby and
the Angel Gabriel.

The Travels of the People which SALMANASSER Emperor of the Assyrians sent to
dwell in the Land of Israel.
SALMANASSER after he had carried the Children of Israel away captive into
Assyria, sent (as it is said) part of them into Media, and part of them into
Persia, and so dispersed them here and there about the Country. But because
the Land of Israel by reason of this captivity became desolate and without
inhabitants, therefore he caused those people which dwelt about the river Cutha
in Persia, to go thence and dwell in Samaria, and in all the country round
about, to till the land and dress the Vines, least some other people that were
strangers to his government should vsurp upon that kingdom, it being thus
without inhabitants, Ios. li. Ant. 9. You may read of this also, 2 Reg. 7. In
whose place, and near to the said river of Cutha, a multitude of Jews with
great shame and grief were constrained to dwell. He also gathered a great
multitude of other people out of Babylon, Hamath, or Antiochia, some out of his
own dominions of Assyria, also out of Medea, and the people of Ava and
Sepharuaijm; which people are mentioned, Esaias 37. and sent them to inhabit in
Samaria and all the cities and countries round about, because it was a fertile
and pleasant country, and to defend it against the incursions of strangers.
From whence may be gathered, that in this behalf the policy of this Emperor
was much greater that of the Romans, for the retaining of this kingdom; but
especially than that of Titus Vespasian; for he having conquered the land,
wasted it and destroyed it with fire and sword, put thence the inhabitants, and
dispersed them here and there, left the country bare and naked, only a few
Garrisons were placed in the strongest cities, to keep it to their use. Which
not being able enough to oppose the incursions of the Saracens, that in great
Troops brake out of the Deserts of Arabia Petraea, they soon lost all that
they had gotten; and the Turks ioining with them, they have now gained into
their possession that pleasant and fruitful Land of Iudaea, and inhabit
therein even to this day, to the great detriment and scandal of the Christians.

But to return to the people sent to inhabit this kingdom, who as they were of
diverse Nations, so were they of diverse religions, and every Family had his
particular god. Wherefore the Lord sent a multitude of Lions among them, which
daily vexed them: from whence it happened that Salmanasser was constrained to
send back unto them a Levite (one of the Priests that had bin carried away
captive) to show them the true worship of God. He came to Bethel, and there
taught them the doctrine of the Lord, and the customs and ceremonies of the
Mosaical Law: whereby it happened that they began to worship God and their idols,
in neither observing their ancient custom. For which cause they became so
abominable unto the Jews, that they refused their company and familiarity,
(as that Samaritan woman confessed to Christ at Jacobs Well, Ioh. 4.) so that
when the Jews could call a man by any ignominious or odious name, they would
term him a Samaritan, Ioh. 8. Do we not say rightly that thou art a Samaritane,
and have a Devil. But of all the people which Salmanasser sent into the Holy
land, those that came out of the East part of Persia from Cutha (called
Cutheis) dwelt in Samaria, and got the chief command and government over the
rest.

The Travels of the Kings of Syria that made war upon the Kings of Israel.
And first of the Travels or incursions of BENHADAD.
BEnhadad King of Syria went from Damascus the chief city of his kingdom, and
came to Samaria and straightly besieged it in the time of Ahab King of Israel,
1 Reg. 20. being 132 miles.

From thence (being overcome and put to flight by Ahab) he returned back
again to Damascus, which was 132 miles.

The second time he came from thence, and invaded the land of Israel even unto
the city of Apheck, 124 miles, which he besieged. But Ahab King of Israel
overcame him in a great battle, and put 100000 Syrians to the sword; and when
the rest of the multitude would have fled into the city, the ruins of a wall
fell upon them, so that there died 27000. This put King Benhadad into such a
fear, that he was constrained to fly from one chamber to another to hide
himself; but at lost was taken, and (not without the great wrath and
indignation of God) by that wicked king Ahab pardoned and set at liberty, 2
Reg. 20.

Wherefore he went thence back unto Damascus, which was 124 miles.

Within three years after he brought a great army against Ramoth in Gilead,
which is 104 miles from Damascus South-eastward. Here he won of Ahab a great
battle, in which Ahab was slain with an arrow, 1 Reg. 22.

From thence he returned back to Damascus, which was about 104 miles.

After that, he came again from Damascus into the land of Israel with a great
army, 120 miles; where he counseled with his Captains and men of war, saying,
Here and there will we incamp our selves. But the Prophet Elisha discovered
their purposes, 2 Reg. 6.

Out of the land of Israel he returned to Damascus, which was 120 miles.

From thence he returned again with his army to Samaria, being 132 miles; which
the second time he besieged so straightly, that an asses head was worth 80
pieces of silver. But yet the Lord at the fervent prayers of Elizeus the
Prophet, struck such a fear and anguish among the enemies, that Benhadad and
his army were constrained to fly, 2 Reg. 6.

Being sore troubled because he was thus put to flight, he went to Damascus,
which was 132 miles, and there within a while after died of grief, 2 Reg. 9.

So all the travels of King Benhadad were 1224 miles.

The Travels of the Captains which Benhadad King of Syria sent to waste and
destroy the land of Baesa King of Israel.
THis army went from Damascus, and came to the town of Hion, 72 miles.

From thence they went to Dan, which is 4 miles.

From Dan they went to the city of Abel-Bethmaacha, twelve miles.

From thence they went to the land of Chineroth, which was accounted 8 miles:
there they took certain cities of fruit, and spoiled and destroyed them.

From Chineroth in the tribe of Nepthali (when they had cruelly wasted and
destroyed that country) they returned with a great booty to Damascus, being 88
miles, 1 Reg. 15.

So all their Travels were 184 miles.

The Description of the Places to which they traveled.
Hion and Dan.
HIon and Dan are two towns near to mount Libanus and the fountains of Jordan,
some 104 miles from Jerusalem North-Eastward. Hion signifies A town of the
fountain, because it stands near to the Town or Fountains from whence
Jordan issues.

Of Abel-Bethmaacha you may read before.

Of Chineroth.
THis Chineroth or Cineroth was the metropolitan City of the tribe of Nepthali,
72 miles from Jerusalem Northward It was situated in a very fruitful and
pleasant place, and for that cause was so called; for Kinroth being derived of
Kinnor, signifies Music or Mirth.

The Travels of NAAMAN the Syrian.
NAaman came from Damascus to Samaria, which was 132 miles, to be cured of his
Leprosy by Elizeus; who commanded him to go to the river Jordan, and wash
himself therein 7 times, and he should be cleansed.

Wherefore from Samaria he went to Jordan, 26 miles, and there according to the
commandment of the Prophet, he washed himself 7 times, and was cleansed, 2
Reg. 5.

From the river Jordan he returned back again to Elizeus the Prophet, to give
him thanks for that benefit, which was about 16 miles.

From Samaria he returned back to Damascus, 132 miles.

So all the travels of Naaman the Syrian were 296 miles.

The Travels of HASAEL King of Syria.
He went from Damascus (where Elizeus told him that he should succeed his
Lord and Master Benhadad in the kingdom, to Ramoth Gilead with his Army, which
was 104 miles. There he overcame Iehoram king of Israel in a great battle, 2
Reg. cap. 8.

From thence he returned to Damascus, 104 miles.

After he went from Damascus to the city Aroer, which was 132 miles.

From thence he went through the land of Giliad into the kingdom of Basan,
until he came to mount Libanus, which is accounted 80 miles, and conquered all
that part. 2 Reg. 10.

After he returned into his own kingdom to Damascus, which is 320 miles.

Within a while after, he went again from Damascus with his army to Gath,
which is reckoned 188 miles. This city he won.

From Gath he went to Jerusalem, 32 miles, which he besieged so straightly,
that Ioas King of Judah was constrained to give him great abundance of gold to
raise his siege and be gone, 2 Reg. 12.

From Jerusalem he went back to Damascus, which was about 160 miles.

The last journey that he went against the Israelites, was when he besieged
Samaria, at which time he won many cities and towns round about in the
country, and made them tributaries to him, 2 Reg. 13. which was 132 miles.

Having finished this expedition he returned back to Damascus, 132 miles, and
there died and was buried.

So all the travels of Hasael King of Syria were 1384 miles.

The cities of Aroer and Gath are described before; therefore I shall not need
to speak of them again in this place.

The Travels of BENHADAD second of that name, King of Syria.
THis Benhadad was the son of Hasael, and succeeded him in the government. He
went from the city Damascus with a great army to Apheck, which is 104 miles.
This King was three times one after another overthrown by Ioab King of Israel,
and lost all those cities which Hasael his father had formerly conquered, 2
Reg. 13.

From Apheck he returned to Damascus, 104 miles, and there died. So both
journies were 208 miles.

The Travels of RESIN King of Syria.
RESIN King of Syria went from Damascus, and joining his Army with that of
Pekah King of Israel, they went to Jerusalem and straightly besieged Ahab King
of Judah, 2 Reg. 16. which was 160 miles. At this time (which was in the year
of the world 3206, and before Christ 762, the Prophet Esaias ca. 7. foretold of
the birth of our Savior Christ, saying, Behold, a Virgin being great shall bring
forth a child, and shall call his name EMANVEL.

From thence he brought his army through Idumaea to Elath a city of the Red
sea, some 160 miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and 16 miles from
Ezeongaber Northward. This city Resin won, and thrust the Jews out of it.

From Elath he went to Damascus, 280 miles, where he was slain by Tiglath
Phulasser that mighty King of the Assyrians, who carried a great multitude of
the inhabitants of Damascus into the country of Syrene, where they endured a
miserable exile, 2 Reg. 16.

So all the travels of King Resin were 600 miles.

The Travels of the Kings of Judah which reigned in the City of Jerusalem: and
first of the Travels of REHOBOHAM.
REhoboam the son of Solomon succeeded his father in the Kingdom, and began
his reign Anno mundi 2971, and before Christ 977. who by reason of his extreme
cruelty and threats (following the counsel of his young Courtiers, rather than
of his grave Senators) the same year lost 10 of the Tribes, that fell from him
and rebelled against him; so that he reigned over Judah and Benjamin 17 years,
1 Reg. 11. 14.

A little after the death of Solomon he went to Sichem, 32 miles, where he was
anointed and crowned King. But the people perceiving that he carried himself
very proudly and arrogantly, desired him that he would ease him of the burden
formerly imposed upon them by his father: (for Solomon had set a certain Tax
on every man, because he was at extraordinary charges as long as the temple
was building) but he little regarding their request told them that his little
finger should be heavier than the whole burden of his father: wherefore they
disliking his speech, fell all from him, except Benjamin and Judah.

Wherefore the King shunning the fury of the people, with all possible speed
went from Sichem to Jerusalem back again, being 32 miles. Then he fortified all
the chief cities of Judah and Benjamin, 2 Chr. 11.

So all the travels of Rehoboam were 64 miles.

But he principally fortified 14 cities in the tribe of Judah, that with the
more safety he might oppose his enemy Jeroboam King of Israel, viz. Bethlehem,
Etam, Thecoa, Bethzura, Adullam, Gath Maresa, Ziph, Adoraijm, Lachis, Aseca,
Zarea, Ajalon, and Hebron: most of which towns, and the memorable actions don
in them, are described in the former part of this Treatise. I will therefore
speak only of such towns as have not as yet bin mentioned.

Of Maresa.
THis was a city in the tribe of Judah, 16 miles from Jerusalem Westward, which
Rehoboam repaired and fortified, 2 Chr. 11. where King Asa overcame the
Ethiopians in a cruel battle, 2 Chr. 14. Here Michaias and Eleazer the Prophets
were born, 2 Chr. 20. Mich. 1.2. Ios. 15 Georgias also fled into this city when
he was overcome by Judas Machabeus, 2 Mac. 12. It was situated on the borders
of the tribes of Judah and Dan, as S. Ierom says, in whose time the ruins
thereof were to be seen. Maresca signifies an Inheritance, being derived of
Moraschah, that is, a Possession.

Of Bethzura.
THis is a strong castle (often mentioned in the history of the Machabees)
situated on a mountain some 5 furlongs from Jerusalem Southward, and fell by
lot unto the tribe of Judah. This tower was as it were a bulwark for the city of
Jerusalem, and stood in the way as you go thence to Bethlem and so to Gaza.

Of Zareah.
THis was a city in the tribe of Judah, eight miles from Jerusalem toward the
West, which Rehoboam did also repair and fortify, 2 Chr. 11. There was
another city of this name, situated upon the border of the tribes of Judah and
Dan, 18 miles from Jerusalem Westward; of which you may read in the travels of
Sampson.

Of Adoraijm.
ADoraijm or Adarah was a city in the tribe of Judah, 44 miles from Jerusalem
Southwestward; which Rehoboam the son of Solomon also fortified, 2 Chr. 11. It
is situated upon the borders of Judah and Arabia Petraea, between Cades and
Casmona. It signifies a glorious City, being derived of Adar, he was glorious.

The Travels of King Abia.
ABijah or Abia signifies, The Father of the sea. He began to reign in the 18
year of Jeroboam his Adversary, An. mundi 2988, before Christ 980, and reigned
over Israel 3 years, 1 Reg. 15. 2 Chr. 17.

He went from Jerusalem to the mount Zemeraim, 8 miles. After that he went to
Bethel, and conquered all the country from thence to Ephron, which was 36
miles.

From Ephron he returned to Jerusalem, 44 miles: there he took unto him 14
wives, and begat 20 sons and 16 daughters, 2 Chronicles. 13.

The Travels of ASA King of Judah.
ASa signifies a Physician. He began to reign about the end of the 21 year of
Jeroboam King of Israel, An. mundi 2990. before Christ 978. He governed Judah
with great commendations 41 years.

He went from Jerusalem to Maresa, 16 miles, where in the valley of Zephatha
he overcame the Ethiopians in a memorable battle, 2 Chr. 14. From thence he
pursued the Ethiopians to Gerar, being 22 miles and recovered many cities which
the Ethiopians dwelt in. 2 Chr. ca. 14.

From Gerar he went to Jerusalem, which was 32 miles, and offered to the Lord
of the spoils that he had taken, 700 Oxen, and 7000 sheep, 2 Chr. 15.

These travels of King Asa make 70 miles.

The journey and expedition of Saerah King of Aethiopia, whom Asa King of Judah
overcame in the valley of Zephatha.
SAerah or Saerach signifies A noble and puissant Lord. This was a mighty and
warlike Prince, who governed Lybia and Aethiopia; the King of which country at
this day we call Presbyter John, or rather Petro Johannes; who holds his
Court in a fair and goodly city called Hamarich, the Metropolitan of all
Aethiopia, and extends his government beyond Meroes in Africa. Many (though
ignorantly) suppose he is a Priest, because he is called Presbyter, though
indeed he is not so, but rather a puissant and mighty Emperor. But to return to
Saerah or Saerach, who in hope to extend his Empire into these parts, went with
a great army out of Ethiopia, to the valley of Zephatha in Judah, to fight with
Asa King of Judah, 1200 miles; but lost the day, and returned with great shame,
2 Chr. 15.

It seems that this King was the mightiest of all his predecessors, and a
Prince of no vulgar estimation, because of the multitude and great abundance
of soldiers which he brought in his army; for it is reported that there were
1000000 that bore armor and 300 chariots; but this great army was dispersed,
and most of them died miserably: as did that great army of Xerxes, which
consisted of 1700000. From whence it may be concluded, That it is not the
strength of man which delivers him, but the Lord.

The Travels of IEHOSAPHAT King of Judah.
IEhosaphat signifies, The Judge of the Lord. He began his reign in the fourth
year of Ahab, 1 Reg. 22. The greatest part therefore of the first year of this
King happened in the year of the world 3033, and before Christ 935. He reigned
over Israel 25 years, that is, from the 35 of his age, till the 60. In the 7
year of his reign he went from Jerusalem to Samaria, which was 32 miles, to
visit his kinsman Ahab King of Israel: for Ioram his son some ten years before
had married Athaliah King Ahabs Sister, 2 Reg. 8.

From Samaria he went with Ahab to the war at Ramoth in Gilead, which was 24
miles, where Ahab was slain, 2 Reg. 22. 2 Chr. 18.

From Ramoth he went safe from the wars to Jerusalem, which was 48 miles.

From Jerusalem he went to the city of Beersaba, the utmost bounds of his
kingdom toward the South, to instruct his people in the Law of the Lord;
which was 42 miles from Jerusalem Southward.

From Beersaba, passing through all his kingdom he came to Mount Ephraim,
which was 48 miles, and the utmost bounds of his kingdom Northward, being
some 8 miles from Jerusalem, 2 Chr. 19.

From Mount Ephraim he went to Jerusalem, which was eight miles. Thus
Iehosaphat went through al his dominions, to instruct his subjects in piety
and the true worship of God: In every City ordaining Judges and Governors,
Magistrates, Procurators, and Assessors, committing to their discretion the
deciding of all controversies; saying to them, Take heed what you do, for the
office which you have taken upon you is not humane, but Divine: and as you
judge, so shall you be judged; for the Lord is with you in judgment.
Wherefore do all things with diligence, and in the fear of the Lord; for with
the Lord there is no iniquity, nor respect of persons, neither takes he any
bribes. And he himself remained chief Judge in Jerusalem, to whom any might
appeal from the inferior Judges, that so there might be a just end of
controversies, 2 Chr. 16.

Afterward Iehosaphat went forth with his army to Tecoa, six miles from
Jerusalem, where by fervent prayers, the sounding of trumpets and other musical
instruments, he obtained a memorable battle against the Moabites, Ammonites,
and Idumaeans; for the Lord turned the weapons of them one against another, and
they wounded one another to the death. This fight happened in a fair valley
between Tecoa and Engedi. So Iehosaphat pursued the enemy for three days with
great slaughter, and returned with a mighty spoil. This was called the valley
of Blessing, because of this great victory at Tecoa, and began 8 miles from
Jerusalem Southeastward, and extended it self to the tower of Engedi near to
the bank of the red sea, 20 miles.

From Engedi (out of the valley of Blessing) Iehosaphat and his army returned
to Jerusalem, 20 miles, and went into the Temple with shalmes, harpes,
timbrels, and great joy, thankfully acknowledging Gods merciful favor toward
him in giving him so great a victory, 2 Chr. 20. But as there is nothing in
this life that can be said permanent, so likewise the felicity of Iehosaphat
changed on a sudden, the froward and adverse frown of adversity seizing upon
his prosperity: for joining with that wicked and impious King of Israel
Ahaziah, upon condition to build a certain navy of ships at Ezeongaber, to
fetch gold from Tharshish and other places in India, he displeased the Lord;
for which cause there arose a great tempest, which brake down the works and
destroyed the Navy.

From Jerusalem he went with Iehoram King of Israel to war against the
Moabites, and with them went the King of Idumaea: so passing through the
deserts of Edom, they came to Mount Seir, and so went to Petra the chief city
of the King of the Moabits, distant from Jerusalem 72 miles, 2 Reg. 3.

From Petra Iehosaphat returned to Jerusalem, 72 miles, where he died and was
buried, 2 Reg. 22. 2 Chr. 21.

So all the travels of Iehosaphat King of Judah were 372 miles.

The Typical signification of IEHOSAPHAT.
AS Iehosaphat by prayer, and the sound of trumpets and other instruments of
music overcame and dispersed his enemies without drawing his sword; so Christ
also by the sound of his Word and doctrine, without drawing weapon, overcame
the enemies of the Church.

The Travels of IORAM King of Judah.
IOram signifies, The Exalted of the Lord. He was crowned king (his father yet
living) at such time as he made his expedition against Mesa King of the
Moabites, which happened about the fifth year of Iehoram King of Israel, An. mundi
3055, before Christ 913. He reigned with his father Iehosaphat 2 years, and
after his decease six. So Ioram reigned 8 years over Judah, and when he was
forty years old died miserably, 2 Reg. 8. 9.

About the beginning of the second year of this Kings reign, (which was the
sixth of Iehoram King of Israel) Elias the Prophet was taken up into heaven.
About the beginning of his reign he went from Jerusalem to Mount Seir, which
was 28 miles Southward; where he used such extreme cruelty toward the Edomites,
which at this time were his subjects, that of a sudden they fell from him, and
chose them a King of their own, 2 Reg. 8.

From the Mountain of Seir he returned to Jerusalem which is 28 miles, and
there cruelly put to death his own brothers. But God stirred up against him
the Philistines and Arabians, who broke into Judah, and destroyed it with fire
and sword. They also went to Jerusalem, and took thence all his substance and
riches, put his children to the sword, all but Ioachas, which also called
Ahaziah or Ochorias; and carried away his wives captive into Arabia Foelix,
which is near unto Ethiopia, 1200 miles. Then the Lord struck him with an
extreme pain in his bowels, of which after two years he died, and was buried
without any funeral pomp or honorable respect, near to the Kings tower. A man
unworthy to be buried in the sepulcher of the rest of the Kings, because he so
much degenerated from David his predecessor, 2 Reg. 8. 2 Chr. 28.

So all the travels of Ioram were 56 miles.

The Travels of AHAZIAH King of Judah.
AHaziah (which also was called Iehoachas) succeeded his Father Ioram in the
government of Judah, and began his reign in the 12 year of Iehoram King of
Israel, Ann. mundi 3062. and before Christ 906, and reigned one year, 1 Reg.
8. He went from Jerusalem to Ramoth in Gilead, which is accounted 48 miles:
There he went to battle with Iehoram King of Israel against the Syrians, 2
Reg. 8. 2 Chr. 22.

From Ramoth in Gilead he returned to Jerusalem, forty eight miles.

Within a while after he went back again to visit his kinsman Iehoram King of
Israel, to Iesreel, for he was wounded in the battle against Hasael, and lay
there to be cured: which was forty and eight miles.

With Iehoram he went to meet Iehu the Captain of the Host, who shot an Arrow
and wounded Iehoram, that he died in the field of Naboth the Iesreelite.
Wherefore Ahaziah to save his life fled with all possible speed, taking his way
to the Kings garden that stood close by the vineyard of Naboth the Iesreelite,
not far from the City and Tower of Iezreel. But Iehu followed him so close,
that he wounded him as he ascended up unto a place called GVR, which
signifies, A Lions Whelpe; near unto the Town which is called Iiblea.
Wherefore Ahaziah feeling himself hurt, he went to Megiddo, four miles from
Iesreel, and near to Apheck upon the West. There, as Josephus says, Lib.
Antiq. 9.) he caused his wounds to be searched and bound up. This city of
Megiddo is 48 miles from Jerusalem Northward.

From Megiddo he went to Samaria, which was 14 miles: there he lay hid for a
while, flying from one place to another, to save himself, 2 Chronicles. 22.

But being found out he was carried back to the city of Megiddo, which was 14
miles; and at the commandment of Iehu, was there slain, 1 Reg. 8.

From Megiddo his carcass was carried to Jerusalem, which was 48 miles, and
there buried, 2 Reg. 8. 2 Chronicles. 22. So all the Travels of Ahaziah King of
Judah, were 224 miles.

Of that Idolatrous and wicked Queen Athalia.
AThalia was sister to Ahab and daughter to Omri, married to Ioram son of
that good King Iehosaphat, when he was but 17 years of age: and after the
death of Azahiah (who was slain about the 23 years of age) she usurped upon
the kingdom of Israel ( anno mundi, 3063, before Christ, 905,) and reigned
with great tyranny almost 7 years: So soon as she had obtained the
government, she cruelly and miserably put to death all the children of Ahaziah,
and all those that were next heir to the Kingdom; only Ioas, who was saved
by the policy of Iehoshabeath sister to Ahasiah, that stole him from among the
rest of the Kings sons, and put him to nourse in her bedchamber: and he was
with them in the house of God six years, all which time Athalia reigned over
the land. And in the seventh year, Iehoiada waxed bold and proclaimed Ioas
King, as being next heir to the crown, and anointed him in the temple; who
after Athalia was slain succeeded in the government, 2 Reg. 11. 4. 2 Chronicles. 22.

Of Ioas King of Judah.
IOas began th reign over Judah when he was almost 7 years of age, and about
the middle of the seventh year of Iehu King of Israel, anno mundi, 3069, and
before Christ, 899, and reigned over Judah 40 years. He did that which was
acceptable in the sight of the Lord all the days of Iehoiada the Priest, who
crowned him king: but after his death he fell into evil courses, and caused
that good Priest Zachariah (the son of Iehoiada, who was the author of all
his preferment) to be stoned to death in the upper court of the Temple; which
act argued that he was very unthankful and tyrannical. But the Lord
(displeased with his cruelty) within a year after the death of Zachariah,
stirred up the Syrians, who invaded Iudaea, and spoiled the city of Jerusalem:
in which war all those that stirred up the king to Idolatry were cruelly
slain. To conclude, within a while after some of his courtiers conspired
against him, and as he lay sick of a grievous disease in his bed put him to
death; and buried him in Millo, the City of David. Thus God justly punished
this tyrant for his unthankfulness, apostasy, and cruelty, when he had lived
47 years, 2 Reg. 12.

The Travels of Amasiah King of Judah.
AMasias, or Amasiah signifies, the strength of Jehovah. This man was 25 years
of age when he was enthronised by his father, about the second year of Ioas
King of Israel, Anno mundi, 3108, and before Christ 806. He ruled the kingdom
while his father was sick one year, and after his decease 28: so all the
years of his reign were 29.

He went with an army from Jerusalem to Saelag, that is to the tower or rock
of Mount Seir, 40 miles toward the South: here in the valley of Salt he put to
death a multitude of the Idumaeans. And although this town was very strongly
situated; yet he won it, and called it Ioctiel, that is, The ear of the
Lord; because God in that place heard his prayers: being derived of Iakah and
El, which is, God has heard. Near to this Town Amasiah commanded ten
thousand Idumaeans which he had taken in war, to be cast down headlong from
the top of an high rock into a deep valley, in which fall their bones were
shattered all to pieces, and they died miserably, 2 Reg. 14.

From Selag Ioctiel he returned to Jerusalem, which was 40 miles; where he
began to worship the gods of the Idumaeans that he brought along with him, 2 Chronicles. 25.

From Jerusalem he went to Bethsemes, and there was overcome by Ioas King of
Israel, which was 4 miles, 2 Chronicles. 25.

From Bethsemes Ioas led Amasiah back again to Jerusalem captive, which was 4
miles, 2 Reg. 14.

From Jerusalem he fled to the city of Lachis, which was 20 miles, and there
was slain by his own servants, 2 Chronicles. 25.

From Lachis his carcass was carried back again to Jerusalem 20 miles: where
it was buried in the city of David, 2 Reg. 14. 2 Chronicles. 25. So all his travels
were 128 miles.

The Travels of Azariah, or Vzziah King of Judah.
THis man succeeded his father Amasia (in the year of the world 3138, and
before Christ, 830) when he was but 16 years of age, and reigned 52 years:
his mothers name was Iecoliah of Jerusalem. He did those things that were
upright in the sight of the Lord, therefore the Lord blessed him. And after the
death of his father, built Elah, and restored it to Judah.

He therefore went from Jerusalem to Elah, 160 miles toward the South, and
rebuilt that town (it being a famous Mart town, situated upon the red sea)
and fortified it, because Resin King of the Syrians in times past for want of
due fortification won it, and destroyed it, 2 Chronicles 26.

From Elah he returned to Jerusalem, 160 miles.

After he went from Jerusalem to Gath a city of the Philistines, which was
accounted 34 miles: this town he won, beat down the walls, and destroyed the
Bulwarks thereof.

From thence he went to Iabnia, which is 24 miles, and broke down the walls
thereof, 2 Chronicles. 26.

From thence he went to Azotus or Asdod, which was 8 miles, 2 Chronicles. 26.

From Asdod he went again to Jerusalem, being 22 miles.

Within a while after, he gathered an army, and went from Jerusalem to
Gur-Baal, that is, Gerar; where he overcame the Arabians in a great battle,
which was 32 miles, 2 Chronicles. 26.

From Gerar he returned to Jerusalem, being 32 miles.

He went from Jerusalem the third time into the land of the Amonites, 60 miles;
which people he conquered, and made tributarie to him: so that he was made
famous through all the countries thereabout, even to the utmost part of Egypt,
because of his often victories and triumphs, 2 Chronicles. 26.

Out of the land of the Ammonites he returned to Jerusalem, which was 60 miles.
But now being lift up with the prosperity of fortune, and not content with his
regal dignity, he endeavored to have chief authority over the Priests also:
for which cause he went into that part of the temple where the Altar of sweet
incense stood (where it was lawful for none to go but the Priests) and there
took upon him to offer sweet incense; but as he was offering the Lord struck
him with Leprosy, so that he was constrained to dwell in a house by himself,
separated from the congregation: And his son Iotham governed in his stead all
the days of his life. But within a while after he died of this disease, and
was buried in the Kings garden at Jerusalem, and not in the sepulcher of the
Kings, 2 Reg. 15. 2 Chronicles. 26. So all the travels of Azariah King of Judah, were
592 miles.

Of the places to which he traveled.
Of Elah.
THis was a city situated upon the Red Sea, 160 miles from Jerusalem toward
the South; between Ezion-gaber and Midian. This city, Resin King of the
Syrians conquered; but Azariah King of Judah drove thence the Syrians, and made
it so strong, that it seemed impossible to be conquered. It took the name of
abundance of Oaks, which (as it seems) grew about that place: for Elah or
Ilix, signifies, a kind of Oak tree, (of which there is great plenty in the
Holy land) so called because of their strength and hardness.

Of Iabnia.
THis was a city near to Ioppa and Lidda, 16 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northwest. This city takes the name of wisdom and prudence, being derived of
Bin, to understand.

Of Gur-Baal.
THis town is also called Gerar, where Abraham and Isaac sometimes traveled;
it is distant from Jerusalem 32 miles toward the Southwest, and six miles from
Hebron. Here the Jews and neighboring Arabians afterward worshipped the Idol
Baal: and therefore this city which in the times of the Patriarchs, was called
Gerar, a Perigrination; was after called Gur-Baal, that is, the Perigrination
of the idol Baal, being derived of Gor, which signifies, He has traveled.

The Travels of Iotham King of Judah.
IOtham signifies, Whole and Perfect. He succeeded his father Azariah when he
was about 25 years of age, anno mundi 3190, and before Christ, 778. He reigned
over Judah 17 years, until the 41 year of his age. His mothers name was
Icruscha, so called from an inheritance or possession. He began his reign in
the second year of Pekah King of Israel, and continued it until the 17 year
of his government, 2 Reg. 15. 17.

When this noble Prince had rebuilded and richly adorned the porch of the house
of the Lord, he went from Jerusalem and invaded the country of the Ammonites
(which was 60 miles,) conquered their King, and made the whole land pay him
tribute, even a hundred talents of silver of the common weight, and 10000
measure of Wheat, and 10000 of Barley yearly. This tribute continued three
years.

From the land of the Ammonites he went back to Jerusalem, which was 60 miles;
where after he had adorned the City and Temple with many Princely buildings,
he died, about the 41 year of his age, 2 Reg. 15. So all his travels were 120
miles.

Of Ahaz King of Judah.
AHAZ signifies Apprehending, or a possessor. He began to reign after the
death of his father Iotham, about the end of the 17 year of Pekah King of
Israel, Anno mundi, 3206, before Christ, 762. He reigned wickedly 16 years, 2
Reg. 16. 2 Chr. 28. For he was a notorious hypocrite, who out of a perverse
zeal worshipped many Idols, and burnt his son in the valley of Gehinnon, as
an offering unto Moloch. Wherefore he was unhappy in his government; for God
stirred up mighty enemies against him, even Resin king of Syria, and Pekah king
of Israel, who wasted and destroyed his Kingdom, and (straightly besieging
Jerusalem) conquered Ahaz in a great battle, and put to the sword 120000 of
his men. After that, Resin returned to Elath, and took it: so that he lost
more than his father had gotten. Where being struck into a great fear hy
reason of these adversities, he sent to crave the aid of Tiglasse Phulasser
king of the Assirians, who at his request sent a great Army from Nineveh to
Damascus, 520 miles, and there overcame Resin, and put him to death, and took
captive 242000 of the people of Damascus, and sent them into Cyren a country of
Africa, 2 Reg. 16.

The Travels of Ahaz.
King Ahaz went from Jerusalem to Damascus, which was 160 miles, to meet
Tiglath Phulasser King of the Assirians, to rejoice with him for his happy
victory, and give him thanks for his aid and assistance: where when he saw the
Altar at Damascus to be very glorious, he sent for Vrija the chief Priest, who
took a pattern thereof, and carried it with him to Jerusalem, where he made
an Altar like unto it, 2 Reg. 16.

From Damascus he returned back again 160 miles. (So his travels were 320
miles.)

But yet Ahaz continued in his perverse impiety and idolatry, without any
regard or fear of God, therefore he stirred up other enemies against him, viz.
the Idumaeans, who took a great multitude of them captive; and the
Philistines, who with their Army broke into the South part of the tribe of
Judah, and took these cities following; viz. Bethsemes, Aialon, Timnath, Socho,
Gederoth, and Gimso, with their villages. These Cities for the most part are
mentioned in the precedent treatise, except Gederoth and Gimso. Gederoth,
commonly called Gederothaim, is distant from Jerusalem eight little miles
toward the South-west, and stands near to the castle of Emaus, being
compassed about with a hedge, from whence it seems to take the name; for
Gadar is as much to say as, He has hedged about. Gimso was also in the Tribe
of Judah, but in what place it is not certainly known. Thus king Ahaz all the
days of his life did evil in the sight of the Lord, for which God punished
him and all the land, and in the 16 year of his reign he died, and was buried
with his fathers in the City David.

The Travels of Ezekias King of Judah.
Ezekias (which signifies, The Champion of Jehovah) was borne when his father
was but thirteen years of age, which made many questions whether he should
succeed him as his lawful heir in his Kingdom, because they doubted whether
he was lawfully begotten. For if you do observe the order and course of the
years and chronology in the Scripture, you shall find that from the
beginning of the thirteenth year of the age of Ahaz, to the first year of the
reign of this King Ezekias, make just twenty five years. Ezekias therefore
began to reign after the death of his father Ahaz, about the end of the third
year of Hosea King of Israel, 2 Reg. 19. Anno mun. 3222, before Christ, 746,
being then about 25 years of age, a little before Easter, as it appears, 2 Chronicles. 29. He governed that Kingdom with great commendations 29 years. The
first journey that he took was from Jerusalem to Gaza, which was 44 miles,
there he overcame the Army of the Philistines, and recovered all those cities
which his father Ahaz had lost, according to that in the Prophet Esaias, cap. 15.
2 Reg. 18.

From Gaza he returned to Jerusalem, which was 44 miles; there he broke down
the places for idolatry, and the brazen Serpent made by Moses in the
wilderness, and called it Nehustan, a brazen thing that has nothing in it
self of a divine nature, and could neither profit nor hurt, therefore ought
not to be worshipped. This brazen serpent was kept in memory of that sign that
God showed unto the children of Israel in the desert, when they were bitten and
stung to death by fiery serpents, for looking upon this brazen serpent they
were healed. But now because of the abuse thereof by the Jews, which turned it
into idolatry, it was broken to pieces. Number. 21. 2 Reg. 18. So all the travels
of Ezechias were 88 miles.

In the 14 year of the reign of Ezekias, and in the 38 of his age, Senacharib
(that mighty Emperor of the Assirians) having taken many towns and cities in
the Holy land, would have also besieged Jerusalem, and for that purpose sent
from Lachis (which was 20 miles distant from Jerusalem) Thartan, Rabsarim, and
Rabsacha, three mighty Princes, Ambassadors, with a great train to attend
them. These men went about the city, to see in what part it was most subject
to battery, and might easiest begot: so when they came to the conduit of the
upper poole, which is by the path of the Fullers field, between the Fish gate
and the old gate, in that place where they might easiliest be heard, they
called to the King: but Eliakim the son of Hilkiah (which was Hezekias
Steward) Shebnah the Chancellor, and Ioab the son of Asaph, the Recorder,
went upon the wall: then Rabsacha uttered blasphemous words against the Lord:
but Ezekias when he had heard what the enemy had said, called all the Elders
of Jerusalem together, and sent for Isaiah the son of Amos the Prophet, and
they went into the temple of the Lord and prayed. Wherefore the Lord heard
their prayers, and sent his Angel into the Camp of the Assirians, and lo, in
one night there were slain 185000 men as they lay in their tents before Gibeah
(which at this time they besieged) being distant from Jerusalem some ten miles
toward the Southwest. This great deliverance happened in the year of the world
3235, and before Christ, 733. About the end of the 38 year of the age of
Ezekiah, he fell into a dangerous disease, which so far forth as could be
gathered by all likelihoods was the plague; (for God does oftentimes try the
patience of his Saints with sundry afflictions) but yet at his fervent prayers
he was restored to health, and his days were lengthned 15 years: at which
time the Sun went back ten degrees, according to the variation of the shadow
in the Dyall of Jerusalem, 2 Reg. 20. Isa. 38. 2 Chronicles. 32. But at the end of
the 15 years, which was about the 54 year of his age, he died, and was buried
with his fathers.

The Travels of Manasses.
MAnasses or Manasseth signifies, forgetting, or he has forgotten. This man
was 12 years old when he succeeded his father Ezekiah in the Kingdom of
Judah: he began to reign anno mundi 3251, and before Christ, 717. This King
was a great Idolater, and one that put the Prophets of the Lord to death, so
that it was wonderful to see what tyranny and mischief he wrought in Israel:
wherefore the Lord stirred up the Assirians against him, who overcame him in a
great battle, and took him captive, carrying him bound in chains from
Jerusalem to Babylon, even 680 miles.

But after being humbled by his afflictions, he came to a knowledge of
himself, and repented for his former evil, humbling himself with prayer and
fasting under the hand of God: wherefore the Lord took compassion of him, and
stirred up the mind of the King of Babylon to mercy, so that he loosed his
bands, and sent him back again to Jerusalem, 680 miles. From that time
forward he left idolatry and worshipped the true God, adorned the Temple of the
Lord with many fair and beautiful buildings, and in the 55 year of his age
he died and was buried in the Kings garden, 1 Reg. 21. 2 Chronicles. 33. So all the
travels of Manasses were 1360 miles.

Of Amon King of Judah.
AMon signifies, True and faithful: he succeeded his father Manasses when he
was but 22 years of age, anno mundi 3307, before Christ, 661. He reigned two
years, and then because of his exceeding idolatry the Lord cast him off when he
was about 24 years of age, near which time some of his servants conspired
against him and put him to death.

The Travels of King Josiah.
Josiah signifies, A sacrifice of the Lord: he succeeded his father Manasses in
the government, when he was but 8 years of age, Anno mundi, 3309, hefore
Christ, 659. He governed Israel with great commendations 32 years, 2 Reg. 22.
his mothers name was Iedidah, and dwelt in a town called Bozkath, but how
far this Town stood from Jerusalem it is not set down by any Author.

This good King went from Jerusalem to Bethel, which was 8 miles; there he
burnt upon the Altar which Jeroboam built, the bones of the Priests of Baal, as
the man of God that came from Judah had told Jeroboam 350 years before, 1 Reg.
13. 2 Chr. 23.

From Bethel he returned back again to Jerusalem, which was 8 miles; there he
celebrated the Passover with a solemn feast and great attendance, 2 Reg. 23.
2 Chr. 35.

In the last year of his reign he went with his army from Jerusalem to
Megiddo, which was 44 miles, against Pharaoh Necho K. of Egypt; in which
battle he was slain with an arrow, about the 39 year of his age, 2 Chronicles. 35.

From Megiddo his body was carried in a chariot back again to Jerusalem, which
was 44 miles, and there with great lamentations honorably buried, 2 Reg. 23. 2
Chr. 35. So all his travels were 104 miles.

The Travels of Iehoahas King of Judah.
IEhoahas signifies, The knowledge of God: he succeeded his father Josiah in
the 23 year of his age, Anno mundi, 3340, which was 628 years before Christ;
and reigned only three months, 2 Reg. 24. 2 Chronicles. 36. Jeremy (cap. 22.)
calls this man Schallum, that is, A recompense.

He went from Jerusalem to Riblah, a city in the tribe of Nepthaly, which is
accounted 80 miles; where he was taken prisoner by Pharaoh Necho, 2 Reg. 23.

From Riblah Pharaoh Necho led him captive bound in chains back again to
Jerusalem, which was 80 miles; and there appointed Iehoiakim, his elder
brother, to reign in his place, 2 Reg. 23. 2 Chronicles. 36.

From Jerusalem he carried Iehoahas to Memphis, the Metropolitan city of
Egypt, which was 244 miles, 2 Reg. 23. So all the Travels of Iehoahas were 404
miles.

Of Iehoiakim King of Judah.
IEhoiakim was the eldest son of Josiah, that good King, and succeeded his
brother Iehoahas in the Kingdom Anno mundi, 3341, before Christ, 627: he
governed Judah 11 years. Pharaoh Necho made him King when he was 25 years of
age, to whom he was constrained to pay 100 talents of What this is in our
money, you may read after in the quantity of moneys.
silver, and a talent of gold. This money being paid, he obtained the
Kingdom, and continued in great impiety and idolatry; for which cause he was
sharply reprehended by Jeremiah the Prophet: but he being offended at his
words, sought to put him to death; wherefore the Lord stirred up Nebuchadnezzar
the second of that name, Emperor of the Assirians and Babylonians, who in the
11 year of this Kings reign came to Jerusalem, and took him captive, tied him
in two chains, and would have carried him to Babylon; but his mind changed,
wherefore he caused him to be put to death and cast out into the fields of
Jerusalem for a prey to wild beasts, Ier. 22. 2 Reg. 23.

Of Iehoiachin King of Judah.
IEhoiachin signifies, the preparation of Jehovah. This man succeeded his
brother Iehoiakim, and began his reign about the end of the 3351 year of the
world, and reigned only 3 months and 10 days, which was about the 8 year of
Nabuchodonesor the great; at which time he was led captive from Jerusalem to
Babylon, together with Mordochae and many other Nobles, which was 680 miles.
This captivity happened 617 years before Christ, 2 Reg. 24. 2 Chronicles. 36. Ester
2. Ier. 52.

The Travels of Zedekiah the last King of Judah.
AFter Iehoiachin succeeded Zedekiah, which signifies, The just man of God.
This was the son of that good King Josiah, (yet an impious tyrant:) who, by
the permission of Nabuchadonezar the great, was suffered to be King of Judah
after his brother, when he was 21 years of age. He began to reign about the
beginning of the 3352 year of the World, and before Christ 616: he governed
tyrannically 11 years, 2 Reg. 24.

In the 11 year of this king, Jerusalem was taken by Nabuchadonezar the great
Emperor of the Babylonians: wherefore Zedekiah, to escape the brunt of war,
fled from Jerusalem with all possible speed to Jericho, which was 12 miles,
Ier. 39.52.

From the plain near the city of Jericho, where he was overcome by the
Princes of the Chaldeans, he was led to Riblah to Nebuchadonezar, which was 68
miles.

From Riblah (after the Emperor Nabuchadonezar, had caused all his children to
be put to death before his face, and had put out both his eyes) he led him
captive to Babylon, which was 600 miles, where he died miserable, 2 Reg. 25. So
all the Travels of Zedekiah King of Judah were 680 miles.

Of the destruction of Jerusalem by Nabuchadonezar.
In the ninth year of this Zedekiah (which was the last King of Judah)
Nabuchadonezar began to besiege Jerusalem, it being then Winter, anno mundi
3860, upon the tenth day of the tenth month Tebeth, which answers to the 27
day of December, which day the Jews till now, observed as a fasting day. The
siege continued even till the 11 year of this king, Ierem. 39.52. 2 Reg. 25.
And upon the 9 day of the 4 month Thamus, (which agrees with the tenth day of
July) the City was taken, and Zedekiah was put to flight. Upon the 7 of the 5
month Ab, Nabusaraden chief captain of the army, was sent back by
Nabuchadonezar into Iudaea, where he destroyed and burned the houses and
buildings of the city of Jerusalem, Ierem. 52. upon the tenth day of the fifth
Month, Ab, which answers to the ninth day of Argust, being the Sabbath day,
the temple of Jerusalem was set on fire, Ier. 52. de bello Iudaei, lib. 6. cap.
26. 27. This first captivity and destruction of the city of Jerusalem by
Nabuchadonezar that great Emperor, happened anno mundi, 3362, and before
Christ, 606. Three hundred and nintie years being then fully complete and
ended, from the first year of Iaroboam King of Israel, who set up the golden
calves, and caused them to be worshipped. For after the end of these years,
according to the prophecy of Ezekiel, cap. 4. the sins of Jeroboam should be
grievously punished upon the people of Judah. In like manner, from the end of
the 13 year of Josiah, wherein Jeremy first began to prophecy, until this
year, in which the children of Israel were carried away captive into Babylon,
are numbered 40 years: which by Ezekiel. cap. 4. are called the years of the
iniquity of Judah, because so long the Jews did contemn and despise the
admonition of the Prophet Jeremy.

Of Babylon.
HOw far this city stood from Jerusalem, you may read before which by the
Chaldaeans is called Shinear, or Sinear, and signifies, To strike upon the
teeth, being derived of Schen, A tooth, and Naer, To strike. It may also be
taken for that, when a man endeavored with all speed to execute a thing, which
seems to resemble the condition of Nimrod; for that in this place he
endeavored to overcome and conquer all his neighbors: from whence this land
was called Casdius, that is, The country of the destroyer. So changing M into
L, it is called Chaldeus or Chaldaea. The chief and Metropolitan city of
which country, was this Babylon, built some thirty years after the flood by
Nimrod, or the Babylonian Saturn, the first great commander of the world,
according to Berosus lib. 4. who writes after this manner: Nimrod which was
accounted the son of Jupiter Belus, being angry with the holy Priests of that
great God Jehovah, came with his colonie and people into the field of Sinear,
where he built a city, and laid the foundation of a great tower, 131 years
after the flood; and raised this tower to such a height, and withal of such a
hugeness, that it seemed as if it had been some great mountain; because he
would have the Babylonian people accounted the chiefest and greatest in the
world; also their governor the King of Kings. A little after he says, he built
this tower, but before he could finish it, dyed, in the 56 year aftet he began
it: wherefore the city and tower of Babylon, according to the opinion of
Berosus, was begun in Anno mundi, 1788, which was 131 years after the flood,
and before Christ, 2180. There were two causes wherefore the children of men
built up this Tower; first, that they might get them a name: secondly, that
they might be safe in case there came another flood to drown the world. It was
made of brick and bittume, least the water should loosen it. But the Lord
turned their enterprises into evil, and divided their Language, so that they
could not understand one another [whereby they were constrained to leave off
their building:] from whence it happened that their minds, manners,
understandings, studies, and principal actions were utterly changed, and is
the foundation of all discord and sedition, where the fear of God, and the
true knowledge of Christ does not prevent it. From this division of tongues, it
is called the city of Babylon, this is, the city of division, being derived
of the word Balal, he has confounded or mingled together. Of this city you may
read in Ios. lib. 1. cap. 9. where he brings in a saying of the Sibels,
which was, That when all nations were of one language, they built an exceeding
high tower, as though they would have ascended by it into heaven; but the Lord,
with great tempest and dividing their tongues, subverted their enterprise, from
whence it was called Babylon. This city was the fairest in those times of all
others, situated in a spacious plain, upon every side whereof, there stood
pleasant orchards and gardens: it was built four square, compassed about with
walls of an incredible strength and greatness, being 50 cubits thick, and 200
high, beautified within with goodly buildings, fair temples richly guilt with
gold, and wonderful to look upon. It was in compass 380 furlongs, as Strabo
says, which make 48 miles. Through it ran the river Euphrates, by which all
things necessary were conveyed to the City: without it was compassed with
fair ditches filled with water like rivers, and in the wall there stood a
hundred gates. Herodotus says, That it was 480 furlongs about, which make 60
miles English, but that is not so credible.

The first founder of this city was Nimrod, who in those times was the chief
commander of the world. It is thought that he was the son of Cham, the son
of Noah; whose name signifies, a cruel governor, or an unmerciful tyrant. And
that his actions might be according to the signification of his name, he is
branded with most perspicuous note of cruelty, omitting no violent action
whereby he might enlarge his dominions; incroching upon other men's gouerments,
through a thirsty and ambitious desire of renown, without either respect of
equity or humanity. And to add evil to evil, committed many outrages upon
such as were accounted good men, and the Priests of the great God Jehovah, from
whence there grew in him a more than humane resolution, accounting himself in
this world a god, and through this opinion grew into contempt of all good
things; compelling such as were his subjects and vassals to do him worship and
reverence, as to a divine power; which, being ingraffed into the hearts of such
as followed in succeeding ages, they countenanced it with authority: from
whence it came to pass, that he was enrolled into the number of their
principal gods, giving him the name of Saturn, whom the Hebrews calls
Sudormin, which elegantly imployeth Saturn.

Berosus says, that the Babylonian Jupiter succeeded this Nimrod, whose
authority I am willing to follow to avoid prolixitie. This man so much
enlarged the City, that many in succeeding ages have attributed the foundation
thereof unto him. He ruled over it sixty and one years.

After him succeeded Ninus, or as some will have it Nimrod the second, who
began his reign Anno mundi, 1909, before Christ, 2061: he did many worthy acts
during his life, and added to the Empire of Babylon many Provinces; and after
he had reigned 50 years, dyed, and was buried in Babylon.

After him succeeded Semiramis his wife, who took upon her the government of
the Assirian Empire, her son Ninus being then within age; and she began her
government Anno mundi, 1959, before Christ, 2009. She was one of the manliest
and resolute women that we read of, and performed as many worthy and memorable
actions. This Queen built her sepulcher over the most eminent gate of Babylon,
in a public and perspicuous place, upon which she caused to be written in
golden letters, If there be any King of Babylon that shall come after me, and
stand in need of money, let him open this sepulcher, and whatsoever he wants
he shall find: but before, it will not be good for him to touch it. This
notwithstanding, it continued till the reign of Darius, who opened this
monument in hope to find what the superscription imported; but no money was
there to be had, only within might plainly be seen engraven other letters,
to this effect: Unless thou had been unsatiably covetous, thou would
never have opened the graves of the dead in hope of gain. This woman
beautified Babylon with many goodly buildings, built up the walls thereof, set
a bridge over Euphrates, made a beautiful Orchard and a Garden in it,
beautified it with many goodly Towers and fortifications, added unto it many
provinces and governments: and after all, because of her own lascivious
appetite (as Sallust says) was murdered by her son Ninus, who succeeded her
in the government.

There were many other memorable things within this City, that were built
before and after her time (as Herodotus says) as that great and mighty tower
before remembered, in which stood the temple of Baelus, and his sepulcher. Not
far from that stood a chapel, wherein was the statue of Jupiter all of pure
gold, worth What this was in our money you may see after.
800 talents of gold. Without that chapel there stood an altar of pure gold,
upon which they yearly offered 100000 talents of frankincense. There was
another also somewhat less, upon which they used to offer their sacrifices; for
it was not lawful for them to offer any thing that had life upon the greater
altar: there stood also in that place another statue twelve cubits high, all of
pure gold.

This City was after taken by Cyrus the first Emperor of the Persians, Anno
mundi 3432. before Christ 536. in the seuentieth year after the Captivity of
Israel and Judah, according to the prophecy of Jeremy; at which time the City
was so great, that they which dwelt in the middle of it did not know that the
Enemy had entered within the walls at the further end: which might happen,
because upon that day when it was taken the Babylonians celebrated a Feast unto
Venus, in which using extraordinary diligence, they were less mindful of
such things as happened unto them.

Thus this City, that with great tyranny had triumphed over the Nations of the
earth for the space of 1600 years (being so plentifully furnished with all
things necessary for the maintenance of life, that the inhabitants thereof
contemned al other people) was by Gods permission, for their pride and
presumption, wasted and consumed by Cyrus, as you have heard: and shortly after
utterly destroyed by Xerxes, the fourth Emperor of the Persians, and so
continues to this day, as Strabo says. Where then, o world, is thy
prosperity? or Riches, thy glory? since in the one thou art consumed, in the
other left desolate.

Of the ruins of old Babylon that are extant at this day.
BAbylon (which as you have heard reigned over the Nations of the earth like a
Queen) at this day has nothing to present you withal but an heap of stones;
out of the ruins whereof there was built a little town close by where it
stood, called Elugo, or Felugo, situated upon the bank of the river
Euphrates. Not far from which it seems there is a profitable harbor for ships,
where Merchants oftentimes go a shore, and travel thence through many Woods
and desert places, unto Seleucia, which at this day is called by the Turks
Bagdeth, distant thence some 36 miles, and is the utmost town of the Turkish
and Persian Empires toward the East, being divided in the midst by the river
Tygris. Some Merchants have reported, That the place where Babylon stood is
become stony, unfruitful, and unpleasant, because of the ruins of the
destroyed buildings which lie in the earth. Also, That there is found a tower
built of a black stone, which to outward appearance seems to have bin a very
goodly house high and eminent; so that upon the top thereof a man might have
seen through the whole city. This tower the Inhabitants of Felugo call the
tower of Daniel, in which was the chamber where he used to pray unto the Lord
three times a day, the windows whereof looked toward Jerusalem, Dan. 6. There
is also to be seen diverse arches of the bridge which Semiramis built, standing
upon the river Euphrates, and the foundation of the great tower whose top
should have reached to heaven; being in compass two miles, but not very high.
Within the ruins whereof are found certain serpents very noisome and
venomous, about the bigness of a Lizard, having three heads, and spect with
diverse colors, which the inhabitants call Eglones. There are such a multitude
of them, that no man dares approach within half a mile of it at any time but in
the Winter season, nor then neither but for the space of a month; in which
time these serpents for the extremity of the cold are constrained to keep
their holes. Thus as this Tower was hateful unto God in the beginning, so
likewise has he made it hurtful unto man even to this day.

The Travels of the Babylonian and Assyrian Kings and Emperors that fought
against Israel and Judah. And first of Phul Belochus King of Assyria.
PHul Belochus (that is, He returned wasting) began to reign among the
Babylonians An. mundi 3149. before Christ 819, and governed 48 years.

This King or Emperor came from Babylon to Samaria, which was 660 miles. There
he so straightly besieged Menahem King of Israel, that he was constrained to
give him What this was in our money you may see after.
1000 talents of silver to raise his siege and depart, 2 Reg. 15.

From Samaria he returned back again to Babylon, 660 miles.

So all the travels of Phul Belochus were 1320 miles.

The Travels of TIGLAT PHVLASSER King of the Assyrians.
TIglat Phulasser signifies, The Assyrian Conqueror. He was also called
Tiglath Philasser, 2 Reg. 15. which name is attributed to him either because he
carried away the children of Israel captive, or else because of the conquest
that he had of all Galile, and over the tribe of Nepthali, which he carried
into Assyria. He succeeded his father Phul Belochus in the government of the
Assyrians, An. Mun. 3197. before Christ 771. and reigned 25 years.

When Resin King of the Assyrians (joining his army with Pekah son of Remalia
King of Israel) had straightly besiege Jerusalem, Ahas was constrained to crave
aid of this Tiglath Phulasser, and sent him great presents, which he accepted
kindly, and brought his arm from Niniveh to Damascus, 520 miles, where he put
Resin and the whole city to the sword, 2 Reg. 16.

From Damascus he came with his army into the land of Israel, which was 120
miles, where he overcame Pekah in a great battle, conquered all the land of
Gilead and the tribe of Nepthaly, and put a great multitude of the Israelites
into perpetual exile, 2 Reg. 15.

From thence he went back to Nineveh, 640 miles.

A little after this, King Tiglath Philasser went from Ninive to Jerusalem, 680
miles, where he so streitly besieged that wicked King Ahas, that he was
constrained to give him great abundance of gold and silver to raise his siege
and be gone, 2 Chr. 28.

From Jerusalem he returned back to Ninive, being 680 miles.

So all his travels were 6640 miles.

OF the city Niniveh you may read after, in the travels of Jonas the Prophet.
Of Kyr, which is commonly called Cyrene.
KYr or Cyrene is situated in Africa, 816 miles from Jerusalem Westward. In
which country Simon that bore the cross of Christ was borne, Mat. 27. Luke 23.
It signifies in Hebrew, A strong wall: and in Latin, a Heart.

The Travels of King SALMANASSER.
SAlmanasser signifies, The Assyrian Peacemaker. This man Ptolomaeus (that
excellent Mathematician) calls Nabonassarus, that is, the Prophet of the
Assyrians. He began to reign upon the 26 of February, An. mundi 3221, before
Christ 747, and reigned ten years or thereabout.

This man went with his army from Ninive to Samaria, being 652 miles, where he
compelled Hosea the last King of Israel to pay him tribute, 2 Reg. 16.

From thence he returned back again with his army to Niniveh, 652 miles.

After, when Hosea K. of Israel (conspiring with So K. of Egypt) denied to pay
him tribute, he returned back again the second time to Samaria, which was
652 miles, and after 3 years siege he took and destroyed it with fire and
sword, and conquered all the country round about.

From Samaria he returned back again to Niniveh, 652 miles.

So all the travels of Salmanasser King of the Assyrians were 2608 miles.

The Travels of SENACHARIB King of the Assyrians.
SEnacharib, as Melancthon expounds it, signifies a two edged Sword. He
succeeded his father Salmanasser, Ann. M. 3231. before Christ 737. He reigned 7
years. This man, imitating his father, endeauored to carry away the rest of Gods
people into captivity: for which purpose he brought an army from Niniveh to
Lachis, which was 700 miles, which town he besieged, and sent his Princes to
Ieresalem, being 20 miles, where he blasphemed the Lord: of which you may
read more in the history of King Hezekiah.

From Lachis he went to Libnah, 8 miles. This was a strong Hold, but he
besieged it so narrowly, that within a while after he had begun the siege, he
took it. While he was before this town there came news, That Taracha a King
of the Ethiopians had invaded his country. Wherefore he sent the second time
messengers to Jerusalem. But the Lord was offended with their blasphemy,
wherefore he sent his Angel, who in one night destroyed 185000 of his army.

This sudden and unexpected evil falling upon him, in a great fear he
returned to Niniveh, 692 miles, where he was slain by his sons in the Temple.
The same of these things was so divulged abroad, that Herodotus, lib. 2. makes
mention of them.

So these three journies make 1400 miles.

Of Lachis and Libnah you may read before.

Of Assarhaddon King of the Assyrians.
ASsarhaddon (his father Senacharib being slain) succeeded in the government,
An. mundi 3238, which agrees with the 730 year before Christ, and reigned ten
years in Niniveh the chief city of the Assyrians. Here again the mutation and
change of Kingdoms may be observed; for Merodach a Chaldaean rebelling against
Senacharib, continued his government in Babylon 11 years, that is, during a
part of the reign of Senacharib, and all the reign of Assarhaddon his son; in
which time he conquered the Assyrians, and made them subject to the empire of
the Babylonians

Of Merodach the first Emperor of the Babylonians.
MErodach signifies, A bitter repentance. He was the son of Baladan Prince
of Babylon, who ruled at such time as Senacharib had that grievous overthrow in
Judah. Wherefore taking advantage of the time, and the necessity of that
Prince, he rebelled against him and his son Assarhaddon, taking upon him the
absolute command of the city and whole Empire. The beginning of whose reign
happened in the year of the world 3236, and before Christ 732. This Merodach
sent to Jerusalem wise and learned men with gifts and presents to King Ezekiah,
just in that year when the Sun went back ten degrees, to know the truth of
this miracle. For it was a custom amongst the Nations round about Jerusalem
(if any thing happened beyond the expectation of man) to send thither to enquire
the truth thereof. Such and so wise a people were the Jews esteemed in those
times, as may appear by diverse places in holy Scripture. In the beginning of
the 12 year of this King, Assarhaddon Emperor of the Assyrians died; after
whose death he became Emperor of all Assyria and Chaldea He began to reign over
that spacious kingdom, An. mundi 3247, before Christ 721. and reigned after
that 40 years.

Of Ben-Merodach Emperor of Babylon.
BEn-Merodach, that is, the son of Merodach, succeeded his father An. M. 3287.
before Christ 681. He reigned 21 years.

Of Nebuchadnezar first of that name, Emperor of Babylon.
NEbuchadonesar or Nebuchadnesar signifies A Divine Judge. He was the most
potent king of all the Babylonians. This man obtained the chief command over
the Babylonian Empire, An. M. 3309, before Christ 659. He reigned 35 years,
and held his Court sometime in Babylon, sometimes in Niniveh, Iud. 1. He made
war with Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, of which battle you may read, 2 Reg.
25. 2 Chr. 35. in the valley of Megiddo, where Josias was slain. Herod. lib. 2.
does also make mention of this battle, and calls the place by the name of
Magdalum. Of which Jeremy also speaks. But they were towns in the tribe of
Manasses, situated near to the plain where this battle was fought: in which
country Mary Magdalen was borne.

The Travels of Nebuchadnezar the second of that name, Emperor of Babylon.
NEbuchadnesar or Nebuchadonesar the Great, which Ptolomaeus calls
Nebupollasser, about the end of the third year of Ioachim King of Judah (being
a little before created Emperor, his father yet living) came unto Jerusalem,
which he besieged so straightly, that he constrained Ioachim to pay him
Tribute for thirty seven years. Berosus says, Lib. 3. A little after, that
is, Anno mundi 3344. before Christ 624, he was sent against the Syrians,
Phoeniceans, and Egyptians that rebelled. So he went with his army from Babylon
to Carchemis, a City of Syria, situated near the river Euphrates, which was
280 miles. Here he overcame Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt in a great battle, Ier.
46. Herod. lib. 2.

From Carchemis, he went to Jerusalem, which was 400 miles; here he took
Daniel and his companions captive, and brought them to Babylon.

After, he went with his army to Pelusio, being 132, miles, which he took,
conquered all the land of Egypt, put to death Pharaoh Necho, and made
Psammeticus his son King in his place. Jeremy the Prophet told of this war,
cap. 25.26.

From Pelusio he returned to Babylon, 800 miles. Within a while after, his
father died, and he succeeded in the government, and reigned 43 years.

In the 11 year of Ioachim King of Judah, he went again from Babylon to
Jerusalem, which was 680 miles, and by policy took that city, and put Ioachim
the king thereof to death, according to the prophecy of Jeremy, cap. 22. 2
Kin. 24.

From thence (after he had made Iechonias his son King) he returned back
again to Babylon, 680 miles.

About three months after, he went the third time back to Jerusalem, 680
miles; for he feared Iechonias would rebel and revenge the death of his father
Ioachim, 2 Kin. 24.

In the eight year of his reign he took Iechonias, Mardoche, and 3000 other
Jews of the Nobility, and carried them captive to Babylon, which was 680 miles,
2 Kin. 24. 2 Chr. 36. Est. 2.

Nine years after, he came the fourth time to Jerusalem, being 680 miles, and
besieged the City, because of the impiety and rebellion of Zedekiah King
thereof. During this siege he took diverse towns, but chiefly Lachis and Aseka,
Ier. 34.

But when he understood that Pharaoh was coming with an army out of Egypt to
rescue Zedekiah, he raised his Camp, and went about 80 miles into the country
of Egypt: which Pharaoh hearing, was abashed, and turned back again. In the
absence of this Emperor, Jeremy the Prophet being then within the city, having
foretold the destruction thereof, would have fled thence for his better safety,
into the tribe of Benjamin: but by the way he was taken in the gate of
Benjamin, and cast into prison, Ier. 7.

Within a while after, according to the prophecy of Jeremy, Nebuchadnezar
returned out of the desert of Sur, whither he went to meet the Egyptians, being
80 miles, and utterly destroyed the city of Jerusalem, carrying thence the
vessels and ornaments of the Temple to Babylon, 2 Kin. 25. 2 Chr. 36.

From Jerusalem he went to Riblah in the tribe of Nepthaly, 80 miles, where
he put out Zedekiahs eyes, and killed his children, 2 Kin. 25.

From Riblah he carried Zedekiah to Babylon, which was 600 miles, where he died
miserably in prison, 2 Kin. 25.

Afterward Nebuchadnesar went with his army from Babylon to Tyrus, which he
won, and pitifully wasted with fire and sword, according to the prophecy of
Ezekiel, cap. 26. being 600 miles.

From Tyrus he went to Egypt, and passed 480 miles through that kingdom,
conquering all the countries and provinces as he went a long, even the
Ammonits, the Moabits, Philistines, Idumaeans, and Egypt it self, all which
countries he made tributarie to him, Isa. 15, 16, 19. Ier. 46, 47, 48, 49. Ez.
25.29.

From Egypt he returned to Babell, 960 miles.

From that time till his death, he was Emperor of all those kingdoms. In the
second year of his Empire Daniel expounded unto him his wonderful dream,
under the similitude of an image setting forth the condition of the four
monarchies of the world, Dan. 2. Not long after, he caused Sidrack, Misack, and
Abednego to be cast into a fiery furnace, because they refused to worship the
golden image which he had set up, Dan. 3. Also this Nebuchadnesar for his great
pride and arrogancy, was by God stricken mad, and into a deep melancholy, in
which disease he continued for the space of seven years, tied in bonds and
chains, running up and down like a beast, and feeding upon grass and roots;
until he came to understand, That God the Governor of Heaven and earth, had
the disposing of Kingdoms and Governments, giving them to whom he list, and
again taking them away. At the end of which time he was restored to his
understanding and Empire: and after beautified the city of Babylon with many
goodly buildings, fair orchards, and pleasant places, as Iosep. lib. Ant. 10
says. And when he had reigned 43 years died, and was buried by his father in
Babylon, An. mundi 3387. and before Christ 581.

So all the travels of Nebuchadonesar, or Nebuchadnesar, were 7892 miles.

The Description of the Cities and places that have not as yet been mentioned.
Of Carchemis.
THis was a city in the country of Syria near Euphrates, 400 miles from
Jerusalem Northward, and signifies A sacrificed Lamb; being derived of Car,
which signifies a Ram or Lamb, and Mosch, He has cut in pieces. It may also
be taken in the third Conjugation, for a Lamb sacrificed to the idol Chemosch
or Chamos, the god of meetings or nightly salutations.

Of Pelusio.
THis City Pelusio was built by Peleus the father of Achilles, from whence it
took the name. It stands in Egypt, some 172 miles from Jerusalem
Southwestward, near to the gate of Nilus called Pelusiachus, where it falls
into the Mediterranian sea. Not far from this city in the mountain Casius, upon
the borders of Arabia Petraea (where the Temple of Jupiter Casius stood) is to
be seen the tomb of Pompey the great, beautified and adorned by Adrianus
Caesar, as Capitolinus says. At this day this city is called by the name of
Damiata. You may read of it Ezekiel. cap. 30.

Of Tyrus or Zor.
TYrus signifies Cheese, or to congeale together, as Cheese does milk;
something alluding to the Hebrew word Zor, signifying, to make straight, or a
rock having a straight and sharp edge. It was the metropolitan city of
Phoenicia, now the haven or passage of Sur: but in ancient time it was called
Sarra, Aul. Gel. lib. 14. cap. 6. It was situated upon a very high rock,
compassed about with the Mediterranean sea, 100 miles from Jerusalem Northward,
and a famous mart town for all the Holy land. By the description of Ezekiel it
seems to have bin like unto Venice both in situation and dignity, Ez. 72.28.
Ierem. Esaias 27.28. and many other Prophets prophesied against this town,
saying, Out of the land of Kithim (that is, from Macedonia) the destroyer of
Tyrus should come. As after happened: for Alexander the Great, King of Macedon,
besieged that town, and in the 7 month after took it; for the obtaining
whereof he was constrained to fill up the sea which compassed it about,
containing 700 paces, and made it firm land for his army to pass upon to the
walls of the city. In this country that famous Civilian Vlpian was borne, as he
writes, lib. 1. ff. de Censibus. And upon the borders of Tyrus and Sidon
Christ cured the daughter of a Canaanitish woman, of a Devil, Mat. 15.
wherefore you shall read more of it in the second Tomb.

Of Evil-Merodach Emperor of the Babylonians and Assyrians.
AMilinus Evil-Merodach, son of Nebuchadonesar the great, succeeded his father,
An. M. 3388. before Christ 580. In the first year of his reign he set at
liberty Iechonias King of Judah, and attributed to him the title, dignity, and
maintenance of a King, Iechonias being then 55 years of age, and 37 after he
had been in captivity, 2 Kin. vlt. Ier. vlt. Whence it is concluded by most,
That this Emperor did also embrace the doctrine of Daniel, concerning the true
God, as did Nebuchadonesar his father; who had before by public Edict
professed it to the whole State, and caused it to be published through his
dominions, and therefore showed favor and mercy toward King Iechonias. And from
thence it is thought, that those which were impious princes about him, called
him Amelinus, that is, the Circumcised, being derived of Mol, which signifies,
to circumcise; and Evil, simple and foolish Merodach. His wives name was
Nitocris, according to Herod. lib. 1. She was a very magnificent and wise
woman, set up many fair and goodly buildings in Babylon, and was the mother of
Balthazar the last Emperor of the Assyrians, Dan. 5.

Of Niriglissoroor Emperor of Babylon.
NIriglissoroor (whose syrname was Regassar) son in law to Nebuchadnesar the
Great, having slain Euil-Merodach his wives brother, reigned over the
Babylonians and Assyrians four years, as Berosus says.

Of Labassardach the last Emperor of the Babylonions.
LAbassardach the son of Niriglissoroor succeeded his father. He reigned only 9
months, and died without heir male.

Of Balthazar Nabonidus the last Emperor of the Babylonians and Assyrians.
ANno mundi 3415, and before Christ 553, Balthazar Nabonidus, whose syrname was
Labynitus, the son of Euil-Merodach and Nitocris, obtained the Empire, and
reigned 17 years, according to Berosus, with Iosep. cont. App. Alexand. Polyb.
apud Eusebium, Praep. lib. 9. cap. 4. Alphae. hist. with Eusebius. calls this
King Nabinidochus. This is that Balthazar (says Josephus, lib. Ant. 10. ca.
13) which Daniel, cap. 5. calls the son of Nebuchadonesar, though indeed he
was but his sons son, as may be gathered from that of Ier. cap. 25. All nations
shall serve Nebuchadonesar, and his son, and his sons son.

Balthazar signifies, The Host of the Lord destroying his Enemies. Labynitus
signifies, a shaken Sword. This man, as he was celebrating a great feast unto
Venus (whom they call in the Assirian tongue Myleta) amongst a great multitude
of his Nobility, and in that using extraordinary excess and blasphemy against
the Lord; In the midst of his feast and all his merriments he saw a hand,
writing upon the wall, which left these words, Mean, Mean, Tekel Vphrasin, of
which you may read more Dan. 5. Some say, That at this very time the city was
taken by Cyrus Emperor of the Persians, and he put to the sword in those
sports and pastimes.

But certain it is that he was slain at a banquet, lost his empire, and was the
last of the Assyrian Emperors: but whether at that time, I refer it to the
opinion of the Reader.

The Travels of the Kings of Egypt that fought against of Judah. And first of
SISACK, who made war upon Rehoboam the son of Solomon.
THat proud and presumptuous Prince Sisack (which signifies a Garment of Silk)
in the last year of his regne (which was the first of Rehoboam the son of
Solomon) came with 1200 Chariots and 60000 Horse, from Memphis to Jerusalem,
which was 244 miles; bringing in his Army a great multitude of people of diverse
Nations, as Lybians, Ethiopians, etc. With this company he besieged Jerusalem
and took it, wasted the city, spoiled the Temple, and took thence the golden
shields which Solomon had made, and destroyed that fair and beautiful house
which Solomon had built. From whence that saying of his own was verified,
Eccles. That it is a great evil upon the earth, for a man to take care to lay
up riches and treasures in this world, yet knows not who shall inherit it.
For those things which a little before he had with great labor and pains
builded and beautified, within less than 20 years after were destroyed and
made desolate by this King.

From Jerusalem Sisack returned with the spoils of the temple and city, to
Memphis in Egypt, which was 244 miles: and in the year following he was
stricken by the Lord with a grievous disease, of which he died miserably.

So these two journies were 488 miles.

The Travels of PHARAOH NECHO King of Egypt, who made war upon JOSIAH King
of Judah.
NEcho signifies an Enemy or Inuader. This man was one of the greatest of all
the Egyptian Kings, who in the thirteenth year of his reign made war upon
Nebuchadnezar the first, and in the valley of Megiddo, near to Magdala, which
was 244 miles from Memphis, fought a great battle, wherein Josiah King of
Judah was wounded to the death.

From the valley of Megiddo Pharaoh Necho went to the River Euphrates, which
was 360 miles, where he fought a second battle with Nebuchadnezar upon a plain
near to Carchemis, where he lost the day and was put to flight.

From Carchemis he fled to Riblah in the land of Israel, which was 320 miles;
where in the land of Chaemath, near to the lake Samachonites, he overcame
Ioachas King of Judah, and took him prisoner.

From Riblah Pharaoh Necho led Ioachas bound to Jerusalem, being 80 miles, and
made Ioachim his brother King in his place.

From Jerusalem he returned to Memphis, 240 miles.

Within four years after he went the second time with a great army from Memphis
to the river of Euphrates, which was 640 miles.

But there he was the second time overcome by Nebuchadnesar, and constrained to
fly thence back again to Memphis in Egypt, being 640 miles. But Nebuchadnesar
followed him with an army of chosen men, and conquered all Egypt, took
Pharaoh Necho, and made his son Psammeticus King in his place, who was the
second of that name. Of this battle there is mention, Ier. ca. 25, and 26.

So all the travels of Pharaoh Necho were 1524 miles.

The Travels of the holy Prophets, and first of the Prophet ELIAH.
ELiah the Prophet went from This be (which was in the land of Gilead) to
Samaria, 24 miles, where he told the wicked King Ahab, that there should be
neither rain nor dew for the space of 7 years, 1 Reg. cap. 17.

From Samaria he went to the river Kerith, 24 miles, where he was fed by a
Raven.

From Kerith he went to Sarepta, which was 100 miles, where he sojorned with a
poor widow that found him necessaries, whose sun he restored to life, 1 Reg. 17.

From Sarepta he went to Mount Carmel in the land of Israel, being 60 miles;
and by the way as he went he met Obediah (which signifies, The Servant of the
Lord) and King Ahab, whom he rebuked sharply because of his idolatry. Also upon
this mountain he put all Baals Priests to death, and prayed unto the Lord, who
sent rain upon the earth in great abundance, 1 Reg. 18.

From Mount Carmel he ran by King Ahabs chariot to Iesreel which was accounted
16 miles.

After, when Queen Iesabel threatened his death, he departed thence, and went
to Beersaba, 84 miles, 1 Reg. 19.

From Beersaba he went one days journey into the wilderness of Paran, because
he thought to remain there safe from the mischief of Iesabel, which was 20
miles from Beersaba Southward. Here the Angel of the Lord brought him meat as
he was sitting under a Juniper tree, 1 Reg. 19.

By virtue of this meat Eliah traveled from thence to Mount Horeb or Sinai, 80
miles, and continued there 40 days and forty nights without meat or drink.
There the Lord spoke to Eliah as he stood in the entrance of a cave, his face
being covered with his mantle, 1 Reg. 19.

From the mount Sinai or Horeb he returned to Abel-Mehola, which was 156 miles,
where he called Elizeus the son of Saphas to the ministerial function and
office of a Prophet, 1 Reg. 18.

From thence he went to Damascus, 124 miles, where he anointed Hasael King of
Syria, 1 Reg. 19.

From Damascus Elias went to Mount Carmell, where he dwelt, which was
accounted 120 miles.

From mount Carmel he went to Iesreel, 16 miles: there in the vineyard of
Naboth (who Iezabel caused to be stoned to death) he sharply reprehended Ahab
for his impiety and idolatry, 1 Reg. 21.

From Iezreel he returned back again to his own house to Carmel, which was 16
miles.

From thence he went to Samaria, which was 32 miles, where he answered the
servants of King Ahaziah, whom he had sent to enquire of Baalzebub the idol of
Ekron, concerning his health, saying, Go and tell your master that sent you,
That the God of Israel says, Because thou have sent to ask counsel of
Baalzebub the idol of Ekron, and think there is no God in Israel, therefore
thou shall not rise off the bed whereon thou lie, but shall surely die. 2
Reg. 1.

Soon after, Elias returned to Mount Carmel, which was 32 miles, where the two
Captains with their Companies of fifty that were sent to take him, were
consumed with fire from heaven, 1 Reg. 1.

From Mount Carmel he went to Samaria with the third Cap. 32 miles, where he
prophesied of the death of King Ahaziah, 2 Reg. 1.

From Samaria he returned back again to Mount Carmel, 32 miles.

From thence he went to Gilgal, 52 miles.

From Gilgal he went with Elizeus to the town of Bethel, being 6 miles, 2 Reg.
2.

From thence to Jericho, 4 miles, 2 Reg. 2.

From Jericho he and Elizeus went to Jordan, which was six miles, through
which river they went upon dry ground. Now as they were speaking one to
another, upon the East side of the river behold a fiery chariot came with fiery
horses and took Elias up alive into heaven, after he had governed the Church
30 years, an. mundi, 3056, and before Christ, 912, 2 Reg. 2. So all the Travels
of Eliah the Prophet were 1033 miles.

Of the Cities and places to which he traveled.
Of Thisbe.
IN this town the Prophet Eliah was borne, it being situated in the land of
Gilead beyond Jordan, 48 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast. It takes
the name from Captivity; being derived of Chabah, he has led into captivity.

Of Kerith.
THe river Kerith (where the Ravens fed Elias) runs from Mount Ephraim
between Bethel and Jericho, 8 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and so
passing along toward the East, falls into the river Jordan, 1 Reg. 17. The
Kerethites were such as guarded the person of the King, which in the Prophet
David's time were called mighty men; taking their name from striking and
cutting, being derived of Charath, he has smitten, or cut in sunder.

Of Zarpath, or Sarepta.
THis was a City of the Sidonians, where they found much metal of diverse
kinds; lying between Tyrus and Sydon, 112 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North; and takes the name from Zoraph, which signifies, To try, or burn with
fire. There is at this time but eight houses in all the town, although by the
ruins it seems to have been in times past a very fair city. The
inhabitants thereof take upon them to show the chamber wherein Elias the
Prophet sometimes lived, when he raised the widows child to life. Before the
gate of the city also there is showed a certain Chapel, where (they say)
Elias first spoke with the widow, 1 Reg. 17.

Of Abelmehola.
THis was a town in the tribe of Manasses, on this side Jordan in the midway
between Sichem and Salem, some 38 miles from Jerusalem Northward. At this day
it is called Abisena; where there are found certain ruins of Marble pillars,
by which may be gathered, that in times past it has been a very beautiful
city. It seems to have taken the name from a great Lamentation or Mourning:
for Abel signifies To lament and bewail; and Machol, A company.

The typical signification of ELIAS.
ELias, according to the interpretation of Saint Jerome, signifies the minister
of Jehovah: but as others would have it, Eliah is as much as my God Jehovah. He
was a type of Saint John Baptist, who was sent before to prepare the way of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Chirst. Of this you may read more, Malach. 4. Matt.
11.17. Isa. 40. etc.

The travels of the Prophet Elisaeus or Elisha.
ELisha followed Elias through diverse countries, and became as it were his
servant, pouring water upon his hands, and ministering to him, 1 Reg. 19. 2 Reg.
3.

Elisha went with Eliah from Gilgal to Bethel, which was six miles, 1 Reg. 19.

From Bethel they both went to Jericho, which was 4 miles.

From Jericho he went beyond Jordan, 6 miles; where his Master was taken from
him up into heaven, and his spirit was doubled upon him, 2 Reg. 2.

From thence he returned back again to Jericho, which was ^ miles, passing
through the river Jordan upon dry ground; by which miracle the children of the
Prophets ( viz. such as studied divinity at Jericho) did certainly know that
the spirit of his master Elias rested upon him. Near to this town, he flang
salt into a river, by which the water was made sweet, 2 Reg. 2.

From Jericho Elisha returned to Bethel, which was 4 miles: here the chldren
that mocked him, saying, Come up thou bald pate, etc. in contempt of his age and
office, were devoured by 2 Bares, 2 Reg. 2.

From Bethel he walked to Mount Carmel, which was fifty six miles.

From thence he went to Samaria, which was about thirty two miles.

From thence he went to the three Kings, viz. Ioram King of Israel, Iehosaphat
King of Jerusalem, and the King of the Idumaeans, into the desert of Arabia
Petraea, which was 104 miles: here he prayed unto the Lord, and he sent them
water lest they should have perished with thirst, 2 Reg. 3.

From the Desert of Arabia Petraea he returned back to Samaria, which was 104
miles, where he relieved a certain widow woman that was afflicted with
poverty and want, miraculously by a Cruse of Oil, 2 Reg. 4. Josephus lib.
Antiq. 9. supposes this Woman to be the widow of Obediah the Kings, Steward,
of whom you may read before, who did hide and maintain a certain number of
the Prophets of the Lord in a cave, 2 Reg. 18.

From Samaria Elisha went oftentimes to a Town called Sunem, as he returned to
Samaria to Carmel, which was 16 miles distant. Here a certain rich woman
observing his often passage to and fro by that Town, built him a little
chamber wherein he might rest himself after his journey: to which place he
often resorted, and in recompense of this benefit (although she had been long
barren) he prophesied, that within a year she should have a son, which
accordingly she had to her great joy and comfort. 2 Reg. 4.

From Sunem he went to Carmel, which was 16 miles.

From thence he returned back again to Sunem to the woman where he used to
lie, which was 16 miles: here he restored her son to life, 2 Reg. 4.

From thence he went to Gilgal, which is distant from Sunem 36 miles toward
the South: here he fed 100 men with 20 barlie loaves, 2 Reg. 4.

From Gilgal he went to Samaria, which is accounted 20 miles: to this place
Naaman the Syrian came to him to be healed of his leprosy, 2 Reg. 5.

From Samaria he went to Jordan, which was eight miles, Here he made a Hatchet
of iron that fell into the water, to swim, 2 Reg. 6.

From Jordan he went to Dothan, where the children of Jacob sold their brother
Joseph to the Midianites, which was 8 miles: here the Angels of the Lord
compassed him and his servant about, lest they should have bin taken by the
army of the Syrians, and God struck the Syrians with blindness, 2 Reg. 6.

From thence he led the army of the Syrians (being thus made blind) to Samaria,
which was 12 miles, and delivered them to the King of Israel, upon condition
that he should give them meat and drink to refresh themselves, and suffer
them to depart in peace, which he did, 2 Reg. 6.

From Samaria he went to Sunem, which was 16 miles: here he advised the woman
where he used to lie, to travel thence to some other place, because of the
famine that should follow and continue for seven years, 2 Reg. 8.

From Sunem he went to Damascus, which was 132 miles: there he told Hazael,
that he should succeed his Master Benhadid in the government of the Syrians, 2
Reg. 8.

From Damascus he returned to Samaria, which was 132 miles, where soon after
he fell sick and died; his body was buried near to Samaria, where the Lord a
long time after his death showed a wonderful miracle, for a dead man being
thrown into his Sepulcher, was restored again to life by touching of his
bones, 2 Reg. 13. This man governed the Church of God amongst the children of
Israel 60 years after the death of Elias.

So all the Travels of Elisha were 730 miles.

Concerning the towns and places mentioned in his Travels, you may read
before.

The Typical signification of Elisha.
ELisha or Elischa signifies, The salvation of God; being derived of El, that
is, God; and Iaschag, He has saved: from hence Jesus, a Savior; because this
Prophet was a notable type of our Savior Jesus Christ: for as Elisha was
anointed Priest by the Prophet Eliah; so Christ was the anointed Priest of
the father: and as Elisha did many works of mercy and miracles, to make
evident Gods power and providence; so our Savior Christ went from place to
place, showing mercy to the blind, lame, and impotent, upon them working
wonderful miracles, that thereby his Doctrine might be made evident to the
World, and all such as trust in him be made capable of eternal happiness.

Tha Travels of the Shunamite, whose son, Elisha had raised from death to
life.
FRom Sunem she went to Mount Carmel, and besought Elisha to come and raise her
son from death to life, which was 16 miles, 2 Reg. 4.

From thence she and Elisha returned back again to Sunem, which was 16 miles;
and there he delivered her son unto her alive, 2 Reg. 4.

From Sunem (having buried her husband) she traveled into the land of the
Philistines, because of the famine that was to come suddenly after, being 56
miles, 2 Reg. 8.

From the land of the Philistines, she returned to Samaria, which was 40
miles, 2 Reg. 8.

From Samaria she returned to Sunem, which was 16 miles. So all her travels
were 144 miles.

Of the Prophet Isaiah or Iesaia.
IEsaia, or Ieschaia, is all one in signification with Elisha, that is, a
Savior. He was the son of Amos (which signifies, strength) and by
consequence Ozia King of Judah was his cosin-german, as may appear by this
Genealogy following.

Ioas King of Judah. Amasiah King of Judah. Ozias King of Judah. Iotham King of
Judah. Ahas King of Judah. Ezekias King of Judah. Manasses King of Judah, who
caused Isaiah to be slain.
Amos, Isaias father. Isaias had two daughters, Sear Iasub, that is, the rest
remaining: and was a sign of the rest of the posterity of Judah that should
remain and dwell there, Isa. 7. Mahez Schatal, that is, a sudde^ destruction:
for this 2d daughter of Isay did denote the immediate desolation of the
kingdoms of Syria and Samaria.




From whence it plainly appears, that the Prophet Esaias was of the stock
of David, and lineage of Christ; for which cause in the fifth chapter of his
prophecy, he calls him his beloved. He began to teach publicly in the
year of the World, 3167, and before Christ 800, and governed the Church eighty
years and more, until the time of Manasses, who caused him to be cut in
pieces with a saw.

In anno mundi 3190: before Christ, 778, Isay saw the Lord sitting upon a high
throne in great majesty, the lower part whereof filled the Temple, and the
Saraphins compassed him round about. Esa. 6. Cherubins are glorious and bright
shining Angels, of a fiery nature: For Saraph signifies, He has turned to
fire.

His doctrine was two fold, that is, partly concerning the Law, partly the
Gospel, as may appear by his prophecy: in the first forty chapters whereof,
the doctrine of the law is set forth with sharp reprehensions for sin: in
the first four of which, are grievous accusations of sinners for breach of the
first commandment; the other for the most part prophecy of horrible
punishments, mutations, and change of government; but principally, of the
Jews, Babylonians, Assirians, Syrians, and Egyptians. From the fortieth to
the end of the book is contained the doctrine of the Gospel, and of the
Kingdom of our Savior Jesus Christ; which he has set forth with such
excellent eloquence, figures, and amplifications, that he may be compared with
the best Orator that ever wrote.

The Travels of the Prophet Ieremias.
IEremias or Jeremiah, signifies, The exalted of the Lord: he was borne in the
Tribe of Benjamin, in a City of the Priests called Anathoth, and from thence
came to Jerusalem, which was two miles, and continued there for 40 years,
teaching and prophesying.

From Jerusalem he was sent to Euphrates, where in the cliffe of a rock he hid
his girdle, Ier. 13. which was 400 miles.

From the river Euphrates, he returned back again to Jerusalem, 400 miles,

A little after, the Lord sent him back again to Euphrates, (400 miles) to
fetch his girdle, and lo it was putrified.

From thence he returned back again the second time to Jerusalem, 400 miles.

From Jerusalem he was led captive bound in chains with other prisoners to
Ramath, a city in mount Ephraim, which was eight miles: there Nabusaraden the
chief captain caused him to be set at liberty.

From Ramath he went to Mispah, which is 8 miles: where he continued a while
with Gediliah Prince of the Jews, which man had the chief command of certain
cities of Iudaea under Nabuchadnezzer.

But in the seventh year of the captivity of the people of Israel, Ishmael
that was of the stock and progeny of David (hoping to obtain the government
of Judah) made war upon Gediliah, and put him to death; wherefore Jeremy went
from thence with John the son of Kareach, Prince of the Jews, to Bethlem
Euphrata, which was 8 miles, Ier. 41. Now when he had stayed a while in a
village near Bethlem called Geruth Ghimeham were sometime Chimeham the son
of Barzillai lived, 2 Samuel 19. he prophesied, saying, If you stay in this land
you shall do well, neither shall any evil hap unto you; but if you depart
hence into Egypt, they shall devour you with famine and with the sword, Ier.
42.

But John and the rest of the Princes would give no credit to the words of
Jeremy, but went into Egypt, and compelled the Prophet to go along with them:
so they went from Bethlehem to Tachpanes, which was 172 miles. Here the second
time Jeremy prophesied unto them, saying, Behold, Nabuchadnezzer shall come
hither and wast and destroy all the country of Egypt, beat down the Images
of Bethsemes, (or Heliopolis) and carry away the Egyptians into perpetual
captivity, Ier. 43. But the people of Israel being moved to anger because of
his words, stoned him to death. So the Travels of the Prophet Jeremiah were
1786 miles.

Concerning the towns and places mentioned in the Travels of this Prophet you
may read of them before, except Geruth. Chimeham, which stood close by
Bethlehem: it takes the name from a stranger, or traveler; being derived of
Gor, which signifies, He has traveled; and Tachpanes, which was a City of
Egypt, some 180 miles from Jerusalem; where the Prophet Jeremy was stoned to
death; it is oftentimes called by the name of Taphnis.

The travels of Vrijah the Prophet.
VRias, or Vriah, signifies, Illuminated, or enlightened of the Lord. He was
borne at Kiriath-jearim, a mile from Jerusalem toward the West: from thence he
came to Jerusalem, and there prophesied of the destruction of the City.

After, when King Ioachim went about to take away his life, he fled thence into
Egypt, 160 miles.

But the king sent messengers into Aegipt and fetched Vrijah back again to
Jerusalem, 160 miles, and there cut off his head, and caused his body to be
thrown into the sepulcher of a poor despised man, that it might not be known
that he had been a Prophet of the Lord. So all his travels were 321 miles.

Of Hananias the false Prophet.
HAnanias or Chanania signifies, the grace of God. This false Prophet was a
Gibeonite, and came from Gibeon to Jerusalem, which was four miles; where he
took the wooden yoakes from the neck of Jeremiah the Prophet: but Jeremiah
caused iron yokes to be made in their places, and told Hananias that for his
falsehood, that year he should surely die, as after he did.

Of the Prophet Ezekiel.
Ezekiel or Iechezkel, signifies, the strength or fortitude of God. He was
carried captive with 3000 others of the Nobility of the Jews from Jerusalem to
Babylon, which was 680 miles the same year that Nebuchadnezzer put King
Ioachim to death: within five years after (a little before Easter) the Book
of the Law was found, 2 Chronicles. 3. He began to prophecy in Babylon, Anno mundi,
3356, before Christ, 612; at which time he saw his first visions, near to the
River Chebar.

Of the River Chebar.
THe river Chebar was near Babylon in Chaldaea, upon the borders of
Mesopotamia, falling into Euphrates; and was oftentimes called Aborras,
according to the opinion of many learned men. Strabo in the seventeenth book of
his Geography says, that there is another river between Tygris and Euphrates,
called Basilius: Aborras passes along by the city of Athemusia, and is a very
fair stream, from whence it is called Chebar, which signifies, a swift and
spacious river. Near to this river the Prophet Ezekiel saw the Glory and
Majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ in a bright shining cloud. In this place also
dwelt many Jews, to whom he prophesied and foretold the destruction of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzer, and the captivity of Zedekiah.

The Travels of the Prophet Daniel.
DAniel signifies, The Judge of God. In the reign of Ioachim King of Judah, he
was carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon, by Nabuchadonezar, which
was 680 miles, and there with his fellows learned the Arts and Language of the
Chaldaeans, for three years. He was then but young, about some 19 or 20 years
of age, and lived in exile 91 years, until the third year of Cyrus Emperor
of the Persians; about which time he saw his last vision, and a little after
died, when he was about 110 years of age, as may be gathered by the
circumstances of Histories and times.

From Babylon he went to Susan in Persia, an. mun. 3418, before Christ, 550,
being then 94 years of age, which was 252 miles, where near to the flood
Eulaeus, he had a vision of a ram and a goat; which set forth the state of
the second Monarchy (which was that of the Graecians.) In this vision Gabriel
the Archangel, appeared to Daniel, Dan. 8. This was in the third year of King
Balthazar.

From Susan Daniel returned to Babylon, which was 252 miles; Here he
interpreted to Belthasar the meaning of these words, Men, Mean, Tekel
Euphrasin, Dan. 5.

From Babylon he went to the river Tygris of Hidekel, which was accounted 36
miles: here in the third year of Cyrus King of Persia, he saw his last vision,
which is described in the 10, 11, and 12 chapters of his prophecy.

From Tygris, he returned to his own house at Babylon, which was 36 miles.
Sometimes also in his three last years of his life, he used to go to Egbatan,
the Metropolitan city of the Medes, which was accounted 464 miles from
Babylon, toward the Northeast: Here Daniel built a fair and artificial
Temple, so strongly, that it remained unperished, and retained the ancient
beauty many ages, to the great admiration of all the spectators: In it the
Kings of the Medes, Persians, and Parthians, were for the most part honorably
buried: the government whereof was committed to a Priest of the Jews, as
Josephus says, lib. Antiq. 10. cap. 4.

From Egbatan, he returned back again to Babylon, which was 464 miles, and
there died anno mun. ^445, and before Christ, 533. So all the travels of the
Prophet Daniel were 2184 miles,

Of the places to which he traveled.
Of Susan.
SVsa or Susan, is so called from a sweet smelling flower; but chiefly a Rose
or a Lilly, because it is situated in a fair and pleasant place. It was a
goodly city, lying on both sides of the river Eulaeus, some 200 furlongs (that
is, 25 miles English) about, as Policletus says. And of this city all the
country round about is called Susana: bordering toward the North upon Assiria,
toward the West upon Babylon, toward the South upon the Gulf of Persia, and
joyneth upon the East part of Persia toward the East. There are but two cities
that are eminent in it, that is this, and another called Tariana. The air in
the Winter season is very temperate, at which time the earth brings forth
many pleasant flowers and fruits; but in the Summer it is extreme hot, by which
heat all things are scorched and burned away, and by reason of the
putrefaction of the air (as some think) in that season there do breed toads,
lyzards, and other noisome serpents in great abundance; so that the inhabitants
are constrained (partly because of the heat, partly because of the loathsome
and dangerous creatures) to build their houses all of earth, long and narrow,
the walls and roofes being at least a yard thick, that so the heat might not
pierce through them, or serpents breed in them, Strabo, lib. Geograph. 5.
says, that one Tython (the brother of Laomedon king of Troy) did first build
this city, about such time as Thola judged Israel. After him his son Nemmon
beautified it with a fair and goodly castle, calling it after his own name
Memnon. (Of this man Homer speaks.) This castle was such a goodly thing, that
a long time after his death, the town was called Memnon, as Strabo observes:
but in Hester and Daniels times, it was called Susa, and the inhabitants
Susans. The Persian Emperors in those times keeping their courts there for the
most part, and did greatly beautify the city with fair buildings. The first
of these Emperors that lived here was Cyrus, who after he had conquered
Babylon, Assiria, and many other Kingdoms and countries lying near to the
city Susa; that he might with more ease and better safety retain them in his
government, removed his court from Persepolis (which lay up in the East part of
Persia) to this town, where all the Winter season, for the most part, he
lived, and in the Summer went to Egbatan the chief city of Media, because
there at that season, the air was very temperate: His successors after him
observing the same course for their better conueniencie, and to make evident
their greater magnificence, repaired the Castle of Memnon, joined to it many
fair and goodly buildings, and close by it planted a pleasant orchard of
diverse and sundry sorts of trees and herbs. It is reported that the gate
whereby they entered into this orchard, was very curiously built, supported with
pillars of polished marble, imbossed with silver and gold very rare to look
upon: over it was a banqueting house, beautified with lively pictures, costly
furniture and beds of gold and silver covered with rich tapestry, wrought with
silk, silver, and gold; upon these they used to eat their banquets: it was
paued with Porphire Marble, and Hyacinths, in such sort, as it greatly
delighted such as beheld it. The Queen had a private garden to her self. In
which were great abundance of trees of diverse kinds, and many sweet flowers
and herbs: In which garden Ahashueras walked to qualify the heat of his wrath
ihat he had conceived against that wicked and perfidious Hamon, who through
envy and ambition sought the destruction of the whole nation of the Jews;
lest by giving place unto anger, he should transgress the bounds of clemency
and justice: wherefore it becomes every King, Prince, and Judge, to imitate
the example of this Emperor, who in the heat of his anger, would determine
nothing of so wicked a man: for long and often deliberation becomes every
wise man before he does any thing, Est. 7.

Not far from the Emperors palace, in a fair and pleasant Garden, there
stood a college of the Magi, that is, such as the Persians accounted wise and
learned men: these were of such account for their knowledge and understanding,
amongst that people, that some of them in succeeding ages were chosen for Kings
and governors in that country. They studied for the most part the
Mathematickes History, Philosophy, and Divinity, and as many have thought,
the Prophecies of Daniel, Ezekiel and others: wherefore as is said before, many
are of opinion, That the Wise men which came into Iudaea to see Christ, were of
this College and town, because it stood East from Jerusalem. It is at this
day called Cusistane, as Ortelius and Sebastian Munster witnesses, and in their
times was under the government of one Caliphus Emperor of the Saracens. This
Caliphus was strongly besieged by one Allan the great King of Tartaria, in this
Town, Anno Dom. 1250. But because of his exceeding covetousness and
parcimony, he lost the city and was famished to death.

Of the River Eulaeo.
VLai, which Stra. li. 15. calls Eulaea, passed through the city of Susa, and
as Pliny says, lib. 6. cap. 27. took the beginning at Media, and so fell into
a whole or cauerne of the earth, and passed under the ground till it came near
to the city Susa, where it brake forth again, and compassed about the tower
of Susa, and a temple in that city dedicated to Diana. The inhabitants hold
this river in great estimation, insomuch as the kings drink of no other water,
and for that purpose carry it a great way. Strabo according to the testimony of
Polycletus, says, That there are two other Rivers of good account, which
passes through Persia, viz. Choaspes and Tigris, but neither of them are in
like estimation as this is.

Of Elam.
PErsia in ancient times was called after this name, from Elam the son of
Sem. But after Perseus had obtained a large and spacious gouernm^nt in that
country, it was after his name called Persia. Elam signifies, a youth, or a
young man.

Of Egbatana or Egbatan.
THis is the metropolitan city of the Medes, and is distant from Jerusalem 1136
miles toward the Northwest, built by Deioce King of the Medes, as Herod. lib.
2. says, Here Daniel built a fair Temple, of which you may read more in his
travels. Of this town you may read more in the travels of Iudeth.

The typical signification of Daniel.
DAniel signifies the Judge of God: tipically representing Christ who is
appointed by that eternal Jehovah to be Judge of all things both quick and
dead, and rescueth his Church, which is (as a rose compassed ahout with
thorns) oppressed with the tyranny and cruelty of evil and wicked men, casting
those false judges and merciless governors into eternal exile and the pit of
destruction. And as the Prophet was innocently condemned, cast into the Lions
den, and had the door sealed upon him, and to the judgment of man, no hope of
life, or means to escape was left him, yet by the providence of God was
delivered out of this danger, and came thence safe and untouched, Dan. 6. so our
Savior was innocently condemned, cast into the grave, sealed up among the dead,
and to common judgment left as a man out of mind; yet early in the morning at
the appointed time, by the power of his Deity he raised himself up from this
pit of hell (the grave) and gloriously triumphed over it and Death.

Of the Prophet Hosea.
THis Prophet Hosea was borne in a town called Bemeloth, or Bethmeloth, (as
Dorotheus sometime Bishop of Tire says) which was a town in the Tribe of
Issacher, not far from Bethulia, some fifty two miles from Jerusalem toward
the North, near to which place Holofernes afterward pitched his Tents,
extending thence to the field of Esdrelon, and the town Chelmon, from whence
it seems this town takes the name. He prophesied in Israel eight hundred
years before Christ; his name signifies, A Savior, being derived of
Hoschiag, the third conjugation of Iaschag, that is, He has saved, Mat. 2.

Of the Prophet Joel.
Joel signifies, Gods own, as Saint Jerome expounds it. He prophesied eight
hundred years before Christ, both in Israel and in Judah. He was borne in a
village which was called Bothomeron, not far from Sichem, in the tribe of
Manasses, as Dorotheus the Bishop of Tire says.

Of The Prophet Amos.
THis man's father dwelt at Tekoa, a poor man, one that kept kine, and used to
gather wild figs, as appears in the first and seventh chapters of Amos. In
this town Amos was borne, and followed the profession of his father, but the
Lord called him to be a Prophet; and then he went to Bethel, which was twelve
miles distant. Here he reprehended Jeroboam King of Israel, for Idolatry, and
worshipping the golden Calfe; after, he was accused by Amasia the chief
priest of the Idols in Bethel, and bound in chains, and at length Vria the
son of this Amasia stroke him upon his head with a spear, whereby he was
mortally wounded.

From Bethel, being sick, he was carried back to Tecoa, which was twelve
miles: where a little after he died, as Saint Jerome witnesses: in whose time
his monument was to be seen.

Amos signifies, A burden, as indeed he was to the wicked Isralites, he so
sharply reprehended them in his sermons of the law. He lived eight hundred
years before Christ. So his travels were 24 miles.

Of the Prophet Obediah.
OBediah signifies, Gods obedient servant, of Abad, he has served, or been
obedient. He lived six hundred years before Christ, about the time of the
captivity of Babylon. Saint Jerome says, that in his time there were to be
seen in the city of Samaria, the monuments of three Prophets, that is, of
Elisha, Obediah, and John Baptist. But some think that Obediah the Prophet lay
not buried in Samaria, but rather it was the sepulcher of that Obediah which
lived in the time of Ahab, that hid a hundred of the Lords Prophets, 50 in one
cave, and 50 in another, between which there were 300 years difference.

The Travels of the Prophet Jonah.
THe Prophet Jonas was borne in Gath Hepher, which was a town in the Tribe of
Zabulon, from whence to Samaria is accounted thirty two miles: here he
prophesied to Jeroboam (second of that name) King of Israel, that he should
recover Hemath and Damascus, and so to the plain of the Red Sea, 2 Reg. 14.

From Samaria to Ioppa or Iapho a port town upon the sea shore (to which Jonas
went when he fled from the Lord) was 38 miles: But the Lord stirred up a great
wind when Jonas was upon the sea, that the Mariners cast him our, and he was
devoured of a Whale, Jonas 1.

That Whale which had devoured Jonas, with a continual course and great
violence, in three days and three nights swam to the Euxine sea, and there
cast him up upon the shore, which was 600 miles, Ios. Antiq. lib. 9.

From the shore of the Euxine sea, Jonas went to Nineveh, which are eight
hundred miles: Here Jonas preached repentance to the Ninevites, Ion. 3.4. So
all the Travels of Jonas were 1470 miles.

Of Gath Hepher.
IN this town the Prophet Jonas was born: it was situated in the tribe of
Zebulon, sixty miles from Jerusalem Northward and four miles from Nazareth
toward the South. It seems to take the name from abundance of grapes; for
Gath Ghephaer signifies a Wine Press.

Of Iapho.
IApho or Ioppa was a city or haven town situated upon the sea, where all
such ships landed as went into Iudaea. At this day the Turks and Saracens call
it Iafa, lying upon the Mediterranean sea, in the tribe of Dan, Ios. 19. in a
certain mountain 20 miles from Jerusalem Northwestward. Pliny, li. 5. says,
This city was built before the Flood; and in S. Ieroms time there was to be
seen the stone to which Andromeda was bound when she should have bin devoured
by a monster of the sea. The Poets feign this woman to be the daughter of
Cepheus, and delivered by Perseus King of the Persians, whom after she married.
It is called Iapho because of the beautiful situation. Some say it was so
called of Iapheth the son of Noah, who first caused it to be built.

Of Tharsis.
FRom Ioppa, as is said, the Prophet Jonas descended into a ship, that he might
fly upon the sea. The Latin and Greek texts read it Tharsin; whence it
happened that many have thought that Jonas fled from Tharsis a city in Cilicia,
in which country Saint Paul was borne. But Luther in his Exposition of the
Prophecy of Jonas does utterly disallow of this as false; for the Hebrew Text
reads it not, To Tharsin, but In Tharsin, that is, into the Sea. For the
Hebrew tongue has two words or syllables which signify the Sea, which are Iam
and Tharsis. Iam signifies not only a great sea, but the meeting together of
waters, or a Lake. So in Luke 5. the sea of Galile, in which Christ and his
Disciples sai^ed, is called a Lake; yet Ioh. cap. 6. and the rest of the
Evangelists, call it a sea. So also Moses, Genesis 1. calls the meeting together
of the waters, Iam; which may signify a sea and a Lake. But Tharsis, or
Tarschich denotes a great sea, and no Lake; or an high and troublesome sea, as
the Mediterranean sea is. In this Paul traveled, and there stands many
Islands, as Rhodes, Cyprus, Sicilia and others; all which are at this day
subject to the Turks, Venetians, or Spaniards. It extends it self from Ioppa
and Silicia, to the Streights between Spain and Mauritania. Into this Sea
Jonas was cast when the Whale devoured him. In like manner, the Red sea and all
others that are ocean seas are called Tharsis, as appears in the 72 Psalm,
where it is said, The Kings of Tharsis and of the Isles shall bring Presents.
Here, the Kings whose Empires extend themselves along the sea coast are
understood. But the city Tharsis (the country of the Apostle Paul) is not a
kingdom, neither ever had a King, much less many Kings. So Solomon sent his
ships by Tharsin (that is, by sea toward the Southeast, into the Red sea and
Eastern Ocean) that they might bring gold, precious stones, and sweet gummes
from Arabia. But the ships could not sail by the Red sea unto the town of
Tharsis unless they would have sailed over the land, which is impossible;
because Tharsis lies into the land from the Red sea, as all Cosmographers
agree. So also the Psalmist says, Thou breakest with thy strong winds the
ships of Tharsis, that is, of the sea; beside many such like speeches. From
whence S. Ierom concludes, that Tharsis may better signify the sea, than the
city Tharsis.

Of the Euxine sea.
THe Euxine Ocean is that great and troublesome sea which beginning not far
from Constantinople, runs from Bosphorus and Thrace, toward the East and
North, containing to the Longitude eight hundred miles, but to the Latitude two
hundred and eighty. Toward the South it touches upon Asia the less; toward
the East upon Calcos; toward the West, Thracia and Valachia: but toward the
North it is joined to the poole of Maeotides. This sea in times past was called
Pontus Axenus, that is, the inhospitable country; because as Strabo, lib. 1. of
his Cosmography says, The inhabitants near about the seashore did usually
sacrifice those strangers they got, or else cast their bodies unto dogs to he
devoured, making drinking cups of their skuls. But after, when the Ionians had
built certain towns upon the sea coast, and had restrained the incursions of
certain Scythian thieves which usually preyed upon Merchants that resorted
thither; at the command of Pontus their King, who had obtained a large and
spacious kingdom in that country, they called it Pontus Euxinus, which is as
much to say as, the hospitable country. Ovid testifies almost the same,
concerning the original of the name of this sea, after this manner; Frigida me
cohibent Euxini littora Ponti,
Dictus ab antiquis Axinus ille fuit.
The chilly shores of the Euxine sea constraines me to abide,
In ancient time called Axinus, as it along did glide.


Of Ninus or Nineveh.
NInus or Nineveh was a city of Assyria, where the Emperors of that country
used to keep their courts. It was first built by Ninus that great Emperor of
the first Monarchy, 300 years after the flood, and 2000 before Christ, about
the time when the Patriarch Abraham was borne. It continued in great glory for
the space almost of 1500 years, and was distant from Jerusalem toward the
Northeast 684 miles: upon the East side joining to the river Tygris, on the
North to the Caspian sea. It takes the name from the beauty of it, being
derived of Navah, which signifies A comely place spacious and pleasant. There
are many that are of opinion that in many things it exceeded Babylon; as, for
the sumptuousness of the buildings, the strength of the Walls, and the extent.
The walls were so thick that three Chariots might have met upon them without
any danger; and beautified with an hundred and fifty towers. Jonas being sent
of God to this city, was three days going through it, that is (as Luther
expounds it) through every street of it; in which time he converted a hundred
and twenty thousand to repentance. Arbaces (who was also called Arphaxad) was
then Emperor. This Arbaces, Iustine lib. 2. calls Arbactus: he was a Captain
of the Medes, who perceiving the effeminat disposition of Sardanapalus the then
Emperor, taking advantage of the times, and this man's weakness, conspired
with some of his companions to vsurp upon his government: and that he might
make them hate and loath his looseness, brought them into a room where the
might see him sitting amongst his harlots, tired in woman's apparel, and
carding wool. This sight greatly displeasing them, and before being encouraged
by Arbactus, they seized upon the city, and besieged Sardanapalus in his
palace. But to prevent the misery of a shameful death, after he had gathered
all his riches together, he set fire on his palace, where he, his companions,
and treasure perished. This fire continued 15 days, and happened 823 years
before Christ: about which time Arbactus succeeded Sardanapalus, began to
reign, and continued his government 28 years. But the Medes held not the
Assyrian Empire long; for Phul Belochus who at this time reigned in Babylon,
and his successor Tiglath Philasser, are called Kings of Assyria, between
whom there happened many great Wars, 2 Kings, 15.26. From whence may be
gathered, That after the death of Arbactus, these Emperors dwelt in Niniveh,
and succeeded in the Empire.

Thus was this city greatly defaced with continual evils, the Lord before
hand giving them many admonitions and gentle corrections (if it had bin in them
to have conceived it) to win them to repentance; but they continued still in
their sins, therefore according to their former prophecies, Cyaxares King of
the Medes besieging this town, took it and destroyed it even unto the ground,
as Eusebius says. This desolation happened 13 years before the destruction of
Jerusalem, in the 11 year of Sadyattis King of the Lyddians, who was
grandfather to Croesus, An. mundi 3349, before Christ 619.

After this destruction it lay a long time desolat, but at length some part of
it was restored, though with much trouble; and then when it was at the best
estate, constrained to suffer many changes; and at length utterly destroyed by
Tamerlane the Great the second time, An. mun. 3390. After this, the inhabitants
of that country upon the East side of the river Tygris, began the third time
to build it. But whether this third restoring of this City was at the command
of some Prince that had the government of the Country thereabouts, or because
of the situation, or for private profit, it is not set down: nevertheless it
is again repaired, standing on the borders of Armenia, beautified with goodly
buildings, with fair and spacious streets, compassed about (as other cities of
the East are) with walls and ditches sufficiently strengthened to oppose the
Enemy. But in respect of the former Niniveh it seems a small village. It has
a bridge built of ships, lying upon the East side of it over the river Tygris;
and upon that side of the River there stand many fair gardens and orchards;
and the land there also is very fertile and pleasant. But upon the West of
Tygris the soil is nothing so fruitful. At this day it is called by the name
of Mossel; so that although it stands in the same place, yet does it not retain
the same name. To this town there is a great resort of merchants, who bring up
their commodities from the River Tygris hither, and from hence convey them to
Bagdeth and many other parts of the world. The inhabitants thereof are for the
most part Nestorians, of whom you may read before in the description of the
Sects remaining in Jerusalem at this day. They are had in great account and
estimation among the Turks, because it is imagined that one of this sect helped
Mahomet to compose the Alcaron. This Nestorius lived anno Dom. 429. and taught
at Constantinople; but after he was condemned at Ephesus for an heretic, he
was constrained to steal from Constantinople, and to fly to Thebes in Egypt;
where God laid a grievous punishment upon him, for his tongue began to rot in
his head, and to consume with vermin, of which he died miserably.

The spiritual signification of the Prophet Jonas
Jonas signifies a Dove, and typically represents Christ in his name. For
Christ was that gracious and innocent Dove, who has made evident to man his
singular mercy and clemency, without any show of bitterness or wrath. Then in
his affliction; for as Jonas thrust himself into the sea of calamity, and
there was swallowed up of a Whale; which might be well resembled to the grave:
so Christ our Savior was cast into the sea of affliction, the misery and
calamity of this world; and after that, thrust into the jaws of death, the
grave, where (as Jonas did in the whales belly) he lay three days, and then
arose again, the earth being unable any longer to contain his body.

Of the Prophet Micah.
THis Prophet was born at Maresa a town of Judea, 16 miles from Jerusalem
Westward; it signifies a bitter field. In S. Ieroms time the ruins of the wall
of this City was to be seen. Micha or Micheas signifies humble or lowly. This
man was held in great estimation, because he was the first that named the
country where our Savior Christ should be born, viz. in Bethlehem, 800 years
before his nativity. He lived an. M. 3200.

Of the Prophet Nahum.
NAhum signifies a Comforter. He was borne in a town of Galile, called
Elcosch, as he says in the beginning of his Prophecy. This village was shown
unto Saint Jerome, by those that traveled with him through the holy land: in
his time it was but a small village, called by the name of Elcos, and situated
(as Dorotheus Bishop of Tire says) on the further side of Bethabara, sixteen
miles and something more from Jerusalem toward the Northeast. This Prophet
lived 750 years before Christ, and prophesied of the destruction of Niniveh,
which after came to pass.

Of the Prophet Habacuck.
HAbacuck, or Chabacuck, signifies, One that embraces, or a lover; from
Chaback, He has embraced. For as a Nurse embraces and kisseth her infant; so
also this Prophet embraced and comforted his people with comfortable doctrine,
lest by the destruction of Jerusalem (which he prophesied should after happen
by the Chaldaeans) they should be driven to desperation. Paul took the
foundation of his Epistle to the Romans out of this Prophet, reciting a saying
of his, viz. The Just shall live by faith He began to preach a little before
the Prophet Jeremy, 650 years before Christ, above 100 years before Daniel was
cast into the Lions den. From whence most of the Learned conclude, that this
could not be that Habacuck which brought meat to Daniel as he was among the
Lions; but they rather think it a fragment of a spiritual comedy, and
therefore worthy to be called Apocrypha.

Of the Prophet Zephania.
ZEphania signifies the Secretary of the Lord; being derived of Zaphan, He has
kept secret. He lived in Jerusalem and Iudaea in the time of Josiah King of
Judah. He was born (as Dorotheus Bishop of Tire says) in a town called
Sabarthaca in the tribe of Simeon.

Of the Prophets Haggai and Zacharia.
HAggai or Chaggai signifies, A Priest celebrating the Feast of the Lord;
being derived of Chagag, He has celebrated a feast. And Zacharias or Zacharia
does denote, such a man as remembered the Lord; being derived of Zachar, that
is, He has remembered or recorded. These two Prophets prophesied in Jerusalem
in the second year of Darius the son of Histaspis, 519 years before Christ,
an. mun. 3449. Haggai began his prophecy upon the first day of the sixth month
Elul, answering to the 28 of August. He sharply reprehended the people because
they neglected the house of the Lord, and built up their own houses.

In the eighth month Marhusuan (which for the most part answers to our
November) Zacharias the same year began to prophecy, and in his sermon
exhorted the people to repentance, adding the promise of our Savior, and that
he would turn unto them that would turn unto him, Zach. 1.

These two Prophets lie buried 20 miles one from the other. For as Dorothaeus
Bishop of Tire says, Haggai lies buried in Jerusalem amongst the Priests. But
Zacharias near to a town in the field of Bethania, 20 miles from Jerusalem
Westward. But in the time of Theodosius the Emperor was removed and preserved
as an holy Relic. Concerning that fable and figment inserted into the history
Nicephorus, I utterly disallow.

Of the Prophet Malachi.
THis Prophet prophesied after the captivity of Babylon, and dwelt in the town
of Ziph, as Dorotheus Bishop of Tire says. Malachi signifies an Angel sent;
and in Greek, a Messenger: for this Prophet preached so comfortably as if he
had bin an angel of God; but principally of Christ and Saint John Baptist, who
should go before him, to prepare his way and make his paths straight. S. Ierom
in his Epistle to Paul and Eustochius writes, that some of the Hebrews suppose
this Malachi to have been Esdras the Scribe, who was sent by Artaxerxes
Longimanus Emperor of the Persians, to restore the commonwealth of Israel, in
the year before Christ 457.

An Instruction how the Prophets may rightly be understood.
FIrst look into the Cosmographicall Table at the beginning of this book, and
diligently observe the countries and cities that are there set down, and how
they lie situated from Jerusalem.

Toward the South of Jerusalem, the Idumeans, Ismaelites, Arabians, and
Egyptians dwell.

Toward the East, the Moabits, Ammonites, Chaldaeans, Babylonians, and Persians.

Toward the North, the Phoeniceans, Syrians, Assyrians, and Armenians.

Toward the West lies the Mediterranian sea, Grecia, Italy, Spain, and the
Isles of the sea.

Secondly this rule is to be observed, that as often as the Prophets speak of
the tribes of Israel, they use these names, viz. Israel, Samaria, Ephraim,
Joseph, Iesreel, Bethel, and Bethauen: these are the names of the Kingdom of
Israel: but to the kingdom of Judah these names are attributed, viz. Judah,
Jerusalem, Benjamin, the house of David. But when the Prophets ioyn these two
Kingdoms together they call them by the names of Jacob and Israel.

Thirdly, when thou read in the Prophets the name of any country or city
which is not sufficiently known unto thee, search this alphabeticall Table
here following, and thou shall find the whole matter declared unto thee.

An alphabeticall Table of all the Countries and Cities mentioned in the
Prophets.
A
ABARIM, that is, a bridge or a passage over. It was a mountain of the Moabits
where the Israelites pitched their tents, Number. 33. ACHOR, the valley of
Trouble. Here Achan was stoned to death for his theeuery. It stood not far
from Gilgal toward the North, 12 miles from Jerusalem, Ios. 7. Isa. 6. ADAMA,
Red earth. This was one of the cities that were destroyed with fire and
brimstone from heaven. AI, Hilly. This city Ioshuah burnt with fire. It lay 8
miles from Jerusalem Northward, Ios. 8. AIATH, Idem, Esa. 10. AR, or ARI, a
Lion. It was a city of the Moabits lying beyond Jordan in the tribe of
Benjamin, called Ariopolis, situated upon the bank of the river Arnon, 24
miles from Jerusalem North-Eastward, Deuteronomy. 2. In Esa. 15. it is called Arar, a
Destroyer. ARAM, Noble or Mighty. Armenia and Syria are so called, of Aram the
son of Sem; the chief city of which country is Damascus. Pliny, lib. 6.17.
says, The Scythians were also in ancient times called Aramites. ARNON, a
famous river of the Moabites in the tribe of Reuben, which falls into the dead
sea, 20 miles from Jerusalem Eastward. In Esa. 16. it is called RANAN, he has
shouted for joy. AROER, by usurpation, an Ewe tree. This is a city of the
Moabits near to the river Arnon, in the tribe of Gad beyond Jordan, 24 miles
from Jerusalem Eastward, Ier. 40. There is another city so called, near to
Damascus in Syria, Esa. 7. ARPAD, the light of redemption. This was a city in
the land of Damascus, Ier. 49. There is another flourishing city of that name
which may compare with Antiochia for greatness, Esa. 10. But where it is
situated it is uncertain. ARVAD was a part of the land of Canaan, so called of
Aruad the son of Canaan, Genesis 10. ASCANES, or Tuiscones, are a people descended
of Ascenitz, the son of Gomer the son of Iaphet, which sometimes dwelt in
Armenia, but now have their abiding in Germany, 2 Genesis 10. Esa. 51. So that of
Gomer they are called Germans, and of Ascanes, Ascanians or Tuiscons. ASSECA,
fortified round about. Near to this town David killed Goliath. It stood 8 miles
from Jerusalem Westward. ASSVR or ASSYRIA, a blessed country; being so called
of Assure the son of Sem. AVEN, Iniquity. Bethel was so called after Jeroboam
had there set up a golden Calfe, Hos. 10.
B
BABEL, Confusion. Babylon is the metropolitan city of Chaldaea, 280 miles from
Jerusalem Eastward. BATH, Domestical. It was a town of the Moabits in the
Tribe of Reuben beyond Jordan, Esa. 16. BAZRA, a grape-gathering. It was a city
of the Edomites scitua^^d upon the bank of Jordan on the farther side, near
to Bethabara, 20 miles from Jerusalem Northeastward, Esa. 24.36. Ier. 48. Note
here, that the country of the Moabits in times past was subject to the Edomits,
and then this city was in their jurisdiction; but after, the Moabits got it
into their hands again and held it. It was one of the six towns of refuge
mentioned, Ios. 29. BEROTHAI, a Cypres tree. This town stood near Hemath or
Antiochia, 280 miles from Jerusalem Northward, Ezekiel. 49. In this city David
King of Israel took Hadadesar King of Zoba or Sophena, and constrained him to
give him a great deal of Brass (as it is thought) yearly for tribute: for
near that city were many brass mines. BETHAVIN, the house of iniquity. Bethel
was so called, Hos. 6. It stood 8 miles from Jerusalem Northward. BETH-CHaeREM,
the house of the Vines. It was a town not far from Jerusalem Northward. Ier.
6. BETH-DIBLATHAIM, the house of dried Figs. It was a city of the Moabits, Ier.
48. BETHIESIMOTH, the house of desolations. It was also a city of the Moabits
beyond Jordan in the tribe of Reuben, Ios. 13. Ezech. 25.20 miles from
Jerusalem. BETH-GAMVL, the house of Restitution. This was a city of the
Moabits, Ier. 48. BETH-BAALMEON, the house of habitation for the idol Baal. It
was a city of the Moabits, 24 miles from Jerusalem Eastward, not far from
Aroer, Ezekiel. 25. 1 Chr. 5. BVTZ, a Castle of prey. It was a city of the
Ismaelites in Arabia Petraea, 80 miles from Jerusalem Southwestward, Ier. 25.
BELL and NEOB, two idols of the Babylonians, Esa. 45. Bell signifies, the god of
mixture or confusion: Neob, the god of prophecy.
C
CALNO, his perfection. This is Seleucia, situated vpoa Tygris beyond Babylon,
316 miles from Jerusalem Eastward. It is now called Bagdeth, Genesis 10. Esaias 2.
CAN, a firm foundation. It was a city of the Syrians, Ezekiel. cap. 27.
CAPHIHOR, a little Sphere, or around globe like unto a Globe or pomegranat.
Also Cappadocia a country of Asia the less, 600 miles from Jerusalem
Northward. CARCHEMIS, a sacrificed Lamb. This was situated too near Euphrates
in Syria, 400 miles from Jerusalem Northward, Ierem. cap. 25.
D
DEEDAN, a city of the Idumaeans, so called of Dedan the son of Esau, Ier. 25.
Isa. 21. DIBON, a mist. This was a City of the Moabites near Hesbon in the
tribe of Reuben, 28 miles from Jerusalem Northeastward. DIBLATH, a bunch of
Figs. It was a city in the tribe of Nepthali, near to the lake of Samoconites,
80 miles from Jerusalem Northward, Ezekiel. 6. Here Zedekiah had his eyes put out,
2 Kin. 25 Ier. 39.52. DIMON, Bloody. This is a city in the tribe of Reuben,
which as S. Ierom says, is 28 miles from Jerusalem Northeastward. DVMA,
Silence. A city of the Israelites so called of Duma the son of Ismael. It stood
in Arabia Petraea, 80 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest, Esaias 25.21.
E
EGBATHANA, the metropolitan city of the Medes, distant from Jerusalem 1136
miles Northeastward. EDEN, Pleasure. A city of Syria situated near Euphrates,
400 miles from Jerusalem Northeastward, Esaias 7. This is thought to have been a
part of Paradise. EGLAIM, a roud Drop. It was a town of the Moabites, Esaias,
15.16. ELAM, a Young man, so called of Elem the son of Sem, Esa. 10.21 After
Perseus had got in this country a great government, he called it after his own
name, Persia. ELEALE, the ascension of God. It was a city beyond Jordan in the
tribe of Reuben, between Iacza and Hehbon, 26 miles from Jerusalem
Northeastward, Number. 32. ELIM, a Heart. This was a lake so called in the land of
the Moabits. Esa. 10. ELISA, the Lamb of God. So were the Aeolians called in
Grecia, of Elysa the son of Iavan the son of Iaphet, Ezekiel. 7. Genesis 10.
ENAGLAIM, the fountain of Calves. It was a town or Castle near to the Red
sea, Ezekiel. 10. EPHA, the land of Obscurity. It was a part of Arabia Petraea,
so called of Epha, the son of Midian the son of Abraham, Genesis 25. Esa. 60.
G
GEBIM, a Ditch. This was a town in the tribe of Judah, Esa. 10. GEBAH, a hill.
It was a hill in the city of Kiriath-jearim: there was a town also of the same
name, standing within a little of it. This was a little more than a mile from
Jerusalem Westward, Esa. 10. GEBAL, a bound or limit. It was the bounds and
limits of Syria, bordering upon the Mediteranean sea. This city Gibal or Gebal
was 160 miles from Jerusalem Northward, 1 Reg. 5. Psalm. 82. GIBEAH, a hill. It
was also called Gibeon, where Saul dwelt, four miles from Jerusalem Northward,
Esa. 10. GILGAL, a roundle, or the compass of a hill. Here Ioshuah pitched his
tents: it stood between Jericho and Jordan, 12 miles from Jerusalem
Northeastward. GOG. The Turks were thus called because they lived in tents,
Ezekiel. 48. GOSAN, a land and river in Mesopotamia, called after that name, 2
Reg. 17. Esa. 37.
H
HADAD RIMMON, a Pomegranat. This was a town near to Megiddo, where Iosia
King of Judah was wounded to death, 46 miles from Jerusalem Northward, Zach.
12. HADRACH, the land of Gladness. So the Prophet Zachary calls Syria, cap. 19.
HANES, an ensign of Grace. This was a city of Egypt bordering upon Assyria,
Esa. 30. HARAM, the Syrian liberty. It was the metropolitan City of
Mesopotamia, where Abraham dwelt, Genesis 11. distant from Jerusalem 440 miles
Northeastward. HAVERAN, a Casement. It was a City in Syria not far from
Damascus, 160 miles from Jerusalem toward the North-East, Ezekiel. 47.
HAZOR-ENON, the gate of a fountain. It was a city in Syria. HAZOR-TICHON, the
middle Porch. It was a town in Syria not far from Haveran, Ezekiel. 47. HAZOR, The
land of Hay. So the Ismaelities called their country. HEMATH, anger. So the
Prophets called Antiochia the Metropolitan of Assyria, distant from Jerusalem
280 miles Northward. HERMON, Acurst. It was a mountain beyond Jordan, near to
Libanus, 122 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast. There is another
mountain of this name near to Naim, and not far from Mount Tabor, 44 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North, of which the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 89. Tabor
and Hermon praise thy Name. The mountain beyond Jordan is oftentimes called by
the name of Mount Gilead. HESBON, an ingenious cogitation. It was a city of the
Moabites in the tribe of Reuben, 28 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast.
HENAH and IEVAH were two idols, Esa. 37. HEVILAH, Sandy. So India is called,
and a certain part of Arabia Petraea, of Hevilah the son of Chus, Genesis 10.
These countries are very dry and sandy. HETHLON, He has rolled together. It
was a city of Syria near to Antiochia, Ezekiel. 47. HOLON, a Window. It was a
town of the Moabits in the tribe of Reuben, and is also called Helon, Number. 2.
Ier. 47. HORONAIM, the Syrian Liberties, two towns of the Moabits, Esa. 16.
I
IACHZA, the priuity of God. A city of the Moabits in the tribe of Reuben, 24
miles from Jerusalem Eastward. IAEZER, the help of God. A city of Refuge
belonging to the Leuits, in the tribe of Gad beyond Jordan, 40 miles from
Jerusalem Northeastward. IAVAN GRECIA, so called of Iavan the son of Iapheth,
which was distant from Jerusalem 800 miles Westward. IEZREEL, the Seed of God.
This is the city where Queen Iesabel was devoured of Dogs. It stands 48 miles
from Jerusalem Northward. IRHERES, or Heliopolis, a city of the Sun. This was a
City of Egypt, 224 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest.
K
KEDAR, Blackness. This was a Desert of the Ismaelites, called Sur, 80 miles
from Jerusalem Southwestward. KIR PARIES, a Wall. This was Cyrene a great city
in Africa, which was 816 miles from Jerusalem Westward. There was a town of
this name in the land of the Moabits in the tribe of Reuben, Esa. 16.
KIR-HAZERETH, or Kir-Hares, a Mudwall. It was a City of the Moabits in Arabia
Petraea, otherwise called Petra, 72 miles from Jerusalem toward the South,
Esa. 16. KIRIATHAIM, a City. This town was in the tribe of Reuben, 22 miles
from Jerusalem Eastward, Esa. 16. KIRIAH, or Kirieth, ibidem. KITHIM, a shining
Jewel. Macedonia is so called of Kithim the son of Iavan the son of Iaphet,
Genesis 10. Ier. 2. Mac. 1. For if you do diligently observe the deriuation of
names, you shall find that of Kithim comes Maketis, and so by continuance of
time, and change of words, Macedonia. It lies 920 miles from Jerusalem
North-Westward.
L
LACHIS, a continual walking, or as some will have it, A pleasant walk. This
was a city in the tribe of Judah, 20 miles from Jerusalem Westward, Ier. 34.
LAISA, a Lioness. So was Caesarea Philippi sometimes called. It was also called
Dan, situated near to the fountains of the river Jordan, not far from Mount
Libanus, 104 miles from Jerusalem Northeastward. LIBNA, Frankincense. It was a
town in the tribe of Judah, 10 miles from Jerusalem toward the South-West.
LVD, that is, Lydia, a country in Asia minor, so called of Lud the son of
Sem. LVIT, green grass; it is also a mountain in the Tribe of Reuben, Esa.
6.
M
MAGOG, dwelling under a shed or tent. The Turks are so called, Ezech. 38.
MARESA, an inheritance. In this town the Prophet Micah was borne, Micha 1. it
was situated in the Tribe of Judah, distant from Jerusalem 16 miles toward the
West. MEDAI, a measure; the Kingdom of Media was so called, of Medai the son
of Iaphet. Genesis 10. MEDBA, warm water: it was a city of the Moabits in the
tribe of Reuben, 28 miles from Jerusalem toward the East, Esaias 16. MEDEMENA, a
dunghill: it was a town in the tribe of Judah, near Beerseba and Gaza, 44
miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest, Josh. 15. There was also another
town of the same name in the tribe of Benjamin, not far from Jerusalem,
Josh. 10. Ier. 48. MEGIDDO, a wholesome apple. Here Iosia King of Judah was
slain in war; it stood 46 miles from Jerusalem Northward, Zach. 12. MEPHAATH,
the splendour of waters: it was a city belonging to the Priests in the Tribe of
Reuben, subject to the Moabites, 24 miles from Jerusalem toward the East, Ier.
48. MESECH, the tract of sowing: so the Muscouites and Russians are called, of
Mesech the son of Iaphet, Genesis 10. MIDIAN, a measure: a town lying upon the
red sea, 160 miles from Jerusalem toward the South; so called of Midian the
son of Abraham by Keturah, Genesis 25. MISPE, a Watch. This city stood in the
land of Giliad, beyond Jordan, eight and forty miles from Jerusalem toward
the Northeast. There is another Town of this name also not far distant from
Jerusalem in the Tribe of Benjamin, Hosea 5. Ierem. 40. MOAB, a father. The
country of the Moabites, situated between the red sea and the mountains
Abarim, Ezech. 9. MEVSAL, running swiftly: it was the name of a people that
took their beginning from Vsal the son of Ioktan. Genesis 19.
N
NABAIOTH, the country of the Prophets: this country begins in the Tribe of
Gad beyond Jordan, and extends to the East part of the dead sea, and so by
the land of the Moabites to the Red sea. It takes the name of Nabaioth the
son of Ishmael: for all the tract of Arabia Petraea, from the Red sea to the
Gulf of Persia, of him is called the land of Nabathaea. Diodorus Siculus says
as much, and further, That it extends toward the East unto the Indian sea,
Genesis 25. NEBO, Prophesying. It was a city of the Moabites in the Tribe of
Reuben, near to mount Pisga, twenty miles from Jerusalem toward the East,
Ier. 48. NIMRIM, a Leopard. This was also a city in the Tribe of Gad beyond
Jordan, thirty two miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast, Isa. 16. NO, a
hinderance, so was Alexandria a city in Egypt in ancient times called,
distant from Jerusalem 288 miles toward the West, Ezekiel. 30. NOPH, a honey
comb; so the Prophets call Memphis the Metropolis of Egypt, being distant
from Jerusalem 244 miles toward the Southeast, Isa. 18. Ier. 2. Ezekiel. 30.
O
ON, opulencie. So Ezech. c. 30. calls Heliopolis, a city of Egypt, which is
224 miles distant from Jerusalem toward the Southwest. OREB, a Crow or Raven.
Near to this place in mount Ephraim Prince Oreb was slain: not far from
Jericho, twelve miles from Jerusalem toward the North, Judge. 7. Psalm. 83.
OPHIR, a palace: it was the proper name of the son of Io^^ the posterity of
Sem, of whom in times past India was called Ophir. You may read of this, Genesis
10. 1 Reg. 9.
P.
PATHROS, or PETRA, the Metropolitan city of Arabia Petraea, 72 miles from
Jerusalem toward the South. It is a country also of Egypt near Taphnis, 180
miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest, Isa. 11. Ezech. 29. PARATH,
fruitful. A name of the river Euphrates, Ier. 2.13. PRAZIN, a breach. It is a
valley near Jerusalem, where David overcame the Philistines, 2 Samuel 5. PHVT is
Africa, so called of Phuth the son of Cham. Genesis 10.
R
RABBA, a multitude. Philadelphia the Metropolitan of the Ammonites is so
called, 96 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast. RAEMA, thunder: so they
called Aethyopia, of Raema the son of Chus, Genesis 10. RAMA, high. This city
stood eight miles from Jerusalem toward the North, Isa. 10. There were other
cities also of the same name and signification. REZEPH, a cole; it was a city
in Syria, Isa. 37. RIBLATH, an inueterate anger. This was a city in the Tribe
of Nepthaly, near to the lake of Samoconites, 80 miles from Jerusalem toward
the North. Antiochia also was sometimes called Riblah, 2 Reg. 25. Ier. 39.52.
RIMMON, a Pomegranat. This was a city in the Tribe of Judah not far from
Gerar, 32 miles from Jerusalem toward the South-East.
S
SABA, the stone Achates. This was the Metropolitan City of Aethyopia, called
also Meroe, 960 miles ftom Jerusalem toward the South. The two famous Queens
(one that came to see Solomon, the other mentioned Act. 8.) dwelt in this
town. SANIR, a clear light. So mount Hermon beyond Jordan was called of the
Ammonites: it stood 112 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast. SARION, the
Doves song. So the Edomites called Mount Hermon that stood beyond Jordan.
SARON, a fair plain, or a green place. So is that plain between the sea of
Galile and Mount Ephraim called, Is. 35. There are some that think there is a
Mountain so called. SELA, a Rock: this is Petra a city of Arabia, ante.
SEPHARVAIM, a city of the Scribes: it stood in Assiria, Isa. 37. SIBARIM, a
city of Syria near to Damascus, Ezech. 47. SIBMA, a possession, a city built
by the sons of Reuben, 24 miles from Jerusalem toward the East, Number. 32.
SICHOR, black. It is a brook or river called Rhinocorurus, which falls into
the Mediterranean sea, near to the town Rinocorura, situated upon the utmost
borders of the Holy land toward the South, 72 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Southwest. The river Nilus in Egypt is also called Sichor, Ier. 2. SIMRI,
Gardians. They were Arabians dwelling upon an Angle of Isthumus of the red sea.
SINEAR, a blow upon the teeth. Chaldea is so called, Is. 11. SION, or SCAION,
by Schin, not by Zade, tranquillity and security: the Mount whereon Jerusalem
stood is not so called, but Mount Hermon beyond Jordan, Deuteronomy. 4. SIENE, or
SEVENE, illustrous: it was a city in Africa, upon the borders of Egypt and
Aethyopia, 516 miles from Jerusalem toward the South. Iouias says, that the
inhabitants at this day call it Guagheram.
T
TACHPANES, or TAPHNIS, a covered or hidden ensign. It is a city in Egypt,
180 miles from Jerusalem Southwestward, Ierem. 2.43. THAMAR, a plain. This
town was built by Solomon, and stood 360 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northeast. THELASSER, a Princes tomb: it was a country upon the borders of
Assiria, Isay 37. THEMATH wonderful: a city of Arabia Petraea, Ier. 25. so
called of Thama the son of Ismael, Genesis 25. it stood 40 miles from Jerusalem
Southward: it is called Theman, a City of the South. THOGARMA, perfection.
Tartaria was so called of Thogarma the son of Gomer the son of Iaphet, Genesis
10. Ezech. 27. THVBAL, a people bordering upon the Muscouites, so called of
Thubal the son of Iaphet, Genesis 10. Ezekiel, cap. 27. and 38. makes Mesech,
Thubal, Gog, and Magog, all one people: from whence may be gathered, that these
people dwelt toward the North, and were governed by one Prince. In the 38
Chapter he calls them Gog, that is, the Turk, who is Prince and governor in
Mesech and Thubal. Therefore without doubt the people of Russia in times past
were called Thubal, which people dwelt near to Muscouia: and this opinion
seems to be more probable than theirs that imagine the Italians and Spaniards,
which have their dwellings near unto the river Iberia, to be the offspring of
Thubal.
V
VPHAR, the country of gold. It is called also Ophir and India. 1 Reg. 9. Ier.
10. Dan. 10. Psalm. 119.
Z
ZEB, a Wolf. The wine press of Zeb was in Mount Ephraim, not far from
Jericho, 12 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, where Zeb the Prince of the
Midianites was slain. There is another town of this name, near to the river
Iaboch, beyond Jordan, 48 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast. ZEBOIM,
pleasantness. One of the five cities that were burnt with fire from heaven,
Genesis 14.19. Hosea 11. ZENAN, a sheepfold: it was a city in the Tribe of Judah,
Mich. 1. ZOAN, moving. Tanis a city in Egypt where Moses wrought al his
miracles before Pharaoh, was so called: it stood 232 miles from Jerusalem
toward the Southwest. ZOBA, presumptuous. This was also called Zophena: it is
the country of Armenia, 600 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, which
David conquered, 2 Samuel 8. 1 Chronicles. 19. ZOR, a rock. Tyrus is so called; it
stood 160 miles from Jerusalem toward the North.
Thus (gentle Reader) for your better ease and understanding, have I collected
a short Alphabeticall Table, and therein briefly described all those countries
and cities mentioned in the Prophets: that so by your diligent care and
observation, you may the better understand the meaning of such texts of
Scripture wherein they are mentioned.

Of Esdras the Lawyer.
ESdras signifies, a helper, of Asar, he helped. He is a type of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is our helper and Savior, which has brought us into that holy
land, eternal life; and is the restorer of religion, and the Christian
Commonwealth.

This Esdras was sent to Jerusalem, to restore the commonwealth of the Jews,
Anno mundi 3511, before Christ, 457, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, that good Emperor of the Persians. So he went from Babylon to
Ahaeua, a certain river near Babylon; to which place he assembled a great
multitude of Jews, and from thence sent to Caspia to fetch a certain number
of Levites, (this land was in Chaldea not far from Babylon.) These being here
met together, celebrated a fast unto the Lord, and with solemn prayers
besought his aid and furtherance in their enterprise: then they went thence to
Jerusalem, which was 680 miles, and there restored the Judicial government,
instituting Ecclesiastical officers, chief Priests, Princes and other
governors.

Of the land of Caspia.
THe land of Caspia signifies, the land of silver, being derived of Kesaeph,
that is, silver. It was so called, because they used to dig silver in that
place (see Lyra) it was a country near Babylon, where the priests and Levites
were in captivity; and stood 680 miles from Jerusalem toward the East.

Of Nehemia.
IN the 20 year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was anno mun. 3524, and before
Christ, 444. Nehemias went from Susan to Jerusalem, which was 920 miles, there
he repaired the walls and gates in 52 days, Nehem. 1.2.6.

When he had governed Iudaea 12 years, he returned back again to Susan to
Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was 920 miles, Nehem. 3.

Afterward Artaxerxes about the end of his reign suffered Nehemia to return
back again to Jerusalem, which was 920 miles, Nehem. 17. So these journeyes
of Nehemia make 2760 miles. Of this city Susan you may read before.

Of the name and typical signification of Nehemiah.
NEhemiah signifies The consolation of God, being derived of Nicham, He has
comforted. This man was a type of our Lord Jesus Christ; for as Nehemias was a
comfort unto the dispersed Jews, in that he was sent to restore them into
their own country, and to rebuild Jerusalem; so Christ our comforter was sent
by his Father from that everlasting throne of heaven, to refresh and comfort us
by his doctrine, and gather the dispersed members of his Church into one
communion, that he might bring them into that heavenly Jerusalem which he has
built, and where he has prepared a place for us.

The Travels of Serubabel.
SErubabel carried the people of Israel from Babylon to Jerusalem, which was
680 miles, in the first year of Cyrus Emperor of Persia, anno mundi 3433,
before Christ, 535.

In the 17 year of his government he went from Jerusalem to Susan 920 miles, 3
Esd. 3.4.

From Susan he went to Babylon, which was 242 miles, 3 Es. 4.

From Babylon in the same year he returned to Jerusalem, 680 miles, where the
next year after, in the beginning of the second month, which answers to the
21 of May, in the 3 year of Darius Ahasuerus, Zerubabel, and Joshua, the chief
Priests of the Jews, began to build the Temple, and finished it in the sixth
year of the same King, 1 Esd. 6. So all the travels of Zerubabel were 2280
miles.

The Book of ESTER.
MOrdochius was led prisoner with Iechoniah, to Babylon, which was 680 miles.

From Babylon he went to Susan, which was 252 miles; there he brought up Ester
his brothers daughter, and taught her honest discipline and the fear of God.
This maid was very beautiful and comely, wherefore at such time as Darius
Ahasuerus (the son of Hystaspis) had caused all the beautiful Virgins of his
Empire to be brought before him, that from amongst them he might choose him a
wife; Mordochius adorned this Virgin with goodly apparel, and she also went
with them: in whose presence (by his instruction) she behaved her self so
well, that the Emperor chose her from among the rest, and made her his Queen,
she being at that time but a poor maid, and of small ability. They were
married in Susan in the second year of his Empire, an. mun. 3454, and before
Christ, 514. From whence it is evident, That preferment comes neither from
the East, nor from the West, but from the Lord. So these two journies make 932
miles.

The Types and Allegories collected out of the Book of Ester.
MOrdochius, or Mordochai signifies bitter and contrite, being derived of
Marah, He was bitter, and Dachah, Sorrowful and contrite. A fit resemblance of
that true Mordochius, Christ Jesus, who for our sins and offenses was
constrained to drink of that bitter cup of afflictions, the necessities of
this world, suffering in his body more than tolerable torments, as you may
read in his passion; therefore justly called Mordochius, that is, bitter and
contrite.

Ester and Alma have both one signification, that is, a virgin, or one kept
from the bed of man. Therefore she was a notable image of the Church, who
keeps her self chaste and undefiled, avoiding the society of evil men; and
although she seem to be desolate and forsaken in this world, in respect of the
wicked (who flourish like a flower, and glory in voluptuousness and pleasure)
yet has she her Mordochius, her Spouse, her dearly beloved, which prouides
for her, even Jesus Christ that immaculate lamb who died for her salvation,
and will clothe her in white, put into her hand a regal scepter, crown her
with glory, and set her with him in the throne of eternal happiness.

Ahasuerus signifies, a noble Captain, and typically represents God the
father: for as the Emperor had the command of 127 Provinces, and in them did
principally rule; so God our heavenly father is the Emperor and governor of all
Kingdoms, and all creatures both in heaven and in earth be obedient to his
will; he sits in that everlasting palace of heaven, that place of joy, and
that eternal Paradise, from whence he looks down to behold us miserable and
distressed creatures upon earth; of his merciful goodness electing and
choosing us to be heirs of that eternal Kingdom, and purifieth us with the
graces of his holy Spirit, so that we might be made capable to sit with him in
eternal felicity.

The disdainful Queen Vasthy may be a fit Type and Effigies of this world,
not only in respect of her pride, but her excess in drinking; taking her name
from Schatha, which signifies, To drink: so this World lives in all manner of
prodigality and luxury, and contemns the Lord and King thereof, that
Almighty God which sits in the Heavens; and therefore is justly thrown
down from that eternal Kingdom; whereas on the contrary, humble Ester (that
is, the Church) is taken up into dignity, and crowned in that everlasting
Kingdom of Heaven.

Haman signifies, A rebellious and proud man: being derived of HAMAN, He has
stirred up a tumult: typically representing the Devil, whom God in the
beginning made a good Angel, exalted him in the heavens, and made him much
more glorious than others; yet notwithstanding glorying in himself, he
contemned his Maker, and nothing would content him but to become like unto him,
yea he desired to be worshipped of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 4. And as Haman
endeavored to overthrow not only all the people of the Jews, but Queen
Hester also; so the Devil does not only endeavor to overthrow the whole
Church, but if it were possible the head of the Church Christ Jesus.

Of that holy man Job.
Job was a holy and good man: he dwelt in the land of Vz, so called of Vz the
son of Aram the son of Sem, as S. Jerome upon Genesis observes. This Vz was
that great man which built (as was thought) Damascus in Syria, and all the land
which extends from Damascus to Jordan, after his name was called Vz, that is,
the land of counsel, fot so Vz signifies. There were two towns in this
country, where Job is said to have dwelt; that is, Astaroth-Carnaim, and
Batzra: Asteroth-Carnaim was distant from Jerusalem, 52 miles toward the
Northeast, the inhabitants of which town worshipped the goddess Venus, and
called her by the name of Astaroth, of which you may read before. S. Jerome
says, That the sepulcher of Job was to be seen in his time in that town; and
later writers testify as much for their times. This town at this day is
called Carnea.

Batzra is mentioned in the 36 of Genesis, it signifies a grape gathering. In
this town it was thought that Job was borne, it lay beyond Jordan in the tribe
of Reuben, 20 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast. All this country in
those times was subject to the King of the Edomites or Idumaeans; but after it
was joined to the land of the Moabites, they having conquered the kings of
Edom: you man read more of it in the 6 of Isay, also Ios. 20. where is showed,
that it was one of the six cities of refuge, appointed by Joshua. Here Job for
the most part continued and held this town in great honor and reputation.

He lived about the time of Baela, first king of the Edomites: and according to
the opinion of Saint Ierom, Augustine, Ambrose, Philo, and Luther, was for his
excellent virtue and singular piety, chosen King of that country, which he
greatly enlarged, making all the countries and neighboring Princes near
adjoining, tributary unto him: wherefore (as Ierom says, in locis Hebraicis)
having obtained so large an Empire, he removed his seat from Batzra to Astaroth
Carnaim, which was a strong and well defenced city, where in those times (as
Moses witnesses, Genesis 14.) there inhabited mighty men, and noble Heroes; that
so by their virtue he might with the greater facility suppress and conquer
other Provinces.

There are many think him to be of the stock of Abraham, and of the family of
Esau, because he is mentioned in the 36 of Genesis where it is said, That when
Baela died, Iobab the son of Zerah of Bozra or Betzra reigned in his stead.
And Saint Ierom in his preface upon the book of Job shows, that he was but
five degrees removed from Abraham: for

Abraham had Ishmael Basmath, who was the wife of Esau, mother of Reguel,
grandmother to Sarah, and great grandmother to Job. So that by the mothers side
Job descended from Ishmael, and by the fathers side from Esau.
Isaac Esau Reguel Serah Job or Iobab, king of Idumaea, Genesis 36.

Notwithstanding there are some that are of opinion, That he descended from
Nahor, Abraham's brother; and was of the family of Vz, Nahors son: which
opinion also Saint Ierom mentions in his Hebraicall questions. But most of
the ancient fathers hold this nothing so probable.

Luther upon the 36 chapter of Genesis says, That he was King long time before
Moses carried the children of Israel out of Egypt. For Judah and Aser the
sons of Jacob, had children before they went into the land of Egypt, Genesis
46. therefore it is not impossible for Reguel the son of Esau, to have
children also, since he was married long before his brother Jacob. From hence
then it may be gathered, that Job was King of Idumaea before Jacob and his
sons went into the land of Egypt. For although the fourteen sons of Esau
governed the land of Edom, like so many Princes (of which number Reguel the
grandfather of Job was one) because they held it as their inheritance; yet to
avoid sedition and distractions, which oftentimes happen where there is not a
certain head and principal commander, therefore they elected Bela the son
of Beor to be their King: after whose death they chose Job, because he was a
holy man of God, and in his actions just and upright; who without doubt reigned
amongst the Edomites a long time. For he lived after his afflictions (which God
imposed upon him to try him) 140 years. Plato says, he married Dina the
daughter of Jacob: but Saint Jerome, That he married the daughter of an
Arabian, by whom he had Enon. Both these may be true; for his first wife being
dead he might marry an Arabian.

After the death of Job, the Giants and Heroes in Asteroth Carnaim fell again
from the Idumaeans; for when Moses brought the children of Israel out of the
desert of Arabia Petraea, and that they had conquered the land beyond Jordan,
the city Astaroth-Carnaim had a King called Og, who governed all the Kingdom
of Basan. This Giant was of a mighty stature; he had a bed of iron Four yards
and a half long, and two broad.
nine cubits long, and four broad, Deuteronomy. 3.

Of Eliphaz.
ELiphaz the Themanite was the brother of Reguel, Jobs grandfather. This
Eliphaz had a son called Theman, who built a city, and after his own name
called it Theman, where Eliphaz his father dwelt with him. From whence it
happened that he was called Eliphaz the Themanite, Job 2. It was distant from
Jerusalem forty miles toward the South, and therefore it was called a city of
the South: you may read of Eliphaz in Ier. cap. 25. He had a Concubine called.
Thimnah, because of her beauty and comely proportion: by her he had Amaleck, of
whom came the Amalekites, between whom and the children of Israel were cruel
wars, Exodus 17.

The Travels of Eliphaz the Themanite.
FRom Themen he went to Astaroth-Carnaim, where Job dwelt, which is accounted
92 miles, to comfort his friend Job, Job, 2.

From Astaroth-Carnaim he returned back to his own house, which was 92 miles.
So the travels of Eliphaz were 184 miles.

Of Bildad, Iobes friend.
BEyond Jordan and the sea of Galile not far from Astaroth-Carnaim, there is
at this day found a town called Suah, where (as it is thought) Bildad the
friend of Job dwelt. Near to this town (as Sebastian Francus observes in his
Cosmographie) there was yerly in the Summer season a great mart kept in certain
tents and tabernacles erected for that purpose, of diverse colors. Bildad
signifies an ancient friend, and Suah takes the name from desolation, being
derived of Scho, he has made desolate.

Of Zophar the friend of Job.
ZOphar dwelt in the city of Naema, Josh. 15. but how far it stood from
Jerusalem is uncertain. Zophar, of Zaphar, signifies, swift. Naema signifies,
pleasant and delectable, of Naem, courteous and comfortable.

Of Jobs daughters.
THe Lord gave unto Job after his affliction, and that he had tried his
faithfulness, three daughters, so fair, that there were none fairer to be
found in all the land. The name of the first was Iemmima, that is, as fair as
the day, of Iom, which signifies, a day. The second Kazia, that is, such a one
as gives a pleasant savor like unto the gum Cassia. The third, because of the
excellency of her countenance was called Kaeren Hapuch, that is, casting forth
rays or beams, Job. 42.

APOCRYPHA. The Book of IVDETH.
Of Egbatana.
AFter the death of Arbactus or Arphaxad, which signifies a mighty Lion, to
whom Jonas prophesied, as is said before; there succeeded in the Empire of the
Medes, Mandanes, Sarsomenes, Artecarnis, Cardiceas, and Deioces; who being
enthronised in that Empire, called himself Arphaxad or Arbactus, the second.
This man built Egbatana the metropolitan city of the Medes, and beautified it
with very fair buildings and goodly walls, made all of four square stone cut
and polished, 70 cubits high, and 30 broad; towers standing upon it 100 cubits
in height, as well those that were for the defense of the town, as those where
the gates were. The air in that country was temperate, inclining rather to
cold than heat, because it lay toward the North: it stood 1136 miles from
Jerusalem Northeastward. Here (for the most part) this Emperor kept his court,
till (as Herodotus says) he was utterly conquered by Nebuchadnezzar, Emperor
of the Babylonians. This was that Nebuchadnezzar which sent Holofernus with a
mighty army against Iudaea, Bethulia, and many other cities and countries, and
would be worshipped as a god. Iudeth. 3.

Of Hydaspes.
HYdaspes is a river that arises in Media, which runs thorough a part of
Parthia, extends it self into India; and not far from the city Nisa
falls into Indus, according to the opinion of Pliny, and Strabo, lib. 15.
Near this river Nabuchadnezzar overcame Dieoces, otherwise called Arbactus,
Judge. 1.

The description of the countries conquered by HOLOFERNES.
Of Kedar.
KEdar (the wilderness of Zur was thus called:) stood in the land of the
Ishmaelites, 80 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest: and took the name
of Kedar the son of Ishmael, Genesis 25.

Of the mountains of Ange.
THe mountains of Ange, lay between Pamphilia and Cicilia; to the latitude of
that famous country of Cilicia in Asia minor, 320 miles from Jerusalem toward
the North; not far from Anchiale a city of Cilicia, from whence it seems
to take the name.

Of Cilicia.
CIlicia is a province of Asia minor; so called of Cilice the kings son of
Syria and Phoenicia: the Metropolitan City of which country was Tharsus,
where the Apostle Paul was borne: it was distant from Jerusalem 304 miles
toward the North.

Of Mallos.
MAllos a city of Cilicia, was so called of Malo, that is, plenty of all
things. Stephanus says, that it took that name of Mollo, who first built it.
It is a city to this day, and of most of the inhabitants of that country
called Mallo, as Gesner observes.

Of Gesem.
GEsem signifies, fruitful. The land of Gosen in Egypt was so called, being
derived of Gusch, that is, a turfe: it stood 174 miles from Jerusalem toward
the Southwest.

Of Aethyopia.
THis country stands beyond Aegipt, 800 miles from Jerusalem toward the South,
where the Sun is extreme hot, that it turns the complexion of the
inhabitants to blackenesse: here breed great abundance of Dragons and cruel
beasts.

Of Esdrelon.
ESdrelon was a plain lying between the mountains, Thabor, Hermon, and
Gilboa, extending it self from the cities of Megiddo and Apheck, to the sea of
Gennezareth or Galile. In this great field, which was called the plain of
Galile, and the field of Megiddo and Esdrelon, there were many cruel battles
fought; for here Gideon overcame the Midianites: here Saul was put to flight by
the Philistines, from whence ascending into Mount Gilboa he killed himself.
Josias also, King of the Jews, was in this place put to flight by Pharaoh
Necho, and wounded unto the death. The camp of Holofernes was so great that it
took up all the plain, which contained 16 miles in length. In some parts it
was wonderful fruitful, and brought forth wine, oil, and many other
commodities in great abundance. It stood 52 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North, and was so called of Caeder, that is, a hid order and disposition: for
Alam is as much to say as, he has hid.

Of Sobal.
SObal was a country upon the borders of Syria, where Sophena was situated,
near to the river Euphrates; which country Saul and David Kings of Israel
sometime conquered: it stood 600 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and
signifies, an ear of corn.

Of Apamea.
THis was a famous city in Tetrapolis of Syria, two hundred and eighty miles
from Jerusalem toward she North, built of Seleucus Nicanor King of Syria, and
was so called of Apamea his wife.

Of the city Bethulia.
BEthulia was situated within 4 miles of Dothan, and two of the Galilean sea,
44 miles from Jerusalem Northward. About four miles from this town, in a
mountain a little beside Dothan, lay the tents of Holofernes in the sight of
Bethulia, Iudeth c. 7. between which and Bethulia lay the plain of Esdrelon, in
the midst whereof there ran a pleasant river, which in times past watered it.
Here Iudeth (according to the custom of the Jews) washed her self. The place
where Bethulia stood is to be seen at this day, the ruins of the town and many
houses still remaining. It was situated upon a goodly high mountain, strongly
fortified by Nature, and as it seems by art also. A man might have seen it
thorough the greatest part of Galile, but above the rest, a certain castle in
the end of the mountain, made for the defense of the city. They show at this
day, in the mountain and field near Dothan, the place where Holofernes camp
stood, and the relics of their tents; also the brook where Iudeth washed her
self. Bethulia signifies, The handmaid of God; being derived of Bethulah, a
virgin; and Iah, God. Holofernes, a profane Captain, of which sort are those
tyrants that persecute the Church of God.

The Book of TOBIAS.
The Travels of Tobias the elder.
TObias the elder was carried captive out of the tribe of Nepthaly, where he was
born, to Ninive the Metropolitan city of Assiria, being 600 miles: at such time
as Salmanasser King of the Assyrians carried away the ten tribes of Israel
into Assyria Captive; in the year before Christ 742. 2 Kings, ca. 17. Tob. 1.
From that time he continued in Ninive, being then about 27 years old, and
numbered amongst the young men that went into exile; for he was born about such
time as Romulus and Remus were born, which was An. mun. 3200. and before Christ
798, Tob. 1.

About the 30 year of his age he went from Niniveh into Media, which was 752
miles, and there came to a city called Rages in that country, to visit the
banished Israelites: at which time he lent by Gabel by bond, 10 talents of
silver, which amounts in our money, at v. s. vi. d. the ounce, to 2062 li. and
10 s. or thereabouts.

From Rages he returned back again to Niniveh, 752 miles. So all his travels
were 2104 miles.

The Travels of the Angel Raphel, and young Tobias.
IN the year before Christ 708, the Archangell Raphel went from Niniveh to
Rages in Media, with Tobias the younger, being 752 miles.

From Rages in Media they returned back again to Niniveh, 752 miles.

So these journies were 1504 miles.

The description of the places mentioned in their travels. Of Nepthaly.
THis was the chief city of the tribe of Nepthaly, 84 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North. It stood in Galile, and in times past was a strong town: here
Tobias the elder was born. It is to be seen at this day (as some say) but much
decayed; and is now called by the name of Sirin, situated in a mountain so
steep and strongly fortified by nature upon the West side, that it is
impossible to ascend upon it. In a valley some two miles from this town
toward the South, Naason spoken of in the first Chapter of Toby is situated.
Upon the left side whereof there stood a town called Sophet: but now there is
nothing to be seen but a Castle, where in ancient times the Knights Templers
kept their abiding, and at this day is in the custody of the Turks. This castle
is situated upon a high mountain, fortified very strongly both by art and
nature, and stands within a mile of Nepthaly Southwestward. At such time as
Josephus that great Historiographer (who was the son of Matthia of Marathia,
a Priest of the Jews) was chosen chief Commander of the tribe of Nepthaly, he
gathered an army of 100000, and fortified this castle and Nepthaly, and many
other towns thereabouts, continuing a long and sharp war against the Romans,
until Nepthaly was taken, and he constrained to yield himself captive. In the
taking in of which town Titus the son of Vespasian did first ascend the walls,
and there made manifest his noble resolution and valor. Vid. Ios. de bell. Iud.
lib. 3 and 4.

Of Rages a city of the Medes.
RAges is so called of a great Congregation, being derived of Ragasch, that is,
He has assembled a great company; for it was a very populous city. It was also
called (as Strab. li. 11. Cosmograp. says) Rahga: but after being rebuilt and
fortified by Nicanor, it was by him called Europus, being distant from
Jerusalem 1396 miles toward the Northeast. The Persians call it Arsacia. S.
Ierom, de Trad. Hebr. would have Edissa, a city of Mesopotamia (or rather as
Pliny says, of Coelosyria) to be Rages, which stands but 448 miles from
Jerusalem Northward, and from Ninive 188 miles Westward. There are diverse
others that have wrote of this town of Edissa: but that this and Rages should be
both one I cannot see how to agree with Toby; for that he himself has set it
down to stand in Media, and the Cities of the Medes lie distant from Jerusalem
1396 miles. Therefore gentle Reader I refer it to thy better consideration.

Of Jesus the son of Syrach.
SYrach signifies an Illustrous Prince, being derived of Sarach, he has shined
forth: he was of that noble family of David, that is, the son of Syrach the son
of Jesus, and cousin german to Amos Syrach, who (as Philo says) was the chief
prince and captain of the children of Israel in the time of Ptolomeus
Philadelphus King of Egypt, and is inserted into the genealogy of Christ, Luke
3. He was born 230 years before Christ, in the city Jerusalem, from whence
about the 38 year of his age he went to Alexandria, a city of Egypt, 288 miles
( Evergetes Ptolomais the son of Philadelphus being then King of that
country) where he gathered out of that flourishing Library (set up at the
charge of Ptolomais Philadelphus) his book of Ecclesiasticus, as bees from
diverse flowers gather sweet honey.

Of the great city Alexandria.
ALexandria was a city of Egypt, distant from Jerusalem 288 miles Westward; in
ancient time called No, that is, a Hinderance. But Alexander the Great taking
affection to this city, in the year 330 before Christ began to build it (for by
continuance of time it was much decayed) and within the space of 17 days made
it a goodly city, much greater than it was before: to which that he might add
the greater grace, he called it after his own name Alexandria; and there he
lies buried, after he had governed the empire of the Grecians 7 years. For
although he died in Babylon the chief city of the Chaldaeans, yet Ptolomais
(one of his chief Princes) removed his body thence in a golden chariot to
Memphis in Egypt, and 20 years after to Alexandria. The situation thereof is
very delectable, bordering to the North upon the Mediterranian sea, and to the
South upon the poole of Mareridis, as Strabo says, lib. 17. It was ten miles
about, strongly fortified with walls, beautified with goodly buildings,
situated in a very fruitful country. And to give a greater delight unto the
inhabitants, without the Walls there stood many goodly Orchards and Gardens,
plentifully furnished with fruits and flowers of diverse kinds, as Pomecitrons,
Figs, etc. During the time of Ptolomais Philadelphus it was a famous and
flourishing city; for this Prince being a great lover of learning, instituted
an Academy, as it is thought, in it, and added thereto a stately library,
wherein were 400000 Books. The same whereof being published through the world,
many people of diverse Nations resorted thither to see it. Then Eleazer also the
high priest of the Jews, at the request of Ptolemais sent 72 Interpreters to
translate the Bible out of Hebrew into Greek; which was (as Eusebius
observes) in the third year of his reign, before Christ 268. In recompense
whereof he sent to be dedicated in the Temple of Jerusalem a table of gold,
richly adorned with Carbuncles, smarages, and other precious stones; two
stately cups, and 30 boules of pure gold, as appears in Iosep. lib. Antiq.
12. The Academy continued there till after Christ's time, as you may read Acts
6. But the Library was consumed 47 years before Christ, and the city greatly
defaced. For Julius Caesar at that time making war with Pompey the younger, who
continued with his sister Cleopatra in this City, caused the Kings navy to be
set on fire, and the Library standing near it, the flame took hold of it, and
burnt it down to the ground with all that was in it, and defaced also a great
part of the city.

Josephus writing of this city, compares it with the fairest cities of those
times, being strongly fortified both by sea and land, so that it seemed to be
invincible. But at this day it is but a small city, the incursions of foreign
enemies having wasted and destroyed the greater part, and left the rest to be a
wonder to the world, the heaps and ruins of goodly buildings making evident
lamentable destructions. Thus man with his devices perishes, but the Lord
endures for ever.

Upon the Book of MACHABES.
The Travels of Antiochus Epiphanes.
ANtiochus Epiphanes, that is, An illustrous Adversary, in the year of Christ
380, was sent out of Syria by Antiochus the Great, to Rome, which 1600 miles,
where he remained as an hostage for his father and his brother Seleucus
Philopater seuenteen years, 1 Mac. 1.

After the death of his father he stole secretly from Rome, and went back
again to Antiochia in Syria, which was 1600 miles; and there succeeded his
brother Seleucus Philopater in the government. He began to reign 173 years
before Christ.

In the third year of his reign he went from Antiochia to Tyrus, 60 miles: in
that journey he conquered all the lower part of Syria and Phoenicia.

From thence he went above six score miles through Galilee and Iudaea,
conquering all the cities and countries that lay in his way; and would also have
gone down into Egypt; but when he heard that his nephew Ptolomais Philometor
had proclaimed an assembly and parliament, and would not acknowledge him for
his Protector, he sent Apolonius one of his princes, upon the day of the
meeting into Egypt, and he himself returned back again to Ioppa, 2 Mac. 4.

From Ioppa he went to Jerusalem, which was 20 miles, where Jason the
High Priest and all the people received him with great honor. At that time
Antiochus placed a Guard in the Castle or tower of Jerusalem, which was the
beginning of their intolerable servitude.

But for that year, which was the fourth of his reign, he returned through
Phoenicia to Antiochia in Syria, 280 miles.

In the fifth year of his reign he went from Antiochia with a great army into
Cilicia, being 80 miles. There he appeased the vprores of the inhabitants of
Tharsus and Mallotus, and conquered all Cilicia, 2 Mac. 4.

From Cilicia he returned back again to Antiochia, eighty miles.

In the sixth year of his reign Antiochus went with a great army both by sea
and land (wherein were many Elephants) to Pelusio, 400 miles. This city he
conquered, and overcame the Alexandrians in a navall battle. 2 Mac. 4.

From Pelusio (having built a bridge over Nilus) he went with his army to
Memphis, conquered all the countries and strong cities as he went, about 140
miles, and brought thither a mighty and great prey: where according to the
saying of the Prophet Daniel, cap. 11. He dealt subtly with Ptolomais
Philometor.

From Memphis he returned to Alexandria, where the citisens would not suffer
him to enter the gates, wherefore he besieged it, but to small purpose, which
was 120 miles.

From Alexandria he returned to Pelusio, which was 160 miles, there he left a
garrison to retain what he had gotten in Egypt, 1 Mac. 4.

From Pelusio he returned to Antiochia with a great prey, being 400 miles. In
the mean time Ptolomais King of Egypt, and his sister Cleopatra brought in the
aid of the Romans, Livy, Decad. lib. 4. 5.

In the next year (that is, in the seventh year of Antiochus Epiphanes) there
was seen in the air as if there had been men fighting; a Comet also appeared.
This happened in the year before Christ 167.

This year in the spring Antiochus went the second time from Antiochia with
his army into Alexandria in Egypt, which was 560 miles. So passing through
Coelosyria and Iudaea, he came into Egypt, which he invaded with open war,
endeavoring to get that by force, which he could not get by entreaty. But the
Romans sent P. Popillius with other Ambassadors into Egypt, who hearing that
Antiochus was come to Leusia, which was within a mile of Alexandria, the
Romans went thither to him. Where when he had welcomed them, and showed all
the courtesy he could to P. Popillius, P. Popillius delivered him certain
tables that he had about him written. And first of all commanded him to read
them, which he did. Then he counseled with some of his friends, What was best
to be done in the business. While he was thus in a great study, P. Popillius
with a wand that he had in his hand made a circle about him in the dust,
saying, Ere thou stir a foot out of this circle return thy answer, that I
may tell the Senate Whe-thou had rather have war or peace. This he uttered
with such a firm countenance, that it amassed the King. Wherefore, after he had
paused a while, quoth he, I will do what the Senate has written, or shall
think fit. So doing little or nothing in Egypt, he returned back again.
Iustine, Lib. 34. Decad. Lib. 4. cap. 5. Ios. lib. 12. cap. 6. These things
happened ann. vrb. Romans 585. L. Aemilius Paulus and Caius Licinius Crassus being
then Consuls: in which year the Moon was totally eclipsed, Aemilius overcame
Perseus King of Macedon, and reduced Macedonia into a Province, Lib. Dec. 4.
lib. 5.

From Leusia, Antiochus (fearing lest the Jews would forsake his Empire and
rebel) went to Jerusalem, which was 288 miles; but the inhabitants of the
town shut him out of the city, wherefore he besieged it, and by the treason of
Menelaus chief Priest, (who for that purpose conspired with the guard that was
in the castle) quickly got it and entered the gates. In every place where he
came he put the Citisens to the sword, and for three days space did little
else but cruelly massacre the people. He went also with Menelaus into the
Temple, where he polluted the sacred things of the Temple, and took thence the
vessels of silver and gold, or whatsoever he found precious or worthy: so that
the prey he took amounted to 1800 talents, which make almost 11 tun of pure
gold; all which were partly gifts dedicated to the Temple, and partly treasure
that was left there as in a safe and sure place, to the use of poor distressed
widows and orphans.

After that Antiochus had robbed the Temple of all the silver and gold that he
could find, had banished Jason, had placed a strong garrison in the tower of
Acropolis, (the captain of which was one Philip a very cruel man) and made
Menelaus High Priest; with all this booty and some number of captives he
returned to Antiochia, which was 280 miles. In the year following, that is,
before Christ 166, Lu. Aemilius Paulus triumphed for the wars of Macedonia. Not
long after, Antiochus misdoubting the fidelity of the Jews, sent Apolonius
with an army of 22000 to Jerusalem, who entered the city upon the Sabbath day,
and committed many outrages.

Then, Antiochus having spent a great part of the gold and silver which he had
got from Jerusalem, about the eleventh year of his reign made his expedition
from Antiochiato, Persepolis, (it was also called Elymaides) in Persia, which
was 196 miles. Here he took the temple of Diana, spoiled all that country round
about, and with strong hand gathered together a great mass of gold and silver
to maintain war against Judas Machabeus. But a multitude of citisens
disliking his sacrilege, banded themselves together, and put Antiochus and his
soldiers to flight before he could take the city of Persepolis. 1 Match. 6. 2
Match. 9.

Wherefore being driven from thence, he fled with his army to Egbatana, a city
in Media, which was 209 miles. Here having certain intelligence by letters, of
the noble exploits of Judas Machabeus, and that he purged the temple of such
things as were profane, he fell into an extreme grief, and like one
distracted railed against the Jews, and swore to be revenged of them, 1 Mac. 9.

In this extreme anger he went from Egbatana to Babylon with his army, which
was 464 miles. But as he went, his Chariot was ouerthrown, in the fall whereof
he was so extremely wounded, that they were constrained to carry him in a bed
to Babylon, where he shortly after died miserably.

So all his travels were 8153 miles.

Thus may we see with what difficulties and dangers this wicked prince obtained
his victories, and past away his life, sometime in travel, his journies long and
troublesome, sometimes in prosperity, sometimes in adversity, again sometimes
afflicted with troublesome cogitations, sometimes with extreme anger, seldom
in peace, and then also his actions savoring of violence and filthiness From
whence it appears, That the wicked with more sorrows, troubles, and vexations
gain eternal damnation; than the Just, though they suffer many grievous
afflictions, obtain everlasting salvation. For amongst all the Patriarchs, good
Kings, and Prophets, there is not found any that had so many long and tedious
journies as this Antiochus, who continually oppressed his mind and conscience
with unprofitable vanities and wicked thoughts, and at length had a miserable
and terrible end.

Of the Cities and places mentioned in his Travels.
Of Antiochia.
ANtiochia, where Antiochus Epiphanes kept his court, was anciently called
Chaemath, or Riblah. It was situated in Syria, 180 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North, near to the Cities Seleucia, Laodicea, and Apamea, which
four Cities (as Strabo says in the sixteenth Book of his Geographie) was
built by Seleucus Nicanor first King of Syria. This man was a mighty Prince;
and obtained the name of Nicanor (which signifies Victory) because he
prospered in his wars, and conquered his adversaries. For when (within 13
years after the death of Alexander the Great) he had got the kingdom of
Syria, he became so great in the 31 year of his reign, that he obtained the
empire of all the East; and beside (as Strabo says) re-edified and built up
these four cities, calling one of them Antiochia, after the name of his
father, another Laodicea after the name of his mother, a third after his own
name Seleucia, and the last Apamea, after the name of his wife. These four
cities, because they were all built by one man and at one time, were called
Sisters. But Antiochia was much fairer than the other, and in those times was a
greater city than any other called after that name, yea it was equal to
Alexandria in Egypt, for glory and excellency of building. It was divided into
four parts, and those parts separated with four walls: The first, which was
anciently called Hemath (A violent anger) of Chamathai the son of Canaan; was
after Riblath, from the multitude of the inhabitants; and the third time by
Seleucus, after his fathers name, called Antiochia. In this part Seleucus to
dignifie the City, kept his court, it being compassed about with goodly walls.
In the second part the citisens of Syria inhabited. In the third, Seleucus
Callimichus (afterward King of the Syrians) kept his court, and greatly
beautified it. But in the fourth (where afterward many Christians inhabited)
Antigonus Epiphanes continued, and did greatly adorn it and set it forth with
goodly buildings and sumptuous houses. Close by the City there stood a
pleasant wood watered with many clear fountains and delightful springs, to
which there resorted a great multitude of Fowls of diverse sorts, which sung
very pleasantly among the trees, to the great content and delectation of the
citisens. In the midst of this wood stood the temple of Apollo and Diana,
goodly things, and very curiously built. It was called the wood of Daphne,
because it was full of Laurel trees. From this wood all the country thereabout
is called Epidaphne. Not far off stands the river Orontes, which begins in
Coelosyria, and passes under the earth til it comes near to Apamea, where it
rises and watreth all Antiochia. So passing thence it runs some 16 miles,
and so falls into the Mediterranian sea. Here Paul preached and kept a Synod,
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 24. 25. There was another Synod kept here by the Arrians,
Trip. lib. 4. 9.

Stephanus reckons up many other cities of this name, as Antiochia Lisidia, in
Galatia, where Paul preached, Act. 3. and is distant from this 384 miles:
Antiochia in Mesopotamia, which is also called Mygdonia, and Nisibis; in which
Apollophanes the Stoicke, and Pharnuchus that wrote the Persian history are
said to be born. Antiochia between Syria and Arabia, built by Semiramis.
Antiochia in Cilicia, situated near to the river Pyramus. Antiochia in
Pieria, also called by the Syrians, Arados. There is also a city called
Antiochia near mount Taurus in the country of Comagena. Antiochia situated
upon the lake of Callichan. Antiochia in Scythia. There was another in Caria,
called also Pithapolis. Antiochia Marigiana, built by Antiochus Soter. And many
Authors call Tharsus in Cilicia by the name of Antiochia. Antiochia signifies
an Adversary.

Of Rome.
ROme stands 1528 miles from Jerusalem Westward. Of this city you may read
more in the travels of the Apostle Paul.

Tyrus, Ioppa, Memphis, Pelusio, Mallo, and Alexandria are before described.

Of Tharsus.
TArsus or Tharsus signifies aa Hyacinth stone, so called (as some think) of
Tharsis the son of Iavan, the son of Iaphet, the son of Noah, Genesis 10. It was
distant from Jerusalem 304 miles Northward.

Of Persepolis.
PErsepolis was the metropolitan city of Persia, distant from Jerusalem 1240
miles Eastward. So called of Perseus that mighty King of the Persians, who
re-edified it and gave it that name; which is as much to say as the city of the
Persians, which also of him were so called. The Astronomers, because he was
greatly affected to such as were skillful in that art, attributed his name and
his wives name to two constellations in the heavens, of which Ovids fable is
contrived of Pegasus and Andromache.

This city of Persepolis was so fair, that it exceeded all the cities of the
East, both for stateliness and beauty, and so continued from Perseus time,
until Alexander the Great had conquered Darius: at which time this great
Emperor having got into his hand the whole empire of the Persians, came to
Persepolis in the year before Christ 329, and there celebrated a great feast
in triumph of his victories; to which there resorted a great many women, not
such as were of the better sort, but them that followed the camp, and lived
dissolutely: amongst whom was that notable curtesan Thais; who perceiving the
King inclined to mirth, and full with wine, began to flatter him in his cups,
and among other things to commend and dignifie his noble exploits; withal
giving him to understand, how acceptable it would be to the Grecians, to see
that royal palace of the Persians fired, which had so often afflicted Grecia.
No sooner had she uttered these words, but another seconded her, and then a
third. After, the whole assembly cried out, Shall we revenge the injury of
Grecians, and burn the city? with that they al rose in great fury, the king
himself (being crowned) beginning first to fire the palace, wherein was great
abundance of Cedar, from whence it happened that suddenly the fire spread it
self a great way; which when the army that lay without the walls perceived,
with all speed came to the city to stay the burning of it, for which purpose
many brought water with them. But when they beheld the King himself busy in
this tragedy, laying aside their water, they also, in hope of booty, and to
imitate the steps of their Prince, fell to firing the city, and according to
the custom of soldiers in such massacres, made a prey of what they could get;
increasing the fire with dry stuff and other combustible matter, whereby it
came to pass that the whole city was therewith fired, and burnt to the ground.
This was the end of that mighty city which ruled over so many nations, where so
many mighty Princes governed, that was the scourge of Grecia and the greatest
part of the world, that sent forth a Navy of 10000 ships and an army of an
infinite number; there being at this day nothing to be seen, unless the river
Araxes that ran close by it remains. Thus was that consumed in a fury, which
the King and all his army before endeavored to spare. But after it turned to
the great shame of the Macedonians, that their King should fire so famous a
city in the midst of his cups: and Alexander himself after he had slept
repented what he had done.

You shall find in 2 Mac. cap. 6. That Antiochus Epiphanes besieged a certain
City in Persia called Persepolis, from whence for his exceeding covetousness
and sacrilege he was forced by the inhabitants dwelling about the town to
raise his siege and be gone. Therefore some may gather, that this Persepolis
before mentioned was rebuilded, because it also stood in Persia: but if you
read 1 Mac. cap. 6. you shall find that this city so besieged by Antiochus was
also called Elymais, wherein stood the temple of Diana, beautified with goodly
ornaments, shining with the splendour of fine gold wherewith it was gilt. In
which temple, as faith Josephus lib. Ant. 12. Alexander the Great left his
armor and other things. From whence may be gathered, that this town was not
the Persepolis which he caused to be burnt, but rather some other town built
out of the ruins of that city (according to the opinion of Quintus Curtius) or
else some village standing near to it, which being built up and enlarged,
might of some be called new Persepolis, though indeed it was anciently called
Elymais, and all the East part of Persia beyond Susa, of that town called
Elematica, having some affinity with Elam the ancient name of Persia, so
called of Elam the son of Sem, Genesis 10. Wherefore it may well be concluded,
that that Persepolis burnt down by Alexander, was never restored, but lies
waste to this day.

Thus the empire of the Persians (afrer they had ruled over the nations of the
earth 260 years) was conquered by the Grecians, who held it 129 years. At the
end of which time, Demetrius Nicanor the last Emperor of the Grecrans in Syria
and Asia, going with a great army out of Syria toward the East, Arsaces King of
the Medes and Parthians, being aided by the citisens of Elymais the Persians,
and Bactrians, meeting him in those parts, gave him many sharp and cruel
battles, and in the end (under pretense of peace) took him prisoner, in the
year before Christ 137, and from that time the Parthians governed Persia and
Grecia, and opposed the Romans in many cruel battles.

Afterward, in the year of our Lord 226, Artaxerxes that mighty Lord of Persia
overcame Artabanus King of the Parthians in a mighty battle, and took his
crown from his head; the same year entering upon the government of Persia, 548
years after the death of Alexander the Great: from which time Artaxerxes and
his posterity reigned in Persia for the space of 314 years; in the which
space there succeeded 28 Kings, viz. Artaxerxes 1. Sapores Ormisdates
Vararanes, Vararanes 2. Vararanes. 3. Narses, Misdates, Sapores 2. Artaxerxes
2. Sapores 3. Vararanes 4. Cermazat, syrnamed Isdigertes, Vararanes 5.
Vararanes 6. Perozes, Valens, Cavades Zambades, Cavades 2. Cosroes, Hormisda,
Cosroes 2. Siroes, Adhasir, Sarbaras, Bornarim, Hormisda 2. who was the last
King of the Persians; for being overcome by Humarus, Amiras of the Saracens,
and third Emperor of the Mahumetans, he was thrown out of his kingdom Anno Dom.
640. After which time it continued long in the government of the Saracens and
Turks.

Where that holy Priest Mattathias the father of Judas Machabeus dwelt.
MAttathias and Dorotheus have both one signification, that is, The gift of
God; being derived of Matath, a gift, and Iah, God. This Mattathias was a holy
Priest of the tribe of Levi, the son of John, the son of Simon, of whom all
that family was called the posterity of Simon, of the stock of Ioarib, of
whom you may read, 1 Chr. 15. He dwelt in a town called Modin, 14 miles from
Jerusalem toward the Northwest, situated in a mountain close by the way as
you go to Ioppa, in the tribe of Dan. Modin signifies a measure, being derived
of Madad, he has measured. In this place seeing the cruelty of Antiochus
Epiphanes, and the insolency of his soldiers, he killed one of his captains,
and afterward in the synagogue put to death an idolatrous Jew, overthrew the
Altar set up by Antiochus: after, called forth all the inhabitants of Modin and
other towns near adjoining, to withstand the fury of this King. So they
brought their goods out of the city, into the wilderness, where they encamped
themselves, and after so manfully opposed Antiochus, that he delivered all the
cities and towns thereabouts out of his bondage, and from idolatry. But being
now grown old, (after he had admonished his sons to constancy in the service of
God, and courage in defense of the country) he died in the year before Christ
164, and was buried at Modin, where afterward his sons were buried. Simon his
third son, high priest of Jerusalem, did maruellously beautify this sepulcher;
for he made a vault of white marble, compassed about with fair pillars which
supported an admirable curious arch, to see to as if it had been one stone.
Over this vault in convenient places he built seven pyramides, in memory of his
father, mother, his four brethren, and himself. In the circumference of this
monument he set up fair marble pillars, upon which he caused to be engraven
ships, so artificially, that they which sailed upon the sea might see them; and
upon these he placed the arms of his father and of his brethren. You may read
more of this, 1 Match. 13. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 9.

The Travels of Judas Machabeus.
IVdas Machabeus succeeded his father Mattathias in the year before Christ 164,
Ann. mundi 3804. and ruled six years. Immediately after his fathers death, who
as is said was buried in Modin he led his army against Apollonius chief captain
of Antiochus, who at that time was in Samaria, which was 30 miles: here he
overcame Apollonius and killed him with his own sword, 2 Mac. 2.3.

When Seron (who was also one of Antiochus chief captains in Syria the lower)
heard that Judas Machabeus had overcome Apolonius and put him to death, he was
very angry and said, I will go and conquer Judas Machabeus and those that are
with him, that so I may get my self a name and be famous through the whole
Kingdom: so he came out of Syria, and pitched his tents near Bethoron the
lower in the tribe of Judah, 32 miles from Samaria. But Judas went down to him
to Bethoron, where he broke into his camp, overcame his whole army, and put
him to the sword with 8000 of his men, but the rest fled into the land of the
Philistines, 1 Match. 3. These two victories he obtained in the first year of
his government, by which he made the name of the Machabees famous thorough
that Kingdom. This battle was fought 8 miles from Jerusalem.

Antiochus Epiphanes having certain intelligence of that which had happened, in
the next year made an expedition into Persia, that he might gather money in
those East parts to make an offensive War against the Jews; and gave
authority to Lysias (whom he made Governor in his absence) to suppress this
faction sprung up amongst them. Wherefore Lysias sent 40000 foot and 7000 horse
into Jury; and appointed Ptolomais, Nicanor, and Gorgias to be Generals of the
whole Army. Who so soon as they had entered Iudaea after hostile manner, they
pitched their Tents near to a town called Emaus, Joseph. Lib. Antiq. 13. c.
10. This town stands six miles and somewhat more from Jerusalem; but Judas
Macchabeus assembled his army in Mizpah, situated in the Tribe of Benjamin not
far from Jerusalem, six miles from Bethoron, 1 Mac. 3.

After Judas Macchabeus had implored Gods assistance in his wars, and
performed many religious ceremonies, he went with his army to Emaus, which was
four miles: where coming upon the enemy in the night and unexpected, he
overcame Nicanor, put him to flight, and killed three thousand of his men. This
victory happened in the third year of Judas Macchabeus his government, 1 Mac.
4.

From Emaus he pursued the enemy to Gexeron Azotus, Asserimoth, and Iamniah,
upon the borders of Idumaea, which was eight miles.

After he returning back from pursuing the enemy with his army to Emaus,
which was eight miles, that he might oppose the army of Gorgias; but Gorgias
understanding of the overthrow of Nicanor, and burning of his tents, fled.

Judas Macchabeus obtained his fourth victory in the third year of his
government, which was 62 years before Christ, and in the 148 year of the
government of the Graecians in Syria, six miles from Emaus, near to the Castle
or fortress of Bethsura, which signifies, the house of the Rock, being a very
strong place, situated in the top of a high rock, some half a mile from
Jerusalem, in the way which leads to Bethlehem. Near to this castle Judas
Macchabeus overcame Lysias, Antiochus his chief general of Syria, who had
20000 foot, and 5000 horse in his army, carrying away a great victory, and put
to the sword 5000 of his men. Lysias being thus overcome, mediated a peace with
the Jews, which was concluded upon the fourth day of the monerh Diosceris
which answers unto the seventh day of our month of June, 2 Macch. 10.

From Bethsura Judas Macchabeus brought back his army to Jerusalem, which was
almost a mile; where he caused the Temple of the Lord to be cleansed of the
abomination of the Gentiles, and broke down the stature of Jupiter Olympus,
which had continued there for the space of three years: and on the fifth day
of the month Caslew, which is our December, celebrated a solemn Passover, and
built up a new Altar, and dedicated it unto the Lord.

In the year after, being the fourth year of his government, he repaired the
town of Sion, and fortified Bethsura against the Idumeans, which nation all
this year made war upon the Jews: But after, Judas gathered an army and went
40 miles into Idumaea, and invaded those that were in Arabathnes, and in the
land of the sons of Bean (which people troubled the Israelites with continual
robberies) and put them to flight, so that they were constrained to take their
castle; where he fired them and it together, 1 Macch. 5.2 Macch. 10.

From Idumaea, he returned back again with his army to Jerusalem, which was
40 miles.

Afterward he led his army against the Amonites, which lay 60 miles from
Jerusalem toward the Northeast, 1 Macch. 5.

From thence he went to Iaeser in the Tribe of Gad, which was 24 miles; which
he took and all the castles thereabouts. This town Moses in times past
conquered, as you may read before 1 Macch. 15.

From Iaeser he returned to Jerusalem which was 40 miles.

From thence he went to Ioppa, which was 20 miles; and there he burned their
haven (for Ioppa was a haven town) and those which escaped the fire he killed
with the sword, 2 Mac. 12.

From Ioppa he went to Iamnia, which was accounted 4 miles, where in the night
he fired their haven, burnt their ships, and spoiled their town, insomuch as
the inhabitants of Jerusalem which were 16 miles off might easily see the fire,
2 Macch. 12.

From Iamnia, Judas went with his army against Timotheus chief captain of
Antiochus Eupator, who continued at the city Caspin, which was something more
than a mile, where he overcame him and 5000 Arabians, which were strengthened
with 500 horse, and took the city, 1 Macch. 12.

Afterward Judas Macchab. with his brother Jonathan, led an army to Characa
unto the Jews that were called Tubieni, which was 96 miles, against Timotheus
governor of the Ammonites but he was gone thence and had done nothing, but
left a garriso^ in a strong hold. Wherefore Dositheus and Sosipater (which we^^
captains with Macch.) went forth and slew those that Timothe^ had left in the
fortress more than 10000 men: Timotheus himself also fell into their hands,
but by reason of his fair speeches they suffered him to depart with life, 2
Mac. 12.1 Mac. 5.

From thence he went to Bozor a fair, city which was situated beyond Jordan
near to Bethabara, in the Tribe of Reuben, it was also called Bazra, which was
24 miles: this town he took and burned with fire, Isa. 64. 1 Mac. 5.

From Bozor he went to Mizpa, where Ieptha sometime sacrificed his daughter,
which was 32 miles. In that journey Judas Macchabeus rescued the castle of
Datheman, drove thence Timotheus, and put to the sword 8000 of his army.
After, he went thence to Mizpa, won the town, burnt it with fire, and put to
the sword all the male children, because the inhabitants had vexed the children
of Israel with continual robbery. After that, he won many other towns and
cities thereabouts, 1 Mac. 5.

From Mizpa Judas passed the river, and went to Astaroth-Carnaim, which in the
second of Macchabes is called Carnion, which was eight miles: here he destroyed
the temple of Venus, which the inhabitants call Astaroth, and put 25000 of the
inhabitants to the sword. He went also to Atargation, a town not far off, and
took it, and delivered all the Israelites from the greatest to the least,
which were in captivity amongst the Giliadites, 1 Macch. 5. 2 Macch. 22.

From Astaroth-Carnaim, he went to Ephron, which was 16 miles: this city
Judas Macchabeus destroyed, because the inhabitants thereof denied him passage,
and went through it over the dead bodies, 2 Macch. 5. Here Gideon Judge of
Israel sometime dwelt; it took the name from the rising up of the dust, being
derived of Aphar, that is, he has made a dust.

From Ephron Judas passed over Jordan into the great field of Galile, and so
went to Scythopolis, which in ancient time was called Bethsan, which was four
miles.

From Bethsan or Scythopolis, he returned to Jerusalem, which was 44 miles, a
little before Penticost, in the fourth year of his government, in the year 161
before Christ, 1 Macch. 5. 2 Maccab. 12.

After the feast of Penticost he went from Jerusalem to Maresa, which was 16
miles; here he overcame Gorgias governor of Idumaea, in a great buttell, 2
Mac. 12.

From Maresa he went with his army to Odullam, which was 6 miles. Here
sometime David hid himself.

From Odullam he returned to Jerusalem, which was 8 miles; 2 Mac. 12.

From Jerusalem he brought his army to Hebron the Metropolitan city of the
Idumaeans, which was 22 miles: this Town he won, and all the towns and
castles near adjoining, 1 Macchab. 5.

From thence he went to Samaria, which was fifty six miles, 1 Mac. 5.

From Samaria he led his army against Azotus, which was 44 miles. This was a
city of the Philistines, which he destroyed, broke their Altars, and burnt
their idols in the fire, 1 Mac. 5. After that, he conquered two castles in
Idumaea, 1 Mac. 10.

After that, he returned to Jerusalem, which was accounted 22 miles, 1 Mac. 5.

From Jerusalem he went to meet Timotheus, chief captain of the Syrians, who
came with a great army to invade Iudaea. But when the battle waxed hot there
appeared to the enemies from heaven, five comely men upon horses with bridles
of gold, two of which led the Jews, and took Macchabeus between them, and
covered him on every side with their weapons, that none could hurt him; but
against their enemies they shot Darts and lightnings, so that they were
confounded with blindness, and beaten down: whereby the Jews obtained a
great victory, and put to the sword 20500 foot, and 600 horse; the rest seeing
this great slaughter, fled. So Judas praised the Lord, and pursued the enemies
to Gazara, which was 16 miles. Here Timotheus hid himself in a cave; but the
Jews took the city, found him out, and put him to death, together with his
brother Chaerea and Pollophanes, 2 Mac. 10.

From Gazara Judas Macchabeus returned to Jerusalem, which was 16 miles.

In the year following, which was the fifth of his taigne, and 160 before
Christ, Judas Maccab. besieged the tower of Sion in Jerusalem, because those
that were in the garrison had put to the sword some of the Jews that were
sacrificing in the Temple. But Antiochus Eupator, the son of Antiochus
Epiphanes, hearing of it; at the instigation of Menelaus chief Priest of the
Jews, brought a great army to their rescue, wherefore Judas Macchabeus
hearing of his coming, left the siege, and went from Jerusalem to Modin to
meet him, which was 14 miles: Here he overcame Antiochus, destroyed his
Elephants, and put 4000 of his soldiers to the sword, 2 Macc. 13.

When King Antiochus had felt a taste of the boldness of the Jews, he went
with his army through by-waies, and secret passages to the castle of Bethsura,
which he besieged, whither Judas followed him, which was 12 miles; incamping
himself a mile from Bethsura, in a straight place called Bethzachara. Here
Antiochus betimes in the morning (thinking to take the army of the Jews at an
advantage) set upon them: But the Jews and their leaders behaved themselves so
manfully, that they put Antiochus the second time to flight, and killed 600 of
his men. In this battle Eliazer the brother of Judas Macchabeus was slain by
an Elephant, Ios. lib. Antiq. 12. lib. 16.1. Macc. 6.

From Bethzachara he returned back to Jerusalem, which was 2 miles. And when
the king had taken the town of Bethsura (for they were constrained to yield by
reason of famine) he followed Judas, with whom he joined the third time in
battle; but Judas overcame him, and put to the sword many of his army.
Wherefore having certain intelligence that Philip (whom he had made ouerseer
of the affairs at Antiochia) rebelled, he made a peace with Judas Macchabeus,
was appeased toward the Jews, did sacrifice, adorned the Temple, and showed
great gentleness toward the people. So Antiochus departed out of Iudaea, and
took Menelaus that seditious high Priest along with him captive, 1 Macc. 6. 2
Mac. 13.

After in the 6 year of his government, Judas went with his army through all
the borders of Iudaea, and executed justice upon all such as were offenders and
contemners of the true religion.

After, when Judas had certain intelligence that Nicanor (whom Demetrius King
of Syria had sent against Jerusalem) went about by fraudulent courses, and
under pretense of friendship, to take away his life, 2 Macc. 14. he went
privily from Jerusalem and came to Caphar-Salama, situated 12 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North. Here Nicanor and he joined battle; but Judas
discomfited his army, and put to the sword about five thousand of his men,
himself not escaping without great danger, 1 Mac. 7.

From Caphar-Salama Judas came to Samaria, which was 28 miles: here he rested
himself, and refreshed his army a while, 2 Mac. 15.

In the year before Christ 128, he went from Samaria to Adarsa, which was 28
miles; and there (upon the 13 day of Adar, which answers to the 13 day of
February) near to Bethoron the lower, he gave Nicanor a great overthrow, and
put him with 35000 of his host to the sword, 1 Mac. 7. 2 Mac. 15.

From Adara and Bethoron the lower, he followed the enemies to Gaza, a City
of the Philistines, which was 44 miles, 1 Mac. 9.

From Gaza he returned to Jerusalem, which was 44 miles: there he caused the
arm of Nicanor (whom a little before he had slain at the battle of Adarsa)
to be cut off, and his tongue to be cut out of his head, shred small, and given
to the fowls of the heaven, and his head to be cut from his shoulders; because
therewith he had blasphemed the Lord, and the temple, swearing desolation and
destruction to it and the Jews, 1 Mac. 7. 2 Mac. 15.

A little after, that is to say, almost at the end of the 6 year of his
government, Judas Macchabeus went out with 3000 chosen men in his army, and
pitched his tents near Laisa, 12 miles from Jerusalem toward the West: But
when the Jews perceived the mighty army of Bacchides (for he had 20000 foot,
and 2000 horse in his host) there were many of them discouraged, so that all
left him but 800 men: Yet nevertheless Judas constrained by necessity
withstood Bacchides, and so manfully behaved himself in the battle, that he
overcame him, and put him to flight, 1 Mac. 2.

His enemies being thus put to flight, he pursued them to the mountains of
Azotus and Gazeron, which was 6 miles; where being oppressed with the
multitude, and hemmed in amongst them, was slain. He died in the month Nisan,
which answers to our April, Anno mundi 3810, and before Christ, 158, 1 Mac. 9.

From the Mountains of Azotus and Gazeron his dead body was carried hacke
again to Modin, which was 6 miles, and there buried. So his Travels were 915
miles.

Of the towns and places to which he traveled.
Of Mispa, Iamnia, and Laisa you may read before.

Of Caspin.
THis city stood not far from Iamnia, 16 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northwest. This town though it was strongly fortified, yet Judas Macchabeus
won it, 2 Mac. 12. It is called Caspin, of Keseph, which signifies, silver.
There was another city called Casphor, that is, The silver mountain, this
stood in the land of Giliad near Mispa, which Judas also won, 1 Mac. 4.

Of Asseremoth, otherwise called Gazaron.
GAzaron or Gazera was a city of the Philistines near Ecron, 16 miles from
Jerusalem toward the West. It is so called from the cliffe of a rock; being
derived of Gezer, which signifies a Cliffe. Here Judas Macchabeus was slain, 1
Mac. 6.

Of the Tubiani.
TVbiani are a people that dwelt beyond Jordan, in that part of Arabia Petraea
which is called Nabathea, of Nabaioth the son of Ishmael, near to a
Mountain of the Gileadites, not far distant from Abel of the Vines, where it
is thought Balaams Ass spoke. This land is called Thubin, and the inhabitants
Tubiani; because all that Country brings forth very pleasant and excellent
Wine: being derived of Zob, which signifies, good, and Iaijn, wine. In this
country Judas Macchabeus continued three days with his army.

Of Caphar-Salama.
THis town stood 12 miles from Jerusalem toward the North. In Herod the greats
time it was enlarged and made a very fair city, which he caused to be called
Antipatridis, after the name of his father Antipater; of which you may read
more in the Travels of the Apostle Paul.

Of Adarsa.
THis was a town in the tribe of Ephraim, between Antipatridis and Bethoron
the lower, twelve miles from Jerusalem toward the Northwest. It seems to be
thus called from a noble gift, for it is derived of Adar, which signifies
illustrous, and Schal, a gift.

The Typical signification of Judas Macchabeus.
IVdas Macchabeus is a type and figure of our Lord Jesus Christ; and Antiochus,
of that wicked Antichrist, as the interpretation of their names do evidently
declare: for Judas signifies a Confessor, praising God and glorifying his name
for all his benefits; so Christ the son of God is the praise and glory of his
father, for that in him and by him God the father praised, as is evident in the
song of Simeon. In like manner our Lord Jesus Christ is worthily called
Macchabeus, for Macchabeus is a syrname of the Jews, which is written after
this manner, (...) Machabai, every letter of which signifies a several word,
according to the Song of Moses in the fifteenth chapter of Exodus, where are
these words, Michamocha baelim Jehovah, that is, Who is like unto thee amongst
the gods, O Lord? Thus did the children of Israel sing with Moses, when God led
them out of the land of Egypt through the Red Sea: and this sentence Judas
Macchabeus continually used as an Adage; and the letters at the beginning of
these words being joined together into one word, make the syrname Macchabai.
Therefore as he had always this golden sentence in his mouth, so had he it
likewise in his name, yea, in his ensigns. Wherefore this name likewise is
worthy to be attributed to Christ; for he is that perfect image and glory of
his eternal father, Heb. 1. who is called Michael, that is, Who is like unto
God? and Macchabeus, or Machabai, that is, Who is like unto thee amongst the
gods, o Lord. Therefore he says thus, I am that great God that will deliver you
from al evil: Ecce, Deus fortis foelix, de morte resurgo:
Tartareosque vnguens, Daemona ipse ligo.
Behold, I am the God of might, from death to life that rose:
I bind the Devil to my will, his furies I oppose.
But Antiochus signifies an adversary, or an opposer, or one that fights
against God. The same also does Satan signify in Hebrew. He is therefore a
fit type of that great opposer of God and Man, (Antichrist) who fights
against Christ, that Judas Macchabeus, and true Captain of the Church. For as
the one (viz. Antochus) was an adversary against the Jews the children of God;
so the other, (that is, Antichrist) is an adversary and enemy against Christ
and his Church, etc.

The Travels of Jonathan, the brother of Judas Macchabeus.
Jonathan or Ionathas, and Theodorus, has but one signification, that is, The
gift of God. This man the same year that Judas his brother died, succeeded him
in the principality, and governed the Jews 18 years, 1 Mac. 9. Ios. lib.
antiq. 3. But understand that Bacchides chief captain of Demetrius King of
Syria, went about to take his life by craft, he and his brother Simon went
from Modin, and pitched their tents in the wilderness of Tecoah, near to the
lake of Asphar, which was 20 miles.

From thence they sent their brother John with certain riches to the
Nabathians, which dwelt in Medaba in Arabia (28 miles) desiring them in
friendship to receive their goods into the town, and to keep them for their
use: but the sons of Iambri and the Nabathians issued out of Medaba, and
unawares fell upon John, put him to death, took away all his wealth, and
returned into their city with great joy.

But Jonathan and Simon took this injury very heavily, and much bewailed the
death of their brother: wherefore that they might be revenged of the
inhabitants of Medaba, they went thence twenty eight miles, and hid themselves
among the mountains just in the way that led ftom Medaba to Canaan; for they
had heard that the sons of Iambri and the inhabitants of Medaba were gone
forth with great jollitie to fetch home a Bride, which was a Princes daughter
of the land of Canaan. Now as they were merry upon the way, Jonathan and Simon
his brother, with their army, went out from among the Mountains, and put a
great number of them to the sword, taking away a mighty spoil.

From Medaba they went to the river Jordan, which was three miles, where upon
the East side of the river they pitched their Tents; here he was constrained to
fight a cruel battle with Bacchides upon the Sabbath day; but as he was in
the fight he met Bacchides, and lift up his hand to strike at him; but he
seeing the danger, retired. Nevertheless he put to the sword 1000 of his men,
and after, he and his followers leapt into the river and swam over: so they all
escaped without danger.

In the 56 year of the Graecians government in Syria, which was the fifth year
of the principality of Jonathan, Bacchides returned again with his army into
Iudaea, and besieged Jonathan and Simon in Bethbesan, otherwise called
Bethgalam, some three miles distant from Jordan. Here Jonathan leaving his
brother Simon in the city, stole out by a posterne, and went to all the
villages near adjoining, from whence he gathered an army of chosen men, and
set upon Bacchides: Simon also broke out of the city and set upon him, so that
they greatly oppressed him and burned his Tents, 1 Macchab. 9. Wherefore when
Bacchides understood that Jonathan and Simon had fortified that city, and that
the Jews were ready to defend it, he concluded a peace with Jonathan; the
captives of either part were redeliuered, and the Jews lived in peace a good
while after, 1 Macchab. 9.

From Bethbesan Jonathan went to Michmas, which was six miles: here he dwelt
for a while and judged the people of Israel, cherishing the good and rooting
out the evil from amongst them, 1 Macch. 9.

From Michmas he went to Jerusalem, which was ten miles. Hither Alexander King
of Syria, and son of Antiochus Epiphanes, sent him a purple robe and a golden
crown, and ordained him high Priest of the Jews. Wherefore Jonathan on the
day of the feast of the Tabernacles, which was in the year before Christ 150,
took upon him the office to be high Priest, 1 Macchab. 10. The next year
after, which was the tenth of Ionathans rule (after the death of Demetrius king
of Syria, who was slain in the wars against Alexander) there appeared a
Comet of an extraordinary greatness, which was of such an exceeding
brightness, that it took away the darkness of the night; and the writers of
those times affirm it to equal the Sun in greatness. After this Prodigi,
the Romans began the third Punick war against the Carthaginians, vide
Camerar. lib. 2. de ostent.

Jonathan in the eleventh year of his reign went from Jerusalem to Ptolemais,
which was 76 miles, to the marriage of Alexander King of Syria, and Cleopatra
the daughter of Ptolomeus Philometor King of Egypt, where he was entertained
very honorably, 1 Mac. 10.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, which was 76 miles, 1 Mac. 10.

From Jerusalem he went to Ioppa and won the town, which was 20 miles.

From Ioppa he went to Asdod, which was 12 miles; there he burnt the Temple of
Dagon, and all that were in it.

From thence he went with his army to Ascalon, which was 12 miles; this town
willingly yielded unto him.

From Ascalon he returned to Jerusalem, which was 38 miles, 1 Mac. 10.

In the 15 year of his government he went to Ioppa, which was 20 miles, to
meet Ptolomeus Philometer King of Egypt, and stayed there all that night, 1
Mac. 11.

The next day he went with the King of Egypt to the river of Eleutherius,
which was 200 miles.

From thence he returned back again to Jerusalem, which was 200 miles. Here
he besieged the tower of Acropolis, because there were many wicked men got into
it.

In the sixteenth year of his government he went from Jerusalem to Ptolomais,
to Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria, which was 76 miles.

From Ptolomais he returned back to Jerusalem, which was 76 miles.

From Jerusalem (in the seventeenth year of his government) he went beyond the
river Euphrates, which was accounted 400 miles; and there gathered an army in
aid of Antiochus the younger, the son of Alexander, and went against
Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, which was 400 miles.

From Jerusalem he went with his army to Ascalon, which was 30 miles.

From thence he came to Gaza, which was 18 miles: this town he besieged, and
after a sharp battle won it.

From Gaza he went to Damascus in Syria, which was about 200 miles.

From thence he returned to the lake of Genesereth, which was 104 miles. Here
he opposed the Army of Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria.

From thence (before day) he removed his camp to Chazor, which was 32 miles;
where, when part of his army was put to flight by a stratagem, he tore his
garments, put dust upon his head and prayed earnestly unto the Lord for aid and
assistance: so having recovered his strength and former courage, he returned
with those few that he had left him to the war, where he put the army of King
Demetrius to flight, and slew three thousand of his men with the sword.

His enemies being thus dispersed, he pursued them to their Tents near Cades
in Galile, which was 6 miles.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem with a glorious victory, which was about
some 92 miles. Here he made a league with the Romans and Spartans, 1 Mac. 11.12.

From Jerusalem he went with his army into the country of Hemath, that is,
Syria, to the river Eleutherius, which was 200 miles; here he put his enemies
to flight, after they had burnt and consumed their Tents.

From thence he went to Nabathia in Arabia, which was 120 miles. Here he
conquered the Arabians and Zabadians, and spoiled their land.

From thence he went through all that country, and wasted it, till he came
within eighty miles of Damascus.

From thence he returned home to Jerusalem, which was 160 miles. In the 18 and
last year of his reign he caused the walls of Jerusalem to be built, and began
to fortify many places in Judea, 1 Macch. 12. Also the same year (which was
the 160 year of the government of the Graecians in Syria) the second book of
Macchabees was written as appears, cap. 1.

After, from Jerusalem he went to Bethsan to meet Tryphon, which was 44 miles:
here being deceived by the fair speeches of Tryphon, he discharged his army
all but 3000.

From thence he took these 3000 with him, and went with Tryphon to Ptolomais,
which was 32 miles; into which town he was no sooner entered, but Tryphon
caused the citisens to shut the gates, where all his men were slain.

From Ptolomais, Tryphon brought Jonathan the High Priest to Addus upon the
borders of Iudaea, which was 68 miles: from whence he sent to Simon, the
brothers of Jonathan whom he kept captive in a castle near adjoining;
promising to release his brother if he would send his two sons to be
hostages, and let him have a hundred talents of silver, that is, 60000 crowns.

So Simon sent his two sons, together with the money, to Tryphon; but Tryphon
took them and the money, and led them captive with Ionathon their father, from
Addus to Addor a town in Idumaea, which was 48 miles.

From thence he carried them to Baschaman in the country of the Giliadites,
which was 96 miles, where in the Winter season in the year before Christ, 141,
this cruel and perfideous tyrant put Jonathan and his sons to death.

From Baschamah of the Giliadites Simon removed the bodies of Jonathan and his
sons to Modin, which was 60 miles, where he buried them, 1 Mac. 13. So all
his travels were 3007 miles.

The description of the places mentioned in his Travels.
Of Michmas and Cades you may read before.

Of Medaba.
THis city is situated beyond Jordan in the Tribe of Reuben, 28 miles from
Jerusalem toward the East. It seems to take the name from a hot bath that
stood near it: for there were many Baths and wholesome Springs stood beyond
Jordan, as Ios. lib. ant. 17. c. 9. witnesses. The same things are also
mentioned in Esa. cap. 26. For Medaba is derived of Maijm and Doba, which
signifies warm or boiling water.

Of Bethbesan.
THis town was situated in the Tribe of Benjamin near Gilgall, twelve miles
from Jerusalem toward the Northeast. The castle of this town Jonathan and
Simon fortified and repaired, that it might be a strong place for them to
retire to from the danger of Baccides, 1 Mac. 9. Ios. li. ant. 13. c. 1. says,
that this town was called the bouse of blushing, being derived of Bosch, to
blush, and Bethagla, a round house.

Of Ptolomais.
IN ancient times this town was called Acon, situated upon the shore of the
Mediterrean sea, between Tyrus and Mount Carmel in the tribe of Aser, 76 miles
from Jerusalem toward the North. But the Aserites could not cast out the
Canaanites out of that city, Ptolomeus King of Egypt conquered this town and
rebuilt it, calling it after his own name, Ptolomais, which signifies, to
make war. In times past it was a goodly city, strongly fortified with towers,
bulwarks, ditches, and walls: it was built in a triangular proportion, like to
a shield, two parts whereof was compassed in by the sea, and upon the third
there stood a fruitful plain, wherein were corn grounds, pastures, meadows,
vineyards, and orchards, adorned with diverse kinds of fruits. It had a very
fair and spacious haven for the preserving of ships: it was beautified with
Arcinals, Castles, Temples, and many other buildings very stately and curious;
but at this day it is utterly desolate, and scarce to be perceived where it
stood.

Of Eleutherius.
ELeutherius was a river upon the borders of Phaenicia and Syria, near to the
city Orthosia at the foot of Mount Libanus, 200 miles from Jerusalem toward
the North: of which you may read in the history of Jonathan, 1 Macch. 11.12.
There is also another river of that name, between Tyrus and Sarepta, upon the
borders of Palestina, 108 miles from Jerusalem toward the North.

Of Genezereth.
IT is a sea in Galile, so called from the land of Genesara which lies about
it; here sometime Capernaum stood: it signifies a Princely garden, being
derived of Gen, that is, a garden, and Sar, a Prince: for the country round
about it was very pleasant. You may read more of this in the Travels of our
Savior Christ.

Of the field Chazor.
THis was a plain near to the town Chazor, or Hazor; which is described in
the Travels of Joshua. It stood in the upper Galile; 84 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North.

Of Zabadei.
ZAbadei, were a people inhabiting Arabia Desarta, near to the river
Eleutherius, on the Northeast side of Syria and Damascus, 200 miles from
Jerusalem. Arabia is threefold; the one part thereof is called Deserta, which
extends it self toward the North, to Syria and Damascus; the other is
called Petraea, in which vast wilderness the children of Israel traveled; the
third is called Arabia Foelix, which is toward the South, extending it self
from the East to the gulf of Persia, and upon the West it is shut in with the
gulf of Arabia. But the Zabadei, they inhabited in Arabia Deserta, and were a
people of a liberal and free condition: from whence it seems they are so
called, for Zabab signifies, To endow, or bestow.

Of Addus.
ADdus is called by Josephus, (lib. antiq. 13. cap. 9.) Iadah: it was a town
near Arimathea in mount Ephraim, 16 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northwest:
and is so called from a congregation, being derived of Iaad, that is, He has
assembled with authority; and Edah, a Congregation, or Synagogue.

Of Ador.
THis was a city of the Idumaeans, 48 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Southwest. Ador signifies, a beautiful city, being derived of Adar, that is,
famous and illustious; and Or, that is, light.

Of Baschamah.
BAschamah stands in the land of Gileah beyond Jordan, 52 miles from
Jerusalem toward the Northeast: and is so called from sweet gums, of which
there is great plenty in that place.

The Travels of the high Priest SIMON, the brother of IVDAS MACCHABEVS.
SImon signifies an Auditor, and one that hears: being derived of Schamah, He
has heard. This man did many worthy acts during the life of Judas Macchabeus;
for being sent into Galile (in which country there were many that rebelled) he
supressed the insurrection and pursued the enemies into the city of Ptolomais,
which was 76 miles.

From Ptolomais he brought his army to Arabath, which was 36 miles.

In this place, after he had assembled all the religious Israelites thereabout,
and their wives and children, he brought them thence to Jerusalem, which was 44
miles.

After, he went with his brother Judas to many places, and behaved himself
manfully in all his enterprises, 2 Mac. 8.14. He went also with him to the
battle fought between Azotus and Gazeron, where Judas was slain, which was 20
miles from Jerusalem Westward, 1 Mac. 9.

Simon and Jonathan brought the dead body of their brother Judas to Modin, 6
miles, and there buried him by his father Mattathias, 1 Mac. 9.

Afterward Simon and his brother Jonathan went from Modin to the lake Asphar in
the wilderness of Tecoa, which was twenty miles.

From the desert of Tecoa they went to Medaba, which was 28 miles.

After, they returned thence to the river of Jordan, where upon the East side
of the river they pitched their tents, 12 miles. Here they fought with Bacchides.

After, they went thence to Bethbesan, 3 miles.

From thence they went to Jerusalem, 12 miles, Ios. Ant. li. 18. cap. 1.

From Jerusalem they went to Ioppa, 20 miles, and won the town, Ios. lib.
Ant. 13. ca. 6.

From Ioppa they went to Asdod, 12 miles, and in the way they put the enemy to
flight.

From Asdod they went to Ascalon, which was 12 miles, 1 Mac. cap. 10.

From Ascalon they returned to Jerusalem, which was 30 miles, 1 Mac. 10.

From thence he went to Bethsura, half a mile: this town he won, and placed a
garrison in it, 1 Mac. 11.

Also in the absence of his brother Jonathan, Simon went with his army to
Ascalon, which was 30 miles from Jerusalem, 1 Mac. cap. 12.

From thence he went to Ioppa, which was twenty miles. This town the second
time he took, and placed a Garrison therein, ^ Mac. 12.

From Ioppa he returned again to Jerusalem, which was twenty miles, Ios.
antiq. lib. 13. cap. 8.

From Jerusalem in the last year of his brother Ionathans government he went
to the plain of Sephala, about 14 miles, where he built the Hold of Abida, 1
Mac. 12.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, 14 miles: There, after the captivity of
his brother Jonathan (whom Tryphon by cunning had betrayed, as is before said)
he was chosen by the people of the Jews into the principality.

From thence he went to Addus to meet Tryphon, 16 miles; where he would have
ransomed his brother Jonathan, 1 Machab. cap. 13.

From Addus he went to a city of the Idumaeans called Ador, or Adaram, 48 miles.

From Ador he returned into Iudaea with his army, 40 miles, that he might
oppose the invasion of Tryphon, and his soldiers, lest they should have
destroyed the country and got Jerusalem in his absence.

Tryphon having put to death his brother Jonathan (which was in the year
before Christ 140) Simon entered upon the office of high priest the same year,
and continued in the government eight years. In the first year of his
government he went from Jerusalem to Modin, 14 miles. Here he buried the body
of his brother Jonathan in his fathers sepulcher very honorably, and richly
beautified it.

From Modin he returned to Jerusalem, 14 miles; where he executed his priestly
function diligently, and repaired the holds and decayed towns of Judea,
compassing them about with stone walls, and fortifying them with towers and
bulwarks.

From thence he went to Gaza, 44 miles from Jerusalem South-westward. This town
he took.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, which was four and forty miles. There
he repaired the tower of Acropolis, wherein he dwelt.

From Jerusalem he went to Ioppa and won the town, which was 20 miles.

From Ioppa he returned to Jerusalem, which was twenty miles where for a time
he lived very honorably, and kept a princely port, 1 Mac. 14.

Lastly, he went with his two sons Judas and Mattathias, and his wife, to visit
his father in law Ptolomeus the son of Abodus, to the castle of Doch, which was
near to Jericho, some ten miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast. Here he
was slain by his father in law at a banquet, in the year before Christ 132, in
the 11 month, which answers to our February, 1 Mac. 16.

So all his travels were 799 miles.

The description of the places mentioned in his Travels.
Of Arabath.
ARrabath or Araba was a city near to the lake or river Merom, not far from
Dothan, 44 miles from Jerusalem toward the North. It seems to take the name
from Locusts, whereof there are many kinds, 1 Mac. 5. for there are Locusts that
live upon herbs and flours; others that fly in great swarms in the air; and
some also that live in the waters, not much unlike Crabs or Crayfishes, their
tails only excepted. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 12. reckons up another kind of
Locusts, whereof John Baptist did feed, and it was lawful for the Jews to eat
of them: he describes them to have four feet and wings, so that they can
either fly or leap upon the earth. They can be resembled to nothing more fitly
than to grasshoppers. These the Hebrews call Rabae, Levit. 11. Mat. 3. because
of the abundance of them; being derived of the verb Rabah, He has multiplied
or increased; because these kinds of Locusts come in mighty great swarms and
multitudes into the East part of the world. Of these kinds of Locusts Arabath
took the name, but they are not known to us: nevertheless such there are, and
as it appears in Levit. cap. 11. were permitted to be eaten among the Jews.
From whence may be concluded, that John Baptist lived upon these kind of
Locusts, and not upon Crabs or Cray-fishes, or any such kind of Locusts, Mat.
3.

Of Sephela.
SEphela is a plain compassed about with mountains, near the river Sorecke.
It lies 14 miles from Jerusalem Westward. Here Simon built the castle Adida,
and fortified it very strongly. Afterward there was a city built near to this
tower, called Eleutheropolis. It was a free city in the tribe of Judah, half
way between Jerusalem and Ascalon; of which Jerome speaks, li. de Locis Hebr.

Of Doch.
THis was a strong tower, the ruins whereof may be seen to this day. It was
situated near Jericho in the field of Hiericuntis, ten miles from Jerusalem
Northeastward; where Ptolomeus the son of Abodus perfidiously put to death his
son in law Simon high Priest of the Jews. From this tower you might have seen
all the country of the Giliadites, the two tribes of Gad and Reuben, and the
half tribe of Manasses, with the mountains of the Moabites, Nebo, Pisga, and
Abarim. vid. 1 Mac. ca. vlt.

The Travels of John Hyrcanus.
John Hyrcanus was made Captain over all the men of War by his father Simon;
and went from Jerusalem to Gaza, 44 miles, where he dwelt, 1 Mac. 13.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, 44 miles, in the 5 year of his fathers
government, to let him understand how Cendebius had invaded the holy land, 1
Mac. 16.

From Jerusalem, he and his brother Judas went with their army to Modin, 14
miles, where they stayed all night.

The next morning before day they gave battle to Cendebius, not far from
Modin, overcame him and put him to flight. So he pursued the chase till he came
to the fortress of Cedron, which stood in the field of Azotus, even 8 miles.

From the field of Azotus he and his brother Judas returned to Jerusalem, being
22 miles. 1 Mac. 16.

From Jerusalem he returned to Gaza, which is 44 miles. Now when Sorius
Ptolomeus the son of Abodus (who a little before had treacherously slain his
son in law Simon at a banquet) heard of John's coming into the town, he sent
forth certain traitors and homicides to put him to death also: but Hyrcanus
having certain intelligence of the matter, prevented the mischief, and put
these traitors to the sword, 1 Mac. 16.

So all his travels were 176 miles.

Concerning the towns and places mentioned in these travels, you may read
before.

Of the Kings of Syria that succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes, and made war upon
the MACHABEES. And first of the Travels of Antiochus Eupator.
THis Antiochus the younger succeeded his father Antiochus Epiphanes, in the 149
year of the Grecians government in Syria, which was the 161 year before Christ,
and he continued King of Asia and Syria 3 years. Lysias the Kings Substitute
for Syria, called this man by the name of Eupator, that is, a good Father;
because Kings ought to be Fathers of their countries.

This Antiochus Eupator in the second year of his reign came with a great army
from Antiochia to the town of Modin, which was 380 miles.

From Modin he went to the Hold at Bethsura: this he sharply besieged; being 12
miles.

From Bethsura he went to Bethsachara (almost a mile) to meet wrth Judas
Machabeus, who put him to flight, and killed 600 of his men, 1 Mac. 6.

From Bethsachara he returned to the Hold of Bethsura, and won it, which was
almost a mile.

From Bethsura he came to Jerusalem, which was half a mile.

From Jerusalem he went with his Army to Ptolomais, being 76 miles.

From Ptolomais he returned to Antiochia, 204 miles and a half.

Concerning the towns and places mentioned in his Travels you may read before.

The Travels of Demetrius Soter the brother of Antiochus Epiphanes.
IN An. mundi 3809. before Christ 159. Demetrius Soter the son of Seleucus
Philopater, who was sent to Rome, brought a Navy from thence through the
Mediterranian sea, and came to Tripolis in Syria, which journey was 2680 miles,
and usurped upon the government of Syria against young Antiochus the son of
Epiphanes, 1 Mac. 7.

From Tripolis he went to Antiochia, where the King kept his court, 88 miles.
Here he caused young Antiochus and Lysias to be slain, and after reigned in
Syria 10 years. At length he was slain in a great battle, by Alexander the son
of Epiphanes, 1 Mac. 7.

So all his travels were 1760 miles.

Of Tripolis.
THis city was situated in Phoenicia a province of Syria, on the shore of the
Mediterranian sea, 170 miles from Jerusalem toward the North; and was so
called because there dwelt in it three sorts of people, viz. Tyrians,
Sydonians, and Arabians, It is a very famous City even to this day, the Ocean
sea coming into every street and principal place of it, and full as populous
as Tyrus. For there inhabit Grecians, Latins, Armenians, Maronites,
Nestorians, and people of many other nations of diverse conditions and customs
in manner of living. It abounds also with great abundance of costly
Tapestrie, which is made so curiously, and with such cost, that it is very
delightful to such as look upon it. It is credibly reported, That there are
found within the city of Tripolis 4000 men, that do little else but weaue and
make Tapestry, and such like costly hangings. The country round about where it
stands is very pleasant, and because of the great abundance of Vines,
Olives, Figgs, and other fruits and flowers (which yield a comfortable smell,
and is profitable for the maintenance of life) it is called Paradise. There is
a field before the City, some two miles in length, and one in breadth, in which
there are to be seen very curious gardens, and artificially contrived.

About six miles from the city stands mount Libanus, at the foot whereof
rises a goodly fountain, which with great violence runs thence, but
suddenly falling into the valleys, it ioyns with other waters, and becomes a
fair and pleasant river, watering all the gardens of the plain between
Tripolis and Libanus, but especially the mountains of the Leopards, which is
not far off. In the Canticles, cap. 4. there is mention of this hill; Come with
me, my Spouse, from the dens of the Lions, and the mountains of the
Leopards. The water of this Spring is very clear, pleasant, cold and
healthful; upon the banks of it there stand many churches and religious
houses. It is called the Fountain of the gardens, and is divided into three
rivers or principal streams, besides many other small brooks which run thence
and fall into the sea; so that the sentence Est. 9. is verified of this, A
small fountain shall increase to a great River, and shall be poured out
against many waters.

The Travels of King Alexander son of Epiphanes, and brother to Antiochus
Eupator.
OF this Alexander, Justin writes, lib. 35. where he shows, That he was not
son to Antiochus Epiphanes, as was supposed, but had to name Prompalus, being a
man of the meaner sort of people: but the Antiochians for the great tyranny of
Demetrius, falling into rebellion, gave unto him the name of Alexander, and
withal caused it to be published abroad, that he was the son of Epiphanes,
which by reason of his youth was easily believed. And at this time Demetrius
because of his cruelty, being much hated of all sorts of people; it came to
pass that most, and those of the greatest also, combined with this young man,
supposing him indeed to be of noble descent, and the son of a King. Wherefore
Alexander or Prompatus being thus encouraged, took upon him to be the brother
of Antiochus Eupator, and called himself the lawful heir and successor to the
crown of Syria: going from thence to Ptolomais, where he kept a royal court;
and in the year of the world 3818, before Christ 150, by the help of the
Antiochians and other the inhabitants of Syria, he took upon him the
government of that country, and reigned five years. This man suffered many
varieties and changes of fortune: at first was put to flight by Demetrius;
after he put Demetrius to flight, and at length put him to death and usurped
upon his government. In the third year of his reign he married Cleopatra the
daughter of Ptolomeus Philometor King of Egypt, by whom he had his son
Antiochus. To this marriage Jonathan was invited.

In the last year of his government he went from Ptolomais to Antiochia,
which was 200 miles, where he opposed himself against Demetrius Nicanor the
son of Demetrius Soter, 1 Machab. cap. 10.

From Antiochia he went to Cilicia, which was 120 miles, to suppress the
rebellion of his subjects: but when he heard that Ptolomeus Philometor his
father in law had taken up arms against him, conquered Syria, and given his
wife to Demetrius Nicanor, which had been married unto him two years before,
he gathered all his forces he could, and with all expedition made good the
war against Ptolomeus: but he was overcome, and fled into that part of Arabia
which bordereth upon the mountain Amanus for refuge; where Zabdiel the
governor of that country, fearing lest he should fall into the displeasure of
Ptolomeus, caused his servants to cut off his head, and sent it to him into
Syria. Within three days after which sight he died, being mortally wounded in
the former battle, Ios. li. Ant. 13. c. 17.

So all his travels were 320 miles.

Of Amanus.
AManus was a mountain between Syria and Cilicia, which extends it self to
the river Euphrates. Between this Amanus and Euphrates, Arabia deserta is
situated, 400 miles from Jerusalem Northward, and signifies The mountain of
truth; from Aman, True and faithful.

The Travels of Demetrius Nicanor, the son of Demetrius Soter.
IN the 165 year of the government of the Grecians in Syria, which was 141
years before Christ, Demetrius, syrnamed Nicanor, which signifies Victorre,
sailed out of Creet into Cilicia, which was 600 miles, Ios. Ant. 13. c. 6. 1
Mac. 10.

Out of Cilicia he came into Syria the lower, 160 miles, where joining with
Apolonius he took upon him the crown and Kingdom of Syria. Afterward
Apolonius went into Iudaea with a great army, and besieged Iamnia. Ptolomeus
Philometor also assisted the proceedings of Demetrius, seeing Alexander his son
in law beginning to decline; and the better to strengthen their alliance,
matched him to Cleopatra his daughter, which before had bin wife to Alexander;
by which policy he added to the kingdom of Egypt all Asia, over which he ruled
2 years, 1 Mac. 11.

After, Demetrius Nicanor came out of Siria the lower, with Ptolomeus
Philometor, to Antiochia, which was 80 miles, 1 Mac. 11.

From Antiochia they went with their army to a plain near the mountain Amanus,
120 miles; where in a sharp war they overcame Alexander and put him out of his
kingdom, Ios. Ant. li. 3. c. 7.

Now after the death of Ptolomeus Philometor, Demetrius Nicanor Nicanor
returned to Antiochia, 120 miles, where he governed the kingdom of Syria two
years.

From Antiochia he went to Ptolomais, which was 200 miles; to which place
Jonathan the high priest came to meet him, where he gave to him many presents
and great gifts to win his favor, 1 Mac. 11.

From Ptolomais he returned to Antiochia, 200 miles. There his soldiers and the
city of Antiochia rebelled against him. For which cause Jonathan the
high priest sent him 3000 men, which delivered the King out of danger, put to
the sword 100000 of the seditious, and burnt the city of Antiochia, 1 Mac. 11.
But after Demetrius showed himself unthankful, he was driven out of his
kingdom by Tryphon and young Antiochus the son of King Alexander, who was
also called Theos, which signifies God.

In the 172 year of the reign of the Grecians in Syria, which was 138 before
Christ, Nicanor having slain Antiochus the son of Alexander, he would have
reigned alone in Syria: wherefore Demetrius, who was the lawful King of Syria,
being 3 years before driven thence, went 1200 miles into Media to crave aid
against Tryphon: but Arsaces king of the Medes, Parthians, and Persians, sent
the chief captain of his host against Demetrius, who burned his tents, took
him prisoner, and carried him back to his master, to Hecatompylon the chief
city of his kingdom, distant from Syria 1220 miles toward the East, Justin.
lib. 36. 38.

From Hecatompylon Arsaces sent him to Hyrcania the Metropolitan city of that
country, which was 176 miles; where although Arsaces kept him as a prisoner,
yet he allowed him royal attendance, and after married him to his daughter,
Just. lib. 38.

After the death of Arsaces, with singular industry and policy he got out of
captivity, after he had been 12 years prisoner in Hyrcania, and came into
Syria, which was 14 miles, where he recovered his kingdom, and reigned four
years. So all his Travels were 4156 miles.

Of the Places to which he traveled.
Of Creta, now called Candia.
THis is an Island of the Mediterranian sea, distant from Jerusalem 600 miles
Westward, very fruitful and pleasant, in which there grows great plenty of
Cypress trees, and grapes of diverse kinds, but principally such whereof
Malmsey and Sack are made. Here Tytus, Paul's Disciple, was Bishop; wherefore
you shall read more of it after.

Of Seleucia.
SEleucia is a famous city of Syria, situated upon the shore of the
Mediterranian sea, 280 miles from Jerusalem Northward, near to which the river
Orantes runs, and the mountain Casius stands, which is 4 miles high,
Plin. l. 5. c. 22. You may read more of this in the travels of S. Paul.

Of Syria.
SYria was sometimes called of the Hebrews Aram, of Aram the son of Sem, of
whom all Armenia took the name. Aram signifies, A man of great spirit and
dignity, being derived of Rom, that is, lifted up; for he was a man of an
excellent spirit, Genesis cap. 10. Syria signifies a great tract of land, and is
divided into two parts, the upper and the lower. In the upper Syria are these
cities, Antiochia, Seleucia, Laodicea, and Apamea: in the lower Syria are
Sydon, Tyrus, Berytus, Tripolis, and Orthosia. This Country is situated in a
very temperat Zone; from whence it happens that it is neither oppressed with
too much cold nor heat. There are that divide Syria into four parts, that is,
into Syria, Assyria, Leucosyria, and Coelosyria. Also Pliny, Lib. 5. Cap. 12.
attributes Mesopotamia and Babylonia to Syria. But it is evident that these
were distinct Countries from them, in the which there reigned Emperors and
Kings which had large and spacious Dominions. For Syria is situated between
the Mediterranian sea and Euphrates; but Mesopotamia (which is so called
because it is situated in the middle of waters) is separated from Syria and
Assyria, with the rivers Euphrates and Tygris: and Arabia is separated from
Syria and Babylon with many vast wildernesses. Therefore these countries cannot
properly pass under the denomination of Syria.

Of Parthia.
PArthia is a spacious country full of mountains and deserts, lying upon the
borders of Media Westward; the Metropolis whereof is Hecatompylon, taking the
name of 100 gates wherewith it is fortified. It lies (as Stephanus says) 1512
miles from Jerusalem Eastward. Here Arsaces that mighty King of the Parthians
kept his court, who had under his government Media, Parthia, Persia, Hircania,
and the greatest part of all the countries toward the East. It is called
Parthia because of the fruitfulness of the soil, being derived of Parah, To
fructify.

Of Hyrcania.
HYrcania is a fruitful and pleasant country bordering upon Media and the
Caspian sea, for the most part plain and champian, beautified with many fair
Cities, the chief of which are, Hyrcania (the Metropolis of the whole
kingdom) Talebrota, Samariana, Carta, and Tape. It was so fat and fruitful,
that the inhabitants use not to till and dress the ground, as they do in
other places, but the seed that falls from the husk upon the earth,
springs up and brings forth great plenty and increase, without further
labor. The Dewes also falling upon the trees, there droppeth from them oil
and honey in great plenty. It takes the name (as it is thought) from a Wood
called Hyrcania. In like manner the Caspian sea which bordereth upon it, of
this country is called Hyrcanum. Many cruel beasts are found therein, as the
Panther, the Tiger, and the Leopard. The Panther is of a whitish color
inclining something to yellow, spotted all over with round shining spots; in
like manner are their eyes. She is a friend almost to all kind of creatures,
except the Aspe and Dragon, and (as Oppianus says) never taken but when she
is drunk, or in her sleep. She is the female to the Leopard. The Leopard is
of the same color, and of the nature of a Wolf, being full, he hurts
nothing; but if empty he preyeth upon every thing, yea, even upon men: his
breath is very sweet, with which many other creatures being delighted, he often
preyes upon them; but being full, he sleeps sometimes three days together.
The Tiger also is a very swift and cruel creature, from whence he is so
called; his skin is yellow and full of black spots round and shining. If she
chance to lose her young, she never leaves seeking till she finds them out.

The Travels of Tryphon, that put Antiochus to death.
IN An. mundi 3826. before Christ 142. Tryphon, sometime chief Captain to
Alexander King of Syria, who was slain in Arabia, went to Emalcuel Prince of
Arabia deserta, with whom Antiochus the son of Alexander was brought up; where
he so wrought with him, that he got the boy from him, and brought him thence
into Syria, 160 miles; and within a while after besieged Antiochia, took the
town, drove thence Demetrius Nicanor, and crowned young Antiochus King of
Assyria. This journey to and again was 320 miles, 1 Mac. 11.

In the second year of the reign of young Antiochus, Tryphon went from
Antiochia to Bethsan, where he perfidiously betrayed Jonathan the brother of
Judas Machabeus, 1 Mac. 12. being thirty six miles.

From Bethsan he went to Ptolomais, 32 miles.

From Ptolomais he went to Addus a town upon the borders of Judea, 68 miles, 1
Mac. 13.

To Addus Simon sent his brothers Children and his ransom, which was 60
talents of silver: but after he had received the money, he broke his word, and
went thence with Jonathan and his sons to Ador, 48 miles.

From Ador he went to Bascharnan in the land of Gilead, 96 miles. Here he put
to death Jonathan and his sons.

From the country of the Gileadites he returned to Antiochia which was 240
miles: here he put to death young Antiochus, being but a boy of 7 years of age,
and usurped upon the government in his place. He began to reign in the 172
year of the Grecians government in Syria, and reigned 3 years, 1 Mac. 14.
Ios. li. Ant. 13.

About the end of the three years, which was in the 174 year of the Grecians
government in Syria, Antiochus Sedetes (brother of Demetrius Nicanor) made war
upon Tryphon, and compelled him to fly from Antiochia to Dora, 240 miles from
Antiochia toward the South, 1 Mac. 15.

But Antiochus Sedetes followed him thither, and so straightly besieged Dora,
that he was constrained to steal thence in a ship, and sail to Orthosia,
which was 160 miles.

Lastly, in the way as he was going thence to Apamea, which was 120 miles, he
was taken and put to death.

So all his travels were 1360 miles.

Of the places mentioned in his travels, which have been formerly recited.
Of Dora.
DOra was a haven town situated upon the shore of the Mediterranean sea, 48
miles from Jerusalem Northward, in the mid way between Carmel and Caesarea
Strato. In Joseph. cap. 17. it is called Dor, that is, a durans.

Of Orthosia.
THis was a city of Assiria, situated upon the shore of the Mediterranian sea,
near to the place where the river Eleutherius falls into it, 200 miles from
Jerusalem Northward; being so called of Diana, whom the Grecians called
Orthosia, that is, Exalted or lifted up. Hither Tryphon sailed when he fled
from Antiochus Sedetes, 1 Mac. 15. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 20.

Concerning the travels of Apolonius, Nicanor, Bacchides, and Cendebius;
because they are sufficiently described in the travels of the Machabees, I
thought it unfit to speak further of them.

The Travels of Heliodorus.
HEliodorus signifies the House of the Sun. He was Scretarie and chief
Governor of Antiochia in Syria, for that mighty King Seleucus Philopater, who
was brother to that cruel Tyrant Antiochus Epiphanes, and was sent by his Lord
and master Seleucus from Antiochia to Jerusalem, which is 80 miles, to spoil
the Temple of the Lord: but the Lord sent an Angel richly beautified with armor
of gold, sitting upon a horse; who went to Heliodorus, and with his horse trod
him under his feet: and there appeared two other Angels full of majesty and
power, that struck Heliodorus and beat him with whips, so that he lay upon the
floor of the Temple as a man half dead, and could not go forth until he was
carried out, 2 Mac. 3.

From Jerusalem he went with that good man Onias chief priest of the Jews (at
whose earnest prayers and supplications he was made whole) to Antiochia, 280
miles; where he told Seleucus Philopater of the wonderful works of the Lord.

So all his travels were 580 miles.

The Travels of the Highpriests of the Jews that ruled before the Machabees,
as they are severally mentioned in the Books of Machabees. And first of the
travels of Onias the High Priest.
ONias signifies the riches of God; from On, Opulency, and Iah, God: for
although he was afflicted with poverty in this world, yet he was rich in God.
He succeeded his Father Simon the Just, an. M. 3757. before Christ 211.
Antiochus the great being King of Syria. He was high priest 39 years until the
death of Seleucus Philopater: at the end of which time, one Simon, the chief
of those that kept the temple, being ambitious of rule, fell to words with
Onias, and from words to blows; so that there were many outrages committed by
the friends of Simon. Wherefore Onias to give place to the fury of his
adversaries, went from Jerusalem to Antiochia, which was 280 miles. But
Seleucus Philopater being dead, and Antiochus Epiphanes in the government, who
was a covetous and cruel prince; good Onias, partly for fear of him, and
partly of his brother Jason (who had but a little before purchased the office
of high priest for 360 talents of silver, and promised to pay a yearly tribute
of 80 talents) durst not return home to Jerusalem, but went to a sanctuary that
stood in the wood of Daphne, which was about one mile from Antiochia, in hope
of safety: to which place one Andronichus chief Captain to Antiochus, came to
him, and with fair speeches and flattering words allured him out of the
Sanctuary, and traitorously put him to death. So his travels were 281 miles.

The Travels of the High Priest Jason.
Jason and Jesus have both one signification: he entered upon the office of High
priest in the first year of Antiochus Epiphanes, which was 173 years before
Christ. He went from Jerusalem to Antiochia, which was 280 miles, where after
the death of Onias he paid to Antiochus for the office of high priest almost 3
tons of gold, with promise to pay a yearly tribute of 48000 crowns.

From Antiochia he returned to Jerusalem, 280 miles; where he began to build
the tower of Acropolis in mount Acra: and that he might please that wicked
King, and keep his favor, he built certain Theaters in Jerusalem, and caused
Interludes and Plays to be acted in them, at such times and upon such days as
the people were wont to meet in the Temple to serve God. Also K. Antiochus
Epiphanes in the 4 year of his priesthood coming to Jerusalem, he gave him
royal entertainment.

The same year Jason was put out of his office of high priest by the policy
and cunning of his brother Menelaus, and was constrained to fly into the land
of the Ammonites beyond Jordan, being 40 miles.

Two years after, when Antiochus Epiphanes invaded Egypt, there was a vain
rumor that he was slain; wherefore Jason with a thousand soldiers returned to
Jerusalem, which was 40 miles, and broke suddenly into the city, so that
Menelaus was constrained for safety of his life to fly to the garrison of the
Syrians that were in Jerusalem.

But Antiochus hearing what had happened, came out of Egypt with a great army to
Jerusalem; wherefore he fled thence back again to the Ammonites, 40 miles; but
they fearing that Antiochus would come thither with his army, he was accused
before Areta King of Arabia, and constrained to fly from one city to another
for safety.

Wherefore when he perceived that he could not live there secure, he went
thence into Egypt, 280 miles.

From thence he went to the Lacedaemonians, 600 miles, where he died in exile,
being cast out unlamented or buried.

So all his travels were 1560 miles.

Of Lacedemonia, the metropolitan city of Peloponesus.
LAcedemonia or Sparta was a famous city of Peloponnesus, distant from
Jerusalem 600 miles toward the West; which although it had no walls, yet was it
one of the fairest and most populous cities in all Grecia; and was called
Sparta of Spartus, who was sometime King thereof, and rebuilt it, adorning it
with fair and goodly buildings. At first it was built by one Lacedaemon, who
was king thereof, and of him called Lacedemonia: and after, Menelaus that
mighty King of the Grecians (who had to wife Helena the fairest woman of all
Grecia) kept his court there. Here also Lycurgus that famous Philosopher
reigned as King, and prescribed to the citisens and inhabitants excellent
laws, by the observance whereof they became famous in after-ages, and
performed many noble wars and exploits against their enemies. Jonathan and
Simon held a friendly league with the Lacedaemonians.

The Travels of the High Priest Menelaus.
THis Menelaus, called also Onias, was (as Josephus says) the third son of
Simon the Just, and brother to Jason, although, 2 Mac. 3, 4. he is said to be
the brother of one Simon of the tribe of Benjamin, who was chief of those that
kept the Temple, of whom you may read before. This man in the fourth year of
Antiochus Epiphanes was sent by Jason his brother to Antiochia, being 280
miles, upon certain business, but principally to carry the king money. Where he
made a secret Contract with him, to pay him 30 talents That is, 180000 Crowns.
beside all that his brother Jason had paid him, if he would institute him to
be High Priest. The King in hope of profit gave ear to his motion, and under
pretense of injury and wrong offered by Jason, constrained him to leave his
office, and fly from Jerusalem into the land of the Ammonites for his safety,
and so instituted Menelaus to be chief Priest of the Jews; who entered upon
his government in the year before Christ 169.

Wherefore Menelaus returned from Antiochia to Jerusalem, 280 miles; where he
began to govern not as chief Priest, but as a cruel and wicked tyrant, 2 Mac.
4.

But when in the beginning of his government he could not pay that great sum
of money which he had promised, the king sent for him to Antiochia, being 280
miles, where for that time he was removed from his office, and his brother
Lysimacus ordained chief Priest in his room.

Wherefore Menelaus being sore troubled, vexed, and grieved in mind for that
which had happened in the first year of his priesthood, returned back from
Antiochia to Jerusalem, being 280 miles.

But a little after, when Antiochus Epiphanes brought an Army into Cilicia, to
suppress the rebellion of the Tharsians and Mallotans, Menelaus taking
advantage of the Kings absence, went to Andronichus (who was chief Agent for
the King in Syria) to Antiochia, 280 miles, and there gave him certain golden
vessels and jewels that he had stolen out of the temple, to hire him to be his
friend, and help him to his office of high priesthood again. But Onias the
elder hearing of this sacrilege, greatly reprehended Menelaus for this
shameful fact; but he taking it in ill part, combined with Andronichus, who by
fair speeches alluring him out of the sanctuary in the wood Daphne, put him to
death, after he had bin 5 years in exile. But King Antiochus returning from
Antiochia, accused Andronichus, of treason, and by the means of a certain
Courtier received Menelaus into favor.

From Antiochia Menelaus returned to Jerusalem, 280 miles; where by the help of
his brother Lysimachus he stole a great mass of money out of the Temple. Which
sacrilege being known to the people, they fell to uproar and killed Lysimachus
close by the Treasury. They accused Menelaus also before Antiochus, 2 Mac.
cap. 4.

Antiochus in the second year of his priesthood went to Tyrus which is 100
miles, where he so corrupted certain courtiers with money, that he procured the
favor of Antiochus, and caused his Accusers (good and just men) to be banished
thence, as slanderers, and such as went about to defame Menelaus.

From Tyrus he returned back again to Jerusalem, 100 miles, where he fell into
his old cruelty, and in the third year of his government received Antiochus
Epiphanes with his army into the city of Jerusalem, who cruelly murdered the
citisens, and spoiled the Temple, 2 Mac. 5.

After the death of Antiochus, who as it is said perished of a grievous
disease, and was buried at Babylon; his son Antiochus Eupator came with a
great Army into Iudaea in hostile manner. Wherefore Menelaus in the last year
of his Priesthood went out to meet him. But Lysias accused him unto the King,
as one that was the only author of all the evils that had happened to the
Jews. Wherefore Antiochus willed Lysias to take him prisoner; who brought him
to Berea a town in Syria, distant from Jerusalem 360 miles Northward; where
upon the top of a Tower fifty cublts high, he was tied to a wheel and had all
his joints broken, and through the extremity of the pain died, 2 Mac. 3.

So all his travels were 2240 miles.

The Travels of Alcimus, High Priest of the posterity of Aaron.
THis Alcimus after the death of Menelaus, which was the year before Christ
150, went with certain impious and wicked men to Demetrius Soter, who lived in
Antiochia in Syria, being 280 miles, and there accused Judas Machabeus and all
the godly Jews; using such flattery toward the King, that he obtained the
principality and office of High Priest, which he held three years, 1 Mac. 7.

From Antiochia he and Bacchides returned back to Jerusalem, where he was
instituted in the office of high priesthood, which is 280 miles.

But when he saw that he was not able to withstand the power and singular
virtue of Judas Machabeus, he returned back to Antiochia, 280 miles; where
after he had accused the good men among the Jews, he obtained aid of
Demetrius, who sent Nicanor with a great army into Iudaea against Judas, to
establish Alcimus in the priesthood.

So Alcimus and Nicanor returned into Iudaea, 280 miles.

But Alcimus seeing familiar conference to pass between Nicanor and Judas
Machabeus, he went back again to Antiochia, 280 miles, where he told
Demetrius of the perfidious dealing of Nicanor. Wherefore Demetrius being very
angry at what had happened, wrote a sharp letter to Nicanor, giving him to
understand, That it was much against his mind that he should make a league
with Judas: and further willed him (the said league notwithstanding) to bring
him bound to Antiochia. Upon receipt of which letter he made war upon Judas; in
which expedition Nicanor was taken and had his head cut off. All this happened in
the first year of the priesthood of Alcimus.

But when Demetrius heard of this overthrow, he sent Bacchides and Alcimus with
a great army, who went to Antiochia, and came to Masloth in the country of
Arbela, 192 miles, where they made incursions upon the tribe of Nepthaly, and
slew a great multitude of the Israelites, 1 Mac. 9.

From Masloth they went with their army to Gilgal, 76 miles. This happened in the
second year of the priesthood of Alcimus.

From Gilgal they came to Jerusalem, 12 miles, 1 Macchab. cap. 9.

From thence they brought their army to Berea, 12 miles: here they were
overcome and put to flight by Judas Machabeus, 1 Mac. cap. 9.

From Berea they fled amongst the mountains which are between Azotus and
Gazeron, six miles. Here Judas Machabeus was slain.

Wherefore Alcimus returned thence back again to Jerusalem 20 miles, and
caused the walls of the inner house of the Temple, and the monuments of the
Priests to be taken down and destroyed: but before his command was fully
executed, the Lord struck him with a dead palsy, of which he lay a time
dumb, but within a while after he died of that disease, in the second year of
his priesthood, an. mundi 3811, and before Christ 157. Alcimus being dead,
Bacchides returned back to Demetrius in Syria, 1 Mac. 9. For seven years after
there was no high Priest in Jerusalem, till Jonathan the brother of Judas
Machabeus took upon him that office, 1 Mac. 10.

So all his travels were 1717 miles.

Of the places to which he traveled.
Of Arbela.
THis was a city in the upper Galile, belonging to the tribe of Nepthali, 96
miles from Jerusalem Northward. Of which town all the country is called
Arbela, being derived of Arab, To lie hid.

Of Masloth.
THis also is a town of Nepthaly, 92 miles from Jerusalem Northward: and is
derived of Maschal, which signifies, He has governed.

Of Berea.
TO this city Iotham sometime fled from the fury of his brother Abimilech Judge
of Israel, Judge. 9. It is situated twelve miles from Jerusalem Westward, and
signifies a clear Well.

Thus by Gods providence have I described the Trauells and Iournies of the holy
Patriarchs, Kings, and Prophets, etc. as they are severally mentioned in the
old Testament; that so, gentle Reader, thou might understand what difficult
and tedious journies, and in them what great labor and vexation they were
constrained to bear in this world, till God of his mercy took them out of
this vale of misery, and placed them in everlasting happiness, where now
without doubt they remain in peace.

FINIS.
The quantities of the Moneys both Silver and Gold, as they are severally
mentioned in the Scriptures, reduced to our Weights and English valuations,
EVer since the time that Moneys have been allowed as current in exchange
betwixt man and man (which for that purpose as Aristotle says was first
ordained) it has passed according to the valuation of a certain weight, which
for the most part is universal, according to the worth and estimation thereof
in the several countries where it is to be sold and exchanged; or else by
Coin, which is current according to the valuation that is imposed upon it by
the consent of a State, or command of a Prince. In both which there have bin
used sundry distinctions of greater and less valuations of weights and coin,
according to the necessity and estimation thereof in several Kingdoms and
governments. As amongst the Jews they used weights and no coin, and these
distinguished in several sorts, and as is thought separated with sundry marks,
that they might be known each from other. The weights that they used were
commonly three, viz. the Centiner or talent, the Mina, and the Sicle; according
to the opinion of Josephus, Budaeus, Hostius, and many others.

Of a Sicle.
A Sicle was a kind of weight current among the Jews, containing precisely
half an ounce of silver or gold, which that it might be distinguished, had a
particular effigies or superscription; viz. upon one side was to be seen the
measure wherein they kept Manna in the Sanctuary, with this superscription,
The Sicle of Israel: and on the other the rod of Aaron flourishing, with this
inscription, Holy Jerusalem, which is ordinarily worth in English money 2 s. 6
d. and in gold 15 s. and more or less according to the pureness or baseness
of either.

A sicle was divided into these parts Into a Dram, i. 7 d. ob. whereof 4
make a sicle, Genesis 13.15. Exodus 21.32, etc. Half sicles, mentioned Exodus
30.13.15. ca. 38.26. which was the yearly tax imposed upon every man toward
the building of the Tabernacle, i. 15 d. English. Quadrans Sicli, or the fourth
part of a Sicle, which was also in use among the Jews, 1 Samuel 8.9. which
amounts to a Roman penny, and in our money to 7 d. ob. and by the Grecians were
called Dram. Gherahs, Exodus 30.13. which was the 20 part of a sicle, and was
worth 1 d. ob.


Of Sicles there were three sorts A common sicle, which weighed a quarter of an
ounce, and was worth 15 d. The Kings sicle, which weighed 3. Drams, that is
in our money 22 d. ob. The sicle of the Temple, which weighed directly half an
ounce, and was worth 2 s. 6 d.


Of a Mina.
Ios. li. ant. ca. 12
A Mina was a pound weight among the Jews, and were of two sorts, one of gold,
which weighed 100 Drams, another of silver, weighing 240 Drams. These
were called the ancient weights, but there was a later, which is said to
contain 100 Denaria's or Attick Drams, Tract. de Aug. cap. 8.
which seem to be so called because of the traffic the Jews had with the
Grecians, among whom it was worth 100 Attick Drams, i. 3 li. 2 s. 6 d.
English.

Of Mina's there were 3 sorts, as appears in Ezech. 45. The common Mina or
pound (weighing 25 half ounces or sicles of the Temple) amounted to sixty
Drams, i. 37 s. 6 d. The Kings Mina or pound (weighing 20 half ounces or
sicles of the temple) amounted to 80 drachmas i. 50 s. The Mina or pound of the
Temple or Sanctuary, (which weighed 25 half ounces or sicles) makes 100
Drams, i. 3 li. 2 s. 6 d.


Of a Talent.
THe Hebrew talent ordinarily weighs 125 pounds, which being divided,
amounts to 3000 sicles or half ounces, as it plainly appears, Exodus 38.25,
26. where it is said that 600000 men offered so many half sicles, which make
300000 sicles, the 100 part of which make a talent, from whence it appears
that 3000 sicles make a talent. Also Epiphanes observes, lib. 1. de Pon. That
the Attick talent is equal in weight with the Hebrew; for as the Hebrew
contains 3000 sicles, which make 125 li. so the Attick contains 1200
Drams, which make the same weight, and is worth 375 li. of English money.
But the Hebrew Talent of gold, which for the most part is used in every place,
is worth 4500 li. in our money.

The Jews had three sorts of talents: The common talent (weighing 3000
quarters of an ounce, or common sicles) amounts to 6000 Drams, which is 187
li. 10 s. The kings talent weighed 3000 of the kings sicles which amounted to
9000 Drams, which is 281 li. 5 s. The Talent of the Temple or Sanctuary
weighed 3000 sicles of the temple, which are precisely so many half ounces,
which amount to three hundred seventy five pounds.


From hence then may easily be gathered, that although the Jews had several
weights and denominations of silver and gold, yet only one kind was usually
observed in traffic with other nations, and that had correspondencie with
their Weights, the rest being only for the common sort or particular uses; for
although there were diverse Sicles, Mina's, and Talents among themselves, yet
the common weight (whether it was of sicle, mina, or talent) was usually that
which they termed the talent of the temple, and that had a just correspondencie
with the Grecian Talent both in weight and worth; and this not only among them,
but also by relation from them to the Italians; and that nation obtaining an
universal monarchy made it common with us also.

Of other Weights used among the Jews.
THey had also other weights which they used, passing under several
denominations and differing value; as Keseph, a siluerling or Nummus; which
name is very often used for a Sicle, as appears, Genesis 20.16. and 23.16.43.21.
2 Samuel 18.11, 12. The Caldaeans called this Silga, and the Hebrews Shekel,
being precisely half an ounce, and worth 2. s. 6 d. For 30 of these
Siluerlings of the Sanctuary our Savior Christ wns sold, Mat. 26. which
amounts to 3 li. 15 s. English.

There was also another kind of Siluerling or Nummus used, which was called
Siclus, but it was the common or vulgar Sicle, which was but a quarter of an
ounce, and was worth but 15 d.

There was another kind of siluerling or Nummus used, which was called
Keshitah; of which you may read in three several places of Scripture, Genesis
33.19. Ios. 24.32. Job. 42.11. and was signed with the image of a Lamb upon
it, from whence it is so called. The ancient Nummus of the Arabians and
Chaldaeans was like unto this, as may be gathered by many circumstances out of
the places where it is mentioned, and was of the same valuation as the Grecians
was amongst the Jews, which was 1 d. ob.

But the Siluerlings mentioned Act 1.9.19. are intended to be Grecian
Siluerlings or Nummus, and is worth an Attick Dram; for the Grecians reckon
their sums of money by drachmas, as the Jews and Romans by Sicles and
Sestertia's, and is worth of our money 7 d. ob.

You shall read in Mat. 17.24. of a Didrachma, which is worth in our money 15 d.

Also Mat. 17.27. of a Stater, which is a Greek Coin worth 2 s. 6 d.

And Mat. 18.22. and 22.19, etc. of a Denarius, which was a Roman Coin, as is
evident Mat. 21. because the image of Caesar was upon it, and was worth 7 d. ob.

1 Samuel cap. 2. of a Scruple, which was worth 1 d. ob. q. c.

In Exodus 30. Number. 3. Eze. 45. of an Obulus, which was 1 d. q.

In Mat. 12. of a Minutus, which was ob. q.

And in Mar. 12. Mat. 5. you shall read of a coin called Quadrans, which was
something more than half a farthing. These are briefly the weights and moneys
the Jews used, both foreign and domestic, in their trade and commerce.

Of the gold Weight among the Jews.
THe Jews also had their particular weights for their gold, as they had for
their silver, the least of which were called Zuza or Dram, which is worth 7
s. 6. d. and more or less according to the pureness or baseness of it. It was
also called Daikemonim, Esd. 2. and Nehem. 7. The Chaldaeans call it
Edarchonim, Esd. 8.

The common Sicle of gold weighed two Drams, and was worth 15 s.

The Kings sicle weighed 3 drams, and was worth 22 s. 6. d.

The sicle of the Temple weighed 4 Drams, being precisely half an ounce,
and was worth 30 s.

The common Mina or pound of gold weighed 60 Drams or Hungarian Ducats,
which is worth 22 li. 10 s.

The Kings Mina or pound 80 Drams or Hungarian Ducats, which is 30 li.
English.

The Mina or pound of the temple weighed 100 Drams or Hungarian Ducats,
which was 2250 li.

The common talent of gold weighed 6000 Drams or Hungarian Ducats, and was
2250 li.

The Kings talent weighed 9000 Drams or Hungarian ducats, which was 3375 li.

The talent of the Temple weighed 12000 Drams or Hungarian ducats, which
was of our money 45000 li.

Of gold weights which were not originally the Jews, but borrowed of other
Nations, and used amongst them.
THere are four kinds of Weights that are mentioned in the Scriptures, which
were common amongst the Jews, besides the former, viz. Zahab, of which you may
read, 2 Kings, 5.5. 2 Chr. 9.16. and is called by the name of a Nummus. The
Sicle of gold, 1 Chr. 21.25. which is there also called Nummus. Both which
being so called, seem to signify a Didrachma of gold: and these two were
properly belonging to the Jews. The other that follow belonged not to them,
but they received them from other nations; as the Stater, Drachmon, and
Adarchon.

The Stater was an ancient piece of gold common amongst the Persians, Grecians,
Romans, and other great governments, being distinguished by the superscription
of the Kings or Countries where they were made or coined; as the Stater
Philippici, Darici, Alexandrei, Romani, etc. They were pure fine gold, some of
which were as much in value as a double ducat, others as 4 Hungarian ducats,
and some as Portagues.

The Drachmon (of which you may read, Ezra 8.27, etc.) is a Persian coin as it
seems, for the Grecian interpreters call it Drachmen, which is as much more as
the Attick Dram, and in our money is worth 7 s. 6 d.

Adarcon also seems to be a Persian coin, and does imply the name of a
prince, or Daricum signifies the gold of the Persians: For Darius the son of
Hystaspis then reigned, when these Nummus of gold thus called, were dedidated
to the building of the Temple; and this man for the most part coined singular
good gold, as Herodotus says: Herod. in Melp. Plut. in Artax.
wherefore they were either called Darici, because they were coined by the
Persian kings; or else, as Plutarch observes, because the image of Darius stood
upon one part of it. And was worth of our money 7 s. 6 d.

Thus you may perceive what diversities of weights were used amongst the Jews;
being crept in amongst them partly because of their captivity, and partly
because of their commerce and trade with other Nations. It is therefore worthy
of observation, that if at any time you read of any weight of money, brass, or
the like in the holy Scripture, to consider of what sort of weight it is, viz.
whether a Weight of the Jews, or some foreign and strange Weight. If of the
Jews, Whether it be a common Sicle, the Kings sicle, or the sicle of the
Temple. But if these may be discerned, you shall for the most part find the
Addition, which may easily distinguish them. But if there be no addition, that
is, the Kings sicle, or the sicle of the Temple, then you may presume that it
is the common sicle. And so for other weights and moneys.

That these things may appear the plainer unto you, I have here added the
principal sums of money, reduced to our English valuations, as they are
severally mentioned in the most places of Scripture. And first out of Genesis.
Genesis.
ABimilech King of Gerar said to Sara, Cap. 20.
I have given your Brother 100 siluerlings, which were common sicles, 62 li. 16
s.

Abraham bought a burying place for his wife Sara, Cap. 24. v. 22.
for 400 sicles of silver, which are common sicles, that is, 25 li.

Abraham's servant gave Rebecca half a sicle of gold, Cap. 15. v. 16.
and two bracelets upon her hands weighing ten sicles, which are intended to be
common sicles, because there is no addition, which was 4 li. 2 s. 6. d.

Joseph was sold by his brothers for 20 siluerlings, Cap. 27. v. 28.
that is common sicles, according to the 70 Interpreters, 1 li. 5 s. but the
siluerlings our Savior was sold for were as great again, being sicles of the
Temple, which were precisely half ounces.

Exodus.
THe mulct that was prescribed by the Lord to pay by him who had an Ox that
gored or hurt another man's servant, Cap. 21. v. 32.
was 30 common sicles, that is, 3 li. 15 s.

When the people were numbered, Cap. 30. v. 31.
each man was to give half a sicle of the Temple, i. 1 s. 3 d.

The seven Lamps in the Temple, Cap. 37. v. 24.
with their snuffers and snuffing dishes, were made of a talent of fine gold,
after the weight of the Temple, and were worth 4500 li.

All the gold that was occupied in all the work wrought for he holy place,
which was the gold of the offering, was 26 talents, Cap. 38. v. 2.
and 370 sicles according to the sicle of the sanctuary, which was 130596 li. 5
s.

Cap. 38. v. 25.
But the silver of them that were numbered in the congregation was 100 talents,
and 1775 sicles after the weight of the Temple; which was 37721 li. 18 s. 6 d.

Cap. 38. v. 27.
Moreover, there were 100 talents of silver to cast the sockets of the
sanctuary and the sockets of the veil, 100 sockets of 100 talents, a talent
for a socket, which was 375 li. a socket, and in the whole, 37500 li.

Leviticus.
Cap. 17. v. 2.3.15.6.7.
IF any man shall make a vow of a person unto the Lord by thy estimation, then
thy estimation shall be thus; a male from 20 years old unto sixty years old
shall be by thy estimation at 50 sicles of silver after the sicle of the
Sanctuary, which is 6 li. 5. s.

Ver. 3.
But a female, then but 30 sicles of silver, i. 3 li. 15 s.

4
And from 5 years old to 20 years old thy valuation shall be, for the male 20
sicles of silver, i. 50 s. and for the female 10 sicles of silver, i. 25 s.

5
But from a month old to 5 years old thy price of the Male shall be 5 sicles of
silver, i. 12 s. 6 d. and for the female three sicles of silver, 6
which was 37 s. 6 d.

And from 60 years old and above, if he be a male, then 15 Sicles, i. 37 s. 6
d.

Numbers.
Cap. 3 46.47.
FOr the redeeming of the 273 which were more than the Levits of the first born
of the children of Israel, there shall be taken 5 sicles a man, after the
weight of the Temple, i. 12 s. 6 d. a man; and for the whole 170 li. 12 s. 6 d.

Cap. 7.13.
The Princes of Israel being 12 in number, offered unto God each of them a
silver Charger of 130 sicles weight, and a silver bowl of 70 sicles after the
sicle of the sanctuary, i. 25 li. a prince, and amounted in the whole to 300
li. and an Incense Cup of gold of 10 sicles, for every prince, which was 7 li.
10 s. a man, which in the whole amounted to 90 li.

Deuteronomy.
IF any man take a wife, and when he has lien with her hate her, Cap. 22. v.
19.
and lay slanderous things to her charge, and she prove not guilty of the
fact, he shall be condemned in 100 common sicles of silver, i. 6 li. 5 s.

If a man lie with a maid he shall pay unto her father 50 sicles, Cap. 22. v.
29.
viz. common sicles, i. 3 li. 2 s. 6 d.

Ioshuah.
ANd Achan answered Ioshuah and said, Cap. 7: v. 20.
Indeed I have sinned against the Lord; for I saw amongst the spoils a goodly
Babylonish garment, and 200 sicles of silver ( i. 12 li. 10 s.) and a wedge of
gold of 50 sicles, i. 37 li. 10 s. English.

Judges.
GIdeon gathered of the spoils of the Midianites for a present 1700 sicles of
gold, Cap. 8. v. 26.
i. 1275 li.

The princes of the Philistims promised the harlot Dalilah, Cap. 16.5.
if she could betray Sampson, to give her 1100 siluerlings, i. common sicles,
which was 68 li. 15 s.

The body of the image in the house of Micah in mount Ephraim weighed 200
siluerlings, i. common sicles, Cap. 17. v. 4.
which is 12 li. 10 s.

And the sum of money which Micah's mother missed was 1100 common sicles of
silver, for which she cursed; i. 68 li. 15 s.

To the Levit that served Micah she gave yearly a suit of apparel, tenths, and
ten siluerlings or sicles of the sanctuary, forwith that kind of money the
Levits were rewarded, i. 1 li. 5 s.

I Samuel.
ANd all that remain of the house of Ely shall come and bow down unto him for a
piece of silver; in Hebrew it is A^orah, Cap. 2. v. 36.
which Forestarius and Avenarius interpret Scrupulo Argenti, which was 1 d. ob.
q. But if you take the ancient interpreters it was Obulum, that is, 1 d. q.

Cap. 9. v. 8.
When Saul sought his fathers asses, his servant had about him the fourth part
of a common sicle of silver, that is, 3 d. ob. q.

Cap. 17. v. 5.
The Brigandine of the great giant Goliath weighed 5000 sicles of brass, which
at 16 ounces in the pound, comes to 78 pounds and 2 ounces: and the head of his
spear weighed 60 sicles, that is after the same weight, 9 pound quarter and
half of iron.

II Samuel.
Cap. 12. v. 30. 1 Chr. 21.2.
ANd David won the town of Rabba, and took the kings crown from his head and set
it upon his own head; which weighed a talent of gold, and was (according to our
common interpreters in these times) a common talent of the Jews, i. 46 li. 14
ounces, worth 2250 li. English. But other writers, considering that if it had
bin so heavy the King could not have worn it, therefore they think it to be a
talent according to the Syrian weight, which is not above a quarter of an
Hebrew talent, and was of our weight 11 pound 4 ounces, that is 551 li. And the
reason of their opinion was, because Rabbah and the whole country of the
Children of Ammon lay in the land of Syria, and therefore it must necessarily
follow that their weight was Syrian weight; the king of Rabbah never wearing
this crown but when he made some solemn feast or triumph. There are others
that value it according to the worth of the crown, not of the weight; and for
that it was made of fine gold, set with precious stones and other jewels,
therefore it weighed a talent, that is, it was worth a talent: according to
that of Zach. ca. 1. So they weighed for my wages as much as I am valued, i. 30
siluerlings. Thus have I set before you three interpretations, follow which you
like.

Cap. 18. v. 11:
And Ioab spoke unto the man that brought him word that Absolon was hanging upon
an Oak tree, saying, If thou had smote him to the ground I would have given
thee ten sicles of silver, or ten siluerlings, which was 12 s. 6 d. The man
answered him and said, If you had laid 1000 siluerlings (that is, 62 li. 10 s.)
in my hand, yet I would not have laid my hand upon the Kings son.

When the Angel of God stretched forth his hand over Jerusalem, and struck
the people with the pestilence; p. 25. v. 25.
at the commandment of Gad the Prophet, David went to Araunah the Iebusite and
bought his threshing flore for fifty sicles of silver of the common weight.
Some say that every tribe gave fifty sicles, which was 3 li. 2 s. 6 d. a Tribe;
and in the whole amounted to 37 li. 10 s.

I. Kings.
THe Queen of Saba gave unto King Solomon 120 Centiners or Talents of gold;
which was 265000 pounds English: Cap. 5. v. 28.
this was pure Arabia gold, and therefore according to the worth of gold in
these days, much more than is set down.

King Solomon had brought into his Kingdom in one year 666 Talents or
Centiners of five Arabian gold; Cap. 10. v. 14.
which at 4500 pound the talent, is 2997000 li. viz. two millions nine hundred
ninety seven thousand pounds English. But the silver that Solomon had, was not
to be numbered.

And King Solomon caused 200 targuets to be made, Cap. 10. v. 16.
of the finest gold, each targuet weighing 200 sicles of gold, that is, 600
Hungarians ducats; and was worth 225 li. a targuet: which in the whole
amounts to 45000 li. English.

There came and went up out of Egypt a chariot worth 600 sicles of silver,
which is 37 li. 10 s. and a horse worth 150, li. that 9 li. 7 s. 6 d.

II. Kings.
NAaman general of the King of Syrias host, Cap. 5. v. 5.
when he traveled to Samaria to be healed of his leprosy, took with him 10
talents of silver, that were of the common weight, each talent worth 187 li. 10
s. being in the whole 1875 l. But if you account it after the Syrians talent
(as some would have it) which is but the fourth part of the Hebrew; then it
came to 46 li. 17 s. 6 d. the talent, and in the whole to 468 li. 15 s. He also
brought 1000 Drachmas of gold, which were so many Hungarian ducats, and were
worth 375 li. English.

Being healed of his leprosy, he gave to Gehazie, Cap. 5. v. 5.
two talents of silver in two bags; which if they were according to the weight
of the Jews, amounted to 375 li. and was as much as a man could carry. But if
according to the Syrian weight, then it came but to 95 li. which he might well
carry and not be discovered.

Cap. 6. v. 25.
Benhadad king of Syria so straightly besieged the city of Samaria, that an
Asses head was sold at 80 pieces of silver, or siluerlings, which is 5 li. and
a quarter of a cabe of Doves dung, at five pieces or siluerlings, that is, 5 s.
4 d. But after the Lord struck the Syrians so that they fled from their siege,
Cap. 7. v. 18,
and the citizens opened their gates, and rifled their tents; by which means
there was such plenty, that two measures of Barley was sold for a sicle, that
is, 15 d. and two measures of fine flower at 15 d.

Cap. 15. v. 19.
When Phul, king of Assiria, invaded Menahem king of Israel, he was constrained
to give him a thousand talents of silver, that is, 187500 li. that his help
might be with him to establish a kingdom in his hand, and depart: for the
payment of which money, all the men of substance in Israel were constrained to
pay fifty sicles of silver a piece, that is, 3 li. 2 s. 6 d. a man.

I Chronicles.
Cap. 22. v. 14.
IT was said that David left Solomon toward the building of the Temple 10000
talents of gold, that is, 450000000 li. four hundred and fifty millions of
pounds.

also he left him for the finishing of the same work 1000000 Talents of
silver, which amount unto 375000000 li. viz. three hundred seventy five
millions of pounds.

Cap. 29. v. 4.
Also David dedicated to the Temple of his own goods 3000 talents of gold, that
is, 135000 li. And of silver 7000 talents, that is, 2625000 li. viz. 2 millions
6 hundred 25 thousand li. English.

The offering which David gave toward the building of the Temple, was 5000
Talents, and 10000 Adarcons or Hungarian Ducats of gold, that is, 22507500 li.
viz. twenty two million five hundred seven thousand five hundred pounds. So
all tha^ was given by David toward the building of the Temple was ^ hundred 47
thousand millions, 3 hundred 82 thousand 5 hundred pounds.

II Chronicles.
SOlomon made 300 shields of fine gold, every shield weighin^ 300 pieces of
gold, that is, 112 li. 10 s. so in the whole the came to 33650 li.

Esdras.
SOme of the chief of the Jews, Cap. 2. v. 69.
when they returned from the captivity of Babylon unto Jerusalem gave to the
building of the Temple 61000 Drams, or Hungarian Ducats of Gold; that is,
21525 li. also five thousand pound of silver, which at 37 s. 6 d. the pound
comes to 9375 li.

ARTASHAST (who in some places is called Darius Artaxerxes Longimanus)
commanded his Treasurer to give unto Esdras toward the building of the Temple
Jerusalem, 100 Centiners or talents of silver, which (at 187 li. 10 s. the
talent) comes to 18750 li. according to the Hebrew common weight; for as often
as there is no addition, it is to be intended in every place the common weight.

The king of Persia and his Nobles, with all Israel, Cap. 8. v. 16.26.
gave to the building of the Temple in Jerusalem 650 Centiners of silver of the
common weight, which (at 187 li. 10 s. the talent) comes to 121875 li. also
in silver vessels 100 centiners or talents, which (at 187 li. 10 s. the talent)
comes to 18750 li. also 100 Centiners or talents of gold, which (at 2250 l.
the talent) in the whole comes to 225000 li. or thereabouts: also 20 cups of
Gold weighing 1000 Drams or Hungarian Ducats, that is. 375 li. each of
which cups were worth 18 li. 15 s.

Nehemiah.
THe Tirshatha (or as some have it Nehemiah) gave to the work 1000 Drachmas of
gold, Cap. 7. v. 37.
which was 275 li. and some of the fathers gave to the work 20000 Drams or
Hungarian Ducats of gold, which came to 5500000 li. also 2200 pounds of silver,
which was 4125 li. and the rest of the people gave 20000 Drachmas or Hungarian
ducats of gold, which came to 5500000 li. also 2000 pieces of silver, which
were common pounds, which comes to 3756 li.

Ester.
PRoud Hammon offered 10000 Centiners or talents of silver, Cap. 3. v. 9.
to destroy the Jews; which (at 187 li. 10 s. the talent) comes to 1875000
li.

Ezekiel.
Cap. 45. v. 43.
A Sicle of the Temple shall be 20 Gerahs, that is, 2 s. 6 d. (for in this place
he speaks of that which belongs to the Sanctuary) and the Mina (that is the
Kings Mina) shall be 20 sicles: and 25 sicles shall be the Mina of the Temple:
and 15 sicles shall be the common Mina, of which you may read before.

Tobias.
Cap. 1. v. 10.
OLd Tobias willingly lent unto the poor man Gabel in Rages, a town in Media,
ten pounds of silver, that is, 18 li. 15 s. But if it be according to our
translation, that is, ten Talents at 187 li. 10 s. the Talent is 1963 li. after
the common weight. But if after the weight of the Temple, it comes to as much
more.

I Macchabeus.
Ca. 10: v. 40. 42.
Demetrius king of Syria offered to give yearly unto the Jews for the
building of the Temple, 15000 sicles of silver, of the temple weight; that is,
1000 Mina's, which (at 37 s. 6 d. the Mina) comes to 1875 li. And, if they
would aid him, he would also restore the money again which his officers had
kept back of the reueneues of the Temple; which was yearly 5000 sicles of the
Temple, of silver; that is, 2500 crowns English, which is, 625. li.

Cap. 11. v. 28.
Jonathan the high Priest of Jerusalem, wrought so well with Demetrius king of
Syria, that he released the Jews of their yearly tribute and made them free:
for which freedom he gave 300 Centiners of gold or common talents; which at
2250 li. the talent, comes to 675000 li.

Ca. 13. v. 16. 19.
Simon to release his brother, sent to Tryphon, the K. of Syrias General of his
host, 100 centiners or talents of silver, of the common weight; which at 187
li. 10 s. the talent amounts to 18750 li.

Cap. 14. v. 14.
Simon the high Priest of Jerusalem sent to the Romans a great shield of gold,
weighing 1000 pounds; which is 100000 Hungarian ducats, 37500 li. English.

Ca. 15. v. 31.35.
Antiochus, Demetrius his son, K. of Syria, asked of Simon the high priest of
Jerusalem, for the redemption of certain towns that he had taken, five hundred
centiners or common talents of siluers and for his charges as much more; in
all, a thousand Centiners or Talents: that is 187500 li. in English money. But
Simon refused the proffer, yet nevertheless, that he might live in peace, he
offered him 100 Talents of silver, which (at 187 li. 10 s. the Talent)
amounts to 18750 li.

II Macchabees.
When Heliodorus would have robbed the Temple, Cap. 3. v. 11.
there was in it 400 Centiners of silver (of the weight of the Temple) which at
375 li. the talent, comes in the whole to 150000 pounds English: also 200
Centiners of gold, which at 4500 li. the talent, amounts to 900000 li.

Jason that wicked Priest deceived his brother Onias of the office of high
Priest, and gave to king Antiochus for it, first, Cap. 4. v. 8. and 19.2, 4.
360 Talents of silver; then 80; after, 150: all the common Weight, which were
in the whole 590 Talents, and amounted at 187 li. 10 s. The Talent, to 110625
li.

The wicked Jason being high Priest, hearing that Antiochus held a great feast
in Tyrus, sent 300 Drams of silver, that is, 9 li. 7 s. 6. d. for a
sacrifice to Hercules. But if you change these into Hungarian ducats (as there
are some think them to be Gold) then they came to 112 li. 10 s.

Menelaus being sent by Jason the high Priest to the King, he behaved himself
in such cunning manner, that he got the high priests office; promising the
King 300 Centiners or Talents of silver, more than Jason would give; which at
187 li. 10 s. the Talent comes to 56250 li. 10 s. But being unable to
perform his promise, he was put from his office of high Priest.

Antiochus paid yearly to the Romans 2000 talents of silver, that is, Cap.
8. v. 10.
375000 li.

Antiochus took 1800 Centiners or Talents of silver of the Temple of
Jerusalem, Cap. 5. v. 21,
which at 187 li. 10 s. the talent comes to 3375000 li.

Nicanor caused to be proclaimed, that he would sell the captive Jews, 19 for
a centiner, that is, Cap. 8. v. 10.
for every Jew 9 li. 17 s. 4 d. q. c.

Judas Macchabeus sent 2000 Drams of silver to Jerusalem for a sin
offering, that is, Cap. 12.43.
62 li. 10 s.

Now follows the Reckonings of the moneys in the NEW TESTAMENT.
And first of Matthew.
Cap. 5.
HHe that agrees not with his adversary, shall be cast into prison and not
come forth (so says our Savior Christ) until he has paid the utmost
farthing. The Hebrew and Latin translations have it, Quadrans, or a fourth
part, that is, a farthing in our money: but if you account according to the
Roman coin, it was ob. q.

Cap. 10. v. 29.
Do not men buy to Sparrowes for a penny? that is, something more than half
a farthing.

Cap. 17. v. 25.
When our Savior Christ went into Capernaum, the receivers of tribute spoke to
Peter, saying, Does not your Master pay tribute? The tribute money in the Text
is called Didrachma, which was 15 d. for so much every man paid for tribute:
from whence may be gathered, that the penny that Peter took out of the fishes
mouth, was worth 2 s. 6 d.

Cap. 18. v. 23.
The kingdom of Heaven is like unto a King that would call his servants to
account, and when he began to reckon with them the one ought him 10000 li. in
Hebrew weight; which at 37 s. 6 d. the pound, comes in the whole to 18750 li.
so much was the wicked servant in debt to his Master. And on the contrary, one
of his fellow servants ought him 100 pence: in the Hebrew text it is Centum
Obulus, and one Obulus was 1 d. q. that is, 10 s. 5 d. so that the bad servant
ought his Master 30000 times more than his fellow servant ought him.

The Greek text says, that this fellow ought him Centum Derius; that is, 3
li. 2 s, 6 d. which is yet a great deal of difference; for the wicked servant
ought his master above 6000 times more than his fellow servant ought him.

Cap. 2. v. 5.
The Lord of the Vineyard agreed with his laborers for a penny a day; in the
Hebrew text it is zuza; and in Greek Denarius; both which are of like value
English, that is, 7 d. ob. so much each labourer had by the day.

When the Pharisees and Herod's servants tempting Christ, asked him whether it
was lawful to pay tribute unto Caesar or not: Christ answered and said, You
Hypocrites, why tempt you me? show me the tribute money, and they brought him a
penny; where it is expressed by the word of zuza, or Denarius that is 7 d. ob.

The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man, Mat. 25.14.15.
that traveling into a far country, called his servants, and delivered unto
them his goods; to one he gave five talents; that is, 937 li. 10 s. with which
he gained just as much more, that is, 937 li. 10 s. to the second he gave two
Talents of the common weight also, which was 375 li. and he also gained just as
much more, that is, 375 li. and to the third he gave one Talent, that is, 187
li. 10 s. and he gained nothing with it, but hid the Talent in the earth.

Judas Iscariot betrayed our Savior Christ for thirty pence or pieces of
silver, which were so many sicles of the Temple, Cap. 26. v. 14.
each sicle being half an ounce, which were accounted worth 2 s. 6 d. so the
whole came to 3 li. 15 s. for which our Savior Christ was betrayed. And with
it they bought a Potters field.

Mark.
Our Savior Christ sat over against the treasury, Ca. 12. v. 41, 42.
and beheld how the people cast into the Treasury: and many rich men cast in
much; and there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites,
which is a farthing, or Quadrans, which was the fourth part of an Assis, being
almost a penny English.

Our Savior Christ being at Bethanie in the house of Simon the Leaper, Cap.
14. v. 15.
there came a woman having a box of ointment of costly oil called Spikenard,
and she broke the box and poured it upon his head; therefore some murmured
among themselves, and said, To what end is this wast of ointment? for it might
have been sold for more than three hundred denarios or pence, that is, 9 li. 7
s. 6 d.

Luke.
Our Savior Christ says, Are not five Sparrowes sold for two farthings? that
is, Assibus duobus, Cap. 12. v. 6.
which is 1 d. ob.

Or what woman having ten pieces of silver, that is, Cap. 15. v. 8.
ten Drams or groats, (each being worth 7 d. ob.) and lose one, will not
seek til she find it, etc. So these 10 were in English money 6 s. 3 d.

Cap. 19. v. 12.
A certain Nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a
kingdom: and he called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pieces of
money, or ten pounds, or Mina's (according to the weight of the Temple) which
came to (at 3 li. 2 s. 6 d. the Mina) in the whole 31 li. 5 s.

John.
Cap. 6. v. 5.
WHen our Savior Christ would feed 5000 men, besides women and children, he
said unto Philip, Where might we buy bread that these people might eat? (which
he spoke to prove Philip.) Philip answered and said, That 200 penny worth of
bread will not be sufficient for them that every man might take a little. The
200 penny worth of bread are called Denarios, which was worth 7 d. ob. in our
money, and in the whole is worth 6 li. 5 s. From whence may be gathered, that
there being 5000, every one of them should have had no more bread than might
have bin bought with a farthing mite and half of our silver.

Cap. 12. v. 5.
As our Savior Christ six days before the Passover was eating in the house of
Lazarus, (whom he had raised from the dead in Bethania,) Mary, Lazarus sister
took a box, some say a pound of oil of Spikenard, and anointed Jesus feet,
and wiped them with her hair; and the whole house was filled with the savor
of the ointment. Then said one of his Disciples, even Judas Iscariot, Simons
son, Why was not this ointment sold for 300 pence; that is, denarios; every
denarios being worth 7 d. ob. which amounted in the whole to 9 li. 7 s. 6 d.

Cap. 19. v. 39.
When Christ's body was to be buried, Nicodemus came and brought Myrrh and Aloes
mingled together, about 100 pound weight according to the common weight, which
was 2500 half ounces and came to 78 pounds and eight ounces, English.

Acts.
IN Asia many books were burnt to the value of 50000 pieces of silver, that
is, Roman denarios, every of which was 7 d. ob. the whole amounting to 1562 li.
10 s.

Thus have I briefly set forth to you the several weights that were common
amongst the Jews, both as they were originally from themselves, and as they
received them from other Nations, comparing them with the Scriptures as they
are severally mentioned, and reduced them to our valuations. In casting up of
which, if there shall chance to be any error, you may with the due examination
of the worth of every piece of silver or Gold (according as you may find them
at the beginning of this Treatise) easily reform them, and bring them to your
own understanding.

Of the ancient Money and Coin that was used amongst the Graecians and Romans.
FRom what has been said, may be gathered, that the Jews used no Coin but
Weights only, though perhaps to put a distinction between those Weights,
there was used some impression: yet that cannot properly be said Coin. But in
all other Kingdoms (where money was current) there was used Coin; and that
valued according to the will of command of the Prince or State where it was
coined: which also because of the captivity of the Jews, came amongst them,
and past as current according to their worth; of which Coins I have already
spoken. Yet because there are many other Coins and Weights mentioned in the
Epistles of the Apostles, which were partly of the Graecians, partly of the
Romans, into which governments most of them traveled; I will therefore
endeavor to set before you the valuation of the Grecian and Roman Coins and
Weights reduced to our valuation and Weights, that so those moneys mentioned in
the New Testament, and in this Treatise omitted, may with the more facility be
apprehended and made plain unto you.

Of the Grecian coin; and first of their Silver and Brass Nummus or Money.
The Atticke Dram.
AN Atticke Dram was a proportion for almost all the Greek moneys: for the
Graecians numbered their moneys by Drams, as the Romans by Sestertia's.
[This was the Nummus or coin amongst the Athenians] and was the eighth part of
an ounce, which is worth in our money 7 d. ob.

The Stater, which was also called Tetradrachma, upon the one side whereof was
the head of Minerua, upon the other the Owl: was worth four Atticke
Drams, as is manifest Matthew. 17.25. which is in our money 2 s. 6 d.

The Didrachma, which was also amongst the Athenians, called Bos, because it
was signed with the similitude of an Ox upon the one side of it (of this
Theseus was the first author) as Plutarch remembers: it was worth half a
Stater, or two Drams, that is in our money 15 d.

The Tridrachma, which was three Drams, and worth in our money 23 d. ob.

The Obulus Atticus, which was the sixth part of an Atticke Dram, was worth
of our money 1 d. q.

The Semiobulus, which was the least of the Greek silver coin, was worth ob.
q.

There was also a Diobulus, which was the third part of a Dram, and worth 2
d. ob.

Triobulus, which was half a Dram, and worth 3 d. ob. q.

Tetrobulus, which contained two third parts of a Dram, and was worth 5 d.
English.

The Egina Dram.
The Dram of Aegina contained ten Atticke Obulus, and was worth 1 s. ob.
English.

Obulus Aeginus, was the sixth part of the Dram of Aegina, and was worth 2 d.
half farthing and a third part of a farthing.

Triobulus Aeginaeus, was half an Aeginus Dram, and of ours was worth 6 d.
q.

Stater Corinthius, was worth ten Obulus of Aegina, and of ours 1 s. 8 d.ob.q.

Stater Macedonius, was worth in ours 2 s. 9 d.q. and three seconds of a
farthing.

Of the Asiaticke silver.
THe Asiaticke money was of less valuations, and other denominations than the
rest of Greece; for the greatest of their silver Coin that was usually
current, was but ten pence: and it was called by the name Siglus, which was
worth seven Atticke Obulus and a half, as Xenophon says: but as Hesychius
says, it was worth eight Attick Obulus, and four scruples, which is 10. d. in
our money.

Cistophorus was also Asiatick silver, and was so called, Lucian in Caront.
Suid. loi. allegat Hesych. in.
because of the image that was upon it: and was worth of our money 4 d. ob. c.

Danaces, which piece of money the Graecians usually put into the mouth of the
dead, to pay Charon for their passage to Elisium war worth ob. q. and two third
parts of a farthing.

They had but two sorts of brass money, Of the Brass money among the
Graecians.
that is mentioned to continue current among them; and they were Aereolum and
Minutum.

Aereolum was worth the sixth part of an Atticke Obulus, according to the
opinion of Suidas and others, which in our money is q. c. and one third part of
a mite.

Minutum, is the seventh part of that, which is little more than half a mite.

Of the gold coins among the Graecians.
IN the next place, is to be described the quantity and valuation of their gold
coins, of which there is any mention in ancient authors: and they were among
the Athenians an Atticke Stater which weighed two Drams, as Pollux says,
and was worth with us 15 s. and a Daricus which was worth 15 s.

A Stater was divided into these parts, that is, A Semi Stater. which was worth
7 s. 6 d.

A Tetrestater, of which Aristotle and Pollux speaks li. 9. which was worth
of our money 3 li.

And the Macedonian golden Stater, coined by Philip, Alexander, Lysimachus,
Demetrius, and others, which succeeded in Macedonia, Syria, and Asia, which was
worth of our money 18 s. 4. d.

Of the Asiaticke Gold.
STater Daricus, which before was called Adarchon, was a Nummus or a piece of
coin of the Persians, and worth a Didrachma, having upon it the similitude of
a Sagitarius, according to Plutarch, in the life of Agesilaus, and was worth
with us 15 s.

Xenophon lib. 1
Semi Darcius, of which there is mention in Xenophon, was worth half a Darick
Stater, and weighed an Atticke Dram, which was worth with us 7 s. 6 d.

Cizycenus was a piece of coin so called, as may be thought of a town called
Cizycus, of which you may read Strabo, lib. 14. and was worth 7 s. 6 d.

Of the Grecian Mina and Talents.
THe Atticke minas weigh one hundred Drachmas, and was equal to the Mina of
the Temple amongst the Jews, according to the opinion of Xenophon and
Plutarch, and was worth with us 3 li. 2 s. 6 d.

There were diverse kinds of Talents, according to the opinions of Pollux and
Varro, most of which weighed sixty Minaes, and a Mina one hundred Drams,
and for the most part, six thousand Drams (of the Country where the Talent
was) make a Talent.

The Atticke Talent contained six thousand Atticke Drams, according to the
opinion of Pollux and Festus, and is equal to the common Talent among the
Jews, worth in our money 187 li. 10 s.

But according to the opinion of Liuie and Priscianus, there was an Atticke
Talent worth eight thousand Drams, which was 250 li.

The Egyptian Talent, according to the opinion of Pliny and Varro, weighed as
much, that is, 250 li.

The Syrian Talent contained 1500 Atticke Drachmas, which was 46 li. 17 s. 6 d.

The Eubeian Talent (according to the opinion of Pompey, and Festus) weighed
four thousand Denarios, that is, Drams, and was worth 125 li.

The Rhodian talent contained 4500 Attick Drachmas, worth 240 li. 12 s. 6 d.

The Babylonian Talent was 7000 Attick Drachmas, worth 218 li. 15 s.

The Aegina talent was 1000 Atticke Drachmas, that is 312 li. 15 s.

The Alexandrian talent is 12000 Atticke Drachmas, which was as much as the
talent of the Temple, which is 375 li. English.

The ancient Talentum Siculum (according to the opinion of Pollux) was six
Drachmas, which was 3 s. 9 d. English.

The Neapolitan talent was as much, according to the opinion of Varro, that is,
3 s. 9 d. English.

The ancient Talentum Siculum, and the Sicilian talent (as Varro says) is all
one, and is worth 1 s. 10 d. ob.

The Regian talent was but half a Dram, and is worth 3 d. ob. q.

Of the Coins and Moneys of the ancient Romans: and first of the Brass Money.
AS (as Varro says) is as much as Aes, that is, brass: For Aerius was a coin
weighing a pound weight: but after many changes that happened in the Roman
State, it came to be worth the tenth part of a Roman penny, which with us is
worth ob. q.

Semissis, is as much as half an As: according to Varro, and was worth q.c.

Triens, that is, the third part of an As, which was half a farthing.

Quadrans, was the fourth part of as As. Pliny calls it Triuncis; Cicero,
Triunus, because ir was a diminution of the former pound containing three
ounces; and with us worth three mites.

Sextans, that is, the sixth part of an Assis, which was worth q. or two mites.

Vncia, the twelfth part of an Assis, worth one might c.

Semiuncia, worth half a mite.

Sextula, that is, the sixth part of an ounce, worth the sixth part of a mite.
These are the ancient brass moneys usual amongst the Romans; but there were
greater used in later times, according to the opinion of Varro.

Of the silver money amongst the Romans.
DEnarias was so called because it was worth ten Asses; but it was not always
of one worth and estimation amongst the Romans, for the ancient Roman Denarius
or penny, which was current in the time of the Consuls, weighed but the seventh
part of an ounce (according to the opinion of Celsus and many other Authors)
and was worth of our money 8 d. ob. c. and one seventh part of a might.

Denarius Novus, or the new penny, was first coined in Claudius the Emperors
time, and was worth (according to the opinion of Pliny and others) precisely a
Dram, that is, 7 d. ob.

Bigatus and Quadrigatus, is all one with the Roman Penny, and was so called,
because these words were stamped upon one side of it, and was worth 7 d. ob.

Victoriatus, was a Coin first brought up by the law of Clodius amongst the
Romans, being so called, because the image of Victory was upon it; and
according to Pliny was half a Denarius, and is worth 3 d. ob.

Sestertius is so called of Sesquitertiers, according to Priscian, it was two
Asses and a half, and was worth 3 ob. q.

Obulus, is the sixth part of a Denarius, and worth 1 d. q.

Libella, is the tenth part of a Denarius, and worth ob.q.

Simbella, so called, because it was half a Libella, and was worth farthing
and half.

Teruntius, was the fourth part of a Denarius, and was worth two mites and a
half.

Of the gold among the Romans.
THere were also gold denarius amongst the Romans; either so called because
they had the same stamp; or else because they were about the same bigness to
see to, coined in the time of the Consuls, worth in English money 17 s.ob. a
piece.

The other was coined later, about the beginning of the Emperors, and weighed
two Drams; being of equal weight with our English Spur-royalls, which are
worth 15 s. This was after the first five Emperors, much diminished in weight:
Nero made it lighter by two or three grains; Galba, Nerua, Trajanus, and
Hadrianus, by eight grains: but those that Vespasian and succeeding Emperors
coined, were precisely two Drams.

A Semissis of gold, weighed a just Dram, and was worth 7 s. 6 d.

A tremissis of gold, which was three parts of an Is, was worth 5 s.

Of the gold after the seat of the Empire was translated to Byzantium or
Constantinople.
COnstantine the Great diminished that Coin which was a Dram, to a
Didrachma, and the seventh part of a Dram; and was worth of our money 8 s. 6
d. ob.

And thus they continued till the time of Valentinian the Emperor, who caused
six of them to be coined out of an ounce of gold, and therefore as Isidor
says, were called amongst the Graecians (...), that is, Sextuala, because it
was the sixth part of an ounce, and was worth 10 s.

The Semissis of Valentinian gold was worth 5 s.

The Triens or Tremissis, was worth 3 s. 4 d.

The Scruple, which was the fourth part of a golden shilling, 2 s. 6 d.

Of the silver and brass money of the Empire; after it was translated to
Constantinople.
MIliarissimum weighed two Drams (according to the opinion of Cedrenus) and
was worth 15 d.

Ceratus, was a piece of Coin called also Siliqua Cornuta, because there was
stamped upon it, the Moon increasing; by which mark it was known to be more
than the common Ceratio or Siliqua, and was worth 7 d. ob.

The common Siliqua or Ceratio, was so called because it was worth four
grains of gold (which is the weighs of a A silique is the fruit of a Charob
tree, which carries certain sweet cods or husks about 5 inches long, and as
broad as a man's thumb; six Carobs or Carob Bean cods weighed a Dram or
Carract:
Silique) and according to Justinian was worth 5d.

Follis of which there is often mention in the History of Eusebius, was a
brass, or (as Lampadius says) an iron coin, so called because there was
stamped upon it the similitude of a leaf, and was worth farthing half and one
third.

Of the Roman sums of Money.
A Sestertium (being taken in the neuter Gender) conteyneth a thousand
Sestertios, and is worth 7 li. 16 s. 3 d.

A pound weight containing twelve ounces of silver, which is worth, 3 li.

A talent containing, 24 Sestertias, 6000 Denarios; being of equal weight and
worth to the Attick talent, and is worth 187 li. 10 s.

I will also add that which is called Sportula, because it was a certain
small sum of 400 Quadrans, which makes 10 Sestertios, of which you may read
in Suetonius in the life of Domitian Nero, and contained 1 s. 6 d. ob.q.

The Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Measures reduced to ours, whereby you may find
the quantity of all such Measures as are mentioned in the Old and New Testament.
But now having briefly and as exactly as I can, described the Weights and
valuations of the ancient moneys that were current amongst the Jews,
Graecians, and Romans, as well those tha^ are mentioned in the Scripture as
others; It rests (that I might make this a perfect Work to say something of
the Measures mentioned in the Scriptures which I will (as near as I can) reduce
to the quantity of our Measures which are common amongst us.

Of the Corn Measures.
A Gomer is a gallon or thereabout with us, according to Budaeus, in Mensuris
Hebr.

An Attick Chenix (according to Budaeus) is the third part of a Gomer or half
Modius, which measure is almost 3 pintes.

Stater was a measure containing 3 Gomers or Simodio's, and is with us 3
gallons and 3 pints, or thereabouts.

An Epha was as much as a Medimnicus Atticus, which according to the opinion of
some Authors is a pottle less than our bushel: but if you follow the
proportion of Budaeus, it is ten Gomers or gallons or more, which is a bushel
and a peck of our measure and more.

A Letech is the half of a Corus, and contained 5 Epha's or Attick Medimnos, i.
according to Budaeus, six bushels and a pecke.

A Cor or Corus, following the same proportion, was two Letech, i. ten Attick
Medimno's; and of ours 12 bushels and half.

Of the measures of Wine and Beer.
HEmina (according to Georgius Agricola and Budaeus) was three quarters of a
pint.

A Sextarius was two Hemina's, i. a pint and a half.

A Lag was as much.

A Congius contained 6 Sextario's, i. 9 pintes.

A Hin was 12 Sextario's, i. 18 pintes.

A Cad was 60 Sextario's, i. 45 quarts.

A Bath was 72 Sextario's, i. 54 quarts.

A Homer was a great measure containing 720 Sextario's, that ^^, 67 gallons and
a pottle.

An Vrna, according to Capulis, contained 24 Sextario's, that is, ^6 pints,
which make 4 gallons and a half of our common mea^^re. But according to
Budaeus account it comes but to 3 gallons ^^d a half or thereabouts.

An Amphora was a measure common amongst the Graecians, which there is mention
made of three sorts, the one containing three gallons and a pottle; the other 8
Congio's or 48 Sextario's, which was 9 gallons of our measure. The third (as
Pliny says) was an Amphora, which contained 20 gallons and a half.

A Modius contained 16 Sextario's, which was 24 pints, that is 3 gallons or
thereabouts; but according to the opinion of some Authors, it is but a pecke
and some small matter more.

A Semimodius was 8 Sextario's, that is, a gallon and half.

A Gomer was somewhat less than a Semimodius, and contained but 7 Sextario's
and a fifth part of a Sextario, which is some ten pintes and a quarter and
three spoonfulls.

A Quartarius contained one Sextarios and a half, which was a quart and the
fourth part of a pint.

A spoonful.

A Cyame is two spoonfuls.

A Mystrus and Cyame according to the opinion of some is al one.

A Cyathus contains 4 spoonfulls.

An Hemila Cottila is six times so much, which is 24 spoonefulls, i. three
quarters of a wine pint.

The Measures mentioned in the old Testament. And first of GENESIS.
Cap. 18. v. 6.
WHen Abraham received three strange men, he went to his wife Sara into the tent
and said, Make ready at once thre^ measures of fine meal; which according to
some Divines wa^ 3 Zata's; according to others, 44 Sextarios, which was of our
measure, at a pint and a half the Sextarios, a bushel and a quart.

Exodus.
Cap. 16. v. 31:33.34.37.
MOses said to Aaron, Take a pot of the quantity of a Gome^ (which was seven
Sextario's and a fifth part, and is of o^ measure a gallon, a quart and four
spoonfulls) to keep for yo^ posterity. In the same chapter Moses says, That
a Gomer is t^^ tenth part of an Ephah, which, as is said, is more than our
bushe^*

You shall present upon the altar two lambs of a year old every day, the one
lamb in the morning, and the other in the evening; Cap. 29. v. 49.
and to each lamb the tenth part of an Ephah (which was 5 quarts and half a
pint) of fine flower, with the fourth part of an Hin ( i. 4 pintes) of wine
for a drink offering.

The anointing oil of the Sanctuary was made of the best and sweetest spices
that could be gotten, viz. of Myrrh 500 sicles, Cap. 30.33.
or 250 ounces; of Calamus 125 ounces, of Cinnamon 125 ounces. All this was
mixed with an Hin ( i. 18 pintes) of oil Olive, as the Apothecaries make it.

Leviticus.
He that sinned, Cap. 5. v. 11.
and was not able to bring two Turtle Doves or two young Pigeons for an
offering, he must bring the 10 part of an Ephah of fine flower, that is, ten
pintes and a half.

When the Leper was visited and found to be infected with the leprosy, Cap.
14. 19.
the eight day after he was to take two he lambs of a year old, without
blemish, and an Ewe lamb of a year old without blemish, and three tenth parts
(that is, fifteen quarts a pint and half) of fine flower for a meat
Offering, mingled with a Log of oil, that is, a pint and half.

Numbers.
TO a meat offering was added the fourth part of an Hin (that is, 4 pints and a
half) of oil, and as much wine, Cap. 15. v. ^
and the third part of an Hin (that is, six pints) of oil, and as much wine.
Some say half a Hin, that is 9 pintes of oil, and as much wine.

Deuteronomie.
THere shall be two sorts of Epha's within thine house; Cap. 25. v. 13.14.15.
which concludes there was a greater and a lesser.

Judges.
WHen Gideon would set upon the Midianites, Cap. 7. v. 16.
he gave each of his soldiers a Trumpet in one hand, and an empty pitcher in
the other hand with lamps therein. These pitchers were called Cados minores, as
some say, that is, oil Cannes, like lamps wherein they used to set Tedae
nuptiales, or Bride candles. For such was the usual custom in those days,
that the Bridegroom went to fetch his Bride by night, and then certain
Virgins were appointed to bear the wedding candles or lamps before them.
Whereof our Savior Christ made that notable similitude of the 10 virgins that
went to meet the Bridegroom, Matthew. Chap. 25. This difference is herein to be
noted, That in the lamps of the Virgins whereof our Savior Christ speaks
there was oil, but in Gideons pitchers there was no oil, but they were empty
oil Pitchers with thick bellies and narrow necks, wherein stood lamps or
candles, such might be called Cados minores, being not very great, but so
light that they might easily be carried in one hand without trouble: but what
their measure was is not specified.

Ruth.
Cap. 2. v. 31.
THe young widow Ruth the Moabite was not sloathful nor yet idle, but went into
Boas field, where she gleaned so many ears of corn after the reapers in one
day, that at night when she had threshed the ears it was an Ephah, i. a bushel
or thereabouts; for there were two kinds of Ephahs, as you may read before.

Cap. 3.
When Ruth laid her self down at the feet of Boas, and desired him that he
would marry her; in the morning when Boas rose he gave her six measures of
Gomers, i. six gallons of Barley or thereabouts.

I Samuel.
Cap. 17.17.
WHen Saul was gone out to fight against the Philistimes, and that Goliath daily
mocked the host of the Israelites, the Lord stirred up Ishai the father of
David, to send him to his brethren to the Host, with an Ephah of partched corn,
that is, a bushel or thereabouts.

Cap. 25. v. 28.
David being upon the way, meaning to destroy the fool Nabal* Abigale, Nabals
Wife, a very wise and discreet woman, went to meet him, and finding David she
appeased his wrath with a Present of 200 loves of bread, two bottles of wine,
five sheep ready dressed, and five Zata's ( i. 15 Gomers, which is 15 gallons
and somewhat more) of fine flower, 100 frailes of Raisins, and 100 of Figs;
which, laded upon an Ass, etc.

I Kings.
THe molten Sea that stood upon the 12 knops like Cucumbers, was very curiously
made of diverse sorts of metals, Cap. 7. v. 23.25.
being ten cubits wide and 5 high: it held 2000 baths, that is, 27000 gallons
English, or thereabouts; every bath containing (according to the opinion of
Josephus) 72 Sextario's, that is, at a pint and a half the Sextarius, 13
gallons and a half.

King Solomon caused 10 copper Kettles to be made, Cap. 7. v. 38.
that stood upon ten stoles, each kettle containing forty Baths, every bath 72
Sextario's, which come to 13 gallons and a half English; so that every kettle
contained 540 gallons.

When the Prophet Eliah desired the widow of Sarepta to fetch him a little
water and a bit of bread, she answered and said, Cap. 17. v. 12. 13* 14:
As true as the Lord your God lives I have not any bread, but only a hand
full of flower in a Cab (which was a kind of Vessel that held eight quarts)
and a little oil in a pitcher. And Eliah said unto her, Thy meal, etc.

The Prophet Eliah being upon mount Carmel about the time of the evening
sacrifice, Ca. 18. v. 32.34.
built up an altar in the sight of the whole congregation of the people of
Israel, and laid wood upon it, and upon the wood an Ox cut in pieces for a
sacrifice, and caused a ditch to be dug round about it, of such wideness
and depth, as might contain two Zata's, that is six Gomers and something more;
about six gallons and a half of our measure. And there was 12 Cads (that is
175 gallons) of water cast on the sacrifice; but when Eliah called upon the
name of the Lord, fire fell from heaven and devoured the sacrifice, dried up
the water, and burned the wood and stones of the altar to dust.

II Kings.
Cap 6.25.
WHen Benhadad King of Syria besieged Samaria, there was such a famine and
dearth in the City, that they sold an Asses head for 80 siluerlings (that is,
common sicles, which is 5 li. English;) but some Texts read it, 8 siluerlings,
that is, 10 s. And the fourth part of a Cab, (that is, a pint and half of
Pigeons doung) was sold for five pieces of silver, that is, for 6 s. 3 d.

When the Syrians were stricken by the Lord and fled from the siege of Samaria,
corn became so cheap (according to the prophecy of Elisha) that under the
gates of Samaria one Zata (which contained 24 Sextarios, that is, half a
strike and a pottle of fine flower) was sold for 15 d. and two Zata's of Barley
was sold for 15 d.

II Chronicles.
Cap. 2.
SOlomon gave to the Carpenters, etc. that cut and hewed down wood in Mount
Libanus, for the building of the Temple, 20000 Corus of Wheat, and 20000 of
Barley; every Corus containing ten Medimnos Atticos, which according to Budeus
account, came to 12 Bushels and a half English, and in the whole to 150000
Bushels. But if you account it according to the opinion of some of our English
Authors, it comes but to nine Bushels and seven gallons and a pottle the
Medimna, and in the whole to 198750 Bushels. And besides, Solomon gave them
20000 Bathes of Wine and as much oil; every Bath containing 13 gallons and a
pottle, which amounted to in the whole, 8437 Barrels and a half.

The Measures mentioned in the New Testament. And first of Matthew.
Cap. 13.33.
THe kingdom of God is like unto piece of Leaven, which a woman takes and
puts into three Measures or Zata's of meal, which make a Bushel.

Luke.
When the unjust Steward called his masters debtors to account, Cap. 16. v. 9.
the first was debtor 100 Bathes of Oil, that is 51 barrells and 18 gallons;
and he bid him write down half, that is, 25 barrels and a half. The second
debtor ought 100 Corus of wheat, which at 9 bushels and 7 gallons the Corus,
comes to 988 bushels, or thereabouts; and the unjust Steward willed him to set
down 80 Corus, that is 790 bushels and one gallon and a half.

So the unjust Steward deceived his master of 25 Barrels and a half of Oil,
and of 198 bushels and one gallon of Wheat, and gave it to his masters
creditors.

John.
AT the marriage at Cana in Galile our Savior Christ changed the 6 pitchers of
water into wine, Cap. 2. v. 1.11.
every pitcher containing 2 or 3 Cads, every Cad holding 60 Sextario's, that
is, 11. gallons and a quart, or thereabouts. Some say, that the first three
pitchers held each three Cads or Metreta's, which if it should be so, every of
them should hold 33 gallons and 3 quarts: then say the other three held each 2
Metreta's a piece, that is, 22 gallons and a pottle a piece; then the whole
that our Savior Christ gave unto the Bride and Bridegroom, amounted to 168
gallons and 3 quarts or thereabouts.

Revel. 6.6.
I Heard a voice saying, A Chenix (that is, 3 pints of wheat) for a Denarius
(that is, 7 d. ob.) There being 85 times so much, and a quart over, in a
bushel, it would amount unto 51 s. 8 d. the Bushel, or thereabouts, which
would be a great dearth.

Here is to be observed, that the Graecians in times past were very strict in
their house keeping, and for that cause confined their servants to certain
measure; that is, to a Chenix, which was three pintes of meat; and to a
Sextarius, which was a pint and a half of Wine for every day: and by this
means the master could readily tell what his servants meat and drink would
cost him in a year, that is 365 Chenix; which in our measure at 3 pintes the
Chenix, comes to 8 bushels 2 pecks and a pint; and 365 pints of wine, that is,
45 gallons a pottle and a pint: so much did every servant eat and drink in a
year. But God fed the Israelites 40 years in the wilderness with a greater
quantity; for he gave each man daily an Omer (that is, 3 Chenixes) of Manna,
i. a Gallon and something more.

Cicero in his 8 oration for Verres writes, that a Modius of wheat (which was a
peck wanting a pint) was commonly sold in Sicilia for 3 Sestertio's, about 6 d.
sterling, and so much had every servant in Grecia daily, and a pint of wine to
drink.

These customs, howsoever in these countries they might be tolerable, in
regard they lived in a hot climat; yet to us, where it is much colder, our
bodies require a greater quantity for nourishment: nevertheless a mean and
spare diet is both more healthful and profitable for the body, than excess;
because the stomach being surcharged, it cannot duly concoct that which it
receives, whereby the body is filled with many crudities and noisome diseases.

And thus have I as exactly as I can, reduced the Hebrew, Greek and Latin
measures to ours: but if there be any who in casting up these quantities of
measures mentioned in the Scripture shall chance to find any error, or would
reduce them to a more near estimation (because I have in this treatise
principally followed Budaeus) to our measures, he is then to understand that
there is an other course to be taken, namely by weight; four ordinary spoonfuls
of water weigh an ounce, 12 ounces of Troy weight make a pound, eight pounds of
Troy weight make a Gallon, and 32 Gallons make a barrel, etc. The same course
may be taken in the account of corn measures, there going 8 gallons after the
same proportion to a bushel. So that what I have set down may be rectified by
your own industry, and made more capable to your understanding.

Examples collected out of profane Histories, by which you may perceive the
profit that may arise by the due use of this Treatise, to all such as read the
Grecian and Roman Histories.
IN the time of Claudus Emperor of Rome there was so great a famine (according
to the prophecy of Agabus, Acts 1) that a Modins, that is a pecke wanting a
pint of wheat, was sold at six Drams, which at 7 d. ob. the Dram comes
to 3 s. 9 d. English. This great famine is specified by Suetonius and Dion,
where they say, that but a little before the same measure of Wheat was worth
but 4 Sestertia's, which was 7 d. ob. English.

Of Pythius King of Lydia. Herodot. 7.
PYthius King of Lydia, who entertained that mighty Emperor Xerxes and all his
Army, would have lent him 3 millions of talents of silver toward the charge of
his war; which according to the Attick talent (that is, 187 li. 10 s. the
talent,) amounts to 562 millions five hundred pounds. And further he would
add to it four millions of Daricons, which at 15 s. the Daricon comes to
three millions of pounds. But Xerxes being greatly pleased with this
hospitality and liberality, that he might make evident his noble disposition
refused his offer, and gave him by way of gratuitie 7000 Darico's, which was in
our money 5250 li.

Of Croesus the mighty King of Lydia.
THis King Croesus sent an Ambassador to Delphos, to ask the Idol of Apollo
if he should prosper in the wars he took in hand against Cyrus King of Persia;
withal sending diverse rich Presents, and amongst the rest, a Lion of gold most
cunningly wrought, weighing 100 Talents, every Talent weighing 4500 li. which
in the whole amounted to 450000 li. Moreover, two cups, whereof one was fine
gold cunningly wrought, weighing 8 Talents and a half, which at 4500 li. the
Talent, comes to 36000 li. the other cup was made by that noble workman
Theodorus Sanius of pure silver, very curiously and artificially wrought
containing forty gallons; but of what valuation it was, is not set down. For
this great and rich present, King Croesus received of the Devil a double and
deceitful answer, whereby he was not only provoked to make war against Cyrus,
but by that means lost his kingdom; and being taken prisoner, he was set upon
a pile of wood to be burnt: but crying with a loud voice, O Solon, Solon,
(thereby showing, that wise Solon had foretold him, That no man is to be
acounted happy before his end.) King Cyrus granted him his life. This
recompense did the Devil return to Croesus for so great a Present. Such and
many other the like histories by this book may be understood.

The first rule for Drams.
IF you have any number of Drams, divide them by 8, and the production will
be English Crowns, according to Budaeus 100 Drams make a Mina, which is
about 12 Crowns, or 3 li. sterling.

The second rule of Mina's.
THe Mina multiplied by 12, the production is Crowns: for twelve Crowns
English is a Roman Mina, or a Mina of the Temple; 125 Mina's makes a Talent: so
that multiply 125 by 12, and the production will be 1500 crowns, which makes
a Talent.

The third rule of Talents.
THe Talent multiplied by 12, the production is crowns. For 125 Mina's being
multiplied by 12 makes 1500 crowns English which is a Talent; and 3000 crowns
is two Talents, etc. by which means you may reduce all Drams and other
less weights mentioned in the Scriptures to Mina's, and Talents; and these
again into crowns. But concerning the distinction of Talents, you may read
before. Notwithstanding observe this, That if you chance to read of any
Talent, Mina, or Sicle in the Scripture, whereto there is not an addition of
the Kings Talent, or, the Talent of the Temple (as I have said) you may then
presume that it is the common Talent. And this shall suffice for the Weights,
Measures, and Moneys mentioned in the Scriptures.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of the principal Authors out of whom this foregoing Treatise of
Weights and Measures, etc. was gathered.
AMbrosius Calapinus. Aulus Gellius. Cassarus Peucerus. Athenaeus. Flavius
Joseph. Galenus. Gulihelmus Budaeus. Hesychius. Saint Jerome. Ioachim
Camerarius. Johannes Avenarius. Johannes Fosterus. Julius Pollux. Martin
Luther. Matthew Hostius. Paulus Eberus. Philip Melancthon. Priscian Grammaticus.
Sebastian Munster. Septuaginta Interpretes. Suidas. Volutius Metianus.
The due proportion of Weights and Measures are also found in Myropolis.

Itinerarium Novi Testamenti. Wherein is contained the Travels of the Virgin
MARY, and JOSEPH; also of the Wisemen of the East, of our Savior Jesus
Christ, and of his Apostles.
But since I have briefly related the Travels of the ancient Patriarchs,
Judges, Kings and Prophets, (which things I know cannot be unprofitable unto
such as are iuditious) mentioned in the old Testament; that I might make a
perfect end of what I have begun, I will proceed and show unto you the travels
of all the holy men and women mentioned in the new Testament: where by due
observation of this discourse you may well understand, that as all the nations
of the world were derived from one man, that is, Adam; so all the Righteous and
such as are to be saved are derived from one man, that is, Christ Jesus. For as
by the first Adam sin came into the world, and by sin, death and damnation; so
by the second Adam that sin is pardoned, and man made partaker of eternal
happiness. And that these things might be the more apparent unto thee, I have
described the Towns, Cities, and places mentioned in their several Travels;
both what they were in former times, and what they are at this present: That so
by the due consideration of both, thou might observe the mutation and change
of estates; since through the revolution of times, those things which seem
most permanent, have within the compass of a few years been subverted, and
the ruins of those Cities which have been greatest, left to make evident
lamentable examples of vast and unheard of destructions, from whence such as
have any small knowledge of the Spirit, may draw such comfortable resolutions,
that neither poverty can subvert them, nor riches and honor exalt them; but
according to S. James, ca. 1. They may possess themselves in peace; since
neither the prosperity of the world is permanent, nor the adversity thereof
intolerable. The knowledge of both which, how soever to some it may seem
ridiculous, yet to such as are at all touched with the sense of worldly
affairs, it cannot choose but take a deep impression, and draw them thence to
the knowledge of Christ Jesus and of his doctrine. To which end and for which
purpose I have principally endeauored to publish this Treatise, that so
comparing the estate of man in this present world with the estate of grace in
the world to come, they might perceive the impotencie of the one, and the
permanencie of the other, and from both draw immovable Axioms; That there can
be no salvation where there is no humility, nor no prosperity where there is
not a knowledge of Christ Jesus in his humanity: and thence gather, That the
afflictions of this world, to which he is most subject through the whole
course of his life, is the ready means to honor and immortal glory. But that
these things may the better appear unto thee, I will endeavor to lay before
thee the beginning, and (so far as the holy Scripture leads me) the ending
of our Savior. From whence thou may draw such comfortable resolutions, that
in what estate soever thou art, whether in prosperity or adversity, thou
may therewith rest content, etc.

Of Zacharias the father of John Baptist.
ZAcharias or Zachariahu signifies Gods remembrance. This man was the father of
John the Baptist, being a Priest of the Tribe of Aaron, and dwelling at a Town
called Abia, of which you may read 1 Chr. 24. There were three famous men of
this name, as Basilius says. One that was a Prophet of the Lord, and lived 520
years before the birth of Christ, Zachar. 1. And another that was the son of
Iehoiada the High Priest, who at the command of that ungrateful King Ioas, was
stoned to death in the upper Court of the Temple, 2 Chr. 24. And a third which
was this Zacharias the father of John Baptist, and son of Barachias, that is,
The Blessed: who according to the opinion of Basil, was slain for no other
cause but for saying that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. This man had to
wife Elizabeth, of the posterity of the High Priest Aaron, and by her had a
son called John, so (...) of the Lord, who was afterward called John the
Baptist. Elizabeth signifies The Rest of God, being derived of Eli and
Scabbath, that is, The Rest and Sabbath of the Lord. The inhabitants of the
Holy land take upon them even to this day to show the house where Zacharias and
Elizabeth dwelt, in a town that stands on the right hand of the way as you go
from Emmaus to Jerusalem. But saint Luke, ca. 1. says, That Zacharias dwelt
not in a town or field, but i^ the city of Judah, which was situated in the
mountain of Judah. Risnerus and Johannes Hedenus write, That Zacharias dwelt in
Jerusalem, in that part of the city situated upon mount Bezetha, as in the
first book of the description of Jerusalem has bin declared. And this seems
to be verified out of Nehemia, cap. 3. Yet there are some of opinion that he
dwelt at Hebron, because that was the chief city of the tribe of Judah, and a
town of the Priests.

The Travels of the Virgin Mary.
MAry, if it be derived of Marah, signifies such a person as is oppressed with
carfulness and grief, one that is laid open to all misery and calamity,
pressed with continual vexation and mourning. She was born upon the 8 day of
September 14 years before the birth of Christ; and in the fifteenth of her age
brought forth her only begotten son, according to S. Hierome and others. Her
fathers name was Eliakim, of the house of David.

Upon the five and twentieth day of March in the same year that our Savior
Christ was born, Mary being then 14 years old, and the Angel Gabriel declared
unto her the embassy of the Conception of our Lord Jesus Christ. A little
after, about the beginning of April, an. M. 3967, she went from Nazareth in
great haste over the hills to Jerusalem, 64 miles, to the house of Zacharias,
and there saluted her cousin Elizabeth, Luke 1.

From thence she returned back again to Nazareth, which was 64 miles.

And when the command came out from Augustus, that all the world should be
taxed, then Joseph and Mary went from Nazareth to Bethlehem, 72 miles: and
there the time of Mary's deleuerance drew near; and lo, she bare the Son of
the living God, our Lord and Savior Christ, Luke 2.

From Bethlehem Joseph and Mary brought the child Jesus to Jerusalem, and
presented him in the Temple, which was 6 miles, Luke 2.

And when they had accomplished all things according to the Law, they returned
back again to Nazareth a town in Galilee, 64 miles.

From Nazareth they went back again to Bethlem, 72 miles, Thither the Wise men
coming out of the East brought the child Jesus Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh,
Mat. 2.

From Bethlehem (the same night that Herod caused all the infants of two years
old and under to be slain) Joseph and Mary fled with the child Jesus to
Hermopolis a city in Egypt, which was 296 miles, Mat. 2. Zozom. lib. 6.

From thence they returned back again with the child Jesus to Nazareth, 368
miles: for they were greatly afraid lest Archilaus (who succeeded his father
Herod in the government of the Jews) would seek the childs life, Mat. 2.

From Nazareth Joseph and Mary came every year to Jerusalem, which was 64
miles, to the feast of the Passover, and so many miles back again; which for
ten years continuance came to 1280 miles.

When Christ was twelve years of age, and at the beginning of the thirteenth,
he went with his parents from Nazareth to the feast of the Passover, which was
64 miles, Luke 2.

And when the days of the feast of the Passover were accomplished, they
returned home again. But the child Jesus stayed at Jerusalem, and his parents
knew it not, for they thought he had been among the company. Wherefore, when
they had traveled a days journey (that is, twenty miles) they missed their
son.

After, they searched through the company, but could not find him: wherefore
they returned back to Jerusalem being 20 miles where on the third day after
they found him in the Temple, sitting among the Doctors, and disputing with
them. So the next three days he returned back again with his parents to
Nazereth, which was 64 miles, and was obedient to them, Luke 2.

After, Iosoph and Mary went every year during the life of Joseph, up to
Jerusalem to the Passover, and without all doubt took Jesus along with them.
Thus they continued for the space of three years, about which time Joseph
died, Christ being then 16 years of age, which three years travel of
Nazareth to Jerusalem and back again, comes to 384 miles.

From that time forward he continued with his mother, till he was 31 years of
age, which was the first year of his ministry. Marie his mother being then
45 years old, was invited to a marriage in Cana, a city of Galile, which stood
eight miles from Ga^ile toward the North-west, John 2. Here our Savior Christ
wrought his first miracle, by changing water into Wine.

From Cana in Galile she went with our Savior to Capernaum, a city of Galile,
a little before the feast of the Paschal Lamb, which was 20 miles.

From Capernaum she returned back to Nazareth, which was accounted 12 miles.

In the 32 year of the age of our Savior Christ, which was ^he second of his
ministry, Mary went from Nazareth back again to Capernaum, where our
Savior Christ cast forth a devil, Matt. 12. Matke 3. which was 12 miles.

From thence she returned back again to Nazareth, which was 12 miles: for in
this Town she dwelt, whiles Jesus traveled from place to place teaching and
preaching the word of God, Mark 6.

And although she oftentimes went from Nazareth with him to many places,
continuing still in his company; yet then specially, when he was to sustain
the wrath of God, and punishment for the sin of man, which was in the 34
year of his age. In which year she would not forsake him till his death: for
she went from Galile to Jerusalem with him, which was 64 miles, a great
journey for one of her age (being then 48 years old.) And when our Savior was
crucified, she stood close by the cross with a heavy and pensive
countenance, bewailing the death of her son. Then was the prophecy of old
Simeon accomplished, And a sword shall pass through thy soul. But after, by
his glorious resurrection and ascension, she was revived and comforted. From
the passion of Christ to the death of the blessed virgin Marie, was 12 years:
All which time she lived with John the Evangelist in Jerusalem, and then being
59 years of age dyed, and was buried (according to the opinion of Nicephorus
and others) in the garden called Gethsamene. So all her Travels were 3506 miles.

Now follows the description of the towns and places to which she traveled.
Of Nazareth.
THis was a town almost of no estimation, situated in a certain mountain in
Galile the lower, sixty and four miles and something more from Jerusalem
toward the North, in the tribe of Zebulon. In this Town our Savior Jesus
Christ was brought up, Luke 1.2. Some say that it was nineteen or twenty miles
from Jerusalem, but they mistake themselves; yet I will not dispute thereof,
but follow my authors, Iacobus Ziglerus, and Tilmanus Stella. There is not any
mention made of it, that is exstant in the old Testament. It has a two fold
deriuation, the one by Zain, and the other by Zade. If it be written by Zaien,
it may have a twofold signification, since the exposition of this name does
depend upon the Verb Nazar, which signifies, to consecrate and keep; from
hence Nezaer, a garland of flower, or a crown set with precious stones, etc.
such as Kings and high Priests are accustomed to wear. Also from the same word
Nazar, is derived Nazir; and thence Nazaraeus, which is as much to say, he is
separated from the use of wine; and suffering his hair to be uncut, as being
dedicated to the Lord. Therefore our Savior Christ is justly called a
Nazarite, Luke 2. For Naezer first signifies, a holy man, who has made a holy
vow unto the Lord: Secondly, it does denote a crown or wreathe of synceritie,
Exodus 29.39. Thirdly, a holy ointment wherewith Kings and Priests were
anointed Leuit. 27. and fourthly, this word Nezaer, signifies a Princely
crown, 2 Samuel 1. 2 Kings 11. Psalm. 89.132. So that Nazareth being derived of
Nazar and Nazir, may signify both a crown, and a holy city, Judge. 13. but if
Nazareth be written by Zade, it signifies a flourishing plant or graffe,
according to that of Isay cap. 11. But there shall come a rod forth of the
stock of Ishai, and a graffe shall grow out of his root, and the spirit of the
Lord shall rest upon him. The inhabitants of this Town at this day show
certain monuments and relics of what had happened in preceding ages: as, two
Churches, one built there where the Angel Gabriel saluted the blessed Virgin,
and she conceived by the spirit: In which there stands three altars hewn out
of a rock: and the other built (as they say) where the house of Joseph and
Marie stood, because there our Savior Christ was brought up. Also they show a
well where the child Jesus drew water and ministered to his mother. They also
show the vast ruins of the sinagogue where our Savior Christ expounded the 61
chapter of Isay; for which cause they would have thrown him headlong down the
hill, Luke 4. And many other things, of which you may read in Borchardus the
Monk. In Saint Ieroms time some 40 years before Christ, Nazareth was a small
town called Nazarah.

Of the mountains by which Mary passed when she went to visit her cosen
Elizabeth.
Between Narareth and Jerusalem, there stands many high hills, as Mount
Gilboa, whereon King Saul killed himself; Mount Grisim, and Hebal, upon which
hills the blessings and cursings were pronounced, Deuteronomy. 27. and mount Ephraim,
upon which Ehud killed Eglon king of the Moabites, Judge. 13. Over this mountain,
being very great and steep, Mary traveled when she went to visit her cosen
Elizabeth.

Of Bethlehem.
THere were two cities called by this name, the one Bethlem Judah; the other
Bethlem Euphrata where our savior Christ was borne, and signifies, fruitful,
or the house of Bread: It stood upon a hill some 6 miles from Jerusalem toward
the South. The inhabitants take upon them to show the place where our savior
Christ was borne, which stood upon the East side of the City, close by the
wall thereof; where as Eusebius says, Hellen the Mother of Constantine the
Great, caused to be built a fair and stately Church, three hundred and
twenty years after the nativity of Christ. This Church was dedicated to
Saint Marie, and remains to this day, being had in great honor both amongst
the Christians, and the Turks and Sarazins. This Church is such a stately
building, that it is thought to exceed all the Churches of Christendom, for
beauty and curious workmanship: It is two hundred twenty and eight foot
long, and eighty seven foot wide, being built all of Marble of diverse
colors, and covered with lead: There are in it four rows of Marble pillars,
wonderful to look upon, not only in regard of their number, but of their
greatness, for there is fifty pillars in every row. The body of this church,
the pillars from the bottom to the top, the walls, and every part of it, is
beautified with lively pictures, adorned with diverse colors, silver, gold, and
curious workmanship, so as it is wonderful to behold. The pauement of it is
of marble; polished, and of diverse colors, so cunningly set in works, and with
such variety, that it is very delightful to such as look on it. There is
painted on the pillars and walls, almost all the stories of the Old Testament,
till the birth of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, with such excellent
cunning, and so lively, that it is to be admired. In the Quire of this Church
there is found two Altars, one close by the Chapel of Saint Katherine, at the
East end thereof; not far distant from which they show the place where our
Savior was circumcised: and in the middle of the Quire there stands another
Altar, where they say the wise men left their Dromedaries, and prepared their
gifts to present unto our Savior, when they worshipped him. Upon the South
side of this quire toward the East, they descend by ten stone steps into the
Chapel of the Nativity of Christ, richly beautified and curiously wrought,
paued with polished Narble. This Chapel is not very great, but wonderful
fair and sumptuous. When the Holy land was ouerrun by the Gentiles, this (as
many other places were in that country) was all polluted with filth and dirt,
that they had much ado to make it clean a great while after. Upon the place
where they said our Lady the blessed Virgin Mary, brought forth our Savior
into the world, there is placed a Table of white Marble, after the manner of an
Altar: about some four foot from this they show the place where the Manger
stood, a part of it yet remaining, cut out of a rock, not of Marble but of
other stone, as many other Mangers are in that country. Close by that there is
an Altar, where they say the wisemen presented their gifts to our Savior
Christ, and worshipped him. At the entrance into the Church there stands a
goodly building, which in times past seemed to have been some Archbishops See,
but now is called Saint Mary's Church. Upon the North side they descended by
certain stepps into the Chapel of Saint Ierom, who lay a long time buried
there, till his bones were removed thence to Saint Mary's in Rome.

About a mile from Bethlehem Southward, stood the Tower of Eder, being a watch
tower of the Bethlehemites, and so called because there resorted thither many
flocks of sheep: for Aeder signifies A Heard. Round about this Tower were
fair and fruitful pastures, to which many sheepheards resorted to feed their
flocks; to some of which sheepheards the Angels told the glad tidings of the
birth of our Savior, and that he was laid in a Manger at Bethlehem. For which
cause, in after times there was a Church built just in the place where the
Tower stood; and in Saint Ieroms time called by the name of Angelos ad
Pastores: the same Luther affirms, and that it is yet standing. Jacob
sometime dwelt in that place, and buried his wife Rachel thereabouts. The
monument that he set upon her grave remains to this day, which was twelve
stones pitched an end, standing about a quarter of a mile from this place, upon
the right hand as they go to Jerusalem: of which grave, all the country
thereabouts is called by the name of Rachel.

Of the way between Iudaea and Egypt.
Between Egypt and Iudaea lies Arabia Petraea: a land for the most part
barren and unfruitful, full of sands, rocks, and mountains, destitute of
water, and subject to many dangers: being in the Summer solstice scorched with
extremity of heat, the Sun being then perpendiculer over them (according to
Munster) in the day time; and in the night, troubled with extreme winds,
which blowing the sand with great violence, it casts it upon great heaps and
mountains, by which dust, both beasts and sometime men are suffocated and
slain.

Moreover there dwell in this Desert, a rude and dangerous people, called
Saracens; who take their beginning from Ishmael, and are therefore also called
Ishmaelites, being given to cruelty and maliciousness. They get their living
for the most part, by theft and violence: and as Ishmael was an excellent
Archer, so they also are very cunning in shooting and hunting, using to this
day their ancient evil custom of robbing and spoiling all that pass that
way; insomuch as Merchants are constrained to go in great companies, lest they
should be endangered by them, and by reason of the winds and sands are
constrained to guide their journey by the compass, as men do that sail upon
the sea. Through this wilderness did Joseph and Marie pass, when they went
with the child Jesus out of Iudaea into Egypt; where they were in danger of
thieves, subjects to be smothered by the sands, constrained to travel over
high rocks and mountains, and to rest in fear because of Lions, Bears, and
other beasts which greatly abound in that place. Besides, diverse other
discommodities were incident unto them, as want of meat, drink, and other
necessaries, there being little water to be found there, insomuch as had not
the Lord by an express command charged him in a dream to go down into
Egypt; Joseph durst hardly have ventured upon so difficult and dangerous a
journey. But the Lord so mercifully provided for him, that he both went and
returned safe. Thus may we see to what dangers these good people were exposed,
and what miseries they sustained from the beginning because of their son
Christ Jesus.

Of Hermopilis.
HErmopilis was called the Town of Mercury, distant from Jerusalem 304 miles
toward the Southwest: it was one of the chief cities in Egypt, as Appianus
writes. Nicephorus and Zozemenus affirm, lib. 5. cap. 22. that Joseph and
Mary came and lived in this Town, where they continued all the days of Herod
that cruel King. But Ziglerius says, that they lived in the land of Gosen,
where the Patriarch Jacob and his posterity lived: which agrees well with the
words of S. Matthew cap. 2. and Hosea 11. Out of Egypt have I called my son.
This land of Gosen lay 200 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest. The
inhabitants of Alcaire in Egypt take upon them to show the place where Joseph
and Mary dwelt when they went down into that country; but how true it is I
cannot tell, because there is no Author for it.

Of Canah in Galile.
This was city in Galile distant from Jerusalem 68 miles toward the North; of
which you may read more in the travels of our Savior Christ.

Of Capernaum.
THis town stood upon the sea of Galile, 68 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North; of which you may read more after.

The travels of the Wisemen out of the East, which came to Bethlehem to see
JESUS.
THe Magi were certain wise men of Persia, so called from Meditation, being
derived of Hagah, that is, He has meditated; and taken in the third
conjugation, it signifies, To find or search out a thing: they being such as
gave themselves to the knowledge of hard things, and to find out the secrets
and mysteries of nature. But according to Varinus, they were not only
Philosophers, but Priests also. And Plato upon Alcibiades, says, Magia est
deorum obseruantia sieve cultus diuinus; that is, Magic prescribes the due
observance and divine worship of the gods. Strabo says, Geogra. lib. 6. That
the Magi were such among the Persians, as those whom the Indians call
Gimnosophists and Academians; the Babylonians, Chaldaeans; and the Hebrews,
Prophets, or Priests, which taught the people divine knowledge. And when the
ten Tribes were carried into captivity by Salmanasser Emperor of the
Assirians (into Assiria, Media, and Persia) there is no question but they took
with them into the East, the holy books and volumes of the Law and of the
Prophets, whereby without doubt many of the people and Philosophers of the East
came to have a taste of the true knowledge and worship of God. Also the Prophet
Daniel was brought up in all the arts of the Chaldaeans; whose writings and
prophecies were not only written and published amongst the Babylonians, but
also had in great account and estimation amongst the Magi: so that they
diligently perusing those books, came not only to the knowledge of God, but
also without doubt to the knowledge of our Savior Jesus Christ, whom they
called The Star of Jacob; from whence may be concluded, That the Wisemen
that came to see our Savior Christ, were rather of Susa in Persia, than of
Zaba in Aethyopia.

Wherefore these wisemen came from the Academy of Susa in Persia to Jerusalem,
which was 920 miles; saying, Where is he that is borne King of the Jews, for
we have seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship him. This happened
in the month of January, in the second year after the birth of our Savior;
for Herod in the seuentieth year of his age caused all the male children of
the Bethlemites of two years old and under (according to the time that he was
told of the Wisemen) to be put to the sword.

From Jerusalem they went to Bethlehem, which was 6 miles, where upon the sixth
of January they offered their Presents which they brought out of Persia, to our
Savior; viz. Gold, as to a King; Frankincense, as to a Priest; and Myrrh, as
to a mortal man, Mat. 2. So let us offer unto Christ our Savior, the Gold of
faith and heavenly doctrine; the Frankincense of earnest prayers, and the
myrrh of patience in the midst of calamity.

Afterward, the Wisemen (as they had bin warned in a dream) returned another
way to Susa in Persia, which was 920 miles. So their travels were 1846 miles.

Of Susa you may read before in the travels of the Old Testament.

Of the Star that appeared to the Wisemen in the East.
SInce this Star appeared in the lower region of the air (as it is apparent
it did) from thence it may be concluded, That it neither was any of the fixed
stars, planet, or a Comet, because they commonly are seen in the upper
region of the air; but rather, according to the opinion of some, it was an
Angel of God appearing in the form of a bright shining Star, to direct the
Wisemen in their way as they went to the town of Bethlem; and so by little and
little descending from the sublimitie of the air, pointed out unto them the
very house where they might find Mary the mother of our Lord, and the child
Jesus. Almost after the same manner as the Angel of the Lord in the time of
Moses appeared to the children of Israel; that is, in the day like ta cloudy
pillar, and in the night like a flaming fire, to direct them their way, Exodus
13.14.34. Wherefore this Star without doubt was no natural apparition, which
happened in the inferior region of the air, suddenly vanishing away; but as I
have said, an Angel of the Lord representing the form of a Star. Or else as
Chrysostom says, a certain miraculous new Star, which according to the
opinion of Augustine, was governed by an Angel of the Lord; and for the
greatness of the body, and variety of the aspects, was not seen first in the
land of Iudaea, but in Persia, a country in the East, where the Magi dwelt,
and accompanied them thence into Judea. And although for a short space it left
them in the journie, yet when they came in the way to Bethlem, it appeared to
them again, Mat. 2. As Nicephorus and Chrysostom observe; the Star appeared
upon the day of the conception of Christ, being the 25 day of March; about
which time the Archangell Gabriel spoke with the Virgin Marie, Luke 1. And with
seen for a whole year and 41 weeks, that is, till the 6 of January, in the
beginning of the second year after the nativity of Christ. It wanted 11 weeks
of two years; and therefore Herod caused all the male children of the
Bethlehemites of two years old and under, to be slain, according to the time
declared unto him by the wise men. Mat. 2. Wherefore this new Star did first
foreshew the birth of Christ, that bright shining Star and eternal light of
glory, according to the prophecy of Billa, Number. 22. Secondly, the light of
Gods Word and the Gospel, 2 Pet. 1. Thirdly, godly and faithful ministers and
teachers, who by their doctrine and godly life and conversation, should set
before their auditors and such as observe their actions, the way to Christ and
eternal happiness, Dan. vlt.

The Travels of John Baptist.
IN the month of Thisri, which answers to our September, Annoo mundi, 3966,
the Feast of the Tabernacles being then celebrated, the Archangell Gabriel told
Zacharias the Priest, of the conception of John the Baptist, which should be
the voice of a crier in the wilderness. And a little after, that is, about the
Autumnall Aequinoctiall, John the Baptist was conceived six months before our
Savior. The next year after, about the month of July, he was borne. Six
months after that, our Savior Christ was borne. In which year Zacharias che
father of John Baptist, was slain in the upper court between the Altar and
the Temple, for saying, that our Savior Christ was borne, and, That Marie his
mother was a Virgin, Matt. 33. Wherefore Elizabeth the wife to Zacharias,
fearing the cruelty of Herod and of the Pharisees, about that time when the
young infants of the Bethlehemites were slain, she fled from Jerusalem to
Apumim, as Nicephorus faith, which was situated in the wilderness between
Jericho and Jerusalem, where she privately brought up her son, which was 32
miles.

In the 39 year of the nativity of Christ, and upon the 24 day of June; John
the Baptist being then 30 years of age, by the commandment of the Lord took
upon him the ministry: for it was not lawful for any to enter into that
function before they were thirty years, of age, Numb. 4. Wherefore upon the
eight and twentieth day of September, it being then the feast of the
Tabernacles, and about the middle of the last week spoken of by Daniel, He
went from Adumim to Bethabara, where he took upon him the Ministry of the
New Testament: Hannas the chief Priest being then newly entered into that
office, Luke 2. (which was about four miles) and within a short time after,
that is, upon the seventh day of October, being then the feast of Expiation,
our Lord and Savior Iesuis Christ was baptized, when he was fully thirty
years of age, Luke 3 Matthew 3. John 1.

In the year following, which was the one and thirtieth year of the Nativity
of Christ, a little before the feast of Easter, the Synedrion of Jerusalem sent
messengers unto John, he then remaining at Bethabara, to know whether he was
the Christ, or Elias, or some other Prophet, John the first. Upon the
eighteenth day of September, the same year John entered upon the second year
of his ministry: About which time Caiphas began to enter upon the office of
the high Priest, and the Sadduces and Pharisees to persecute John Baptist.
Wherefore he departed from Bethabara and went to Aenon, a City in Galile,
which was 24 miles.

After that John had preached publicly and freely, by the space of a whole
year and two months; about the month of December, and the end of the first
year of the Ministry of our Savior, by the commandment of Herod, he was
taken and led prisoner from Aenon to the Tower of Macheruntes, which was 28
miles; where he remained until his death. So all his Travels were 88 miles.

Of the towns and places to which he traveled. Of Adumim.
ADumim, or Adummim (as it is in Joshua, ca. 15.) was a Tower twelve miles from
Jerusalem toward the East, situated in the wilderness that is between
Jerusalem and Jericho; so called because of the multitude of robberies and
murders that were done in that place: for Dam, signifies Blood. Here the
poor man that Christ mentioned, Luke 10. fell amongst thieves; and here Eliah
continued when he was fed by the Ravens, aad drank the water of the river
Cherith, 1 King. 17. which was a notable type of John the Baptist, who lived in
a cave in this place. This cave stood close by the Garden of Engedi, where in
former times the Academie and School of the Prophets Eliah and Elisha, was
kept: here the Esseis (which was a Sact amongst the Jews) also continued, who
led a Monastical kind of life, and gave themselves wholly to prayers and good
works; under whose discipline and instruction John was brought up. Mathesius
wisely observes, that of all other, the Esseies would never oppose Christ; but
were a people that lived chastely and honestly according to the custom of the
Nazarites; with all diligence reading the Scriptures, and avoiding idleness as
a great temptation of the devil, giving themselves principally to the study
of Physic. After rhis sort was John brought up.

Of Bethabara.
THis was a town situated upon the East side of the river Jordan, 16 miles
from Jerusalem toward the East, where there was either a Bridge or a ferry to
pass over Jordan: from whence this place was called Bethabara, being derived
of Both, a house; and Abarah, a passage: Wherefore at a certain time there
being assembled in this place a great concourse and congregation of people,
John did first enter upon the ministry of the New Testament, and taught the
people the Doctrine of Repentance and Baptism. Here Elias the Thesbite, who
was a type of John the Baptist, was taken up into heaven in a fiery Chariot.
Here John spoke with the messengers that came to inquire, Whither he was the
Christ or not; to whom he answered, that he was neither Elias nor a prophet
of the Old Testament, but the voice of a crier in the wilderness, Io. 4. Is.
40. And in the same place where the Priests stood with the Arc of the
covenant, whiles Joshua and the children of Israel passed over Jordan, John
baptized Christ, the true Arc of the Covenant of the Throne of grace, Josh.
3.4. Mat. 4. Luke. 3. Heb. 9.

Of Aenon.
THis town stood upon the West side of the river of Jordan, 42 miles from
Jerusalem Northward, a little on this side of the sea of Tiberias, near the
mouth of the river Iaboch, where it falls into Jordan, in which place was
great abundance of waters. Here also John sometimes baptized, Ioh. 3. it being
two miles from Salem where Jacob in times past dwelt, Genesis 33. Of the meeting
together of the waters this town was called Aenon, of Ain which signifies an
Eye, and a fountain that springs as it were from an Eye.

Of Macherus or Macharuntes.
MAcherus was a town of Peraea, beyond Jordan, 20 miles from Jerusalem toward
the East, situated in a high mountain: being derived Macherah, that is, A
Sword. This was one of the chief castles of Herod Antipas, who obtained the
chief command in the city of Jerusalem, Plin. lib. 5. c. 16. In this place
John Baptist was beheaded, as Joseph. says, lib. Antiq. 80. c. 10. And
although his Disciples buried his body thereabouts, yet long after the
christians removed his bones and relics to Sebasten, that is, Samaria, where
they were the second time buried with great honor and reverence. Afterward (as
Nicephorus and Theodor says) his bones were taken up again by Julian the
Apostata, and burnt. There are many other things that are written concerning
his relics, which (because of the uncertainty of them) I omit to speak of;
and will proceed to a further description of this city. Alexander King of the
Jews first built and fortified it; and then making war against Aristobulus,
it happened to be destroyed by Gabinus one of his Captains, and so continued
desolate till Herod's time, who rebuilt the town and the castle, and fortified
it with strong walls and high towers, even a hundred and sixty cubits in
height, so that a man could scarce see to the top of it. But, that God might
revenge the blood of his Saints, at such time as Jerusalem and the Holy land
was left desolate. Lucius Bassus (a noble Roman) came to this city and
besieged it; during which siege, Bassus took a certain young man which was a
Prince of the Jews called Eliazer, and caused a Cross to be set on purpose to
have crucified him: but they which were besieged in the town, seeing the
pitiful lamentations this young man made, promised Bassus, if he would spare
his life to yield up the town, which he did; so the castle being taken, the
gates of the city were set open. But the Romans fell to the slaughter without
mercy, and put to the sword 1700 persons, besides there were a great multitude
of women and children carried thence into captivity, as Josephus (lib. de
Bello Iud. 7. cap. 25.) affirms.

There were many goodly wells, and stately buildings, within this city: there
is cut out in the castle a Rue tree of an admirable greatness. And in the
valley upon the North side of the City, the root Baarus is found, presenting
both in color and figure a flame. There are also found many hot Baithes and
Fountains of wholesome waters. But above the rest, Josephus makes mention of
one in a cave, where two streams issues, as it were out of two duggs; the one
hot, the other cold: which two waters being mingled together, are very
wholesome and cure many diseases, but principally the shrinking of the sinews.
And this shall suffice concerning the travels of John the Baptist.

The Travels of our Lord and Savior Christ in his infancy, Matthew 3. Luke 2.
FRom Bethlehem the child Jesus was brought to Jerusalem, and there presented
in the Temple, Anno Mundi 3967, which was 6 miles.

From Jerusalem Joseph and Marie, (when they had accomplished all things in the
Temple of the Lord) carried the child Jesus to Nazareth in Galile, which was
64 miles.

From thence Joseph and Marie brought Jesus back again to Bethlehem, which
was 72 miles.

Upon the second day of January, in the second year after the nativity of
Christ, the wise men of Persia brought gifts and worshipped him. A little
after, that is, about the Ides of January, just the night before the command
came from Herod to kill the innocent children, Joseph and Marie went with the
child Jesus through the mountains and deserts of Iudaea, into Egypt to
Hermopolis, in the land of Gosen; which was reckoned from Bethlehem 296 miles.

From Hermopolis in Egypt (after the death of Herod) Jesus was brought back
again by his parents to Nazareth in Iudaea, which was above 368 miles.

When Jesus was twelve years of age, he went with his parents from Nazareth to
Jerusalem, to the feast of the Passover, which was 64 miles.

And when his parents had lost him, and found him again in the Temple among
the learned; then he continued in obedience unto them, and went with them from
Jerusalem to Nazareth, which was 64 miles. So his Travels were 934 miles.

Concerning the towns and places mentioned in his Travels, you may read
before in the Travels of the Virgin Marie.

The travels of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, from his Baptism till the
first year of his Ministry.
CHrist in the thirtieth year of his age, went from Nazereth and came to
Bethabara, which stood upon the river Jordan, where John baptized; and upon the
seventh day of October, in the middle of the last week spoken of by Daniel,
cap. 9. was there baptized, at whose baptism the testimony of the spirit
descended down upon him in the likeness of a Dove; which was 52 miles.

From Jordan, Jesus was led by the spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted of
the devil, and there fasted forty days and forty nights: at the end of
which time, the devil came unto and tempted him. How this wilderness was
called, the Evangelist does not specify: but it is to be thought that it was
the desert of Arabia Petraea, and that our Savior Christ fasted upon the
mountain of Sinai, where Moses and Eliah fasted forty days and forty
nights, Exodus 24.1. Reg. 19. For this desert extends it self from the
borders of Egypt and the Red sea, to Jordan, where John baptized: and from
thence by the country of Trachonitis, to the mountain of Libanus. Therefore our
Savior Christ might that present seventh day of Actober whereon he was
baptized, come into this Wilderness; and by little and little go thence to
mount Sanai, which was 136 miles. For there was no place more fit for Satan to
tempt our Savior in, than where the law was delivered, which is the power of
Sin: for although the Son of God was without sin, yet he took upon him the
sins of all the world, Leuit. 16. Ioh. 1. Isa. 53. So then our Savior Christ
(according to this supputation) continued in the Desert from the seventh day of
October to the sixteenth of November, which was forty days and forty nights.
Epiphanias lib. 2. Tom. 1. Hoeres. 51. says, that our Savior Christ was
baptized upon the eighth day of November which was the twelfth day of the
month Athyr amongst the Egyptians: but this supputation is false and
altogether repugnant to the certain Mathematical calculation.

Wherefore upon the 17 day of November our Savior Christ hungered, Mat. 4. Mark
1. Luke 4. and then the devil with an extraordinary boldness came unto him,
and carried him from Mount Sinai with great violence through the air, and set
him upon the top of a pinnacle of the temple in Jerusalem, which was 120 miles:
this pinnacle was so exceeding high (as you may read in the description of
Jerusalem) that whosoever looked down from it into the valley of Cedron, their
eyes dazzled, and it seemed as though there had bin clouds in the bottom of the
valley; for it was 600 foot from the bottom to the top. From this place the
devil bad our Savior Christ throw himself down, etc. Mat. 4.

From the pinnacle of the Temple the devil took our Savior Christ and set him
upon a high mountain; but what hill it was, or how called, the holy Evangelist
does not set down. The inhabitants of the Holy land think it was the hill that
stood betwixt Bethel and Ai, upon which hill in times past Abraham dwelt, Genesis
13. But that hill is not very high, and there are many higher hills in the holy
land: wherefore it is to be thought that he was carried upon the top of that
high mountain Nebo, which was also called Pisgah, and stood 24 miles from
Jerusalem Eastward, where God showed unto Moses all the holy land beyond
Jordan, Deuteronomy. 34. and in this place, as God had showed Moses, so the devil
showed our Savior the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, saying, All
these will I give thee, etc. It is to be thought that all these sharp
temptations of the devil were done in one day.

This hill Pisgah is distant from Bethabara 8 miles, where John Baptist
baptized, and bare witness of our Savior Christ, Ioh. ca. 1. Now after the
devil had left him, and the Angels had comforted him, he came thence unto John,
which was 8 miles, and John said to his Disciples, Behold, this is the Lamb of
God which takes away the sins of the world, Ioh. 1.

So these travels were 140 miles.

The Travels of our Savior Christ in the first year of his Ministry, which
was the 31 of his age.
But yet our Savior Christ began not to preach publicly, because it was not
lawful for any to be admitted into the Ministry of the Word until they were
past thirty years of age. Now our Savior Christ in the months of January and
February, being then past thirty (for he was full thirty upon the 25 day of
December) began to preach publicly, but yet he had no disciples, neither had
he wrought any miracles. In the month of March John Baptist testified of Christ
before the Priests and Levits; and within two days after, Christ being then
present, John said, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world, etc. Within a while after, Christ went thence toward Cana in Galile, in
which journey he took unto him some disciples, namely Andrew and John the
Evangelist, and as some think, Peter, Philip, and Nathaniel; near to the town
of Bethel, where the Patriarch Jacob saw a ladder reaching from earth to heaven
(for Christ makes mention of that vision in this journey) which was 32 miles,
Ioh. 2. where he graced the marriage with a notable mircle, turning six pots
of water (containing 168 gallons and three quarts, or thereabouts) into wine,
Ioh. 2.

After, he went thence with his mother and his disciples to Capernaum, 20
miles: but he stayed there but a while, for the passover of the Jews was at
hand, Ioh. 2.

In the beginning of April Christ went from Capernaum to Jerusalem, to the
feast of the Passover, which was 56 miles, and there cast out of the Temple
the money changers, and those that sold sheep, and oxen, and doves in it. This
was done about 46 years after Herod Ascalonita King of the Jews had rebuilded
and beautified the Temple; of which you may read in Iosep. li. Ant. 15. cap.
14. Ioh. 2.

This first Passover of the Ministry of our Savior Christ, The first
Passover of the Ministry of Christ.
of which you may read, John, cap. 2. was celebrated upon the sixth day of
April, and continued until the thirteenth day of the same month. During
which time our Savior Christ did many Miracles, insomuch that many believed in
his name; and amongst the rest Nicodemus, who came to him by night, and
reasoned with him concerning the kingdom of God. Nicodemus signifies the
Victory of the people, Ioh. 3. At this time he continued in Jerusalem till the
month of October, and there celebrated the Feast of Tabernacles, and preached
the acceptable year of the Lord, Esaias 61.

The feast of Tabernacles being ended, Jesus with his disciples came into
Judea, that is, he went from Jerusalem, and began to teach in Judea, and his
Disciples baptized, Ioh. 3.4. John also baptized at this time upon the borders
of Galile near Judea, 42 miles from Jerusalem Northward, upon the East side of
the river Jordan, for he was not yet cast into prison. Therefore Christ chose
him a place to teach and baptize in upon the river of Jordan, near John, that
they might meet and converse together. A little after, the question was moved
concerning Purification, and John began to preach of Christ, and that he was
the Son of God, and Spouse of the Church. In this Sermon John in many places
called himself the Friend of the Spouse. From whence it is evident, That
Christ and John in the month of November did often meet and converse together.

In the month of December Christ being assured of the captivity of John the
Baptist, Mat. 4. Mark 1. and of the persecution and fallacies of the Pharisees,
John 4. went from Jordan, and returned into Galilee by the province and
country of Samaria: in which country he came to Jacobs Well, which stood
close by Sichar, in former times called Sichem, about some 10 miles from Jordan
toward the West; in which place he spoke with the Samaritan woman (this
happened some four months before Harvest) and after went into Sichar, and
continued there for the space of two days; and after returning into Galile,
was very acceptably entertained of the Galileans, because they formerly having
seen his miracles done at Jerusalem, were joyful to see him there.

When he had traveled from Sichar to Cana (a city in Galile the lower, which
was 32 miles, where he had changed water into wine) there was a certain Ruler
came unto him, whose son lay sick at Capernaum, 20 miles distant, and
besought him to heal his son; our Savior told him that his son was made
whole: so he believed, and his son was made whole the same hour. This was the
second miracle that our Savior Christ did, Io. 4. It is thought that this
rulers name was Chuza, of whom there is mention Luke 8 and was Herod's
Procurator; whose wives name was Iohanna, which signifies Gracious. This woman
ministered of all her substance unto Christ, Ioh. 4. So these Travels were 192
miles.

Of the Towns and places to which he traveled. Of Canain Galile.
THis was a city of the lower Galile, where our blessed Savior Christ turned
water into wine, being distant from Jerusalem 68 miles Northward. The place
where our Savior wrought this miracle is to be seen at this day; but it is
within the ground, and you must descend by certain steps before you can come at
it; because (as it seems) there have bin many churches and buildings set upon
it, which being sundry times ouerthrown, the ruins thereof have raised the earth
in such sort, that the ancient place is as it were hidden and laid under the
earth, as is also the place of the Annuntiation, of the nativity of our Savior
Christ, and many other where he wrought miracles; to which they do descend
down under the earth by steps. Upon the North side of this town stood a round
hill, and upon the South a goodly plain; being called Cana in Galile, to put
distinction between it and another town called after the same name, which
stood upon the borders of Tyrus and Sidon, in the Tribe of Aser; in which the
Canaanitish woman or Syroph oenicean dwelt, which besought Christ to heal her
daughter who was possessed of a devil, Mat. 15. Mark 7. which was called Canah
the greater, as this was called Canah the less, and was distant each from
other 44 miles.

Canah was so called because round about it grew Reeds, and there were many
moorish and waterish grounds, whereof the town took the name. For Canah
signifies a Reed: which is a fit type of the Church; for as our Savior Christ
at this town (which stood in a moorish and reedy place) graced the marriage
with an extraordinary miracle; so likewise will he grace the marriage of his
Church (though troubled with miseries and afflictions in this world, tossed to
and fro like a wavering reed) with the glorious presence of his gracious
countenance, and in the world to come crown it with eternal glory.

Of Capernaum.
THis city was so called from the pleasant and comfortable situation of it. In
the Hebrew text Matthew calls it Capharnacum, i. The town of comfort; being
derived of Nocham, i. Consolation. In this town our Savior dwelt after he had
left Nazareth, and in it wrought many miracles, as the healing of the sick,
casting out of devils, and such like, whereof you may read, Mat. 8. Mark 1.
Luke 5.7. John 4. It stood in the land of Genesareth, upon the West and North
side of Jordan, in an angle of land joining to the sea of Galile, 56 miles from
Jerusalem Northward, in the tribe of Issacher; and as it is thought by some,
just in the midst of the twelve tribes. Mat. 9. calls it the city of our
Savior. And that Christ was no stranger, but an inhabitant of this city, it is
manifest, Mat. 17. where Christ when he gave tribute to the magistrates of this
city) asked Peter saying, Of whom do the Kings of the earth take tribute?
Peter said, Of strangers: Then, quoth he, the children are free; yet
nevertheless, etc. From whence may be gathered that he was no stranger, but an
inhabitant in Capernaum. It had upon the Northside of it the three Tribes,
Nepthalim, Aser, and Zabulon; upon the South, Benjamin, Judah, Dan, and Simeon;
upon the West, Issacher, Ephraim, and the half Tribe of Manasses; and upon the
East, Reuben, Gad, and the other half tribe of Manasses: so that our Savior
Christ dwelt in the midst of the 12 tribes of Israel. Furthermore, it was a
goodly market town, and had as well relation to Tyrus and Sidon (two towns of
the Gentiles within 44 miles of it) as to Jerusalem: from whence may be
verified that saying of Esa. ca. 8.9. The land of Zebulon and Nepthalim, near
the way of the sea beyond Jordan, and Galile of the Gentiles; a people which
sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, saw a great Light. This town is
therefore instly called the city of Comfort and Consolation; since our Savior
Christ dwelt there, who with his doctrine and preaching refreshed and comforted
all such as were afflicted with the burden of their sins. But the great men
that were inhabitants of this City had more respect to their private profit,
than to the doctrine and miracles that Christ wrought among them; from whence
it came to pass that they did as it were neglect and contemn that good which
God had offered unto them: which made our Savior say, And thou Capernaum, which
seem to be exalted up unto heaven, shall be cast down into hell: for if the
miracles had been done in Sodom and Gomorah, which have been done in thee, they
had continued until this day. Verily verily I say unto you, It shall be easier
for Sodom and Gomorah in the day of Judgment, than for thee, Mat. 11. For there
was no such benefit offered to any City, neither such honors and dignities,
as were to Capernaum, our Savior himself dwelling there. Wherefore for their
ingratitude and impiety the city has diverse times bin wasted and destroyed, as
well by the Romans as other nations; so that at this day this glorious city is
become so desolate, that there is scarce 8 houses standing, and they also like
small sheds.

Of Sichar.
IN ancient time this town was called Sichem, of which you may read more both
in the travels of Jacob and Abimilech. After it came to be called Sichar,
according to the opinion of Luther upon Genesis, because the inhabitants of
that country were given to pleasure and voluptuousness, the greatest part of
their delight being in drinking and quaffing: for Sichar, being derived of
Schachar, signifies, to be drunk, or inordinately to swallow sweet and
pleasant wine, of which there was great plenty in that town, made of the juice
of Apples, the fruit of Palm trees, and honey, which may very well resemble
Hipocras or Metheglin, as some Authors have it. And although by the incursion
of the Romans it was utterly wasted and left desolate, yet in succeeding times
it was rebuilt, and called Nicapolis, that is, a New town. It is situated
very pleasantly, and abounds with all manner of delights; but it is
unfortified, neither can it by any means be fortified; neither have the
inhabitants any help, if they be oppressed by the Enemy, but to fly: for it is
situated in the middle of a valley, between two high mountains, so that a
man may fling a stone from the top of one of them into the city. About two
bows shoot without the South gate of this town is to be seen the Fountain
or Well of Jacob, upon the brimme of which our Savior Christ sat when he was
weary, as we may read in the fourth of John. This Well stands just in the
way as Pilgrims travel to Jerusalem. Upon the right hand above this Well
there stands a mountain of an exceeding height, divided into two tops, the
one of them being called Gerizim, the other Heball. In mount Gerizim the
Patriarch Ioshuah built an Altar, and the people standing upon mount Heball, he
caused the whole book of Deuteronomie to be read over, with the Blessings and
Cursings, so that all the people might hear them; for thus we read in Ios. 8.
The one half of the people stood close by Mount Gerizim, and the other by
mount Heball, etc. Deuteronom. Chap. 27. These two great mountains began upon
the right side of the City Sichar, and extended themselves in length to the
City of Jericho.

Upon the left side of this Well is to be seen the ruins of a great town, which
is thought to be the old Sichem, and by the relics that remain there, it may
be judged to have been a very goodly City. For there are yet to be seen
certain broken Pillars of Marble, as also large and spacious Buildings, which
in times past without question have been very goodly things, and stands
wonderful pleasantly; the soil round about it being very pleasant and
fruitful, only there is want of water. This Town lies some two Bows shoot
from Sichar, and the inhabitants of that place judge this Sichar to be Thebez,
where Abimelech died, Judge. 9. Not far from Jacobs Well, is to be seen that
piece of ground which Jacob gave to Joseph, more than the rest of his brethren,
Genesis 48. It is a long valley, very fruitful and pleasant, where there lies
buried in a certain fair garden, the bones of Jacob and Joseph, which were
brought out of Egypt, Josh. 24. the relics of which sepulcher are yet to be
seen. Mount Garizim or Gerizim, is so called from the cutting down of Trees:
for Garaz signifies, To cut downc. Upon this Mountain is to be seen (even to
this day) the place where the Temple stood that was built by Sanballath,
dedicated to Jupiter Olympius, in contempt of the Temple of Jerusalem. The
chief Priest of this Temple was one Manasses, a fugitive of the stock of
Leui. This Manasses was brother to Iaddus, chief Priest of Jerusalem, of whom
you muy read Nehem. 13. But some two hundred years after the first
foundation, John Hircanus high Priest of Jerusalem utterly destroyed it to the
ground.

The Travels of our Savior Christ in the second year of his Ministry; which
was the two and thirtieth year of his age.
IN the month of January, Christ went from Cana in Galile to Nazareth, which
was eight miles. Here, upon the Sabbath day he went into the Sinagogue and
began to teach, insomuch as the inhabitants were astonished at his doctrine:
but the citizens being ungrateful, he went to Capernaum, a city which he had
chosen to dwell in before all others, Luke 4. Mat. 4. which was 12 miles, or
thereabouts.

In the month of February he compassed about all Galile, preaching the Gospel
of the kingdom of God, healing the sick, and those that were diseased amongst
the people, Matthew. 4. In this visitation our Savior went to Gaesarea Philippi,
which was distant from Capernaum forty eight miles toward the North. Here
Matthew was called, as he was at the receipt of Custom; and the woman was
healed of her bloody issue, Mat. 9. But that Matthew was called about this time,
the circumstances of times make evident; for a little after the second
Passover of our Savior Christ, the same Matthew was chosen to be an Apostle,
Luke, 5, 6. Mat. 9. Mark 2. In the month of March, the inhabitants of the
towns which Christ visited in Galilee, brought unto him many that were
possessed of devils, and afflicted with other diseases, all which he healed:
insomuch that there followed him a great company out of Galile and Decapolis,
and from Jerusalem and Iudaea, and of all the countries beyond Jordan, Mat. 4.
Thus having finishing this visitation, as it may be thought, he returned back
again to Capernaum, where he dwelt, as I have showed before, which was 48
miles; for Caesarea Philippi stood so far from Capernaum.

A little after these things were finished, The second Passover of the
Ministry of Christ:
was the feast of the Jews, John 4. and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, John 5. to
celebrate the feast of the Passover, which this year happened a little before
Harvest, which was 56 miles. This second Passover of the Ministry of Christ
fell upon the six and twentieth day of March, at which time Christ celebrated
the Passover with his Disciples according to the Law of God. Here, upon the
Sabbath day, being the last day of March, he healed a certain man that lay by
the Poole Bethesda, which had bin diseased eight and thirty years, Ioh. 5. And
at the end of the Passover he went with his Disciples from Jerusalem, through
the corn fields: but his Disciples being hungry began to pull the ears of
corn, and to eat them; wherefore the Pharisees being offended at them, began
to reprehend our Savior Christ and his Disciples: upon which followed the
disputation concerning the Sabbath, Luke 6. Matthew. 12.

Upon the seventh day of April he went on the Sabbath day to Peraea, which
country was in the command of Herod Antipas, and there he healed a man with a
dried hand, Luke 6. Mark 3. The country of Peraea beyond Jordan is distant
from Jerusalem twenty miles.

But when the Herodian Council heard that he had healed a man on the Sabbath
day, they sought occasion how they might do to put him to death: Wherefore our
Savior Christ went thence to the sea of Galile, which was 40 miles. Here he
went up into a mountain not far from Capernaum, and chose the twelve Apostles,
Luke 6. Mark 3. And then upon this mountain he preached unto the people, which
resorted thither unto him out of the Country round about, whom they heard with
great diligence and attendance. This sermon being ended, he came down from the
mountain, and healed the man that was sick of the Leprosy. He also went
into Capernaum and healed the Centurions servant, Mat. 8. Luke 7. Afterward
Christ in the same month of April, when the man whom he healed of his leprosy
had published that Miracle, he went from Capernaum into the Desert which lay
near unto Bethsaida; for there was a certain Desert, Mark 1. Luke 7. In the
month of May our Savior went out of Galile toward Jerusalem, to keep the
feast of Penticost; so he came to the gates of the city Naim, which stood on
the border of Samaria, and was distant from Capernaum 16 miles. Here he
recalled the widows son to life, Luke 7. And after he went to Jerusalem,
which was 48 miles, that he might celebrate the feast of Penticost, according
to the law of God, Exo. 23. Thrice every year shall every male child appear
before the Lord thy God. This feast fell this year upon the 15 day of May; for
it behooued our Savior, according to the law, to go every year to Jerusalem to
these three principal feasts, that is, of the Passover, Penticost, and of the
Tabernacles. A little after the feast of Penticost, John Baptist (being then in
prison) having certain intelligence of the Miracle that our Savior wrought
upon the Widows son at the gates of Naim; and of other wonderful Miracles
that he did in Jerusalem, and in other places in Iudaea; sent two of his
disciples from the Castle of Macharuntes, to ask him the question, whether he
was the Messia or no? So when they came unto him and delivered their message,
at that time he cured many of their sickness and plagues, and evil spirits,
and to many blind men he gave sight freely. And Jesus said unto them, Go
your ways and tell John what things you have seen and heard, That the Blind
see, the Halt go, the Lepers are cleansed, the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised,
and the Poor receive the Gospel: And blessed is he that shall not be
offended in me, Matthew 11. Luke 7. At this sermon it was thought he converted
the sinner that washed his feet, and poured a box of precious oil upon his
head, Luke 7.

In the month of June our Savior Jesus Christ went with the Twelve about six
and fifty miles out of Iudaea into Galilee, and there in diverse Cities and
Towns he began to preach and teach the Kingdom of God. At this time there
were diverse Women followed him, whom he had healed of evil Spirits, and of
their infirmities; but principally Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven
Devils; and Joan the wife of Chuza, Herod's Procurator; and Susanna: All which
ministered unto him of their substance, Luke 8.

Now when he had traveled from place to place some certain time, and visited
many cities and towns thereabouts, he returned back again to the city of
Capernaum, where it is said that our Savior Christ dwelt; and there dispossessed
the man of a devil, that was both blind, lame, and dumb, Mat. 12. Mar. 3. Luke
11. And going thence to the sea he recited 8 Parables, Matthew. 13. Mark 4. Luke
8. In the evening of the same day he went six miles into the country of the
Gadarens, Mar. 4. Luke 8. The next day betimes in the morning he went out of
the ship into the country of the Gadarens, and healed two that were possessed
of devils, Matthew. 2. Mar. 5. Luke 8.

Out of these two he cast a legion of Devils, and suffered them to enter into
the herd of swine, which they carried headlong into the sea. Presently our
Savior Christ went thence 6 miles, into the land of Genesareth, where there
was a great multitude upon the sea shore not far from the City of Capernaum,
that expected his coming, Mar. 5. Luke 8. Within a few days after, about the
beginning of June, he entered into Capernaum, and there healed the man that lay
sick upon his bed of a dead palsy, Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Luke 5. after he went to
sea, and taught the multitude that came to him, Mar 2.

From Capernaum he went to Caesarea Philippi, 48 miles, where being invited to
a banquet by Matthew, he ate among Publicans and sinners, and confuted the
Pharisees and John's disciples. In the same city he restored the daughter of
Iairus to life, Mat. 9. Mark 2. Luke 5. and as he went thence, he restored
two men to their sight, and cast out a Devil, Mat. 9.

About the end of the month of July our Savior Christ went from Cesarea
Philippi to Nazareth, 36 miles; where because of the ingratitude and contempt
of the citisens he did no great miracles, Mark 6. Mat. 13.

In the month of August our Savior Christ went from Nazareth toward Jerusalem
to the feast of Tabernacles, and as he went visited the towns and cities near
adjoining. Now when he saw that they wanted Teachers, it being at this time
the second harvest, he said unto his Disciples, Lo the Harvest is great, but
the Laborers are few, etc. and he sent his Disciples out into the Harvest,
Mat. 9. Luke 9.

Of this second harvest you may read, Exodus 23. where God commanded the people
that they should observe the feast of the Tabernacles, when in the end of the
year they had gathered in all the fruits of the fields. Also in Levit. 23. it
is thus written, From the fifteenth day of the seventeenth month, when you
have gathered all the fruits of your land, you shall celebrate unto the Lord
your God seven days, etc.

From Galile our Savior Christ came to Jerusalem, 64 miles; where from the 20
to the 27 day of September he celebrated the feast of Tabernacles, according to
the Law of God.

About the 18 day of October: in this year, the Practices of Seianus were
discovered, and he died miserably, Tac. lib. 5.
The rest of the travels of our Savior Christ, and the miracles that he wrought
in these three last months of this year, viz. in October, November, and
December, for their great multitude cannot be described. So the travels of our
Savior Christ in the second year of his Ministry were 912 miles.

Of the towns and places to which he traveled.
Of Caesarea Philippi.
THis city is situated not far from the foot of the mountain Antilibanus, 104
miles from Jerusalem toward the North, close by the two Wells of Jordan, Ior
and Dan. Upon the East side of this City these two streams meet, and make the
River Jordan.

Philip the Tetrarch of Traconitis called this city after his own name,
Philippus; and in honor of the Roman Caesar's he added the name of Caesaria;
Tiberias at this time being Emperor of Rome. In times past it was called
Laisch or Lais, which signifies, a ravening or roaring Lion. But the tribe of
Dan having conquered it and rebuilt it again, they called it Dan; and the
inhabitants of the Holy land, Laechem Dan, as you may read in the travels of
the Danits. But this town (as it is reported by such as have traveled into the
holy land, and by the authority of Volateran) notwithstanding these names, is
often called Belenas. Here (as Eusebius, Zozomenes, and Nicephorus say in their
Ecclesiastical histories) the woman that was diseased with the bloody issue,
was healed by touching the hem of our Saviors garment; which woman in token of
thankfulness for so great a benefit, and in memory of so notable a miracle,
erected in this City, a little without the gates of her house, a stone pillar,
on which she caused to be set the image of Christ made of brass; and behind
that stood the image of this woman, who had been diseased 12 years with the
bloody issue, bowing her self at the feet of our Lord, and touching the hem of
his garment. They also say there grew certain herbs about this pillar, whereby
miracles were wrought thirty years after it was set up. But Julian the
Apostata having intelligence of these things, caused those images to be broken
down, and erected his own in the same place. But soon after there happened such
an exceeding thunder, that fire falling from heaven, struck this image thus set
up by this cruel tyrant, upon the breast, and cast the head and the neck
thereof with great violence upon the earth. These things happened in Caesarea
Philippi. Upon the borders of Caesarea Philippi our Savior Christ asked his
Disciples saying, Whom do men say that I am, Mat. 6. Iosep. Ant. li. 20. ca. 6.
says, Agrippa King of the Jews did much enlarge Caesarea Philippi, in honor
of Nero, and called it after his name Neronia: but it retained not that name
long.

Of Peraea.
PEraea or Peraia was the utmost part in the holy land, in which were the
Tribes Gad and Reuben, separated from the rest of Judea by the river Jordan,
and under the subjection and government of Herod Antipas. It was 16 miles from
Jerusalem Eastward, so called of Peran, which signifies, beyond, or upon the
other side, Pli. li. 4. ca. 1. In the castle of Macharuntes, standing in this
country John Baptist was beheaded.

Of the sea of Galile.
THis sea lay 44 miles from Jerusalem Northward, representing upon the banks a
harp in figure, whence it was called Kinnaereth, that is, the sea of the harp,
Number. 34. for Kinnor signifies an harp. Toward the North it extends it self
into some breadth, but toward the South it drew into a straight angle, and was
called the sea of Galile, because it bordered upon Galile. It was also called
the lake of Genesareth, because of the pleasantness and fruitfulness of the
soil lying upon the North side of it. It is called ( Ioh. 6.) the sea of
Tiberias, from the city Tiberias that stood upon the shore of it. It was but 4
miles and a little more broad, but in length from the North to the South 12
miles. Upon the East side it had the town Chorazin, and upon the West
Capernaum; and (as Josephus says) the water of this sea was very sweet and
pleasant, from whence it came to pass that fishes did greatly abound in it,
and there were many fishers that lived thereabouts only by fishing in that sea.
There were many other Cities besides those two before mentioned, that stood
upon this Sea; as Bethsaida, Migdala, Tiberias, and Trichaea; these stood upon
the West. Upon the East stood Iulia and Gadara.

Of the holy mountain near Capernaum in Galile.
ABout a mile from Capernaum toward the Southwest, is to be seen an exceeding
high hill, standing upon the shore of the sea of Galile, beautified with many
herbs and flowers of diverse kinds, being very fruitful and pleasant,
extending it self in length almost two bows shoot, and in breadth one. From
this hill one might have seen the whole sea of Galile, the countries of Itura
and Trachonitis, even to mount Libanus, also the mountains Sanir and Hermon,
and a great part of the upper and lower Galilee. Here also the inhabitants of
the holy land show a certain stone, on which they say our Savior Christ did
usually sit when he preached to the people; which stone the Christians call the
table: here was that sermon made of the eight Beatitudes, Mat. 5.6.7. Luke 6.
Here were the twelve Apostles chosen, Luke 6. Mar. 3. And our Savior Christ
descending from this mountain, in the suburbs of the City of Capernaum healed
a man that was infected with the leprosy.

About thirty paces from the foot of this hill there arises a fountain which
is compassed about with a wall, and is thought to be a vein of Nilus, because
they find in it such kind of fishes, the like whereof are not to be found in
any other place but Nilus. Josephus calls this Spring Capernaum, and likewise
all the plain (being very pleasant and fruitful for the space of a mile, even
unto Jordan) after the same name, because it is subject to the jurisdiction of
that city. About 20 paces from this wall, on the shore of the sea of Galile,
there is shown a place where they say Christ appeared to his seven Disciples
after his resurrection, and asked them whether they had any meat? And about ten
paces from that is shown a place where they say our Saviors Disciples came to
land, and they drew up in their nets a great draught of fishes, etc. Ioh. 21.

Of Naim.
NAim signifies Fruitful and pleasant: it stood 48 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North; and typically represents the condition of this world. For
the children of this world live in all manner of pleasures and delights, never
thinking of any sorrow til death seiseth on them; but then that ouerturns all,
and those delights become loathsome unto them. Notwithstanding this one comfort
we have left us, Hope in Christ Jesus; who as ^e raised the Widows son (at
the gates of this city) from death to life, will by his mighty power raise us
again at the last day, from the bowels of the earth, and make us partakers
with him of an heavenly habitation. It stood in the land of Samaria; and in the
tribe of Issacher about two miles off it, upon the East side, stood mount
Tabor; and a little from it upon the South side stood mount Hermon the lesser;
and extended it self thence unto the sea of Galile, 16 miles. Of these two
hills you may read, Psalm. 89. And about 2 miles from Naim Westward Sunem is to
be seen, to which the Prophet Elisaeus sometimes resorted, 2 Reg. 4.

Of Gadara.
GAdarah or Gederah in Hebrew signifies munition; and sometimes it is taken to
compass about, of Gadar, he has hedged or compassed about. S. Ierom says,
in his time (that is, 400 years after Christ) this was a very fair city, and
stood in a very high mountain upon the East side of the sea of Galilee beyond
Jordan, in the half tribe of Manasses, some 48 miles from Jerusalem Northward,
and is to be seen at this day. Strabo, lib. 6. Geogr. says, that close by
Gadara there is a venomous lake, whereof what beast soever drinks, he
immediately loses his horns, his hoofs, and his hair; and there are many that
think this Lake became thus venomous, because of the 2000 swine that were
drowned in it, when our Savior suffered the devils to enter into them, Mat. 8.
Mark. 5. Luke 8. Close by this town stood Gerasa, called also Gergesa, Mat. 8.
so named (as some think) of Girgasus the son of Canaan, Genesis 10.

Of Genesareth.
THis was a Country bordering upon the Northwest side of the sea of Galile,
from whence this sea was called the Lake of Genesareth, Luke. 5. This land was
very pleasant and fruitful, as if it had bin a Princes Garden, bringing forth
fair Apples, Pomegranates, Palms, Olives, Vines, and diverse other kinds of
pleasant Fruits, fair and goodly to the eye, and therefore not without cause
was it called the Garden of a Prince; being derived of Began, which signifies, a
Garden; and Sur, a Prince. It is distant from Jerusalem six and fifty miles
toward the North, as you may read. Matthew. 6. and 14. The chief cities of
this country were Capernaum and Bethsaida; of which cities though in former
times they were very fair and large, there are at this day not scarce eight
houses to be seen.

The Travels of our Savior Christ in the third year of his Ministry, which
was the three and thirtieth year of his age.
FRom Jerusalem our Savior Christ returned, some six and fifty miles, into
Galile, and in the beginning of this year wintered in that place: so that (as
it may be gathered out of the Evangelists) he continued there the most part of
January and February, and now the Spring approaching, a little after the death
of Saint John the Baptist (who, as it is thought, was put to death between the
midst of Winter and the Spring, not long before the feast of the Passover; so
that he lived two years and a half in his Ministry) he wrought many
notable miracles, not far from the city of Bethsaida. The same time the
Feast of the Passover drawing near (which was the third Passover of his
Ministry) he went thence over Jordan and so beyond the sea of Tiberias, Matthew.
14. Make 6. Luke 9. At this time the Apostles of Christ being dispersed through
all Galile and Iudaea, teaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of heaven, hearing
of the miserable death of John the Baptist, about the beginning of the Month
of April returned with all possible speed out of every part to our Savior
Christ, that so they might be secure against the tyranny of Herod, Matthew. 14.
Mark 6. Luke 9. Also the Disciples of John came unto him and told him of his
death and burial, Matthew. 14.

Our Savior Christ therefore having by this means certain intelligence as he
was between Bethsaida and Tiberias, of the death of S, John Baptist, in the
month of April he went into a ship and passed about four miles to the further
side of the sea of Galile, where, in a certain desert, he fed five thousand men
with five barley loaves and two fishes, Ioh. 6.

From thence he returned back again to the sea, and so to Capernaum, which was
four miles: here he made that long sermon of the spiritual eating of his
flesh, Mat. 14. Luke 9. John 6.

From thence he went to Jerusalem, which was 56 miles, to the feast of the
Passover, being the third Passover of his ministry.

The third Passover of the Ministry of Christ.
Upon the thirteenth day of April being Sunday, according to the
Ecclesiastical computation, Christ (as God commanded) celebrated the third
Passover of his Ministry for the space of eight days in the city of
Jerusalem, that is, till the twentieth day of the same month.

After the feast of the Passover, the Jews took council how they might put
him to death, Ioh. 7. wherefore about the end of April, he departed thence, and
went 56 miles into the land of Galile.

In the month of May, after the controversy that happened concerning the
tradition of the Elders (because of the falacies and contentions of the Scribes
and Pharisees) he departed thence into the borders of Tyrus and Sydon, which was
56 miles, Matthew. 15. and there entered into a house, and would feign have been
private; but there was a certain woman that was a Grecian of Syrophoenissa came
unto him and entreated his aid, Mark 7.

But our Savior having a determination to depart from this place, this woman
was very importunate that he would dispossess her daughter of a devil; which
(because of her importunity) he did, Mat 15. And after he went thence into the
country of Trachonitis beyond Jordan, going through the borders of Decapolis,
and coming to the Galilean sea, and in the way he healed one that was both
blind and dumb, Mark 7. and there ascending up into a mountain, he cured
many that were blind and lame, and the third day after fed four thousand with
seven loaves and a few fishes, Mat. 15. So this journey was 64 miles.

Afterward in the same month of May he went into a ship and passed thence into
the parts of Dalmatia, and upon the borders of Magdala, which was four miles,
he propounded the sign of the Prophet Jonah to the Pharisees and Sadduces,
Mat. 15. and 16.

From thence he sailed to Bethsaida, which was 4 miles, and by the way he
admonished his Disciples to take heed of the leaven of the Sadduces and
Pharisees, Mat. 16. and as he was entering into a town he cured a blind man of
his sight, Mark 8.

About the end of the month of May Christ went to Jerusalem, which was 56
miles, where upon the second day of June he kept the feast of Penticost,
according as God had commanded, Exodus 23.

The feast of Penticost being ended, he returned from Jerusalem into the
Country of Galile to Capernaum, where he dwelt, which was 56 miles.

In the same month of June he went the second time unto the borders of the
Gentiles, where Peter in the name of all the disciples upon the confines of
Caesarea Philippi, made that notable confession, saying, Thou art Christ the
son of the living God, Luke 9. Capernaum is distant from Caesarea Philippi 48
miles.

Six, or (as Luke says) eight days after, our Savior in the month of June
went to the mountain Thabor, which stood 48 miles from Caesarea Philippi
toward the Southwest, where he was transfigured; and the next day after he
cured the Lunaticke, and cast out a Devil, Mat. 7. Mark 9.

In the month of July Christ walked into Galile, and there confirmed his
doctrine with many wonderful miracles, which did greatly amase his Disciples,
where he put them in mind of the cross and of his death, Mat. 17. Luke 9.

From thence he returned to Capernaum, which was 10 miles from Mount Thabor: at
this time Peter went to the Lake of Genesereth, and there caught a fish, in
whose mouth he found a Stater, which was worth ij. s. vi. d. in our money, Mat.
17. Here also our Savior Christ made a long Sermon, wherein he reprehended the
pride and arrogancy of his Disciples, and withal taught the doctrine of the
remission of sins, Mat. 12. Mark. Luke 9.

In the month of August he had a full determination to make a journey through
Samaria into Iudaea, and so by little and little (visiting the Churches as he
went) to go to Jerusalem to the feast of the Tabernacles, John 7. but when he
came to Samaria, which was ten miles from Capernaum, the Samaritans would not
receive him, because he made as though he would go to Jerusalem; wherefore he
turned aside into Galile, Luc. 9. And as he was there visiting the Churches,
there came a certain man unto him saying, I will follow thee whither soever
thou go. But Christ answered him saying, The Foxes have holes, and the
fowls of the heavens have nests, but the Son of man has not where to hide
his head, Matthew. 8. And to another Jesus said, Follow thou me. But he answered,
Let me first go and bury my father. There was another also that would have
followed Christ, but he would first go take his leave of his friends, Luc. 9.

In the month of September, about the time of the second harvest, which was
next before the feast of the Tabernacles, Leu. 23. Christ began his last
visitation throughout all the land of Judea; at which time he sent forth
seventy of his disciples into Galile, to prepare the way, and so Dispersed
laborers into his harvest; saying, The harvest is great, but the laborers are
few, Luc. 10. This speech seems to be taken from the present condition of the
time for it was now heruest time, it being a little before the vernall
Aequinoctiall.

About the beginning of October, when the feast of the Tabernacles drew near,
the Disciples and those that were of the kindred of our Savior according to
the flesh, went up to the Feast, but he remained in Galile, notwithstanding a
little after he went privily up: now between Galile and Jerusalem were
accounted 56 miles, Ioh. 7. Upon the ninth day of October was this feast
celebrated in Jerusalem; and being now half past, our Savior Christ taught
publicly in the Temple, Ioh. 7. Upon the fifteenth day of October (it being
the last day of the Feast of the Tabernacles, and the Sabbath day, he taught
the second time publicly in the Temple, and so continued preaching and doing
miracles in Jerusalem until the Feast of the Dedication, which was kept about
the middle of Winter, Matthew. 4.

In the Month of November he preached daily in the temple, and at night went to
the Mount of Olives, where he rested, which was above half a mile from
Jerusalem, and every morning returned back to the Temple. At this time there
came unto him certain Scribes and Pharases, who brought a woman which had
been lately taken in adultery, and said unto him, Master, what shall we do
with this woman, etc. And he answered, He among you that is without sin
throw the first stone at her, John 8. About this time also were the Sermons
concerning the power of the Son of God, and a great disputation between our
Savior and the Jews, Ioh. 8. for which cause they would have stoned him. In
the Month of December Christ wintred in Jerusalem, and recited the parable of
the Sheep, Ioh. 10. Also upon the Sabbath day a little before the feast of the
Dedication, he healed a man that was born blind, John 9.

In this feast the Jews (being angry because he had healed the blind man upon
the Sabbath day) compassed our Savior about as he was in Solomon's Porch; and
when they heard our Savior confess openly, that he was the Son of God,
they began to grow into a fury, and for very anger would have stoned him to
death. Wherefore our Savior Christ went thence beyond Jordan, and continued
there the rest of the Winter, John 10. But before he went to Jerusalem there
were returned unto him certain of the seventy Disciples, which a little
before (in the month of September) he had sent abroad, and there at that time
he recited the similitude of the man, who descending from Jerusalem to Jericho,
fell amongst thieves. This similitude seems to be taken from the present
occasion, because our Savior Christ going from Jerusalem beyond Jordan, was to
pass through great wildernesses just in the way as they go thence to Jericho,
John 10.

At the same time he went from Jerusalem to Bethania, which was almost two
miles, and there visited Mary and Martha, where Martha ministered unto him, but
Mary sitting at his feet gave diligent heed to his Doctrine, Luke 10.

At this time he took his leave of these two sisters, and went thence to
Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John baptized, which was 16 miles, it being now
about the midst of Winter, Christ at this time being about 33 years of age.

I am not ignorant that there were many which refer that long journey of our
Savior Christ when he went to visit all Iudaea, the sending forth of his
Disciples, and diverse other miracles mentioned from the ninth chapter of Luke
to the sixteenth, to the beginning of the following year. But I am of opinion
that all those things could not have been done within the compass of four
months, and before the feast of the Dedication: so that it must needs be that
the seventy Disciples were sent forth before the feast of the Dedication; for
after the feast of the Dedication (which was celebrated in the midst of Winter,
John 10.) there were but two months between it and the raising up of Lazarus,
in which short time all those things which are described by Luke, could not
possibly be accomplished, especially considering that our Savior Christ
wintered some time in Bethabara, and there taught the multitude that came unto
him, Ioh. 2. So these travels of our Savior were 596 miles, or thereabouts,
besides the diverse visitations and journeies he went hither and thither: which
because of the great multitude of them, it was not possible for the Evangelist
to set them down.

Of the towns and places to which he traveled.
Of Bethsaida.
BEthsaida, signifies the house of hunting: being derived of Both a house, and
Zaid, hunting, from Zod, he has hunted: for from this place went the fishers
and hunters which fished and hunted through the world, Ierem. 16. In this Town
dwelt three Apostles, Peter, Andrew, and Philip, John 1. It was situated upon
the West side of the Galilean sea; in the Tribe of Issachar, fifty six miles
from Jerusalem toward the North. And because of the abundance of Fishes that
were in the sea of Galile, Peter and Andrew became Fishers, and in that
vocation got their living, till our Lord and Savior Christ made them Fishers
of men, Matt. 4. Luke 5. Before the birth of Christ this was but a small Town,
and without doubt was so called from hunting; because close by it stood a
wilderness that did greatly abound with wild beasts. Philip the Tetrarch of
Traconitis and Itura made this a fair city, which in honor of Iulia he
called Iuliades. This Iulia was the daughter of Augustus Caesar, and wife of
Tiberias. Philip also brought many inhabitants thither, who dwelt in that
City. But when Herod (the Tetrarch of Galile, and brother of this Philip) had
builded up Bethara, (which stood beyond the river Jordan on the East side of
the sea of Galilee) and called it by the name of Iuliades, in honor of this
Iulia. This town re-edified and enlarged by Philip, was called again in the
time of our blessed Lord and Savior Christ, after the ancient name Bethsaida,
and so continues to this day. From hence it is manifest, that the sea of
Galile was subject to the government of both these Tetrachs, since upon the
shore thereof on both sides they had cities standing.

I do think the wilderness or wood and land near adjoining to Bethsaida, is
called Itura, of Ietur the son of Ismael, Genesis 25. or else from the compass
and roundnesse of it; for Tur in Hebrew signifies, A circle. But that Itura
stood upon the West side of the sea of Galilee, those that have been at the
Holy land can testify.

This city of Bethsaida has an ancient water course coming from a river not
far from it, which Josephus calls little Jordan, which falls into the sea
of Galile, just in the midway between this town and Capernaum, the channel
whereof appears to this day. Beside the many sermons which our Savior Christ
preached here, he did many notable miracles, Marc. 8. etc. But for the
ingratitude and impiety of the citisens the curse of our Savior fell upon
them, Woe be thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida: for if the miracles had
been done in Tyrus and Sidon, which have been done in thee, they had long ere
this repented in sackloth and ashes: Verily, verily I say unto you, it shall be
easier for Tyrus and Sydon in the day of judgment, than for you, Matt. 11.
Luc. 10. The prophecy of our Savior Christ fell upon them accordingly; for
after diverse and sundry overthrows and deuastations, this town became utterly
unpeopled, and as Britenbacchus says, there are scarce six houses standing in
it at this day.

Of Chorazin.
THis city also stands upon the further side of Jordan, close by the sea of
Galile, in the same country as Capernaum stands: for the city of Chorazin
stands upon the East side of the river Jordan, where it falls into the sea
of Galile; and Capernaum upon the West, in the half tribe of Manasses, some 16
miles from the city of Jerusalem toward the North. This city also neglecting
the preachings and miracles of our Savior Christ, felt the efficacy and force
of the curse of the Son of God, Mat. 11. Luc. 10. For there is not at this
day a house to be seen, only some ruins where it stood. Chorazin does denote
a dukedom or principality, from Coh and Razon, a Prince and Duke; for Rozez
signifies, A laborious Prince. Ierom turning this word Rozez into Razi, calls
it A secret mystery, or my secret.

Of Tiberias.
TIberias stands upon the West side of the sea of Galilee, 48 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North. Before the birth of Christ it was called
Kinnereth, that is, the city of the Harp; after which name the lake of
Tiberias or sea of Galile is called, Numb. 14. But Herod the Tetrach of Galile
(at whose command John the Baptist was beheaded) did beautify this City with
many fair buildings and compassed about with strong walls, and after Tiberias
Caesar's name called it Tiberias. He also gathred thither many inhabitants, and
endowed it with many large privileges: for although this place before the
restoring of the city was very filthy and impure, by reason of the dead bodies
both of men and beasts, which lay in that place, (from whence it happened that
the Jews shunned this place as utterly unlawful, and durst not dwell there)
yet notwithstanding, Herod with singular industry and diligence removed all
that filthiness, and in that very place built up this City both fair and
spacious; partly with gifts, partly with fair speeches alluring many Jews to
inhabit therein. Many poor people also built themselves houses at their own
charge, and those that had no children gave way unto the liberty of the city;
besides, many rich and noble men were constrained to remove their whole
families, and to dwell in this city, so that in short time it became very well
peopled, according to Ios. lib. Antiq. 18. cap. 4. and Egisip. lib. 2. cap. 3.

Not above two miles from Tiberias toward the South, upon the shore of the sea
of Galile stood Tarachaea, a town wherein Josephus dwelt. Now it happened that
the Citisens of Tiberias upon some discontent, and as it was thought at the
instigation of one Clitus, fell into rebellion; of which Josephus having
certain intelligence, he caused all the gates of Terachaea to be shut, least
any man going thence should disclose his intentions, or any coming from
Tiberias, should move that City also to rebellion; and then privily sent out
a command to assemble all the ships and other vessels that were upon the sea
or lake, even to the number of 230 ships; all which he caused to be manned only
with four men apiece, and of a sudden sailed toward Tiberias. But when he
came within view of the city, so that the citisens from the wall might discern
the ships, he left the body of the navy a good way remote from Tiberias, and
took only one ship manned with seven men, and went close to the city of
Tiberias, as it seemed to have had a parley with the citisens: but they seeing
such a multitude of ships, and the bold resolution of Josephus, supposing that
they had been sufficiently manned, and contained a great army, were greatly
afraid, insomuch that they cast away their arms, and came out of the city
with humble petitions to Josephus, entreating him to spare the city, and to
take pity of the inhabitants. Notwithstanding he utterly refused to show them
any mercy, unless they would deliver unto him the Ruler of the city, which
they did: so he settled the affairs of that Town, and took the Ruler thereof
with him to Terachaea, where he committed him to prison.

But after, it being certainly found out that one Clitus was the principal
author of this rebellion, he sent Leuyn one of his Guard with command to
apprehend him and cut off both his hands: of which punishment Clytus being
certainly informed, with tears and prayers humbly besought rhis Leuyn that he
would spare one of his hands, and he would willingly lose the other; which with
much ado was granted him, upon condition that he would cut off his own hand:
so he took his sword and cut off his left hand; which being done, Josephus
returned the captives to Tiberias and received the inhabitants again into
favor, and ever after retained it in obedience.

Vespasian also invaded this city at such time as he undertook his expedition
against Jerusalem, as it appears in Josephus lib. de bello Judah. cap. 16. but
the inhabitants fearing his greatness, willingly submitted themselves to his
power, and opened him the gates, going forth of the city to meet him with
great humility, giving him and his whole army entertainment into the city,
receiving him with music and songs, and with great acclamations and shouts;
calling him their Savior and protector: which kind of courtesies the Emperor
took very lovingly, and in token of thankfulness for this kindness, he
commanded his soldiers (after they had broken down a great part of the wall
upon the South side) that they should abstain from all manner of rapine and
violence; so that he continued there peaceably and went away peaceably.

This city to this day (as Borchardus the Monk says) is a fair town,
situated to the longitude, upon the shore of the said sea, there being upon
the South side many wholesome bathes and springs; and there are to be seen
also many great ruins of decayed buildings. The land also round about is very
pleasant and fertile, abounding with Palm trees, Vines, Olives, and Figs. This
city in ancient time was situated in the Tribe of Issachar.

Of Tyrus or Zor.
THis was the chief city of Phoenicia, distant from Jerusalem 100 miles
toward the North. It was first builded by the citisens of Zidon, (because of a
sedition that happened in that City) 240 years before the Temple of Solomon, as
Josephus says, just in the place where at this day the ruins of ancient Tire
are to be seen. But after it began to grow famous (which was about such tims
as Troy was destroled) King Angenor removed it to a rock which stood in the
heart of the Mediterranean sea, compassed about therewith like an Island, Ezekiel.
26. and bestowed great cost in fortifying and building it. It stood round,
compassed with strong walls, beautified with goodly buildings, and fairly
situated for the entertainment of ships; for which puprose, on every side
there were many safe havens and harbors made. It was but a small town, almost
three miles about, and two miles wide: yet the great Mart Town in those parts,
for Merchants resorted thither from all the three parts of the World (Europe,
Asia, and Africa) as well for the uttering as buying commodities; and was made
so much the more famous, because of the situation and strength: It stood
distant from the land of Phoenicia almost two miles; upon which continent they
had obtained a portion of land for the maintenance of the city, containing
19000 paces in compass. The citizens also being greatly enriched, because of
their traffic, built up many fair cities and towns in more remote parts,
which was added to their jurisdiction, as Leptis, Vtica, rnd Carthage,
situated in Africa. They also built Cades, which at this day is called Caliz,
as Pliny says, lib. 5. cap. 19. being situated in a very fair Island in the
Mediterranian sea, not far from Hercules pillars; insomuch as the citizens of
this town having thus enlarged their command, and increased their substance;
In every place they called themselves Princes, and took upon them to wear
scarlet and purple, which colors in that place above all other colors, were
most artificially dyed: And because of the raritie of them, transported thence
into many countries more remote. But because of their extreme arrogancy and
pride, it was twice conquered and ruinated: First by Nabuchadonozer Emperor of
Babylon: and then by Alexander the Great, as it appears in Quint. Curtius,
lib. in the life of Alexander.

Now the occasion that Alexander made war upon this City, was because the
citizens upon a time sending unto him certain Ambassadors with a crown of
gold, in token of friendship, and to congratulate his prosperity (which he
accepted very kindly, and gave them royal entertainment, as to his friends)
amongst other things, he told them that he would come unto their City, and
do sacrifice to their god Hercules (for the kings of the Macedonians are
persuaded that they proceed from the offspring of that god, and beside he was
commanded by an Oracle so to do.) But the Ambassadors of Tire answered, that
the Temple of Hercules stood without the city in Paaetzron, where ancient Tire
stood; so that the King might easily come thither to do sacrifice; but
Alexander hearing these words, could not contain himself, but in a great
anger answered, And do ye proud Citizens put such trust in the strength and
situation of your City, that you think I am not able to come to it with my
Army by land? You shall well perceive within this short space, that you are
situated upon the continent, and that I will enter it and sack it. With these
terrible words the Ambassadors departed and shortly after Alexander followed
them with a great and mighty army.

But when it was known that Alexander had undertaken the sacking of this
city, there were many that thought it almost impossible for him to accomplish
his designs; first, because of the inconstancy of the winds, and the
vehemency of the water, whereby all such matter as they cast into the sea to
join it to the continent, would be driven away by the violence of the Water;
again, the city was compassed about with such exceeding high walls, and
fortified with such strong towers, that it was not possible for him to bring
any engines to batter them, or fasten any scaling ladders to ascend them,
unless it were by ships. Twice Alexander attempted by flinging into the sea
mighty trees of Libanus, and heaps of the ruins of ancient Tire to have made
a bridge to it, or else join it to the continent, insomuch as the Tyrians
mocked the Macedonians; saying, What, can your king Alexander conquer Neptune
the God of the sea? For the violence of the sea was so extreme, that it
carried away all things with it, and oftentimes broke the ships that were
joined together to make a bridge, and drowned the soldiers that besieged and
sought against the city. During this siege, a Citisen of Tyrus dreamt that
their Idol Apollo would depart from them; whereupon they bound the Image of
Apollo with a chain of gold, unto the pillar whereon he stood, that he might
not leave them. There happened also a horrible ostent amongst the Macedonians;
for a certain soldier breaking bread, there fell from it some few drops of
blood; at the hearing of which accident Alexander was greatly amassed, until
he was resolved by one Aristander a very skillful Prophet, That if it issued
from off the outside of the bread, it had betokened a heavy event to the
Macedoniaes; but in regard that it issued from the inside of the bread, it
foreshewed that he should forthwith conquer the town he had so long
besieged: And so it happened; for when Alexander had besieged the city for the
space of seven months, with great difficulty he won it: but before he could
win it he was constrained to use a great multitude of ships and fasten them
together with iron bands, upon which placing many engines of battery and other
offensive instruments, what with the moving of the ships and the extreme
violence of the battery, they overcame the city. This exploit Alexander
performed when he was 25 years of age, and about 300 years before Christ.

There was one thing that Alexander did during his siege, that was memorable;
for before any of his soldiers would attempt to ascend the walls, he went in
person with his crown upon his head, and in princely armor, and scaled a high
tower of the city, where he expressed an extraordinary resolution, and by reason
of his courage did great hurt to the enemy, who perceiving him to be the King,
resorted to that place in great heaps, and shot at him with all their might;
but he manfully defended himself, and compelled the enemy to fly. In this
assault there were 6000 of the inhabitants slain; and after he had entered the
walls and sacked the city, he caused 2000 to be tied to crosses and thrown into
the sea. From whence may be gathered, that God by this young Prince did
accomplish this great work, that the prophecies of the Prophets, Esaias 23.
Jeremy 43. and Ezekiel 25.26. might be fulfilled.

Afterward Alexander (as Pliny and Strabo observes) caused the sea to be
filled up, that it might be no more an Island, and joined it to the continent;
upon which place he caused Tyrus to be rebuilded, and compassed it about with a
wall five and twenty foot thick, strengthened with twelve towers, that it
might be sufficiently fortified to oppose the incursion of any enemy; so that
it continued safe a long time after, and in the time of our Savior Christ was
a fair city, though it never attaind to the former dignity and power that it
had before Alexander conquered it. The ancient city of Tire was distant from
this city about four miles toward the South.

Our Savior Christ being in the borders of Tyrus and Sidon, helped a woman of
Canaan, whose daughter had been cruelly tormented with a Devil, Matt. 15. In
the time of Dioclesian the Emperor, there were many Martyrs put to death in
this City: And at this time it is called by the name of El porta del zur, that
is, the haven of Zur; as it was in the Old Testament called by the name of Zor.
In the year 1100, when the holy land was in the hands of the Christians, there
was an Archbishop of Tire, under whose government were the Bishops of Ptolomais,
Sydon, and Beryti, etc. The holy man Origin lies buried in this city: in the
Church of the holy Sepulcher, which is compassed about and fortified with a
mighty strong wall. There also lies buried the Emperor Frederick Barbarosso,
who died Anno 1160, after he had done many valiant acts, and fought many great
battles for the Christians against the Turks and Saracens, being overcome by
Saphadinus the Sultans son, and put to flight, was drowned in the river of
Suro, to the great grief of his army; but he left behind him a famous report.
Pope Alexander the third being a great enemy to this Emperor, in S. Mary's
church in the city of Venice, when this Prince submitted himself to his
Holiness, set his foot upon his neck, repeating these words, Thou shall tread
upon the Aspe and upon the Basiliske, etc. Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical
History says, that there are yet standing in Tire certain Marble pillars,
and other precious stones of a wonderful greatness, that it amaseth such as
behold them; near to which there have been many Christians and Pilgrims put
to death by the Saracens. There are also four wels of wholesome and pleasant
water standing not far from it, of which wells you may read before.

Of Zidon.
THis also was a city of Phoenicia, situated upon the shore of the
Mediterranean sea, thirty six miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and
sixteen from Tyrus. In times past it was assigned to the Tribe of Ashur, and
lay upon the borders of the Philistines, near to Mount Libanus. Being called
Sidon or Zidon, of Zidon the son of Canaan, who first built it, Genesis 10. and
signifies a hunter. It was a notable mart town, wherein much Satin was made,
which kind of stuff was very precious among the Jews: and it is said, That
Joseph of Arimathia wrapped the body of our Savior in white Satin, for in
Matthew 27. it is called Zadin, which in English is Satin. And as at this day
the finest glass is made at Venice, so the finest glass in those times was
made at Sarepta, a city that belonged to the Sidonians: about which there stood
many mines, of which it is 'called Sarepta, as you may read before.

This town in times past was one of the chief cities of Phoenicia, but
because of the extraordinary pride of the citisens, God afflicted them with
diverse punishments, and brought in Ocho king of the Persians, who besieged it,
and by treason won it and burnt it to the ground, as Diodorus Siculus lib. 16.
says. The Citisens whereof were driven to such streights by the enemy, that
there perished in the fire above forty thousand men. Within a while after
Darius last Emperor of the Persians rebuilt it, but made it nothing so
beautiful, neither fortified it in like manner as it was before: he ordained
one Strato to be King thereof, a man proud and arrogant. After, about three
hundred and two years before the nativity of Christ, Alexander being then but
24 years of age, having overcome Darius that mighty Emperor of the Persians,
at Issa a city of Cilicia, in a cruel and sharp war; he sent Hephestion
one of his Princes, to the Sydonians, with authority to depose Strato, and to
let the Citisens understand that they should choose him for their King, whom
they thought most worthy of that honor, as Quint. Curt. shows, lib. 4. At
this time there was a certain young man among the followers of Hephestion, in
whose behalf he moved the Citisens that he might be their King; but they
refused, saying, it was not their custom to choose any to rule over them, but
such as were of the Kings stock and progeny. Hephestion hearing this answer,
greatly admired their resolution and modesty, especially when they refused to
accept him for their King, whom others had sought to obtain with fire and
sword; saying, Truly there is more required to rule and govern a Kingdom,
than to get it; but yet name one unto me of royal descent, whom you would
willingly receive to be your King. So they named unto him one Abdolomius, who
had been known to have been of the Kings stock, by many discents; but
because of his poverty he was constrained to dwell in the suburbs of the City
in a cottage, and had little else but a Garden to live upon. This man howsoever
poor, and because of that, of many contemned; yet he was known to be honest
and of an upright life, following with all diligence his vocation, without any
regard of other business; insomuch as he was utterly ignorant of all these
stir and combustions which had so lately vexed Asia. As he was now in his
garden digging and laboring, purging it of weeds, and planting herbs;
Hephestion with the rest of the Citizens went unto him, and brought him the
robes and habiliments of a King. The poor Gardner stood amazed to see such a
company of gallants come unto him: but Hephestion told him, That the occasion
of their coming was to make an exchange with him of those royal ornaments
which he had in his hands, for those poor and foul garments which he wore;
therefore go and wash thy self and return. So he did, where immediately they
put upon him those royal robes, and saluted him as their Sovereign. Afrer
these things were finished, quoth Hephestion, Now remember in what a state thou
art, no more Gardener but a King; and therefore take unto thee the mind and
resolution of a King, that so thou may rule and govern this city as a man
worthy of that honor; and remember, that although the lives and goods of thy
subjects are at thy command, yet by them thou wast chosen, neither be
forgetful of him that was the author of thine honor.

No sooner was he enthronised in his kingdom, but fame (who is more speedy
than a thousand Posts) had dispersed this news through all the neighboring
cities: some being thereby moved to admiration, and quickened in their studies;
others stirred up to indignation and envy. Those that were mighty and friends
to Alexander, contemned and despised his humility and poverty; and no sooner
were they come into his presence, but they began to accuse him for his
ignorance: wherefore Alexander commanded that he should come before him, where,
after he had wel^ viewed the lineaments and proportion of his person, and
could not perceive it any whit repugnant to the fame of his birth, he demanded
of him how it was possible that he should endure his poverty with patience.
To which he answered, I pray the gods I may continue the government of this
kingdom with the like mind; for these hands were sufficient for me to live
by, and as I had nothing, so I wanted nothing. At which answer Alexander was so
well pleased, that he not only gave him all the princely jewels and ornaments
of the first king called Strato, but also a great part of the booty which he
took from the Emperor of Persia, and added to his command all the neighboring
countries round about. This history I have inserted, that thereby we might
perceive the mighty power of God in all his works; that can exalt the poor,
contented with his estate, out of the very dust, and can pull the mighty from
their thrones. So the Evil carke and care in this world to gather riches for
the Virtuous to inherit. But to return to Sidon: This city did so much
increase, and grew so famous in succeeding ages, that it was the chief town
(Tyrus only excepted) in all Phoenicia, joining upon the West to the
Mediterranian sea, extending it self toward the North and South, lying in a
plain under Antilibanus, which mountain lay some two miles off it upon the
East. It oftentimes, because of the pride of the inhabitants, felt the wrath
and punishing hand of God, as well by the invasion of Enemies, as sickness and
dearth, according to the predictions of the Prophets, Esaias 28. and Ezekiel. 28.
until at last in succeeding ages it was utterly destroyed, the ruins of which
city remain to this day, and make evident that it was a fair and spacious
town.

There is to be seen yet to this day a city built out of the ruins of the
former (though nothing so large as it) very strong and mightily fortified, so
that it seems almost invincible, if it have men wherewith to defend it. Upon
the one side it joins to the sea, and upon the other side of it there
stands two mighty strong castles, one of them situated toward the North,
upon a very strong ^ock as it were in the heart of the sea, the which was built
by cer^ain Pilgrims that came out of Germany to visit the holy city of
^erusalem. The other of them was situated upon a hill toward the South of the
city, as well fortified, and no less difficult to be conquered. These two
castles with the whole city in times past were in the hands of the Knights
templers. The land round about it is very pleasant and fertile, abounding with
all kind of good things necessary for the maintenance of life and delight.
There is also found great abundance of Grapes which are very delicious and
pleasant to the taste, whereof the wine Canamella is made. But because the Turks
and Saracens are inhibited by the strict law of their Alcaron from drinking of
wine, therefore they suffer no vineyards to be planted, neither the inhabitants
to dress those Vines that grow naturally. Before the East gate of the ancient
city which now lies destroyed, there is built a Chapel, in which place they
say the woman of Canaan entreated our Savior Christ to cast a Devil out of her
daughter, Mat. 15. The mountain Antilibanus begins close by the river
Eleutherius, and extends it self beyond Tripolis; and in some places it
joins so close to the sea, that for the straightness of the ways those that
travel that way can scarce pass. In this city was the fairest purple in all
those parts: nay as some Authors affirm, the like was not to be found in the
world, etc.

Of Cana Syro-Phoenicea.
THis town, which was called Cana the Great, was situated upon the borders of
Tyrus and Sydon, 112 miles from Jerusalem Northward, situated in the Tribe of
Ashur, 4 miles from Sydon toward the South, and three from Sarepta toward the
East. In this town the Syrophoenician dwelt, that besought our Savior Christ
to heal her daughter that was possessed of a devil, Mat. 15. Mar. 7. It was
called Cana, to put a difference between it and another Cana situated in
Galile the lower; in which city our Savior Christ turned water into wine. You
may read more of this town before.

Of Trachonitis.
THis city was so called from the stony hardness of the mountains of Gilead
which compass it in upon the East side: in which province the tribe of Gad and
the half tribe of Manasses inhabited. It was in ancient times called Basan; in
which Og the mighty Giant had a great command: but Moses overcame him, and gave
the land to the tribe of Gad and the half tribe of Manasses. In Christ's time
the Tetrarch and governor of it was Philip, who was son to Herod the Great,
and brother to Herod Antipas Tetrach in Galile and Petraea; which Herod took
to wife Herodia, whom his brother Philip had formerly married, the said Philip
being at that time alive: but because John Baptist reprehended him for that
fact, therefore at her request he was beheaded in the Castle of Machera.

Itura was another Province belonging to the tetrarchy of Philip, joining upon
the West to the river of Jordan, and called Galile of the Gentiles, of which
you may read before.

Of Decapolis.
THis country is so called of ten cities that were situated in it. It stood
beyond Jordan and the sea of Galile, as may be gathered out of Mark, ca. 7. and
Mat. 15. So that it is manifest that that country which in times past was
called Gilead, was afterward known and called by the name of Decapolis, because
of the ten cities which stood there; as Chorazin which Christ cursed, Mat. 11.
Gamala, where Agrippa King of the Jews was hurt in his right arm, Ios. de
bell. Iud. lib. 4. cap. 1. Iuliades, built by Herod Antipas in honor of the
Empress Iulia. Gadara, where our Savior Christ cast out the legion of devils,
suffering them to enter into the herd of swine, Mat. 8. Mar. 5. Astaroth, the
chief city of that Country in the time of Og King of Basan, Ios. cap. 12.
Here also that holy man Job sometimes had his dwelling. Iabes in Gilead, where
Saul King of Israel lies buried, 1 Samuel 31. Mizpah, where Ieptha offered his
daughter for a sacrifice to the Lord, Judge. 11. Ramoth in Gilead, where King
Ahab was slain with a Dart, 1 Reg. 22. And Abel of the Vines, where Baalams
Ass spoke, Number. 22. These are those ten cities whereof this country is called
Decapolis; being situated in the land of Gilead between Jordan, where our
Savior healed the man that was both blind and deaf, Mark 7. This opinion
exactly agrees with that of the holy scripture. Yet I know there are some (as
Plin. lib. 5. cap. 18. and others) who differ from this in the description of
this country, but they err from the truth.

Of Magdala.
THis was a city situated upon the West side of the Galilean sea, 52 miles
from Jerusalem Northward; in which Country Mary (who of this town was called
Magdalen) was borne. At this time this city is called by the name of Castle
Magdala; in which place they show the house of Mary Magdalen. Upon the West and
North side of the city there lies a great and spacious plain, preserved only
for pasture, which Mar. cap. 8. calls Dalmanutha, that is, Drawn dry, or a
poor and naked habitation; being derived of Dalal, He has made dry; and Maon,
a House or dwelling place. It may be a notable figure of the Christian Church,
which in this world may rightly be said to have a poor habitation, but yet is
a right Magdala, that is, a strong and impregnable Tower, against which the
gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail, Matt. 16. Upon the borders of
Magdala and Dalmanutha, the Pharisees and Sadduces tempting our blessed Savior
Christ, demanded of him a sign from heaven, Mat. 15.16. Mar. 8. This city
belonged to the tribe of Issacher.

Of Thabor.
MOunt Thabor was a round and high hill, upon which our blessed Savior Christ
was transfigured: situated upon the borders of the tribes of Issacher and
Zebulon, fifty two miles from the City of Jerusalem toward the North, and
extends it self toward the South to the river Kison. Here Deborah and
Barack discomfited the Host of Sisera King of the Canaanites, and put them to
flight, Iug. 4. Of this mountain you may read, Psalm. 89. Hos. 4. Ierem. 45.
There was also a town called after this name, situated at the foot of this
mountain, where Ziba and Zalmana Kings of the Midianites put to death the
brothers of Gideon, Judges 8. It was a very fruitful and pleasant place.
Concerning the signification of the name you may read before. Egesippus says,
That this mountain is almost four miles in height, and that upon the top
thereof there is a round Plain almost three miles over, in which there grows
great plenty of trees of an admirable pleasantness and sweetness; amongst
which Trees there are many birds which sing very pleasantly, to the great
delight of all such as hear them: and the air on the top of it is very pure
and pleasant.

It is the received opinion, that upon the top of this mountain our Savior
Christ in the presence of Peter, James, and John, was transfigured, and he
spoke with the holy Prophets Moses and Elias, Mat. 17. Luke 9. which place at
this day is compassed about with a great Wall, within which is a fair and
pleasant Orchard, watered with many clear and goodly springs, but there is no
man that dwells in it, (notwithstanding there are many towns and inhabitants at
the foot of the mountain) neither do they think any man worthy to dwell in it,
they hold it in such estimation, and reverence it as the Hill of God. There are
to be seen in it diverse great ruins of Palaces, Towers, and princely Edifices;
in which at this day there harbor many Lions and other wild beasts. It is
very difficult to ascend up to the top of it, it is so exceeding high: it is
one of the principal hills in the holy land, not only because that Christ on it
was transfigured, but because it is very fruitful, and plentifully abounds
with Vines and other profitable plants, and herbs. The air thereof is wholesome
and good, and the dew upon it rising thick and sweet, with indifferent rain;
the trees high and fair, green both Winter and Summer. At the foot of the
mountain, toward the South near to Endor, in the way that leads from Syria
into Egypt, is showed the place where (as it is said) Melchisedech met with
Abraham, when he returned from the battle of the four Kings, Genesis 14. At the
foot of the mountain lying toward the West, just against Nazareth, there is a
Chapel built, in the place where they say our Savior Christ descending from
this mountain, spoke to his Disciples saying, Tell none of this vision, Mat.
17. Upon the East side of it runs the brook Kison, where Barak and Deborah
overcame the Army of Sisera, Judge. 4.

There is also another hill in the upper part of Galile, 92 miles from
Jerusalem Northward, which hill is also called Thabor, and is three miles
distant from Caesarea Philippi Eastward: but that was not the place of Christ's
Transfiguration.

The Travels of Christ in the fourth year of his Ministry, be the four and
thirtieth of his age.
IN the month of January Christ the son of God wintered in Bethabara, 16
miles from Jerusalem Northeastward, where John sometimes baptized, Ioh. 10. And
many came unto him saying, John showed us no signs, but whatsoever he preached
of this Christ are true. And many believed on him. Now as Christ went into the
Desert to preach, his Disciples came unto him saying, Lord teach us to pray, as
John taught his Disciples to pray. Whereupon he prescribed to his Disciples a
form of prayer, which is called the Lords prayer, Luke 11. At this time there
came unto him a great multitude, and thronged about him, where he made that
long sermon which is described Luke 12 and 13. Upon the seventeenth day of
January, it being then the Sabbath, he cured a certain woman which had been
diseased 18 years, Luke 13. And when there came unto him certain Pharisees
saying, Thou art the Son of God, wherefore get thee out of this country, for
Herod seeks to kill thee: Jesus answered them saying, Go and tell that crafty
Fox, Behold, I cast out Devils to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall
be perfected. Presently he departed out of Petraea, (where Herod kept his Court
in the castle of Macharuntes) and went into Galile beyond Jordan, 28 miles,
Luke 13. Upon the last day of January being the Sabbath, our Lord and Savior
Christ healed (in the house of a certain prince of the Pharisees) a man sick
of the dropsy, and recited the parable of the great Supper, Luke 14.

In the month of February he went through all Galile, which was 80 miles long,
and 24 broad; in which visitation there followed him a great company. And when
there came unto him Publicans and sinners, he began to speak of repentance:
but the Pharisees and Scribes murmured at him, and opposed his parables of the
lost sheep, of the woman that had lost her groat, and of the prodigal son, Luke
15. And a little after he recited unto his disciples the parable of the unjust
Steward, and of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16. About the later end of February (as
by the circumstance of the history and times may appear) he made that sermon
of the power of Faith and Good works, etc. Luke 17. And going out of Galile
through the midst of Samaria he healed the ten Lepers, Luke 17. he recited
the parable of the unjust Judge, and that of the Publican and Pharisee, Luke 18.

In the month of March he finished this general visitation. Which journies
were so many and diverse that his disciples could not describe them.
Notwithstanding in this month he went into the borders of Iudaea and Petraea
beyond Jordan, and came to Bethabara where John sometimes baptized, and there
followed him a great company, and he healed them, Matthew. 19. Mark 10. There the
Pharisees moved the disputation of the Divorce, and Christ lovingly embraced
the little children, Mar. 20. In this month of March Lazarus the brother of
Martha and Mary, who dwelt at Bethania, fell sick of a deadly disease, and
they sent messengers to Christ, who at this time was at Bethabara, to give him
to understand of his sickness, Ioh. 11. This message came unto our Savior
Christ to Bethabara upon the twentieth day of March, being the last day of the
twelfth month Adar, Anno Mundi 4000. and about such time as the seventy weeks
spoken of by Daniel were fully ended: At the end of which prophecy it behooued
Christ, that he might fulfill the prophecies of the old Testament) to suffer,
and by his resurrection and ascension to enter into the glory of God, and to be
partaker of his eternal kingdom.

Although our Savior had received this message of the sickness of Lazarus, he
stayed at Bethabara. Two days after, and as it may be thought about the 22 day
of March, which was the second day of the first month Ahib, Lazarus died. But
Lazarus being dead and buried, then our Savior went from Bethabara toward
Jericho, Ioh. 14. Luke 8. and in the way a man came to him and said, Good
Master what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? Christ said unto him,
Go and sell all that thou have, and give it unto the Poor, and thou shall
find treasure in heaven, and then come and follow me. But because he was very
rich he refused, and went his way. After, he recited the Parable of the
Laborers in the vineyard, making mention of predestination. Also in this journey
he reprehended the sons of Zebedeus for their pride and arrogancy, and
fore-telleth his disciples of his death and passion, and in the way healed the
blind man that sat begging, and so entered into Jericho, where he rested all
night in the house of Zacheus, Mat. 20. Zacheus signifies Clean.

Upon the 24 of March Christ went from Jericho to Bethania, which was 12 miles.
Here he healed Bartimeus the son of Timaeus, Mark 10. ( Timaus signifies
Unclean, of Tame, He is defiled) And going a little further he healed other
two, restoring them to sight, Matthew. 19. Upon the 25 of March (being Tuesday)
our Savior Christ came to Bethania, where by the power of his word he raised
Lazarus to life after he had bin buried four days, Io. 11. Lazarus and Eleazer
have both one signification, that is, God is my Help.

Upon the 26 day of March, the feast of the Passover of the Jews drawing
near, he sent from Bethania to the city of Ephraim near to the desert, that
he might avoid the traps and deceits of the Jews, who went about to take him,
John 11. which was ten miles.

Upon the 27 day of March he returned back again from Ephraim to Bethania
(being 10 miles) coming thither about the evening, six days before the
Passover, at which time Martha ministered to him, and Mary anointed his feet,
whereat Judas grutched, Ioh. 12. Upon the Sabbath day, being the 28 of March,
he rested in Bethania at the house of Martha. Now as he was at supper with
Lazarus, many of the Jews understanding that he was there, resorted thither,
not only to see him, but Lazarus also whom he had raised from the dead, Ioh.
12.

Upon the 29 of March Christ sitting upon an ass went to Jerusalem. Now when
the multitude heard that he was come unto Jerusalem, they went out to meet him,
some laying their garments in the way, others strowing the boughs of trees,
where he should go; and those that went before cried saying, Hosanna to the
Son of David, blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord. At this
time our Savior Christ wept over Jerusalem, and cast out all those that bought
and sold in the Temple, Matt. 21. Ioh. cap. 17. About the evening he went out
of the city again to Bethania, almost two miles, and there rested all night,
Mat. 21. So this days journey was almost four miles. In the evening of this
day the Jews chose their Paschal lamb, according to the Law, Exodus 12.

Upon the 30 day of March he went from Bethania to Jerusalem betimes in the
morning; in which journey he cursed the Fig Tree that wanted fruit, and after
entering into the city, he cast out of the Temple the mony-changers and
Merchants, Mark 11. About the evening (as may be gathered by circumstance of
time) he returned back again to Bethania. This days journey was four miles.

Upon the last day of March in the morning Christ went back again from
Bethania to Jerusalem; and by the way as he went, his Disciples beheld the
Fig tree that he had cursed, and lo it it was dried up, Mar. 11. After, when
he was in the Temple, there came certain Pharisees unto him and disputed with
him. At which time he recited the Parable of the marriage of the Kings daughter.
Also certain Scribes and Pharisees came unto him asking him whether it was
lawful to pay tribute unto Caesar, Matthew. 21.22. He also sharply rebuked the
Scribes and Pharisees, and recited the Simile of the Hen and her Chickens, Mat.
23. After that, he went to the mount of Olives, almost a mile. And then his
Disciples looking upon the goodly building of the temple, from thence he took
occasion to preach of the destruction of Jerusalem, and the consummation of the
world; so he stayed all that night in the mount of Olives, Mat. 24.

Upon the first day of April being Wednesday, our Savior Christ rising before
day, taught again in the Temple; and after as he was going to Bethania, he said
to his Disciples, Know ye that within these two days is the feast of the
Passover, and the Son of man shall be delivered tnto the hands of sinners, and
crucified. At the same time the chief Priests assembled themselves together,
and took counsel how they might do to take him by deceit, Mat. 26. The same
day as our Savior Christ was in the house of Simon the Leper, (whom he had
healed of that sickness) there came a woman and brought a box of precious
ointment and poured it upon his head, at which the Disciples murmured, Mat. 26.
Mar. 14. Luke 21.

The 4. Passover of the Ministry of Christ
Upon Turseday being the second day of April, the days of the feast of the
Passover being now at hand, Christ with his disciples prepared for the eating
of the Paschal Lamb; which was the fourth Passover of our Savior, and when
about the evening of this day it was necessary for them to keep the Paschall
Lamb, and to prepare the Passover according to Gods Law; Christ sent Peter
and John to make ready the Supper, and he with the rest of his Disciples about
evening went from Bethania toward Jerusalem, just at the beginning of the 14
day of the 1 month Abib or Nisan, which began about the evening of this day.
Here he celebrated his last supper among his Disciples, between six and seven
of the clock in the evening; at which time he celebrated the sacrament of the
Lords supper, concerning the true receiving of his body and blood: of which you
may read, Mat. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. Afterward about the eight hour
he washed his Disciples feet, and then leaning upon the table, he pointed out
Judas that should betray him, John ca. 13. From the ninth hour to the tenth
hour, about the second Watch of the night, Judas that Traitor went from his
Disciples, Ioh. 13. In the mean time Christ made that long sermon recited only
by John, 14.15.16. and made that effectual prayer, John 17. About the 10 hour
(after they had sung a Psalm) Christ went over the brook Cedron, to the
garden of Gethsamene, being somewhat more than half a mile. There between the
hours of 11 and 12, he sweat water and blood, and prayed earnestly. About 12 of
the clock, it being then midnight, Christ was betrayed by Judas, who about
three days before had sold him for thirty siluerlings, which was worth about 3
li. 15 s.

From Gethsamene the Jews brought him bound to Jerusalem being more than half
a mile: and about one of the clock in the morning carried him to the house of
Annas who was one of the chief priests. About two of the clock they led him
from thence to Caiaphas chief Priest. From three of the clock till 4, (which
was about cocks crowing) Peter denied Christ. At the same time Caiaphas and all
the Priests of Jerusalem would have condemned the Lord of Glory the son of God.
At the same time also the servants and Officers of the Priests beat him and
mocked him. About five of the clock in the morning Christ was condemned by the
whole consent of the Synedrion of the Jews, Luke 22. All these things Christ
suffered between Thursday and Friday. And whereas the Jews according to the
commandment of God begin their day in the evening, therefore that night wherein
our Savior Christ suffered all these things, belonged unto the 14 day of the
month Abib. So that just at the same time as the Feast of the Paschal Lamb
was celebrated amongst the Jews, Christ the true Lamb of God was made a
living sacrifice on the Cross for the sins of man. Thus as we have observed
the hours of the night, so likewise let us observe the hours of the day.

Friday being the third day of April (which as I have said began the evening
before) was the fourteenth day of the first month Abib or Nisan among the
Jews. At six of the clock in the morning, about Sun rising of the same day,
our Savior Jesus Christ was brought unto Pilat, and Judas Iscariot hanged
himself, because he had betrayed the innocent blood. About seven of the clock
in the same morning our Savior Christ was carried to Herod Antipas, that cruel
Tyrant who the year before had put John Baptist to death: here he was
daisdainfully handled. At 8 of the clock our Savior Christ returned to Pilat,
who propounded unto the Jews (because they were to have a capital offender
delivered unto them at the feast of the Passover) whether they would have Jesus
their King, or Barabas who had been a murderer, let loose unto them? But they
condemned Jesus and chose Barabas, which name signifies, The son of the
multitude, or a seditious man. About 9 of the clock in the morning (which the
Jews commonly called the third hour of the day, because it succeeded the
morning, and continued till noon) our Savior Christ was whipped and crowned with
thorns. About ten of the clock Pontius Pilat, in the place called Gabbatha
publicly condemned Christ to be crucified, and washed his hands in token of
innocence. Pontius signifies cruel and inhumane; Pilat, a man armed with a
Roman dart, Mart. lib. 10. Ioh. 19. Between ten and 11, our Savior Christ
carrying his cross, was brought to the place called Golgotha. About 11 of the
clock (the third hour of the morning being not yet fully finished) our Savior
Christ was fastened upon the cross, Mark 13. He therefore hung 4 hours upon the
cross, that is, from about 11 of the clock, till about three in the
afternoon. And he spoke before that supernatural Eclipse of the Sun three
memorable sayings: First, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do,
Luke 19. Secondly he said to his mother, Woman behold thy Son: And to John
being converted, Behold thy mother. Thirdly, to the Thief, Verily I say unto
thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise. About twelve of the clock (in
that meridian which the Jews call the sixth hour, that is, the sixth hour from
the rising of the Sun) that supernatural Eclipse of the Sun happened, of
which you may read in Dionysius the Areopagite, and Eusebius. About three of
the clock in the afternoon, which the Jews call the ninth hour (the Sun
now beginning to receive his light) our Savior Christ spoke these four
sayings, My God, my God why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27. I thirst, Ioh.
19. When he had taken the Sponge he said, It is finished, Ioh. 19. And after,
crying out with a loud voice he said, Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit, and so died. At which time there were many wonderful miracles wrought,
as you may read Mat. 27. Mark 15. Luke 23. Ioh. 19. About four of clock in the
afternoon our blessed Savior was pierced through with a Lance, and there
issued out of his side blood and water, Ioh. 19. About five of the clock, which
the Jews call the eleventh hour of the day, our Savior Christ was buried by
Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus. About the sixth hour there fell an eclipse
of the Moon, which was natural and not miraculous, neither is it observed by
any of the Evangelists.

Upon the fifteenth day of the first month, which answers to the 4 of April
(being justly called the great and holy Sabbath of the Jews, for that Christ
this day rested in the Sepulcher) the Priests and Pharisees being partly joyful
because, as they thought, the disturber of the common peace and one that
opposed their authority was dead; and partly careful how they might prevent
his resurrection, went to Pilat, and obtained of him a band of soldiers to
watch the sepulcher, and to put his seal upon the stone.

Upon the fifth day of April early in the morning, our Savior Christ having
overcome death and the devil, by his divine power raised him self up from the
dead, according as he had foretold his disciples, and appeared to Mary
Magdalen, Ioh. 20. and to other women that touched his feet, Mat. 28. About
noone he appeared to Simon Peter, Luke 24. 1 Cor. 15. In the afternoon he
traveled with two of his disciples almost 8 miles, to the castle of Emaus,
Luke 24. One of these disciples was Cleopas the brother of Joseph, who brought
up our Savior Christ. The other, as may be gathered by the circumstance of the
story, was Luke, because he has set it down so exactly.

In the evening of the same day he returned inuisibly from Emaus to Jerusalem,
8 miles, where when the doors were all shut, and his disciples were assembled
together for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst of them and
said, Peace be unto you. And he showed himself to all his Disciples except
Thomas. Mark calls this the first day of the Sabbath, that is, of the week,
Mark 16. Luke 24. Ioh. 20. for the Sabbath of the Jews (as Iosep. witnesses)
is not only taken for a day of rest, but also for the whole week: from whence
is that saying in the Gospel, Iejuniobis in Sabbato, i. I fast twice in the
week, Luke 18.

Upon the 12 day of April, and eight days after his resurrection, he appeared
again to dis disciples, Thomas being then present and the doors shut; that he
might make evident that his Omnipotency was not tied to any secondary causes,
or hindered by the property of any natural bodies, which according to S.
Austin. Ser. 160. was so much the more wonderful, because he appeared unto
them substantially and effectually, not as a Phantasma or Shadow which
vanishes away, and is without any corporiall substance.

In the same month of April our Savior Christ appeared again to Peter,
Thomas, Nathaniel, the sons of Zebedeus, and other two Disciples, as they were
fishing upon the shore of Tiberias, which stood 56 miles from Jerusalem
Northward, between Bethsaida and Capernaum, Ioh. 21. The day of this
apparition is not set down.

From the sea of Tiberias near to Capernaum and Bethsaida, to mount Thabor
situated in Galile, is reckoned 10 miles: there about the end of April our
Savior Christ appeared to above 500 brethren at once, where many worshipped
him, and others doubted, Mat. 28. 1 Cor. 15. In the month of May our Savior
Christ appeared to James the son of Alpheus, for he had been seen before of
James the son of Zebedeus: both which were after crowned with martyrdom in
the city Jerusalem; the son of Zebedeus upon the 25 day of July, ten years
after the resurrection; and the son of Alpheus upon the feast day of the
Passover was thrown from a Pinnacle of the Temple, 29 years after the
resurrection of our Savior.

Upon the 40 day after his resurrection he returned fifty six miles to
Jerusalem, where his disciples were assembled together: and upon the fourteenth
day of May, in the sight of all the Apostles, with great triumph and joy he
ascended up into heaven, and sits at the right hand of his father in divine
majesty and glory Mar. and Luke vlt. Act. 1. Psalm. 28. Ephesians. 1. 1 Pet. 3.
Heb. 1. So these Travels of our Savior Christ were 319 miles. But if you reckon
his travels from the time of his infancy to the day of his ascension, they
make 3093 miles. Besides his general Visitations and journies hither and
thither, which were so many, that as John witnesses, cap. vlt. they could not
be described.

Of the towns and places to which he traveled.
Of Jericho.
THis city stood very pleasantly in the tribe of Benjamin, ten miles from
Jerusalem Northeastward. Ioshuah overcame this town by sounding of trumpets,
Ios. 6. Heb. 11. it was rebuilt by Hiel, and was compassed about with a new
wall by Herod, that mighty King of the Jews, who put the innocent children to
death and called it after his mothers name Cyprus, Ios. de Bell. Iud. lib. 1.
cap. 16. And although this city was taken and utterly ouerthrown the second
time by the Romans, at such time as Vespasian and his son Titus wasted and
destroyed Jerusalem and all the land of Iudaea; yet afterward it was
re-edified, and in Ieroms time which was 400 years after Christ, it was a
fair city. There was shown the house of Zacheus, and the Sycomore tree that he
went upon to see Christ, Luke 19. But by reason of the often destructions and
deuastations that has fallen upon it, there is not to be seen at this day
above eight houses in the town, and all the monuments and Relics of the holy
places are utterly destroyed, the house of Zacheus and the Sicomore tree are no
more to be seen in that place: only the place is to be seen where our Savior
restored the blind man to sight when he cried after him, Lord thou Son of
David have mercy upon me, Luke Chap. 18. Also though this Country throughout
be very fruitful and pleasant, yet is it nothing so fertile and pleasant as it
was when the Children of Israel did dwell there. For the Roses of Jericho are
no more to be found there, but rather in a Village about sixteen miles from
Jordan toward the East. And although they stand so far distant off, yet they
retain their ancient name. Between Jerusalem and Jericho there is a desert or
wilderness, which by the inhabitants of the holy land is called Quarentena,
where the man of which Christ speaks fell among thieves, Luke 10. There is in
the same place at this day great theeuing, and many roberies committed, as
Brittenbacchus says. In this place also is to be seen the river Chereth where
the Ravens fed Eliah, 1 Reg. 17. Near to Jericho also is found the river, the
water whereof Elizaeus made sweet by casting in salt, whereas before it was
bitter; and it remains very pleasant and sweet to this day, 2 Reg. 2.

Of Ephraim.
THis city is so called from the pleasantness and fruitfulnes of the soil,
being derived from Parah, To fructify. It lies 8 miles from Jerusalem
Northeastward, just in the way as you go from thence to Jericho, in the
wilderness of Quarentena, close by the river Chereth in the tribe of Benjamin.
Here our Savior Christ, after he had raised Lazarus from death to life, hid
himself with his disciples, because the Jews sought to take away his life by
deceit. The Passover following, he was made a sacrifice for the sin of man,
Ioh. 11.

Of Bethania.
THis city was a type of the Church, which is always subject to the Cross,
and exposed to every calamity; and therefore is called Bethania, that is, The
house of sorrow and affliction: being derived of Both, an House; and Oni,
Affliction. According to the prophecy of our Savior, who foretold of the
afflictions and tribulations that should fall upon his Church, You shall mourn,
but you shall be comforted, and your grief shall be turned into joy. It was
distant from Jerusalem almost two miles toward the South-East. Borchardus the
Monk observes, That close by a Well about a stones cast out of this Town,
there is showed the place where Martha met our Savior Christ when he came to
Bethania, and a little after called her sister to meet him, John cap. 11. There
is also shown in this Town the house of Simon the Leper, where ^ certain
woman having an Alabaster box of precious Ointment poured it on our Sauiors
head, not without the great indignation of his Disciples, Matthew. 26. There is
also to be seen the house of Martha, to which our Savior did oftentimes
resort, Luke 10. Ioh. 11. and 12. and in that place there is at this day a
Church built in honor of those two sisters, which were the sisters of Lazarus.
There is also seen the sepulcher out of which Lazarus was raised from death to
life, Ioh. 11. which stands close by the said Church, and over it is built a
chapel of Marble, very decent and comely. The Saracens hold this Chapel in
great estimation. You cannot see the city of Jerusalem from Bethania because
of the mount of Olives, but as soon as you ascend a little hill in the way as
you got hence to Jerusalem, you may discern mount Sion and a part of the city:
then when you are descended from that hill, the city is again hidden. After
that upon the left side of the mount of Olives, some stones cast from Bethpage,
you do leave a small village standing under the mountain of Offense, where
Solomon in times past committed Idolatry. From this village the Ass and the
Colt was brought unto Christ. Not far from thence, upon the South side as you
go upon the Mount of Olives, you come unto the place where Christ mounted upon
the Ass, as we read, Matthew. 21. And a little after you may see the whole
city of Jerusalem, with Solomon's Temple, and the Church of the holy sepulcher,
with many other holy places. Then as you descend from the top of the mount of
Olives, you may see the place where the multitude cried, Hosanna, blessed be he
that comes in the name of the Lord. And in this descent also our Savior
Christ wept over Jerusalem, saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I
have gathered thee under my wings as a Hen gathers her Chickens, but thou
would not?

Of Bethpage.
BEthpage stands upon the right hand of the way toward the East, as you go
from Bethania to Jerusalem; and as S. Ierom says was sometimes a habitation of
the Priests, which at their appointed times went up to Jerusalem to minister to
the Lord. It was so called because of the multitude of Figs that grow there:
for Pagim signifies a Fig, Cant. 2. Bethpage is a notable type of the Church,
for that ought likewise to be fruitful, and to bring forth sweet Figs, that
is, good works, and many other comfortable virtues, that so men in their
afflictions might be comforted. As it is thought, the Fig Tree that our Savior
Christ cursed because it wanted fruit, stood not far from Bethpage, Matthew.
21. Mark 11. Wherefore let us take heed that we be not like that fruitless
Fig Tree, covered only (like our forefathers Adam and Eve) with leaves, and
bearing no fruit, Genesis 3. lest so Gods curse fall upon us, and we be thrust out
of eternal happiness, Matthew. 3.

Of the Castle from whence the Ass and the Colt were brought upon which our
Savior rode to Jerusalem.
THis Castle (as Adamus Risnerus says) was a certain Hold compassed about
with strong walls, and within beautified with a fair palace, supported with
goodly columns: it stood not far from the Mount of Olives, just in the
dividing of the way as you go from Bethania to Jerusalem; for there goes one
way to the fountain gate, and another to the valley of Gehinnon. In the Hebrew
text it is called Tirah, as you may read in Matthew, which signifies not only
a Castle, but a firm and sure building, with good decorum and order: for Tor
signifies a circular order. It is credible that this Hold is a resting place,
and that the Ass and the colt were tied in the way, for this cause, that if by
chance any travelers were weary (by reason of the tediousness of their
journey) they might hire them for certain hours to carry them over the Mount
of Olives, and so return them back again. The Allegorical meaning of this
Ass and the Colt, according to the opinion of many learned men, signifies the
people of the Jews, who were burdened with Moses laws: and the Asses Colt
signifies the rest of the Gentiles, which were not charged with the burden of
Moses law, but tied only to the law of nature. So we also like travelers and
strangers in this miserable world, are tied to the afflictions and calamities
thereof, standing in two ways, expecting the death of the body, and liberty
of the soul; then our Savior Christ comes in peace and loses this bond of
death, (as the Apostle says, Romans 7.) and brings us to that heavenly
Jerusalem, eternal joy, according to that of Saint Paul in the first of the
Philippians, I desire to be loosed and to be with our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of the Mount of Olives.
ABout half a mile and a furlong from Jerusalem toward the East, stood the
Mount of Olives, very fruitful and pleasant, bringing forth Olives, Palms,
Figs, Gossumpine, and many other notable fruits, but principally Palms and
Olives, of which the mountain takes the name. It is said in Pliny, lib. 16.
cap. 19. that these Olive and Palm trees do never lose their leaves, and are
green both Winter and Summer. Saint Austine calls it, The mountain of
unction, because of the fertility and pleasantness of it: also, The mountain
of health, because it brings forth Oils and many other plants necessary for
Physic: also, The mountain of light; first, because it lies upon the East,
so that the Sun shines in the morning very pleasantly upon it, and in the
evening when it sets, the beams thereof reflecting upon the Temple of
Jerusalem, casts a beautiful light to this Mount: secondly, because it
brings forth Oil, which is the nourishment and life of light: thirdly,
because it was beautified with the gracious presence of our blessed Lord and
Savior Christ, which is the Day Star and light of the Church, rising upon
high to enlighten all those which shall be called unto eternal happiness. For
which cause it typically represents the Church, which is the light of the
World, wherein are found many Christians that bring forth pleasant fruit, (good
works) relieuing the necessity of such as are in want, comforting the
afflicted, and patiently supporting the calamity and misery of this world,
that so they might triumphantly rejoice with Christ in that heavenly city of
Jerusalem.

What things Zacharias has spoken of this Mount in his last chapter, is to be
understood of the preaching of the Gospel, and propagation of the Church
through all the world. Saint Ierom says in his Epitaph upon S. Paul, That upon
this hill the Jews commonly burnt the red Cow, with the ashes whereof the
people of God being sprinkled, they were purified and sanctified, of which you
may read, Number. 19. Heb. 6.

Hellen the Empress, mother to that godly Emperor Constantine the Great, about
the year of our Lord 332, caused a fair and beautiful church to be built
upon this Mount, just in the place where our blessed Lord and Savior Christ
ascended up into heaven. It was built round, all of white polished marble: upon
the top thereof there is no roof, but a window even as Christ should ascend
through it, as Eusebius says in the life of the Emperor Constantine the
Great, lib. 3. cap. 40. The same S. Ierom affirms, in his book de locis
Hebraicis. He also says, That the inhabitants of the Holy land take upon them
to show in this Church, the impression of the feet of our Savior Christ, which
happened as they say, just at such time as he ascended up into heaven: out of
which, travelers and pilgrims take sand to carry with them as an holy relicke,
though indeed it is verily to be thought, that they were feet made in stone by
ancient Monks, thereby to get money from such as resorted thither upon
devotion; for look how often pilgrims take thence the sand, they are presenly
filled again: from whence may be gathered, that there is no sand naturally
there. Every man therefore ought to embrace a nearer way to salvation, than to
follow those monkish fables; and to seek Christ in the holy Scripture, not
upon the Mount of Olives, or amongst sand: for since the grave could not
contain him, the Mount of Olives cannot hold him, who now sits at the right
hand of his father, in power and eternal glory: but rather if we be desirous
to see the footsteps of Christ, let us seek them in the Church, which is
dispersed through the world; wherein we are sufficiently taught how we should
follow him.

The Palm is a famous tree which brings forth Dates; and is so called
because upon the top the boughs are thick and round, extending out like
fingers; from whence it is called Dactylus, that is, a finger.

Of Gethsamene.
THis was a village situated at the foot of the mount of Olives, in a pleasant
and fruitful place. Near unto this village, as Saint Augustine observes
there were many pleasant gardens which gave forth very sweet and delectable
sauors; unto which place Christ and his Disciples did oftentimes resort, as the
Evangelist Luke cap. 22. observes. It was so called from the pressing forth of
oil; for Gathor Geth, signifies, a Press, and Schaemen, Oil. In this place
the heart of our Savior Christ was so pressed with affliction that he sweat
drops of blood: By which blood the sins of our souls are washed away, and
we that are wounded are made whole, as with a most precious balsome, Isa. 53.

Hellen the Empress, in an Orchard close by this town, set up a fair and
beautiful Church, over the sepulcher of the Virgin Mary; which she called by
the name of the mother of God, Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 30. It is said that this
sepulcher remains to this day in this Church, made of white polished Marble,
standing about eight and forty steps under ground, being something wider than
the sepulcher of Christ: in it there is two doors, one to go in, another to
go out. But whither this be the right sepulcher of the blessed Virgin, it
concerns us not, since it appertains not to our salvation, neither is
mentioned in the holy Scriptures: but if any man be desirous to be further
satisfied in it, let him read Nicephorus, who makes mention of that and her
ascension, both in my opinion of like credit; because, I suppose, that Saint
Luke (who wrote the Acts of the Apostles, and lived in those times) would not
have omitted so memorable an action. But to return to the Garden of
Gethsamene. About some fifty paces toward the East of this sepulcher of the
blessed Virgin, close by the foot of the mount of Olives, stands a certain
chapel, just in the place where sometimes the town of Gethsemane stood. Not
far from this chapel is shown a certain hollow place under a rock, where
the inhabitants say our Savior sweat drops of blood. They also show a certain
stone whereon the Angels stood which comforted our Savior. Discending thence
about a stones cast, they show unto Pilgrims a place close by the cave in the
Mount of Olives, where Peter, James, and John, sat when our Savior was in his
agony. They also show the place where Peter cut off Malchas ear. There is to
be seen a memorable place where Judas betrayed our Savior with a kiss, when
he delivered him to the Jews. Not far off is to be seen the place where the
Jews fell backward when our Savior asked them, Whom seek ye? Besides many
other things (if Borchardus may be credited) as the impression of his hair and
head upon a stone; and of his finger, as if it had been in wax, upon a rock:
and in the place where he prayed, of his hands and knees, which are so firm in
stone that they cannot be defaced with any instrument. But there have been
many in this place since these times, which have seen none of these things:
from whence may be gathered, that they have been idle delusions used by ancient
monks to get money from Pilgrims and strangers; and I have here remembered
them, that others knowing these, may beware of the like fallacies and deceits
purposely invented for lucres sake.

This garden of Gethsamene is credibly thought to have been planted in former
times, by the Kings, David and Solomon; but increased and enlarged by other
succeeding Princes, that there they might recreate themselves, and receive some
content by the fruits of the earth. But on the contrary, that great King the
anointed of the Lord, our blessed Savior, in this place of pleasure, this
paradise of the Jews, was constrained to undergo that almost unsupportable
passion, to make us partakers of that heavenly paradise and place of pleasure.

Not far from hence is to be seen the place where Judas hanged himself: and
a little from that, the field of Akeldoma, which was bought with the thirty
Siluerlings for which Judas betrayed Christ. This field (by the appointment of
the Empress Hellen) was compassed about with four walls, in the manner of a
tower: upon the top whereof there are seven distinct doors, like windows, by
which the dead bodies of Christians are let down into it: it is fifty foot
wide, and seventy two long. It stands not far from the valley of Hinnon
toward the East, and upon the South side of Mount Sion in Jerusalem, etc.

Of Kidron or Cedron.
THis brook was so called because of the blackness of the water, being
derived of Kadar, To wax black. The Mountain whence it first rises, stands
not far from Jerusalem toward the South; from whence it runs through the
valley of Iehosaphat (which valley being very fat and fertile, changes the
color of the water, and makes it look black) and so through Jerusalem; then
passing toward the East over a cliffe of Mount Oliuet, it falls into the
Lake of Asphaltites. When there falls any store of rain the channel is very
full, but in Summer it is oftentimes dry with the extremity of heat. Over this
brook David passed when he was persecuted by his son Absolon, 2 Samuel 16. and
our Savior Christ when he drank of the River in the way, that is, when he
suffered upon the cross for the sin of man, according to that saying of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 69. Save me, O God, because the waters are entered even into my
soul.

Of Mount Caluarie.
THis Mountain, according to the common opinion, was so called of dead men's
skuls, or the skuls of such who were put to death for some capital offense. It
stood upon the West side of Jerusalem as you go out of the ancient Gate, and
is a part of Mount Gihon. At this day it stands within the city of Jerusalem
together with the sepulcher of our Savior: and upon it is built a fair
Church, which is joined unto the Church of the holy Sepulcher, being as it were
a Quire unto it: But it stands somewhat lower. It is built all of Marble, and
the inside is all polished and wrought very curiously. It is also paued with
the same stone. Within it, is seen a piece of the pillar of stone, to which
they say Christ was tied when he was whipped: in which stone are to be seen
certain red spects, as if they had been drops of blood; and these also (they
say) were the blood of Christ when he was scourged; besides many other things,
of which you may read at the beginning of this treatise in the description of
Jerusalem as it is at this day.

The Description of the holy Sepulcher.
THe Sepulcher of Christ stood upon the West side of Jerusalem, close by Mount
Golgatha, in the garden of Joseph of Arimathea: for it was the custom of the
Jews to build their tombs or sepulchers, in their Orchards and Gardens; and
beautify and adorn them with Lillies, Roses and other flowers, on purpose to
put them in mind of their mortality, according to that of David, Psalm. 103,
The days of man are like grass, as a flower of the field so flourishes he:
for the wind goes over it and is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no
more. And for this cause the Jews, but especially the kings, would be buried
in their gardens: so Joseph, a good and just man, following this custom, had
hewed him out of a rock a new monument, in which there had been no man laid;
that so when he walked into the Garden to take the air, he might be put in
mind of his mortality. In this monument our Savior Christ was buried: And
from this place upon the third day early in the morning, he rose; to the
terror and astonishment of such as watched the sepulcher. From whence may be
gathered, That as our first parents, Adam and Eve, trespassed against God, and
lost felicity in a garden; so Christ the Son of God in a Garden made
satisfaction for that sin; restored us again to grace, and make us capable
of heavenly felicity. This sepulcher (as it is described by S. John, when he
went with S. Peter, to see of that notable miracle of the resurrection were
true) was like a little chapel, the door thereof being upon the outside, and
was but one room without any division, so that a man might see all that was
within it: for he says, Ioh. 20. That he did not go in, but looked in, and saw
the linen clothes were they lay wrapped up: from whence may be concluded, that
the sepulcher which is now extant (howsoever perhaps it may stand in the same
place) is not the same sepulcher wherein our Savior Christ was buried: for it
is described to be four square, to be open at the top, to have within it two
vaults (an inward and an outward) and that you descend to it by stairs, as you
may read at the beginning of this treatise; which description does not agree
with that of S. John's. Again S. John says, that they rolled a great stone to
the door of the sepulcher, did not lay it upon the top of it. Also Eusebius
and Nicephorus affirm, that the Pagans and other heathen people filled up the
Sepulcher of Christ with earth, and built up in the place the Temple of Venus,
and in it put her image, where she was worshipped a long time after, until
such time as that godly Emperesse Hellen caused that Temple to be abolished,
and the sepulcher cleansed and purified. Afterward at her instigation,
Constantine the Great (who was her son) built up in the very same place a
fair and goodly Church in memory of our Savior, and bestowed great cost both
in the workmanship, and in beautifying it with gold and silver. This Temple
(as it was before it was destroyed by the Saracens) is said to be built all of
white polished marble, and beautified with stones of diverse colors, guilt with
gold and silver, covered on the outside with lead to withstand the storms and
showers of rain that happened; but the inside was guilt all with splendant and
refulgent gold, which cast a wonderful luster upon the beholders. On either
side of it were two walking galleries, one above, which was close; and another
below, which was open; extending themselves the length of the sanctuary; all
the roof and vault being covered over with gold and artificial work: the one
being supported with pillars of Marble, the other with posts of wood plaited
with silver. There were also three gates toward the East, very fitly and
fairly disposed, by which the multitude that resorted thither, go in and out:
within these, there stood an arch, representing after a sort the Hemisphaere of
the Heavens, extended to the top of the sanctuary like a circle, girded about
with twelve pillars of equal bigness, representing the twelve Apostles, and
upon the top of this arch were placed cups of silver, beautifully burnished.
All which the said Emperor dedicated to God for a monument.

There were many other memorable things that did belong to this Temple, which
were admirable to look on, all which as you came up the high street from the
market place, were presented to your view; a stately sight, the like whereof
those parts did not afford. This temple was built by the Emperor Constantine,
Anno Dom. 333. Venerable Bead; who was a Dr of Divinity, and lived in England
700 years after Christ, describes the holy sepulcher after this manner: This
Sepulcher over head was something round, and so high that a man could scarce
touch it with his hand; standing in that rock which extends it self from
mount Caluarie into the Garden of Joseph of Arimathea: representing in form, a
little chapel; the entrance thereinto was toward the East. And further he
adds, that they which went into this veil, found on the right hand toward
the North, a stone tomb which resembled a coffin, situated in the pauement,
joining to the wall; which stone coffin was of a mixed color, that is, white
and red, being seven foot long, and three handfulls high. This description
venerable Bede received from certain Monks, that went upon devotion to
Jerusalem to visit this Sepulcher: but since, it has been diverse times
destroyed and polluted by the Turks and other heathen people. From whence may
be gathered, that the Sepulcher which is now standing and showed unto Pilgrims,
is some new device of Monks to get money of strangers, and procure a kind of
blind devotion in the hearts of ignorant people; wherefore as the Angel said,
Mark 16. Let us not seek Christ any longer amongst the dead, or in the grave,
but in his holy Church, where the lively pourtraiture of his divine presence is
set forth unto us: that so we may be made partakers with him hereafter in that
place of eternal glory. Concerning the residue of this description you may
see it before.

Of Emmaus.
THis city or castle of Emmaus, is distant from Jerusalem almost eight miles
toward the Northwest. It signifies the mother of fortitude; being derived of
Em, a mother; and Vtz, which the Hebrews call Fortitude. It stood where three
several ways were, that so it might serve for a direction to passengers. From
whence Melancton says that it was a notable type of the Church, which is our
true mother, showing us the way unto eternal life. And although it be but
little, and the number in it few, yet it is strong. As the castle, though it
were small, yet it is almost invincible; and for that cause called The mother
of strength, as the Church is called The mother of the righteous, against which
the gates of hell shall not be able to prevail.

In the time of Judas Macchabeus (though it was then a small city) it was
numbered amongst the greatest cities of Judah, because of the situation and
strength of it. To this place our Savior traveled from Jerusalem the same day
that he arose from the dead, Luke 24.

In the time of the Romans wars in Iudaea, this city was wonderfully defaced
and ruined by the soldiers of Tiberius Maximus (who was chief Captain in
this country, in the absence of Titus Vespasian,) but yet not utterly
abolished; for about a hundred and fifty years after, Heliogabolus Emperor
of Rome caused it to be rebuilded, and called by the name of Nicopolis, that
is, the city of Victory. Not far from Emmaus there was an Inn, or a place
to which strangers might resort, and there three ways met; two went of either
side the town, and one through it: in this place the two Disciples constrained
our blessed Savior to stay with them, because it was then about Sunne-set.
Near unto this Inn Nicephorus and Zozemenus say (in their Ecclesiastical
History) there was a Spring or Well of that admirable virtue, that if either
man or beast that was infirm or sick did drink of the water thereof, they
were immediately restored to their former health. The reason that these Authors
have for it (because they are impertinent) I willingly omit.

But to return to the city of Emmaus, as it is now called Nicopolis, being
situated eight miles from Jerusalem toward the Northeast, in the way as you
go thence to Ioppa: the country round about it being very fertile and
pleasant, by reason of the rivers and springs wherewith it is watered, as Pliny
says, l. 5. c. 14. and much altered from that which it was in times past: but
because you may read more of this city in Pliny, as it is at this day, and in
Nicephorus and Eusebius, I leave to speak further of it.

Of Simon of Cyrene.
THis Simon which carried the Cross of our Savior Christ, was born in Kir, a
city in Africa, situated 16 miles from Jerusalem toward the West, Matthew. 27.
Luke 23. In which city Tiglath Phulasser Emperor of the Assirians planted many
of the inhabitants of Damascus, after he had conquered that city, 2 Reg. 16.
This city and the country round about it, by reason of these new inhabitants,
by little and little changed the name: and whereas in former times it was called
Kir, in the time of our Savior it was commonly called Cyrene, and this man (of
that country) Simon of Cyrene. At this day it is a strong and beautiful city,
situated between Mareotides and Zeugitania: at first built by Battus, whom
Callimachus the Poet claims to be his progenitor. This Battus was a mighty
king in Africa, but was one that had a great impediment in his speech, insomuch
that many think this word (...) to have been originally used by him, and by
none other. Afterward (as is said) Tiglah Phulasser having obtained the
jurisdiction of this city, planted the people of Damascus in it: and they
obtaining some power there, continued till a long time after Christ, and
embraced the religion of the Jews, built up Synagogues, and dispersed that law
in many parts of those quarters. There were some of this country that opposed
that holy Marter Stephen, and were consenting to his death. There were many
learned men in it, as Eratosthenes the Mathematician, Callimachus the Poet
(both which were had in great estimation among the Egyptians) Carneades also
the Academian, Cronus Apollonius, and Hegesias the Philosopher (of whom Cicero
speaks in the fifth book of his Tusculans) and Eratosthenes the Historian,
who was son of Agaclis. Salust says, that this city in his time was so
mighty, that it maintained war against the Carthaginians for their bounds and
limits of their fields and grounds, a long time; and Iustine lib. 39. That they
maintained war against two nations, the Phoenes, and the Egyptians: in which
wars they gave Aprius, the King of the Egyptians, such a mighty overthrow,
that there were very few of his army that returned into his country with him,
as Horodot affirms, lib. 4. there were also many great Princes that ruled in
this city, of which because you may read in diverse other Authors more at
large, I omit to speak of them.

Of Joseph of Arimathea who buried Christ.
THis Joseph which caused our Savior Christ to be buried in his garden, was a
rich man, upright and just in all his actions, a Senator of Jerusalem, and one
that expected the Kingdom of God, borne at Arimathea a city of the Jews,
Luc. 23. This city was sometime called Ramathaim Sophim, and sometime Ramah,
because it was situated in a high place, and in times past was a fair city
standing 16 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northwest, the description whereof
you may read before. At this day it is called Ramalea; being nothing so far
as it was, but like a country town, the houses being carelessely dispersed
here and there, lying without walls or bulwarks to defend it; notwithstanding,
the ancient ruins of the former city is to be seen even at this day. There is
also a great Inn or resting place for strangers, having within it many rooms
for the receipt of passengers, and a well of very sweet water. This house was
first purchased at the charge of Philip Duke of Burgondie, and by him committed
to the protection of the Monks of Mount Sion, by whom it is at this day made
an hospital, wherein pilgrims, travelers, and strangers are entertained and
find much relief. In an inward Orchard belonging to this hospital, there is a
fair plot of ground that brings forth great abundance of Aloes, of which
there is often mention in the holy Scriptures, but more especially in Psalm
48. Thy garments smell of Aloes and Cassia, when thou come out of thy Iuorie
palaces, where they have made thee glad.

Nichodemus a Prince of the Jews, together with Joseph of Arimathea, brought
with them an hundred pound of Aloes mixed with Myrrh, to embalme the body of
our Savior Christ, when they had begged it of Pilat, before they buried it,
Ioh. 19. Myrrh is a kind of gum that issues out of a tree that grows in the
East countries, but principally in Arabia: the tree out of which it issues is
commonly two yards and a half high, with some pricks upon it, the bark
whereof being cut, there issues out of it drops like tears, which congealeth
into a gum, and is called Mirrh: the principal virtue that it has, is to
keep the bodies of the Dead incorruptable, see Pli. li. 12. ca. 15. and 16. In
Arabia Foelix there is such abundance of sweet Myrrh, Frankincense, and other
odoriferous gums, that such as sail in the Red sea may easily smell the savor
of them. There is also found in the holy Land Myrrh and Aloes. Aloes is the
juice of a certain bitter herb, which by some is called Everliving: it
kills the worms, and preserves from putrefaction; it is also good for the
sight. There is to be gathered in India, Arabia, and the Holy land, a certain
herb of an extraordinary sweet smell, with leaves broad, fat and juicie, which
being pressed yields more Aloes than honey; from whence this metaphorical
proverb is used, Quod plus molestiae quam voluptatis gignit, that is, more
troublesome than profitable. You may read also in Plautus, that the life of
man tastes more of Aloes than honey. And Iuvenal speaking of an evil wife,
says, she has more of Aloes than honey. So Euripides, Every sweet has his
sour. So also the holy Cross seems to have more of Aloes than honey,
notwithstanding it preserves us from eternal corruption, and kills the
venomous worms of conscience, cleanses us from our sins, and freeth us from
the fear of the Devil and eternal death, that so we might be recreated, and
by the faith of our Savior be raised up at the last day, and partake with him
in his everlasting kingdom: according to that of Johannes Taulerus, Where the
cross, there the light; where temptation, there prayer and regeneration, etc.

The Travels of Peter.
IN the 35 year after the nativity of Christ, about the month of January,
and a little before the conversion of the Apostle Paul; Peter and John were
sent from Jerusalem to Samaria, which was 32 miles, that the Samaritans might
receive that admirable gift of the Holy Ghost, and there they disputed with
Simon Mag^^, Acts 8.

From Samaria they returned back again to Jerusalem, which was 32 miles. In
this journey they went to diverse towns of the Samaritans, teaching and
preaching unto them the doctrine of the Gospel, Acts 8.

In the sixth year after the resurrection of Christ, Peter went to Lidda, which
was distant from Jerusalem twenty miles toward the Northeast; where he cured
Aeneas, who had lien sick eight years of the Palsy upon his bed, Acts 9.

From thence he went to Ioppa, which was three miles: here he raised Tabitha
from death, Acts 9.

In the seventh year after the resurrection of Christ, Peter went from Ioppa
and came to Caesarea Strato, which was six and thirty miles: where he
preached the Gospel to Cornelius the Centurion, and baptized him and his whole
family, Acts 10. Clemens Recogn. lib. 9.

From Caesarea he returned to Jerusalem, which was 32 miles; where being
accused for going to the Gentiles, he excused himself, Acts 11.

In the eleventh year after the resurrection of Christ, he was cast into
prison, and set at liberty by an Angel of God, Acts 12. So he went secretly
from Jerusalem (as it was thought) into the desert, or to some other unknown
place: upon the second day of August in the same year, Herod Agrippa King of
the Jews was struck by an Angel of God at Caesarea, and he was devoured of
worms, Acts 12. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 4.

After, Herod Agrippa being dead and buried, Peter returned to Jerusalem, where
he was in Council with the rest of the Apostles, about sixteen years after
the resurrection of Christ, and fourteen after the conversion of Paul, Gal. 2.
Acts 15. See also Bid upon the Acts of the Apostles.

In the seventeenth year after the resurrection of Christ, Peter went from
Jerusalem and came to Antiochia in Syria, which journey was 280 miles: there
Paul resisted him, Gal. 2.

From Antiochia he went to Babylon in Egypt, where he wrote his first
Epistle: this journey was 520 miles. So all his Travels which are mentioned in
the Scripture were 955 miles.

Allegations of the Author to prove that Peter was never at Rome.
But that Peter was twenty five years seven months and five days Bishop and
chief Priest at Rome, cannot be proved by the testimony of the Scripture, and
is utterly repugnant to the supputation and true account of the times. First,
because it is manifest by that which has been said, that he continued at
Jerusalem and in Iudaea during the time that Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius
were Emperors of Rome. And shortly after the martyrdom of Steven, he and
John were sent into Samaria, that the Samaritans might also receive the gift of
the holy Ghost, Act. 8. Paul also in the third year after his conversion, came
to Jerusalem, and there spoke with Peter, and remained with him fifteen days,
Act. 9. Gal. 1. Fourteen days after the conversion of Paul, Peter was at the
Apostolical council held in Jerusalem; and there, with James and John gave
the right hand of fellowship to Paul and Barnabas, that they should go and
preach the Gospel unto the Gentiles; and that he and the rest would go unto
the Jews and those that were circumcised, Gal. 2. In the time of Claudius
Caesar, Peter was committed to prison by Herod Agrippa in Jerusalem, and
miraculously delivered by the Angel of God, Act. 10. In the ninth year of
Claudius Caesar, Peter was at Antiochia in Syria, where Paul resisted him to
his face, Gal. 2. All these things manifestly prove that the Apostle Peter was
not at Rome at such time as any of these three, viz. Tiberius, Caligula and
Claudius were Emperors; but either in Jerusalem, or else at Antiochla in Syria.

Secondly, it may axactly be made evident out of the holy, Scriptures, that
Peter was not at Rome in the time of Nero. For in the second year of Nero,
Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, and sent it from Corinth by the hand of
Phebe: in which Epistle he saluted all his friends which he had in that city,
by name, as by the conclusion of the Epistle more plainly appears; but there
is no mention of the Apostle Peter, who (if that at time Bishop of that place)
surely should not have bin omitted. Also in the fifth year of Nero, Paul being
then in prison at Rome, wrote his Epistles to the Galatians, Ephesians,
Philippians, Colossians, and to Philemon; and in the conclusion of these
Epistles he expressly names all his friends that he had in Rome, yet makes no
mention of Peter. And when he was the second time in prison under Nero, in the
last year of the reign of this Emperor, he wrote from Rome his second
Epistle to Timothy, being a little before his death, at the end of which
Epistle he plainly shows that he had no companion there but Luke, 2 Timothy 4.
From whence it is manifest, that Peter during all the pilgrimage and life of
Paul, was never at Rome: how then can it possible be, that Peter should be
bishop of Rome for the space of almost 26 years? Truly there are many learned
men, and they also of great judgment, which hold this opinion false, and
utterly repugnant to holy Scripture, neither can be proved by any good Authors
or histories. But if Peter were ever at Rome, he came thither after the last
imprisonment of Paul, and a few days before his martyrdom. Because (as
Onuphrius says, in Comment. fast. lib. 2. also Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 22. and
Tertul. cont. Marcion.) Peter and Paul in the 35 year after the resurrection
of Christ, and upon the third day of the Calends of July ( C. Fonteius
Capitonius and C. Julius Rufus being then Consuls of Rome) were crowned with
the Wreath of martyrdom, and with their blood sealed the truth of the Gospel.
But there are others of opinion that Peter never came at Rome, but that he was
crucified at Jerusalem by King Agrippa's command; others say at Babylon. But
because it is a thing doubtful, and not greatly material, I leave it to the
Readers consideration.

Of the Towns and places to which he traveled.
Of Samaria.
BEcause I have before briefly entreated of the beginning and foundation of
this city, I shall not need here again to repeat it. I will now therefore show
the end of it, which was principally caused by the obstinacy of the
inhabitants: who refusing the doctrine and prophecy of Elias and Elizeus,
embraced and followed strange gods, and offered incense unto idols; whereby the
wrath of God was kindled against them, insomuch that he left this goodly city
as a prey to the Gentiles and foreign nations, that carried the people thereof
into captivity, where for a long time they remained in great misery.

After the first desolation, because the country round about this city was
very fertile and pleasant, abounding with springs, rivers, vines, olive
gardens, mountains, fruitful valleys, fair cities, and strong castles and
towns; Herod Ascalonites (that great King of the Jews, who put to death the
innocent children) reedified it, set up many goodly buildings beautified with
marble pillars and pleasant walks: and also in the circuit of the Kings house,
and under the buildings of the nobility in the common Market place, the houses
and vaults were supported with marble pillars, according to the manner of the
Jews. The palace (callled the K. house, stood in the midst of the city, upon
the top of the mountain: and round about it there were diverse other buildings
set up, but much lower, even about the descent of the mountain; yet so
situated, that the inhabitants might see out of their houses the country round
about. Then close to the palace in the upper part of the city, he caused a
temple to be built in honor of Augustus. Thus having finished the inside, he
compast it about with a mighty wall, and upon that placed many turrets: and
then to flatter Augustus, called it by the name of Sebasten, which among the
Grecians signifies Augustum and venerabile principem: now although this city
was very glorious and spacious in those times (for it was three miles about)
yet at this day it is utterly ruined and destroyed, insomuch, that there is not
a house standing, two Churches only excepted, which were built in honor of S.
John Baptist: and the chief of these, which was the Cathedral Church, the
Saracens have converted to their use, so that at this day Mahomet is worshipped
in it. In this stood the Sepulcher of S. John Baptist, cut out in marble, like
the sepulcher of Christ, where (as Hierom says) he lies buried between Elisha
and Obediah the Prophets. This church stands upon the side of the mountain, in
the descent.

The Saracens do principally reverence S. John Baptist next after Christ, and
they affirm the virgin Mary to have conceived by the holy Spirit, and not by
the seed of man: That S. John was the greatest prophet (except Christ) that
ever was. They also believe Christ to be the son of God, but not to be equal
with God. Yet they prefer Mahomet before both, because they hold him a
messenger sent of God, not unto all men, but only unto the Saracens and Turks,
and their subjects.

The other Church which stood in Samaria, was upon the top of the mountain
which sometimes the Kings palace stood. In this Church in times past there dwelt
certain Grecian Monks, which were Christians, and entertained Christian
Pilgrims with great humanity, and furnished them with many necessaries.

But the city of Samaria it self has bin so often ouerthrown, and brought to
such extreme misery, that almost all the ground where it stood is at this time
converted into an Olive garden. So that as that wicked King Ahab turned the
Vineyard of Naboth which stood close by his house, into an olive garden; so God
in his singular justice has turned the palace of that King, and the whole city
wherein he dwelt, which was the strength of his kingdom, into an olive garden.
There are not so many ruins found through all the land of Iudaea (though there
have bin many worthy cities destroyed) as are in this place at this day. The
situation of this city was very beautiful, for a man might have seen from it
to the sea of Ioppa and Antipatris; also to Caesarea Palestina, and through all the mountain of Ephraim, to Ramatha Sophim, and so to mount Carmel and the city
of Ptolomais.

Of Lidda.
THis city was situated not far from Ioppa, upon the shore of the
Mediterranian sea, 20 miles from Jerusalem Northwestward. In this city Peter
healed Aeneas, who had bin sick 8 years of the palsy. At this day there is
nothing to be seen but the Church of S. George, who was beheaded by the
Emperor Dioclesian, for professing the Christian faith. The Grecians call this
town Diospolis, i. an holy Town. And the Turks account S. George for a valiant
Knight and holy man.

Of Caesarea Strato.
THis city was situated upon the shore of the Mediterranian sea, some 32 miles
from Jerusalem Northward: in ancient time it was called Strato, being first
built by Strato King of Sydon. But time having decayed a great part of it,
Herod Ascalonita repaired it, and made it a goodly thing, calling it Caesarea,
after the name of Augustus Caesar. And that ships might lie at anchor there
without danger, he caused to be builded a fair haven to oppose the violence of
the sea. This haven was so wonderfully contrived, and set up at such a great
charge, that it was admirable to look upon; for he laid the foundation of it
twenty yards under water, burying in the Deep stones of an extraordinary
greatness, some fifty foot long, eight foot thick, and ten foot broad, and
many of them more. The Haven it self was beautified with fair buildings and
goodly Walks, supported with marble Pillars, and mounted up aloft, so that you
might see the ships as they were upon the sea, and made way to this harbor. The
entrance into it was upon the North, at the mouth thereof there stood three
mighty Colosses upon marble pillars. He also placed upon the wall of the City
toward the Haven mighty Towers, the chiefest and fairest of which he dedicated
to Drusus, Augustus his son in law, and called it by the name of the Drusian
tower. The buildings that joined to this Haven were all of white polished
marble, and the streets of the City were directly toward it. Also the
Marketplace where they bought and sold was not far from it. Upon a little
hill close by this Port he caused a Church to be built in honor of Augustus
Caesar. This Temple was a very magnificent and stately building, and in it he
caused the Statue of Augustus (curiously wrought and cast just in the figure of
Jupiter Olympius) to be erected, and worshipped it as his god. There are many
other stately and sumptuous buildings that were set up by this King. But
amongst the rest, he bestowed great cost upon the market place, the Theater,
and the Amphitheatre, which he wonderfully beautified, and instituted certain
Games to be there used once every fifth year in honor of Augustus, as Iosep.
de Bell. Iud. li. 1. witnesses. After the death of this king, Herod Agrippa
was made King of the Jews. This Prince some ten years after the resurrection
of Christ caused James the son of Zebedeus upon the 25 day of July to be put to
death in Jerusalem; and when he perceived it was acceptable unto the Jews, in
the following year about the feast of the Passover he caused Peter to be
cast into prison; who by the prayers of the Church was miraculously delivered,
as you may read Acts 12. A little after, that is, about the month of August,
this King was struck by the Angel of the Lord, and died miserably: for when he
came to Caesarea Strato he caused the public shows to be solemnly practiced,
and in honor of Claudius Caesar set forth very sumptuous interludes and plays;
to which feast and shows all the Nobility and Gentry of that country round
about resorted. Where the next day very early in the morning, having put on a
rich and goodly garment made all of cloth of gold, he went into the theater,
and there according to his usual custom sat in a princely seat, and made an
oration to the inhabitants of Tire. Now when the sun was up and shone upon
his garments, the rays thereof cast such a reflection upon the beholders, that
it dazzled their eyes, insomuch that they could scarce see. Wherefore those that
were his flatterers, hearing his gracious speech, cried with a loud voice, O
Agrippa be propitious unto us; for although heretofore we feared thee as a man,
yet now we well perceive thou art of a more noble and Divine nature. But when
the King (taking delight in these speeches) would not restrain the impious
clamor of these flatterers, a little after he lifted up his head, and upon the
top of a pillar he saw an Owl sitting over him. Presently he was troubled in
his mind, and within a while after he was struck with an extreme pain in
his bowels, insomuch that with a loud voice he cried out unto his friends, I
whom but now was called your god, am but a man; and him that you imagined to be
immortal, must presently die. These words being ended, they carried him sick
into his palace, and it was given out that he was dead.

No sooner came this news to the ears of the vulgar, but they with their
wives and children put on sackcloth, and fell upon the ground with earnest
supplications to God to be merciful unto him. But the King looking out of his
window and seeing them lie thus prostrate upon the earth, wailing and weeping,
he could not abstain from tears. At the length after he had been cruelly
tormented by the space of four days, upon the fifth dyed, being the second of
August, the worms having consumed his guts, and eaten through his body. Thus
God grievously punished him, who had so much afflicted the members of the
Church of Christ: but toward other men, as well strangers as Gentiles, he was
mild and courteous. He reigned in the whole almost seven years; for he held
the Tetrarchy of Philip three years under Caligula, and other four years he
held the whole kingdom of the Jews. He died in the eleventh year after the
resurrection, and in the third of Claudius Caesar, being then about 54 years of
age, Act. 22. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 19.

Pliny says that this town of Caesaria Strato, was sometime called
Apollonia, but after obtained the name of Caesarea Palestina. Saint Jerome
says in his Epitaph upon Paul, that in his time (which was 400 years after
Christ) there was to be seen in this place the house of Cornelius the
Centurion, whom Peter baptized, Act. 10. (This Cornelius is thought by some to
have been of the family of the Lentuli in Rome, for they were also called
Cornelij, as appears in Salust in the conspiracy of Cataline: and it may be
that this Cornelius was that Lentulus which wrote to Tiberius Caesar that
excellent Epistle, concerning the figure, proportion, and person of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.) Also the house of Philip the deacon, and the chambers
of his four daughters who were Prophetesses. When Paul came unto this town,
Agabus the Prophet came unto him, who bound his hands and feet with the girdle
of Paul, saying, The man that owes this girdle shall be thus bound by the Jews
at Jerusalem, and they shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles. Here
he made a notable sermon before Festus, Agrippa Junior, and his sister Bernice,
Act. 16.

This town flourished for a long time after the destruction of Jerusalem, and
it was situated in a fair and profitable place, fortified toward the West
with the Mediterranean sea, and toward the East it was compassed about with a
lake, in which were great abundance of Crocodiles, though the water was very
sweet, and of a great depth. Many godly and religious men were here crowned
with the wreath of martyrdom, for professing the Gospel of Christ, as Eusebius
Bishop of this town and of Pamphilius well observes in his Eccles. Hist. But
the Lord did so sharply revenge the death of these men, that at this day it is
utterly destroyed, and there is not a house left, though in times past it had
been a Bishops See. There was also another town built by Philip the Tetrarch,
called Caesarea Philippi, whereof you may read before.

Of Ioppa.
COncerning this town I have already showed many things in the Travels of
Jonas, but omitted some, specified by Brittenbach and Dr Ranwolfe, who have
described the holy land as it was in the year of our Lord 1575. which Authors
affirm that there is seen a great chain of iron fastened to a certain rock, to
the which ships that lay in that harbor were sometimes tied. Also the chain
wherewith Andromeda was fast bound to a stone, when she should have bin
devoured of the sea monster. Also they say that there is a Chapel at this day
built up in the place where sometime the house of Simon the Tanner stood, who
gave entertainment to Peter, standing by a rock close by the sea side, and
dedicated to saint Peter. But for the rest of the town (although formerly it
has bin a goodly city) it is utterly destroyed, nothing standing but a part of
the wall, and two castles upon the haven to defend such as come thither with
ships, from the injuries and incursions of Pagans and Saracens.

Of Babylon in Egypt.
BAbylon signifies Confusion, as you may read before. There were two Cities of
this name; the one was in Chaldaea, and the other in Egypt. That in Chaldaea
was situated upon the river Euphrates; and this upon the river Nilus, which
was 244 miles from Jerusalem toward the Southwest, and called in the Arabian
tongue Alcair, or Cair, whether you please, which also signifies Confusion.
Concerning both which cities you may read more at large in their former
description. From this town it is credibly thought (and not from that town
which stood in Chaldaea) Peter wrote his first Epistle, as the circumstances of
the history do evidently declare: for that Babylon which stood in Chaldea was
in the time of Peter utterly destroyed; but then this Babylon was had in great
estimation. About this time also Mark who was the disciple of Peter, was the
first Bishop of Alexandria, as you may read in the end of his first Epistle.
Wherefore that opinion which some would have to pass for truth, that Peter
wrote his first Epistle from Rome, calling it allegorically Babylon, is utterly
to be condemned, since there is none who can certainly prove that conjecture,
neither is it grounded upon any firm foundation; for although Babylon in the
Revelation of S. John (because it was a secret prophecy) was allegorically
used; yet in a plain and manifest history such kind of Allegories are not
allowed. From whence may be concluded, that S. Peter wrote his first Epistle
from this Babylon, not from Rome.

The Travels of Saint John, with the Annotation of the Times wherein he lived.
John the Evangelist and Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, was borne in the
tenth year after the nativity of our Savior, and was made his Disciple when
he was 21 years of age. He saw the miracle of Christ when he changed the Water
into Wine, John cap. 2. In the year following, viz. in the 22 year of his
age, he was taken into the number of the twelve Apostles, Luke 6. Mar. 3.
After that, in the three and twentieth year of his age he saw the
transfiguration of Christ in mount Thabor: and when he was four and twenty
years of age he stood under the Cross of our Savior Christ; and the same
year a little after Christ's Ascension, he with the rest of the Apostles
received the gift of the Holy Ghost, being then the feast of Penticost, which
fell about the four and twentieth day of May in the same year he was cast into
prison with Peter, for healing the lame man, Acts 3.4. Thus much of his youth.

About the middle of the first year after our Savior Christ's ascension ( John
being then 25 years old) was sent with Peter from the city of Jerusalem to
Samaria, 32 miles.

From Samaria he returned back again to Jerusalem, 32 miles, and as he returned
preached the gospel of Christ in diverse towns of the Samaritans, Acts 8.

Mary the mother of our Lord being now 59 years of age, died in the twelfth
year after the resurrection of Christ, and was buried by John the Evangelist in
the garden of Gethsemene, John being then 35 years old. Four years after
her death he was present at the Apostolical Council in Jerusalem. Now James
his brother, who was called the Elder, was beheaded two years before; for this
Council was celebrated in the presence of James the younger, Peter, John, Paul
and Barnabas, etc. about sixteen years after the resurrection of Christ, and
14 after the conversion of Paul, Gal. 2.

Before the destruction of Jerusalem, which happened about the 61 year of his
age, and 38 after Christ's ascension, John went from Jerusalem, and came to
Ephesus, 544 miles, where after the death of the Apostle Paul he governed the
Churches of Asia minor.

In the 86 year of his age, being cast into a Vessel of boiling oil, and
coming out unhurt, by the command of Domitian the Emperor he was banished into
the Isle of Pathmos, distant from Ephesus 40 miles. There he wrote his
Revelation to the 7 churches in Asia minor, whereof you may read Apoc. 1.

From Pathmos he returned to Jerusalem, which was forty miles, being then 88
years of age, and there he raised Drusana from death to life. After this, he
governed the Churches in Asia four years, that is, from the government of Nero
the Emperor, unto the fourth year of the government of Trajan the Emperor,
and called the young man to repentance which was of the Society of thieves: at
length he died at Ephesus when he was 91 years old, An. Dom. 100. as S. Ierom
and Nicephorus li. 2. ca. 32. observe. So all his travels were 688 miles.

The testimony of the Fathers concerning John.
THe testimonies of the holy fathers that are yet extant concerning John, are
these: In Eusebius. li. 3. c. 1. 18. 20. 3. you may read the history concerning
the conversion of the young man from the company of thieves. Irenaeus witnesses
the same, li. 2. ca. 23. In Irenaeus also, li. 3. ca. 23. you may read the
history of Cerinthus, and how that John lived until the time of Trajan the
Emperor. Also li. 3. ca. 11. he says, that the Gospel of S. John was written
because of the blasphemy of Cerinthus.

The description of the towns and places to which John traveled.
Of Ephesus.
THis was the metropolitan city of Ionia, situated in Asia minor, 544 miles
from Jerusalem Northwestward. It was built (says Strabo) by Androclus the son
of Codrus king of Athens, in the time of David King of Israel, and because of
the beautiful situation and fertility of the soil called Ephesus: in future
Ages growing into such credit and estimation, that it was mightily increased,
and became one of the most famous mart towns in all Asia; but it stood
somewhat low, so that the sea brake in upon it and drowned it, and many of the
inhabitants perished. Nevertheless Lysimachus K. of Thrace built it up again
in the place where now it stands, and called it Arsinoes, after his wives name.
But he being dead, it was again called by the ancient name Ephesus. There were
many worthy men that lived in it, as Heraclitus, Scotinus, and Hermadorus, who
for his excellent understanding and singular honesty was banished. Hipponachus
also the Poet, Perrhasius and Apelles the Painters, Alexander the orator, and
Theodotio a Jew, who interpreted the Bible. It was in ancient times inhabited
by the Amazons, whose queen kept her court there, and wonderfully increased and
adorned it with fair and beautiful buildings. Here also that notable Temple
dedicated to Diana, which as Stra. says li. 14. Plin. li. 36. ca. 14. was 220
years a building. It stood upon moorish ground to avoid the danger of
earthquakes. There were in it 127 pillars, erected by so many Kings; among
which there were 36 that were curiously sieled, and artificially carved and
engraven: it was 425 foot long, and 1^0 broad. There were so many gifts and
gratuities sent from all the cities and kings round about, toward the building
of this Temple, that the riches and treasure thereof was wonderful; insomuch
that when it was finished, it was accounted one of the stateliest buildings the
world could afford, and numbered amongst the wonders of the world. This temple
thus built at such an extraordinary charge that it was almost invaluable, was
set on fire by one Herostratus a wicked and perverse fellow (in the same
Olympiad and day that Alexander the Great was borne) who having nothing in him
that might make him famous in after-ages, burnt this goodly building, that so
(though not for his good, but for his evil) he might get a name. But the
Ephesians were so insenced because of this mischief, that they procured
proclamation to be made through all the kingdoms round about, that his name
should not be once mentioned: which perhaps for a time was observed, but in
future ages they could not prevent it, but that he was both spoken of and
written of. Notwithstanding afterward the inhabitants of this City became so
exceeding wealthy, that they soon after rebuilt this temple of Diana, and made
it much fairer than it was before; all the Citisens contributing with willing
hands to the charge of the building: insomuch that the women brought all their
silver, gold, and other precious ornaments, and communicated them toward this
great work.

Also in aftertimes those fair pillars before spoken of, were again erected;
toward the rebuilding whereof they received so many and wonderful gifts, from
all the neighboring Kings, Cities, and Countries, that this Temple might (as
it was thought) compare with all the world beside for riches and treasure. It
was standing in S. Paul's time, who came thither about 12 years after the
resurrection of our Savior, and continued there three years; in which time he
so faithfully and diligently preached the Gospel, that he converted most of
the Citisens, from their idolatry and worship of Diana, to the reverend
knowledge and confession of our blessed Savior. For which cause Demetrius the
silver smith (who made a great gain by idolatry) stirred up a great tumult; so
that the Gentiles running up and down the City for two hours space, cried out
with a loud voice, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Acts 19. Here also Paul
fought with beasts, 1 Cor. 15. And to this city Paul wrote his Epistle, and sent
it from Rome, 996 miles. He made Timothy also a Bishop of this city, to whom he
wrote two Epistles; the first was sent him from Laodicea to Phrygia, being 280
miles: the second from Rome, as I said. By these Epistles Timothy was greatly
comforted, and taught them to his disciples and auditors, that so they might
constantly continue and persevere in the Christian faith and religion to the
end. To conclude, John the Evangelist came also to Ephesus, and wrote his Gospel
against the heretic Cerinthus, who denied Christ to be the true God; for which
cause God grievously punished him, so that he died as he was bathing himself
in a bath, Irenaeus, lib. 5. ca. 3. Eusebius. li. 3. c. 22. This was the first
Church to which John wrote his Revelation; and there when he returned out of
Pathmos he raised his host Drusana from death to life. So when he had governed
the churches in Asia 30 years, after the death of Paul he died, when he was
91 years old, and was honorably buried at Ephesus not far from the city. There
was also another John that lived in Ephesus, to whom (as many think) the
Epistles of John the Evangelist were dedicated, as Ierom shows in his
catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers. The sepulcher of this man is showed not
far from the Sepulcher of S. John the Evangelist, as Eusebius. witnesses, lib. 3.
cap. 31. At this day this city is named Figlo ho Epheso. See Gesner.

Of Pathmos.
THis is an Isle of the Aegean sea, situated betwixt Asia minor and Grecia,
2080 miles from Jerusalem Northwestward. Pli. l. 4. c. 12. says, that it was
30 miles in compass. Into this Isle the Evangelist was banished by Domitian
Nero, where he wrote his Revelation. It was one of the Cyclad Islands, which
were 53 in number that lay round about the Island Delus, as Stra. li. 10. Geog.
observes. It stood 40 miles from Ephesus Southwestward, and as Petr. Apianus
says, was sometimes called Posidius, but now, Palmosa.

Of Smyrna.
THis is the second city to which John dedicated his Revelation. It was
situated in Ionia in Asia minor, 540 miles from Jerusalem Northwestward. This
was a very fair city, beautified with many goodly buildings, and of good
account in Grecia. It was at first but a Colony, transplanted from another city
in that country. But Theseus that great prince being then King thereof, that
he might add some grace to that which he had begun, he called it after his
wives name Smyrna, signifying Myrrh. Herod. says that Homer was born here (but
not blind) and called by the name of Melisigines: but after the Cumaenians
called him (of his blindness) Homer. Strab. li. 14. Geogr. says, That the
inhabitants take upon them to show his picture standing there, and also a
temple built in his honor. During his life he was a man of small or no
reputation, or rather contemned than honored, as Herod says. But after his
death his works beginning to grow famous, the Cities of Greece contended who
should patronise him. The Colophonians claim a part in him, because he was in
that town, and there made some of his Odysses. They of Chios say he belonged
to them, because he lived there a long time, and taught school. But for ought
that can be found by Authors, the Smyrnians have most interest in him.
Nevertheless I leave him to them that please to patronise him, since it is not
certainly found where he lived. He lived about 900 years before Christ.

Eusebius says, Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 14. that in after times this city
grew very famous, and was so much enlarged that it became a Bishops See,
whereof Polycarpus a very godly and religious man was Bishop. He governed the
Church in that place at such time as John the Evangelist wrote his Revelation,
and by him, cap. 2. is called the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. This man
after he had faithfully preached the Gospel for the space of 86 years, was by
the inhabitants thereof condemned to death for the profession of Christ, Anno
170. But the town of Smyrna because of the unthankfulness and cruelty of the
inhabitants was grievously punished, for within ten years it was cast down by
an earthquake, since which time it was hardly rebuilt again. The river Pactolus
which begins in Lydia, runs by this town of Smyrna. But the inhabitants,
because of the golden veins that are found therein, call it Crysorrhoas, Plin.
lib. 5. cap. 29. A little after that, there was such an extreme plague happened
in Rome, that they were constrained to carry out the dead bodies in carts. Thus
God turns the air and the earth to the confusion of those that persecute his
Church.

Of Pergamus.
THis was another of the towns whereto John wrote his Revelation. It was a
famous city, and metropolitan of Mysia, situated in Asia minor, 228 miles from
Jerusalem Northwestward. It stood upon a high rock close by the river Caicus,
from whence it was called Pergamus. For in ancient times all famous and notable
places were called amongst the Graecians Pergama, as Suidas and Servius
observes. Strabo, lib. 13. says, That in the time of Lysimachus the son of
Agathocles (who was one of the successors of Alexander the Great) it was but a
castle; in which place because of the strength of it, he usually kept all his
treasures, and those things that were of account, and committed the custody of
it unto one named Philetaerus, an Eunuch of Tyanus. But this man being accused
to Lysimachus, That he would have forced his wife Arsinoes, for fear of some
future punishment because of that offense, moved the inhabitants of that Hold
to rebellion. At the same time also there happened many commotions in Asia,
whereby Lysimachus was constrained to leave this, and make opposition against
Seleucus Nicanor, who had invaded his dominions. But in this war Lysimachus was
slain. And Philetaerus having in his possession great riches, that he might
enjoy what he had, was always obseruant to him that gat the victory, by
which means he kept himself and his riches for the space of 20 years in that
castle; and then dyed, and left all his wealth to Eumenes his brothers son,
who enlarged his government, and overcame Antiochus the son of Seleucus. This
man after he had reigned 32 years dyed, and Attalus his son succeeded him
in the Government, who having conquered Galatia made a league with the Romans,
and by them was first called by the name of a King. After him succeeded his son
Eumenes the second of that name, who aided the Romans against Antiochus magnus
King of Syria; for which service the Romans gave him all the dominions that
Antiochus had on this side the Alps. This man was the first that enlarged the
castle of Pergamus, and made it a goodly city, planting round about it a thick
wood or grove, and called it Nicephorus. And after he had reigned 49 years he
died, and left his kingdom to his son Attalus, called Philometor. This Attalus
after he had done many notable exploits, died without issue, when he had
reigned 5 years, and left his kingdom to the Romans, who turned it into a
province.

There lived in this town many learned men, as Galen the Physician, who was
famous in the time of Trajan the Emperor, and (as the fame went) lived 140
years. Of that town also was Apolodorus the Rhetoritian, who was
schoolmasters to Augustus Caesar, of which man the Apollodorean sect took
name, and Dionysius Atticus his scholar. Here Antipas was crowned with the
Wreath of martyrdom.

To the Bishop of this Town John wrote his Revelation, and in the second
Chapter thereof sharply reprehendeth him, because he bore with the sect of the
Nicholaitans; which although it lasted not long, yet it was very dangerous.
Eusebius says, That Nicholaus one of the seven Deacons for the poor at
Antiochia, of whom you may read, Act. cap. 6. was the first author of this
sect: yet Clem. Alexand. cleares him of it, laying that offense rather on
certain idle persons, that misconstruing his words, being given over to vile
affections, covered their evils under his name, calling themselves Nicolaits,
though indeed he had no hand in it, but lived and died honestly.

The opinion that this Sect held (as Eusebius. says, li. 3. ca. 23. and Irenaeus,
libr. 1. Chap. 27.) was, That women were to be common, That it was lawful to
eat meat offered to Idols; That fornication and Adultery was no sin: beside
many other wicked and perverse opinions concerning the Deity, which would be
too tedious to recite in this place. You may read more of it in Eusebius and
Tertullian.

Of Thyatira.
THis was the fourth church to which John wrote his Revelation: it was situated
close by the river Caicus, upon the borders of Mysia and Lydia, 600 miles from
Jerusalem Northeastward. It was a very fair city in Asia minor, yet subject to
the Lydians. In this country Lidda was born, that dwelt at Philippa, and gave
entertainment to Paul and Sylas, Acts 16. Philippa was distant from this town
400 miles. It was at first called (according to the testimony of Stephen)
Pelopea and Semiramis. But after Seleucus Nicanor K. of Syria (making war upon
Lysimachus king of Thrace) coming to this town, had news that his wife had
bore him a daughter, in honor whereof he would needs have the town called
Thugateira, which in Greek signifies a daughter; but Thyatira, Divine
reverence.

Of Sardis.
TO this city also S. John wrote his Revelation. It was a famous and princely
seat, situated in Asia not far from the mountain Tmolus, where Croesus King
of the Lydians kept his court, being 536 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northwest. It was so called (without doubt) of Sardus the son of Hercules,
which makes Sardis in the plural number. Of this Town were those two
Diodories which were Orators. The younger of them did write Histories and
Poems, and was one of Strabo's great friends. Close by this Town is found a
precious stone, which after the towns name is called Sardis: it is of a
fleshly color, and therefore is commonly called Carnalia; of which you may
read more in Pliny, lib 37. cap. 4.

Of Philadelphia.
SAint John also wrote his Revelation to this city. It was situated in Mysia a
country in Asia Minor; being 450 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northwest.
This city is so often troubled with Earthquakes, that the inhabitants are many
times constrained to dwell in the open fields. Upon the East side thereof lies
a dry and barren country, which seems to be burnt and scorcht with heat,
being 60 miles long, and 48 miles broad; where there grows no trees, but there
are found great plenty of grapes, which being pressed yield very pleasant wine,
and may compare with the best of those parts. The superfices of the earth
seems like ashes, mountany, stony, and black: many conjecture the cause
thereof to be by reason of the great thunders and lightning that they have
there; but there are some which give other reasons for it. It was called
Philadelphia of Attolus Philodelphius who first built it.

Of Laodicea.
THis was the seventh and last City that John directed his Revelation to. It
stood close by the river Lycus in Caria, a country in Asia the less, five
hundred and twenty miles from Jerusalem toward the Northwest; and is likewise
oftentimes troubled with Earthquakes, as Sardis Magnesia and Philadelphia are.
The reason of these often Earthquakes is thought to be, because there are
vaults and hollow caves under the earth, into which the air (in the time of
heat) having free entrance, then closes up again so that it can find no
passage out; it strives with continual motion to make way through the earth,
by which means the earth trembles and shakes: and look how much the deeper
these vaults are under the earth, so much the more violent are the Earthquakes;
by which means, cities are oftentimes utterly overthrown and ruined, sometimes
the earth sinketh and ponds and rivers are swallowed up.

It was at first called Diospolis, that is, the city of Jupiter; then Rhoas;
and lastly, it obtained the name of Laodicea. And although at the beginning it
was but a small town, yet by reason of the fertility of the soil, and
pleasant situation, it of a sudden became a fair city, beautified with many
fair and goodly houses, wherein there dwelt many wealthy citizens, so that
for their nobility and worthiness it was accounted the most famous town in
all Asia. Here Hiero dwelt who divided his inheritance among the citizens, and
over and above he gave them two thousand talents of gold, besides many other
gifts and gratuities to adorn and beautify the city. After him there lived
Zeno the Orator, and Polemon his son; who for his noble acts was first by
Antonio, and then by Augustus Caesar, honored with the dignity of a King, as
Strabo witnesses, lib. 12.

This Laodicea, Colossis, and Hieropolis where the Apostle Philip was
crucified, were sunk by an earthquake, about the tenth year of Nero, and a
little before the Martyrdom of Paul. There were three cities called after this
name; that is, this which stood in Caria (to which Paul never came; as
appears in the second chapter to the Collossians;) a second stood in Phrigia,
where Paul wrote his Epistle to Timothy; and a third in Syria, near to
Antiochia, Seleucia, and Apamea.

The Travels of Philip.
THan a little after the martyrdom of Stephen (which happened in the Month of
January, thirty and five years after the nativity of Christ) Philip which
one of the seven Deacons with Stephen, Acts 6. went from Jerusalem to Samaria,
which was thirty and two miles: and in many Cities of the Samaritans preached
the Gospel, and did many miracles; at which time he converted Simon Magus,
Acts 8.

From Samaria he went to Bethzur, which was situated forty and four miles
toward the South: here Philip baptized the Ethiopian who was Queen Candaces
Eunuch. And suddenly he was taken out of sight by the spirit of the Lord, and
went to Azotus, which was 16 miles.

From thence preaching in all the cities as he went, he came to Caesarea
Strato, which was 44 miles. So all his Travels were 136 miles.

Concerning the towns and places mentioned in his Travels, you may read of
them in several places mentioned before.

The Travels of the Ethiopian which was Eunuch to Queen Candaces, who kept
her court in Saba.
FRom Saba or Meroe in Aethiopia, this Eunuch came to Jerusalem, which was
about 964 miles, Acts 4.

From Jerusalem he came to the town of Bethzur, which was 12 miles: here he
was baptized by Philip in the Month of January, the next year after the
resurrection of Christ.

From thence he returned to Saba in Aethiopia, which was 952 miles. So all his
Travels were 1928 miles.

Of Saba.
THis city is before mentioned: and at this time when the Eunuch came to
Jerusalem, Candaces governed it and a great part of Aethiopia, Tiberius Caesar
being then Emperor of Rome. She was a very warlike woman, but blind of one
eye, as Strabo says, lib. 16. and Plin. lib. 6. cap. 29. In whose time the
city Saba was called Meroe; and the Queens, for many successions, Candaces;
because of the worthiness of those Queens which had been of that name. This
woman was very well beloved of her subjects; and was very gracious toward
them, as Suidas says. To this Queen the Eunuch which Philip baptized was
chief Steward; and no doubt spread the Christian faith in many places of those
parts.

An Introduction to the Travels of Saint Paul.
NOw before I enter upon the Travels of the Apostle Paul, I though it fit to
make a collection of all the Countries, Islands and Cities wherein he taught:
so that they which are skillful in Geometry or Cosmographie, might discern
their Longitudes, Latitudes, and several distances, according to the degrees
and scruples hereafter following.

Towns in Italy. Long. Latit. Rome 36.40 41.40 Puteoli 39.50 41.00 Naples
39.10 41.00 Capua 40.00 41.00 Brundusia 42.30 39.40 Regium 39.50 38.15 Towns
in Graecia. Constantinople 56.00 43.05 Neapolis 51.15 41.40 Philippi 50.45
41.45 Amphipolis 50.00 41.30 Apollonia Mygdoniae. 49.30 40.30 Thessalonica
49.50 39.50 Athens 52.45 37.15 Corinthus 51.15 36.55 Ce^chera 51.20 37.00
Cities in Syria. Antiochia 69.30 35.30 Seleucia 69.25 35.40 Sydon 67.15 33 30
Tyrus 67.00 33 20 Ptolomais 66.50 32.58 Caesarca Stratonis 66.16 23.25 Ioppa
66.40 32.06 Jerusalem 66.00 31.55 Damascus 60.55 30.00 Cities in Asia minor.
Thrasia 67.40 36.50 Attalia 62.15 36.30 Perga 62.15 36.56 Antiochia Pisidiae
62.30 39.00 Laodicea Phrigiae 63 40 39.40 Lystra 64.00 39.00 Iconium 64.30 38
45 Derbe 64.20 38 15 Calcedon 56.05 43.05 Nicea 57.00 41.40 Cities in Asia.
Ilium 55.30 41.00 Troada 55.25 40.40 Assus 56.00 40.15 Pergamus 57.25 39.45
Philadelphia 59.00 38.50 Sardis 58.20 38.15 Ephesus 57.40 37.40 Thyatira.
Smyrna 58 25 38.25 Myletus 58.00 37.90 Halicarnassus 57.50 36.10 Gnydus 57.10
35.30 Patara 60.30 36.00 Mira 61.00 36.40 Hycropolis 60.00 38.15 Cities in
Egypt. Alexandria 60.30 31.00 Memphis Alcayre 61.50 29.50 Hermopolis magna
61.40 28.55 Jslands. Ciciliae ciuitatis Siracusa 39.30 37.15 Malta 38.45 34.50
Corsica 45.40 38.15 Creta 45.00 34.45 Clauda 52.20 34 00 Salamis 50.00 37 00
Enbea 43.40 38.15 Andros 55.00 37.12 Samathrocua 52.30 41.15 Mithilena 55 40 39
20 Chius 59.20 38.25 Trogylion 57 15 37 40 Pathmos 57.00 37.35 Cous 57.00 36.25
Rhodus 58.30 35.40 Raphus cypri 64.10 35.05 Salamais cypri. 66.20 35.10

The Travels of the holy Apostle S. Paul, with an axact annotation of the times.
PAul was borne at Tarsus in Cicilia, about the tenth year of the nativity of
our Savior; and was near about the age of S. John the Evangelist, as the
circumstances of Histories do declare. After he grew to some bigness, he was
sent by his parents from thence to Jerusalem, being 304 miles; where he had not
been long brought up with Gamaliel (which signifies, The recompense of God)
Acts 22. but he became the Disciple of Simon the just, Luke 2. Acts 5.

This Paul was of the Tribe of Benjamin, Phil. 2. 2 Cor. 11. and being yet but
a young man, he was one of those that kept the garments of the holy Martyr S.
Stephen, who was stoned about the end of the four and thirtieth year after
the nativity of Christ, Acts 1. at which time also S. John the Evangelist was
but four and twenty years of age. If therefore you would observe the age of
the Apostle Paul in this following discourse of his Travels, deduct ten from
the years after the nativity of our Savior Christ, and the remainder is his
age. At his circumcision he was called Saul, that is, a mortal man: but when
he was made the Apostle of the Gentiles, he was called Paul; of which name
there was a noble family in Rome, so called because of the lowness of their
stature, and smalnesse of their body; as Carolus Sigonius observes.

In the 35 year after the nativity of Christ Paul was an inquisitor for
private heresy, and a cruel persecutor of the Gospel. The next year he went
from Jerusalem to Damascus in Syria, which was 160 miles: in which journey
(about the 25 day of January) he was converted; and upon the 28 day of January
was baptized by Ananias. So he stayed some few days in Damascus, and taught
the Gospel of Christ, Acts 9. and 22.

In the same year that he was converted, the Jews and those that were enemies
to the Gospel, went about by deceit to take his life; wherefore he went from
Damascus to Arabia Petraea, which was 160 miles; here he continued teaching
the Gospel by the space of three years, that is, from the beginning of the 35
to the end of the 37 year after the Nativity of Christ, Act. 9.

In the 38 year after the Nativity of Christ he returned from Arabia Petraea
and came to Damascus, which was 160 miles; and there he diligently taught the
Gospel of Christ.

But when in the same year Araeta King of Arabia went about to put him
secretly to death, he was let down in a basket over the wall, and so went from
Damascus to Jerusalem, which was 160 miles: and when he came thither he
brought Barnabas to the Apostles, and showed them his conversion, and remained
with Peter 15 days preaching the Gospel. At this time he saw James the son
of Alpheus and brother of our Lord, Acts 9. 2 Cor. 11. Galat. 1.

But when his adversaries that were at Jerusalem went about secretly to put him
to death, he went from Jerusalem and was brought by the brethren to Caesarea
Strato, which was 32 miles, Acts 9.

About the 38 year after the nativity of Christ he went thence into Syria to
Tarsus a city of Cilicia, which was 272 miles: here he continued some years
teaching the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1. 2 Cor. 11.

In the 41 year after the nativity of Christ, and about the seventh year of
his Ministry, he was brought by Barnabas from Tarsus to Antiochia in Syria,
which was 120 miles. At this time and in this town all those that believed in
Christ began to be called Christians, whereas before they were called Disciples
and brothers, Acts 11. These things happened in the eight year after the
resurrection of Christ: about this time also Matthew wrote his Gospel, and
Agabus prophesied of the universal dearth that should happen under Claudius,
Acts 11.

In the 42 year after the nativity of Christ, Paul being then at Antiochia,
and about 32 years of age, was wrapped up into the third heaven, 14 years before
he wrote his second Epistle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.

In the 43 year after the nativity of Christ, the famine whereof Agabus
prophesied, being now begun, he went with the gifts of the Church from
Antiochia to Jerusalem, which was 280 miles: this year James the elder was
beheaded at the command of Agrippa, Acts 11. and 12.

In the 44 year after the nativity of Christ, Paul and Barnabas with Peter,
were delivered out of prison by the Angel of the Lord. Now having distributed
the gifts of the Church, he returned in the company of John Mark, from
Jerusalem to Antiochia, which was 280 miles. So these travels were 1928 miles.

Of the towns and places to which he traveled.
of Tarsus or Tharsus.
THis was the Metropolis of Cilicia, situated upon the river of Cydnus, which
beginning at Mount Taurus, runs thence through this town into the
Mediterranean sea. It was first built by Perseus King of the Persians, (whom
the Poets faigne to be the son of Jupiter and Danae) and called Tharsus, of
the Hyacinth stone, which, as it seems, is found thereabouts. It was distant
from Jerusalem 304 miles toward the North; in ancient time a goodly city; but
through the injury of the time, and invasion of the enemy, much impaired, and
lay almost ruined, til (as Strab. says, li. 14.) it was repaired by
Sardanapalus that effeminat K. of the Assirians; of whom Tully remembers this
Epitaph, lib. 5. Tuscula: Haec habeo quae aedi, quaeque exaturata libido,
Hausit, at illa jacent multa and praeclara relicta.
What things I eat or spend in sport and play;
Those I enjoy, the rest I cast away.
From his time, until the reign of Darius the last king of the Persians, it
continued in great prosperity, and was become a marvelous stately city, the
inhabitants thereof being grown very wealthy: but then Alexander the Great,
making war upon that Prince, amongst others, brought his Army against this
city: but the citisens hearing of his notable exployts, durst not abide his
coming: therefore they fired the city, left he should make a prey of their
riches, and fled: which when Alexander perceived, he gave order to Parmenio
with all possible speed to quench the fire, and save the city. In the mean
time the King (being pressed with an extraordinary thirst, by reason of the
extreme heat that was in that country, the dust, and his long journie) put
off his royal garments, and cast himself into the river Cydnus, which being a
cold water coming out of the North, stroke the heat presently inward, and so
benumbed his sinews, that had it not been for the present help of his
soldiers, and the extraordinary diligence and care of Philip his Physician,
he had died immediately; notwithstanding, by the great providence of God, and
the carfulness of his physician, he recovered his dangerous sickness
beyond the expectation of man; and after overcame Darius in a sharp and cruel
war, near to a place called Issa, as you may read before, See Plutarch in
vita Alexand. and Quintus Curtius. From that time forward this city grew to be
very famous, and daily increased in stateliness and fair buildings. And to
add more dignity to it, there was a famous Academie, in which were many
learned and rare Philosophers; in so much that they of Tharsus exceeded the
Philosophers of Athens and Alexandria for learning and knowleged, though indeed
for number of scholars and common resort they exceeded Tharsus.

Saint Paul was borne and brought up in this Town, and here learned the
knowledge of the tongues, Philosophy, and other good arts. He also perused
the writings of Aratus, Epimenides; Menander, and other learned men, whose
sayings are here and there dispersed through his Epistles. From thence he was
sent to Jerusalem, where he lived and was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel,
who was Provost of that Academy: and after, was converted to be an Apostle of
Christ Jesus, as appears Acts 22. This town at this day is subject to the
Empire of the Turks, and called by the name of Terassa; being neither so
famous nor so fair a city, as in the time when the Roman Empire flourished;
for then, because of the extraordinary virtue of the citizens, it was endowed
with the liberty and freedom of Rome.

Of Damascus.
THis was a metropolitan town in Syria, distant from Jerusalem 160 miles
toward the Northeast; being an ancient and fair city, and, before such time
as Antiochia was built, the head of all that kingdom. It was situated in a
fair and fruitful place, close by the mountain Libanus, which brings forth
Frankincense, Ceders, Cypress, and many odoriferous and sweet smelling
flowers. There were many Kings that kept their court in it, as Hadad, Benhadad
the first, Benhadad the second, Hasael, and others, who grievously opposed the
Kings of Israel in many sharp and cruel wars, as you may read before. The
land round about it abounds with white and red Roses, Pomegranats, Almonds,
Figs, and other sweet and pleasant fruits. In that place the Alablaster stone
is found, very fair and clear. The air, pleasant and healthful. The river
called Chrysorrus, runs close by it, in which there is found golden veins
which yielded perfect gold. The houses without are not very curious; but
within, all of polished Marble and Alablaster guilt with resplendent gold, so
artificially that it dazleth the beholders eyes.

There was a certain Florentine who revolted from the Christian faith, and
obtained to be chief governor of this town; in which he erected a strong and
beautiful castle, which stood for the defense of it. No man can sufficiently
express the beauty and glory of this city: there is great traffic, and
much resort of people to it, but especially of Turks, Saracens, Mamalucks, and
other kinds of Pagan people, who are preferred before the Christians in that
government: and although there are many Christians in that place, yet they are
constrained to endure great injury by those Barbarians, because they are hated
even to the death: and if any of them chance to die, they are buried in that
place where Paul was converted. The inhabitants show the place where Saint Paul
was let down over the wall in a basket; also the house of Ananias, who cured
the blindness of Paul, besides many other things that are memorable in that
city, of which you may read in Sebestian Munster, Sebastian Frankus, Plin.
lib. 5. and many other authors.

Of Arabia.
MAny things are already spoken concerning this Country, as the division of
the place; one called Petraea, the other Deserta, and the third, Foelix. Arabia
Petraea is so called from the Metropolitan city thereof, called Petra, which
is situated forty miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and bordereth upon
Egypt and India. It is also called Arabia Nabathea, as you may read before.
Paran and Sur are a part of it, compassing toward the East the land of Iudaea,
and so extends to Damascus. This country is very full of rocks and stones,
the chief city Petra being situated upon a rock, of which it takes the
name. Here stands the mountains Horeb and Sinai; here the children of Israel
traveled when they went out of Egypt; here is the Sardonix stone found; and
the people of this country in times past were great Prophets and Astrologians;
here also S. Paul taught the Gospel a little after his conversion, Gal. 1. at
which time Aretas was King thereof, whose sister was married to Herod the
Tetrarch of Galile and Petraea; but he cast her off, and married Herodias his
brother Philips wife, upon which there began a bloody war between Aretas and
Herod, and a sharp battle was fought near to Gamala a city beyond Jordan.
And although the two Kings were not at this battle, yet by the treason and
flight of the soldiers out of Tracones, (who without all question would have
revenged the contempt done unto their Lord Philip) the Arabian army carried
away a notable victory, as Josephus witnesses, lib. antiq. 18. cap. 9. Aretas
signifies, An excellent man; which was a common name to the Kings of Arabia.
It is to be thought that Damascus and all the Country round about was under
the jurisdiction of this King; and that he ordained a Lieutenant or General in
those parts, who would have taken Paul and put him to death, Acts 9. 2 Col. 12.

The other part of Arabia is called by Ptolomie, Deserta; but Strabo calls it,
Scenilis, because the inhabitants thereof are without buildings or Tents, and
live like vagrants up and down the woods. This is compast in upon the South
with certain mountains of Arabia Foelix; toward the North, it borders upon
Mesopotamia; and toward the West, upon Petraea.

The third is called Arabia Foelix, because of the fertility thereof; for they
have there every year two haruests, as they have in India, as Strabo
observes. See Plin. lib. 6. cap. 28.

Of Antiochia.
YOu may read of this Town before. It is said that Luke the Evangelist was
borne here. This man was by profession a Physician, Colos. 4. and an
inseparable companion to Paul in all his Travels: he was of the number of the
seventy Disciples, as Epiphanius observes. Tertullian says in his fourth
book against Marcion, that Luke received his Gospel from the mouth of Paul:
he lived till he was 84 years old, and then died, and lies buried at
Constantinople, as S. Ierom says; for his bones were removed out or Achaia
thither.

The second Travels of the Apostle Paul, in the company of Barnabas.
IN the eleventh year after the nativity of Christ, and in the four and
fortieth year of Paul, he and Barnabas was sent by the holy spirit from
Antiochia in Syria to Seleucia, which was four and twenty miles.

From Seleucia they sailed to Salamais in Cyprus, which was 94 miles, Acts 13.

From thence they went to Paphos, which is in the same Isle where Sergius
Paulus was converted, and Elymas the Magitian, who professing himself to be
the Messiah and Son of God, was struck with blindness, Act. 13. this
journey was 100 miles.

They loosing from Paphos, went by sea and land (the same year) to Pergamus a
city of Pamphilia, situated in Asia minor, which was 148 miles.

In the 45 year after the Nativity of Christ, they went from Pergamus to
Antiochia in Pisidia, which was 132 miles.

From thence they went to Iconia, which was 96 miles; here they stayed some
time and converted many, Act. 13. and 14.

In the 46 year after the nativity of Christ, there being a great tumult
raised in that country, lest the inhabitants should have stoned them, they
fled thence to Lystra a city of Lyaconia, where Paul healed the lame man, which
was 28 miles. The inhabitants seeing this miracle, worshipped them for gods,
and called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius; because he wrought the
miracle. But not long after, certain Jews coming from Antiochia and Iconia,
arrived in Listra, by whose persuasion the people stoned Paul, and supposing
him to be dead carried him out of the city: but when his Disciptes came unto
him, he rose up and went into the town, Act. 14.

The next day they went to Derbe, a city of Lyaconia, which was 48 miles.

From thence they returned back again to Lystra in the same year, which was
28 miles.

From Iconia they came to Antiochia in Pisidia, which was 16 miles: in this
city they comforted the Disciples, exhorting them that they should persevere
in their faith, For through many afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. They also elected Elders in the Churches, so with fasting and prayers
they commended them to the Lord in whom they believed.

In the 47 year after Christ, they went from Antiochia thorough all Pisidia,
and came to Pergamus a city in Pamphilia, which was 132 miles: here they
preached the word of the Lord, Acts 14.

From Pergamus in the following year they went down to the city of Attalia,
which was 26 miles.

In the 48 year after the nativity of Christ, they loosed thence and went to
Antiochia in Syria, which was 340 miles, here they assembled the Church and
showed what wonderful things the Lord had wrought by them, and how he had
opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles: in this place they stayed a great
space, Acts 14.

In the year following they went from Antiochia to Jerusalem (which was 280
miles) to the Apostolical Council, which was celebrated in that city, Anno
Dom. 49. and as they went they passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, and there
declared the estate of the Church among the Gentiles, Acts 15.

From Jerusalem they (with Sylas and Judas, syrnamed Barsabas) went again to
Antiochia in Syria, which was 280 miles: here Paul opposed Peter for preaching
unto the Gentiles, Gal. 2. So these travels of Paul were 1744 miles.

Of the towns and places to which he traveled.
Of Cyprus.
BEcause you may read of Seleucia before, I therefore willingly omit it, that I
might speak more fully of Cyprus. This is a fair and spacious Isle, situated
in the Mediterranean sea in the gulf of Issa, bordering upon Cilicia and
Syria, distant 160 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, as Strabo says,
lib. 14. It is in compass 428 miles, very fertile, powerful and spacious for
an Island. There inhabited in it in times past nine Kings, and (as Pliny says,
lib. 5. cap. 31.) called Macaria, or one of the happy Islands: the inhabitants
were given much unto luxury and venerie; from whence it happened that Venus was
greatly honored amongst them. It is said that there are many precious stones
found in it, besides Crystal, Alum, and Cypress wood which abounds in that
place, from which it seems the Island was called Cyprus. There are also found
many Symples that are Physical, much Sack comes thenee and many other things
necessary for the life of man. Here also stands the Mountain Olympus, whose
top seems to touch the heavens, from whence it takes the name because there
never lies any clouds upon it. Lucan, lib. 2. There are four mountains of
this name; the one lies between Macedon and Thessalie; the other in Cyprus,
the third amongst the Mysians, at the foot whereof Haniball built Prusa; and
the fourth in Aethiopia, upon the East side of Heliopolis.

There are many cities in this country, as Macaria, Cyprus or Cyrhera, after
called Paphos, and now Baffa (in which there stands such a famous Temple,
that Venus of that is called Cypria and Cytherea) Nicosia, and Salamus now
called Famagusta. There have been many and cruel sharp wars between the
Venetians and Turks concerning this country, but at this day it is under the
jurisdiction of the Turks; from whence they fetch great abundance of Pitch and
Rosin for their ships and cables.

Of Salamais.
SAlamais, Salamin, or Salamina was one of the principal cities of Cyprus, and
was distant from Jerusalem 196 miles toward the North; built by Teucer the
son of Telamon, and situated in the Eubeian sea just against Athens. The
occasion why this town was built, happened by reason of a discontent that grew
between Teucer and his father Telamon: for Teucer returning from Troy (not
having revenged the death of his brother Ajax) so much incensed his father that
he banished him his country, whereupon Teucer sailed thence to Cyprus, where
he built this city, and because of the extraordinary affection that he bore
to the country where he was borne, called it by the name of Salamena, or
Salamais. Saint Ierom says, that there is a river of extraordinary hot water
that runs through a great part of this country; and that it was once
overcome by the Jews, and utterly ruined and destroyed; but afterward
repeopled and called by the name of Constantia. This town at this day is
called by the name of Famagusta, and was taken (with the whole Island of
Cyprus) by Mustapha chief Captain to Selimus the second, Emperor of the
Turks, An. Dom. 1570. Solon that notable and famous Philosopher was borne in
this Town. And Paul and Barnabas sailed out of Syria and lived in this Town,
Acts 31.

Of Paphos.
THis City is situated upon the shore of Cyprus, 212 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North, and seems to take the name from Paphos the son of
Pigmalion the Artificer. In this town there stood a notable Temple, built by
that Pigmalion in the honor of Venus; for that (as it seems by the Poets)
he was much given to women. Here Elimas that wicked Magician who (as some will
have it) called himself the son of Jesus; as others, the son of Jehovah,
dwelt, whom the Lord by the hand of Paul struck with blindness. Here also
Sergius Paulus the Proconsull was converted.

It was in times past a goodly fair city, as the ruins thereof testify to
this day; but now it is destroyed and almost desolate. There (as it is for the
most part through that Island) the air is impure and vnwholsom, and the ruins
of many goodly churches and buildings are to be seen; also the walls of a
strong and almost impregnable tower situated upon a hill in the middle of the
city; and as may be thought, was sometime the habitation of Sergius Paulus.
There is also shown under a certain Church (which in ancient times belonged
unto the brothers of the Minories (a certain Prison divided into seven rooms,
where Paul and Barnabas were imprisoned for preaching the Gospel. Here also
under another Church is found a spring of very wholesome water, which is a
present remedy for the Ague and Fever. Here also is excellent Wine.

Of Perga.
PErga was a city of Pamphilia, from whence Diana is called Pergea, because
there was a notable Temple in that Town which was dedicated to her. It is
situated in Asia the less, near to Cheractus, as Ptolomais says; but as
Strabo says, close by Cestria a fair and goodly river, 356 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North. The country wherein this stands is full of
mountains, extending from the mountain Taurus (which begins in this place,
abounding with Vines, Olives, and other fruits) unto the sea. There are many
fair and fruitful pastures in it, and many goodly and beautiful cities; as
Aspendius, Phaselis, and this Perga, besides many others needless to be named.
There was usually every year a great feast kept here in honor of Diana; but
Paul and Barnabas coming to this town, converted most of the inhabitants to
the knowledge of God and of his son Christ Iessu, Acts 13.

Of Antiochia in Pisidia.
THis was the chief city in Pisidia, situated in Asia minor, 460 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North. S. Paul converted a great multitude in this town
to the faith of Christ.

Of Iconium.
IConium was one of the Metropolitan Cities of Lycaonia, as Pliny says, lib.
5. cap. 27. situated not far from the bowing of mount Taurus in Asia the
less, as Strabo says lib. 12. 420 miles from Jerusalem toward the North. In
this city Paul and Barnabas continued a long time, and did many miracles, by
which means a great multitude of the inhabitants were converted to the
Christian faith, Acts 13.14. It is to this day a fair city, and under the
government of the Turks, who won it from the Princes of Caramanian. About 400
years before, there was a great battle fought close by this town, between
the Saracens and the army of the Emperor Conradus the third, in which the
Christians lost the day.

Of Lystra.
THis is a City in Lycaonia situated in Asia the less, 436 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North. In this Town Timothy was borne, Acts 16.2 Tim. 3.
In this city Paul healed the Cripple and was stoned, Acts 14.2 Cor. 11.

Of Darbe.
THis also was a city in Lycaonia situated in Asia the less, 388 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North, where Paul and Barnabus preached the Gospel, Acts
14.

Of Attalia.
ATtalia was a haven Town of Pamphilia, built by Attalus Philadelphus King of
Pergamus, after whose name it was so called, as Strato observes, lib. 14.
being distant from Jerusalem 332 miles toward the North. Paul and Barnabas
sailed out of Syria into this town. At this day it is called Catalia.

The third Travels of Paul in the company of Sylas.
IN the fifth year after the ascension of Christ Paul took unto him Sylas,
and going through Syria and Cilicia, came to Derbe, which is 400 miles, and
there established the Churches, Acts 15.16.

From Derbe they went to Lystra, 48 miles, where Paul circumcised Timothy, Acts
16.

In the 51 year after Christ they went from Lystra, and so traveled through
Galatia, Phrygia, and being hindered by the spirit that they could not preach in
Bythinia, they went through Mysia, and so came to Troas; where by a vision that
Paul saw in the night he was admonished to go into Macedonia, Acts 16. So this
journey between Lycia and Troas was 480 miles.

Loosing from Troas they sailed with a direct course to Samo-Thracia, 116 miles.

From thence they sailed to Neapolis, 92 miles.

From thence they went to Philippos in Macedonia 24 miles; Act. 16. here Lydda
the seller of purple was converted, and Paul dispossessed a Devil: and then he
and Sylas being scourged were cast into prison, Paul being then about 41 years
of age, Acts 16.

From Philippos they went to Amphipolis, about 36 miles, Acts 17.

From thence they went to Apollonia, 44 miles.

From Apollonia they went to Thessalonica, where the Jews stirred up a tumult:
80 miles.

Wherefore they went thence by night, and came to Berrhaea 60 miles: here also
the Jews stirred up a tumult, Acts 17. These things happened in the summer
season, An. Dom. 51.

From Berrhaea Paul was brought by the Brethren to the sea, where entering into
a ship he went to Athens, which was 264 miles; where he converted Dionysius
the Areopagite. From this town he wrote both his Epistles to the Thessalonians,
as the subscription witnesses, and sent them to Thessalonica. These were the
first Epistles that Paul wrote.

Afterward he went from Athens and came to Corinthia, 74 miles: he came
thither about the beginning of August, An. D. 51 and continued there a whole
year and six months, preaching the Gospel, and making tents with Aquila the
Jew, who was of that trade, Acts 19.

From Corinthia, about the spring An. Do. 53. he went to Cenchraea with Aquila
and Priscilla, 304 miles. There for devotions sake he polled his head.

From Cenchraea he sailed in the company of Aquila and Priscilla to Ephesus,
about 304 miles. Here he left them, Acts 18.

From Ephesus he sailed to Caesarea Strato in Iudaea, being 280 miles.

From Caesarea he went to Jerusalem, 32 miles, and saluted the Church.

From the city of Jerusalem Paul went to Antiochia in Syria, 280 miles.

So all these travels were 2154 miles.

Of the towns and places to which he traveled.
Of Cilicia.
BEcause you may read of Syria before, I will omit it, and proceed to speak of
Cilicia. This was a country in Asia the less, so called (as some would have
it) from Cilix the Kings son of Phoenicia; compassed in upon the East with the
mountain Amanus; upon the North with the mountain Taurus; upon the West by
Pamphilia; and upon the South by the Mediterranean sea. At this day it is
called Caramania, and is distant from Jerusalem 304 miles toward the North. In
times past it was divided into two parts, that is, into Cilicia the higher and
the lower: Cilicia the higher abounds with mountains, the lower is a plain
champian country very fertile and pleasant. The principal cities thereof are
Tarsus, where the Apostle Paul was born, and where the river Cydnus runs
through the midst of it; Issus, where Alexander overcame Darius last Emperor of
the Persians; Anazarba, where Dioscorides that excellent Physician was borne,
who was of great estimation with Antonius and Cleopatra. There are six books
yet extant of his profitable and necessary labors in that science.

From hence may be gathered that the situation is strong and pleasant; in
regard it is fortified on every side with mountains, but principally with the
mountain Taurus (famous for the fertility of it, and the passage of Alexander
with his army, who at the he conquered Darius, went through the straight
passages thereof, being both dangerous and difficult) and watered with many
Rivers that take their beginning from that mountain, and so passes Southward
through all Cilicia, falling then into the Mediterranian sea.

Of Galatia.
GAlatia or Gallo-Grecia is a country of Asia minor, distant from Jerusalem
400 miles; having upon the East Cappadocia, upon the South Pamphilia, upon the
West Bythinia, and on the North the Euxine sea. The cities of this country were
anciently Sinopis, where King Mithridates kept his Court, and Diogenes the
Cynick was born; Amisus, also Pessinus, where the Mother of the gods was had in
great honor, and was fetched thence by the Romans. This was a famous mart town
(as Livy says, li. 29.) Laodicea, Tauius, and Ancyra, where there was held a
notable Sinod: and in this large and spacious country also stood Antiochia
Pisidia; for the Galathians dwelt in all Paphlagonia a part of Licaonia,
Pisidia, and Isauria: in which countries the Apostle Paul taught the Gospel of
Christ.

These inhabitants (which in those days were called Galathians) are said to be
a people of France, who joining themselves to the Cymbrians, Danes, and
Germans, under the conduct of Brennus their captain invaded Italy; in which
enterprise they were so fortunat that they conquered a great part of it, wherein
they planted colonies: and because of their neernesse to their own country in
process of time grew mighty; and from that beginning the country where they
inhabited was called Cice-alpine-Gallia; taking that name partly of the place,
partly of the people. After, Brennus and his army making use of their
fortunes, forraged all Italy, and came to Rome, which they woone and sacked, all
but the Capitol, and that also was in great danger, until such time as
Camillus (a valiant Roman Captain) taking advantage of the enemies security
(who now took more care how to satisfy their covetousness, than to defend
what they had got) of a sudden set upon them; by which unexpected invasion they
were put to a marvelous straight, and the besieged greatly encouraged; so that
they also issuing out of the Capitol, made such a slaughter, that they forced
Brennus and his army to retire, and to restore all the pillage that he had
got, and also forsake the country. This misfortune they bore patiently,
considering their former prosperity, and in hope of better success sailed
thence into Grecia: where, after they had attempted many noble exploits, and
failing in some, they determined a voyage for Delphos, because there was great
store of treasure, and the inhabitants (as they supposed) weak to oppose their
army. In this expedition they used much pillage and robbing upon the Seas; and
through many dangers came at length to this Isle, landed their men, wan the
city, fired a great part of it, and put many of the inhabitants to the sword:
with this victory, most of his army which were more religious than the rest,
would have willingly left the country; but Brennus who beforetimes had been
used to sacrilege, and those that were as covetous as himself, thought it
baseness through an opinion of holiness to leave so great a booty behind
them as was contained in the Temple of Apollo, (for that place of all the
Temples of the world in those times was notorious for riches and treasure, the
many and great gratuities and offerings of most Princes, which were both
magnificent and rich, being hoarded up in the secret caves of this Oracle)
wherefore they attempted the assault, but with bad success, for the devil
raised such a tempest, with thundering, lightning, and other strange and uncouth
accidents, that Brennus in this distemperature of the air was Some say he
killed himself with his own dagger.
slain, many of his ships were set on fire, and the greatest part of his
army lost, being either spoiled with lightning, slain by the inhabitants, or
dispersed with fear. Such event had this sacrilegious attempt. Those that
remained, after they had gathered themselves into a body, went thence into Asia
the less, and planted themselves in this country; where the inhabitants in
process of time called them Gallo-Graecians, adding their original name to
that of the country wherein they lived: and after, for beauties sake, they
were called Galatians, See Liu. lib. 5. Diodorus Siculus, lib. 6. says, That
the inhabitants of Galatia were so called of this people, in the time that
Gidion judged Israel, and that Cyrus was Emperor of Persia; both may be true,
considering the mutabilitie and change of States in those times.

Some think they were first called Galatians by Attalus King of Pergamus, (who
gave them a great overthrow close by the river Halym) because they originally
were of Gallia, and continued sometime in Graecia, and after came into Asia; so
he joining these two names into one, called them Gallo-Graecians, or
Gallatians. This history is diversely reported by diverse authors; but all
conclude that they rested and inhabited in Asia, where their posterity
continued to this day.

In times past it was a very warlike and generous nation, and in their
expedition performed many noble exploits, attaining to eminence only by their
sword; for which cause many Princes near them were beholding unto them for
their aid: but withal, cruel and barbarous, insomuch as they oftentimes eat
their captives or offered them to their gods; and thus they continued for the
space of 300 years, till Paul coming into that country preached the Gospel
amongst them, and converted them from this Barbarism to the Christian faith.
He sent an Epistle to this people from Rome, being 1200 miles. They in those
times held all Paphligonia, a part of Phrigia, Cappadocia, and of all the
neighboring countries thereabouts, which after their names was called Gallo
Graecia or Galatia: such a mighty nation was this grown in a short time, at
first being a people thrust out of theit own country for want of a place to
inhabit in, as you may read more at large in the fifth book of Liuie, whose
authority I have principally followed herein.

Of Phrygia.
PHrygia is as much to say as a dry and sandy country, situated in Asia the
less between Galatia and Mysia, 600 miles from Jerusalem Northwestward. It is
divided into two parts, the greater and the less: in the greater Phrygia stood
Smyrna; in the less Dardania, so called of Dardanus who first built it: in
which town there reigned many wealthy and mighty Princes, as Ericthonius, Tros
of whom it was called Troy, Ilus of whom it was called Ilion, Laomedon who was
the father of Priamus the last king thereof, for in his time it was destroyed by
the Grecians. Of which desolation I will not speak because it is commonly known.

It lay waste so long (although it had bin a fair and goodly city, the like
not in the world) that the place where it stood was become like a plain field,
only here and there some heaps of old ruins, to show that there had been a city
in that place. And as Virgil said, I am seges est vbi Troia fuit, Corn now
grows where Troy stood.

A long time after there were a certain people that called themselves Trojans,
who rebuilt it, but not in the same place, and in it erected a goodly Temple in
honor of the goddess Pallas to the which Temple Alexander the Great (after he
had conquered Darius King of Persia close by the river Granicus, which took
beginning in a mountain not far from Troy) went, and with singular gladness
and great solemnity offered many rich and goodly Presents, enlarged the town,
and greatly adorned. But after he had ended the Persian war, and conquered
almost all the known world, he sent very kind and loving letters to these new
Trojans, promising not only to enlarge the town, and endow it with
ma-priuiledges and revenues, but also to build up a fair and sumptuous Temple
there, as Strabo lib. 15. says: all which was done for the love he bore to
Homers Iliads.

Wherefore look what Alexander had promised, Lysimachus (one of his chief
Princes, and King of Thrace) after his death performed; for he returned to
Troy, enlarged the city, beautified it with goodly buildings, set up a stately
Temple, and then compast it about with strong walls. After this sort it
continued a long time, until Fimbria a Questor of the Romans (when he had
slain Valerius Flaccus the Consul, with whom he was sent, against
Mithridates King of Pontus) besieged it, and within ten days space won it;
making his vaunts, that he conquered that city in ten days, which Agamemnon
could scarce do in ten years; to which one of the inhabitants of the city
answered, That then Troy had a Hector, but now it had none. But for this he
cruelly wasted the city. This destruction happened in the 84 year before
Christ: thus it lay desolate till Augustus Caesar's time, who caused it again to
be re-edified and beautified with many fair and goodly buildings, because the
Romans, and especially those noble families of the Iulij and Caesar's, do
derive their progeny from the Trojans: for which cause Augustus used such
diligence in the rebuilding of this city, and bestowed such infinite cost, that
he much exceeded Alexander, and made it a fair and goodly city. At this day
it is called Ilium. But in the place of old Troy there is little to be seen,
only a small town, as Strabo says. It is distant from Jerusalem, 760 miles,
Northwestward.

Of Bythinia.
THis country is opposite to Constantinople, situated in Asia minor, distant
from Irusalem Northwestward, and so called of Bythinus the son of Jupiter and
Thrax. It was sometime called Pontus, Bebrycia, and Mygdonia, as Stephanus
says. In this country the Apostle Paul could not preach the Gospel of Christ
when he went into Macedonia and Graecia, because he was hindered by the Spirit,
Act. 16. The principal cities thereof were Calcidon, Heraclea, Nicea,
Nicomedia, Apamea, Flauiopolis, Libissa (where Hannibal lies buried) and
Prusa, now called Byrsa, where in times past the Emperors of Turkey kept their
Courts, and were buried. The mother and metropolis of all these cities was
Nicea, or rather Nicaea, being distant from Jerusalem 720 miles toward the
Northwest; at the first called Antigonia, of Antigonus the son of Philip King
of Asia, who built it after the death of Alexander the Great. But Lysimachus
called it Nicaea, after his wifes name, and at this day is called Nissa. The
compass thereof is two miles, being four square, situated (as Strabo says
lib. 12.) in a fair and pleasant place, lying close by the poole of Ascania,
and has in it 4 gates, standing in a direct line; al which gates might easily
have been seen from a certain stone which stood in the middle of the Market
place.

In this city the most Christian Emperor Constantine the Great celebrated a
Council, anno Dom. 325. at which time there were present 320 Bishops, who
condemned the Arrian herisie, and instituted the Nicaen Creed. But after that,
viz. anno Dom. 326, the Arrians endeavoring to hold a second Council in this
city, to confirm their opinions, and to dissolve that which went before, the
Lord hindered them with an Earthquake, by which almost half the city was
thrown down. Not long after, there happened another earthquake which utterly
destroyed it: notwithstanding it was rebuilt again, and in it a second Council
held, wherein the Nicaen Creed was condemned.

There were many cities of this name; that before spoken of, another in Thrace,
a third in France, not far from the river Varus, a fourth (as Stephanus says)
is amongst the Lorrenses in Graecia, a fifth in Illeria, a sixth in India, a
seventh in Corsica, and the eighth in Leuctris of Boetia.

Of Mysia.
THis is a country of Asia the less, bordring upon Hell spont and Troada;
being divided into two parts, that is, the greater and the less. That part
that bordreth upon Troada, is distant from Jerusalem 800 miles Northwestward:
but that which is called Mysia the less, and bordring upon Lydia, is 1028
miles from Jerusalem Northwestward. In this country stood Pergamus, to which
John wrote his Revelation; Scepsis where one Neleus kept the books of
Aristotle til Apollonius time, also Antandrus, Adramitium, Tranoiapolis, and
Apollinia, which stood close by the river Thyndaeus.

The inhabitants were men of a base condition, and contemned of the world,
insomuch as they became a proverb, as often as a man would denote a thing of
no estimation, they would say Vltimum esse Mysiorum, that is, It is worse than
the Mysians, as it appears in Cicero's oration for Flaccus. Yet
notwithstanding, Paul and John the Evangelist preached the doctrine and light
of the Gospel to this poor and despised people, so that the Mysians, which
were a contemptible and abominable nation before all the world, were not so
before God, for they were converted at the preaching of John and Paul: From
whence he says, Not many wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble; but God has chosen the foolish things of this world, that they
might confute and overthrow the wise, etc. 1. Cor. 1.

In times past they were a great people, though of small estimation, for they
had under their jurisdiction, Lydia, Caria, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis,
Philidelphia, and Laodicea; to many of which John wrote his Revelation. Also
(as Herodotus says, Lib. 7.) the Mysians and Teucrians, before the Trojan war,
past into Europe, and there won and held Thracia, Macedonia, and all the land
to the Adriatic sea, etc.

Of Troas.
THis city Troas, where Paul raised Eutichus (which signifies happy or
fortunate) from death to life, Acts. 10. stood upon the sea of Hellespont in
Asia the less 720 miles from Jerusalem Northwestward. Antigonus king of Asia
called it Troas, because it was in the country where Troy was. But after the
death of Alexander he called it after his own name Antigonia: And the better
to honor it, kept his court there. But Lysimachus King of Thrace having got
this city into his jurisdiction, bestowed great cost upon it, and set up many
fair and goodly buildings, then called it after Alexanders name, Alexandria,
and so it began to be called Alexandria Troas, Plin. lib. 5. Strabo, l. 13. Ier
de locis Hebraicis. Now it was called Alexandria Troas to put a difference
between it and diverse other cities of that name: for there was an Alexandria in
Egypt, another in India, and many others elsewhere; but only this in the
country where Troy stood. It was situated in a high and spacious mountain,
about a mile and a half from the shore of Propontus toward the East, between
which and Troads is twenty and eight miles.

It is a thing worthy observation, to consider by what diverse names the sea
that lies between Europe and Asia the less is called, for between
Constantinople and Calcidonia, close by the Euxine sea it is called Thracius
Bosphorus, in which place it is not above half a mile broad: here Xerxes when
he invaded Graecia, built up a bridge for his army to pass over. There is also
another strait and narrow place in this sea, which is called by the name of
Cimmerius Bosphorius. These two Bosphori are so called (as some authors hold)
because a Bull when he loweth may be heard from the one side to the other: but
Pliny seems to derive the name from Io, that fair maid which Jupiter turned
into a Cow, who swam over this sea, and of her was called Bosphorus, lib. 6.
cap. 1. It is also called Propontus, because it lies just before the Euxine
sea; and Hellespont from Hell the daughter of Athamantis K. of Thebes who was
drowned therein: then running thence it falls into a gulf of the
Mediterranean Ocean, and there it is called the Aegean sea, of Aegeus King of
Athens, who drowned himself therein for the supposed loss of his son
Theseus. In this sea were situate the Isles of Pathmos, Mytelene, Samothrace,
Chius, Lesbus, and many other Isles, as you may read in the travels of S. Paul.

Of Samothracia, ot Samothrace.
SAmothracia is an Isle of the Aegean sea, situate between Troades and
Thracia, eight hundred and eighty miles from Jerusalem toward the Northwest,
close to that part of Thracia, where Hebrus falls into the sea; sometimes
called Dardania, of Dardanus King of Troy, who when he had slain his brother
Iacius, and taken from him the Palladiam, he came first into Samothracia, and
then into Asia, where he first laid the foundation of the city called Troy,
and of that Kingdom. And although this Isle at that time was called Dardania,
yet because of the neerenes that it had to Thrace, and the altitude of the
rock whereon it stood, it soon changed the name: and then especially, when
the people called Samos came thither to inhabit, who after their own name
called it Samothracia. It stood upon such a lofty place, that from thence all
the countries round about might easily be seen. Arsinoe Queen of Thrace was
banished by Ptolomeus her brother, into this Island, who after put to death all
her children, and usurped upon the kingdom of Thrace. A cruel part in a
brother. Virg. li. Aeneid. 3. makes mention of this Island, saying, Treiciamque
Samum quae nunc Samothracia fertur. And Samian-Troy, which now adays is
Samo-Thracia called.

Strabo also writes of it, li. 13. And in Acts 16. it is said, S. Paul sailed
from Troad is to Samothracia, and so went thence into Thracia and came to the
city of Neapolis.

Of Neapolis.
THis Neapolis to which Paul went, was a city of Thrace not far from Macedoni,
880 miles from Jerusalem Northwestward, called also of some Caurus. There are
many other Cities of this name; one in Judea, where Sichem and Sichar stood;
another in Caria, a third in Africa, a fourth in Pannonia; but above all, that
which stands in Campania is most remarkable being the chief city of the
Neapolitan kingdom.

Of Philippa.
THis city in times past was called Crenides, because of the veins of gold that
were found close by it. But after, Philip King of Macedon, father of Alexander
the Great, caused it in the year before Christ 354, to be re-edified and
enlarged, and then after his own name called it Philippos. It was situated in
Grecia close by the river Stridon, 936 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northwest) and endowed with many privileges. In those times the gold was so
much increased in this place, that the revenue thereof was worth unto this King
more than a thousand Talents, which at 4500 li. the talent, amounts to forty
five Millions of pounds yearly. By the which means King Philip grew so rich,
that he caused his gold to be coined, and called it after his own name,
Philippian gold. To this place Paul came, and did many miracles, taught the
Gospel, and converted many. From hence he wrote his second Epistle to the
Corinthians, and sent it to Corinth; even 292 miles. He also wrote an Epistle
from Rome to the Christians of this Town, and sent it them by the hands of
Epaphroditus, even 628 miles. It was afterward a Colony of the Romans.

Of Amphipolis.
THis was a city of Macedonia, compassed about with the river Strymon, from
whence it took the name; and was distant from Jerusalem 960 miles toward the
Northwest. Here also the Apostle Paul was, Acts 17.

Of Apollonia.
THis was a city of Mygdonia, situated not far from Thessalonica toward
the West, close by the river Echedorus, 948 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northwest: being so called from Apollines, which signifies the Sun: it stood
twenty miles from Thessalonica. There are many other Cities of this name; one
situate in Graecia, close by the Adriatic sea; another, among the Islands of
Thrace; a third, in Creet, on this side the river Ister; a fourth, in Syria;
and a fifth, in Africa amongst the Cyrenes.

Of Thessalonia or Thessalonica.
THis was a city of Macedon, in ancient times called Halia, because it stood
upon the sea; after, called Therma, of the hot bathes that were in it; and
lastly, Thessalonica, of Philip the son of Amyntas King of the Macedonians,
who gave it that name either of the great victory that he had against the
Thessalonians, or else after the name of his daughter called Thessalonica, who
was the mother of Cassandrus: it stood close by the Thermaick gulf, not far
from the mouth of the river Echedorus, 932 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northwest. The Apostle Paul taught publicly in this city, and there converted
a great multitude of people, Act. 17. He also wrote two Epistles to the
inhabitants thereof, and sent them from Athens, being 232 miles distant.

In the time of Theodosius the first, Emperor of Rome, there happened by reason
of some discontent, a grievous sedition amongst the Thessalonians, in which
stir some of his captains and governors were slain. Wherefore the Emperor
(having intelligence of what had happened) sent an army against the city, with
authority to put to death a certain number of those who had rebelled: whence it
happened that the city was filled with many unjust slaughters: for the soldiers
respecting more their private profit than the equity of the cause, spared
neither innocent nor nocent, young nor old; so that as well the inhabitants as
strangers that resorted thither did partake of this misery, and suffered like
punishment as did they which were the first authors of this rebellion.

But because the emperor was consenting unto these evils, Ambrose Bishop of
Millaine would not suffer him without public repentance to come to the
sacrament of the Lords supper: wherefore in a public assembly he
acknowledged his offense with great contrition, Theodor. li. 5. ca. 17. and
Soz. li. 7. ca. 24.

This town was afterward purchased by the Venetians, of Andronichus Palaeologus
son of Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople; who held it a long time, until
Amurath Emperor of the Turks won it from them, and exercised grievous cruelty
upon the inhabitants. At this day it is a fair and goodly city, wherein is to
be seen 23 Churches, and is inhabited both by Christians, Jews, and Turks, as
Sebastian Munster says: but the greatest number is Jews, who are partly
merchants, partly of other trades; their number in this place (as it is said by
some of their own nation) is 14000, and they have 80 synagogues: but they are
constrained to wear yellow wreaths about their heads, the Christians blew, and
the Turks white. There are many Jews also in Constantinople and Adrianople;
but in no place more than in this town, which is now called Salonica.

Of Berraea.
THis is a city of Macedon, situated upon the river of Halakmon, 960 miles
from Jerusalem Northwestward. In this city the Jews stirred up a great tumult
and sedition against the Apostle Paul, Acts 17. At this day it it is called
Voria.

Of Athens.
THis was the most famous City of all Grecia, the mother of Arts, and a
bountiful nourisher of large and mighty Colonies, in that part of Achaia
called Act or Attica. It was situated upon the shore of the Mediterranian
sea, 720 miles from Jerusalem Westward. It took name from a Divine knowledge;
for the word is derived of (...) and (...), i. the mind of God. It was first
built by Cecrops, five years before Moses fled out of Egypt into the land of
the Midianites, and of him called Cecropia. This Cecrops was the first King
thereof, and there succeeded him at least 40, both famous and worthy princes.
But after it was called Mopsonia, of Mopsus K. of Thessaly: and after Ionia,
which name it held for a while: and lastly Athens, dedicated to Pallas (which
goddess the Grecians say was born of the brain of Jupiter) which name it held
a long time after. There lived in this city Solon, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle,
Demosthenes, and many other excellent Philosophers.

It was situated upon a fair and strong Rock, beautified with many goodly
Temples and buildings; but principally that of Minerva was most sumptuous, in
which there hung a great number of Lamps, which gave a continual light. There
was also the Monastery of the holy Virgins, and the image of Pallas made all
of white Ivorie very curious and costly. There were many Schools, Colleges,
and pleasant gardens in which Philosophers used to walk, and it abounded with
sweet and delectable music, and with great resort of Merchants and Scholars.
To conclude, in those times it was the most notable city in the world.

Moreover, there were many profitable havens for the receipt of ships, but that
which was called Piraeum exceeded, being capable to receive 40 As some say 400.
ships; beautified with many goodly buildings, in compass two miles, fortified
with seven walls, and joining to the city (whereof Terence writes in Eunuch.
Act. 3. Scen. 4) At this day it is called Porto Lini, fortified with two walls
four miles in length, extending to the hill Munichya, the syrname of Diana
(being compassed in the figure of a Chersonesse, and so joined to the city of
Athens. In which distance there are two other havens besides that of Piraeum.
In this Jupiter had a magnificent Temple, and in it were found many artificial
tables, pictures, and graven images, all which are at this day destroyed and
carried away.

It has been three times destroyed; first by Xexes and Mardonius, which
happened in the year before Christ 479. Then by Lysander, who broke down an
hundred paces of the wall, and almost utterly destroyed their ships, and broke
down the haven of Peraea. It was also sore oppressed by the Romans, and they
also brake down their haven and burnt their ships, but spared the town, and
held it in great estimation. But it was the third time overthrown and utterly
destroyed by the Turks, who both changed the place and name of the city, after
it had flourished 3113 years. At this day it is divided into three parts, and
called by the name of Sethina, because of the variety of the inhabitants that
live in it, being very well peopled, and a fair and spacious City, but much
altered from that it was in times past. For although before it was the very
mother of eloquence, and glory of Attica, yet at this day it is so much
altered, that their language is base, and their glory is eclipsed. The
uppermost part of the city, where formerly the temple stood dedicated to the
unknown God, is now wholly and absolutely in the hands of the Turks, in which
they have built a strong and almost invincible Castle, which has the command
of the rest of the town. The second and middle part of the town is all
inhabited by Christians. In the third there stands a fair and goodly Palace,
supported with marble pillars, and adorned with goodly works. In this part of
the City there inhabiteth people of diverse sects and conditions. And here also
is the seat of a Metropolitan, who has under him many Bishops. So that God
does support and maintain his Church even amongst the enemies thereof; for
there ate four Patriarks in Turkey, to which all the other Christian Metroplitans
and Bishops are subject; viz. the Patriarch of Alexandria, Constantinople,
Antiochia, and Jerusalem.

Paul was the first man that preached the Gospel of Christ in this city, and
converted many citisens, but especially Dionysius the Areopagite, who dwelt
upon a promontory without the city, and as it seems was one of the principal
Judges and governors of the town; for after he had taught publicly in the
town, and had disputed against the Jews and Philosophers concerning Christ,
they supposing him to be a busy fellow, and one worthy of death as a disturber
of the common peace, brought him before this Dionysius, that so by his
judgment he might receive condign punishment for his offense. But S. Paul so
well behaved himself, and preached with such admirable eloquence and learning,
that he not only confuted his enemies, but among others converted this
Dionysius Areopagitus, who was afterward the first Bishop of Athens (as Eusebius.
says, lib. 4. cap. 23.) and went captive with Paul to Rome, and from thence to
Paris in France, where he suffered martyrdom under Dionysius the Emperor.

Of Corinthia.
COrinthus is a famous city in Grecia, situated in Peloponessus a pleasant
country of Achaia, joining to the continent of Grecia like an Isthmus or
Peninsula, distant from Jerusalem 760 miles toward the West, commonly called
Corantha, built (as Eusebius says) by Sisiphus son of Aeolus, at such time
as Ioshuah governed Israel; who was a mighty Pirat. At first it was but a
castle, and called after his name Sisiphyus: but after, because of the strength
of the place, and pleasant situation, it became a fair town, and called by
the name of Corcyra, as Strabo faith; then Ephym, of Ephyra, who was a fair
and goodly Nymph, and Queen of that place. Now although even in those times it
was held in great estimation, yet it became much wasted and decayed through the
continuance of time, until it was repaired by King Corinthus (who as some
think was the son of Marathon Suidas says, the son of Pelops; others
would have him the son of Orestis: and after his name was called Corinth,
that is, The flower of Maids.

It was a fair and goodly city, very commodiously built, for it stood
between the two seas of Ionium and Aegeum, so that there resorted thither
great multitude of Merchants from all places, Close by the city there stood a
steep mountain, which was as it were a bulwark for the defense thereof,
being 560 feet high, and called Acrocorinthus, that is, the glory and strength
of the Corinthians. It was also compassed about with strong walls, and
beautified with many goodly buildings and temples, but above the rest, the
Temple of Venus was had in great reputation, which (as Strabo says) stood upon
the top of the mountain Acrocorinthus, wherein there were above a thousand
Maids prostituted every year. This Temple was had in such great honor, and
was so gloriously built, that above all the places of the world there was
resort unto it. Close by it stood the ancient castle called Sysyphius, built
all of white Marble; and a little below that, the fountain of Pyrene dedicated
to the Muses.

There were many mighty Princes that ruled in this city, as Alethes who was
King thereof at such time as Samuel judged Israel, which was 1103 years before
Christ; he bestowed great cost upon it, set up many fair and goodly
buildings, and ruled over it thirty and five years, as Eusebius says. After
him there succeeded many Kings, by whose worthiness and prowess it was so
much enlarged, and made so famous, that it was little inferior to the city of
Rome: for at such time as Ambassadors were sent thence to entreat of some
business concerning the state, the Corinthians did not let to give them many
reproachful terms, as Strabo says, lib. 8. because of which insolency the
Romans sent Lucius Mummus the Consul, into Graetia, who besieged Corinth, and
within a short time took it, and burnt it down to the ground, in the year
before Christ, 145, of which you may read more in Florus, and in the second
Decad of Lyuie. It was a marvelous rich Town, and abounded with gold, silver,
and costly brass, also with plate, and curious pictures: so that although
Mummius conquered Corinth, yet Corinth conquered Rome; for the citizens thereof
were so bewitched with the riches and glory of this town, that they forgot
their ancient severity, and with violence followed their vices, as Salust
says, lib. 1. So that as before Corinth abounded with luxury and diverse other
abominable evils, as whoredom, adultery, fornication, covetousness, idolatry,
rapine, and murder: so Rome in future ages became as bad or worse than it.

Thus it continued waste from that time till Julius Caesar was Emperor of
Rome, who having traveled into those parts of the world, and seen the ruins
of this city, and the profitale situation for traffic, caused it to be
rebuilded: after which time it began to grow great and spacious, little
inferior to the former in glory, and no less corrupted with vices, having
forgot the former misery which it sustained by the hands of the Romans; and so
continued from the year before Christ 44, until the year after Christ 41, at
which time Paul came thither and preached the Gospel, by whose divine doctrine
and godly life and conversation, they were converted from their evil courses,
and lived more holily and honestly, as appears by the two Epistles of Saint
Paul wrote from Philippos to the inhabitants of this town.

But after, they falling from their faith and forsaking their ancient
integrity, the Lord punished them with a second desolation; for at such time
as Amurath Emperor of the Turks grew to eminency, and had conquered
Thessalonica, Boaetia, and Attica, he came into this Isthums, and made all
Peloponessus tributary to him. Then after him Mahomet the second (although the
inhabitants of Corinth had fortified their city with three walls, and made it
so strong that it was thought to be almost invincible) besieged it and won it,
An. Dom. 1458. about six years after Constantinople was conquered by the
Turks. But now it is in the command of the Venetians, and that, and all the
country is called by the name of Morea, as it appears in the Turkish
History, lib. 10.

The fourth peregrination of the Apostle Paul.
IN the year after the Nativity of Christ, 53, Paul went from Antiochia in
Syria, and came to Galatia, and Laodicia in Phrygia, and thence wrote his
Epistle to Timothy, as it appears by the subscription of that Epistle, which
was 380 miles.

From Laodicea he went to Ephesus, which was 280 miles; and there appointed
Timothy to be a Bishop, and daily disputed in the school of a certain Tyrant,
and did many miracles, as it appears, Acts 19.

From Ephesus he came to Troada, which was 200 miles, where when he could not
find Titus he was troubled in spirit, 2 Cor. 2.

From Troada he sailed into Macedonia, and came to Philippos, which was 232
miles: from hence he wrote his Epistles to the Corinthians, and sent them to
Corinth, which was 292 miles.

In the same year also, Paul passing through Graecia, (in every place where he
came, preaching and visiting the churches, Act. 19.) at length came to
Corinthus, which was 480 miles.

In the 57 year after the Nativity of Christ, when Paul had wintred among the
Corinthians; in the Spring (that he might avoid the deceits of the Jews who
went about to take away his life, he went thence and returned to Philippos,
which was 292 miles, where he celebrated the feast of Penticost, Acts 2.

From thence he sailed to Troada, which was 232 miles, where he raised Eutichus
from death to life, Acts 20.

From Troada he went to Assa, which was thirty and six miles, Acts 20.

From Assa he sailed to Mileten, which was 760 miles, Acts 20.

From Mileten he went to Chius, which was 64 miles, Acts 20.

From Chius he sailed to Samus, which was 60 miles, and continued in the Isle
of Trogylius which was close by Samus, as Pl. says, lib. 5. cap. 3. and
Strabo, cap. 13.

From Trogylius he sailed by Ephesus, and came to Miletus, which was 160
miles. From thence he sent Messengers to the Ministers of Ephesus, commanding
them to have a special care to the flock of Christ, which he had purchased
with his precious blood; and added that he was so much the more importunate in
that behalf because they should never see him again: Wherefore they embraced
Paul with great lamentations and sorrow, Acts 2.

From Myletus he and his companions went with a direct course to the Island of
Cous, which was 200 miles, Acts 21.

From thence the next day they went to Rhodes, which was 84 miles.

From Rhodes they went to Patara, which was 100 miles.

From Patara they sailed to Tyrus, leaving Cyprus upon the left hand, which was
360 miles, where he found certain Disciples, and remained there seven days,
Acts 21.

From Tyrus Paul and his companions sailed to Ptolomais, which was 24 miles.

From thence they came to Caesarea Strato, which was 44 miles; there they
remained in the house of Philip the Evangelist, who was one of the seven
Deacons with Stephen, Acts 21.

From thence Paul went to Jerusalem, which was 32 miles, and there about the
feast of Penticost he was taken by the Jews, imprisoned and scourged, Acts 21.
At this time Paul was about 47 years of age. So all these Travels were 3396
miles.

Of the towns and places to which he traveled.
And first of Assus.
COncerning Laodicea to which Paul traveled you may read before. I will
therefore proceed to Assus, which was a town within the jurisdiction of
Troada, situated close by the Aegean sea, 700 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-East, as Strabo says, ( Lib. 13.) wonderfully fortified both by nature
and art, so that it is a thing almost impossible to be conquered. There is
found close by it the stone called Sarchophagus, in which if any man's corpse be
buried, within the space of 40 days it is utterly consumed all but the teeth,
as Pliny says, li. 36. cap. 17. In this city Cleantes the Stoicke was borne,
as Chrysippus says.

Of Mitylene.
THe Isle and town of Mitylene is situated in the Aegean sea, 624 miles from
Jerusalem toward the Northwest. In times past called Lesbus, which obtained the
whole jurisdiction and government of Troada. It is in compass 136 miles, and
contains in length from the North to the South 56 miles. In it is found much
matter for the making and calking of ships: there was many goodly cities in it,
as Mitylene and Pyrrha, which stood upon the West part of it; also the
Metropolitan called Lesbos, Eressus, the haven of Antissa, and Mithymna. Of
Lesbos in times past this whole Isle was called Lesbus, until the city of
Mitylene grew famous; being so called of Mitylene the daughter of Macharus, as
Diodorus says, lib. 4. and after that cities name it was called Mitylene.
There were many other goodly cities which stood in this Isle, but they were
either consumed by earthquakes or drowned by the sea. The land thereof was very
pleasant and fruitful, bringing forth grapes, whereof there was a very
excellent and clear wine made, which they of Constantinople principally liked:
there is also found great store of Cypress, Pines, and plenty of figs come
thence. Their horses are very strong, but of a low stature: it is very
mountainy, and pestred with wild beasts.

There were many famous men that lived and were borne in this country; as
Pittachus one of the seven Wisemen of Graece, Aliaeus the Poet, and
Alcimenides his brother, Diophanes the Orator, and Theophanes who wrote the
acts of Pompey the Great, (as it appears in Tullies Oration for Archia)
Theophrastus also that notable Philosopher, (who at first was called
Tyrtamanus, then Euphrastus, that it, a good Orator) and lastly, Theophrastus,
that is, a divine Orator: this man was an excellent Perapateticke, and scholar
to Aristotle, whom he succeeded in his school, and had two thousand scholars.

Vitruvius the Architect makes mention of Mitylen in his first book, saying
that it was a very magnificent city, and rarely builded, but very badly
situated, for when the South wind did blow, the inhabitants grew sick; when
the West, they coughed, and when the North wind did blow they were made well.
Notwithstanding the Apostle Paul and his companions came to this city, as it
appears, Acts 20. At this day it is under the jurisdiction of the Turks, and
is called by the name of Midilly.

Of Chius.
THis is an Isle situated in the Aegean sea, distant from Jerusalem 600 miles
toward the Northwest, being 112 miles in compass; the principal city
thereof is called Chios, taking the name, as some say from the Masticke tree,
which sweateth out a certain gum, of the Syrians called Chian, and by us
Mastick: this Mastick is the best in those parts of the world. Ephorus calls
it by the ancient name Aetalia; but Cleobulus, Chia; either because of the
Nymph called Chion, or else because of the whiteness of the soil: there are
others that call it Patyusia; and there are some who derive the name of Chius
from the temple of Apollo that stands in it, called Chion. There stands in it
a fair and goodly mountain called Pellenaeum, from whence the inhabitants dig
very excellent marble. Also in times past the best Malmsey came thence, but in
these days it is brought from Creet.

Of Samus.
THis is an Isle and City situated in the Aegean Sea, upon a high or lofty
piece of ground, so that from thence the inhabitants may see into all the
Countries near adjoining, lying upon the coast of Ephesus and Ionia, 560 miles
from Jerusalem toward the Northwest; it was in compass 88 miles, very fertile
and pleasant, much exceeding Chius, although it brought forth no Wine. In times
past it was called Artemisia, Parthenea, and Stephane; taking those names from
a crown or wreath of sweet smelling flowers, of which there were great plenty
in this Isle: the Poets feign that Juno was both borne and brought up in it;
and Varro says, That there was a fair and stately Temple dedicated unto her,
where solemn service and the rites of Marriage were yearly celebrated.
Pythagoras the Philosopher was borne here; and one of the Sybels (which
prophesied of the coming of Christ) lived here. S. Paul also came to this
Isle, and converted many, as appears, Acts 20.

There is another Isle called Samus, situated upon the coast of Epirus, not
far from the gulf of Ambracius, called also Cephalenia, not far from the
promontorie of Actium, where Augustus overcame Antonius; in honor of which
victory he built up a city and called it Nicapolis, etc.

Of Trogyllium.
THis is a promontorie and town not far from Ephesus, scituared in Asia minor,
at the foot of the Mountain Mycales, four miles and somewhat more from Samus,
where Paul stayed, Act. 20. It is distant from Jerusalem 460 miles toward the
Northwest. There are which say, that S. Paul stayed at a certain Isle joining
close to this promontory, called after that, by the name of Trogylium, See
Strabo, lib. 14.

Of Myletus.
THis was a famous city, situated upon the borders of Ionia and Caesaria,
close by the shore of the Aegean sea, 104 miles from Jerusalem toward the
Northwest. The Poets feign, that Miletus, who was the first builder of this
city, was the son of Apollo, and called it after his own name Myletus: but
Strabo, lib. 12. thinks that it was rather built by Sarpedon the son of
Jupiter, and brother to Radamanthus and Minos, and by him was called Myletus,
from another City of the same name, which stood in Crete. The wool that
comes from this town is wonderful soft, and singular good for many
purposes; but it was principally used to make cloth of, which they died into an
excellent purple and transported into many places. There were many famous men
that either lived or were borne in this town; as Thales Milesius one of the
seven Wisemen of Graece, Anaximander, who was his scholar, Anaximenes and
Hecataeus the Historian; also Eschenes the Orator, (not he that contended with
Demosthenes who taking too much liberty against Pompey was banished) Timothius
the musician, and Pittacus the Philosopher, besides many others.

But of all these, Thales Milesius was held in greatest estimation, because he
was thought to be the first that taught natural Philosophy and the
Mathematics amongst the Grecians. He was the first also that foretold of the
Eclipse of the Sun, about such time as the battle was fought between Cyaxares
father of Astyages King of the Medes, and Hallyat^es father of Croesus K. of
the Lidians, which was about the 44 Olimpiad. There came unto him a certain
man, who asked him what was the hardest thing in the world; he answered*
seipsum nosce, to know himself. Another came to him, and asked him how he might
do to live justly; he answered, Si quae in alijs reprehendimus, ipse non
faciamus, That we do not those things which we reprehend in others. He died
about the 58 Olympiad. Meletus at this day is called Melasa.

Of Cous.
THis is one of the Cyclad Islands, lying in the Aegean sea, bordring upon
Caria; being so called from the Vaults and caves that are in it, and distant
from Jerusalem 524 miles. It has a city called after the same name, wherein
there was a stately Temple built in honor of Juno; and another standing in the
suburbs thereof dedicated to Aesculapius: this was a very sumptuous temple, and
made very rich, because of the many presents and gifts that were sent and
dedicated to it. When the Romans had obtained the command of this Isle,
Octavius the father of Augustus Caesar, took out of this temple a naked Venus,
which was a goodly image, and carried it with him to Rome in honor of his
progenitors, who derived their progeny from her.

It is in compass 56 miles, being so pleasantly situated that it was a sea
mark to Mariners, very fruitful, and bringing forth abundance of wine and
silk, by reason of a certain fish that is found there, from which they got
great plenty. See Plin. lib. 11. cap. 22.

There were many that lived only by weauing of silk, and above the rest there
was one Pamphila the daughter of Plates, that was most excellent in that Art.

There were many famous men that were either born or lived in that country, as
Hipocrates that excellent Physician, Apelles that notable painter, Simus the
Physician, Philetas the poet and orator, Nicia the prince and tyrant of Cous,
Ariston the Peripatetick, and Theomnestus that notable politician. At this day
this Isle is within the Turkish Empire, and by them called Stacu: also the
principal city thereof is called by the same name, and wholly inhabited by
the Turks, two towns only being inhabited by the Grecians: but there are many
that dwell in strong castles compassed with round and stately towers. This
country is very fertile, abounding with cattle, and the mountains thereof
are little inferior to those of Creet.

Of Rhodes.
THe city and Isle of Rhodes (which is so called from the sweet smell or roses)
is situated in the Mediterranean sea, a little from Asia the less, upon the
South; being distant from Jerusalem 140 miles toward the Northwest, as Strab.
says, l. 14. It is in compass 112 miles. It was at first called Ophy, then
Statilia, and after Telchin, of the inhabitants thereof, who were called
Telchines, a people which, as some say, were witches; others say, curious
Artificers, and were the first that found out the making of brass and iron. At
last it took the name of Rhodes from the principal city that stood in it: for
there were three cities in it, viz. Lyndus, Camirus, and Ialyssus. In Lyndus,
Cleobulus one of the seven Wisemen of Graece, and Chares that famous Statuarie,
who made the Colossus which stood in this Isle, were borne. Ialyssus of a Rose
that was found in it, was called Rhodes, being situated upon an exceeding high
promontorie, lying toward the East part of that Isle. This exceeded the other
two cities both for ports, ways, walls, and other ornaments, and the
inhabitants were governed with such excellent laws, and so skillful in
navigations, that it might compare with the strongest city of the world, and
for a long time had the command of the sea round about, and utterly abolished
all Pirates and robbers from those parts.

Diodorus Sicul. li. 6. says, that it was called Rhodes of Rhodia a fair and
beautiful maid, who was dearly beloved of Apollo, and therefore this Island
was dedicated to the Sun; for as Solinus says, though the heavens be never
so cloudy yet the Sun shines in Rhodes. Pindarus the Poet (because of the
fertility of the soil, and the exceeding opulencie of the inhabitants) says,
that it rained gold in that country. In former times it flourished with
learning and good arts, insomuch that the Romans for the most part sent their
children to be brought up at Rhodes. This Isle is very fruitful, and brings
forth many things necessary for the maintenance of life, but above all, a
certain red wine which the Romans did greatly delight in, and valued at a high
price. In this city lived that notable Painter called Protogines, which Apelles
conquered in that science, as Pliny says, lib. 35. ca. 10.

Demetrius King of Asia erected a notable Collossus or Statue of the Sun in
this Isle, which that notable caruer Chares made, being outwardly all of pure
brass, but within nothing but stones; it was seventy cubits high, and so
artificially made, that it was accounted for one of the wonders of the world.
Afterward it was carried into Egypt by the Egyptians who won the town. This
Isle is famous to this day: in times past it was accounted one of the keys of
Christendom, but at this day subject unto the Turk: of which you may read
more in the Turkish History.

Of Patara.
PAtara was a City of Licia, so called of Patarus the builder thereof; who was
the son of Apollones, or Lacones, as Strabo and Servius says: it was
situated upon the South side of Asia the less, close by the shore of the
Mediterranean sea, 408 miles from Jerusalem toward the Northwest. Ptolomaeus
Philadelphius K. of Egypt enlarged this city, and called it after his sisters
name, Arsinoes Lysiaca, to put a difference between it and other Cities called
after that name; for there was an Arsinoe in Egypt, and another near Cyrene,
where Apollo in certain Months of the winter season (by the help of the
Devil) gave answer to them that sought after him. S. Paul was in this town,
Acts 11. There was also another town of this name in Achaia, where S. Andrew
was crucified.

The Travels of S. Paul when he was taken captive and carried Prisoner to Rome.
IN the 57 year after the nativity of Christ, Paul being then 47 years of
age, by the command of Claudius Lysius was taken and scourged by the Jews, and
brought thence to Antipatris by night (because there were forty Jews which had
sworn his death) which was 12 miles, Acts 22, 23, 24.

From Antipatris he was brought to Caesarea Strato, which was 28 miles, where
he was brought before Foelix (who was President for the Romans in those parts)
and was captive there for the space of two days, Acts 24, 25, 26.

In the 59 year after the nativity of Christ, Paul being then 49 years of age
or thereabouts, was sent by Portius Festus President of the Jews, to Rome: so
Paul sailed from Caesarea Strato, to Sidon, which was 84 miles, Acts 27.

From thence Paul sailed close by Cyprus, because the wind was contrary, and
came to the sea over against Cilicia (which was very troublesome) and so
passing by Pamphilia they came to Myra, which was 480 miles.

Loosing from Myra they sailed to Gnidum, which was 248 miles, Acts 27.

From Gnidum they sailed toward the South, and came to Crete, and so passed by
the towns of Salmo, Lasaea, and Assus, and so came to Phoenicia, which was 180
miles.

From Phoenicia they came to the Island of Claudia, which was 108 miles.

From the Island of Claudia they came to Melite, which now is called Malta; in
which place they suffered shipwreck, and Paul shook off the Viper off his
hand into the fire, and did many other miracles, which was 720 miles.

From Malta they sailed in a ship of Alexandria, to Syracusus, in Sicilia,
which was 180 miles: Paul at this time was 50 years of age, Acts 28.

From Syracusa they sailed to Regium, which was 52 miles.

From thence they went to Puteola, which was 164 miles.

From Puteola they went to Apiforum, which was 12 miles: there certain
Christians of Rome came to meet them, above 22 miles, and received Paul with
great friendship.

From Apiforum they led him to Tribatera, which is six miles, and there he met
more Christians.

From Tribatera he went to Rome, being 16 miles, where he remained two years
prisoner, and there wrote his Epistles to the Galathians, Ephesians,
Philippians, Colossians, Philemon, and the Hebrews: so all these Travels were
2300 miles.

And in the whole, from his first beginning, until his being prisoner in Rome
were, 10270 miles.

But being deliuertd out of prison, the last ten years of his age he did not
only preach the Gospel in Asia and Creta, where he appointed his disciple
Timothy to be a Bishop, and in Macedonia, (where being in Neapolis he wrote an
Epistle to Titus, and sent it to him above 300 miles to the Isle of Creta) but
also he preached the Gospel, and spread the word of God abroad in the country
of Spain, Romans 15. which is distant from Jerusalem 2800 miles: and being the
second time imprisoned in Rome, he wrote his second Epist. to Timothy, and sent
it above 996 miles to Ephesus: not long after, he was beheaded in Rome, in the
place called Via Ostensi.

Of the towns and places to which he traveled.
Of Antipatris.
THe town of Antipatris is distant from Jerusalem twelve miles toward the
Northwest. In times past it was called Caphar Zalama, that is, a Village of
peace. There Judas Macchabeus overcame Nicanor, 1 Mac. 7. Afterward Herod that
lived in the time of our Savior Christ, built this town much fairer, and
called it after the name of his father, Antipatris. It stood in a very pleasant
and fruitful soil, having many fair trees and fresh waters about it, Ios.
lib. 16. ca. 7. S. Paul was by night brought prisoner into this town, Acts 23.

Of Myra.
THis was a great town, as Strabo, li. 14. says, and stood in Asia minor, in
the province of Licia, upon the coast of the Mediterranean sea, 380 miles from
Jerusalem Northwestward. S. Paul was in this town.

Of Gnidus.
THis town lies in Asia minor, upon the Mediterranean sea, in the Pennisida
called Doris, which by a narrow point joineth unto the Province of Caria, and
is distant from Jerusalem 492 miles. In this town the goddess Venus had a
great temple, wherein her image was placed, made by that cunning workman
Praxiteles, of Marble stone; and for that cause Horace calls Venus Queen of
Gnido, Lib. 1. carm. Od. 30. O Venus Regina Gnijdi Paphique, that is, O Venus
Queen of Gnidus and Paphos, etc.

There came many learned men out of this town, as Eudoxus, Agatarchides,
Paripateticus, Theopompus, and others.

This town is yet standing, and (as it is thought) it took the name of the
fish Gnidus, which is taken there in the sea; which fish is of so strange a
nature, that if you take it in your hand it stingeth like a nettle. At this day
this town has another name, and is called Cabo Chrio, as Conradus Gesnerus in
his Onomastico writes.

Of Creta.
THe Island of Creta took the name (as Strabo says) from the people called
Curetes that dwelt in this Island: those people used to cut all the hair off
from the foreparts of their heads, and therefore they would not endure to
suffer any man to wear his hair being in the wars; for which cause in the
Grecian tongue they were called Couretes, and in time this name by corruption
of speech was changed, and they called Cretans. This Island stands in the
Mediterranean sea, between Graecia and Africa, 600 miles from Jerusalem toward
the West. It is a great Island, being 200 miles long, 48 miles broad, and in
compass 588 miles: it is very fruitful of Cypress trees, Malmsey, Sugar, and
other spices: the Malmsey takes the name from the town of Maluesia, in
Peloponessus, standing upon the point of Malta, right over against Creta or
Candia; and at this day the like wine is made in Creta, and called by the same
name, from whence it is commonly brought unto us, though in times past it came
out of this Island of Chius.

Among all the hills that are found in the Island of Creta, the hill Ida is
most spoken of, because of the height: about it stands diverse towns and
villages: it has many hills and woods; for the Island is very full of sweet
Cypress trees, insomuch that there are woods full of them. Pliny writes, that
upon a time there was such an Earthquake in this Island, that one of the hills
removed, out of which there came a man being forty cubits high. In this Island
there are no venomous beasts, but in times past it was inhabited by cruel
people, of whom S. Paul complains in his first Epistle to Titus, cap. 1.
where he rehearses the saying of Epimenides, which was after this manner, The
people of Creta are always liers, evil beasts, and slow-bellies. And to
conclude, they resemble some of the Friars among the Papists; for as they are
idle people and shave their heads, so were the men of Creta. Titus (Paul's
disciple) was a Bishop in this Island, and S. Paul wrote an Epistle to them,
and to Nicapolis, and sent it them above 320 miles. This Island in times past
was very rich and populous, for in it there was 100 towns; the chief of which
were Gnossos, Cortyna, and Zydon, but Gnossos was the most principal and
antientest, wherein King Minos kept his court: in it the notable Geographer
Strabo was borne.

This town of Gnossos in times past was called Ceratur, of the river Cerata
which passes by it; but now it and all the Island is called Candia. The
Venetians every three years appointed a new Duke to govern it. In this Island
stood the towns of Salmona and Lassica, (by Pliny called Lasas) and in the
middle between those two towns was the haven of Gutfurt, whereof Saint Luke
makes mention in the Acts of the Apostles, cap. 27. saying, That Paul
counseled the Sailors that were in the ship to anchor there, and stay the
Winter season in that Island: but the Captain of the ship gave more credit to
the Master of the ship, than to Paul's words, whereby in the end they were in
danger of their lives. The towns of Salmona and Lassica, with the haven of
Gutfurt, lay Southward in this Island, upon the coast of the Mediterranean sea:
somewhat distant from them stood the town of Asson, by Pliny called Asum,
where they hoised out their boat and sailed Northward; and because they had a
fair South-winde, they thought to sail to Phoenicia, a haven in Creta, but
the wind coming about to the East, drove them back again into the sea, by
which means they were in danger of their lives.

This Island was brought under the subjection of the Romans 66 years before
the birth of Christ, and so for a long time continued, until the Saracens
entered therein, and took it from the Romans, 800 years after the birth of
Christ. After that, in the year of our Lord 979, the Emperor of
Constantinople drove the Saracens out of the Island, and kept it; but in the
end the Venetians brought it under their subjection and seigniorie, in the
year of our Lord 1202, and at this day it is called Candia.

Of Clauda.
CLauda is an Isle not far from Creet, lying toward the Southwest in the
Mediterranean sea, 288 miles from Jerusalem toward the West: at this day it is
called Porto Gabaso; here the Sailors, the Apostle Paul and the rest of the
company, haled ouer-bord their Cock-boat and tied it to their ship, and fell to
^awing lest they should have been sunk into Syrtis, a dangerous gulf upon
those seas. Acts 27.

Of Syrtis.
THis is a gulf of the sea lying upon the shore of Africa, in which the water
is both troublesome and the shore dangerous, because of Quicksands; and in
this there are two places most remarkable, called by the name of Syrtis, from
drawing and attracting ships unto them, by which they were greatly endangered:
the one was called the greater, the other the less; the greater lay 1000 miles
from Jerusalem toward the West, but the other lay under the Isle of Mylete
toward the South, being distant from Jerusalem 1320 miles toward the West: in
this place it was where Paul and his companians were in such danger, mentioned,
Acts 17.

Of Mylete.
THis Island was so called from the great abundance of honey that was found in
it; but at this day it is called Malta, situated in the Mediterranean sea,
1340 miles from Jerusalem toward the West. It is very pleasant and fruitful;
bringing forth great plenty of Wheat, Rye, Flax, Comin, Cotton, Figs, Wine,
Roses, Violets, Time, Lauender, and many other sweet and delightful herbs
from whence Bees did gather great plenty of honey. The Sun is very hot in
this Island, insomuch that by the extreme feruor thereof, the inhabitants lose
their natural complexion, and look of a tawnie color. In Summer euenings
there falls great plenty of dewes, whereby the earth is refreshed, and the
herbs increased. There is neither snow nor frost seen in it, for the
Northern winds (which with us are the authors of cold and frosts) with them
procure rain, which greatly refreshes and increases the fruits of the earth;
so that the pastures and meadows become very pleasant and full of grass: and
although it be but 28 miles long, and 60 miles about, notwithstanding it is
very populous; for in the eight parishes that stand in this Isle, there is
numbered above twenty thousand men. The inhabitants are very honest, religious
and godly; and the women fair, chaste, and modest, for they never come abroad
but with their faces covered. The children that are borne in this country fear
not any snakes, neither are hurt be any thing that is venomous, insomuch that
they will take Scorpions and eat them without danger, although in all other
parts of the world those kind of creatures are most pernicious. In this Isle
also there are bred a kind of Dogs that are but small, yet very white and
shagged, and so loving that the inhabitants of all the neighboring countries
will buy them, though they be at dear rates.

The chief city thereof (called Malta) is so strongly fortified both by art
and nature, that it is almost impossible to be conquered, unless it be either
by treason or famine. The tower or Castle thereof is fortified with the knights
of S. John's Order, who have mightily expressed their valor and resolution in
defending this town from the Turks. About a mile from this, the ruins of a
goodly fair city are to be seen. And upon the East promontorie, a little
from the city of Malta, there yet remain the decaies (which are worthy to look
upon) of a goodly temple dedicated to Juno. It seems by what remains, that
this church has bin a fair and goodly thing in times past.

There is also here and there in the earth found certain brass moneys, having
upon the one side a superscription written in Greek letters, and upon the
other the image of Juno. There stood upon the South side of Malta a Temple
dedicated to Hercules, the ruins of which are yet extant; and in it are found
monuments worthy of admiration. At such time as the Captain of Massanissa King
of the Numidians had conquered this Island, amongst other precious things that
he found in these Temples, he took thence a great deal of goodly Ivorie: but
that religious King did faithfully restore all those things back again, and
dedicated them to the several Temples. Thus we may perceive that the
inhabitants of this Isle of Malta were wholly given to idolatry and
superstition, until such time as Paul by the inconstancy and vehemency of the
wind was driven upon it, and converted them from that perverse and profane
worship to the Christian Religion, at such time as he suffered shipwreck, and
Wintered amongst them, Acts 27. The inhabitants show upon the North part of
this Isle, the place where the ship was cast away wherein the Apostle Paul was;
in which place they have built up a Chapel, and dedicated it to Saint Paul.
They show also a Cave, in which they say he lived; and they verily believe that
he expelled all venom and poison out of that Island at such time as he was
there.

It was first subject unto the Africans, as may appear by certain Marble
Pillars which are here and there found, in which there are engraven certain
Characters of the Carthaginians, not much unlike to Hebrew letters. And
although the Inhabitants are Christians, yet their speech is much like the
Saracens, which differs little or nothing from the ancient Punick. At such
time as Dido built Carthage (which is thought to be 890 years before Christ)
Battus was King of this Isle, and held a confederacy with Dido: for when
Hyarbas King of the Gelutians made war upon Dido, because he could not obtain
her in matrimony, she received aid from this Battus; and when for the love of
Aeneas she had killed her self, Hyarbas having conquered Carthage, banished her
sister Anne, who was entertained by this Battus. But Hyarbas taking that
unkindly, made war upon Battus, and conquered the Island of Malta: so it
continued in the jurisdiction of the Carthaginians a long time after, until
the Carthaginians were conquered by the Romans; and then one Titus Sempronius
(about such time as Hannibal brought his army before Trebia) won it, 217
years before Christ. And after it continued under the jurisdiction of the
Romans 130 years, and then it was conquered by the Saracens; but they held it
not long, for Roger Norman King of Sicilia got it out of their power, An. D.
1090. And so it continued in the hands of the Sicilians til An. Dom. 1520. And
then Charles the fifth being Emperor, gave it to the Knights of saint John, upon
condition that they should oppose the Turks galleys, and defend that part of
Christendom. So the Knights of S. John together with their governor sailed to
Malta, and so fortified it, that it is impossible to be taken unless by famine
or treason. There were many famous Bishops that lived in this place, and very
devout Christians. In the time of the Emperor Theodosius there was a Council
held, at which were present 240 Bishops. At this day this Bishopric is
subject to the Archbishop of Palermo; and the chief government of the Isle is
in the power of the Knights of S. John, etc.

Of Syracusa.
THis was a City of the Isle of Sicilia, built by one Archia of Corinth,
standing close by the sea shore on the North side of the Isle, 2756 miles from
Jerusalem toward the West. It was a fair and goodly city, in ancient time
called Tetrapolis, because it was divided into three parts: one of which parts
stood in the Isle of Ortygia, separated from the continent with a little streit
sea, and with that famous fountain Arthusia. The other part was called
Acradine, and the third Tycha; to which in aftertimes there was built up a
fourth, and called by the name of Neapolis. All this city was compassed in with
three walls, so strong and so admirably fortified both by Nature and Art, that
it opposed the Carthaginians in equal war. It was called Syracusa, from
drawing or sucking; and in process of time obtained the whole jurisdiction and
government of that Isle; which was so well peopled in the time of Dionysius the
Tyrant, that he was able to make and maintain an Army of one hundred thousand
foot, and twelve thousand Horse. There were two havens in that part which was
called Ortygia, so maruellously fortified with such huge Rocks and other
munition, that they were wonderful to look upon. There also stood a Castle or
Tower called by the name of Mercia, which was so strong, that when all the rest
of the Town was conquered, yet that maintained War for a long time. In this
Hold the Kings and Tyrants of this Country usually kept their Treasures and
other things that were material. There were many worthy and famous Princes
ruled in it; but above them all, Dionysius the elder exceeded the rest. Who
when he saw what abundance of Vessels of gold and silver Dionysius the
younger had heaped together, cried out and said, In te Regius affectus non est,
qui ex tanta poculorum vi amicum neminem conciliasti: That is, Verily the mind
of a King is not in thee, that out of so many Cups could not procure one
Friend. For after he was banished, and constrained to keep a School. Both
these Dionysians were learned men and great Philosophers. It is thought that
this Island was sometime a part of Italy, and joining to the field of Brutius;
but in time through the violence of the sea separat from the continent. From
whence it was called Sicilita, and also Trinacris, because there were three
mountains standing upon three promontories in three several places of it,
giving the proportion of a triangle; for there was an angle toward the South,
called Pactinus, another toward the Southwest called Lilybaeus, and another
called Pelorus, which lay distant near about two miles from Italy. In times
past it was under the command of the Romans; but now the Spaniards have chief
government of it. There are many things remaining to this day worthy
observation, but chiefly the mountain Aetna, which still casts out fire and
smoke, etc.

Of Rhegium.
THis was a town of Italy belonging to the family of the Brutians; at first
built by the Calcedonians and Messenians, upon the utmost bounds of Italy
toward the Sicilian sea, being distant from that Isle 60 furlongs, and called
by the name of Rhegium, as some think, from Rumpo, to break; for that near
about the place where that town stood, the sea being very tempestuous, broke
the Isle of Sicilia from the continent. Others think it was called Rhegium,
because it was so strong and beautiful a City that it might well have bin the
seat of a Prince. Close by this city in the Sicilian sea there stands a rock
somewhat above the water, representing in figure the proportion of a man, and
round about it are to be seen other little rocks like barking dogs. In this
place the water is so extreme violent, and runs with so strong a current,
that it is very dangerous for mariners (especially such as are ignorant) to
sail that way. Wherefore the Poets made this verse, to signify a man that
stood in a dangerous and doubtful estate: Decidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare
Charibdim.
Seeking to shun Charibdis curled waves,
He thrusts himself into stern Scylla's jaws.
But that mariners might avoid these dangerous places, upon the North angle of
Sicilia in the promontorie of Petorus there is erected a lofty tower, standing
as a sea mark, that so they by that direction might escape these dangerous
places. Not far from Scillari is to be seen another town, of that rock called
Scyllacus, but of the inhabitants it is commonly called Scyglius or Scyglio;
and Rhegium also at this day is called Rezo and Reggio; of Antimnestus captain
of Chalcedon: and as Strab. li. 6. says, is situated in Calabria, 1332 miles
from Jerusalem Westward.

Of Puteoli.
THis city is in Campania, a country of Italy not far from Naples, situated
on the sea shore, 1388 miles from Jerusalem Westward; taking that name from
fountains or Wels of hot water, being built by the Salamians, as Eusebius
says, about such time as the Tarquins were banished Rome, 507 years before
the nativity of Christ. It was anciently called Dicaearchia, because of their
singular justice and noble government. But when the Romans made war against
Hannibal, they fortified this town to withstand his forces, and then called it
Puteoli, which name it retained a long time after. At this day it is called
Puzzoli.

At this city the Apostle Paul and his companions arrived when they sailed into
Rome, Acts 27. Between Puteoli and Baia there lies the lake of Lucrinus, into
which by the command of Augustus Caesar, a Dolphin was thrown. Now there was a
young Youth called Simon, the son of a poor man dwelling in Baia, who usually
played among other youths upon the banks of this lake; and seeing the Dolphin
(it being a strange fish in those parts, and very amiable to look upon) did
take great delight in it, and often times fed it with bread and other things as
he could get: insomuch as the Dolphin when it heard the boys voice upon the
banks of the river, would resort to him and receive at his hand his accustomed
food. Thus it continued so long, that the Dolphin would suffer the boy to
handle him, take him by the gils, play with him, yea and sometimes to get upon
his back, then swim with him a great way into the lake, and bring him back
again, and suffer him to go safe upon the shore. After this manner he
continued for many years together, and in the end the youth died. Yet the
Dolphin resorted to his usual place, expecting his accustomed food from the
hands of this boy; but missing him, he left the shore, languisht away and died.
Concerning the nature of this fish you may read more at large in Pliny, lib. 9.
cap. 8.

Of Colossa.
THis City is situated in Phrygia a country in Asia minor, near the rivers
of Lycus and Meander, 520 miles from Jerusalem Northwestward, not far from
Laodicea; so called from the mighty statues and Colosso's that were set up in
it. These cities, Colossa, Laodicea, and Hierapolis (where the Apostle Philip
was put to death in the tenth year of Nero) a little before Paul's martyrdom
were sunk by an earthquake, which without doubt was a great judgment of God
upon them, because they refused the grace and comfort of the doctrine of the
Gospel offered unto them by the Apostles. The Epistle of Paul dedicated to the
Colossians was sent by the hand of Onesymus from Rome unto these towns, being
1080 miles. For although the Rhodians were called Colossians, because of that
famous Colossus that stood there: yet this city wherein Archippus and Philemon
dwelt (to whom Paul directed that Epistle) stood in Phrygia a country of Asia
minor, and not in Rhodes.

Of Nicopolis.
NIcopolis is a city of Macedonia, situated close by the river Nessus, not far
from Philippus upon the borders of Thrace, 920 miles from Jerusalem
Northwestward. From hence the Apostle Paul wrote his Epistle to Titus, and sent
it to Creet, 600 miles. There are many other cities of this name: one standing
in Epyre, built by Augustus; another between Cilicia and Syria, built by
Alexander in glory of his victory against Darius. A fourth in Bythinia, a fifth
in the holy land, formerly called Emaus.

Of Rome.
THis city, if we rightly consider the deriuation of the name in Hebrew, was
not built without the singular providence of God; being derived of Rom, i. He
has exalted or made high. But the Grecians derive it from Romen, i. strength
and power. Now although the providence of God extends to every Creature, may
to the very hairs of a man's head; yet where he determines to express his
singular power, there he works beyond the expectation of man. And who knows
not that the beginning of this City was mean, raised from a confused company,
destitute both of civility, community, and laws; yet has it bin, and for
the most part is the glory of the world, and the great commander of the Princes
of the earth.

It was so called at first by Romulus (as Livy, lib. 1. says) who first built
it, seven hundred fifty and one years before the Nativity of Christ; being
situated upon seven hills, that is, Capitolinus, Aventinus; Palatinus, Caelius,
Exquilinus, Viminalis, and Quirinalis. But after, when the City was compassed
about with walls, the hill Ianiculus was enclosed within it. The Valleys that
lay between these hills were so raised up with arches, vaults, and artificial
mounts, that in process of time they became level with the top of some of
those hills. It was beautified with fair and sumptuous buildings; so that as
it was the head of the world for command and power, in like like manner it
exceeded all the rest of the world for glory and riches, but principally for
stately buildings. There were many goodly Temples, dedicated to Jupiter,
Apollo, Aesculapius, Hercules, Diana, Juno, Minerva, Lucia, Concordia, Fides,
Pietas, Pax, Victoria, Isis, besides many other dedicated to other gods. But
above all, that was the most sumptuous that was called Pantheon deorum; at this
day called the Church of All hallowes.

Moreover, here was to be seen the princely Edifices of Kings, Emperors,
Consuls, Senators, Patricians, and other Romans who were mighty in wealth and
substance, built all of polished Marble, beautified with gold and silver;
beside palaces, bulwarks; theaters, triumphant arches, statues, and such like,
al which were glorious, and greatly adorned the city. But above al these, the
house of Nero was most worthy of observation, which to see to was built all of
burnisht gold very curiously wrought. Here also stood the monuments of the two
Caesar's, Julius and Augustus; also their statues, the one made of pure brass,
the other of white marble. Besides, there were many fruitful orchards,
watercourse, and wholesome baths, brought thither by Antonius, Nero,
Dioclesian, and Constantine the Great.

Also the Emperor Constantine erected many goodly churches for the use of the
Christians, and endowed them with great means; and amongst the rest that which
was dedicated to Saint John of Latteran, a fair and goodly Church, and for
riches and curious workmanship might compare with the stateliest Temples that
ever had been in the world, most of the ornaments and images being made of
Gold and Silver: he also erected the Vattican, which was dedicated to Saint
Peter; and another holy house dedicated to Saint Paul; in either of which he
placed their several sepulchers and monuments, bestowing extraordinary cost to
beautify them. So many were the gifts and gratuites of this Emperor, that
they can scarce be numbered: so that although the Emperor Trajan, and Boniface
the fourth, Pope of Rome, bestowed great cost to beautify and adorn the city;
yet were they nothing comparable to that which this Emperor did. These things
then being presented to your view, you might justly say, that Rome in her
prosperity and eminency was the glory of the world: but as all estates are
fickle and uncertain, still subject to variety and change, so was this: first
envied of the world, because of the extreme oppression of her governors; and
after made desolate by violence and force, all her former glory being
eclipsed, and the greatest part of these goodly buildings laid level with the
ground. Thus have I showed you what Rome was when it was in her prosperity: It
rests now to show what Rome is.

Rome at this day differs as much from the ancient Rome, as the substance
from the shadow. For although the Pope has beautified and adorned the West
part of it with many fair and goodly buildings, and called it by the name of
new Rome. Yet is it nothing comparable to the ancient city, as it was when
Augustus and Constantine the Great were Emperors thereof, neither does it
stand in the ancient place: for the first City stood upon the East side of
Tyber, this upon the West. The chief part of the other stood upon the
mountains Capitolinus and Palatinus, upon which were the stately buildings of
Senators, Kings, and Emperors, but now they lie desolate and waste. The
Capitol also, and the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius (goodly Buildings) beaten to
the ground; only some ruins, to show that such things there has been. And
what now rests, that are worthy note, are in the command and power of the
Pope: which are not many; the most that can be named, are the Vattican, the
tower of S. Angelo, the Popes Palace, his banqueting house, and the gardens
and walks about it; which are so well situated, that they are a grace to all
Rome, the rest are but ordinary and common buildings. Thus may you see that
there is nothing in this world but has a period, to which if with much labor
it attaineth, then it commonly declineth, seldom continues: for who knows
not with what labor, what perils by sea, what dangers by land, through how
many foreign wars and Domesticke seditions, Rome was raised to her
greatness? And how suddenly was all this lost? What the virtue and wisdom of
grave and resolute Consuls, Captains, and Commanders had with great hazard
heaped up; thrusting their Capitol and other Treasuries full, with the
triumphant spoils of foreign nations, was left to be consumed either by
seditious soldiers or prodigal Emperors, and the State left as a prey to
those that were mightiest: so that they were accounted most honorable, that
with most injury could get to themselves either countenance to ouersway
authority, or opulency, to purchase eminency; insomuch that there has been no
action so evil, nor any attempt so pernicious in former times, but may be
matched in the declining of the Roman state. Where more murders? where more
corruption? where more oppression than is mentioned in Histories to be
practiced amongst the Romans? the lives of men, the state of Provinces, and the
crowns of Kings sold for money. But now her time is finished, and her ruins are
left for succeeding ages to admire; that so in beholding, they might learn to
know the difference between virtue and vice; and from thence conclude, That
there is nothing permanent; and that those things wherein men most glory, do
oftentimes soonest decay. For if this city which commanded the nations and
Princes of the earth (whose Colonies, Armies, Legions, confederacies, and
treasures, were so mighty, and extended so far, that there was almost no
country unconquered, or nation that did not fear to hear the inhabitants
thereof named) is made desolate and laid level with the ground: what then may
be said of petty Cities, Towns, Lordships, Manors, and Houses? shall not they
likewise be subject to the like calamities, and wasted and destroyed through
the continuance of time? Verily yea: Wherefore let not the king glory in his
power, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches: but
let him that glories glory in the Lord.

FINIS.
A Table of the Persons, Towns, and places mentioned in the foregoing Treatise.
A
ADam, 72.78. Abarim, 127, Abel of the Vines, 129. Abner and his travels, 194.
Abraham and his travels, 79 Absalon and his travels, 197. Achor, 134.
Aethyopia, 205, and 320. Aialon, 134. Alexandria, 324. Amanus, 361. Antiochus
Epiphanes and his travels, 325. Antiochus Eupator, 357. Apamca, 320. Aphec,
166. Arabia, 522. Aroer, 154. Asdod, 136. Azeca, 134. Asteroth, 92 128. Athens,
542. Antipatris, 556. Ahab and his travels, 218, Aeziongaber, 125. Arbona, ib.
Almon Diblathaim, 127. Athniel, 143. Arad, 144. Abdon, 155. Ascalon, 158. Of
the Ark of God, 165. Abiathar, 180. Abishag, 200. Ahazia, 224 Abijn, ibid.
Aza, ibid. Ahazia, 240. Athalia, 241. Amasia, 242. Amos, 287. Ammon king of
Judah, 250. Assarbaddon, 260. Abelmehola, 274. An instruction to understand the
Prophets, 297 An Alphabeticall table of all the cities and countries mentioned
in the Prophets; fram 298, to 309. Ange, 319. Antiochia, 330. 523. Asseremoth,
343. Adarsa, 344. Addus, 352. Addor, ibid. Arabath, 355. Alexander son of
Epiphanes, 359 Alcimus and his travels, 373. Arbela, ibid. Adummim, 448. Aenon,
429. Antiochia Pisidia, 527. Attalia, 528. Amphipolis, 540. Apolonia, ibid.
B
BAbylon, from 253, to 258. Babylon in Egypt 583. Baaena and his travels, 197.
Baesa and his travels 215. Bazra 289. Benhadad and his travels, 228, 232 Berea
374, 542. Bethabara 429. Bethania 480. Bethoron, or Bethcoron 202. Bethel 100.
Bethlem 104, 420. Bethpage 481. Bethsaliza 173. Bethsan 176, 350. Bethseme,
ibid. Bethsura 234. Bethulia 321. Beerzaba 86 Baalzephon 117. Benei Iaaechon
125. Baalam, and his travels 129. Beseech 142. Bezra 152. Bahurim 192. Baalhazor
198. Baaelath 203. Ben Merodach 263. Balthazar Emperor of the Assirians 268.
Bildad 317. B^schamah 352. Bethsaida 454. Bethbesah 350. Bythinia 535.
C
CAdes Barnea 124. Caesarea Philippi 444. Caren 78. Caleb and his travels 141.
Caphar Salama 344. Catchemis 266. Carmel 174. Cedron, or Kydron, a little Hill
that runs through Jerusalem, 487. Chasor, or Hazor 138. Creet, and the
situation thereof 363, 537. Chehelah 112. Chasmona 124. Chesbon 128. Chinereth
152. Cilicia 319, 530. Caspina 310. Caspin 345. Chazor a field 351. Canah in
Galile 423, 436. Capernaum 437. Chorazin 435. Of Canah Syro Phoenicia, 466. Of
Mount Caluarie 487. Caesarea Strato 502. The Isle of Cyprus, and how it is
situated. 525. The Isle of Chius, and how situated, 550. The famous city of
Corinthia, 544. Cous, how situated, and why so called, 552 Of the Isle of
Clauda, and how situated, 559 Of Colossa in Phrigia, 566.
D
DOthan, so called from commanding, 111. Doch, a castle, 356 Dora a haven
town, 366. Dibon Gad, 127 Deborah and Barak, 145. 147 Debir, 135. Danites, and
their travels, 160 Demetrius Soter, and his trauells 358 Demetrius Nicanor, and
his travels, 361. Decapolis, and why so called 467 Derbe, 528 David, and his
travels, 180. The typical signification of David, 192. Daniel and his travels,
282. The typical signification of Daniel, 286 Damascus a famous city in Syria,
521. Dibon Gad, 127.
E
ELeazer (Abraham's servant) and his travels, 93 Esau and his travels, 106. The
typical signification of Esau ib. Elim, 118. Eglon, 135 Ehud, 143 Of mount
Ephraim, 144. Elon and Ebzan, 155. Estaol 157 ^limelrc^, 164 ^cron, 166 Engedi,
175. Endor, 176 Ella, 216. Elah, 244. Ezekias, 247. Evil Merodach, Emperor of
Babylon, 267. Eliah the Prophet, and his travels, 271. The typical
signification of Eliah, 274. Elisaeus, or Elisha, 274 His typical
signification, 276. Ezekiel, 281. Elam, 285. Egbatan a famous city, 286, 318.
Euxin^ sea, 290. Eleutherius, 351. Esdras the lawyer 310. Of the book of
Ester, 312. The types and figures collected out of Ester, 312. Eliphaz the
Temanite, 316, 317. Esdrelon, 320 Eporaim, 480 Emmaus, 490 Eyhesus, 506 Queen
Candaces Eunuch, and his travels, 515.
G
GIhona hill, 32. The valley of Hinnon, idem. Gera^, 86. The country of
Gilead, 102. The land of Gosen, 105 Goren Atad, 112. The Graves of concupicence
121 Gedion Judge of Israel, 147 The typical signification of Gedion, 150.
Gilgal, 133. Gibion, 134. Gaza, 136. Of mount Gerizim, 151 Gath, 166 Of mount
Gilboa, where Saul killed himself, 176. Gazer, 192 Gesur, 196. Gurbaal 245.
Gath Hepher, 289. Gesem, 320. Genezereth, 351. Tadara, 448. The lake of
Genezereth, ib. Of Gethsamene, and the gardens thereabouts, 485. Of the
country of Galatia, and how the inhabitants came to be called Galatians, 531
Gnidus, 557.
H
HAran, or Charan, 81 Hebron, and the inhabitants thereof, 84. The field of
Hakeldema, 38. The hill Hameskita, ib. Hazezon Thamar, 92 Hagar, and her
travels, 96 Hagars Well, and the signification of it, 94. Heliopolis, otherwise
called the city of the Sun, 111 Of mount Horeb, 115. Hazaroth, 121. Harada,
123. Horgid gad, 125. Of the mountain Hor, 126. Hazor, 146. Hemath, 133. Hay,
ibid. Hohab, 144 Hananias the false Prophet, 281 Hosea the Prophet, 286. Of the
Prophet Habacuck, when he lived; how he lived, when he dyed, and where he
lies buried, 295 Of the river Hidaspia, 319. Hyrcania the high Priest, 364.
Hesiodorus who would have robbed the treasury of Jerusalem, 367. Hermopolis,
or the town of Mercury, 423.
J
OF Jerusalem, 6. Of the situation of it, 7. The description of it, ibid. The
circuit and bigness of it, 8. Of the gates of Jerusalem, 34. The destruction
of Jerusalem by Vespatian, from 38 to 49. Of Jerusalem after this destruction,
from 49, till 58. Of Jerusalem as it is now, from 58 to 63. Of the sects in
Jerusalem, from 63 to 67. Where Ishmael dwelt, 93. Of Jsaac and his travels,
94. The tipical signification of Isaac 98. Jacob and his travels, 99. The
typical signification of Jacob, 105. Judah and his travels, 107. Joseph and his
travels, 109, The typical signification of Joseph, 112. Iotbatha, 125 Igim,
127 Iahra, 128. Iaezer, ibid. Iael and her travel, 145 Joshua and his travels,
137 The typical signification of Joshua, 138 The names of the kings that
Joshua overcame, and where they dwelt, 139 Iaboch, 149 Iogb^ha, 150 Iotham, 157
Of Iaier Judge of Israel, 152 Ieptha and his travels, 153 The diverse opinions
concerning his death, 154. Iabes, 163. Jonathan Saul's son and his travels,
179. John and his travels, 194 Of the Country called India 204. Jeroboam and
his travels, 124. Of Ieroboams wife, 214. The journey of the men of God which
came out of Judah, 214. Iezreel, 219 Iehoram and his travels, 224 Iehu and his
travels, 221. Iehohas, 222. Johas and his travels, ib. Jeroboam the second of
that name, and his travels, 223 Iehosaphat and his travels, 237. The typical
signification of Iehosaphat, 239. Ioram king of Judah, and his travels, ibid. Of
Ioas King of Judah, 241. Iabnia, 245. Iotham King of Judah, and his travels, 245.
Josiah and his travels, 250. Iehoahas King of Judah, and his travels, 251.
I^h^iakim King of Judah, ibid. Of the destruction of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar, 253. Of the Prophet Isayah, 277. Of the Prophet Jeremiah, and
his travels, 279. Of the Prophet Joel, 287. Of the prophet Jonah, and his
travels, 288 The typical signification of Jonah, 294. Iapho, 289. Of the holy
man Job, 314. Of his three daughters, 318. Of Jesus the son of Syrack, 323
Judas Macchabaeus and his travels, 336. The typical signification of Judas
Macc. 344. Jonathan and his travels, 345 John Hyrcanus and his travels 356
Jason and his travels, 368 John Baptist and his travels, 426. Jericho, 479. Of
Joseph of Arimathea, 493 Ioppa, 503 John and his travels, 504. The testimony
of the Fathers concerning John, 506. Iconium, 528
K
Kiriathauen, 92. Karkor, 150 Kiriathi^arim 161. Kegilah, 180 Cyr, 260. Kereth,
271. eder, 319.
L
LOt and his travels, 87. Of Lots daughters, 90. Of the kings that took Lot
prisoner, 91 Of Libnah, 122, 135. Lachis, ibid. Libanus, 137. The Leuite and
his travels, 161. Lais, 160. Of Lacedemonia called also Sparta, 369. Lidda,
489. Laodicea, 513. Lystra: 528.
M
OF mount Moriah, 10. The Aligoricall signification of it, 11. The buildings
upon mount Moriah, 25. 86 Of mount Acra from 27, to 29. Of mount Besetha, 32.
Of the mount of Olives, 37. Of the mount between Bethel and Hay, 83.
Machanaim, 102. Mount Seire, 106. Moses and his travels, 112. Midian, 115.
Marah, 117. Mithca, 123. Macehelath, ib. Maseroth 124 Makedah. 135 Merom, 137
Mizpah, 153. Minneth, 154. Mickma^, 173. Maon, 175. Memphis, by whom, and when
built, 209 Menahem and his travels, 224. Maresa, 234. Manasses and his travels,
249. Micah, 294. Malachi, 296 Mallos, 319 Matta^hias, 335 Medaba, 350 Menelaus
and his travels, 370 Of a Mina, 376 The Virgin Mary and her travels 415
Machares, 429. Of the holy mountain near Capernaum, 446. Mysia, 536. Of the
Isle and city of Mitylene, 549. Of the Isle and city of Mylerus, now called
Malta. 551. Magdala, 468. Of the Island Mylete, 560
N
OF Neapolis, or the new town, 32 Of Noah, 78 Of Nimroth, 79 Nabach, 149. Nob,
174. Nadab, 214. Naaman the Syrian and his travels, 231 Nebuchadnezzer and his
travels, 263 Ninus, or Nineueh, when built and by whom, 291 Nahum the Prophet,
294. Nehemia the Prophet. 311. Nepthaly 322 Nazareth 418 Naim, 447 Nicapolis.
539, 566.
O
OF the cave of Odullam, 108. Oboth, 127. Omry and his travels, 216. Obediah
the Prophet, 288 Orthosia, 366. Onias and his travels, 367.
P
OF the poole Bethesda, 26. Of Paradise and where it stood, from 72, to 78. Of
the Palm or Oak of Mamre, where Abraham dwelt, 83 Penuel, 103 Of Pibaccharoth,
116 Phunon, 126. Pisgah, 129. The Plain of the Vines, 129. The Philistims
travel from their camp to Michmas, 178. Pharaoh and his travels, 209. Peka
and Pekahiah, 225. Of Phul Belochus King of the Assirians, and his travel.,
259. Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, and his travels, 270 Pelusio, 266.
Persepolis, when built, by whom and why so called, 337. Ptolomais, 350 Of the
country of Parthia, 364. Perea, 446. Peter and his travels, 494 Allegations of
the Author, to prove that Peter was never at Rome, 496. Of the Island called
Pathmos, 509 Of the famous city Pergamus, 510 Philip and his travels, 514 Paul
and his travels, 517, 523. 529, 547. 555. Of Paphos, why so called, 526. Of
Pe^ga, 527 Of Philippa, 590 Patara, 554 Puteoli, 565
Q
THe Queen of Saba, 204.
R
OF the Roman mile, 2. Rachels grave, 104. Raemses, at what time it flourished,
115. Of the red sea, 116 The mystery of the Red Sea, 117. Rephadi^, 118
Rithmab, 120. Rimnon, ibid Rissa, ibid. Rechob, 132.. Of the rock Eta, 158.
Ramah, 162 Reason, Solomon's adversary, 212. 232. Rehoboam and his travels, 233.
Of the river Cheber, 281. Of the river Eulaeo, 285: Of the Angel Raphael, 322
Of Rages a city of the Meades, 323 Of the Isle and city of Rhodes, and why so
called, 553 Rhegium, 564. Rome, and why so called. 566: Rogel, 197
S
OF Stades and furlongs. 2. Of mount Sion 8. The Allegorical meaning of mount
Sion, 10. Of the Springs and Foantaines about Jerusalem, 36 Of the Saracens and
Turks, from 68, to 71. Of Sem, 79 Sichem, 82. Sodom, 88. Of the Sea
Asphaltites, 89 Of the valley Siddim, 96 Succoth, 103 Salem, ibid. The desert
of Sin, 118. Of mount Sina, 119. Of Saphar, 123. Sidon, 138. Sampson and his
travels, 156. The typical signification of Sampson 459. Of the river Soreck,
158. Samuel and his travels, 167. The typical signification of Samael, 168
Saul and his travels, 196. The typical signification of Saul 158 Sur, 191
Sunem, ibid. Sichor, 192 Shemei, 199 Solomon and his travels, 200 The typical
signification of Solomon, 203 The travel of Solomon's ships, 204 Saba and the
situation of it. 205 Samaria, by whom built, 217 Seleucia, when it was built
and flourished, 363. Syria, ibid. Of the star that appeared to the wise men in
the East, 445 Sychar 438. The sea of Galile 446. The description of the holy
sepulcher 488 Simry 217 Sallum 224 Saerah King of Aethiopia and his travels
269. Salmanasser and his travels 260. Sanacharib and his travels 261. Sysach
King of Egypt, and his travels 236. Sarepta 273. The Sunamite and her trauells
277. Of Susan 283. Scrubbabel 311. Sobal 320. Simon and his travels, 352
Sephala, 356 Of a Sickle 375. Simon of Cyrene who carried Christ's Cross 491
Samaria 497. Smyrna 509. Sardis 512. Saba 515. Salamais 550. Samus an Isle 559.
T
THe description of the Temple 6 Of the Portches or open Courts of the Temple,
from 16 to 19. Of the Allegorical or Spiritual meaning of the Temple from 20
to 24. The Tower Antonia, 26. The Tower Ophel 27. The tower of the Centurions,
27 The typical signification of Abraham 87. The travels of the two Angels 90.
The Tower Aeder 104 Thimnah 108. Thahath 123. Tharah ibid. Thabor 146. Thola
152 Thob 153. The travels of the children of Israel, when they fought against
the Benjamites 162. Thecoah 198. Thamor 203. Thirza 213. Thipza 225 The Travels
of the people that Salmanasser carried into captivity 227 Tiglat Pullasser and
his travels 259 Tyrus or Zor 266. Thispe 273. Tharsis 289. Tobias 321. Of the
city Tharsus 332. The Tubiani a people 343. Tripolis 358. Tryphon and his
travels 365. The travels of the wise men out of the East 424. The travels of
our Savior Christ in his infancy 431 The travels of our Savior Christ from his
Baptism, till the first year of his Minstrie 432 The travels of our Savior
Christ in the first year of his Minestry 434. The travels of our Savior
Christ in the second year of his Ministry 440. The travels of our Savior
Christ in the third year of his ministry, 449 Tyberia, 456. Tyrus or Zor,
458. The travels of our Savior Christ in the fourth year of his ministry,
470 Thyatira, 512 Tarsus or Tharsus, 519. Troas, 5^7. Trogyllium, 551.
V
THe valley of Cedron, 31 Vzziah or Azariah, and his travels, 243 Vryah and his
travels, 280
W
OF the walls that compassed the city of Jerusalem, 33. Of Weights, Measures,
and Moneys from 375, to 411. They Way between India and Egypt, 422.
Y
THe years of the iniquity of Israel, 214.
Z
ZOan, 82. Zin Cades, 126. Zalmona, ibid. Zarea, 157. Zoba, 173. Ziph, 175.
Ziglag, 129. Zemeraim, 219. Zakariah, 224, Zarea, 234, Zedekiah, 252. Zephania,
224 Zacharia, ibid. Zophar, 317 Zabadei, 351 Zacharias, 414 Zidon, 462
FINIS.

