AN HISTORICAL NARRATION OF THE IVDGEMENT OF some most Learned and Godly
English Bishops, Holy Martyrs, and Others: (Whereof III; viz. Archbishop
CRANMER, B. LATIMER, and Bishop HOOPER, Suffered Martyrdom, in the Days of Q.
MARY, for the Truth and Gospel of CHRIST JESUS) Concerning GODS Election, and
the Merit of CHRIST his Death, etc.

LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. F for Samuel Nealand, and are to be sold at
his shop at the Sign of the Crown in Duck. Lane. 1631.

Archbishop CRANMER his Book, of the Sacrament of CHRIST his Body and Blood,
against STEPHEN GARDENER, B. of Winchester, was written by that most Reverend
Father; Anno 1551. in the Reign of K. EDWARD the 6. And Reprinted by John
Day, Anno 1580. Cum Privilegio.

B. HOOPER his Book, upon the Commandments (together with the Preface, which
is here presented) was Written by him, An. 1549. November. 5. and Printed first,
in the said Kings reign, Anno 1550. And afterward reprinted by Robert
Walgrave, in Queen Elizabeth's Time: but the year is not specified.

B. LATIMER, is Printed by Diverse, and at diverse Times, and is in every man's
hands: But the Copy here-alledged; is that which was Printed by John Day, Anno
1571.

TO THE IMPARTIAL Christian Reader, (Whether He be Laick, or Ecclesiastic)
Grace, Mercy, Truth and Peace, be Multiplied.
Dear CHRISTIAN:
ALbeit, I am no Professed Scholar, nor am able to brangle Sophistically about
the niceties of Schoole-Quod-libets; yet, by the Blessing of GOD, and Tender
care of my Parents, I have been trained up to such a little Measure of
Learning, as has enabled me (though not to conceive the STRONG LINES of these
Times, yet) to understand Plain English, And some Easie-latine Authors.
Wherefore, when I can steal any Vacancie from mine Ordinary Employments, I do
betake my self to converse with such Books, as speak to my Simple capacity
in a Style Intelligible. And happening by Chance upon a Book, written some
Fourscore years agone, by an excellently-learned Bishop, and a most holy
Martyr. John Hooper, upon the Ten Commandments, I perused it with Diligence;
and received no small comfort to my Soul, and instruction to my understanding,
by It: Especially, by the Perface. In which (to my simple Judgment) The Author
discourses very learnedly and conscionably, about the Points of Gods Election,
and the Merit of our Blessed Savior, Jesus Christ-his Death and Passion. I had
also read, in the Book of English Martyrs, That the great learned and Holy
Arch-Byshop, Doctor Cranmer, and Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Hooper, did (All of
them) suffer Martyrdom, and shed their dearest Hearts blood, in the black
days of Persecution under Queen Marie, for the Truth and Gospel of Christ
Jesus: And, that None of Them could justly be Charged, or Branded, with any
Heretical, or damnably-Erroneous Doctrine. More-over, I was informed, That All
of Them were worthy Instruments of God in the First Reformation of Religion,
from Popish Errors and Superstition, in the Reign of King Edward the sixth of
ever-Blessed Memory: And, that Some of them were employed in the Making and
Ordering of our Book of Common Prayer (as it was THEN set out) and in
Composing the Confession of the Church of England, in the Book of Articles of
Religion. That These were Persons, as clear and Free from all Taint of
Popery, Pelagianisme, Superstition, or Heresy, as Any that lived in Those
Times, or Since; I think the Book of Acts and Monuments will fully persuade
any honest man, that shall There read their Stories without prejudice.
Besides, (Though I will not take upon Me to give you the Sense and Meaning of
the Confession of our own Church; yet). This we may say without offense to
Any: That such learned Men, and Holy Bishops, as were Principal Agents,
inframing the Confession and Doctrine thereof, in the Book of Articles, and in
the Book of Common Prayer, did well and thoroughly understand, and know, the
True-sense and meaning of their own Conclusions: and neither did, nor would,
either write, or preach, any thing against or Contrary to the Same. Neither is
it possible, or any ways probable, that These Holy Martyrs, and learned
Bishops (who sacrificed their lives for the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Almost
fourscore years agone) should derive and borrow Their Tenants, touching these
matters, from James Harmin, or the Remonstrants in Leyden; Considering, These
did first begin publicly to write of such Things, not much above Twenty years
since. Wherefore, It seems to me, that it is against Reason, that very Many
Conscientious and learned Divines amongst us (which do now teach the
selfsame Doctrine, that was long agone delivered by These Holy Mirtyrs and
Fathers of our Church) should be uncharitably, Falsely, and Ignominiously
Branded with Odious and Abhorred Nicknames, fetched from Leyden: Whereas, in
Truth, I know They disdain to become Sectatours' to Any Sectaries of any
Country: But (Contrariwise) do strive to preserve the Purity of the same
Doctrine, which They received from the First Fathers of the Reformation in
England: and need not to straggle beyond the Seas into Belgia, to learn
Instructions from thence. For which Cause, I thought I should do God, and my
Holy Mother (the Church of England) no Evil service, in giving Notice to the
world, of what These Holy Fathers and Martyrs did hold, and Teach touching
these Matters of Gods Election, and the Merit of our Blessed Saviors Death, in
a mere Narrative and historical way, (which only will stand with my
profession:) not in any Argument or so much as in a Bare-word, Interposing or
Engaging my self. For my End and scope is, not at all to Debate or Determine
such points; to Meddle with the sacred Doctrine of the Church; to wrest the
sense or Meaning of the Articles; or indeed any way to State the Truth on
either side; (For this would not suit with my poor Abilities,) But mine
Earnest Endeavor and desire is for Peace and quietness- sake among Those of
our own [whose Consecrated Mouths, especially in consecrated places, cannot
without Sacrilege) be employed by the Hour, in ray lings and evil
speakings] to give such, as are willing to read it, only a sight and view,
what Propositions concerning These matters (Opinions, or Doctrines, call them
what you will) were agitated and Maintained, by Many ancient Fathers of our
Church, and Principal Authors in our Reformation; who were all Dead, before
Leyden was so much, as For Ieyden was made an University not past 56. years
agone, by Will(...) Prince of Orange. Anno 1574.
an University; and concerning whom no member of any Reformed Church in
Christendom can make any scruple, but that they might be saved.

To the Intent, that if such Positions (as we Here shall find) were by them
tolerated, and Approved in those Times, by One or other, without Breach of
Charity, or Bandying of Nicknames; We also, in these Times; (notwithstanding
the like private Differences in unnecessary Controversies) may, (as They
herctofore did) bear with one Another; and unanimously, orderly, and silently
submit our Pens and Tongues unto Gods sacred, and our Dread Sovereigns
Royal and Christian Ordinance in this Church, which only bids us, to keep
the UNITY of the Spirit, in The Bond of Peace. And I am persuaded, that (upon
the deliberate and considerate Reading of these following passages) Many, who
are not too-much Byaced in Judgment and Affection, will (as I my self have
done) out of mere Conscience forbear, uncharitably and contumeliously to
stander, and condemn (as Broachers of NEW Doctrine) Those Men who labor
faithfully to preserve (as They concerve) the OLD DOCTRINE; and which, I am
sure, was anciently taught by These first Fathers in the First times of the
Blessed Reformation. So desiring God, by his Holy and blessed Spirit, to
increase his Graces of Illumination, and Sanctisication in every One of us, I
commend These Following Pages to thy Christian Consideration; and Thy self,
Body and Soul, to GODS most gracious Protection and direction in the Truth;
resting

Thine in CHRIST JESUS, (...)

Courteous Reader.
In some places of this Copy, the right Pointings are missed (by reason of the
Collectors absence:) which the Printer requests thy Gentleness to pardon, and
to mend these places following with thy Pen.

PAge 13, Line 31, 32, blot out, H(...)i(...) peccatum vitare non posse, quam
i(...)os, quieum Io^iniano, asseru^^. Page 50. l. 24. read, Ado^ai. From page
66, to page 89, in the Title, read, The Judgment of B. Hooper^ Page 71. l. 10.
blot out, as, and read, By whose Passion we are made whole. Page 73. l. 5.
read, Though, by the Scriptures. Page 73. l. 26. r. Not in the persons
themselves. Page 74. l. 20. read, That Epistle. Page 76. line 10. read, Clean
delivered. Page 76. l. 14. read, His own Body. Page 79, l. 3. read, They that
be led; and line 10. blot out, Yet. Page 82, l. 1. read, Poor creature. Page
86, In the Margin, blot out, First. Page 86, line 24. read, Except it be Helped
Page 87, line 12, read, Simple, and plainly; and line 14, read, The same near
unto us. Page, 88. l. 27. read Others that be Learned. Page 95. l. 13. read,
Then to hearken. Page ^8. l. 17. blot out, H^^. Page 100, l. 16. read, For
there are None.

THE Copy of an Answer unto a Certain Letter;
Wherein the Answerer purges himself, and others, from Pelagius Errors, and
from the Error of Free Will, or Justification of Works; wherewithal He
seems to be Charged, by the said Letter: And further, He shows wherein, he
differs in Judgment, from certain English Writers and Preachers; whom he
charge with Teaching of False Doctrine, under the Name of Predestination.

Published about the Second or Third year of Q. ELIZABETH, by a Protestant
Divine, who flourished both in the time of K. EDWARD and Q. ELIZABETH, and in
the time of Q. MARY for his Conscience endured voluntary exile.

I desire of GOD, by his Grace and Mercy, to settle, strengthen, and establish
you, in the Truth of his holy Word for ever.
Dearly Beloved:
WHere, you write unto Me, that you have often heard, that I and others should
hold the Errors of Pelagius, (whose errors, you say, are almost unknown unto
you, what they are^) and whereas, further, it is reported of us, (as you say)
that we should deny the Prede(...)ina^ion of GOD, and seek a Justification by
Free Will and by * Deserving of works, (which matter Merit.
you do both understand, and also have found good proof [as you suppose] that
we are guilty in the same;) laying the whole Foundation of your Proof upon
this saying, set forth in Print. viz.

Although there be but Few on Earth,
That Rightly They * Deserve;
Yet Thou, o LORD, for their good life, Merit.

The Residue Preserve.
With which Filthy saying, to burden Me, and others, whom you Name; I
marvel greatly that you could be so much abused* not considering by whom it
was written and se^ forth in Print. For, by the Intituling, you see, it was
Printed beyond the Seas in Q. MARY'S time: For that it is entitled, A Prayer
to GOD for hi^ Afflicted Church in England: and, as it there appears
manifestly, it is the work of one WILIIAM SAMV^L; which is a Man, to Me, of
very small acquaintance. But a Preacher He is: And as for his saying [that a
Man may Deserve God, etc.] which you des(...) me to prove, if I can* It is a
Doctrine so Abominable and Blasp(...)s, as I am sure, Neither Papist, nor
Pelag(...), nor any other Heretic, either Old or New, has ever written, or
maintained, a more filthy and execrable saying. For it is the flat and manifest
Denying, both of GOD the Father, and of his Son CHRIST JESUS: Neither does it
require any Confutation to him that does but Confess, that there is a GOD. And
as for My self, I do not love my Life so dearly, as I Hate this vile Saying,
Deadly.

But wonder it is, that such a Sentence, containing the very filthiest Dregs of
all Pelagius Errors, could so long stand printed, and neither be forbidden,
nor by any man Written against. And although I deny not, but some other there
are, which (maintayning the power of Man's F(...) will, and the Meritorious
worthiness of Man's deseruings do deny the Free gift of Gods Grace in Christ
Jesus, and For his sake only, comprehended in the Eternal Predestination and
Fore-ordinance of God; and Declared unto us, in his most-Holy word: Yet,
because I see, there be many in these Days, wrongfully and falsely, accused to
be the Enemies of that Blessed Predestination; to be Pelagians; Iustisiers of
themselves; and such like; and, with Those bitter Terms, are, in
Open-Auditories, defaced, and brought into Contempt among the Multitude; who
(being deceived with giving over-has^y Cred^t unto such men, not
throughly-understanding the Matter) do use to give Sentence, before the Cause
be heard: I have thought it good therefore, (Most-dearely Beloved) [Not to
Them, which take more Delight in the Defamation of other, than in knowing the
Truth themselves; but to Thee, which art willing to understand the Matter,
before Thou Condemn or Justify either partie] in as Few words, as I possibly
can, to show what shameful Doctrine (under the Name and color of Gods
Predestination) is Now-a-dayes set forth and taught of Many, which both I and
many others mislike; and have diverse times with some of them, in Private and
Friendly talk, persuaded to leave: Both because we Judge the Doctrine to be
False; and also, the Destruction of all virtue to Follow thereupon.

For which Cause, (as the Manner is, of Them that Fear not so much the
Shipwreck of a good Conscience, as they do the loss of worldly estimation,
least any such Disfavourers of their Fantasy should hap to have some credit
among the People) with boisterous breath, they blow abr^ad, That the Mislikers
of this their Doctrine are Enemies of Gods holy Predestination. But, right well
they know, that those, whom they now so specially accuse to be such Haters of
Gods Predestination, are indeed Most entire lovers of the same; and Many of
Those, whom They accuse to be Popish Pelagians, and Iustifiers of themselves,
have bestowed both their Goods and their Lives against that Fil^^y and
detestable Sect.

And, as for those Errors, which Pelagius the old Heretic, with Calestinus
and Iulianus his Adherents, did hold, and also Revoked the same in the
Judicial Council of Palestine, I think it good to Rehearse them; First, in
Latine^ and after, in English, as they are gathered together by St. Augustine;
And then to show (according to your request) what part of their Doctrine, which
they teach under the name of Predestination, My self and others do mislike.
To the end, that you and others may the better Judge, who are indeed worthy to
be called Pelagians; and whether some part of their Doctrine be not for just
cause misliked.

The words of St. Augustine are These.

Obiectum Epist 100. Tom. 2.
est, Eum dicere: 1. Quia Adam, sive peccaret, sive non peccaret, Moriturus
esset. The Errors which ^el^g^^^ held, and (...). ^a^ted in ^he ^ounc^il of
Pal^s(...).


2. Et, quod Peccatum ejus, Ipsum solum ^eserit, Non and genus Humanum.

3. Et. quod Infantes in Illo statu sunt, quo Adam fuit ante praevaricationem.

4. Et, quod, neque per Mortem, vel praevericationem. Adae, Omne Genus humanum
moriatur; neque per Resurrectionem Christi, Omne Genus Humanum resurgat.

5. Et, Divites Baptizatos, nisi Omnibus abrenuncient, si quid Boni ^^s^
fuerint facere, non Reputari illis, nec cos habere posse Regnum Dei.

6. Et, Gratiam Dei and Adjutorium non ad Singulos Actus dari; sed, in Libero
Arbitrio esse, vel in Lege atque in Doctrina.

7. Et, Dei Gratiam, secundum merita nostra, dari.

8. Et, Filios Dei non posse vocari, Nisi omnino absque peccato fuerint effecti.

9. Et, Non esse Liberum Arbitrium, si Dei indiget Auxilio; quoniam in propria
voluntate habet vnusquisque, facere aliquid, vel non facere.

10. Et, victoriam nostram Non ex De^ adjutorio esse, sed ex libero Arbitrio.

11. Et, quod Poenitentibus venia non Detur, secundum Gratiam and Misericordiam
Dei, sed secundum Meritum and Laborem eorum, qui per Poenitentiam Digni fuerint
misericordia.

Haec omnia Pelagius Anathematizavit.

The First of Pelagius's Errors, which St. Augustine PELAGIVS his first Error.
here cites, is: That ADAM should have Dyed, whether he had Sinned, or not
Sinned.

This is, as you hear, One of Pelagius his wicked Errors: That Sin is not
the Cause of Reprobation, or casting away; Death sprung out of Gods Ordinance,
or some other way; and came not of Man's Sin. For, (says He) Whether Man had
Sinned, or Not sinned, yet He should have Dyed: Contrary to the Manifest
Scripture; which says; That, By One man Sin entered into the world; and
Death, by the Means of Sin. And the Wiseman Romans 5.
says: That GOD Created man to be undestroyed. And, again he says: God
has (...) made Death, Wisdom. 1. 13.
neither has He pleasure in the Destruction of the living. He created All
things, that They might have their Being: yea, All the people of the Earth
has He made, that they should have Health; That 14.
there should be no Destruction in Tlum: And that the Kingdom of Hell should
not be upon the Earth. For Righteousness in everlasting. But Unrighteousness
15, 16.
brings Death.

Wicked therefore and abominable was This Error of Pelagius, which affirmed;
That whether Man had Sinned, or not Sinned, He should have Dyed.

And here, in the very Beginning of Pelagius's errors, I report me to
Themselves; even, to Them (I say) that blow the Trumpet of Defamation against
others, (with the Terms of pestilent Pelagians!) whether Those, whom they so
accuse now to be Pelagians, do hold this Error? Or, whether they Themselves
(which would take some Mote of Error out of other men's Eyes) have not this
Pelagius Beam sticking fast in their own? Let they-themselves be Judges; or,
^et their own Doctrine Judge, both in Print, and Preaching, whereof some part
shall be hereafter rehearsed. Ye^, let All the world judge, (which have heard
the Doctrine of both parties) who they are, which in this point, ought worthily
to be called Pelagians.

The Second Error, which St. Augustine rehearses, I he Second Error.
is: That ADAMS Sin did only hurt Himself, and not the whole generation of
Man.

This is another vile and Detestable error, which Pelagius held. That the
Sin of Adam brought not Misery and Death upon all his Posterity: Contrary to
the open Scripture, which says: That, By the sin of One, condemnation came
upon All men. Romans 5. 18.
And the Holy man Esdras says: O Adam! what (...). Esdras, 6.
have th^n done? For though it was Thou that sinned, yet Thou art not fallen
alone, but All we that come of thee.

The Third, depending also upon the Second, The Third.
is this: Thas Infants, being newborn are in that state that Adam was in,
before his Transgression.

Which Error seems only, or chiefly, to extend to the Innocence of
Children. For, if his mind were, that, in All points, Infants were in Adams
state, then should it be over-Brutish, For, who sees not, that. Babes
newborn suffer oftentimes Pain and Grief? Which Adam did not before his
Transgression. But, to affirm, that Infants, are not Borne and Conceived in
si^ne, is to deny Original sin; which is an old ard a Dive^^sh error, and
utterly against the Scripture; which says plainly: Behold, I was borne in
wiskednesse; Psalm. 51.
and in sin, has my Mother conceived Me.

The Fourth error is: That, Neither, by the The Fourth
Death and Transgression of Adam, All the Generation of Man dies; nor, that,
by the Resurrection of CHRIST, All the Generation of Man does rise again.

I do no^ understand, that Felagius here, spoke of the last Resurrection at
the Day of Judgment; as though he had (after the manner of the Sadduces) C.
denied the Resurrection of our Souls and Bodies at the last Day. [For, then,
were all their Disputation in vain, of the Manner, how we should be saved?
Whether, by the Grace of GOD; or, by the Deserving of Man; if Salvation, or
Resurrection had, of either part, been denied altogether. Neither does the
Scripture attribute the last Resurrection unto CHRIST, as though the Souls and
Bodies of Men should have dyed, like Beasts, and not have rison again unto
Judgment, if CHRIST had Not come; yea, no Doubt all men should have risen
again; and That, unto the Judgment of everlasting Damnation, if CHRIST had
not come.] But, I understand, that Pelagius, in N. P.
this Article, denied the Genera^^tie of Redemption by the Death of CHRIST; by
which, we (...) (as it were) arise from Death, because of the State of Life
and Salvation, whereunto we are brought in Christ, by Redemption: like as we
were in the state of Death and Damnation in ADAM, by sin. Not that any Man is
purged from the Corruption of Sin, unto the Innocence of ADAM: but, because
the Sin is covered in Christ, and pardoned, for His sake. And further; there
is to be Noted, that the First part of this Error is manifestly the very
same, which is the Second, and Third Error, before rehearsed; and by the same
Scriptures plainly condemned. But to make the Latter part of this Error more
Plain, it was Necessary, and thought good of St. Augustine, to rehearse the
First again. That, by the comparison of Condemnation in ADAM, and Redemption
in CHRIST, it might the more plainly be perceived, that Christ was not
inferior to Adam; nor Grace, inferior to Sin: And, that, as All the
generation of Man is condemned in Adam; so, is All the generation of Man
redeemed in Christ: And; as general a Savior is Christ by Redemption; as Adam
is a Condemner by Transgression. Which comparison is taken out of St. Paul his
Epistle to the Romans; where he says: Likewise then, (...) by the Sin of
ONE, Condemnation came Romans 5.
upon All men; even so, by the Justifying of ONE, comes the Righteousness,
which brings Life upon All men.

Yet s^all not All men be Condemned, by Adam, Eternally: For, there is,
ordained of GOD again a way to Life; which way, is Christ. Neither, shall All
be eternally saved by Christ: For, there is, of GOD declared a way, again unto
Death; which way, is Sin; and the wilful Consempt of GODS Mercy in CHRIST.

But this appears to be oa^ of Pelagius's damnable N. B.
Errors; That Christ was not a general Savior; That Christ offered not ^p
the Sacrifice of Redemption, for All the whole World. Contrary to the manifest
Scripture, which says: He it is, that obtained Grace for our sins; and not
for our Sins only; but also, for the sins of the whole 1. John, 2.
world. The same is also manifestly declared in these Scriptures following, and
many other. [Iohn, 1. a. b. f. and 12. g. Romans 5. d. 1. Cor. 8. d. 2. Cor. 5.
c. Heb. 2. c. and 2. Pet. 2. a.]

And, here, it is worthy to be noted again, how justly this Error of
Pelagius reboundeth again into the Bosoms of those, which so falsely accuse
Others to be guilty of the Pelagian Errors. Be indifferent (dearly Beloved in
the Lord) I beseech thee; and weigh the matter, as it is; I desire No more.

The Fifth, of Pelagius Errors, was: That R^^h The (...).
men, being baptized, except they did utterly ren^^nce and for sake all their
Riches, Though they seemed to do some good, Yet it is not Acceped: neither can
they have the kingdom of God.

A filthy and Abominable Error; directly repugnant, both to the State of a
Common wealth; and also, to the word of God; which ^aith: Charge 1 Timotl. 6.
them that be Rich in this world, that they be not exceeding wise, etc. and
that they d^e good and be r^^h in good works, etc.

The Sixth Error, is: That the grace of GOD and The Siat.
the Help of God, is not given to every One of our works, but that it is in
Free choice, or by the law, and ^.
(...) Doctrine.

This Error is exceeding wicked, and execrable: That Man, by the law, by
Doctrine, or by Free choice is able to do any Manner of good work (whatsoever
it be) without the Grace and Help of God. For, as St. Paul says: We are not
sufficient of our selves, to Think Any thing, as of our selves; 2. Cor. 3 5.
but, our Ableness comes of God. And, Again; It is God that works in us,
both the Will, and Deed, even of his good will.

The seventh Error, is: That the Grace of God The Seventh
is given, according unto our Deserving.

Vile and Abominable is this Error, Also; and Contrary to the Manifest Mind
and words of the Apostle; which says: If it be of works, then Romans 11. 6.
it is no more of Grace. For then were Deserving, no more Deserving.

The eight Error is: That, None can be called The Eight Error.
the Children of God, except they are altogether made without sin.

This Error is alike-wicked with the rest; directly repugnant to the open
Scripture; where it is written: If we say, we have no sin; we deceive 1. John
1.
our selves, and the Truth is not in us. For, as St. James says, of Himself,
and of all others: In many James 3.
things we sin All.

The Ninth Error, is: That there is no Free The Ninth.
Choice; if so be, a Man have need of Gods Help: Seeing it is in a Man's own
will, to Do a thing, or Not to Do it.

This was, also, the wicked opinion of Pelagius: That, if it be granted, that a
Man has need of Gods Help; then, it must needs follow (says Pelagius) that
He has no Choice, in Doing of things; but whatsoever a Man does, that must
He needs do, and cannot Choose, but Do. This is the Devils only way (above
all other) to lead men to Destruction; not to suffer them to walk in the
plaine-path of the Lord; but, to Tur^e them to some Extremity: either, on the
left hand, or else on the Right; either, into the wide way of Lewd Liberty, or
into the Blind path of crooked Superstition; either to seek Justification by
Deserving of works, or by an Onely-Faith, not-mighty in Love by Operation.

Such like Extremity does the Devil use in this point of Doctrine, Driving
Men, either into the Doting Dreams of Destiny, or into the Absolute Free
will of Papistrie: either, Affirming All things So to be Ordained of God, that
whatsoever a Man does (be it Good or Evil) He must Needs, and cannot choose,
but of Mere Necessity, by the Ordinance of God, Commit the same: or else
affirming, that Man by Free Will, or Natural strength, can do the will of
God, and walk in his laws, without the Continual help and Grace of God:
which two Extremities St. Augustine does very plainly Condemn, in these words
following. Liber^m sic confitemur arbitriu^, vt Dicamus Nos semper De^ indigere
Aug. de verb. Apost, Se^. 192.
auxilio; and tam Illos errare qui, cum Manichaeo, dicunt, Hominem peccatu^
vitare non posse; quam Illos qui, Cum Ioviniano, asserunt, Hominem non posse
peccare.

We do (says He) So confess * Free Choic^, That we say, A Man has always
Need of the Or, Free Will.
help of GOD: And, That, as well they err, which say (with Manichaeus) that a
man Can not esche^ Sin; as also; They, which say (with Iovinian) that a Man
can not Commit sin.

Thus says St. Augustine.

To conclude therefore: This is Numbered among the wicked Errors of Pelagius:
That if a Man have Free Choice, then He has no Need of the ^race, or Help of
God. Contrary to the Manifest and open Scripture; which says, by the Mouth of
St. Paul: I c(...) do All things, by the Help Philip. 4.
of Christ, which strengthens me. And Esdra^ says: They that have abhorred
my law, while they 4. Esd^a^, 9.
had yet Freedom, and Open room of Amendment and Conversion; and understood
Not, but despised it; The same must know it after Death in pain.

And here, yet once again, I desire Thee to Mark who they are, which (with
Pelagius) fall into this Extremity, to asfirme, That if a Man have Free Choice,
Then he has no Need of Gods Help; or N. B.
if he have Need of Gods help, Then He has no Free Choice at all. And, who
they are, which, on the other Side, (with St. Austin against Pelagius) do
asfirme and confess; That Man, So, has Freedom, or Choice; that,
Nevertheless, he has continually need of the Help and Grace of God. Who they
are (I say) which in This point also, ought worthily to be called Pelagians,
let All men Judge. The Case is so clear, that No lack of knowledge, but only
wilful Blindness, may help to Cloak the Matter.

There follows the Tenth and Eleventh Errors; The tenth and element i^
Error.
which are these: That our Victory comes not of Gods-Helpe; but of
Free-Choice: And, that Remission of sins is not given, to them that repent,
according to the grace and Mercy of God; but, according to the Deserving and
labor of them, which, by Repentance, are worthy of Gods Mercy.

O Blasphemy Intolerable! O Filthy Puddle! and Sincke most Execrable! full of
stinking Errors; full of Damnable Presumption, like to the Pride of Lucifer,
most Abominable! The detestable vileness whereofis such; that rather, by
Exclamation, I thought it Good to Re^^unce it; Than, with Scripture, or Reason,
to Confute it. Seeing, All Reason, and All Scripture, gives All glory unto
GOD; and this Blasphemous Error raketh away all the glory of all Goodness,
from the Father of all Mercy, and GOD of all Consolation, and gives it unto
vile and wretched Man; which has, of Himself, Nothing that is Good; but does,
altogether, receive it from the mercy and goodness of GOD.

Here concludes St Augustine, with the Errors The Conclusion of the first
part of this Trea^ise.
of Pelagius; and says, That All these Errors He Revoked, and Renounced, in
the general Council of Palestine.

Thus have I set forth, in English, these Errors of Pelagius together; That
thou, which art willing to know the Truth, and understand the Matter, even as
it is, may be Able to Judge, who they are, that hold Any of these Errors;
and, not credit the Malice of certain, which (to cloak their own False
Opinions) accuse Other to be Pelagiaus, who, indeed (from their very Heart and
Soul) abhor All these wicked Opinions; and have been, many years, willing
to bestow their lives, against all these Abominable Errors.

Yet there is One thing, whereunto Pelagius was Compelled to Subscribe, which I
have not rehearsed among the Errors aforesaid: because, the Denial thereof
is, of all our Gospellers (as I suppose) received for no Error. The Article is
This: Quod Infantes non baptisati, non solum Regnum Calorum, verum etiam vitam
aeternam, habere non possint. N. (...).
Hereunto did Pelagius subscribe: That Infants, which are not Baptized, cannot
have the Kingdom of GOD, nor Eternal life.

Which cruel Opinion, [That All un-baptized Children are damned] St. Austin,
in many places of his works, does boldly and vehemently maintain. But Calvin
says; Explodendam esse Illorum Glossam, palam est; qui Omnes non-Baptizatos
aeternae morti adiudicant. It is clear (says he) that their Gloss is worthy
(with hissing and clapping of Hands) to be driven out of Doors, which
Condemn unto everlasting Death all those, which are not Baptized.

And because Calvin is with so Many of us, which are Gospellers, in Authority
fully-sufficient to encounter with Augustine; I think it good (for shortness)
in this Article, to say no further.

There remains then, (as before I promised) The Second Part of this Treatise.
briefly to Note those things, which I think worthy to be reprooved, about the
Doctrine of Predestination, as it is (Now-a-dayes) taught of many.
Wherein, lest I should seem to speak without assured Ground; and, because
words in Preaching, in Talk, or Disputation (whereof I have heard great
abundance in this Matter,) may rashly pass with small advisement; and either,
easily be Denied; or, soon forgotten; I am determined to touch Nothing, but
their very words, which are set forth in Print. And, because the taking and
answering of their whole Books were a matter long and tedious, (Being commonly
stuffed, on the oneside, with an heap of Opprobrious and outrageous words,
against such Private persons, as they took in hand to write: And, on the other
side, filled, rather with obscure Subtilties, than with plain Affirmations:) I
have thought it best, therefore, to take certain Sentences, which contain
manifest Affirmations out of Diverse late Printed English Books; wherein the
Sum and effect of this Doctrine (which Many do for just cause mislike:) is
Fully, plainly, and simply declared.

I read in an English Book, set forth by Robert Crowly, and entituted; THE
CONFVTATION OF 13. ARTICLES, etc. These words. viz. Adam therefore being so
perfect a Creature, that there was in Him no lust to Sin; and yet, so weak,
that of himself, he was not Able to withstand the assault of the subtle
Serpent; No Remedy, the only Cause of his Fall must needs be the
Predestination of GOD.



Thou see (Dearly beloved!) in the Conclusion of this Sentence, one Point
declared, wherein the Contreversie does consist. For, where He plainly
affirms; That GODS Predestination is the only Cause of Adams Fall: (which is
the Fountain of All sin;) Others (having much more Reverend opinion of GOD,
and of his Holy Predestination) 1. God is not the Author of Sin.
do set their Foot, or rather, their Heart and Soul, against their said
Conclusion: Esteeming it far better to be Tor^e in many thousand pieces,
than to think or say, that Gods fore-Ordinance, or Predestination, is the
Cause of any Sin, or Evil.

I beseech Thee; Let not thine Eyes be blinded, nor thy Mind muffled with
malice, either against the One party, or the Other: but, in the Ballan^e of an
upright Judgment weigh the Difference.

The One says, (as, in this Conclusion, manifestly appears; And, as
afterward yet more plainly he affirms;) That the Predestination of GOD is
the only Cause of Adams sin; and so (Consequently) of All evil.

The other affirms directly Contrary: that GOD or his predestination is the
Cause of No Sin, or Evil; but the only Cause of all Goodness and Virtue.

And Herewith agrees the Holy and Divine Apostle S. John in his Epistle;
saying: All that is in the world (as the Concupiscence of the Flesh, the 1.
Ioh. 2.
lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of life,) is Not of the Father.

All Good things, that are in the world, are (no doubt) of GOD, our Heavenly
Father: But, what soever in the world, is Concupiscence, Lust, Sin, Evil, or
Wickedness, That same it not of GOD our Heavenly Father; as S. John does
plainly and precisely affirm. The like plainness uses also the holy Man
Jesus, the Son of Syrack; in these words: Say not Thou, It is the Lords Fault
that I am gone by; For, thou should not do the Ecclus. 15.
thing that GOD hates. Say not Thou; He has caused me to go wrong: For, He
has no Need of the Ungodly.

The very same thing is plainly declared in these Scriptures following, and in
other places almost innumerable. [Psal. 5. a. Prove. 19. a. Ierem. 7. c. and 19.
B. Ose. 13. c. Job. 34. b. and 36. B. Romans 7. b. etc. 1. Cor. 4. F. Iam. 1. c.
Exodus 34. A. Deuteronomy. 5. D. 2. King. 14. b. Psalm. 81. c. and 144. b. Prove. 1. c.
Wisd. 1. c. 2. D. 11. D. 12. B. C D. 15. A. Eccl. 2. D. and 18. B. Esa. 5. A.
and 3. D. and 55. B. and 65. A. Lament. Ier. 3. Cap. Ezekiel. 18. c. D. and 24. b.
and 33. c. Joel. 2. A. 4. Esdr. 1. c. and 2. a. and 7. c. and 8. c. Math. 23.
E. Act. 17. G. 1. Tim. 2. A. and 4. c. 2. Pet. 3. B.]

The same says St. Augustine also plainly, in these words: Non ergo Casu^
Ruentium, ne^ Malignitatem iniquorum, neque Cupiditates Peccantium,
Predestinatio Dei aut EXCITAVIT, aut SV ASIT, aut IMPVLIT; sed plane
pradestinavit IV DICIV M suum, quo unicuique retributurus est, prout gessit;
sive Bonum, sive Malum: Quod IV DICIV M futurum Non esset; Si Homines, Dei VO
LVNT ATE peccarent. Neither the Falls, of them that Fall; nor the wickedness,
of them that are wicked; Nor the Lusts, of them that offend, has the
predestination of God, either PROVOKED, MOVED, or COMPELLED: but, without
doubt, He has Fore-Ordain^d his IV DGMENT; whereby He will recompense every
man, according as He has done, whether it be Good, or evil: The which should
be no Judgment, if Men did sin, by the WILL of God. Note.


And although There be some places of Scripture, whereupon They would ground
this Opinion, [That Men should sin, By the WILL of GOD; or, that GOD should
predestinate, or ordain men to sin;] as where it is said: That God hardened
the Heart of Pharaoh; and such like: yet pertayneth August. (...). (...). (...).
it Nothing to that purpose, if it be weighed with the Rest of the Scripture.
For as St. Augustine says: Ipse, quasi eos indurat; quia Iusto Iudicio
indurari sinit. He does (says St. Austin) as it were, Harden Them; because
that, with his Just Judgment, he suffers them to be hardened. And in his Book
De lib. arbitr. and gra. C. 21. He says: Where, at any time, we read in the
Scripture, That Men be SEDVCED, or Their Hearts HARDENED of GOD; There, may we
not doubt, but that Their wicked DESERVINGS went BEFORE: Lest, ye run (says
he) into the saying of Solomon. Insipientia viri violat vias eius, Deum autem
causatur in cord suo. The Foolishness, of a Man, Defiles his ways: but he
says in his heart; GOD is the CAUSE.

Of this HARDENING of Heart, Melancthon, in his Common-places, speaks very
plainly; saying: Nee Figurae illae verborum offendunt, etc. Neither (says he)
do these figurative speeches offend, [as, I will HARDEN the Heart of Pharao;
and such like:] For, it is Certain; that, in the HEBREW Phrase, they signify
a PERMISSION, or Suffering; and not an Effectual WILL of GOD. As, [Leade us
not into Temptation:] That is to say; SVFFER us not, to be lead into
Temptation.

These are Melancthons words: And Mark what He says of the HEBREW Phrase:
For, All Men know Him to be a Man Learned. But, (to be short;) It is surely to
be marvailed at, that although They do thus accuse Gods predestination to be
the only Cause of of ADAMS FALL, (which is, indeed, Not only Sin: but also
the very Wellspring of All wickedness;) And the Filthy-Fountaine of all our
Uncleanness:) That yet THEY dare affirm THEMSELVES to be the N. B.
ONLY Friends and Lovers of Gods Predestination; and All Others to be the
Enemies of GODS Holy Predestination, who do not subscribe unto This their
fantastical Imagination.

Moreover, if it should be said, That They make GOD the Author of Sin; They
would cry, Nay; and say, They were slandered.

But, whether GOD be not the Author of That, whereof He is the only Cause, Let
the un-corrupted Heart Judge.

Also (to say the Truth) when They see their Time and Place, They are
Bould-enough, yea even, to use the Term, Author; (in that same manifest
sense:) as in a Book set forth by John Knoxe, Against an Adversary of Gods
Predestination (as He calls Him:) Wherein He, (Page. 158.) says thus: viz.
Therefore whatsoever the Ethnicks and Ignorant did attribute unto Fortune, WE
assign to the PROVIDENCE of GOD.



And straight w^y, he says: We shall Judge nothing to come of Fortune; but
that All comes by the Determination of His Counsel; And, further; It
Displeases him, when we esteem Any thing to proceed from Any other: So that
we do Not behold and know him, Not-onely the Principal Cause of All Things;
but Also, The AVTHOR appointing All things, to the One-part, Or, to the Other,
by his Counsel.



Mark well his words, and the very Sense thereof. All comes from God (says
He:) GOD is the principal Cause; and, God is the Author of it, whatsoever it
be; God appoints All things, both to the One part; and to the Other; both to
the wicked, and to the Godly. All THINGS; Nothing is excepted; As well
DAMNATION, as Salvation; as well Sin, as Virtue; as well Wickedness, as
Holiness; yea, if it hap to be MVRTHER it self. (For, THAT (a little before)
by Name He rehearses:) Whatsoever it be, it Proceeds from None other (says
He) but from GOD. GOD so has appointed it: God is the Principal cause of it:
Yea, not only the principal Cause, but also the Author of it.

Here thou see, those Plaine-termes, which sometime (for a little nice
lisping) they Cannot, or will not Speak. [Sc. That God is the Author of all
MV^THER and Mischief.]

As for Fortune, I know it to be an Heathenish-Fable. But, where He says,
that God is not only the Principal Cause, but Also the Author of all things,
without any exception: and that whatsoever the Ethnicks attributed to Fortune,
That same we ought to ascribe unto the Providence of God; It is such a Wide
WANDERING, and Large BLASPHEMY, as has not been lightly heard.

For, who knows not, that unto FORTUNE, the Ethnickes ascribed Treason and
crafty Conspiracy? As where they call Her, Insidiosa, perfida, and Malefida.
Unto Fortune they ascribed cruel Murder, and tyrannical Mischief: As when
they call Her, Aspera, Dura, Sava, Truculenta. Unto Fortune, they ascribed
filthy Lust, and impudent Bawdry: as when they call her; Lenocinans, Bruta, and
Impudens. Unto Fortune, they ascribed scornful Pride and Vainglory: calling
her, Imperiosa, Procax, and Superba. Unto Fortune they ascribed beastly
Blindness, and rude Ignorance: calling her, Caeca, and Exoculata. To conclude;
unto Fortune, the Ethnickes ascribed All perverse and Pestilent wickedness,
and all abomination Detestable: calling her, Nefaria, Abominanda, and Improba.
Yet say these Professors of Destiny, [whatsoever the Ethnickes ascribed unto
Fortune, That same ought we to attribute to the Providence of GOD.] Yea, and
GOD is the very Author; the Principal cause; and the Only cause thereof.

But, now to return again to Mr. CROVVLY. After that he has written, that
GODS Predestination is the Only cause of Adams Fall: Then goes he forth in
the same Book, and the same Article, unto the NEXT execrable Wickedness
committed in the world; saying: Now, what say we of CAINE? Was He not
Predestinate to slay his Brother? No, say the Free Will men.



Here, thou see (Dearly Beloved) Who they are, that so Odiously are noted
with the Name of Free-will-men: not only the Papist (against whom He
pretends, there to write;) but Namely all Those, that say GOD Has not
predestinate any Manto commit Murder, or suchlike wicked Abomination. These,
They call FREE-Will-Men, These, They call Pelagians.

Indeed, Such as So maintain Free Will, That a Man by Free Will, without the
Grace and Help of GOD, may abstain from Evil, or do Good [As the blind
Papists do, and (as before is proved) that Pelagius did hold: or as (before
rehearsed) William Samuel says: That men may Deserve God:] Those, I say, might
worthily be called Pelagians; because They hold, either All, or Some part of
His Errors.

But, Those, which Teach that all Murth^ and Mischief springs out of GODS
Fredestination; or, That Any Manslayer is predestinate of GOD to kill his
Neighbor; or, any Adulterer, to lie with his Neighbors wife; or, any Traitor,
predestinate of God to Conspire against his Prince; or, any Rebel, to Rise
against his Sovereign; (as These men most plainly affirm;) They hold in this
point the Error of the Manicheans. Which was (as ye heard before, by the words
of Saint Augustine;) Hominem peccatum vitare non posse. That a Man cannot
eschew Evil; or, cannot choose but commit sin.

These Men (I say) which affirm, That Cain was predestinate to murder his
Innocent Brother Abel; and (as, in the same Book and same Article also, he
says) that The most wicked Persons, that have been, were of GOD Appointed to
be Wicked, even as They were.



They hold the Error both of the Stoics, and also of the Mani^heans.

That is to say, (as AVGVSTIN^ declares) August. retra^^. l. 1. c. 9. and 16.
That evil has his Original of Gods Ordinance; and not of man's Free Will,
For if Murderers, Adulterers, Thieves, Traitors, and Rebels, be of GOD
Predestinate and Appointed to be Wicked, (even as they are,) and cannot choose,
but, of mere Necessity, by the Ordinance of GOD, commit all such wickedness,
even as they do: Then, what is our life, but a mere Destiny? All our Doings,
Gods Ordinances; and All our Imaginations, Branches of Gods Predestination?

And I doubt not, but the Stoics and Manichaeans, would also Temper the matter
with great Discretion of words: (as These men will say, that we must speak
more Reverently of the Matter;) But, seeing they plainly hold these
Principles, and (when they see their Time) speak plainly thereof Themselves
[as you may well perceive, by that which has been already, and shall yet,
more at large, be rehearsed;] I see no cause, why it should not of All men be
plainly declared. Again; if it be a Truth, why should it not be plainly
spoken? If it be a Truth, that Traitors are predestinate of GOD to Conspire
the Destruction of their Princes; and, Rebels, predestinate of God, to make
insurrection against their Sovereigns; If, I say, it be a Truth, that GOD
has so Predestinate them; and, that They must of Necessity; and cannot choose
but commit such wickedness; why should it not be plainly spoken? Except, a
man should be ashamed to speak the Truth.

But in what Scripture is That written? Or, is it not rather written? For thy
life, shame not to say Eccl. 4. d.
the Truth. And surely (to say as it is) I see not well, How any man can speak
more plainly, in this matter, than they themselves do. For, what can be more
plainly spoken, than that Gods Predestination, is the only cause of Adams
Fall? And, That Cain was predestinate to slay his Brother? And, That God is
both the principal Cause, and also the Author of All things, both on the One
side, and / on the Other; appointing all things to All men? And, whatsoever
Ethnicks ascribed to Fortune, that same we ought to attribute unto the
Providence of GOD? And, That that the most wicked persons, that have been,
were of GOD appointed to be wicked, even as they were.

And further, in the same Book, and same Article, he says: Yea, I am sure,
that you will grant; that if God do Predestinate a man, to do things rashly,
and without any deliberation, He shall not Deliberate at all; but run
headlong upon it; be it Good or Evil, that he, does.



He makes also an argument, after this sort; saying:

Mayor. What soever God foreseeth and predestinateth, must Necessarily come to
pass: (for his Prescience and Predestination are infallible.) Minor. But He
Fore-seeth and Predestinateth all Things. Conclusio. Ergo. All things must come
to pass, of Necessity.


The Minor of which Argument, is apparently false. For, Though GOD fore-seeth
all Things; yet, does he not predestinate all things. For, His Foresight does
extend, Both to Good and Evil: But, His Predestination is ONLY of things,
that be Good: As the Scriptures, and all ancient Writers, prove.

And, here again, it is to be noted also, how plainly they make GOD the
Author of Sin. For, if this Mayor be True (viz. That GOD does not only
foresee, but also predestinate all things; yea, even Sin and Evil: As the
fall of Adam, the Murder of Cain; and the wickedness of all them, that have
been most wicked:) Then may this Minor be truly annexed: [viz. That GOD is
the Author of all that he predestinateth:] And so, must this Conclusion needs
follow: (viz. That GOD is the Author of all Sin and Evil.

The First Part, [viz. That GDD predestinateth all Things; Or, all that he
Fore-seeth;] is a Proposition of their own Assertion, without any Ambiguity,
or doubtful meaning.

The Second Part, [viz. That GOD is the Author of all that he predestinateth;]
is My affirmation: which is so True and Manifest, that they have scarce any
manner of Color to Deny it. For, what is it to predestinate any thing? But,
First, to Purpose, Decree, Appoint, and Ordain it to be done? Now, He which
First Purposes, Decrees, Appoints, Ordains or Inventeth a Thing to be
done, is not He The Author of the same? Or is not He rightly called; Causa,
Origo, Fons, Radix, Principium, Author? The Cause, Original, Fountain, Root,
Beginning, or Author of the same?

He which first Purposes, Decrees, Appoints, and Ordains an Insurrection,
or Rebellion to be made against his Prince, is not he to be Apprehended, as the
very Author of all the Sedition? And worthily, or Rightly, so to be judged, and
called? What man can be so Ignorant, as not to perceive it? For all the world
knows, that, for None other Cause, One is said to be the Author of any
thing, but only for that, either He is the first Inventor; or else, the first
Purposer, Appointer, and Ordainer of the same. And also, whosoever is the first
Inventor, or else the first Ordainer of any Thing; most properly, He is said
to be the Author of the same. Mayor. Now, mark, again, the Argument; and
see, how the Conclusion follows. God Predestinateth All things; yea, even
Sin, and Evil. Minor. And, God is the Author of all that he predestinateth;
as has been plainly prooved. Ergo. Conclusio. He is the Author of Sin.


This must needs follow; if the first Proposition be granted: [viz. That GOD
predestinateth, or ordains all things: or, All that he Fore-seeth.]

Wherefore the old Writers, in Confutation of the Manichaeans, labored in
nothing so much, as to prove, that although God did foresee all things (Both
good and evil:) yet did he onely-Fore-see, and Not Predestinate, those things
which are evil: As, by an Infinite Number of places, out of the ancient
Writers (if shortness would suffer) I could easily prove. But one place of St.
Augustine I will rehearse: which does not only resolve clearly this matter,
(Between Foresight, and Fore-ordinance; or, between the Praescience and
Predestination;) but also most plainly teaches all Prospor. ad Object, Vinc.
that is to be said of Predestination. Prosper, rehearsing the words, and
defending the Opinion of Augustine, [where he prooveth, that the Devil can
scarce be called the Author of Sin; because it came of Man's own Will: and
asks, by what Madness and Frenzy Men do attribute that unto God, which
cannot be, altogether, ascribed to the Devil?] at the last, he concludes with
these words of AUGUSTINE.

Nihil ergo Talium Negotiorum Deus praedestinavit, ut fieret: Nec illam animam
nequiter turpiterque victuram, ad hoc, ut taliter viveret, praeparavit. Sed
Talem futur am non ignoravit: and de Tali, Se Just Iudicaturum esse,
praescrvit: Atque ita, ad praedestinationem, eius nihil aliud referri potest,
nisi quod aut ad debitam Iusticia Retributionem, aut ad indebitam pertinet
gratiae largitatem. Therefore (says he) God has predestinate no Part of any
such Doings: neither the Soul, which afterward lived wickedly, and filthily,
has he prepared to that end, that it should so live: but, He was not
ignorant, that such a One it would be; and of such He foreknew, that he
himself would ^ustly judge. And so Nothing may be referred to the
Predestination of GOD, but only that, which pertains to the due recompense
of his Righteousness, or to the undeserved gift of his Grace.

These are the words of S. Augustine: which, surely are marvailous full of
pyth; containing the whole Sum, of that which may be said, in this matter of
Gods predestination: and are therefore most worthy to be noted; yea, and to be
committed to memory. For, being thoroughly weighed, They do plainly set forth,
the full resolution of all this Question.

But, to return again unto Those, that (Contrary to the Scripture, and all
ancient Writers) do teach, that GOD does not only Foresee, but also
Predestinate both Good and evil; as well, the Murder of Cain, as the Holiness
of Abel, (and thereby make God plainly the Author of Sin:) when they
perceive the outrageous Blasphemy, to be overmuch Apparent and manifest, Then
do they (Sometime) closly roll it up in a Riddle again; which, for the Dark
speech thereof, may serve, at the least, to Blind the eyes of some. As, where
(among many other ways) they plainly make God the Author of Sin [Saying;
that God is not only the Principal Cause, but also the Author of All Things,
without Exception, both on the One Side and on the Other;] if they be then
urged with the Consequence, [That God is the Author of sin:] They will
Answer: That in All Abomination, God is the Author of the Fact; but, Not N. B.
of the Crime. As, of the Fact, Deed, or work, of Adultery, Sodomitry,
Murder, and Idolatry; God is the Author (Say They:) but, not of the Fault, or
Crime.

This Aenigma, have I heard some men use: and it is also written in a Book,
entitled, [A Brief Treatise of Election and Reprobation;] lately set forth,
and printed in the English Tongue; where He says thus. Though we be Compelled
to say, that God is the Author of the Fact; yet, we must answer; but Not of
the Crime.



Areade, Areade; what is that? God is the Author of the very Fact and Deed of
Adultery, Theft, Murder, Treason: and yet, he is not the Author of Sin. And
why? The subtilty of the Riddle is This: viz. Tha^ Sin is No-thing. The
theife is not hanged for the Deed, which he has committed; [For GOD is the
author thereof:] but he is hanged for the sin: and that is, For No-thing.
For, when they say, God is the author of all things: Then Nothing is excepted;
but, sin, is Nothing: And, therefore he is not the Author of sin. The
thief, is hanged, for nothing: The Murderer, is put to death, for nothing:
The traitor loses his Head, for nothing: The wicked are punished in
everlasting fire, for nothing. A Marvelous Sophistication! a strange Paradox;
and cautelous Riddle.

But (to be short) though, many ways, this subtilty might be answered, I will
take only the Definition of Sin; as I find it written in the same book: where
he says, very Truly:

The Nature of Sin is Defined, by the authority of Scripture, to be, a
Thought, Word, or DEED, Contrary to the will of GOD.

Now, because They say, that God is the Authoof all evil DEEDS, though not of
the CRIMES; Let us pass over the evil Thoughts, and evil WORDS, and speak
only of the Deed it self, (which He himself Defines, to be Sin, and
contrary to Gods will.)

If God then be the Author of that FACT or DEED, which Deed is Sin, and
contrary to Gods will; How can He then say, that GOD is the Author of the
FACT, but, not of the FAVLT? Seeing he himself sets forth, not only a
Thought, or a Word; but also, a DEED to be Sin. And, if God be the Author of
that SAME DEED (which DEED is Sin) Is it not a thing most plain, that God
is the Author of Sin?

And All this their Travel is to prove, That the Ordinance and Predestination
of GOD, do so carry men, even Headlong, unto all actions (be they never so
Mischievous) That, of Necessity they must Needs, and Cannot Choose but commit
the same. As though Gods Predestination were like a Tempest of wind, ^o
blowing, in the Sails of Man's heart, That, by It, He is carried Headlong to
all things whatsoever he does. According to the saying of the Poet:

Iam magis atque magis Pr^ceps agit Omnia FATVM.
Now more and more, DESTINY hurleth all things headlong.
But surely, This STOICALL Necessity makes such a Confusion of all things;
That, (let them color up the matter with as much cunning, as they can; and
Qualify it with as Fair words, as may be;) yet shall there never the State
of a Common wealth in England stand, if this pers^^asion may once take Perfect
Root among the PEOPLE: besides, that it is utterly repugnant to the Holy
Scripture; and, against all ANCIENT Writers: a^ shall be, hereafter, briefly
prooved.

And whereas They deny this Doctrine, of Theirs, to be the Stoicall Opinion:
[because the STOICS (say they) fained, that Nature, with such Order of Causes,
as she has Tied together, does bring all things to pass By Necessity: But,
They affirm, that GOD by his Fore-ordinance, aternall Predestination and
Providence, brings all things to pass, By a like Necessity.] Thus, the
Best-learned of them make the Difference.

But a plain Delusion it is to blind the eyes of men withal. For, (as
Priscia^^s says) FATVM (which we call Destiny) is derived of the Participle
Fatus; which is, as much to say, as spoken: Because it is Nothing else (says
he^) but that, which is spoken or appointed of GOD. As if a man should say; It
must Needs be SO; For God has spoken the word. Eusebius also, citing the
Definition of Chrysippus, says: Fatum is nothing else, but a Certain Decree,
Ordinance, and Determination of God. Which thing (To make no more Rehcarsall of
many men's sayings) St. AUGUSTINE plainly Declared. Aug. de. Civ* Dei lib. 5.
Cap. 1.
Thus (says he) it is proved, that they did call the Will of the High-God,
FATVM: Gods-Will (says St. AUGUSTINE) they (Stoics) called Fatum, or Destiny.

It is manifest therefore, that the Stoics did not imagine, that Nature, by an
order of Causes, brought all things to pass by a Necessity: But rather, that
God, Fore-ordaining and appointing in order all causes in Nature, (or,
otherwise) brought all things to pass by a Necessity.

Which thing, together with the Order of Causes, Tully speaks of, plainly;
saying: Fati Necessitas, etc. The Necessity of Destiny (says Tully) is That,
which of GOD is Ordained and appointed, that it come to pass by an Everlasting
Order of Causes.

The SAME ORDER of Causes also is not-Forgotten of OUR MEN; That, in All
points, Their Doctrine might agree with the Stoicall Doctrine: as in an English
book, translated out of French, lately set forth in print, and Entitled [A
Brief Declaration of the Table of Predestination.] Where he says: Seeing God
has appointed the End, it is Necessary also that He should appoint the Causes,
which Lead unto the same End.



As if he should say: Like as God has appointed some Man to be hanged; so,
has he appointed him also to STEAL; as a cause leading him to the same End,
whereunto he has appointed him Or else; It was his Destiny to be hanged.
Ergo; it was not his Destiny to steal. Or Thus; (which is all one) He was
appointed, by GODS Predestination, to be hanged. Ergo; He was appointed, by
Gods Predestination to steal.

For, seeing God has appointed the end (says He;) it is Necessary also, that
he appoint the Causes, which lead to the same end. As for example: If this be
true which they say: (viz. That God does Predestinate all things; or, That God
does both appoint the end of all Things; and also the Causes which lead to the
same end:) Then does it follow, and may truly be said; That Martin Swarth with
his men was appointed and Predestinate of God to be slain at the Battle of
Stoke. And further it follows; As God appointed Martin and his Fellows to
This end: So was Sr. Richard Simon, the Priest, Appointed and Predestinate of
GOD, to power in the pestilent Poison of privy Conspiracy, and Traitorous
mischief of vainglory, into the heart of Lambert; (his scholar) as a Cause,
leading unto the same end. Item; that He (the said Lambert) was appointed and
predestinate of GOD, to consent and agree unto the pestiferous persuasion of
his Master (Sr. Richard) in the Pride of Lucifer, to aspire to the High type of
Honor, in Deposing (if Possible it were) the Right and most Noble Heir of
England; and Elevating himself (like a Traitorous villain) into the Royal
throne of the same. And, that, Thus, he was appointed of God to do, as Another
Cause, leading to the same end, which God Ordained. Item; that the Irish men
were Appointed vix. K. Henry the sea^enth.
of God to be Rebellious Traitors, against their Sovereign Lord, the King of
England; and, to maintain the False and filthy Quarrel of the said Lambert,
As Another Cause, leading unto the same end. Item; that the Lady Margaret,
(Sister to K. Edward the 4.) was appointed and predestinate of God, to be a
Traitoresse to England; and, to employ all her Wits, Forces, and Power, to the
utter Destruction of her natural Country, as Another Cause leading to the
same end. Item; that the said Lady Margaret was appointed of God, to conduct
and hyre the said Martin Swarth and his men, to Invade the Realm of England,
as Another Cause leading to the same end. Item; That the said Martin Swarth;
The Earl of Lincoln; The Lord Lovell; the Lord Gerard; and Diverse other
Captains of the Rebels, were Appointed or Predestinate of GOD to be of such
valiant Courage, in maintaining the False quarrel, of Traitorous Lambert, that
They were slain, (and, On the Other side, that many a True English man's Blood
was shed,) at the Battle of Stoke: which was the end of this woeful Tragedy;
And (By this Their Manifest form of Doctrine) was Altogether, and every part,
appointed and Ordained of God. Both the end and also the causes above
rehearsed, and others Innumerable, which did lead to that same end.

Alas! who sees not the Destruction of England to follow This Doctrine? who
sees not, the Confusion of All Commonwealths to depend hereupon? what Prince
may sit safely in the seat of his Kingdom? what Subject may live quietly,
possessing his own? what Man shall be ruled by Right of a Law; If this opinion
may be perfectly placed in the hearts of the People?

But (to be short) Thou see here, by Example; The same which Tullie calls
(Series Causarum) the Continual order of Causes appointed of God: and Our Men
(even in like manner) call it, the Causes appointed of God, to lead unto the
same end, which he has ordained: whereupon follows the Force of
CANNOT-Choose; which is called, Fati Necessitas, Fatal Necessity: or, the
Necessity of Gods Ordinance. For, (as you have heard) Fatum, is Nothing else
but a Decree, or Ordinance of God.

Which Necessity is set forth of some Men, under the Name of Gods
Predestination: and Now oftentimes the same thing is set forth also, by This
word, Providence. Which Name of PROVIDENCE Likewise, the Heathen Stoics used
for the same purpose; as Cicero says, Pronoea, Anus Fatidica Stoicorum, quam
latin licet Providentiam dicere. Pronoea in Greek, (says He) the Old wife of
the Stoickes, that sets forth their Destiny, which in latin may be called
Providentia, the providence of GOD.

But, let them call it Providence, Predestination, Pre-Ordinance, or what they
will: This is, no doubt, the very Stoickes opinion; [viz. That God has so
appointed and pre-ordained All things, That, of Mere Necessity, they come to
pass: And, whatsoever men do (whether it be good or evil) they CANNOT
CHOOSE but do it.] Which Necessity, Seneca also manifestly declares, in these
words: Necessitates omnium Rerum, quas Nulla vis rumpat, Fatum existime. The
Necessities of all things (says he) which no Force, or violence can break,
That same I hold to be Destiny.

And, as for that, which the Heathen did attribute to the Stars or Planets,
They mean none Other, but that God ordained the Planets, in Nature, to work
such things, as He, before, had decreed and appointed. Even as we also Judge,
That GOD uses the Operations of the Planets, in sending such Rain and
Tempest; fair weather, or ^oule, as his pleasure is.

Let them say; therefore, what they can, or will: This mere Necessity, which
our Men do ^each: is the very Same, which the Stoickes did hold. Which
opinion, because it destroyed the State of a Commonwealth, It was banished out
of Rome as St. Augustine declares, Lib. Quast. vet. and Nov. Testam. Where,
He notably refelleth that Opinion, in these few words; saying:

Qua ratione Nati dicuntur, etc. By what reason (says Augustine) were they
borne, which banished Math(...), is often taken, as S. Augustine uses it
here, for Ge^^thliacus: whose profession was to declare men's Fortune or
Destiny, by the Time of Nativitie. Which in Esa. 2. The translation of Zurich
calls Mathematicos: and our Translator calls it: Talkers of men's (...).
(MATHEMATICOS) the setters forth of Destiny out of Rome (...) Which law was
kept; and they were but Heathen. How were these Things done by Destiny, which
make against Destiny? But surely if there be a Destiny, it does nothing
against It self; says St. Augustine. For so were Destiny, no Destiny: Of,
at the least, Destiny fighting against it self.

Or, (to speak the Same, in those words, which Our Men (by abuse) taken out of
Scripture, to maintain the very same Matter:) If it be GODS Predestination,
that men should write and speak against his Predestination, (as, they say,
some do:) Then is GODS Predestination, a Kingdom, not only divided; but also
fiercely Fighting against it self. O miserable Absurdity! which any Child may
perceive must needs follow; If All things come to pass, with absolute
Necessity, by GODS Predestination; as They teach.

This same Doctrine also [That all (...) springs out of GOD^ ordinance: Or,
that Gods Predestination was the Cause of (...) fall, and of All wickedness:]
is plainly maintained in an English Book, la^ely set forth and (...)led
(Against a Pr^vie Papist, etc.) Where, among many Open and plain Sentences
upon this matter, I find an Argument made; in these words:

Major. Whatsoever (...) in Adam, was in Him by Gods will and Ordinance. Minor,
But, Sin was in Adam. Conclusio, Ergo, Sin was in Him by Gods will and
Ordinance.


The Mayor of which Argument (being understood of Adam, after his ^all) is
manifestly false: and therefore the Conclusion also is false. For if it may be
said of Ad(...) (...)fter his Fall; (as, by the Minor, you well perceive, that
he so understands it;) Then may it also be said, ^ow, of any Man; [That, what
execrable wickedness soever is in Any man, that same is in him, by GODS Will
and Ordinance.] He goes about also to prove the same, by another Argument,
which he makes, speaking of the lying Spirit; saying:

Major, God commanded him to Sin: Minor, But, God commanded nothing, which
he ordained not. Conclusio, Ergo: So he ordained him to Sin.


Which argument, it is (...)veil, that Any man could be so Blind, is not to
see, how it might (with much more Strength, and Force, and much more manifest
Truth) be Turned against Himself; in This sort; (speaking of Adam, yea, and
of all men): saying.

Major, God commanded Adam; and does command all men, to Absteyne from Sin.
Minor, But, He commands Nothing which He ordains not. Conclusio, Ergo, God
Ordained Adam, and all men to absteyne from Sin.


If GOD, then, Ordained ADAM, and all men, to absteyne from Sin; Then did He
not Ordeyne Adam, or any man, to commit Sin: So, was not Sin in Adam, or in
any man, by Gods will, and Ordinance; Not, GODS Ordinance the Cause of Adams
Fall, or of any Man's Sin. And, Therefore, Their Opinion is utterly False.

Also, if GOD, in his SECRET COUNCIL, do predestinate, appoint, and ordain
man to Sin; and, yet, give unto Him a strict law, and commandment, Not to
sin; is not then His SECRET WILL contrary to his Open WORD? And, his Eternal
Ordinance repugnant to his WRITTEN LAW? All Their Fair words, and Fine framed
fetches cannot avoid it.

Yet would I further ask them a Question: Seeing it is the Decree, Ordinance,
and Will of GOD expressed in his word, That man should not sin; How crept
they into That SECRET COUNCIL, where God Ordained, Decreed, and Willed the
Contrary? That is to say, That man should Sin?

But I hear their Answer, already published in Print, standing in the Third
leaf, and second page, of the First Blast of that Traitorous Trumpet, set
forth, against the REGIMENT of weomen. Where, (fol. 2. page 2.) he, briefly
and covertly, touches this Close and Privy Counsel of God; in these words.
The SECRET COUNCIL of God excepted.



But (in fol. 3. page 2.) he says: I am assured, than God has Reveiled to
some, in this our Age, that it is More, than a Monster in Nature, That a WOMAN
shall Reign, and have Empire above Man.



This may be the Apocalypse of some men in Our Age: But, sure I am, it is not in
the Revelation of St. John the Evangelist, nor of Any Other old Apostle, or
Prophet. THESE NEW REVELATIONS (which are reveyled to Men of our Age, out of a
SECRET COUNCIL, Decree, and Ordinance of God, CONTRARY to the OPEN word and
commandment of God) are meet for Those which delight in Damnable Dreams of
some doting Destiny; and may well be called the Inspirations of old Arians;
Revelations of blind Anabaptists; or, un-written Verities of Superstitious
Papists; rather than the secret Counsel of GOD, revealed to Men of our Age.

But, to conclude: That Angel, or Spirit, which (contrary to the manifest WORD
of GOD) has revealed unto Men of our age, that a WOMAN, (being Right
Inheritour to the Crown of a Realm) ought not to be Ruler thereof; That same
Spirit and Angel of Darkness, has Revealed unto Men of our Age, that Caine
was Predestinate to Murder his Brother Abel; and that the most wicked.
Traitors, Murderers, and Thieves, that live, are Ordained of GOD, in his
SECRET Counsel, contrary to his Open Word, to be wicked, even as they are;
and, to commit such Murder, Theft, and Treason, even as they do.

The same Conclusion, and New Revelation, is also plainly set forth, in the
other late-printed English Book, before Named, translated out of French into
English: Where, anon after the Beginning, speaking of GODS Will, he says: By
virtue whereof, All things are Made: yea, even those Things, which are Evil
and Execrable.



Yet, when he has plainly affirmed; that, by virtue of GODS Will, evil and
execrable Things are made: lest the Horrible face of Satan should be
perceived in the Burning flame of Those terrible Words; The matter is,
afterward, trimly covered with a cloak of unsavorie Subtlety. For, he
declares his mind to be; That those evil and execrable Things, which are
wrought by the virtue of GODS will, are not Evil and Execrable. Sc. In That
they are wrought, by his Divine Counsel.



As if he should say; Though they be indeed Evil and execrable things,
which the Counsel of GOD works: yet are they not Evil in that respect; or,
Therefore evil, because GOD works Them. But for as much (says he) as They
proceed from the Prince of the Air, etc.



Or, (to speak it in more usual terms) because the Devil, or wicked Men,
do work It; which nevertheless (as they plainly hold and affirm,) are but
the Instruments of GOD appointed thereunto; and, in doing the Same, do nothing
else, but that which GOD has Ordained them to do: and, SO ordained, that they
Cannot choose, but Do it, Even as they do.

Which opinion, Prosper, (defending the Sentence Prosp. Respons. ad Object.
Gall. cap. 6.
of St. Augustine) writes against: in these words. Pradestinationem Dei, sive
ad Malum, sive ad Bonum, etc. That the Predestination of GOD (says he) does
work in All men, ey^her unto Good, or unto Evil, is most foolishly said: As
though a Certain NECESSITY should DRIVE men unto BOTH: Seeing, in good Things,
the Will is to be understood not-with-out-Grate, And, in evil Things, the Will
is to be understood with-out-Grace.

But that, which PROSPER and AUGUSTINE do (Here) most truly call a
most-Foolish saying; The same do These men call the most High, and profound
Wisdom. For, GOD (say They) predestinateth all things: Ergo, All Things must
come to pass of Necessity.

And further; M. Crowly, in the said book of Confutation before named, and in
the same Article, using the very same Term of [DRIVING] He says; That Gods
Predestination has DRIVEN them unto it.



And yet, not therewith content; anon after he says: We are compelled by the
Necessity of Gods Predestination, to do those Things, for which we are
Damned. But, To repeat the whole sentence. To This must we Answer (says He)
in This wise. If God were an Inferior, to any Superior Power, To the which He
ought to render an Account of his Doings; or, if any of us were not his
Creatures; but of another Creation besides his workmanship; Then might we
charge him with Tyranny: because He condemns us, and appointed us to be
punished, for the Things we do by Compulsion, through the necessity of his
Predestination.



Mark here (...) by the way) How all Rulers are charged with Tyranny; for
punishing Malefactors. First, grant this Proposition, which He affirms: [Sc.
That all offenders (as Murderers, Thieves and Traitors) do commit their
offenses, by the compulsion of Predestination.] Secondly, This assumpted Minor,
(which he also affirms.) [viz. That it is Tyranny, for one that is an
Inferior Power, (and not their Creator) to punish Them, which do commit
Crimes, by such Compulsion. Then must it Needs follow; that all Rulers are
Tyrants, which punish Malefactors, and are no Creators, but Inferior powers.
Because All Malefactors could not choose, but commit such wicked offenses,
being DRIVEN thereunto by Compulsion, thorough the Necessity of
Predestination. Woe worth the Sinful Generation of our age! Which has bred
and brought forth such a Noisome Novelty and strange Paradoxe: To whom the
hands of GODS mercy are stretched out all the Day long; and yet, They are ever
defying him to the Face; as the Prophet says. Esa. 65.

Consider (I beseech Thee) not the Persons of them that Speak, (be they never
so High, never so Wise, never so Many:) but Mark the Opinion it self; (even
in thy Conscience, and in the sight of GOD;) whether Any thing may be spoken
more Repugnant to the Nature of GOD? More contrary to the Word of GOD? More
defacing the Justice and Mercy of GOD? Than, to say; That GOD punishes man
with the Torments of Hell in everlasting Fire, for doing Those things, which
He himself has Predestinate, Ordained, Decreed, determined, appointed,
willed, and Compelled him to Do: and That, which A man Cannot choose, but he
must needs do, by the Force and Compulsion of his Predestination: All which
Things, in those plain Terms, THEY most-evidently Teach in diverse parts of
Their writings. But, of all other, This is most- odious and horrible; where
they affirm; that Men Sin by Compulsion, thorough the Necessity of GODS
Predestination.

And, the very same, says Knoxe, in the 317. side of his Book, before-named:
Affirming likewise in Those plain terms: That, the Wicked are not only
left, by GODS Suffering: but Compelled to Sin, by his Power. And he cites
it as the Saying of St. AUGUSTINE against IVLIAN. Lib. 3. Cap. 5.



But very falsely (as I suppose:) For I have sought the same place in Saint
Augustine: and He has, neither those words, nor any such like, that import
the same, or the like Matter. Wherefore, till such time, as they make better
proof: I must think they have forged a lie, in AUGUSTINES name; supposing
thereby to give authority to falsehood: But to Conclude; whether it were the
saying of Augustine, or not; you see, it is plainly their Opinion; not only
that men cannot choose, but do what wickedness, or mischief soever they do;
but also, they are Compelled with the power, force, or compulsion of GODS
Predestination, to commit all those evils and wicked Crimes, for the which they
are executed with the Temporal sword, or demned with Everlasting torments.
Against which Error, cries out the Wordof GOD in a multitude of places;
manifestly prooving, that through the Grace, and help of GOD, men may choose,
and are neither driven by absolute necessity, nor compelled by GOD^
Predestination, to commit Murder, Theft, Treason, or any such Flagitious
offense; nor any manner of Sin, or evil whatsoever it be.

As for Example: MOSES says; Therefore Deuteronomy. 30.
choose Life, Deuteronomy. 30. And IOS^AH says; Choose whom you will serve; And
after, when the People promised to serve the Lord only, he says unto them,
You are witnesses unto your selves, that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him;
But afterward, Iosuah, 24.
when the people forsook the Lord again, and chose other Gods: The Lord says
unto them; Go, cry unto the Gods which ye have chosen. Iud. 10. CHRIST says,
MARY has chosen her that Iud. 10.
good part, which shall not be taken from her. DAVID Luke 10.
says, I have chosen the way of truth: and again Psalm. 119.
in the same Psalm: I have chosen thy Commandments: But the Lord says by his
Prophet Isaiah: They did wickedness before mine eyes, and chose the thing,
Esaias. 65.
that pleased me not. And in the next Chapter, he says; Et Elegerunt, quae
Ego Nolui: And Esaias. 66.
they have chosen those things, which I would not. Thus it is plain that, as
choo^e, and cannot-choose agree together; so does their opinion agree with the
Scripture.

For such direct contrariety, is between Cho^se, and mere Necessity,
between violent Compulsion, and Christian liberty, that Black, and White, may
with more Possibility, be coupled in a subject.

But it is marvel to see, how scrupulous some men are in these words of
Choice. I doubt whether they dare read these and many such like places of
Scripture, which so plainly speak of Choice: But perhaps they always skip
over that Word, or read some other in stead thereof, (as the Jews do ADONAY
in stead of JEHOVAH:) For surely, many are so afraid of Free Will; that they
fall (as the Proverb says) Out ^f the Lyme-keele, into the Cole-pit; from
high Presumption, into deep Desperation, fiercely following that old Spirit of
wicked PELAGIVS; as before it is touched in the Ninth of his Divellish N. (...).
Errors. Where he affirms; That if a Man have need of GODS help, then has
he no freedom, or choice at all. Thus do they break their Ship, upon the
perilous Rock, seeking to escape the dangerous Whirle-poole. For an horrible
Presumption it was of Pelagius, to think that a man by Nature, had such Power
to choose Good, and refuse Evil; That he needed not the Grace, and help of
GOD; and a Desperate opinion is this of Others; to say, That the Predestination
of GOD, works all things in Man, whether it be Good, or Evil: And that a
man cannot-choose, but do whatsoever he does: For, no doubt, this Opinion,
makes a very disordered Chaos, and an utter Confusion of all things; (as it
were) mixing and thrusting together, both Heaven, Earth, and Hell, making one
confused lump of GOD, the Devil, and the World: of Sin, Grace, and Nature;
turning all doings into Dreams, all Truth into Traunces; all Verity into
Fables; all Prayer, and Meditation, into vain Imagination. For, if GODS
Predestination be the only Cause of Adams fall, and filthy Sin; and,
consequently, the only Cause, and worker of all Evil; yea, even with
compulsion, and force, (as they shamefully, and plainly affirm;) then, will
no man deny, that (on the other side) GODS Predestination, works as violently
in all things, that are Good: So then, if Gods Predestination work All,
without all exception, both in Evil, and Good; then, all other things,
whatsoever they be, although they appear to work, and do some thing; yet,
do they indeed utterly nothing: So that, the Devil does nothing; Man does
nothing; Laws do nothing; Doctrine dath nothing; Prayer does nothing: But
GODS Predestination does altogether, and is the efficient Cause; yea, and the
only cause of all Things.

Against this Opinion, the Word of GOD is exceeding plain, and manifest; not
only in the places before rehearsed, but also in these following, here briefly
noted (in the Margin:) yea, and Genesis 4. a. (...). King. 24. b. 1. Para. 21. b.
Prove. 3. d. Ecel^s. 25. (...). 4. ^s^r. 7. b, d, and g, (...). and 9. 2. Luk,
10. d, and f. John, 1. b. Acts, 5. a. 1 Cor. 7. g. and 9. a. and 10. c. and 14.
f. 2 Cor. 13. (...). Phil. 4. c. Heb. 14.
abundantly, throughout the whole Scripture.

Against this evil opinion, also do All the ancient Doctors, with one consent
vehemently write; (as they themselves cannot deny;) except only Augustine;
which, because of his exceeding obscurity, and darkness, in diverse places,
liee is often alleged of both parts.

Also, against this opinion, writes earnestly Phillip Melanchton, the
chiefest, and best learned of all the Germans.

In like manner, does Bullinger, the chiefest, and most excellent of all the
Switzers.

The same does also Erasmus Sarcerius, and many other of the best learned
Protestants: whose sayings were profitable beer to rehearse; but that their
Judgment in this matter, is well known, to all the Learned: and my
determination is, at this present, rather briefly, and simply, to declare what
part of Doctrine, I, and many other mistike; than, with long discourses, and
many Authorities to disproove the same.

Wherefore, to conclude: Take this one Note in this matter of Cannot choose, or
of Necessity; both, for the better understanding of the thing it self; and
also, of those which write thereupon.

They commonly speak of two kinds of Necessity: The One, is of Necessity
absolute; and the other, of Necessity of consequence: or, Mere necessity; and
necessity upon Condition. Which division, all Learned, and good Authors do
use: and it is very profitable to be considered. For, touching the One; there
is neither Reason, Law, Counsel, or Doctrine, neither Fair promise, nor
Sharp threatening, nor any other thing, whatsoever it be, which may h^lpe, or
kinder: add, or take away; hurt, or profit; wherefore there is never any of
all the aforesaid ways, or means used, in any of all those things, which
came to pass by Absolute necessity.

As for Example; It is of mere Necessity, that the Devil is, and ever shall
be Damned. That, the Soul of man shall be Everlasting, and not come to an End,
like to the Life of Beasts: nor, the life of Beasts, be Immortal, as the
soul of Man; and such like. Wherein, it were more than madness, to endeavor
either by Reason, Law, or Counsel, or any other way, whatsoever it were, to
alter, change, with-stand, or remove, any of those things: seeing of Mere
necessity, they must needs be so, and cannot be altered. For, as Augustine
says; Aug. Quast^e. and Nov. ^est^n. Quaest. 115.
Omne enim, quod prohibetur, ideo prohibetur, ne (quia potest fieri) fiat. Si
autem Fati esset, non posset fieri, neque prohiberetur. Whatsoever is forbidden
(says AUGUSTINE) therefore it is forbidden, because it might be done, and yet
ought not to be done: But, if it were of Destiny, then could it not be done,
nor should not be forbidden. These words of Augustine, being few, contain
much matter, if they be truly weighed.

Now to the necessity of Consequence, or necessity of Condition; whereof
Melancthon says: Neque enim haec consequentia libertatem voluntatis tollit.
Neither does this Consequence, take away the liberty of the will. And this
necessity is not-repugnant to diligence, Prayer, Laws, or Doctrine. For,
therefore, (that I may use again the words of AUGUSTINE) things are forbidden
to be done, because they might be done, but ought not to be done. And this
necessity, grows upon former causes, granted, or wrought: As; it is of
necessity, or needs must be, that Sects and Heresies shall grow in the Church;
because the wicked seek their own glory; and Satan stirs their hearts, to
imagine, and set forth abominable Errors; wherein, they serve the Devil, with
all the diligence of their power: Wherefore it must follow, that Sects, and
Heresies shall grow. Neither does This necessity prove, that they
could-not-chuse, but commit such Evils: But, seeing they do refuse the Light,
and embrace the Darkness, this must necessarily follow; this must needs be the
end; that, Heresy, and much mischief shall spring: or, As when a man
Presently beholds with his eyes, Murder, Theft, Drunkenness, or any other
wickedness; it must needs be true, that such things are committed, according
to that which a man does see plainly before his eyes. Yet does not follow,
that those wicked doers, could-not-chuse but commit those outrageous Crimes:
but seeing that they do commit such things, it must needs be true by the
necessity of Consequence, that such things are committed of them. These two
kinds of necessity, does AUGUSTINE notably declare, how, and in what sort, they
spring out of GODS Predestination. Lib. de Pradest. Cap. 2.


First of all, faith AUGUSTINE, it is horrible iniquity to say, that GOD does
Predestinate any thing, saving only, that which is good. But of
Predestinations, some be of binding, or of bondage; and others be of condition.
These are of Justice; and Those, of Power. And, that it may be the more
manifest, it shall be declared (says he) by Example, which are of binding, and
Power, and which are of condition, and Justice. GOD created Heaven, and Earth,
and Sun, and Moon: Further, he did Fore-ordaine, or Predestinate, that the
Heaven should ever be turned, and the immovable Earth, should be in place of a
Center unto the turning heaven. The Sun, and Moon should rule the day, and
Night; the day, and night should succeed one another, in certain times
appointed. These Predestinations are of power, and of binding; for, Every one
of these things aforesaid is so bound unto his work, by the Predestination of
GOD, that it cannot be moved from the same.

But GOD created Man, and did Predestinate him, That if he were obedient, and
did abstain from the taste of the forbidden Apple, he should Live; but, if
he were disobedient, he should abide the sentence of Death. This
Predestination is of Condition, and of Justice: For GOD (before the Fall of
man) did not by power of binding, so Predestinate him to Dye, that of
necessity, he must needs dye; but under that condition, if he Sinned. Because
therefore Man did Sin; it was a righteous thing, that he should Dye: If he
sinned not, he should not be bound to Death by any chain of GODS
Predestination.

All these are the words of AUGUSTINE. And this division is often repeated,
and commended by the best learned of the Protestants.

Many things do offer themselves in this matter to be spoken; but, my
purpose of briefness, causes me to grow to an End. I have thought good
therefore in few words, to note one point II. Sin, the Cause of Reprobation.
more of evil Doctrine; which, now adays, is taught: and it springs also
cut of this aforesaid Proposition: That GOD's Predestination, causes all
sin, and wickedness. And this it is; That N. B.
Sin is not the cause of Reprobation; nor of GODS hatred toward the wicked,
which are Damned: Which thing indeed (to be short) I grant must needs follow;
if the former Conclusion be true; [That Sin comes of GODS Predestination;
or, that GODS Predestination, was the cause of Adams Fall; which was the
Original of Sin:] For, if Sin, or the Original thereof came of GOD; or,
of his Ordinance: and, from GOD comes nothing, but that which is Holy, Just,
and Good; then, is Sin, no sin; and cannot be the cause of GODS hatred
toward them, that perish: Except, we should say, that GOD hates them, for
that thing, which is Holy, Just, and good.

And, lest I should be thought (through pretense of brevitie) to pass over,
without plain proof, of that which I say; that, this part of Doctrine is also
set forth, and taught: I will rehearse One sentence of theirs, published in
Print; which is so open, and manifest, that it may serve as well as a Thousand.

I read, in the forenamed Book, translated out of French into English,
toward the latter end of the Book, upon this place, thus noted in Figures,
and these very Words follow. Romans 9. c. 11, 12, 13. Romans 9. c. 11, 12, 13.
He says, not only that Esau was ordained to be hated, Before he did any
Evil: [For, in so saying, he should not seem to Exclude any thing, but
actual Sin, and Incredulity.] But he says, Expressly; [before he was
Borne:] Whereby, he excludes Original Sin; and all that which might be
considered in the Person of Esau, by his Birth, from the cause of Hate.



Touching the Text, whereupon it is spoken; assuredly, Ink serves not (...),
to make Ivorie white; than, these Words, to open the mind, and sense of the
Apostle: as, it were easy to prove, if shortness would suffer to make a
digr^s^ion.

But, touching that part of Doctrine a tho(...)se^est that he speaks of two
Opinions. The one, that Actual Sin, or Incredulity, should be the cause of
GODS hatred, toward the wicked. The other; that Original Sin, is the cause
of GODS hate toward them.

This man (against them both,) takes occasion, upon this example of ESAU, To
Exclude all that is in Man; either outward Sin, or inward, either original
Sin, or actual; from the cause of GOD^ hate. So, that (if it be true which
they say) GOD does hate men, neither for their outward wicked Life; not, for
their inward D^vellish lust; but, for his own pleasure only.

The very same thing, says KNOXE; in the 14^. Page, of his aforesaid Book:
where his words are those: Further I say* That if ESAU was Hated for his Evil
deserving, then must needs follow, That JACOB was Loved for his
Well-deserving; by the Argument following of the nature of Contraries.



As well, it might be said: It must needs follow, by the contraries That if a
King, or Prince, hate one man, which has Well-deserved his hate, by stealing
from him his Ring, his Chain, or some great Jewel: then, does he not love,
any other man, but he which has well deserved his Love, by giving to him a
Ring, a Chain, or some great Treasure. As though he should say: because
Justice works on the one side; therefore, Mercy has nothing to do on the
other side: or, as though GOD, were not both Just, and Merciful. Just; in
Damning for their offense; those, which are damned: and Merciful, in saving
(without their desert,) those which are Saved. And who sees not, that (neither
Simile, nor Dis^imile,) neither like things, nor things contrary, do hold in
all points? For, nothing is So like, which in some thing is not unlike;
neither, any thing, so contrary, which does in all things vary. CHRIST is
likened to a Lion; but did he ever Ravish, Devour, and shed any Innocent
blood? Latimer wishes, That All the Bishops, were like Bishop Devil in
diligence: then, ought not the Devil, and a Bishop to differ in any thing. And
most especially, and plainly, does the Scripture beat in our heads, (above
all other things,) That the natures of Contraries do not hold in both sides,
of GODS reward, and Man's deserving. For, as they are inseparable Relatives in
the one part; so, on the other side, the one has never any relation to the
other.

For, as GODS Hatred, and Vengeance, has ever Relation to Man's ill-deserving:
So, has GODS Love, and Mercy, never any relation to Man's merit: Yea, all the
Scripture teaches us; That GOD never Hates, or punishes Man, without his
own Deserving. For, as the Wise man says; Et eum, qui nullam poenam
commerit(...)s sit, condemnasse, a tua potentia indic as alienum. And Sap. 12.
c.
thou Lord (says he) esteemest it a thing contrary to thy Power, to have
condemned him, which has not deserved, Punishment. What should be said of the
Caananites, and the Israelites? (If the nature of Contraries do always hold,
and have such relation of the one to the other:) Must it not then, necessarily
follow, (as he says) by the nature of Contraries: That, if the Caananites,
were cast out of the fortunate-Land, that flowed with Milk and Honey, for
their Evill-deserving: That, on the other side, the Israelites, were brought,
and Planted into that same happy, and blessed rest, for their Well deserving?
But, what says the Scripture? Speak not in thy heart, after that the Lord,
thy GOD, has cast them out before thee, saying; For my Righteousness, the
Lord has brought me in, to possess this Land: Nay; but, for the wickedness
of those Nations, the Lord has cast them out before thee. D^^t. 9.


So plainly speaks the Holy Ghost here; that thou may easily perceive, how
gross, and vain their saying is, which affirm. That, if GOD Hate an Evil
man, for his own Evil deserving; then, must it needs follow, that, he
Loves a good man, for his own Well-deserving. For, the hatred of GOD, and
Everlasting damnation, are Just rewards of Man's Evill-deserving: But, the Love
of GOD, and Everlasting life, are free gifts of GOD, for CHRIST'S sake;
without any part of Man's own deserving.

Take therefore this Saying of theirs, [No Sin, (neither Original, nor
Actual,) is the Cause of Gods hate, or Eternal death;] and put the same into
the one side of the Balance; then, take, and put into the other side, this
saying of Saint PAVL, to the Romans: Was that then which was good, made Romans 7.
13.
Death unto me? GOD forbid! but, Sin was made Death unto me: Then, weigh both
these Sayings together, with the hand of good advisement, in the indifferent
Balance of upright Judgment; and put not in, above three grains, of wilful
Partiality; thus shall thou plainly see, that the Apostle agrees far better,
with the Majesty of GOD, and has a much more Reverend opinion of his
Judgments, than these men have: yea, thou shall easily perceive (whatsoever
they say) that neither GODS Pleasure, nor GODs Ordinance, or Predestination,
nor none other thing that is good, is made Death, or the Cause of Gods hatred,
against any man: But, Sin is the very grounded Cause, why God hates, takes
vengeance, and punishes Man by Death, and destruction. According to that which
the same Apostle says: Death is the reward of Sin. And, the words of Romans
6.
HOSEA, are also manifestly plain, where he says: O Israel, thou do
destroy thy self, but in Ose. 13. c.
Me only is thy help. In which words of the Holy Ghost, thou see how
manifestly God does, (as it were) purge himself, from being the Cause, or
worker of Man's destruction; so that, the Perdition, and destruction of Man, is
altogether to be attributed unto Himself: And GOD (being clear) neither
accessory, nor partaker thereof, as the chief, and high Judge of Heaven, and
Earth, unspotted, and without blame gives sentence of Everlasting death upon
Man, for his own wicked deserving, and offense.

But (on the other side) says God unto Man; In Me, only, is thy help. In
GOD only, only in God, is our help, and Salvation: In him only, and of him
altogether; and not of our selves comes our Salvation, and all whatsoever
belongs thereunto. The same is also set forth, by all those Scriptures, which
are before rehearsed to prove, [that Sin, and Evil, comes not of Gods
Predestination;] For, upon that Conclusion, depends also this Proposition;
[That Sin is not the cause of Reprobation; or, of GODS hatred toward Man.]

And, upon the same Article, depends also another part of Doctrine, which
they Teach, worthy to N. B.
be misliked of All men; as well, for that it imports a Sophistical search
of bottomless Secrets, in the very Essence, and Nature of GOD: as also, for
that it clearly withdraws us from CHRIST, the only stay, and comfort of our
weak Conscience, delivered unto us in the Word of GOD.

For, that they might be surer to hold fast the former Principle, [That All
things come of GODS Predestination; as Running streams, out of a deep III.
GODS Free Mercy, in CHRIST, the Chief cause of Election. N. B.
Fountain:] They affirm, that the free Mercy of GOD in Christ, is but an
Inferior cause of Election; and, that we are taught to ascend unto a higher
Cause: as, unto the Eternal Purpose, and Predestination of GOD, which he
determined only in Himself. So says the Printed Book before named,
Translated out of French into English. That same thing we read also, late set
forth in English Print, in the Gloss of the last Translated Bible, Romans Cap.
9. With these Words: Genera Bible. Romans 9.
AS The only Will, and Purpose of GOD, is The chief Cause of Election, and
Reprobation; So, his Free Mercy in CHRIST is an Inferior cause of Salvation,
etc.



But (for my part) I trust, in mind never to ascend unto that high cause of
Election; and, in Heart, never to taste of that Eternal Purpose, or
Predestination, which GOD has determined only in Himself, without, or above
his Free-mercy, which is in CHRIST.

For, surely, That Eternal Purpose (which comes not of GODS free Mercy in
Christ,) is to Destroy, and not to Save. Again; if that Eternal Purpose
spring out of Gods Free-mercy; then is that Free-mercy of GOD, the Chief
cause; and not an Inferior cause, why he purposes to save us.

For, a great dishonor it were to the Mercy of GOD: To be put in an Inferior
place, touching Election, and Salvation of Man: For, if Ever GODS Mercy be
above all, it is in the Saving of miserable Man. And, Mercy there is not in God
toward Man; but, only in Christ. Therefore, St. PAVL calls it, the Eternal
Purpose, which (...)s. 3. b.
he purposed in CHRIST JESUS our Lord: In CHRIST therefore, was this Eternal
Purpose; and, For his only sake, GOD the Father Eternally purposed, to Elect,
and save us.

Consider, and mark it well; whence comes this Purpose, or Will of GOD to
save us: But of his free Mercy? If his Purpose to save us, spring out of his
Free mercy, why is then his Mercy inferior to his Purpose? Or, how is the
Fountain, inferior to the Springs that come thereof?

Also, what may be said in GOD at any time, or in any respect to be higher,
or greater, than his Mercy? Seeing it is written, That his mercy is as Eccl. 2.
d.
great, as Himself. Yea, and most especially it is so to be said, That his
Mercy passes All; when we speak of this matter. For, of this, it is written:
That mercy rejoices against Judgment; and why? Iam 2. b.
All the Judgments of God, in this behalf, are not to be compared unto his
Mercy. For though it were not true, which DAVID says; That his mercy is above
all his works: Yet were in clear, that Psalm. 149. b.
in Election, Redemption, and Salvation of man, GODS mercy in Christ has Ever
the highest place. And, Those (which in the Salvation of our Souls, make the
Free mercy of GOD, an Inferior cause;) how base a Room, will they assign
(...) (...) mercy, in nourishing, and preserving our bodies? Let them reach as
high, as they can; I trust to go no further, but to hold me fast by the
Everlasting Mercy of GOD; and by the Hemme of CHRIST's garment.

For the Scripture describes GOD unto me, (without Christ) as a wrathful, and
most terrible Judge; but (in Christ, and, for his sake,) as a Father; whose
wrath is pacified, and He well pleased, reconciled, agreed, and at one: And,
to speak of a higher cause, or purpose, to Elect, and Save, (only in GOD)
beside, or without this Free-mercy in Christ; or, that Christ, and Gods
free-mercy in him, is not the chiefest Cause, which works, and obtayneth the
decree, and purpose of God, to Elect, and save; it is plainly nothing else, but
to deny the mercy of God in Election, Reconciliation, Redemption, and Salvation
by Christ, in Christ, and for Christ: As, easily it may be perceived, if a man
do but weigh and consider, what Eternal purpose, an Election, and a
Reconciliation is; Seeing, Christ is our Advocate, Mediator, Peace,
Reconciliation, and Atonement: as, in these Scriptures following, and many
other, it does plainly appear, Psalm. 84. a. etc. Psalm. 84. a. Math. 1. a.
Ephesians. 1. a. 2, b. Romans 5. a, b. Colos. 1. c. 2, Cor. 5. d. 1, John, 2. a. Heb.
5. b, c. and (...). a, b, c, d, c. 2, Tim. 1. c.


And, although it be true, according to the Scriptures, That God, so loved the
world that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. Yet did he, neither love the
World, nor give his Son, without the interoession, and mediation of his
Son. For, if God loved the world, without the Reconciliation, and Mediation;
or, before he was reconciled, entreated, and pacified by Christ: then, is
Christ in vain, come too late to be out Mediator; seeing God the Father is
(without him) already reconciled.

But horrible false is this Opinion: for like as the Son of a King might
entreat his Father for the Servant, whom (for his offenses) the King in his
displeasure, were ready to cast, not only out of his service, but also into
perpetual Prison: Even so, Christ our only Savior, and GODs only Son, did
offer up Himself, as a Ransom unto his Father for Us: whereby he pacified
the wrath of his Father, and adjoined us with himself, to be Sons, and
Heirs of his Fathers glory.

And, this has Christ done, not only now in time, but also, Everlastingly in
the most high and Eternal purpose of God, before the Foundation of the World
was laid.

Thus I end: thinking it sufficient for this present, that I have in these few
words, ^urged my self of those things, which you lay to my Charge; and set
forth unto your Judgment, the Errors of Pelagius; that you may the better
discern who they are, which are worthy to be called after that Sect: and also,
plainly declared in what points my Conscience differs, from certain
Teachers of our time: and upon what ground I am moved, so to mislike some part
of their Doctrine; which things if you diligently weigh, and consider, reading
the same without Partiality; then have I my desire.


THE TESTIMONY OF B. HOOPER.
Unto the Christian Reader.
I Commend here unto thy Charity and Godly love (Christian Reader) the ten
Commandments of Almighty GOD, Exodus 20, and Deuteronomy. 5. the which were given to
this Use and End, diligently Why the Law was given: Deuteronomy. 4. 13. Math. 7. 12.
to be learned, and religiously observed. My mind and commentaries in them I
beseech thee to read with Judgment, and give sentence with Knowledge; as I
doubt nothing at all of thy Charity, or good willing heart toward me, and all
well meaning persons. But forasmuch as there can be no Contract, Peace,
Alliance, or Confederacy between two persons or more, except first the persons
that will contract, agree within themselves upon such things, as shall be
contracted; (as thou right well know:) also, seeing these ten
Commandments, What the ten Commandments contain.
are nothing else, but the Tables, or Writings that conteyne the conditions of
the peace between GOD and Man; and declared at large, how, and to what, the
persons named in the writings are bound unto the other: Genesis 17. 22. Ierem. 7.
Genesis 17, 7. and 22, 16. Ierem. (...) 7, 23.
I (...) be your GOD, and you shall be my People. GOD and Man are knit
together, and united in one. It is necessary to know, how GOD and Man was made
at one: That such conditions could be agreed upon, and confirmed with such
solemn, and public evidences, as these Tables be, written with the finger of
GOD. The contents whereof bind The condition on Gods behalf.
God to aid, and succor, keep, and preserve, warrant, and defend man from
all evil, both of body and soul; and, at the last, to give him Eternal E^od.
19, 56. Deuteronomy. 4, 20. Math. 11, 28.
bliss and everlasting felicity. Man is bound, of the other part, to obey,
serve, and keep GODS The condition on man's part.
Commandments, to love him, honor him, and fear him above all things. Were
there not love and amity between GOD and Man first; the one would not bind
himself to be Master; neither, the other, to be Servant in such a friendly,
and blessed society, and fellowship, as these Tables contain.

Before therefore they were given, GOD commanded MOSES to go down from the
mount Sinai to the people, to know of them, whether they would confederate, and
enter alliance with him, or not: Exodus 19. Moses did the message, as GOD bade
him; Whereunto the people all together Exodus 19, 3. etc
consented. So that it was fully agreed upon, that GOD should be their God; and
they, his servants; with certain conditions, containing the Office of them
both: GOD, to make them a peculiar People, to prefer them above all Nations
of the Earth, to make them a Princely Priesthood, and a Holy people.

Their Office; to Obey, and observe his Holy will and pleasure.

Here, see we the alliance and confederacy made between GOD and Man; and
the writings given: likewise, how it was made. But, wherefore, For whom the Law
was made and given.
it was made, and for whose merits, yet, by these Texts, we see not: why GOD
should love Man, that so neglected his Commandments, favored and loved,
believed and trusted better the Devil, than GOD: so far offended Genesis 3.
the divine Majesty of GOD, and degenerated from grace, and Godliness by
custom of Sin, and Contempt of GOD, that he bewailed, and repented, that
ever He made Man: and Decreed to destroy the creature Man, that he Genesis 6, 6.
Created: as he did indeed. Not only thus destroying Man; but also protested
openly, that better it had been JUDAS never to have been borne. And in the
25.th of Matthew, the displeasure of GOD is declared so great; that, he
appoints Man to another end, than he was Created for: saying; Depart ye
dooers of iniquity from Math. 25, 24.
me, unto Eternal fire; prepared, not for Man; but, for the Devil, and his
Angels. What is now more contrary one to the other, and farther at debate, than
GOD and Man? Whom, now, we see bound in league together, as very friends.
Deuteronomy. 9, 5. 7, 8. Only Mercy provoked God to the covenant.
MOSES shows, That only Mercy provoked GOD unto this alliance, to receive
them into Grace, deliver them out of Egypt, and to possess the plenteous land
of Canaan: further, that God found just matter and occasion to expulse the
inhabitants of that Land, and found no merits in the Israelites, to give it
them: for they were a stifnecked people, and intractable; as Moses lays to
their charge. Howbeit, GOD having respect only unto his Promises (made unto
Adam, Abraham, and his Deuteronomy. 9, 6.
posterity) measured not his Mercy according to the merits of Man, who was
nothing, but Sin; looked always upon the Justice, and deservings, Genesis 3,
15. 12. 3. 15, 5. 1^, 4. The Death of Christ the means. Heb. 9, 28.
Innocence and perfection of the blessed seed promised unto Adam, and unto
Abraham: GOD, put the Death of CHRIST, as a means and arbiter of this Peace.
For the Testament avails not, except it be confirmed by the Death of him,
that makes the testament: the which Death, in the judgment of GOD, was
accepted, as a satisfaction Heb. 7. 1.
for sin from the beginning of Adams fall: as Paul says; CHRIST'S Priesthood
was, and is, like unto Melchisedeeh, that had neither beginning, nor ending;
bound neither to time nor place; as the Priesthood of Aaron: but, as God
accounted in Adams sin, all Mankind (being in his loins) worthy Death: so
he accounted, in Christ, all to be Apoc. 13 8. Genesis 3, ^0. All the prom(...)
se^ made in and for Christ.
saved from death: as Adam declares by the name of his Wife, calling her HEVA;
the Mother of the Living, and not of the Dead. All these promises, and other
that appertained unto the salvation of Adam and his Posterity, were made in
Christ, and for Christ only, and appertained to our Fathers and us; as, we
appertained to Christ. He is the door, John, 10. 9. John. 14. 6. John, 1. 12.
3. 16. etc. 6. 32. etc.
the way and the Life: He only is the Mediator between GOD and Man; without
whom no man can come to the Father celestial Ioh. 1. 3. 6. Because the
Promises of GOD appertained to our Fathers, forasmuch as they likewise to
Christ; Hitherto, and for ever, they were preserved from Hell and the pains
due to Adams sin, in him, for whose sake the Promise was made. The means of
our Peace and reconciliation with GOD, is only in Christ, as by whose Passion,
we are made holy. Therefore Esa. 53. 4. 5.
CHRIST is called by John the Baptist, The Lamb that takes away the Sins of
the world. And John, 1, 29. John, 14, 30.
as the Devil found nothing in Christ, that he could condemn: likewise so
now, he has nothing in us worthy damnation; because we be comprehended, and
fully enclosed in him: for we be his by Faith. All these, that be comprehended
under the Promise, belong unto CHRIST. And, as far extends the virtue, and
strength of GODS Promise to save Man: as the rigor and Justice of the Law for
sin to damn man. For as by the offense Rom, 5, 17, 18.
and sin of one man, Death was extended and made common unto all men unto
condemnation, as Paul says: So by the Justice of one, is derived life into all
men to Justification. The words of the promise made unto Adam and Abraham,
confirms the same. They are these. I will put enmity and hatred between thee
and the Woman, between thy Gen 3, 15.
seed, and the woman's seed, and her seed shall break thy h^^d. For, as we
were in Adam, before his

Fall; and, should, if he had not sinned, been of the same Innocence, and
perfection, that he was created in: So, were we in his loins, when he sinned,
and participated of his sin. And, as we were in him, and partakers of the
ill: So, were we in him, when GOD made him a promise of Grace, and partakers of
the same grace: Not, as the children of Adam; but, as the children of the
Promise. And the sins of Adam, without privilege or exception, extended, and
appertained unto all Adams, and every of Adams posterity: So, did this promise
of Grace generally appertain, as well to every and singular of Adams
posterity, as to Adam: as it is more plainly expressed. Where GOD promises to
bless in the seed of Abraham, all the Genesis 15. 4, 5. and 17. 1.
people of the world. And Paul makes no diversity in Christ, of Jew, nor
Gentile. Further, it was never Galat. 3, 28. Colos. 3, 11.
forbid, but that all sorts of people, and of every progeny in the world, to
be made partakers of the Jews Religion and Ceremonies. Further, St. Paul
does, by collation of Adam and Christ, Sin and Romans 5, 15.
Grace, thus interpret GODs promise; and I^aketh not Christ inferior to Adam;
nor grace, unto sin. If all then shall be saved; what is to be said of
those, that St. Peter speaks of; That shall perish for their false Doctrine.
And likewise Christ 2, Pet. 2, 1. 3.
says; That the gate is straight that teadeth to Life, and few enter. Thus the
Scripture answers: (...) the promise of Grace appermineth to every sort of
men in the world, and comprehends them all, howbeit within certain limits
and bound(...) the which, if men neglect, or pass over, they exclude
themselves from the Promise in CHRIST: as Caine was no more excluded, till he
excluded himself, than Abell; Saul, than David; Judas, Malac. 1. 2. 3. Romans 9,
13.
than Peter; Esau, than Jacob. By the Scripture, it seems, that the sentence
of GOD was given to save the one, and to damn the other; before the one loved
GOD, or the other hared GOD. Howbeit See B. Iati(...), part, 2. fol. ^2. Christ
shed as much blood for Judas, as for Peter, etc.
these threatenings of GOD against Esau (if he had not of his wilful malice
excluded himself from the promise of Grace) should no more have hindered his
Salvation, than GODS threatenings against Ninivie, (which notwithstanding that
GOD said should be destroyed within 40. days) Jonas, 1, 2.
stood a great time after, and did Penance. Esau was Circumcised and presented
unto the Church of GOD by his Father Isaac in all external ceremonies, as well
as Jacob. And, that his life and conversati^n was not as agreeable unto justice
and equity, as Jacobs: the sentence of GOD unto Rebeced Genesis 25. 23.
was not in the fault; but his own malice. Forthere is mentioned nothing at
all, in that place, that Esau was disinherited of eternal life: but, that he
should be inferior to his brother Jacob in this world. Which Prophecy was
fulfilled in their Posterities; and not the persons themselves. Of this
acceptance of the one, and reprobation of the other, (concerning the promise
of the earth) speaks Malachy the Mal. 1. 2, 3.
Prophet; as, the beginning of his book declares, speaking in this wise: I
have loved you (says the Lord,) and ye say: Wherein have thou loved us? God
answers: Was not Esau Jacobs brother? (says the Lord) Not withstanding, I
loved Jacob and hated Esau. Wherein hated GOD Esau? The Prophet shows: I have
made his possession, that was the mount Seir, desolate; as a desert, or wilder
nesse of Dragons: the which happened in the time of Nabucho donozor. Wherein
he loved Jacob, the Text declares; God transferred the right and title that
appertained unto Esau the elder Brother, to Jacob the younger. Likewise, the
Laad that was promised unto Abraham and Isaac, was by legacy and testament,
given unto Jacob and his Posterities. St. Genesis 25. 23. and 27, 28, 29. Romans 9,
11, etc.
Paul uses this example of Jacob and Esau, for none other purpose, but to take
away from the Jews, the thing that they most put their trust in: to say; The
vain hope they had in the carnal Lineage, and natural descent from the family
and household of Abraham; and likewise their false considence, they had in the
keeping of the Law of Mose^. Paul's whole purpose is in the Epistle, to bring
Man unto a knowledge of his Sin, and to show him how it may be remitted, and
with many testimonies and examples of the Scripture, he proves Man to be
saved, only by Mercy, for the merits of Christ: which is apprehended and
received by Faith, as he at large shows in the 3, 4, and 5, Chapters of the
same Epistle.

In the understanding, of the which three Chapter aright, is required a
singular and exact ailigence: For it seems, by those places, that Paul
concludes, and in a manner includes the divine Grace, and promise of GOD,
within ^ertaine terms and limits, that only CHRIST should be efficatious
and profitable in those, that apprehend and receive this abundant grace by
Faith: and to such, as have not the use of Faith, neither CHRIST, nor Gods
grace to appertain. Now seeing no Romans 11. 32.
man, by reason of this nature all I^^redulity borne, and begotten with us, can
believe and put such confidence Galat. 3, 22:
in God, as he requires by his Law, as experience of our own weakness
declares, though Man have years and time to believe, the promise of GOD in
CHRIST appertains to no man. This sentence is plain in the last Chapter of
Mark; He that believes not, shall be damned. Mark. 16, 16.
Howbeit, we know by the Scripture, that notwithstanding this imperfection of
Faith, many shall be saved: And likewise, notwithstanding that Gods promise be
general unto all people of the World: yet many shall be damned. These two
Points therefore must be diligently discussed. First, how this faith, Math. 11.
28. Romans 11. 32.
being unperfect, is accepted of GOD. Then, how we be excluded from the promise
of Grace, that extends 1. Tim. 2. 4.
to all men.

I will not rehearse now the minds of other, but as briefly, and as simply, as
I can, declare the mind of the Scripture in this matter. Saint Paul calls
How Faith b^ing unperfect is accepted of God.
this servitude of Sin, naturally remaining in our Nature corrupted, some
times Apeitheian; then Amartian; at another time Asthenian. The first word
signifies an Impersuability, diffidence, incredulity, contumacy or
inobedience. The second, signifies Error, sin, or deceit. The third,
betokens Weakness, imbecility, or imperfection. So writes Paul: Man's body
to be first borne in imbecility. Also, that God concludes all men under
infidelity. Romans 11. 32.
In another place, That the Scripture does conclude All men under Sin. In
those three places Galat. 3; 20.
thou may see the three words that I rehearsed before: By which PAVL
describes the infirmities of Man: which infirmities, are translated into Esa
53. 4, 5. John, 1. 29.
CHRIST. Not so, that we should be delivered from them, as though they were
dead in our nature, or our nature changed, or should not provoke us any more to
ill; but, that they should not damn us, because Christ satisfied for them in
his Body. And Paul says; That Christ dyed for Sinners that were infirm, and
calls those sinners, the Enemies of Romans 5, 8.
(...).
God. Howbeit, he calls not them, Theostygas in the Scriptures; to wit, Vid.
Melanet. 2. part. Operum. page 268. Quanto magis Pater vester dabit sp: Sanctum
petentibus cum? Non ait, Cantemnentibus.
Contemners of GOD. How we are called the enemies of God.
Every man is called, in the Scripture, Wicked, and the enemy of God; for the
privation and lack of Faith and love that he owes to GOD. Et impij vocantur
qui non omnino sunt pij; That is, they are called wicked, that in all things
honor not GOD, believe not in God, and observe not his Commandments; as they
should do: which we cannot do, by reason of this natural infirmity or
hatred of the Flesh, as Paul calls it, against God. In this sense Rom 8, 7.
takes Paul this word Wicked, when he says; that Christ dyed for the wicked.
So, must we interpret St. Paul, and take his words; or else no man should be
Romans 5, 8.
damned. Now we know, that Paul himself, Saint John, and Christ, damneth the
Contemners of GOD, or such as willingly continue in sin, and will not Repent.
Those the Scripture excludes from the general promise of Grace. Thou see by
the places before rehearsed, that though we cannot believe in God, as
undoubtedly, as is required, by reason of this our natural sickness and
disease: yet for Christ's sake, in the judgment of God, we are accounted as
faithful believers: for whose sake this natural disease and sickness is
pardoned, by what name soever St. Paul calls the Natural infirmity, or
original sin in Man. And this imperfection or natural How we are excluded
from the promise of Grace that is extended to all.
sickness taken of Adam, excludes not the person from the promise of God in
Christ, except we transgress the limits, and bounds of this Original sin,
by our own folly and malice, and either of a contempt or hate of Gods word we
fall into sin and transform our selves into the Image of the Devil. Then ^ee
exclude, by this means, our selves from Christ received our infirmities but
not the contempt of the Law, and of God.
the promises and merits of Christ: who, only, received our infirmities, and
original disease: and not the contempt of him and his Law. Further the
Promises appertain to such as Repent. Therefore Esaias said without exception;
That the infirmities of all Men were cast upon his blessed shoulders. It is our
office therefore to see, we exclude not our selves from the general Grace,
promised to all men. It is not a Christian man's part to attribute his salvation
to his own free will, with the Pelagian, and extenuate original Sin. Nor to
make God the author of ill, and our damnation; with the Manichee. Nor yet to
say, God has written fatal Laws, as the Stoicke, and with necessity of
Destiny, violently pulls one by the hair into Heaven; and thrusts the
other headlong into Hell. But assertaine thy self, by the Scripture, what be
the causes of Reprobation; and what, of Election. The cause of Reiection, or
damnation, is Sin in Man; which will not hear, neither The cause of
Damnation in man.
receive the Promise of the Gospel; or else, after he has received it, by
accustomed doing of ill, falls either into a contempt of the Gospel, and
will not study to live thereafter, or else hates the Gospel, because it
condemns his ungodly life: and would there were neither God, nor Gospel to
punish him, for doing of ill. This sentence is true; howsoever Man judge of
Predestination. God is not the cause of Sin; nor would not have Man to sin.
Thou art not the GOD that wills sin. Psalm. 5, 4.
And it is said: Thy perdition, O Israel, is of thy self, and thy succor
only of me. The cause of our Ose, 1 3, 9.
Election is the Mercy of God in Christ. Howbeit, The cause of man's Election,
Romans 9, 16.
he that will be partaker of this Election, must receive the Promise in Christ
by faith; for therefore we be elected, because afterward we are made the
members of Christ. Therefore, as in the justification or remission of Sin,
there is a cause, though no dignity Ephesians. 1, 5. Romans 8, 29.
at all, in the receiver of his justification; and so we judge him by the
Scripture to be Justified, and has remission of his sin, because he
received the Grace promised in CHRIST. So we judge of Election, by the event
or success, that happens in the life of Man: those only to be elected, that
by Faith apprehend the mercy promised in Christ: otherwise, we should not
judge of Election. For Paul says plainly: That they that believe by the spirit
of God, are the Children of God, and that the Romans 8, 15. 15, 16.
spirit of God does testify with our spirits, that we are the children of
God; being admonished therefore by Scripture, we must leave sin, and do the
works commanded of God, or else it is a carnal opinion that we have blinded
our selves withal, of fatal Destiny, and yet will not save us. And, in What
declares a lively Faith. John, 6. 44. How God draws unto Christ.
case there follow not in our knowledge of Christ, amendment of life, it is not
lively Faith that we have, but rather a vain knowledge and mere presumption.
John says; No man comes to me except my Father draw him: Many men understand
these words in a wrong sense: as though, God required in a reasonable man, no
more Nec tamen habeut se Men's and voluntas vt statua: ideo diueru^t ^eteres,
Praecedente gratia, comitante voluntate, bona opera fieri. Melau^th. part. 2.
Operu^. p. 268. and page 248.
than in a dead poast: and marketh not the words that follow; Every man In
illo loco Ieannis decitur. Omnis qui aud^t a Patre et discit. veniet ad me:
Discere iubet, id est, Audire vocem Doctrinae traditaem a^ ipso and assentiri,
non indulgere di^^edentia. Melan^^h. ibid.
that hears and learneth of my Father comes to me. GOD draws with his
Word, and the Holy Ghost, but Man's duty is to hear, and learn; That is to
say, Receive the grace offered, consent to the Promise, and not repugne the God
that calls. GOD does promise the Holy Ghost unto them that ask him, and not
to them that contemn him.

We have the Scripture daily in our hands, read it, and hear it Preached,
Gods mercy ever continue the same. Let us think verily that now God calls,
and convert our lives to it. Let us obey it, and beware, we suffer not our
foolish judgments to wander after the flesh, least the Devil wrap us in
darkness, and teach us to seek the Election of God, out of the Scripture.
Although webe of our selves bondmen unto sin, and can do no good by reason
our Original and race is vicious, yet has not the Devil induced wholly his
similitude into any of Adams posterity, but only into those that contemn, and
of a set purpose, and a destinyed malice hate God, as Pharao, and Saul. The one
gathered all his men of war, and would fight with GOD and his Exodus 14.
Church, rather than obey his Commandment. The other, would against GODS
express will, and 1. Sa(...). 18. 11. See B Latimer, part. 2. fol. 54. Math.
12, 32. Mark. 3, 29. Luke 12, 10. 1. John, 5, 16. Heb. 10, 26. Genesis 3, 45. D.
F. Handum. page 214.
pleasure, kill David, that God had ordained to be King. These sins Christ
calls, The Sins of Infirmity are committed against the Power of the Father.
Sins of Ignorance, against the Wisdom of the Soun^: Sins of Malice, against
the goodness and grace of the Holy Ghost.
Sin against the Holy Ghost. St. John, Sin unto Death. St. Paul,
Voluntary, or willing sin. We must therefore judge by the Scripture, and
believe all things there spoken. Know thereby the will of God, and search not
to know the thing that appertains nothing to thine office. Remember how
crafty a workman the Devil is, and what practice he has used with other.
Chiefly, and before all things, he goes about to take this persuasion, that
Gods word is true, out of man's heart: as he did with Adam; that thought nothing
less than to Dye, as God said. Then thought he wholly to have printed his
own Image in Adam, for the Image of GOD: and to bring him to an utter
contempt, and hatred of God for ever, as he had brought him to diffidence and
doubt of his Word. Here let us all take ^eed of our selves, which daily by the
word of GOD, being admonished of ill, yet amend not.

We shall find at length, God to be just in his word, and will punish with
eternal fire our contumacy and in obedience: which fire shall be no less hot,
than his word speaks of. So did he also with Saul persuade that God was so
good, that though he offended, he would not punish him, as he said: But 1. Sam.
15, 15.
be pleased with a fa^^e sacrifice again. This doctrine is therefore necessary
to be known of all men: that God is just and true, and requires of us fear
and obedience; as Saint John faith, He that sent John 8. 26. Psalm. 145. 17. The
justice of God intends it self to two diverse ends.
^^o is true! DAVID speaks thus of his Justice, The Lord is just in all his
ways. And understand, that his justice extends to two diverse ends: the one
is, that he would all men to be saved, the other and, to give every man
according to his acts.

To obtain the first end of his justice, as many as be not utterly wicked, and
may be help: partly, with threatenings, and partly, with promises he allureth;
and provokes them unto amendment of life. The other part of his justice,
rewards the obedience of the good, and punishes the inobedience and contempt
of the ill. These two justices the elders do call correctivam, and
retributivam. Jonas Jonas, 2. Mat. 25. 31, etc.
the Prophet speaks of the first: and, Christ, of the second. God would all
men to be saved: and therefore provokes, now by fair means, now by foul,
that the sinner should satisfy his just and righteous pleasure: not, that the
promises of GOD appertain unto such as will not repent; or his Threatenings,
unto him that does repent: but, those means he uses to save his creature.
This way uses he to nurture us, until such time as his Holy spirit 1. Cor.
11. 32.
work such a perfection in us, that we will obey him, though there were no
pain nor joy mentioned at all.

Therefore look not only upon the promise of God, but also, what diligence and
obedience he requires of thee, least thou do exclude thy self from the
Promise. There was promised unto all these that departed out of Egypt with
Moses the land of Canaan: howbeit, for disobedience of Gods Commandments,
there was but one or two that entered. Of the other part, thou see that, of
the menaces and horrible threatenings of God, that Ninivie the great City
should be destroyed within forty days, nothing appertained unto the Ninivites,
because they did Penance, and returned to God. In them see thou (Christian
Reader) the Mercy of God, and general Promise of salvation performed in
Christ; for whose sake only, GOD and Man was set at one. So that they received
the Preaching of the Prophet, and took God for their God, and God took them
to be his people, and for a certainty thereof, revoked his Sentence, that gave
them but forty days of life. They likewise promised Obedience unto his holy
Laws and Commandments, as God give us all grace to do. That though we be
infirm and weak to all virtues, we exclude not our selves by contempt or
negligence from the Grace promised to all men. Thus farewell in CHRIST.

Novembris 5. Anno 1549.
CHAP. 17. 4. Curiosity.
THe fourth let or Impediment (of keeping The fourth impediment.
GODS law) is Curiosity and overmuch searching the Privities and secrets of
GOD, when men of an ill and licentious life return not to Repentance, as the
Scripture bids, but mount straight way into Gods providence and
Predestination; contemning the will of God that is made open unto him in the
Scripture; that God would have him now to Repent, and to receive Grace; and
search to know the thing that never was made open to Man or Angel: the event
and end of things to come. Thus reasons Man with himself: Who knows what
his last hour shall be? Wherefore favors God the one, and not the other?
Sometime the good makes an ill end; and the ill a good. In this opinion and
inscrutable mystery he wears all his wits, and, at the end of his
cogitations, finds more hidden and doubtful objections, than at the
beginning; so that he comes from this School neither wiser nor better.
Moses remooveth this ungodly Deuteronomy. 19. 29.
let and impediment, saying: The secrets of the Lord our God are made open unto
us, and unto our children for ever, that we do all the precepts of this law.
The which words plainly condemn our foolish and audacious presumption; that
seek to know what shall happen unto us in the hour of death; and will not
know the thing that should be done in all our lives; to wit, that God would
have us know the thing that is opened unto us, in the Scripture; or Gods mercy
promised in Christ Jesus, and follow him in all virtue. If we offend, and
repent, and leave sin, then has he promised mercy and will give it. Moses
says: Do the thing that thou art bid to do; and follow the will of Deuteronomy. 30
19.
God made open to thee in his word. As for the disputation of Gods providence,
is a curiosity and no relig(...) (...) presumption, and no faith; a le^ of
virtue, and furtherance of vice. When thou hear repon^ance spoken of, learn
that lesson out of hand: lest per adventure tho^ be never good scholar in
divinity of Gods laws. It fares many times with us, that we go long to
school in divinity, and yet never good divines, as it fares in the school of
rethorike: whereas, if at the beginning, the scholar profit not, (as Aristotle
says) he shall never be good orator. Therefore Moses says: God gave you not a
heart to understand, eyes to see, nor ears to hear, until this present day.
Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
Here does Moses speak ironice, and seems to deny the thing, he would
affirm. As Aristotle or Cicero might say, (when they have applied all their
labor, and done the best they can, to make their scholars learned, yet profit
nothing, then depart out of the school; and say unto their audience:) I never
opened unto you the science that I taught you. Not, that the fault was in him,
but in the auditors, that neglected their diligence and Doctrine. So does Moses
now speak of God; not that the fault was in him, that those unkind people
understood not the doctrine, he taught, but in themselves: as it appears in
the text; for, he uses now the rod of persecution; punishes them; beats
them, yea and kills them; because they would not learn the thing he taught
them: yea further, he shows that his pleasure was, they should choose the
good, Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
and leave the ill, to be in wealth, and avoid the woe. This argument he
proves, of his own nature; which is amiable, loving, and holy; inclined to
do well unto man, and to be at peace with him. But because man, of his own
malice, contemns the word and doctrine of God; he is not only rigorous and
severe against man, but also he waxes so angry for sin, as he that chafeth
and moves himself; that all men may perceive by his countenance he is
offended; therefore (says the text) the fury of God Deuteronomy. 29. 27.
shall smoke against the sinner. Our gospellers be better learned than the
Holy ghost; for they wickedly attribute the cause of punishment and adversity
to Gods providence: which is the cause of no ill; as he himself can do no ill:
and of every mischief that is done they say it was Gods will. The Holy ghost
puts another cause: that is to say: Sin in man, and contempt of his holy
word. Further, the pain is not inflicted by predestination to lose man; but
both predestination and the affliction extend to call man from damnation. The
blind southsayers, that Ezech. 33. 1. Cor. 11, Psalm. 119. Revel. 3. Esaias 26.
Hebr. 12.
writ of things to come, are more to be esteemed, than these curious and high
climing wits; for they attribute the cause of ill to the ill aspects, and
sinister conjunctions of the planets. Refuse not therefore the grace offered,
not once received banish it not with ill conversation. If we fall, let us
hear almighty God, that calls us to repentance with his word, and return;
let us not continue in sin, nor heap one sin upon another, lest at last,
we come to a contempt of God and his word: for, remission is promised to as
many as repent: as Moses shows; and likewise all the scripture and examples
thereof. But remember Deuteronomy. 30. 1. 2,
what the text says, that thou must convert unto God; and that by the means
and mediation of Christ, and that with all thy heart; and then thou may find
remedy. Convert not to superstition, and buy not a mass for thy sins; nor
look for help of any Saint; but only of God; as his word teaches: for he
that struck thee for sin, can heal thee again: say not in adversity, as
Cicero John, 15.
did: Except God, or some good hap do save us, we cannot Cic. lib Epist. 16.
escape. For there is nothing in Heaven nor Earth that saves, but God alone.

CHAP. 19. 6. Ignorance.
THe sixth let, or impediment wherewith men excuse themselves from the obedience
of the law of GOD, is the pretense of ignorance, the which they do think
shall excuse them. Thus they say; the Scripture has so many mysteries in it
self, and is too hard for our capacity. Sometime the letter; sometime the
spirit; and sometime both, must be understood. Further, they say the Doctors
braule and chide between themselves; and how should the unlearned understand it
aright? Who can tell, says another, whether this be the true law, or not? If
it were the true law of God, then should it contain all verities, and have no
need of man's laws. Now First, they of the Church of Rome.
the greatest part of such as have the name of Christianity, say, Gods laws
save no man, instruct no man aright; no, it is not wholesome for man, except it
be held and aided by the law of the Meaning the Popes of Rome.
Bishops. This the world owes to the Bishops decrees, that have called the
authority of the holy Testament that contains all truth (whose sufficiency
and verity is scaled with the precious blood of Christ) into doubt: and not
into doubt only, but clean abrogated it, and preferred their own laws.
Confer their preachings, and ministration of the Sacramints with the holy
word and law of God, and see. Other say, I have no wit to understand the Word
of GOD; and if I had; yet have I no leisure to learn it. Against this
objection, Moses answers, and says this law is sufficient, is simple, and
plaint, easy to be understood, a perfect doctrine, and required of all men.
Thus he proves it; the Commandment that I prescribe unto thee to day, is not
far above thee, Deuteronomy. 30, 1^.
nor put far from thee; read the last half of the chapter. By the which
words it appears, that GOD has made his will, and pleasure, simply and
plainly open unto his people, with apt sentences and open words, and also put
the same to us, that we should not seek it with great danger of our life, to
sail into the Indies for it, or look it in Heaven above; as those that
receive all things by revelation, Enthusiasts.
or apparitions of Angels, or other such means. But Moses says, it is no need
of any such ambassadors, and so says Abraham. For man may learn out of the
Scripture, what is to be done, and what not to be done, Luke 16, 29.
what is the condition of the good and of the bad. No need to seek the
knowledge thereof in Egypt, Athens, or Rome. But the word is present, and at
hand with thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou should do it. By
these words we see, that in the greatest sinner that is, is a certain rule and
knowledge to live well thereby, if he did follow it. So confounded St. Paul the
Gentiles of Romans 1. 21.
sin: because they knew the evil, they did, was condemned by the testimony
of their own conscience. For, the law of God to do well by, is naturally
written in the heart of every man. He, that will diligently search himself,
shall soon find the same; and, in case, man should behold his own Image both
in body and in soul, although there were no law written, nor Heavens over our
heads to testify the goodness and the justice of God, and the equity of an
honest life: man's conscience would Romans 2, 15.
tell him, when he does well; and when evil. Further, the judgment and
discourse of reason desires not only to live justly in this world, but also
to live for ever in eternal felicity without end: and that comes by the
similitude of God, which yet remains in the soul after the sin of Adam.
Whereby, we see plainly, that those excuses of ignorance be damnable when man
sees he could do well, if he followed the judgment of his own conscience.
So that, we see, that the law of God is either outwardly or inwardly, or both
ways, opened unto man; and by Gods grace ye might do the good, and leave the
evil; if it were not of malice and accustomed doing of sin. The which
excuses the mercy and goodness of God; and makes that no man shall be
excused in the latter judgment, how subtly soever they now excuse the
matter, and put their evil doings from them, and lay it upon the
predestination of GOD, and would excuse it by ignorance; or say, he cannot be
good, because he is otherwise destinied. This Stoicall opinion reprehended
Horace: Nemo adeo ferus est, vt non mitoscere possit, Simodo, etc.
No man is so cruel (says he) but may wax meek, so that he give a willing
care to Discipline. Although thou can not come to so far knowledge in the
Scripture, as other that believed, by reason thou art unlearned, or else thy
vocation will not suffer thee all days of thy life to be a student, yet may
thou know, and upon pain of damnation art bound to know, the Articles of thy
faith, to know God in Christ, and the holy Catholic Church, by the word of God
written; the ten Commandments, to know what works thou should do; and
what to leave undone; the Pater Noster, Christ's prayer, which is an
abridgement, epitome, or compendious collection of all the Psalms and prayers
written in the whole Scripture. In the which thou prayest for the remission of
sin, as well for thy self as for all other; desire the grace of the holy
Ghost to preserve thee in virtue, give thanks for the goodness of God
toward thee and all other. He that knows less than this cannot be saved;
and he that knows no more than this, if he follow his knowledge, cannot be
damned. There be two common verses that all men in manner know, and doubtless
worthy, that teach us that to know Christ, though we know no more, is
sufficient.

That is to say; Hoc est nes^ire, sine Christlo plurimas^ir^.
To be ignorant, is to know many things without Christ. If thou know Christ
well, it is sufficient, though thou be ignorant of all other things.

Thus far the Judgment of B. HOOPER.
THE IVDGEMENT OF B. LATIMER.
B. LATIMER Sermons, Part. 3. Fol. 213. In his Sermon upon Septuagesima. MVlti
sunt vocati, pauci vero Electi; That is; Many are called, and few are chosen.
These words of our Saviors are very hard to understand; and therefore it is
not good to be too Curious in them, Curious interpretations of Scriptures, are
wicked and odious.
as some vain fellows do; who seeking Carnal liberty, pervert, toss, and
turn the Word of GOD, after their own mind, and purpose. Such (I say) when
they read these words, make their Reckoning thus, saying; What need I to
mortify my body with abstaining from all sin, and wickedneis; I perceive God
has Chosen some, and some are rejected; now if I be in the number of the
Chosen, I cannot be Damned: But if I be accounted among the condemned number,
then I cannot be Saved. For GODS Judgments are immutable. Such foolish, and
wicked reasons some have; which brings them either to Desperation, or else to
carnal Liberty. Therefore it is as needful, to beware of such reasons, or
Expositions of the Scriptures; as it is to beware of the Devil himself. But
if thou art desirous to know whether thou art chosen to Everlasting life: Thou
may not begin with God; for God is too high; thou can not comprehend him:
the Judgments of God, are unknown to Man; therefore thou may not begin
there. But begin with Christ, and learn to know Christ; Enter not into the
inscrutable Mysteries of God.
and wherefore that he came; namely, that he came to save Sinners; and made
himself a Subject to the Law; and a fulfiller of the same, to deliver us from
the wrath, and danger thereof: and therefore was Crucified for our Enter into
Christ, and there seek thy Salvation.
Sins, and rose again, to show, and teach us the way to Heaven; and by his
Resurrection; to teach us to arise from sin. So also his Resurrection,
teaches, and admonishes us of the general Resurrection. He sits at the
right hand of God, and makes intercession for us, and gives us the Holy
Ghost, that comfort, and strengthens our Faith, and daily assures us of
our Salvation.

Consider I say Christ, and his coming; and then begin Christ, is the Book of
Life, wherein our Names be written, if we bele^ve in him.
to try thy self whether thou art in the book of life, or not. If thou
find thy self in Christ; then thou art sure of everlasting life. If thou be
without him; then thou art in evil case. For it is written: Nemo venit ad
patrem, nisi per me, that is: No man comes unto the Father, John, 6.
but through me. Therefore, if thou know Christ; then thou may know
further of thy Election. But when we are about this matter, and Troubled within
our selves, whether we be elect, or no; we must ever have this Maxim, or
principal Rule before our eyes; namely, that GOD bears a good will toward
us. God loves us; God bears a fatherly heart toward us: But you will say;
how shall I know that? or how shall I John, 1, 3.
believe that? We may know Gods will toward us through Christ: God has opened
himself unto us by his Son Christ. For so says John the Evangelist: Filius,
qui est in sinu Patris, ipse revelavit; that is, The Son which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has revealed. Therefore we may perceive his good
will, and love toward us, he has sent the same his Son into this world,
which has suffered most painful death for us. Shall I now think that God
hates me? or shall I doubt of his love toward me? Here you see how you shall
avoid the scrupulous, and most dangerous question of the Predestination of God.
For, if thou will inquire his counsayles, and enter into his consistory, thy
wit will deceive thee; for thou shall not be able to search the counsels of
God. But if thou begin with Christ; and consider his coming into the world;
and do believe, that God has sent him for thy sake, to suffer for thee; and
to deliver thee from sinnz, death, the Devil, and Hell. Then, when thou art so
armed with the knowledge of Christ; then (I say) this simple question cannot
How you shall know, when you are in the Book of life.
hurt thee: for thou art in the book of life, which is Christ himself.

Also we learn by this sentence, (Multi sunt vocati, That many are called,
etc.) That the Preaching of the Gospel is universal; that it appertains to
All mankind; that it is written, In omnem terram exivit sonus little, Psalm. 19.
Rom, 10, 18.
Through the whole earth, their sound is heard. Now seeing that the Gospel is
universal, it appears that he would have all Mankind saved; and that the
fault is not in him, if we be Damned. For it is written thus: Deus vult owmnes
homines salvos fieri; God would have all men 1, Tim. 2, 4. God would, that All
should be saved.
to be saved; his salvation is sufficient to save all Mankind; But we are so
wicked of our selves, that we refuse the same; and we will not take it, when
it is offered unto us, and therefore he says: Pauci vero electi; Few are
chosen; That is, few have pleasure and delight in it. For the most part are
weary of it; and cannot abide it; and there are some that hear it, but they
will abide no danger for it; they love more their riches, and possessions, than
the word of God; and therefore, Pauci sunt electi, there are but a few, that
stick heartily unto it; and can find in their hearts to forgo this world for
Gods sake, and his holy word. There are some now adays, that will not be
reprehended by the Gospel, they think themselves better, than it. Some again
are so stubborn, that they will rather forswear Our stubbornness and lack
of Faith, is the Cause of our Damnation.
themselves, than confess their sins, and wickedness: Such men are cause of
their own Damnation; for God would have them saved; but they refuse it; like
as did Judas the Traitor; whom Christ would have had to be saved; but he
refused his salvation. He refused to follow the Doctrine of his Master Christ.
And so, whosoever hears the Word of God, and follows it, the same is Elect
by him. And again, whosoever refuses to hear the word of God, and to follow
the same, is Damned. So that our Election is sure, if we follow the word of
God. Here is now taught you how to try out your Election: A right Doctrine to
try our Election.
namely, in Christ. For Christ is the accompting book, and Register of God.
Even in the same Book, that is Christ, are written all the names of the Elect:
Therefore we cannot find our Election in our selves, neither yet in the high
Counsel of God: for Inscrutabilia sunt iudi Job, 34.
cia altissimi; where then shall I find my Election? In the counting book of
GOD, which is Christ: For thus it is written: Sic Deus dilexit mundum; that is,
God so entirely loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, Ioh.
3, 10.
to that end, that all that believe in him should not perish, but have life
Everlasting. Whereby appears most plainly, that Christ is the Book of Life;
and that all that believe in him, are in the same Book, and so are chosen to
Everlasting life; for only those are ordained, which believe.

Therefore, when thou have faith in Christ, then thou art in the book of Life,
and so art thou sure of thy Election: Christ is the Book of Life.
And again, If thou be without Christ, and have no Faith in him; neither art
sorry for thy wickedness; nor have a mind, and purpose to leave, and forsake
Sin, but rather exercise, and use the same; then The unbeleevers are not in
the book of Life.
thou art not in the book of Life, as long as thou art in such a case; and
therefore shall thou go into Everlasting fire; namely, if thou dye in thy
wickedness, and finne without Repentance. But there are none so wicked but he
may have a Remedy; what is that? Enter into thine own heart, and search the
secrets of the same. Consider thine own life, and how thou have spent thy
days. And if thou find in thy self all manner of uncleanness, and
abominable sins, and so see thy Damnation before thine eyes, what shall
thou then do? Confess the same unto thy Lord GOD, be sorry that thou have
offended so loving a Father, and ask mercy of him in the name of Christ, and
believe steadfastly that he will be merciful unto thee, in the respect of his
only Son which suffered Death for thee; and then have a good purpose to
leave all sin and wickedness, and to with-stand The right way, how thou
may be assured of everlasting life.
and resist the affections of thine own flesh, (which ever fight against the
spirit,) and to live uprightly, and godly, after the will, and Commandment of
thy heavenly Father. If thou go thus to work, surely thou shall be heard, thy
sins shall be forgiven thee, God will show himself true in his Promise.
For, to that end, he has sent his only Son into this world, that he might
save Sinners. Consider therefore, I say, Wherefore Christ came into this world;
Consider also, the great Hatred, and wrath, that God bears against Sin; and
again, consider his great Love showed unto thee, in that he sent his only
Son to suffer most cruel Death, rather than that thou should be damned
Everlastingly.

Thus speaks that Learned B. and Blessed Martyr, in that place. And in
another place, he says:

O What a pitiful thing is it; That a man will not Idem. Part. 3. sol. 207.
In his Sermon, on the First Sunday after Epiphani^.
consider this, and leave Sin, and Pleasure of this world, and live godly,
but is so blind, and so mad, that he will rather have a momentary and a very
short, and smll pleasure, han to hearken to the Will and pleasure of Alnighty
God; that might avoid Everlasting pain, and ^oe, and give unto him Everlasting
felicity. For that a ^reat many of us are Damned, the fault is not in God; 1,
Tim. 2. 5.
for Deis vult omnes homines salvos fieri; GOD would have all men to be saved:
But the fault is in our selves, We ourselves are causes of our own damtion.
and in o^ own madness, that had rather have Damnation, th^^ Salvation.

And fu^her, in another passage, the same Holy Marty, writes in this manner:
viz.

We rode in the Acts of the Apostles; That I'^m. Part. 3. fol. 198. In his
Sermon, on the third Sunday after Epiphanic. Act. 13, 48.
when Saint Paul had made a long Sermon, at Antioch, then believe (says the
Evangelist) as many as were ordaind to life Everlasting. With the which saying,
(...) great number of people have been offended: and have said; We perceive
that only those shall come to believe, and so to everlasting life, which are
chosen of God unto it; therefore it is no matter whatsoever we do. A lewd
opinion of Predesti. nation.
For if we be Chosen to Everlasting life, we shall have it: And so they have
opened a door unto themselves, of all Wickedness, and carnal liberty,
against the true meaning of the Scripture. For, if the most part be damned,
the fault is not in God; but in themselves. For it is written, Deus vult omnes
homines salvos fieri: God would that 1, Tim. 2.
all men should be saved: But they themselves procure their own damnation; and
despise the passion of Christ, by their We our selves procure our own
Damnation.
own wicked, and inordinate living. Here we man learn to keep us, from all
curious and dangerous questions. When we hear that some be chosen, and some
^ee damned, let us have good hope, that we shall be among he chosen; and live
after this hope; that is, uprightly, and godly, then thou shall not be
deceived. Think that God has chosen those that believe in Christ; and Christi
the Christ, the Book of Life.
book of life. If thou beleevest in him, then thou ar^ritten in the book of
life, and shall be saved: So we need not to go about to trouble our selves
with curios questions of the Predestination of God. But let us rater endeavor
our selves, that we may be in Christ; for ^hen we be in him, then are we well,
and then we my be sure, that we are ordained to Everlasting life. But you will
say; How shall I know that I am in the bookof life? How shall I try my self to
be Elect of God to evelasting Life? I answer; First, we may kn^w, that we may
and time be in the book, and another time come ^t again; as it appears by
DAVID: which was written in the book of life: But when he sinned, he, at that
same time was How we may know, when we are in the state of Salvation, and when
Not.
out of the book of the favor of God; until he had repented, and was sorry
for his faults. So we ^ay be in the book, one time; and afterward, when we
^rget God, and his word, and do wickedly, we come out of the book; that is,
out of Christ, which is the book. And in that Book, are written all
believers. But I will tell you how you shall know, when you are in the book.
And there are Three marks, whereby we may know, whether we be in the book of
Life, or no. The first.
three especial notes, whereby we may know the same. The first note is, if
you know your sin and feel your own wretchedness, and filthiness; which
is a great matter; for the most part of people, are so drowned in sin, that
they no more feel the same; for sin greeveth them no more. According to the
saying of Solomon: Impius quum in medium peccatorum venit, contemnit; That is,
The ungodly man, when he enters into the midst of all sin, and mischief,
despises the same; he regards Sin nothing at all, neither is he sorry for it;
But, as I said, the first note is, when you know your sin, and feel the
same; then are they heavy unto you and greeve you. Then follows the second
point, which is faith in The second.
Christ; that is, when you believe most steadfastly, and undoubtedly, that God
the Heavenly father, through his Son, will deliver you from your sins. When
you believe, I say, that the blood of our Savior is shed for you, for the
cleansing, and putting away of your sins; and believing this most steadfastly,
with an unfeigned heart, then you have the second Point. The third point is, The
third.
when you have an earnest desire to amendment, and hatred against Sin, study
to live after Gods will and Commandments, as much as is possible for you to
do; then have you the third Point. And when you find these three Points to
be in you: Namely, first when you know your sin, and be sorry for the same,
and afterward believe to be saved, through the passion of Jesus Christ: And
Thirdly; have an earnest desire to leave sin, and to fly the same: when you
find these three things in your hearts, then you may be sure that your names
are written in the book, and you may be sure also, that you are elect and
predestinate to everlasting life.

And again, when you see not your wickedness, and that sin grieveth you
not; neither have you faith, or hope in our Savior, and therefore are
Careless, and study not for amendment of life; then you are in a heavy An
evident and plain Doctrine that shows you when you are out of the ^^^or of
God.
case; and then you have cause to cry, and lament your wretchedness; For
truly, you are not in the book of life; but the Devil has power over you,
as long as ye are in such a state. Here you see now, how you shall try your
selves, whether you be in the book of life, or no, etc.

And, again.

THe Evangelist, says he, when Jesus was borne. Idem. Part. 3. fol. 183. In
his Sermon, on the first Sunday after Epiphani^.
What is Jesus? Jesus is an Hebrew word, and signifies in our English tongue,
a Savior, and Redeemer of all Mankind, borne into this world. This title, and
name to save, appertains properly, and principally unto him; for, he saved
us; else had we been lost for ever. Notwithstanding the name of Savior is
used in common speech; as the King, is called a Savior; for The term
(Savior) is used in sundry common speeches.
he saves his subjects, from all danger, and harm, that may ensue of the
Enemies. Likewise, the Physician, is accounted a Savior; for he saves the
sick man from the danger of his disease; with good and wholesome medicines. So
Fathers and Mothers are Saviors; for they save their Children from bodily
harm, that may happen unto them; So Bridges, leading over the waters.
Likewise, Ships and Boats, great and small Vessels upon the Seas, are
Saviors; for they save us from the fury, rage, and tempest of the Sea. So
Judges, are Saviors; for they save, or at least should save the people from
wrong, and oppression. But all this is not perfect saving; for, what avails
it to be saved from Sickness, Calamities, and Oppression, when we shall be
condemned after our death, both body and soul for ever, to remain with the
Devil and his Angels? We must therefore come to Jesus which is the right, and
true Savior; And, he it is, that Jesus Christ is our only Savior.
has saved us from sin. Whom has he saved? His people; how saved he them?
First, by Magistrates, he saves the poor from oppression, and wrong: The
Children he saves, through the Tuition of the How many ways Christ saves us.
Parents from danger, and peril: by Physicians, he saves from sickness, and
diseases: but from sin he saves only through his Passion and
bloudshedding. Therefore he may be called and is the very Christ's Death is
only our Salvation.
right Savior: for it is he, that saves from all infelicitie all his
faithful people; and his salvation is sufficient, to satisfy for all the
world, as concerning it self; but, as concerning us, he saved no more, but
such as put their trust in him. And as many as believe in him shall be saved;
The other shall be cast out, as Infidels, into everlasting damnation. Not for
lack of Salvation; but for Infidelity, Si is the only cause of Dam*
and lack of Faith; which is the only cause of their damnation.

He saved us from what? even from sin? Now, when he saved us from sin, then
he saved us from the wrath of God; from affliction, and calamities; from Hell,
and Death, and from Damnation, and everlasting pain: for Sin is the cause, and
fountain of all mischief: Take away sin, then all other Calamities, wherein
mankind is wrapped, are taken away and clean gone, and dispersed: Therefore,
he saving us from sin, saved us from all affliction. But how does he save us
from sin? In this manner; that sin shall not condemn us; Sin How we be
saved from Sin.
shall not have the victory over us. He saved us not so, that we should be
without sin; that no sin should be left in our hearts: No, he saved us not
so. For all manner of imperfections, remain in us, yea in the best of us; so
that if God should enter into Judgment with us, we should all be damned. For
there are more, nor ever was any man borne into this world, which could say, I
am clean from sin, except, Jesus Christ. Therefore he saved Christ only, is
^oyd of sin.
us not from sin, in taking clean away the same; that we should not be
inclined unto it; but rather, the power, and strength of the same sin, he
has so vanquished, that it shall not be able to condemn those, which believe
in him: for sin is remitted, and not imputed unto the believers.

So likewise he saved us from sin, not taking it clean away, but rather, the
strength, and force of the same. So The Power and Force of Sin is taken away
by Christ.
he saved us from other Calamities, not taking the same clean away; but rather
the power of the same: So that no Calamity nor misery, should be able to hurt
us, that are in Christ Jesus. And likewise, he saved us from Death; not that we
should not dye; but that Death should have no victory over us, nor condemn us;
but rather, to be a way, and entrance unto Salvation, and everlasting Life: for
death is a gate to enter into everlasting life. No man can come to everlasting
life, but he must first dye bodily: But this death cannot hurt the faithful,
for they are exempted from all danger, through the death, and passion of Jesus
Christ our Savior, who with his death, has overcome our death.

And in another place, the same Father writes, as follows: viz.

THe Holy Scripture makes mention of a Sin against Idem. Part. 2. fol. 64.
In his First Sermon preached in Lincolushire, Anno 1553. upon These words. The
Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain King. Math. 22.
the Holy Ghost; which Sin cannot be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in
the world to come. And this makes many men unquiet in their hearts, and
consciences. For, some there be, which ever be afraid, least they have
committed that same sin against the Holy Ghost, which is irremissible.
Therefore some say, I cannot tell whether I have sinned against the Holy Ghost
or not: If I have committed that sin I know I shall be damned. But, I tell
you, what ye shall do; Despair There is a Sin against the Holy Ghost.
not of the Mercy of GOD; for it is immeasurable. I cannot deny, but there is a
Sin against the Holy Ghost, which is irremissible; But we cannot judge of it
aforehand; we cannot tell which man has committed that sin, or not, So
long, as men are alive, we cannot Judge whether they have committed the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, or not.
as long, as he is alive: But, when he is once gone, then I can Judge whether
he sinned against the Holy Ghost, or not. As now I can judge that Nero, Saul,
and Judas, and such like (that dyed in sins and wickedness) did commit this
sin against the Holy Ghost: for they were wicked and continued in their
wickedness still, to the very end. They made no end in their wickedness. But
we cannot judge, whether one of us sin this sin against the Holy Ghost, or
not. For though a man be wicked at this Christ knew the hearts of the
Pharisees and therefore judged of them
time, yet he may repent, and leave his wickednsse to morrow; and so not commit
that sin against the Holy Ghost. Our Savior Christ pronounced against the
Scribes, and Pharisees, that they had committed that sin against the Holy
Ghost: because He knew their hearts, he knew that they would still abide in
their wickedness to the very end of their lives.

Further the promises of Christ our Savior are general, they pertain to all
Mankind: he made a general Christ's promises are general, to All Mankind.
Ioh. 6, 47. Romans 5, 20. and 15, v.
Proclamation, saying: Qui credit in me, habet vitam aeternam; Whosoever
believes in me, has everlasting life. Likewise, St. Paul says: Gratia
exuperat super peccatum. The Grace and Mercies of God, exceeds far our
sins. Therefore let us ever think, and believe, that the grace of God, his
mercy, and goodness, excedeth our sins. Item, consider what Christ says,
with his own mouth; Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis etc. Come unto me All
ye, that labor, and are laden, and I Mat. ^^, 28.
will ease you. Mark here, he says; Come all ye: Wherefore then should any
body despair, or shut out himself from these promises of Christ, which be
general, and appertain to the whole world? For he says, Come all unto me:
and then again, he says, Refocillabo vos; I will refresh you, you shall be
eased from the burdens of your sins.

Therefore, as I said before, he that is blasphemous and obstinately wicked,
and abides in his wickedness, still to the very end, he sins against the
Holy Ghost: as St. Augustine, and all other godly writers do affirm, But he
that leaves his wickedness, and sins, and is content to amend his life, and
then, believing in Christ, seeks Salvation, and everlasting life by him: No
doubt that man, or woman, Whosoever they be shall be saved; For, they feed
upon Christ, upon that meat that God the Father this Feastmaker has prepared
for all his guests.

Such another passage. to This same purpose, you may Read in his sixth Sermon,
upon the Lords Prayer, Some two passages before the End of the Sermon; Speaking
against Novatus the Heretic.

CHrist only, and no man else, merited Remission, Idem. Part. 2. fol. 92. In
his fourth Sermon preached in Lincolnshire, upon Philipp, 3.
Justification, and eternal felicity for as many as will believe the same;
They, that will not believe it, shall not have it. For it is no more, but
believe and have: For Christ shed as much blood for Judas, as for Peter. Peter
believed it, and therefore he was saved: Judas would Judas lacked belief, and
therefore was not saved.
not believe; and therefore he was condemned. The Fault being in him only, and
in no body else.

Again, The same blessed Father, writes Thus; as follows.

SIc Deus dilexit mundum; So entirely has GOD Idem. Part: 2. fol. 132. In his
eight Sermon in Line: upon Luke 21, 25. Erunt Signa. John, 3.
loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son, to that end, that all
that believe in him, should not perish, but have life Everlasting: this is now
a Comfortable thing, and a great promise, which GOD makes unto the whole
world; and no doubt he is as able to fulfill that promise of Grace, as he was
able to fulfill His wrathful word against V^^. In the destruction of
Jerusalem, etc.
the Jews. So likewise he says: Vivo ego, dicit Dominus, nolo mortem
Peccatoris, sed ut convertatur, and vivat: As truly as I live (says the Lord
God) I will Bzech. 33, 11.
not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he shall turn, and live. It is
not his pleasure, when we be damned; therefore, he swears on Oath: we
ought to believe him The Cause, why God swear.
without an Oath; yet to satisfy our minds, and to the intent, that we
should believe him, and be the better assured of his goodwill toward Us, he
swears this Oath. Now therefore, if we will follow him, and leave our wicked
living, convert, and turn our selves unto him, be sorry for that which is past,
and intend to amend our life now forward: If we do so; no doubt, we shall
live with him everlastingly without end. Therefore let every one of us go into
his own heart, and when he finds that he has been a Wicked man, an
Irefull man, a Covetous, or a sloathfull man: Let him Repent, and be sorry for
it, and take a good purpose to leave that same sin, wherein he has lain
before. Let us not do, as the Jews did, which were stiff-necked; they would
not The reward of the Obstinate, and sti^uecked People.
leave their Sins, they had a pleasure in the same; they would follow their
old Traditions, refusing the Word of GOD: Therefore their Destruction came
worthily upon them: And therefore (I say) let us not follow them, least we
receive such a Reward, as they had; least everlasting destruction come upon us,
and so we be cast out of the favor of GOD, and finally lost, world without end.

Furthermore, in another Sermon, he says; as here follows:

I Say, there be two manner of Men: Some there be, that Idem. Page 114. In a
Sermon preached on Romans 13. 11.
are not Justified, not Regenerate; nor yet in State of Salvation: That is to
say, not GODS Servants: They lack the renovation, or Regeneration; they be not
come yet to CHRIST. Now these persons that be not come yet to Christ, or if
they were come to Christ, be fallen again from him: and so lost their
Justification (as there be many of us, which when we fall willingly into
Sin against Conscience, we lose the favor of GOD, our Salvation, and
finally the Holy Ghost:) all they now, that be out of the favor of GOD, and
are not sorry for it; Sin grieveth them not, they purpose to go forward in
it; All those that intend not to leave their Sins, are out of the Favor of
GOD; and so all their works, whatsoever they do, be deadly sins: For, as
long as they be in purpose to sin, they sin deadly in all their doings.
Therefore, when we will speak of the diversity of Sins, we must speak of
those that be Faithful, that be regenerated and made new, and clean from
their Sins through Christ.

To these two Holy Martyrs and learned Bishops, I add a third, who (when he
lived) was, in place, the First; and in Grace not inferior to any. It is
Archbishop CRANMER. He, speaking of the merit of Christ's Death, writes on
this wise. viz.

THE IVDGEMENT OF Archbishop CRANMER.
Archbishop CRNMER'S Preface to the Reader, in his Answer to Doctor GARDENER
Bishop of Winchester: Touching the Holy Sacrament. Printed by John Day, 1580.
and written by the said Father, Anno 1551. Our Savior CHRIST JESUS, according
to the Will of his Eternal Father, when the time thereto was fully
accomplished, taking our Nature upon him, came into this World, from the high
Throne of his Father; to declare unto miserable sinners good news; to Heal
them that were sieke; to make the Blind to see; the Deaf to hear; and the
Dumb to speak; to set Prisoners at liberty; to show that the time of Grace
and Mercy was come; to give Light to them that were in darkness, and in the
shadow of Death, and to preach and give Pardon, and full remission of Sin to
all his Elected; And to perform the same, he made a Sacrifice and oblation of
his own. Body upon the Cross, which was a full Redemption, satisfaction, and
propitiation for the Sins of the whole world.

And in another place.

CHRIST was such an high Bishop, that he once offering Idem. lib. 51. page 372.
himself, was sufficient by once effusion of his blood to abolish Sin unto
the worlds end. He was so perfect a Priest, that by One oblation he purged an
infinite heap of Sins, leaving an easy and a ready Remedy A plain
declaration of the Sacrifice of CHRIST.
for all Sinners; that his One sacrifice should suffice for many years unto
all Men, that should not show themselves unworthy. And he took unto himself
not only their sins, that many years before were dead, and put their trust
in him; but also, the sins of those that until his coming again should
truly believe in his Gospel. So that, now; we may look for none other
Priest, nor Sacrifice, to take away our Sins, but only him and his
Sacrifice. And, as he, Dying once, was offered for All, so as much as
pertained to him, he took all men's sins unto himself.

To which we join B. Jewel, in his Apology, toward B. Jewel. De^eus. Apolog.
Cap. 19. Devis. 1.
the End thereof. Certo Animis nostris persuademus, Illum (id est, Christum)
esse propitiatorem pro peccatis nostris: Eius Sanguine, Omnes Labes nostras
deletas esse: Illum pacificasse Omnia Sanguine Crucis suae: Illum unica^ illa
Hostia quam semel obtulit in Cruce, OMNIA perfecisse, and Ea causa, cum Animam
ageret, dixisse: CONSVMMATVM Est: Quasi Significare vellet, Persolutum jam esse
Pretium, pro Peccato Humani (...) Oenus: (...). Mankind, that is, All that have
the Nature and Kind of Man in them: all that are (...)ted of Men.
Generis. That is;

We do assuredly persuade our Minds, That He [Christ] is the obtainer of
forgiveness for our sins: And, that by his Blood, ALL our spots of Sins be
washed Clean: That he has Pacified and set at One All things, by the Blood of
his Cross, That he, by the same One Only sacrifice, which he Once offered
upon the Cross has brought to effect and fulfilled ALL things; And that, for
that Cause, He said; It is Finished; as though he would Signify; That the
Price, or Ransom, was Now Fully-paid, for the sin of Mankind.

To this GOD the Son, together with GOD the Father, and GOD the Holy Ghost,
be ascribed all Honor, Worship, Praise, and Glory for ever.
FINIS.

