ANE DETECTIOVN of the duinges of Marie Queen of Scotts, touchand the murder
of her husband, and her conspiracy, adultery, and pretensed marriage with the
Earl Bothwell. And ane defense of the true Lordis, mainteineris of the Kingis
graces actioun and authority.

Translatit out of the Latin quhilke was written by G. B.

QUhairas of things iudicially determinit within any dominioun, to haif
account demandit by strangeris, is to sic as be not subject to forane
iurisdictioun, both strange, and also for the strangeness displeasant, to us
above all other it ought to be most grievous, quha are driven to this straight
of necessity, that quhase fautes we desire to cover, their lives we are
enforced to accuse, unless we will our selves be accounted the most wicked
persons that live. But a great part of this greef, is releued by your equity
(most excellent Queen) quha take it no less displeasantly to see your
kinswoman, than we to see our Queen thus in speech of all men to be
dishonorably reported, quha alswa are for your part no less desirous to
understand the truth, than we for ours to avoid sclaunder. Thairfoir we will
knit up the matter as breefly as possibly may be, and declare it with sic
shortness, as we may rather seem to have lightly run over the cheef points
than to have largly expressed tham, beginning at the Queen's first inconstancy.
For as in making of her marriage, her lightness was very hedlang and rash, so
sodanely followed either inwart repentance, or at least outwart tokens of
change of her affection without any causes appearing. For quhair before time
the king was not only neglected but also not honorably used, at length began
open hatred to break out against him, specially in that winter quhen he went
to Peble with small train even too mean for the degree of a private man, not
being sent thither a hawking, but as commandit away into a corner far from
counsel and knawledge of public affairs. Nouther is it necessary to put in
writing those things, quhilk as they were than as a spectacle noted of all
men's eyes, sa now as a fresh image they remane imprintit in all men's hearts.
And though this were the beginning of all the evils that followed, yet at the
first the practices were secrit, sa as not only the commoun pepill, but alswa
sic as were right familiar and present at the doing of many matters, could not
understand thoroughly, what thing the Queen than chiefly intended.

At the last about the month of April in the year 1566. quhan the Queen was
returned from Dunbarre to Edinburgh, and was lodged in the castle, she keipt
her their till the time of her travail of child. After her deliverance
immediately the secret counsels of the intendit mischief began to break out,
quhairof the effect was this, to dispatch away the king by one way or other
howsoever, and to mary with Bothwell. And that her self should not be touchit
with suspicion of the murder, she began secritly by littil and littill to sow
seeds of dissentioun between the king and the Lords that were than in Court,
and by mair and mair inflaming tham, to bring the matter to deadly feude. And if
at any time she espied the suspicions of the one against the other to languish,
by and by with new reports to both parts, she whetted tham on again to
fresch displeasuris, persuading the Nobility against the king, and the king
against the Nobility, that either intendit vthers destruction. And she thought
nothing so long as to see the matter come to strokes, for douting whether of
tha^ she had rather to haif the victory, she accounted the loss on either
side for her auantage, as hoping thairby to auance forward one degree neirer to
that quhilk she intendit. Finally in short time she so filled all their hearts
with mutual ialousies one against an other, that their was not a man of any
reputatioun in the Court, but he was driven to this necessity, either with
dishonor to yield to rumors fained against him, or to enter into combat with
the reporters, or to withdraw him home. And though we shall pass over the rest
for desire to have to the chief point of the matter, yet this one notable
sclanderous practice at that time, is not to be omitted. For on a time quhen
the king had been in talk with the Queen till it was far in the night, the
sum in a manner of all her communicatioun was, that almost all the nobility
had conspirit his death, and were devising how to dispatch him. After the kings
departure from her, she sent forthwith for the Earl of Murray her brother, wha
after was Rege^t, with this message, that the matter was heinous, and
necessarily requiring his presence without delay. He being awaked out of sound
sleep, in great fear, cast a night gown over his shirt, and as he was half
naked ran to her in have. To him than she used euin the like talk as she had
before to the king, informing him that the king boiled in such deadly hatrit
against him, and took it so displeasantly that he stood so hyely in her grace,
that he was fully determinit, so soon as any possible opportunity served, to
murder him. So, as mekle as in her lay, she left no mean vnassayit to set tham
together by the ears, and without all dout had done it in deid, if it had not
ben Gods good pleasure to deliver the innocent persons from so perilous
treasons, and to disclose her wicked treachery.

Quhen this attempt failed her, she assayit the young and unexperienced
gentleman with ane new suttilpractise. She earnestly labored him, that quhile
she was great with child, The Queen offreth to be baude to her own husband.
he should choose him some young gentlewoman, quhairof their was great store,
quhose company he might use in the mean time. She promised him her assent and
furtherance, with pardon and leave to commit the offense. She named to him the
Earl of Murrayes wife, not for that she esteemed that most noble Lady most apt
for sic a villainy, but because she thought by that way to be revenged of three
enemies at once, the king, the Earl, and his wife, and therwithall to win a
color and cause of divorce to make empty bedroome for Bothwell. After that she
was delivered of child, though she courteously enterteined all other, yet as
often as word was brought her that the king was come to see her, both she and
her company so framed their speech and countenance, as if they seemed to fear
nothing mair than that the king should perceive that they lothed him, and that
his coming and presence was displeasant to tham all. On the other side
Bothwell alone was all in all, he alone was gouerner of all her counsels and
all her affairs. And so desirous was the Queen to have her hearty affection
towart him understood of all men, that if any suit were to be made to her,
their was no way of speding for any man but by Bothwell to obtain it.

Not lang after her deliverance, on a day very early, accompanied with very few
that were privy of her counsall, sche went down to the water side at the place
called the New haven, and while all marvelled whether she went in sic have,
sche suddenly entered into a ship there prepared for her, quhilk ship was
provided by William Blacater, Edmond Blacater, Leonard Robertson, and Thomas
Dicson, Bothwelles servants and famous robbers and pirates. With this trayde
of thiefes, all honest men wonderyng at it, sche betook her self to sea,
taking not ane other with her, na not of her gentlemen nor necessary
attendantes for common honesty. In Aloe castle, where the ship arrived, how
sche behaved her self, I had rather every man should with him self imagine
it; than hear me declare it. This ane thing I dare affirm, that in all her
words and doings sche never kept any regard, I will not say of Quenelike
majesty, but not of matronelike modesty. The king, quhen he heard of this
sodeine departure of the Queen, followed after with all the have that he
possibly cauld by land, and there ouertuke her, in purpose and hopyng there to
be her company and to enjoy the mutual loving fellowshyp of marriage. But how
lovingly he was received of her, both all they that were present, and sic as
have heard tham report it, can well remember. For being scarcely suffered to
tarry there a few hours, while his men and horses bayted, he was enforced to
get him away in have again an peine of further peril. As for her self, sche
pastimed there certain days, if not in princely magnificence, yet in mair
than princely or rather unprincely licentiousness. There went sche a huntyng,
ones at the river of Magat, an other time at the forest of Glenartue. There how
coylye, yea how loftily and disdaynfully she behaved her self to the king,
quhat need it be rehearsed, for the thing was openly done in all men's sight,
and continues emprint it in all men's memory.

Quhen sche was returned to Edinburgh, sche tuke not her ladgyng in her own
palace, but in a private house next adjoining to Ihon Balfoures. Thense sche
removed into an other house quhair the yearly court, quhilk they call the
Exchequer was then kept: For this house was larger, and had pleasant gardens to
it, and next to the garden altogether a solitary vacant room. But there was
an other matter quhilk, mair tha^ al these things, specially allured her
thither. There dwelt hardby one David Chambers, Bothwels servant, whoes
backdore adioynit to the garden of the Quenis ladging. The rest, wha gesseth
not? for the Queen her self confessed the matter both to many other and also
namely to the Regent and his mother. But sche laid all the blame upon my lady
Rerese a woman of may vile unchastity, wha had sometime been one of Bothwels
harlots, and than was one of the chief of the Quenis privy chamber. By this
woman, wha now in her age had from the gain of horedome betaken her self to
the craft of bawderie, was the Queen, as her self said, betrayed. For Bothwel
was through the garden brought into the Quenis chamber, and there forced her
against her will forsothe. But how much against her will Dame Rerese betrayed
her, time the mother of truth has disclosed. For within few days after, the
Queen intending as I suppose to reaquite force with force and to ravish him
again, sent Dame Rerese, (who had her self also before assayit the man's
strength) to bring him captive unto her hyghnes. The Queen with Margaret
Carwod, a woman privy of all her secrets, did let her down by a stryng over
an auld wall into the next garden. But in sic weirlike affairs, all things
can not ever be so well foreseen, but that some incommodious chance may
ouerthwartly happen. Behald, the stryng suddenly brake, and down with a great
noise fell Dame Rerese, a woman very heavy both by unwieldy age and massy
substance. But sche an auld beaten soldiar, nothing dismayed with the darkness
of the night, the height of the wall, nor with the sodennesse of the fall, up
sche gets, and wins into Bothwels chamber, sche gyt the door open, and
out of his bed, even out of his wives arms, half a sleep, half naked, sche
forceably bringes the man to the Queen. This manner and circumstances of the
deed, not only the may pairt of tham that then were with the Queen have
confessed, but also George Daglish Bothwelles chamberlane, a little before he
was executed plainly declared the same, quhilk his confessioun yet remains of
record.

In the mean time, the king commanded out of sight, and with injuries and
miseries banisched from her, kept him self close, with a few of his servants
at Stereline. For alas quhat should he else do? He could not creep into any
piece of grace with the queen, nor could get so much as to maintain his daily
necessary expenses to find his few servants and his horses: and finally with
brawlynges lightly rising for every small trifle, and querels usually piked he
was chaced out of her presence. Yet his heart, obstinately fixed in loving her,
cauld not be restrained, but he must neidis come back to Edinburgh of purpose
with all kind of serviceable humbleness to get some entry into her former
favor, and to recover the kind society of marriage. Quho ones again with
may dishonorable disdain excludit, anes again returns from quhense he
came, their as in solitary desert to bewail his woeful miseries.

Within few days after, quhen the king determined to go to Iedworth to the
assizes their to be halden, about the beginning of October, Bothwell maiketh
his journey into Liddesdale. Their behauing himself nouther according to the
place quhairto he was called, nor according to his nobility of race and
estimation, he was waunded by a poor thief that was him self ready to dye,
and carried into the castle called the Heremitage, with great uncertainty of
his recovery. Quhan news hereof was brought to Borthwik to the Queen, she
flingeth away in have like a mad woman, by great iourneyes in post, in the
sharp time of winter, first to Melrose and than to Iedworth. Their though she
heard sure news of his life, yet her affectioun impatient of delay cauld not
temper it self, but nedis she must bewray her outrageous lust, and in an
inconvenient time of the year, despising all disco^modities of the way and
wether, and all dangers of theifis, she betook her self hedlong to her journey
with sic a company as na man of any honest degree wald haif adventured his life
and his gudes amang tham. Thense she returns again to Iedworth, and with
may earnest care and diligence provides and prepares all things to remove
Bothwel thither. Quhen he was ones brought thither, their company and familiar
haunt together was sic as was smally agreing with both their honors. Their,
whether it were by reason of their nightly and daily travails, dishonorable
to tham selfis and infamous amang the pepill, or by some secrit providence of
God, the Queen fell into sic a sore and dangerous sickness, that scarcely
their remained any hoip of her life.

Quhan the king heard thairof, he hasted in post to Iedworth, to visit the
Queen, to comfort her in her weakness, and by all the gentill services that
he possibly cauld to declare his affectioun and hearty desire to do her
pleasure. So far was it of that his lodging and things necessary was prouidit
for him against his coming (quhilk is wont to be done euin for mean persons)
that he found not any ane token toward him of a freindly mind. But this was a
point of may barbarous inhumanitie used against him, that the Nobility and
all the officers of the Court that were present were specially forbidden, not
anes to do him reverence at his coming, nor to yield him their lodging, nor to
harber him so mekle as for ane night. And quhairas the Queen suspected that the
Earl of Murray, quhilk afterward was Regent, wald show him courtesy, she
practiced with his wife to go home in have and feign her self sick, and keep
her bed, that at least by this color, under pretense of her sickness, the
king might be shut out of doors. Being thus denied all duties of civil
kindness, the next day with great greef of heart he returned to his auld
solitary corner. In the mean time quhile the king in that want of all
things, and forsaken of all freindes, scant with begging finds rowme in a
cotage, Bothwell out of the house quhaire he was lodged befoir, as it were in
triumph over the king, was gloriously removed in sight of the pepill into the
Quenis a win lodging, and their laid in a lower parlor directly under the
chamber quhaire the Queen her self lay sick. Their quhile they both were yet
feebill and unhealed, she of her disease, and he of his wound, the Queen being
very weak of her body, yet visited him daily. And quhan they were both a
littill recovered, and their strengthes not yet fully settled, they returned to
their auld pastime again, and that so openly as they seemed to fear nathing
mair than least their wickedness should be vnknawen.

About the v. day of November, being removed from Iedworth to a town called
Calco, their she received letters from the king. Quhilk quhan she had red in
presence of the Regent, the Earl of Huntley, and the Secretary, she cast a
pitious luik, and miserably tormented her self as if she wald haif by and by
fallen down again into her former sickness, and she plainly and expressly
protested, that unless she might by some mean or other be dispatched of the
king, she should never haife ane good day. And if by no other way she cauld
atteine it, rather than she wald abide to live in sic sorrow, she wald slay her
self.

Within few days after, quhile in her return through Marchela^d she lay at
Coldingham, Dame Rerese passed through the watch and was knawen and let go.
Quhat company she had, and whether she went at that time of night, it is not
vnknawen to the Queen. From thense about the end of November she came to
Cragmillar, a castle about two miles from Edinburgh. Their in presence of the
Earl of Murray (quhilk afterward was Regent, and now is him self also slain)
and of the Earls of Huntley and Argyle, and the Secretary, she fell into her
said former discourse, and also added the may commodious way, as she thought,
how it might be brought to pass, that is, to sue a divorce against the king.
And she douted not but it might easily be obtained, forasmuch as they were the
one to the other in sic degree of consanguinitie, Cousin germans.
as by the Popes law might not marry together, specially (quhilk was easy for
her to do) the Bull being conveyed away quhairby the same law was dispensed
with. Here quhen ane had cast a doubt, that if sche should go that way to
work, their son should be made a bastard, being borne out of lawful
wedlock, specially since neither of his parents were ignorant of the causes
quhairby the marriage should be void: this answer quhen sche had a quhile
tossed in her mind, and knew that he said troth, and that sche durst not as
yet disclose her purpose to make away her son, sche gave over that devise of
divorce, and yet from that day forwart sche never cessed to pursue her
intentioun of murdering the king, as may easily be perceiuit by that quhilke
followid.

The King being returnid from Stereline to Cragmillar, quhen he hoipid to find
her mair gentill towart him, and her displeasure by process of time somequhat
appeasid, he so found na toke^ of change of her affectioun, that he was not
allowed any thing for his daily sustenance, unless he kept him still at
Stereline. Quhilk thing exceedingly increased the pepils suspicioun, vtherwise
of it self already enough inclined to that judgment, of the unchaste companiyng
of the Queen with Bothwell

About the beginning of December, quhen there were Ambassadors come out of
France and England, to the Christening of the king that now is: that Bothwell
might be gorgiously beseene amang the Nobility, sche her self laid out the
money to bye him apparel, and sum sche baught her self of the marchantes for
him, and sche sa applied her self with sic diligence in ouerseing the making
thereof, as if sche had been, I will not say his wife, but even his servant. In
the mean time her lawful husband, at the Christening of his awn child, not
only wanted all her maintenance for his necessary expensis, but also was
co^maundid not ones to cum in the Ambassadors sight, his ordinary seruantis
were remouid from him, the nobility weir enioynid not ones to attend on him,
nor to do him honor, nor in a manner to know him: the foreign Ambassadouris were
warnid not to talk with him, quhen yet the may pairt of the day they were all
in the same Castle quhere he was.

The young gentleman thus contemptuously and unkindly used, fell in sic
despeire, that he departed from Stereline and went to Glascow to his father. At
his departure the Queen still pursued him with her wonted haitred. All his
silver plate quherewith he was served from his marriage till that day, sche
took it away every whit, and appointed pewter in the s^eede thereof. But let
this serve only to prove her contempt of him: the rest that followed are
evident arguments of outrageous cruelty and unappeasable haitrid. Ere he was
passid a mile from Stereline, all the pairtes of his body were taken with sic a
sore ache, as it might easily appear that the same proceeded not of the force
of any sickness, but by plain treachery. The tokens of quhilke treachery,
certain black pimples sa soon as he was cum to Glascow, brake out over all
his hole body, with sa great ache and sic peine throughout all his limbs,
that he lingered out his life with very small hoipe of escape: and yet all this
quhile the Queen wald not suffir sa much as ane Phisitioun anes to cum at him.

After the Ceremonies of the Christening ended, sche practisid with her brother
the Earl of Murray, that quhe^ he should go to conduct the Earl of Bedford, the
Queen of Ingla^dis Ambassador to S. Andrews, he should require Bothwell also
to bear him company. Quho in deide frankly promised sa to do, howbeit both
he and the Queen the deviser of that dissimulatioun, thought nathing less, as
the success schewed. For sa soon as the king was gone to Glascow, and the
rest towart S. Andrews, sche with her Bothwell got her to Drumen, and from
thence to Tylebarne. In quhilke housis they sa passid the time about viij.
days, in every corner, and in familiar haunting together, as all (saving
themselves alone that had throwe^ away all schame) were hiely offended with
their contempt and vile regard of public fame, seeing them now not ones to
seek to cover their filthy wickedness.

Quhen about the beginning of January they were returned to Stereline, sche
began to find fault with the house quherein her son was nursed, as
incommodious because it stood in a cold and moist place, dangerous for
bringing the child to a rewme. But it shall easily appear that this was done
for other purpose, for as much as all these faults that sche pretended both
weir not in that house, and also were in deid in the other house to quhilke the
child was remeuid, being set in a low place and a very marishe. The child
being scarcely above vj. months old, in the deep of a sharp winter, was
conveyed to Edinburgh. There, because the first attempt prevailed not, and the
force of the poison was overcome by strength of nature, that at length yet sche
might bring forth that qhuerwith sche had sa lang traueiled, sche enters into
new devises for the murder of the King.

Her self goes to Glascow, sche pretends the cause of her journey to be to
see the king alive, quhoes deith sche had continually gapid for the whole
month befoir. But quhat was in deid the true cause of that journey, each man may
plainly perceive by her letters to Bothwell. Being now out of care of her
son, quhom sche had in her own ward, bending her self to the slaughter of
her husband, to Glascow sche goes, accompanied with the Hameltons and other
the kings natural enemies.

Bothwell, as it was between tham befoir accordid, provides all thyngis ready
that were needful to accomplish the heinous act, first of all a house not
commodious for a sick man, nor comely for a king, for it was both torn and
ruinous, and had stand empty without any dweller for diverse years befoir: in
a place of small resort, between the auld fallen wallis of two Kirkes, near a
few alms houses for poor beggars. And that no commodious mean for committing
that mischief might be wanting, there is a posterne door in the town wall
hard by the house, quhereby they might easily pass away into the fields. In
choosing of the place sche walde needs haif it thought that they had respect to
the holesomnes. And to avoid suspicioun that this was a faynid pretense, her
self the two nights next befoir the day of the murder, lay there in a lower
room under the kingis chamber. And as sche did curiously put of the shows of
suspicioun from her self, sa the executiomn of the slaughter sche was content
to have committed to other.

About three deyes befoir yt the King was slain, sche practisit to set her
brother Robart, and him at deadly feude, making reckening that it schould be
gain ta her, quhilk sa ever of tham both had perishit. For matter to ground
thayr dissentioun, sche made rehersall of the speech that the King had had with
her concerning her brother. And when they both sa grew in talk, as the one
seemed to charge the other with the lie, at last they were in a manner come from
words to bloes. But while they were both laying thayr hands on thayr
weapons, the Queen fayning as though sche had be perilouslously affrayit of that
quhilk sche earnestly desirit, callith the Earl of Murray her other brother to
the parting, to this intent that sche might either presently bring him in
danger to be slain him self, or in time to come to bear the blaime of sic
mischeife as than might haif happenit. When this way the success fell not out
as sche desirit, sche deuisit a new way to transfer the suspicion from her
self. While the Earl of Murray did willinglye keipe himself from the Court, and
had reasonable excuse for his absence, for that his wife bying neir her time,
was beside that alswa very sick: at the same time their was an Ambassador come
from the Duike of Sauoy. This the Queen tuke for a convenient color to send
for her brother: but the true cause of her sendyng for him was, that sche had a
desire to throw the suspycioun of the Kyngis murder upon him, and upon the Earl
Moreton, and therwythall alswa at ones to procure the distructioun of those two
being men acceptable to the pepill and likely adversaries to her practice quha
entendyt to set up a tyranicall regiment. But Gods good cleme^cy that often
befoir had deliuerit the Earl of Murray fra many tresons of his enemeis, did
than alswa manifestly succor him: for upon the sunday quhilk was the ix. day
of February, quhen he was going to the Kirk to ane sermon, a letter was
brought him that his wief was deliuerit afoir her time, and in very small hoip
of lief. Quhen he being dismayit with these soden news, prayed leave of the
Queen to depart, sche aunswerit, that gif the caas were sa, it were a superfluous
journey for him to go to her, being not abill to do her any good in her
sickness. But quhen he was still mair importunate, sche prayit him, that he
wauld yet tarry but that one night, and take his journey the next day to his
wife. But the clemency of God, as at many other times, both deliuerit the
innocent gentleman fram present peril, and alswa tuke away the occasioun of
sclaunder against him in time to com. Howbeit for all this though there were no
cause of suspitioun, yet he eschaped not free from sclander: for Huntley and
Bothwell, though they could not justly charge him, yet labored by infamous
libelles quhilk they spread abroad, to disteyne him with the may foul spotte
of that schamfull act. And quhairas the murder was committed after midnight,
they had befoyr daylight caused by special forapointid messengers rumors to be
spread in Ingland, that the Earls of Murray and Moreton were doers of that
sclaughter. But that rumor, so soon as the light of the truth ones brake
forth, suddenly vanisched away, as other falshodes are commonly wont to do.

Quhen all thingis were ready preparit for perfourming this cruel fact, and yet
all occasiouns cut of to divert the blame thayrof, the partenaris of the
conspyracie fearyng lest lang delay shauld either bring some impediment to
their purpose, or disclose thayr counselles, determynit to dispatch it in have.
The Queen thairfoir, for manners sake after supper, goes up to the Kingis
lodging. Their, being determinit to show him all the tokens of reconciled good
will, sche spent certain hours in his company, with countenance and talk
mikle mair familiar than she had vsid in six or seven monethis befoyr. At the
coming in of Paris sche brake of her talk, and prepared to depart. This Paris
was a young man borne in France, and had lived certain yeires in the houses of
Bothwell, and Seton, and efterwart with the Queen. Quhairas the other kayis of
that lodging wair in custody of the Kingis servants, Paris by fayning certain
fond and sclender causis, had in keipyng the keyis quhilk Bothwell kept back,
of the back gate and the posterne. He was in special trust with Bothwell and
the Queen, touchand thayr secret affairs. His coming (as it was befoyr
agreit emang tham) was a waitchword that all was ready for the matter. As soon as the queen saw him, sche rose up immediately, and feyning an other cause to
depart, sche sayid, Alas I haif mikle offendit towart Sebastian this day that I
come not in a mask at his marriage. This Sebastian was an Aruernois, a man in
greit favor with the queen for his cunning in music, and his merry jesting,
and was maryit the same dey. The king thus left in manner alone in a desolate
place, the queen departith accompanyit with the Earls of Argile, Huntley, and
Cassilis, that attendit upon her. After that sche was come into her chamber
after midnicht, sche was in lang talk with Bothwell, none byeng present but
the captain of her guard. And quhen he alswa withdrew him self, Bothwell was
their left alone without other cumpany, and schortly after retired into his
awin chamber. He chainged his apparel, because he wald be unknown of sic as
met him: and put on ane lose cloak, sic as the Swartrytters wear, and sa went
forwart through the watch to execute his intendit traiterous fact. The whole
order of the duyng thayrof, may be easily understood by thayr confessions
quhilk were put to deith for it.

Bothwell after the deed was ended that he went for, returned, and as if he had been ignorant of all that was don, he got him to bed. The Queen in the mean time
in greit expectation of the succes, how finely sche played her part (as sche
thought) it is marvel to tell. For she not anes stirred at the noise of ye fall
of the house, quhilk shook the hale town, nor at the fearful outcryis that
followit, and confused cries of the pepill, (for I think there happenit her
not any new thing vnlukit for) till Bothwell fayning himself afraid, rose
again out of his bed and came to her with the Earls of Argile, Huntley, and
Athole, and with the wives of the Earls of Athole and Murray, and with the
Secretary. There quhile the monstrous chance was in tellyng, quhile every one
wondered at the thing, that the kyngis ladging was euin from the very
foundation blown up into the air, and the king him self slain: in this
amasednesse and confusit fear of all sorts of persons, only that same
heroical heart of the Queen, maintenit it self so far from castyng her self
down into base lamentations and tears vnbesemyng the Royal name, blud, and
estate, that she matched or rather far surmounted all credit of the
constancy of any in former times. This also proceeded of the same nobility of
courage, that she sent out the mair part of tham that were then about her, to
enquire out the manner of the doing, and commandit the soldiars that watchit to
follow, and she her self settlit her self to rest, with a countenance sa
quiet, and mind sa vntroublit, that she sweetly slept till the next day at
noone. But least she should appear void of all naturalnesse at the death of
her husband, by litil and litill at length she kept her close, and proclaimed a
mournyng not la^g to endure.

The commoun pepill, not certainly knawyng whether she laughed or lamented, were
divided into sundry imaginations, since it was perilous dealing with the
disguising of the court, either in knawyng it to seem to mock it, or in not
cunnyngly dissemblyng to seem to know it. Quhile some talked of one sort, some
of an other, in the mean time of any inquiry to be had of the murder, there
was na mention made at all. At length, the day followyng, at efternoone, quhen
both shame and fear constrainit them thereto, Bothwell the principal doer of
the vile act, with certain other that were privy to the same, assemblit
together with the Earl of Argyle for that he is by inheritance the Justice to
deal with crimes punishable by death. First as though they had been utterly
ignorant of all that ever was done, they begin to wonder at the strangeness
of the matter, sic as never was heard of, and incredible. Then they begin to be
busy a litill about their inquiry, they sent for a few poor silly women that
dwelt there about. Quhilk poor saules standing in dout whether it were better
for tham to tell or hald their peace, though they deintily tempered their
spech, yet quhen they had blabbed out somewhat mair then the judges luked for,
they were dismissed again as fools that had but indiscreetly prated. For their
testimonies, though they touched some folks shrewdly, yet they were sic as
they might easily set light by. Then were called and examined the kyngis
servants that were of his household, sic as were left vndestroyit with the cruel
chance. They denied that they had the keys in keeping. Being examined quho had
tham, they said the queen. So the inquiry for manners sake was adiornit, but in
deed suppressit, for fear least if they proceeded further, the secrets of the
court might hap to be disclosed. Yet least the matter should seem not to be
regarded, out goes a proclamatioun with rewards promised to him that could
give informatioun of it. But quho durst accuse the queen? or (quhilk was in
manner mair perilous) quho durst detect Bothwell of sic a horrible offense:
specially quhe^ he him self was both doer, judge, inquirer, and examiner? Yet
this fear quhilk stoppit the mouths of every man in particular, could not
restrain the hale multitude in general. For both by bukes set out, and by
pictures, and by cries in the dark night, it was sa handelit, that the doers
of the mischeuous fact might easily understand that those secrets of thairs
were come abroad. And quhen every man was now out of dout, quho did the murder,
and quho gave furtherance unto it, the mair that they labored to keep their own
names vndisclosit, so much the peoples grudge restraynit brake out mair openly.
Though they tuke upon tham as if they regardit not these things, yet sometime
the rumors sa nerely prickit them to the quick, that they could by no means
hyde their anger. Thairfoir, discontinuyng their searchyng for the kings
death, they begin a new inquiry, far mair earnest, against the authors of
bukes, and the sclanderers of Bothwell as they tham selves termed tham. These
examinations were sa rigorously put in excutioun, as nouther money, nor labor of
men nor horses was spared about it. All the paynters were callit together, all
that earned their living by writing, were assembled, to judge of the pictures
and bukes that had been set out. And if ane painter had not of his awn accord
confessit, that it was he of quhoes work they inquirit, an other that was not
gilty thereof, but touchit a litill with a slight suspicioun, had suffered for
it. There was published a proclamatioun agreeable with the manner of the
Inquisition, quhairin it was made death, not only to set out any sic matter,
but also to read it being set out by ane other. But these persons that with
thretenyng of death practiced to stop the speech of the pepill, yet not
satisfiit with may cruel murder of the king, cessit not their hatrit against
him quhe^ he was dead. All his gudes, armure, horses, apparel, and other
furniture of his house, the queen diuidit, some to tham that slew him, and some
to his fathers ancient deadly foes, as if they had upon atteinder come to her
by forfaiture: and his fathers tenantes, as though they had been alswa part of
her conquerit booty, she sa scraped till she brought tham in a manner to extreme
beggerie.

But this was a strange example of cruelty and sic as never was heard of
befoir, that as she had satisfied her heart with his slaughter, sa she would
needs feed her eyes with the sight of his body slain. For she lang beheld,
not only without grefe, but alswa with gredy eyes, his dead corpse, the
gudlyest corpse of any gentleman that ever lived in this age. And than suddenly,
without any funeral honor, in the night time, by commoun carriers of dead
bodies, upon a vile beer, she causit him to be buried hard by David Rizo.
Quhen these doings were knawin abroad, and that the indignatioun of the pepill
had overcome the threatenings of penalties, and the fra^knesse of sorrow
surmounted fear, by litill and litill she began to set her face, and with
counterfaiting of mournyng she labored to appease the hearts of the grudgyng
pepill. For quhair the ancient manner has been for quenis after the death of
their husbands, by the space of fortye days, not only to forbear the
company of men, but alswa from lukyng on the open light, she attemptit a
disguisit manner of mournyng. But the mirth of heart far passing the feigned
sorrow, she shut the doors in deed but she set open the windows, and within
four days she threw away her wayling weed, and gane to behald both sun
and open sky again. But this ane thing fell very ouerthwartly. For quhen
Henry Killegree, was come from the queen of Ingland to comfort her, as the
manner is, this gentleman strangeris hap was to mar the play and vnuisor all
the disguising. For quhen he was, by the quenis commandment come to the
Court, though he being an auld courtier and a good discrete gentleman, did
nathyng hastily, yet he came in sa unseasonably ere the stage were prepared and
furnished, that he found the windows open, the candeles not yet lighted, and
all the provision for the play out of order. Quhen of the forty days that are
apoyntit for the mournyng, scarce twelve were yet fully past, and the
counterfaityng wald not frame half handsomely, and to disclose her true
affections so soon she was somewhat ashamit, at length taking heart of grace
unto her, and neglectyng sic trifles, she comes to her own byace, and openly
shows her own natural conditions. She posteth to Setons house, with a very
few and those not all of the saddest company. There Bothwel, though it seemed
that for the great favor he than had in court, and for the nobility of his
birth, and other respects of honor, he should have been, next after the queen,
most honorably received, yet was ludged in a chamber hard by the kitchen.
Howbeit the same was a place not altogether unfit to assuage their sorrows,
for it was directly under the quenis chamber: and if any sodein qualme of grefe
should have happened to come over her heart, there was a pair of stayres, though
somewhat narrow, yet wide enough for Bothwell to get up to comfort her.

In the mean time, after the rumor hereof was spread into France, Monsieur de
Croc, quho had often befoir ben Ambassador in Scotland, came in suddenly upon
tham, God wot full unseasonably. By his advise she returned to Edinburgh, out
of that den quhilk even as far as France was infamous. But in Setons house
were sa many commodious opportunities for her purpose, that how soever her good
name were thereby appeyred, needs she must ga thither again. There were
conselles holden of the great affairs of the realm. The end of the
consultatioun was, that Bothwell should be arrainit of the murder, and acquitit
by judges thereto chosen for the nones and constrainit. It was concludit, that
the meaner sort of the judges might with favor and fair promises. be led,
and the rest of the greater and grauer sort (whom for fashions sake they were
driven to call to the matter) might be drawn with fear to acquit him. For
byside libelles thereof commonly thrown abroad, the kyngis father the Earl of
Lennor did openly accuse him for principal author of the murder.

The assembly of the states in parliament was at hand, quhilk was to be halden
the xiij. of April, befoir quhilk day they wald needs have the arrainement
dispatchit. That great have was the cause, quhy in that preceding and trial
nathyng hes ben done according to the form of law, nathing in order, nathing
after the ancient usage. There ought to have been public summons of the
accusers, the next of the kin, the wife, the father, and the son, either to
be present thamselfis, or to send their proctors. The law also gave tham time
of forty days. But hair the father was commaundit to cum within xiij. days,
and that without any assembly of his frendis, with his own household retinue
anely, quhilk by reason of his great poverty was now brought to a few: quhile
in the mean time Bothwell with great bands of men, daily mustered about the
town. And because he verily beleuit that in sa assurit peril na man would
take upon him to be his accuser, he grew to sic ane negligence, and sic
contempt of law and judicial procedyng, Enditement.
that the dictay was framit of ane murder supposit to be done the ix. day of
February, quhen in deed the King was slain the x. day. In choosing and
refusing of the Judges, the like severity was vsid, for the murderers tham
selfis made the choice of the Judges* quhen there was na man to take exceptioun
against tham. The Earl of Cassiles, willing raither to pay his amerceme^t as
the manner is, than to be a Judge in the matter, quhen he had stood in it a
quhile and wald not appear at the Quenis request and manacing, yea though sche
sent her ring for credit both of her earnest prayer and threatening, at length
constraynit with fear of exile and punitioun, he yielded. There sat the
Judges, not chosin to judge, but piked out to acquit: the cause procedit
without any adversary: a trial in a matter of life and deith, quhen there was
never ane accuser, but suborned by the party accused: so as a man might well
think it not the trial of a cause in a court but the playing of ane interlude
upon a stage. In all this recklesnesse of all things, yet behald I pray you of
quhat force is the testimony of conscience on either side. Suddenly, vnluked
for, there starteth up a youngman of the Earl of Lennor house, in quhame the
respect of duty vanquishit the fear of danger. This youngman made ane open
protestatioun that the same assembly of Judges was not lawful, because in
their proceeding there was nathing done according to law nor order. At this
saying the Judges were all stricken in sic a fear, that they all by and by with
one mouth made protestatioun, with promise that it should not hereafter be
prejudicial to tham, in that they acquitted a prisoner quhame na man accused,
and that they had acquitit him of a murder allegit to be committit the ix. day
of February quhen the king was slain the x. day. This is that saim nobill
trial and judgment, quhairby Bothwell was, not cleansed of the crime, but as
it weir washed with sowters blacking, and sa mair comely prepared to go a
wooing to wed the Queen, and sa to become a husband to her greater schame than
he was befoir an adulterer. To make up yet the full perfectioun and increase of
this jolly acquitall, there was set up a writing in the most notorious place of
the court, that though Bothwell had by just trial and judgment been lawfully
cleansed and acquitit of the murder quhairof he had been falsely accusit, yet
for mair manifest declaratioun of his innoce^cie to the hale world, he was ready
to try it in combat, if any man of good fame and a gentilman borne would
charge him with the murder of the king. The next day after, there was ane that
set up a bill in open place, and offered to accept the combat, sa that there
might for the battle be sic a place appointed, quhairin the party might
safely without fear disclose his name.

Quhile matters and men's affections were in this stir, the parliament
assembled. There after they had for viij. days together, in manner done nathing
but treated of reuersing ye judgment, quhairby the Earl Huntleyes father had been attaintit of treason, and for restoryng the son to his fathers
possessions and honors: there were alswa certain plausible thyngis grauntit to
please the pepill, and specially for the Kirk, namely the repellyng of certain
laws of popish tyranny made for punisching of sic as durst ones mutter
against the decrees of the sea of Rome. Though these thingis were acceptable
among the commonaltie, yet there remainit ane thing quhilk na less vexed the
queen the^ offended the pepil, that is to say, her co^panieng with Bothwel, not
altogether sa openly as she wald feign have had it, and yet not sa secretly but
that the pepill perceiuit it, for that all men's eyes were gazyng upon tham. For
quhairas Bothwel had a wife of his own, and to tarry for a divorce was thought
an ouerlang delay, and in the mean time the queen could nouther openly auow to
have him, nor secretly enjoy him, and yet in no wise could be without him, some
shift, though not an honest ane, yet a shift forsothe, must be devised. And
quhen they could not think upon a better, it semit tham a marvelous fine
inuentioun god wot, that Bothwell should rauishe and take away the Queen by
force, and sa save her honor. Sa within a few days after, as the queen was
returning from Stereline, Bothwell forceably took her by the way and cariit her
to Dunbarre: whether with her will, or against her will, every man may easily
perceive by her awin letters that sche wrote to him by the way as sche was in
her journey. But howsoever it weir, that the wrong of the rauishment might be
defaced with honest color of marriage, Bothwels wife was compelled, in two
courtis to sue a divorce against her husband.

Befoir Judges delegate appointit by the quenis authorifie to haif
iurisdictioun in sic causis, the wife accuses the husband of adultery,
quhilke with tham was a just cause of divorce. Befoir Popish Judges quho in
deed by law weir forbidden, yet by special dispensatioun of the Bischop of S.
Andrew, weir for the hearing of this cause anely permitted, Bothwell was
accusit, that befoir his marriage with his wife, he had committit fornicatioun
with his wives near kinswoman: howbeit all this quhile they kept close the
Popis Bull by quilk the same offense was dispensit with. The divorce was posted
forwart without any slacknes either in the witnesses or in the Judges. Within
the space of x. days, the matter was taken in hand, began* and intented,
ioynit unto, tryit and judged befoir both the companies of Judges. Quhen the
sentence of divorce was given and sent to Dunbar, Bothwell by and by assembleth
together from all pairtes, all his friendis, his seruantis, and reteiners, to
convey to Edinburgh the queen, quho wauld then needs take upon her to be a
prisoner. Quhen they weir thus gatherid together, the may pairt of tham in
armor, by the way as they weir conducting the queen, many of tham weir suddenly
stricken in some fear, least in time to cum they might be chargit for halding
the queen as prisoner, and that though there were none other evidence, yet this
ane thing would be proof enough against tham, that in time of peace they were
found armid about her. Quhile they were in this doubt, in the midst of their
journey they all threw away their lances, and in mair peasabill array, at least
in schew, they conveyed her to the castle of Edinburgh, quhilke castle was
also the same time at Bothwelles commandment. There sche tarried with
Bothwell, quhile the banes weir publishing. Then sche came down out of the
Castle into the town, to the commoun assembly of the Judges, and there
pronouncit her self to be free and at her own liberty. And sa at length
within viij. days sche finished that vnmatrimoniall matrimony, all good men
sa far detesting or at least grudgingly foreiudging the unlucky end thereof,
that Monsieur do Croc the French kings Ambassador, a man very well
affectionit to the queen, ane of the factioun of the house of Guise, and
soiorning very near to the place, though he were earnestly required, yet
thought he could not with his honor be present at the feast.

These thyngis were done about the xv. of May, in the year. 1567. The xv. day of
June followyng, Bothwell being either dismayed with gilty conscience of the
vile fact, or sent away by the queen, she came her self to the Lords of the
realm, quho earnestly requirit the public king murderer to be brought forth
to due executioun. Quhat has sins ben done, pertains not much to this
present matter. And though my spech have perhaps ben langer than you luked
for, yet I plainly perceive in my self, that quhile I seek to make end of my
tale, many thyngis I have omittit, and many thyngis for have I have but lightly
touchit, and nathing have I according to the haynousnesse of the offense fully
expressit.

Ane oratioun, with declaration of evidence against Marie the Scotishe Queen
quhairin is by necessary argumentis plainly prouit that sche was guilty and
privy of the said murder.
Since these thingis are by writings and witnesses sa prouaible, and stick sa
fast emprimtit in the knaledge of all the pepill, that sic as wald may have
thaim hidden, yet can not deny thaim: quhat plaice is here left for cunning, or
quhat neid can be of diligence, to preue or repreue a thing sa plain and
evident? For all thingis are sa cleir, sa manifest, and sa mutually knit
together, each pairt to strengthen other, that there is na neid of foreine
probations, and all thingis sa fully witnessit, that there is na necessity of
other argumentis. For if any will ask me, as in other matters is wont to be
askit, the causes of sa foul a fact, I might alswa likewise ask of him, since
the time, the plaice, the deed, and the author is sufficiently knawen, to quhat
purpose is it to stand upon searching the causes, or to enquire by quhat means
it was atcheuit? Again quhen there be extant sa many causes of hatrit, and sa
many taikens thereof do offer thamselues to knawlege, as may well be able to
bring euin thyngis uncertain to be beleuit, surely sa far fet an explicatioun
of the act committed may right well seem superfluous. Not the less, for as
mikle as sa great is the impudence of the vile offenders in denyeng, and sa
confident the boldness of impudent persons in lyeng, let us assay to see with
quhat wepons truth is able to defend innocence against those wickit monsters.
If than they demand the cause of sa heinous a deed, I answer, it was
unappeasable hatrit. I demand of tham again if they can deny that sic hatrit
was, or that the same hatrit was sa great as without blud cauld not be
satisfiet? If they deny that sic hatrit was, than let tham answer me, why she
a young woman, rich, noble, and finally a Queen, thrust away from her in manner
into exile the young gentleman, beautiful, nere of her kin; of the blud royal,
and (that may is) entierly loving her, in deep of sharp winter, into places
nouther fruitful of thyngis necessary, nor replenished with inhabitants, and
commonly perilous with haunt of theifes? why sent she him away into desert and
barren craggy mountains, without provision, into open periles, and in manner
without any company? Quhat wald she else have have done if she had may dedly
haitit him, and couaitit to have him dispatchit? But I trow she feared na sic
thing. But that voydenesse of fear, I construe to be a note of may obstinate
haitrit, specially sith she both knew the places and was not ignorant of the
dangers. That husband thairfoir, to quhom she was but laitely weddit, against
the liking of her subjects, against the will of the freindis on both sides,
without quhom sche cauld not endure, quhom sche scarcely durst suffer out of
her sight, him I say she thrusts forth to uncertain death and may certain
perils.

Will ye ask of me the causes of the chainge of her affectioun? quhat if I say
I ken tham not? it suffices for my purpose to prove that sche haitit him. What
if I ask again, why sche sa extremely loved the yongman quhom she never saw
befoir? quhy she sa hastily married him, and so vnmeasurably honorit him? Sic
are the natures of some women, specially sic as can not bruike the greatness
of their own good fortune: they have vehement affections both ways, they love
with excess, and hait without measure, and to quhat side sa ever they bend,
they are not governed by advised reason, but carried by violent motion. I cauld
out of the monumentes of antiquity rehearse innumerable examples, but of her
self I had raithest believe her self.

Call to mind that part of her letters to Bothwell quhairin sche makes her
self Medea, that is, a woman that nouther in love nor in hatrit can keep any
mean. I could alswa allege other causes of her hatrit, although in deed not
reasonable causes, yet sic as are able to shooue forwart and to push hedlang a
heart for outrage not able to govern it self. But herein I will forbear. And,
if her self will suffer me, howsoever she has deseruit of her subjects, yet
sa much as the co^moun cause will permit, I will spare her honor, yea I will
spare it mair than the cause will allow me. I omit thairfoir her other causes
of hatrit, and return to this, that she hatit and not meanly hatit him.

Will ye see alswa an other proof of her hatrit? The tender wife forsooth so
loving and fond of him, quhen she could not do him the duty of a wife, offreth
to do him the service of a bawd. Her own brothers wife she made choice of, to
put to him in her place. Quhat shall we think to be the cause of this sa sodein
change? Sche that quhilere gapingly sought for every small breath of suspicioun
against her husband, and quhaire true causes weir not to be found, sche
inuentit sic as weir manifestly false, and this sche curiously did, not quhen
sche louid him, but quhen sche had begone to hate him, and quhile sche was
fisching for occasions to be divorced from him, even sche I say now of her own
accord offreth him a lover, declaireth her own contentatioun therewith, and
promises her furtherance. Quhat can we imagine to be the cause hereof? Was it
to pleasure her husband? no, for sche hatit him, and although sche louid him,
yet sic manner of doing in a woman is incredible. Was it that he knawing
himself likewise gilty of adultery on his pairt, might the maire willingly
bear with a partner in use of his wife? No, for he bare withal perforce
against his will. Was it to find cause of divorce, and sa to drive him to
leave his bed empty for Bothwell? Yea, that was it in deed that sche sought
for, but yet not that alone. For in this woman ye must imagine na single
mischefe. Sche hatit the Earl Murrays wief, euin with sic hatrit as all
dishonest persons hait the honest. The difference of their two fames mikle vexit
her, and thairwithal alswa she couitit to set the good ladies husband and the
king together by the ears, and sa rid her self of two combrances at ones.
Thus see you how many and how greit thingis sche practisit to dispatch with ane
labor. Her paramors enemy, the bridler of her licentiousnes, and her own
hatit husband she hopith to rid all at ones, quhile by sa sundry sorts of
wickit doings she makes have to her may wickit weddyng.

Quhairto tended that fearful hasty calling for the Earl Murray at midnight?
Cauld she not tarry til day light? quhat was the occasioun of sa sodeine
fear? The good woman, God wot, careful for concord of the nobility, derely
loving her brother, and may derely loving her husband, was afraid forsooth,
least her brother should in the night haif ben assaltit by the king, quhom she
her self had disarmit? disarmit, said I? Yea she had disfurnished him of all
convenient company for his estate, and made him be shaken up with women's
scoldyng, and that by one of her own train, one past all shame and of
prostitute unchastity. She feared perdie, least the yongman, destitute of all
freindes, beset with all sorts of miseries, should make assalt in the night
time. Upon quhat person? the Quenis brother, a man of a great reputatioun and
power, and in highest favor with all estates. And quhair should he have assailit
him? in a may strong castle, quhair upon the deed done nouther was issue for
him to flee, nor mean of refuge to the Quenis mercy. For quhat cause should he
assail him? There was no enimitie between tham but sic as she had sowed. Quhat
say you, if she couetit that thing may quhilk she most faynit her self to
fear? For to quhat purpose else sent she for her brother to come to her in the
night time, unarmed? Why did she not advise him of this one thing at least,
that because he was to pass by, and hard by the kyngis door, he should in any
wise put on his armor? Why did she not either forewarne him of the danger, or
differ the calling of him till the next morning? Na na, she had a far other
purpose in hand. She had but newly sent the king away, inflamed (as she hopit)
with hatrit of the Earl Murray. So thought she it not unlikely but that the
king, kindlit with fresh displeasure, rash by feruor of youth, lightly believing
her by excess of love, wald have aduenturit to slay his supposed enemy,
nakit, unaccompanied and vnarmit. So sent she the king ragyng in anger to
commit the slaughter, and practisit to draw the Earl Murray nakit,
unaccompanied, vnwarnit, to be suddenly trappit in treason. This was her
meaning, this was her desire. But wickit counsels, how subtle soever they be,
are not always prosperous.

What meant this, that after her deliverance of child, at quhilk time other
women do chiefly comfort tham selves in the louingnes of thayr husbands, and
confess that they find some ease of pain by sight of tham, sche at the same
time drives her husband away? Quhat else shall we say sche meant thareby, but
as the Poet says, for pure love God wot, she shut him out of doors. But this
tender creature, that either shuts out her husband, or as soon as he is come
chaceth him away again, whoes stomach turnit at the sight of him, quho is
suddenly taken with pangis at his presence, quhen sche was in the pynnesse amang
pirates and theefis, sche could abide at the powpe, and ioyit to handle the
boisterous cables. Now ask I quhame sche loved, and quham sche haytit. For
that at Aloe sche drove away the combersome interrupter of her pastime, that
again quhen he came to her to Edinburgh, sche rejected him, I blame her not. I
am content to belief sche did it not for hate to her husband, but for her
fancies sake. That again at Iedworth sche suffrit him not to come at her, let
it be borne withal: For not without cause sche fearit lest the force of her
sickness wauld increase at sight of him, whoes deith sche sa earnestly
desyrit. That sche gaif special commandment that na man shauld lodge him, na
man shauld relieve him with meat or drink, that sche in manner forbad him the
use of fire and water: this is undoubtedly a token of outrageous haytrit. But
it seems sche fearit the very infectioun of her husband, if he were in any
place neir her. That sche sent him back from Cragmillar to Stereline, I
complain not. But that sche bereued him of all his necessaries, that sche tuke
from him his servants, that sche abatit the allowance for his expensis, that
sche alienit the nobility from him, that sche forbad strangeris the sight of
him, and (as much as in her lay) tuke from him even quhile he lived, the use of
heaven, earth, and air: this, I say, I doubt quhat to call it, unnaturalness,
hatreit, barbarous fierceness, or outrageous cruelty? That quhen he went from
Stereline sche tuke away all his plate, let it be pardoned, for what need had
he of silver, that caryit with him present deith in his bosom? But this this I
beseech you consider how greit indignatioun of all men it has kindlit, that
quhen the King pure saul hardly shiftit with lief in desolatioun, in sorrow,
and in beggary, in the mean time Bothwell, as an Ape in purple, was
triumphantly showed to the Embassadoris of foreine natiounis, euin that saim
partener of her husbands bed, not sa mikle for love of him self, as for
despite of her husband, was caryit abroad, set out with all kinds of
ornaments, even that adulterous partener I say, that neither in birth, nor in
beauty, nor in any honest quality was in any wise comparable with her
disdayned husband. Now let tham denay that here were tokens of hatreyt.

But how great and how unappeasable this haitrit was, even by this ye may
gather. Her husband sa often shut out, sa often sent away with dispite, driuin to
extreme poverty, banisched into a desolate corner, far from the court, far
from presence of men, spoiled of his seruantis and furniture of housshold,
bereuit in a manir of his daily necessary sustenance, yet by na injuries can be
shaken from her, by na fear of deith can be withdrawn, but with
serviceableness and patience he assayeth, if not to overcome, yet at least
sumwhat to assuage the violent cruelty of her unkind courage. In the mean
time quhat does this good gentill wife, this merciful Queen, that is at
beholding of men's miseries sa kind and pitiful? Neither is sche anes mouit
with the loving doingis, nor with the wretched plight, nor with the miserabill
woefulness of her husband, nor appeasit by time, nor satisfy it with tormentis,
but rathir with his serviceableness sche is irritatit, with his humble prayers
sche is mair inflamit, and at every time of his coming she deuiseth some new
increase of spiteful dishonor. Quhairin quhen she had spent the vttermaist of
all her force, of wit, and bitterness of nature, quhen sche saw the poor young
gentilman, neither to give ouir by faintyng, being oppressit with poverty, and
though he weir despisit of all men, and sa often thrown into opin perillis,
neither to despeire nor vtherwise mair cruelly to misdoe to himself, at length
as it weir gluttit with sight of his miseries and tormentis, sche determinit
presently to rid him of his calamities, her self of irksomeness, and her
adulterer from fear, and sa by certain special personis thereto appointit,
sche causit him to be poysonit, that being absent from her, he might sa die
with less suspitioun. But of the poison I will say mair in an other place.

Quhen this practice framit not fully to her desire, sche goes her self to
Glascow, that quhom being absent she could not kill, sche might her self in
presence satisfy both her cruel heart and her eyes with sight of his present
miseries. And as if her self alone weir not sufficient to execute the cruel
tormenting of him, sche brings into his sight the ministers of her heinous
doings, and his ancient natural enemies, and with these outragis travailed
to vex his saul at his last breath. But quhairto gather we argumentis as in a
doubtful case, quhen sche her self will not suffir us to doubt at all? sche
the Queen her self I say opinly protestit, not to her lover in bed, not amang
her confederatis in secret chamber, not befoir few and mean personis, of
estait apt to flattery, constraynit by poverty, or of purpose affectionit,
sche her self I say opinly confessit, that sche could not live ane good day if
sche weir not rid of the king: and that not ones, nor unadvisedly, but in
presence of those personagis quhome sche vsit to call to counsel in the
weightiest affairs. For it can not be said unadvisedly slipped from her that
was sa often spoken, in sa many, sa far distant placis, with tearis alswa addit
to move credit, befoir men notabill, both for their nobility, wealth, and
wisdom, and quhairin sche declairit her own opinioun, practisit to win
their assent, and harkenit for their aduises. But be it that she forgid al
these things, be it that her tearis weir faynit, let thaim not believe it that
heard it, let the greatness of the outrage make the report vncredibill. I my
self alswa would gladly be ane of that number, to think these thingis vtterit
by her rathir to groape the myndis of other, than that she her self sa thought
in her heart, if it weir not sa that the thing it self confirms the report,
that the outragiousnesse of the doingis far surmounteth all bitterness of
utterance.

Quhen he was preparing to depart from Glascow, sche causit poison to be given
him. You will ask, by quhom? in quhat manner? quhat kind of poison? quhair had
sche it? Ask you these questions? as though wickit Princis ever wantit
ministeris of thayr wyckit treachereis. But still you press me perhaps and
still you ask me who be these ministeris? First that poisoned he was, it is
certainly knawin: for though the schamlesnesse of men wald not stick to denay
a thing sa manifest, yet the kind of disease, strange, unknown to the pepill,
unacquainted to phisitiones, specially sic as had not been in Italy and Spain,
black pimples breaking out over all his body, grievous ache in all his limbs,
and intolerable stinch, disclose it. If this cause were to be pleaded befoir
grave Cato the Censor, all this were easy for us to prove befoyr him that was
perswadit, that there is na adulteress, but the saim is alswa a poysoner. Need
we seek for a mair substantial witness then Cato, every of whoes sentences
antiquity esteemed as sa many oracles? schall we not in a manifest thing
believe him whoes credit has in thingis doutfull sa often prevailed? Lo here a
man of singular vprightnes, and of may notable faythfulnes and credit
bears witness, against a woman burning in hatrit of her husband, and in love
of ane adulter, and in both these diseasis of corrupt affectiounis vnbridelit,
vntemperable by her estayt, raging by her power, and indulgently following the
wantonness of her wealth. But let us omit auld and dissused thingis, and let us
sever the credit of inconstaunt multitude from the case of Princes. Let us in
sa greit a matter admit no witness in quhom either his estait may be suspectit,
or his manners may be blamit. Quhat witnessis than schall we use? for by this
conditioun, we may bring forth none under the royal degree of a King or a
Queen. But sic vile actis are not wont to be committit by noble and good men,
but by lewd and wickit ministeris. Howbeit that herin alswa the may precise
may be satisfyit, go to, let us bring forth a royal witness. Read her awin
letter, her letter (I say) written with her awin hand. What mean these words,
He is not mikle deformit, and yet he hes receiuit mikle. Quairof both he
receauit mikle? The thing it self, the disease, the pimples, the savor do tell
you. Euin that perdy he receauit, that brought deformity, forsooth very poison.
But her letters name not poison. This is sufficient for me that is their sayit,
that though he receauit mikle, he is not mikle deformit, or, though he be not
mikle deformit, yet he receauit mikle. Quhat means this word Yet? quhat else
but this, that quhat sa ever it was that he receauit, the saim was the cause of
his deformity, quhilk though it were mikle, yet was it not mikle enough to
work sic deformity as was desyrit. But be it, it were not poison. What then
was it else? You can find na thing that can with conuenience of reason be named
in place of it. Finally quhat sa ever it be that is meant by this word mikle,
it is sic, as sche her self in sa secreit and familiar a letter dare not call
by the right name. Yea and though we wald schyft it of by cauillous expounding,
yet sche her self will not suffer us. Compare that quhilk went befoir with
that quhilk follows, and by her devise and purpose for time to come, ye schall
easily understand quhat it is that sche has done in time past. First sche
says it is needful that he be purged, then sche determines to carry him to
Cragmillar, quhaire both the physicians, and (quhilk is mair dangerous than
any physician) sche her self may be present. Finally she asks counsel of
Bothwell, quhether he can devise any secreter way by medicince, and that at
Cragmillar, and after a bath. See how all thingis hang together. He haith
receuit mikle, he must be purged, and at Cragmillar, that is, in a desolate
corner, in a place by reason of small resort very apt for a mischief to be
committed. And Medicine he must use, and quhat forsooth? even the same quhairof
he had befoir receauit mikle. How schall that appear? Sche will have the manner
of ministering the medicine to be secret. If it be to heal him, quhat need that
secrecy? quhy is it not ministrit openly and in a notorious peoplid place? Now
he is eased of his sickness, lusty and healthy, why is he purged in an
unusual manner and an unhaunted corner? But perhaps it was a strange kind of
disease, it had need of strange remedies. Quhat Phisicions then called she to
counsel? to quhom is this charge committit to seek out a new medicine and
curyng for the king? Forsothe to the kyngis enemy, to the Quenis adulterer,
the vilest of all twa-footit beasts, quhoes house was in France defamit of
poisonyng, and quhoes seruantis were there for the same cause, some torturit,
some emprisonit, and all suspectit. Quhen was he pointed to receive this noble
medicine? either at his bathyng quhair he should wash alone, or after his
bathyng quhair he should suppe alone. So forsothe are medicines accustomit to
be prouidit by enemies, in secret place, without witnesses. That thairfoir
quhilk an adulterer, an adultresse, and the partener of his wives body,
curiously prepares, and secretly ministers: quhat kind of medicine it is,
let each man with him self weye and consider. By this time I suppose you see*
the hatrit of the Queen, how unappeasable, how outragiously cruel, how
obstinate it was against her husband, quhom she thrust among theiues, quhom she
practisit to match in feude and battle with the nobility and with her
brethren, quhom nakit and poor, laden with dispites, vexit with raylinges,
assailit with poisoun, she drove away into solitary corner there to dye with
extremest torment. Now let us proceed to the other causes.

This hatrit it self was of it self sufficient to prick her forwart to her
enemies slaughter, often sought, ones attemptit, and almost atcheued. Yet was
there besides, ane stronger enforcement, able to inflame her hatrit it self, I
mean the love quhairwith she intemperately fansied Bothwel: Quhilk love
quhosoeuer saw not, and yet has seen him, will perhaps think it incredible.
For quhat was there in him, that was of a woman of any honest countenance to be
desired? Was there any gift of eloquence? or grace of beauty? or virtue of
mind, garnishit with the benefits quhilk we call of fortune? As for his
eloquence and beauty, we need not make lang tale of tham, sith both they
that have seen him can well remember his countenance, his gate, and the hale
form of his body, how gay it was: they that have heard him are not ignorant
of his rude utterance and blockishnesse. But, ye will say, he was in executyng
attemptes, wise and politic: in auenturyng of periles, hardy and valiant: in
frank geuyng, liberal: in use of pleasures, temperant. For wisdom, cuin
they that be may affectionate unto him, dare not charge him with it. Of
valiantness in deed he laborit to win some estimatioun, but among horsemen,
on a swift stead well mountit, well prouidit for his own safety, a beholder
of other men's fighting, sometime hardly chacing tham that fled, but his enemies
face towart him nere hand he never durst abide. Will ye have an example of his
excellent valiantness? Of a theife, a notable cowart, quhom being yielded and
unware he had deadly woundit he was thrown down to the ground, hurt, brusit
with dry strokes, and had been stark slain if the poor theifes strength
being ready to dye had not failed him. I cauld rehearse his glorious vain
braggeries in France, I cauld tell of his last fearful flight as far as to
Denmark. But I had rathest rub up the remembrance of that day quhen the Queen
forsakyng him, came to the nobility that protestit to revenge the slaughter of
the king. The armies stood ready in array, Bothwell in number of men was equal,
in place had the auantage: there stood befoir him to be his reward being
vanquisher, a Queen may fansiefully loving him, a kingdom, wealth, and
honor, for him and his posterity, mairouer impunitie for his offenses passit,
extreme liberty to do quhat he list in time to come, ability to auance his
freindes and be revenged on his enemies, and on the other side if he were
vanquishit, dishonor, poverty, and banishment, finally all thingis that
thereafter happenit or hereafter may happen weir then befoir his eyes. There
weir also present beside the two armies, beholders and witnesses of each man's
valiance and cowardice, the Queen the price of the battle, and Monseur de
Croc the Ambassador of France. Now you luke to hear how this magnificall
boaster of valiantness did acquit himself. First, mountit upon an excellent
horse, he came bravely fourth befoir the army. There the man forsooth very
sparing of his countrime^s blude, and lauishe of his own, calls for ane to
try it with him by combat man to man. And quhen there weir many on the other
side of honorabill birth and estaites, that offrid to accept the cumbat, by and
by his violent heat cooled, and his glorious speech quaylit: and had it not
been that the Queen, as it weir some God out of a ginne in a tragedy, had by
her auchoritie taken up the mattir, and forbidden her pretty venereous pigioun
to do battle, he had failed to find not only a mean but alswa an honest
color to refuse to fight. And sa the combat interruptit, yet in the ioynit
battle he valiantly behauit him. Farsoth the first man, almost at the
beginning, and alone, he ran his way, and sa at length drew the rest of his
pairt to flee after him.

But his defaultes in martial feats, parhappes the man supplied with civil
virtues. Alas quhat weir they? or quhat virtues could be luked for in him? a
man perdie brought up in the byschop of Murrayes palace, to wite, a may wickit
corruptit house, in dronckennes and horedomes, amanst may vile ministeries of
dissolute misorder. After that he was grown towart ma^s estait^* at dice and
amang harlottes he so wast it a may gudely large revenue of his inheritance,
that (as the Poet says) at his need he had not lest quhair^ with to buy him a
halter to hang himself, he I say that defilit not only vthir men's houses with
cuckoldrie, but alswa his own with incestuous vilanie.

This man therefoir quhen I say to haif ben belouit of the Queen, and not only
louit, but also outragiously and vntemperately louit, they that knawe it not,
will paraduenture think that I tell monstrous wonders. But some man parhaps
will say: was there none other in all the troop of the youth of nobility,
beside him mair worthy to be belouit? Certes there were full many. And ane
there was, in all things that are wont to allure luif, of all other may
excellent, even her awn husband. Quhat was it than that ioynit sa unequal luif
and sa far against reasoun? If I shall say it was likeness of conditions, I
shall name a likely cause of luif, though to some men parchance it shall seem
ane untrue cause of their luif. Neither am I willing to enter into that
discourse. Neither do I affrime the rumors spread of her in France in time of
her frst marriage* howbeit the wickitnes of the rest of her life make some
proof that they rose not all of nathing. And many thingis that haif been
noysit of her (...) return into Scotland, I have (...) to believe. As for me I
am content they be buried in forgetfulness, or if that can not be, let thaim be
discreditit, let thaim be taken for false and fainit. Neither also is it
necessary ouercuriously to examine causis in luif, quhilk is usually sa caryit
with rash violent motioun of a muddy troublit mind, that for the may pairt
it ends in madness, quhilke if ye labor to govern by discrete advise, ye do
nathing else but as if ye should endeavor to be mad with reason. But yet here
also there want na causis, for there was in thaim both a likeness, if not of
beauty, if not of outwart thingis, if not of virtues, yet of may extreme
vices. Sche a young woman, suddenly aduancit to the hiest degree of authority,
quhe^ sche had never seen with her eyes, heard with her ears, nor considerit
in her heart the form of a kingdom gouernit by law, and thereto was furnishit
with the intemperate counsels of her kinsmen, quho thaimselfis practisit to set
up a tyrannous rule in France, endeuourit to draw right, equity, laws, and
customis of auncesters to her own only beck and pleasure.

Of this immoderate desire there brast out from her many times many words
disclosing it. This she studied day and night. But against this desire there
withstode the custom of the country, the laws and statutes, and principally
the consent of the nobility, quho remainyng safe she cauld never attain it.
To the end thairfoir that she might be able violently to atcheue it, she
determinit by force to remove all that stood in her way. But she wist not
well, by quhat mean, or by quhoes help to attempt it.

Fraud was the way to work it, for that vtherwise it was not possible to be
obtained. For this purpose thairfoir Bothwell only seemed the fittest man, a
man in extreme poverty, doutfull whether he were mair vile or mair wickit, and
quho between factions of sundry religions, despising both sides, cou^terfaitit
a love of tham both. He quhe^ he had ones befoir offrit ye Hamiltounis his
service to murder ye Earl Murray, gave thairby a likelihode that upon hoipe of
greater gain he wald not stick to adventure some greater enterprise, being
one quhom the ruin of his own decayed family pricked forwart hedlang to
mischef, and quhom na respect of godliness or honesty restrainit from
ungracious doing. As for excessive and immoderate use of lechery, he therein no
less sought to be famous than other me^ do shun dishonor and infamy. Sche
thairfoir a woman gredily coveting vntemperit authority, quho estemit the
laws her prison, and the bridle of justice her bondage, quhen she saw in her
husband not metal enough to trouble the state, she piked out a man for her
purpose, quho nouther had in his wealth any thing left to be lost, nor in his
fame any thing remaining that might be stainit, and yet sic a one as stood not
upon any sic strength but that he might easily be overthrown again quhen she
should ones wax weary of him: sic a one as she might easily snare his
incontine^ce with wanton allurementes, satisfy his need with money, and bind
his assuritnes unto her with gilty conscience co^federatit in mischefis. These
be the fou^taines of that same not unmeasurable but mad love, infamous
adultery, and vile parricide, quhairwith, as with a pledge, that bludy marriage
quhas plightit. These thairfoir were the causes of enterprising that heinous
act, to wit, unappeasable hatrit of her husband and vntemperabill luif of her
aduoutrer. There was mairouir a hoipe, that the crime might be diuirtit from
thaim to other, and the executioun for it might be laid upon upon the poor
lives of their enemies, and that men may giltlesse of the fault might be
thrust in their place as sacrifices to appease the pepils displeasure. If not,
quhairto then seruit that battle almaist begun to be foughten between the
king and Lord Robart her brother? Quhairto tended those seedis of discord
scaterit between the king and the nobility? Quhairto reachit that curious
entreatie to stay the Earl Murray with her the day befoir the murder was
committit? Or quhat cause was there to send for him? There was an Ambassador
come out of Sauoy. For quhat cause? Surely it behouit to be a great cause, and
sic as could not be ended without assembly of the nobility. No, God wot. The
Ambassador of Sauoy, being bidden to late to the christening, came quhen all
was ended, not for ane Ambassador to the christening, but as ane sent to
excuse the neglecting of doing that kindness, quhen both he liked not to
send sa far for sa small a mattir, and he was somequhat aschamit to haif
faylit in presence, quhen the Frenchmen and Inglishmen had already done it. For
the maire honorabill dismissing of him, the Earl Murray was sent for, and that
with sundry messingers to cum from his wife that lay dying. Quhat need was
there then of his presence? to draw him to be a partner in conspiracy of the
slaughtir? Quhy was it never attemptit befoir? Thought they it best, then at
the last point, at the very instant quhen the murder should be committit, to
join him to their fellowschip, as a light man, inco^stant, and shifting his
purposis at every moment of time, infamous in his former life, and not well
assurit in his present staite? Na there is none of these thingis that they yet
dare say of him? Since then they can not imagine a false cause to stay him,
quhat was the true cause in deid each man may easily gather: even the same that
causit first the Earl of Athol, and afterwartis him to depairt from the court:
the same that sa often brought him in dangir of deith: the same that had
sclanderit him with false rumors scaterit in Ingland: the same that presecutit
him with infamous libelles of the murderers thaimselfis: the same that made him
to choose raither to go into banischment, than to remain in court amang
ruffians weapons with great peril of his life.

But quhat avails this equity of the cause befoir hearers either utterly
ignorant of the matter how it was done, or of tham selfis disfauouring this
pairt and enuyous, or apt to be caryit away with faynit rumors, quhilk esteem
the sclanders of may lewd slight persons, for sad testimonies, and give
credit to these men, quho boasting at home that they are able to do what that
list, yet neither dare commit thayr cause to the sentence of the Judges, nor
were abill to defend tham selfis in battaill. And as by guilty conscience of
offensis they fearit judgment: so by raige grown of thayr giltinesse they
run hedlang to battle, and from battayll run cowartly away: and now again
quhen standing upon the advantage that they haif both in number and wealth,
they scorn the wisdom of their aduersareis, and despise their power in
comparison of their awin: yet distrusting to prevail by true manhood, they
fall to robbery, and turn thayr ungracious mind tormentit with inwart
terrouris of guilty conscience, to sclandering, cauillyng, and lesing, quhom
yet for the good will that I beir to my conteryme^, I waid advise to cease from
this folly, or fury, or disease of evil speiking, lest in time to come, quhen
truth shall shine out, they shut up and stop with hatrit of tham those persons
ears to thayr petitiounis, quhom now they new fill and lode with false
rumouris, for their will not always be place for forgeuenes: but as darcknes at
the sun shining, so lies at the light of treuth must vanische away.

As for the commodious means for committing that vile fact, and the hoipe of
hiding it, I neid not to pursue the declaring of tham in many wordis, since
both the easiness to do it, the opportuteis of placis, and all aduauncementis
of occasiouns and seasons were in their own power. And to hide the fact quhat
neidit they, quhe^ they fearit na punishment gif it were publishit? For quhat
punischment cauld they feir in sa strange a conspiracy? quhen both the force
of laws, quhairof tham selfis were governors, was utterly extinguishit, and
the mindis of may pairt of men weir either snarit with partenerschip of the
mischievous fact, or caryit with hoip, or forestallit with rewardis, or
discouragit and bridelit with fear of sa greit a power on the other pairt? But
how sa ever this be, yet schall it be good to see thoroughly both the order of
the duing, the vnaduisidnes, inconstancy, and end of thayr deuisis. For
tharwithall schall ye perceive that their wanted not desire to hyde the fact,
but that the furor of a distracted mind overthrew all the order of their
counsels, quhile some time as desirous to beguyle public fame, they endeuourit
to keip close thayr intendit mischief, yet they dealt tharein sa opinly, as
gif careless of their estimatioun they seemit to make small account how men
judged of thayr duyngis. For the poysoun at his preparyng to go to Glasco was
given him secretly, and they thought they had sufficiently well prouidit that he
should in his absence from tham be consumit with pynyng sickness. But the rest
of their dealinges towart him were sa cruelly handlit, that though his disease
should have happenit to be natural, yet it wald have been suspectit for
poysonyng. For he her husband, the father of her only and first borne child,
the father I say of that son quhoes Christenyng was solemnisit with sa great
pomp and glory, being escapit away in manner nakit as it were out of his house
flaming in fire, tormentit by the way with grievous peine, quhe^ he lay at
Glascow of a dangerous sickness likely to dye, quhat did his excellent good
wife the quhile? Quhat did sche? At the first news of it did she have to him
in post? Does sche with her presence, with her freindly familiar spech, or with
her loving countenance comfort him in sickness? quhen she can not stay him in
life, comes she to receive his last breath? closes she his eyes at his
deyng? does she the other kind duties of honest matrones? No. But she that had
now let him escape to go and dye, and hopit that he cauld not linger out his
unhappy life but a few days langer, gets her a clean contrary way into an
other country in progress, and with her fair Adonis she visits noble men's
houses, and stayneth the houses that harborit them with the spots of their
vnchastities, and just about the time of her husbands death (as she gessit by
the strength and workyng of the poysoun) she returns to Stereline. Quhen the
matter wrought not sa fast as she lukit for and the strength of his youth had
wrastlit with the soreness of the peine, least she should seem to have
altogether forsaken her duty, sche daily prepares to go to Glasco, but never
goes. At the last disapointit of the hope that sche had conceiuit in her heart,
she takes her to other devises. She comes to Edinburgh and there calls to
counsel her aduoutrer and a few other privy of those secrets. There they
decree that in any wise the king must be slain. Yet were they not fully aduisit
with quhat kind of death he should be murderit. Quhilk may easily be gatherit
by her letter quhairin she partly compares her self with Medea a bludy woman
and a poisoning witch. Alswa by an other of her letters quharin she asks
advise about the poysonyng him. The king quho had already tastit of her lovely
cup, doutyng whether he were better any mair to believe her flattering speches,
or to fear the shrewdness of her nature, though sometime he despeirit not of
her reconciliation, yet ever was somewhat mair fearful and suspicious. But
quhen he saw that nouther his life nor his death were in his power, he was
constrainit in silence to purse up his passit injuries, to dissemble his
present fear, and to feign him self some hope for time to come. Sa was he led
out not as a husband, but carried out as a corse, or rather drawn as it were to
the shambles. The Queen gloriously showing her self in pompous manner goes
befoir in triumph over the young gentleman vexit with all kind of injuries,
tormentit with poison, entrappit with treasons and drawn to execution. There
follow after the triumphant carre, the ancient enemies to his fathers house,
brought thither for the nones, that they alswa might feed their eyes with that
woeful spectacle, and quhoes death at hand they lukit for, they might in the
mean time take pleasure of the sorrow of his heart. And that na ceremony of
solemn sacrifices might be wanting, Ihon Hamilton Archbishop of of S. Androwes
was present as their priest, a man befoir defiled with all kind of wickitnesse,
pa^pered with the spoils and murders of his contreymen, ane auld conqueror of
many murderyng victories. The pepill, all alang the way lukyng pitiously shewit
a foreboding of na good luck to come. The Queen's companio^s, could nouther
well enough feign their sadness nor hide their gladness, quhen the heinous
outrage of the vile fact inte^dit held their unmeasurable joy in some suspense
upon expectation of the success. Thus led they him to Ede^burgh, not into the
quenis palace. Why so? Least the infection of the pestilent disease forsooth
might hurt her young son: as though they that be poysonit were alswa to be
shonned for fear of infection. But the truer cause was this, least his
presence should trouble tham, in interruptyng their free enioyng their
pleasures, and their consultations about his murder. Quhether then is he led?
into the may desolate part of ye town, sometime inhabitit quhile the popish
priests kingdom lastit, but for certain years past, without any dweller, in
sic a house as of it self wald haif fallen down if it had not been botched up
for the time to serve the turn of this nightis sacrifice. Quhy was this place
chiefly chosin? they pretend the holesomnesse of air. O good God. Going about
to murder her husband, seeks sche for a wholesome air? to quhat use? not to
preserve his life, but to reserve his body to torment. Hereto tend her wifely
diligent attendance and her last care of her husbands life. She fears least
he should by preventing death be deliuerit from peine, sche wald feign have him
feel himself dye. But let us see quhat manner of holesomnesse of air it is.
Is it amang dead men's graves to seek the preserving of life? For hard by there
were the ruins of two Kirkes: on the East side a Monastery of Dominike
Friars: on the West a Kirk of our Lady, quhilke for the desolatenes of the
place is callit the Kirk in the field: on the South side the town wall, and
in the same for commodious passage every way is a posterne door: on the North
side are a few beggars cotages, the^ ready to fall, quhilk sometime seruit for
stews for certain Priests and Monks, the name of quhilke place does
plainly disclose the form and nature thereof, for it is commonly callit
Theifis Lane. There is never an other house nere, but the Hameltons house,
quhilke is about a stonis cast distant, and that also stood void. Thither
remoueth the Archbyschop of S. Andrews, quho always befoir was wont to be
lodgit in the may populous pairtes of the town. He also watchit all that
night that the king was slain. Now I beseech you, since you can not with your
eyes, yet at the least with your minds behalde, a house quhilome of auld
Priests, amang grauis, between the ruins of two temples, it self also
ruinous, near to the theefis haunt, and it self a receiter of theefis, not
far from the fort and garrisoun of his enemies that stood right over against
the door, by quhilke if any man should fly out, he could not escape their
traitorous embushment. The very shape of this place quhen ye consider in your
mind, quhen ye hear of the ruins of Kirkes, grauis of dead men, lurking
corners of theefis, brothelhouses of harlotes, does not, I say, not the house
only, but also every pairt near about it seem to proclaim mischief and
treachery? Seems here a king to have gone into a house for lodging, or to be
thrust into a den of thefis? Was not that desolate wastnesse, that vnhauntit
place abil of it self to put simple men in fear, to make wiser men suspicious,
and to give naughty me^ shrewd occasions? Quhat meant his enemies vnwontit
repair into those pairtes, and watching all night in manner hard at his gate?
Quhy chose he now this plaice for his lodging against his former usage? The
house, ye will say, was empty, and his brothers house, and near to the kings
lodging. It was empty long befoir, quhy lodgit you never there befoir? Quhy
forsook you the populous places in the heart of the city, and nearenesse to
the Court, and thrust your self in a desolate corner? quhat profit, quhat
commodity, quhat pleasure herein respectit you? was it your meaning that you
being ane that ever had been a gredy coueiter of popular fame, and catcher of
courtiers with baytes of good chere, now wald of your own accord go hide
your self in a blind hole out of all company and resort? that you one
raither ouerwhelmit than laden with plenty of benefices, went thither to
delight your heart in the ruins of temples? But be it that your coming thither
was but by chance, and that you had some causes to go thither, though not
true, yet somequhat likely. Quhat meant your vnwontit watching all night? quhat
meant the fearful murmuring of your seruantis that night, quhom yet in that
public tumult you commaundit, not ones to stir out of doors? But quhat cause
had they to go out? was it to haif understanding of the matter quhairof your
self were an author and deviser? no, for out of your own watch tower, you
heard with your ears the noise of the ruin, you saw the smoke and ashes with
your eyes, you drank up the joy thereof in your heart, and the savor of the
gunnepouder you in manner snuffed up at your nose. Perhaps you meant to send
out some to receive thaim that fled. but you saw no man flee. And therefore the
lights that were seen out of the highest part of your house all the night long,
were, as upon the lucky ending of the thing that you lookit for, even then
suddenly put out.

But let us return to the King. They thought it not enough to have set opin the
posterne in the wall, to let in thiefis thereat, nor to have set an ambush
befoir the door, that none shauld eschaipe, but alswa they kept with tham
selfis the kayis of two doris, the one of the lower room quhare they had
vndermynit the wall, and fillit the holes with gunpowder, and the other of the
upper room, that the murderaris might come to the King in his bed. Than of
these few seruauntis that he had, they withdrew the greiter number, being sic
as were befoir set about him not sa mikle to do him service, as to be spies of
his secrets, and carry newis to the Queen. The last that was left, one Saunder
Duraine, quhen he could find no reasonable excuse to depairt, was thrust out
by the Queen her self. Sche in the mean time, meaning not to fail in playing
her pairt, quhile Bothwell is in preparing the tragical stage for the murder,
daily visits the King: his heart passionit with love sometime sche comfort
with sweet promisis, sometime sche vexes with brawlinges, and still keeps
his wit occupyit with suspitiounis, and rightly representith in action the
Poets fable, quharin is faynit, that Prometheus his liver daily growing to
suffice to new torments, is daily gnawin and tyerit upon by an Egle. For
after the very saim manner sometime sche cherishes and refreshith the silly
young gentleman, to none other end but that he may haif life remaining to suffer
more sorowis.

Now I beseech you every one think with your selfis upon the fresh duing of
the fact, how men's hartis were mouit, quhen euin now these thingis can not be
heard reportit without indignation. There was prouidit by the may wickit man
in the world, by his enemy, by his wiefis aduoutrer, a house in manner seuerit
from all haunt of men, fitter for a sclaughter house, than for man's dwelling:
it is prouidit for a young gentilman, improvident by youth, easy to be trappit
in treasoun by love, spoylit of his servants, forsaken of his frendis: a
house (I say) torn, solitary, on every side not only not close, but alswa
opin to pass through, the kayes thereof in his enemeis custody, no man left
within but a young man not yet recouerit of sickness, and an auld man feeble by
age, and two strangeris vnacquaintit with the places, matter, and persons, no
man dwelling neire but his enemeis and thiefis. But as for danger of thiefis
the good forecasting woman had well prouidit, for sche had left him na thing to
allure a thief withal: and as for his enemeis, sche had appointed tham to be
but lukers on, and not pairtplayers in this tragedy: but the glory of the
fact sche reseruit to her self and Bothwell.

Quhat in the mean time does the Queen's greit carfulness? quhat means her
vnwontit resort? quhat her malicious, and not obsequious diligence? Sche
visits him daily, sche prolongith her talk with him many houris together,
two nightis sche rests in a lower chamber under him, gif guilty conscience of
may heinous duingis can from tormentis of furies suffer that outrageous heart
to rest at all. Sche fearit perdie, lest if the lower place of the house were
left empty, the noise of the underminers working, and of the bringers in of
the powder, should bring some of the servants in some suspitioun of treachery.
Beside that sche had a mind to see the thing done her self rather then to
commit it to the trust of any other. She had a desire to take a foretast of the
joy to come, and quhen sche could not with her earis, yet at leist with her
heart to conceive aforehand the fire, the smoke, the powder, the crack of the
house falling, the fearful troubill, the tumulte, the confuse dismayednesse
of the doers, the thiefis, and the pepill. All thingis thus preparit for that
doleful night, then enters sche into the last care of her good fame: sche
endeuourith to divert all suspiciounis from her, sche goes to her husband,
sche kisseth him, sche gives him a ring for pledge of her love, sche talks
with him mair lovingly then she was wont to do, and promises mair largely,
sche faynith that sche has greit care of his health, and yet her companieng
with her adulter sche surceaseth not.

They that mair nerely notit these thyngis, prognosticatit na good thing to
come. For how mekle the greater tokens that the Queen shewit of reconcilit
affectioun, so mekle the mair cruelty did every man in his heart fore conceive
of all her intentions. For else quhense comes that sodein change? Quhense
comes sa great a care for him quhom she had poysonit but the month befoir,
quhom euin lately sche not only wishit dead but alswa desirit to see him dye,
quhoes death sche set her brother, yea both her brethren, to procure, and sche
like a master of mischef thrust forth the king to fight, and her self in the
mean time preparit for his burial? Not past a few months befoir, sche her
self was desirous to dye, because she lothed to see the king alive. Quhense
comes now this sodeine care for his health? I luke she should say she was
reconcilit to him. Were you reconcilit to your husband, quhom you sent away
into ye desert, that camp of furies as the Poet calls it? for quhom among
brothellhouses of harlottes, among beggars cotages, among theifes luckyng
holes, you preparit a house sa open to pass through that you left therein mair
entries then men to shut them? you that allurit and assemblit ruffians to his
slaughter, and theifes to his spoil? you that drove away his servants that
should have defendit his life? you that thrust him out nakit, alone, vnarmie,
among theifes to be slain? quhen in all this miserable state of your husband,
your adulterer in the mean time dwelt in your palace, daily hauntit your
chamber, day and night all doors were open for him, quhile your poor husband
barred from al company of the nobility, his servants forbidden to come at him
or sent away from him, was forsaken and thrust away into solitary desert for a
mockyng stock, and I wald to God it had been for a mockyng stock only? Of his
other servants I enquire not. I do not curiously questioun why they went away,
why they then specially forsook the king, quhen he chefely neded their help
and service, quhen he was newly recouerit, quhen he began to go abroad and had
none other company. Of Sawnder Durain I can not keep silence, quhom you had
for his keeper and your spy. Quhat was there for him to epsy? was there any
thing for him to bring news of to an honest matrone, loving to her husband,
faithful in wedlock, and fearful of a partener of his love? Fearit she
least he a yongman, beautiful, and a king, should cast wanton eyes upon some
other woman in her absence? Na God wot. For that was it that she may desired.
For sche her self had practisit to allure him thereto befoir, she her self had
offrit him the occasions, and of her self shewit him the means. This was it
that most greuit her quhile she was sekyng causes of divorce, that she could
not find in him sa mekle as any sclender suspicioun of adultery. Why then
were spies set about him to watch him? was it not that none of the nobility,
none of his servants, nor any stranger at all should come at him, that na man
should speak with him that might disclose the treason and warn him of his
danger? This same very Sawnder how carefully sche saves, quhen she goes
about to kill her husband? how late sche sends him away quhen the rest were
gone, even at the very point of her husbands death, quhen she had now na mair
need of espialles? For the day befoir the murder committit, there was none of
the ministers that were privy of her secret counsels left behind but only
Sawnder. He quhen he saw that night no less doleful then shameful to
approach, prepares, as himself thought, a fine subtle excuse to be absent, so
as rather chance might seem to have driven him out, then he him self
willingly to have forsaken his master. He puts fire in his own bedstraw,
and quhen the flame spread further, he made an outcrie, and threw his beddyng
half singit out of the kyngis chamber. But the next day quhen that excuse
seruit not sa handsomely as he desirit, for that in the Quenis hearing, the king
very swetely entreatit him not to leave him alone that night, and alswa desirit
him to lie with him self, as he had often vsit to do, for the king entierly
louit him above all the rest, Sawnder in perplexity wanting quhat to answer,
addit to his first excuse fear of sickness, and pretendit, that for
commodious taking of phisike for his health he wald lie in the town. Quhen this
wald not yet serve him, the Queen addit her authority and told the king that
he did not well to keep the yongman with him against the order of his health,
and therewith sche turnit to Saunder, and bad him go quhair was best for him:
and forthwith as soon as the word was spoken he went his way. I will not here
precisely trace out all the footynges of the wickit doings. Nouther will I
curiously enquire, whether that former days fire were happenit by casualtie or
kindlit by fraud. Neither will I ask why he that had sa often ben receiuit to
lie in ye kyngis awn bed, does now this only night specially refuse it. Let us
suppose that sickness was ye cause thereof. This only ane thing I ask, quhat
kind of sickness it was, that came upon him at the very instant, and befoir
morning left him again without any physicians help, and quhairof neither
afoir, nor since, nor at that present, there never appearit any token? And I
trust, though he hold his peace, ye all sufficiently understand it. In the man
gilty in conscience of the mischeuous intentioun, fear of death overcame
regard of duty. Had it not been that Saunder, befoir time a spy and
talebearer, now a forsaker and betrayer of his master, was ioynit to her in
priuitie of all these wickit doings, wald not the Queen sa cruel in all the
rest, have found in her heart to bestow that ane sacrifice upon her husbandis
funerallis? Quhile these thyngis were in doing, the night was far past, and
my Lady Rerese a lusty valiant soldiar, befoir sign given cummeth forth into
the field out of array, abroad sche goes, gets her to Horseback, and
though sche were somewhat afraid, as ane that foreknew of the storm to cum,
yet sche sat still on horseback tarying for the Queen, but yet a good pretty
way from the house. In the mean time Paris cummeth, and then the
communicatioun brake, and they rose to depart. For by and by upon sight of him
came to her remembrance that heinous offense that without great propitiations
could not be purgit, forsooth that the Queen had not dauncit at the wedding
feast of Sebastian the minstrell and vile iester, that sche sat by her husband
quho had not yet fully recouerit his health, that at the banquet of her
domestical parasite sche had not played the dancing skit. A matter surely
worthy of excuse. But quhat should she else do? sche must needs go as soon as
sche saw Paris, for sa it was agreit, and somequhat must neides be pretendit.
How happenit it that the other nightis befoir quhen sche went away earlyer,
sche made na excuse at all, and now her departure about midnight must needs
haif an excuse allegit? But be it sa. Could sche remember na better excuse
than Sebastians wedding? No no, I say to the contrary that if sche had left the
wedding of her own natural brother, or her sister, to visit her husband
though but a little crased, sche had had a just excuse befoir all men sa to do.
Quhat if sche had done the saime kindness for the king being not her husband, or
for any other of the nobility? Is Sebastians wedding of sic a value, that a
masking dance thereat is to be preferrit befoir wiuely duty and love? But
surely in this curious excusing and pretendit sorrow of neglectit duty,
somequhat lies hidden, and yet not sa hidden but that it appears through the
closure. This ouirmickle precisenes of diligence, in excusing quhair na need
is, haith some suspicioun of some secrit mischief that you are loath to have
disclosit, and the slightness of the excuse, increases the suspitioun,
specially quhe^ there were other matters enough that she might better have
allegit. But let us admit ye excuse, since ye queen her self has thought it
reasonabill. Quhether then goes sche? straight into her chamber. Quhat does
sche next? weary it with the days trauaill and the nights watching goes sche
to bed? no, but sche falls to talking with Bothwell first almaist alone, and
afterwart alone altogether. Quhat talk she had, ye matter it self declares.
For Bothwell after that he had put of his clothes as if he wald have gone to
bed, by and by puts on other apparel. Going to do the deid, he wald not be
knawen. I like well the ma^s policy. But his way was to go through the watch.
Here I marvel at his madness. But men's wits beset with giltinesse of
mischiefis, do commonly bewray thaimselfis by their own inconstancy, and
blind to all other thingis, do see only that quhilk they have bent their
mind unto. Quhat he did, the kingis deith, his own running away, the
confessioun of the gilty personis, and other thingis that folowit the murder,
do declaire. After the great uproar in the town about it, he as ane utterly
ignorant of all, returns thorough the saime watch to bed. Quhen noise of the
ruin had fillit all men's ears, and the crack of it had shaken all the
houses, only the Queen intentive to expectatioun of the chance and broad
awake, hears nathyng at all, and Bothwell hears nathyng. O marvelous
deifnesse! All other thorough out the town, as many as were awake were
affrayit, and as many as slept were awakit. At the last Bothwell ryseth again,
and in one self interlude suddenly shifting his part from the Poet beo^meth a
messenger, he runs to ye Queen, and thither resort alswa other that lodgit
in the palace. To some the matter seemit true, to some faynir, to some
marvelous. Quhat does the Queen the quhiles? Quhat should sche do? She
temperately brooketh her good luck, sche rests sweetly till the next day at
noone. Yet the day following, to observe decorum and comely conuenience in her
pairt without marring the play, sche counterfeiteth a mourning, quhilke yet
neither her ioyfulnes dwelling withal in heart suffers* lang to be faynit, nor
schaime permits to be quholy neglectit. These thingis thus lying opin befoir
your eyes, thus palpable with handis, thus fast emprentit in men's earis and
knowledge, stand we yet in enquiring for the author of the murder, as though
it were doubtful? But ye say, the Queen denyith it? What denyith sche?
Forsooth that sche did the murder: as though there were sa greit a difference
if ye be the author or the executor, gif ye command it or commit it. Sche gave
her counsel, her furtherance, her power and authority to the duing of it.
Neither is the cause unknown quhy sche did it, euin that the saim filthy
marriage with Bothwell might be accomplishit. Though all which argumentis and sa
many witnessis of them that were privy to it faylit, yet by her awin
testimony, by her awin letters it must neidis be confessit. And though all
other thingis wantit, these thingis that folowit the murder do plainly declare
the doer, namely, that at ye slaughter of her husband she sorrowit not, but
quietly restit as after a gay enterprise well atchieuit: that sche mournit not,
but in manner openly ioyed: that sche could abide not only to luke upon his
dead body, but alswa gredely beheld it: that sche secretly in the night buryit
him without funeral pomp, or rather hid him like a thief: for that fame so
inconstant counterfeiting of mourning did plainly bewray it self. For quhat
meant that removing to Setons? quhy shonned sche the townis resort and peoples
eyes? Was it because sche was aschamit to mourn openly? or because sche could
not well cloak her joy? or secretly to give her self all to sorrow? No, for at
Setons sche threw away all her disguisit personage of mourning, sche went daily
into the fields among ruffians, and not only resortit to her former custom,
but alswa affectit to exercise manly pastimes, and that among men and opinly.
So lightly sche despisit the opinioun and speich of her country. But I beshrew
that same Kiligree, and that saim Monsieur de Croc, that came upon her sa
unseasonably, and schewit to other her counterfeited person vnuisorid. For, had
not they been, many thingis that were done might haif been denyit, many thingis
might haif been handsomely faynit, and mikle the matter might haif been helped
by forgit rumouris.

But they will say their was a solemn inquiry for the murder. Forsooth by
Bothwell him self principally, and by some other that than labored, and yet
at this day do labor to deliver the persons guilty thereof, from punischement
of law, and do now plainly show quhat they than secreitly meant. But with quhat
diligence, with quhat upright severity was that inquiry handlit? A few poor
saules the next dwelling neighbouris to the Kingis lodging being callit,
neither durst tell quhat they had seen and heard, and gif they touchit any
thing neir the matter, either they were with fear put to silence, or dispisit
as of na credit: the wiser sort of them durst not offend Bothwell that sat
among the Judges. Ane or two of the Kingis seruantis that eschapit the
mischaunce, were examinit quhilk way the murderaris came in. Forsooth, sayit
they, we had not the kayes. Quho then had them? It was aunswerit that the Queen
had them. So began the secrets of the Court to break out. Then was ye inquiry
adiornit, and never recontinuit. Quhat can be more severe and upright then this
inquiry? and yet they preuailit nathing by it. For quhat the examiners wald
haif had kept secret, that the pepill cryit out opinly: that quhilk they
supressit, bursteth forth: that quhilk they cloak in secreit, breaks out into
broad light. But there was a proclamation set forth, with pardon of the fact
and promise of rewart to him that wald utter it. Why? quho had been sa mad, that
he durst in sa manifest peril of his life bear witness or give information
against the judges tham selves in quhoes power lay his life and his death? It
was likely forsothe, that they quhilk had murderit a king, wald spare him that
should disclose ye murderer, specially quhen all men saw that the inquiry of
the kingis slaughter was quite omittit, and the other inquiry severely pursuit
concerning bukes accusing the slaughter. What manner of judgment it was quhairby
Bothwell was acquitit, you have heard. Forsothe by him self procurit, the
judges by him self chosen, the accusers by him self subornit, lawful accusers
forbidden to be present unless they wald yield their throtes to their enemies
weapons: the assise apointit nouther to a day according to the law of the land,
nor after the manner of the country, nor to enquire of the murder of the king,
but of sic a murder as was allegit to be committit the day befoir that the king
was slain. Here quhen Bothwell by his friendship and power, and the Queen by
prayer and threatenings trauailit with the judges, do you now expect quhat
sentence men chosen against law, and against the custom of the land have
pronounced? In their judgment they touchit the matter nathyng at all: only this
they have declarit, that it was na lawful judgment, in this that with ane
special protestatioun they prouidit, that it should not be prejudicial to
tham in time to come.

Then, that all men might understand what it was that they sought by sword,
fire, and poisoun, they iumble up marriages: one is diuorcit, an other is
conplit, and that in sic posting speed as they might scant have hastit to
furnish a triumph of some noble victory. Yet that in those unlawful
weddinges, some show of lawful order might be obseruit, the gudely banes were
openly proclamit. For publishyng whereof though the Minister of the Kirk were
thretenit with death if he did it not, yet at the time of his publishyng, him
self openly protested that he knew cause of exceptioun why that marriage was
not lawful. But in sic a multitude assemblit, how few were they that knew it
not? since all could well remember that Bothwell had then alive two wives already
not yet diuorcit, and the third nouther lawfully marijt nor orderly diuorcit.
But that was not it that was intendit, to observe the ceremonies of lawful
order, but (as they use to do in enterludes) they prouidit a certain show or
disguisit counterfayting of commoun usage. For he that has often broken all
humane laws, and has cast away all conscience and religion, could easily
neglect the course of Gods law.

Now I suppose I have brefely declarit (in respect of the greatness of the
matter) and yet perhaps in mair words then nedit (the playnnesse of the proves
considerit) of quhat purpose, by quhat counsel, and upon quhat hope, that
heinous murder was atte^ptit, with what cruelty it was executit, by quhat
tokens, aduertisements, testimonies, and letters of the Queen her self the
whole matter is prouit, and sa plainly prouit, that it may be as openly seen as
if it lay befoir your eyes: yet will I show fourth the testimony of the hale
pepill, quhilk I think worthy not to be neglectit. For several men do
commounly deceive and ar deceiuit by other, but na man deceueth all men, nor is
deceiuit by all. This testimony of the pepill is this. Quhen at the Quenis
going abroad amang the pepill, the greatest pairt of the commo^s were wont to
make acclamations, wishing her well and happily with sic speches as either luif
enforces or flattery inuenteth: now at her going after the kingis slaughter
to the castle through ye chief and may populous street of the town, there
was all the way a sad glu^ming silence. And quhen ane woman alone of the
multitude had cryit God save the Queen, an other by and by sa cryit out as all
men might hear her, Sa be it to every ane as they haif deseruit.

Albeit these thingis were thus done as I have declairit, yet there are some
that stick not to say that the Queen was not only hardly but also cruelly
dealt with, that after sa detestabill a fact sche was remouit from regiment:
and quhen they ca^nat deny the fact, they complain of the punishment. I do not
think there will be any man sa schamelesse to think that sa horribill a fact
ought to have na punishment at all. But if they complain of the greuousnesse
of the penalty, I fear least to all good men we may seem not to have done sa
gently and temperately as loosely and negligently, that have laid sa light a
peine upon an offense* sa heinous and sic as was never heard of befoir. For
quhat can be done cruelly against the author of sa outrageous a deid, quhairin
all laws of God and man are violate, despisit, and in manner wholly
extinguishit? Every several offense has his punishment both by God and man
appointit: and as there be certain degreis of evil deides, sa are there also
increases in the quantities of punishmentis. If one have killit a man, it is a
deid of it self very heinous. Quhat if he have killit his familiar friend? quhat
if his father? quhat if in one foul fact he has ioynit all these offenses
together? Surely of sic a ane, neither ran his life suffice for imposing, nor
his body for bearing, nor the Judges policy for inuenting pain enough for
him. Quhilke of these faults is not co^prisit in this offense? I omit the
mean commoun matters, the murdering of a young gentleman, an innocent, her
cou^triman, her kinsman, her familiar, and her cousin germane. Let us also
excuse the fact if it be possible. She vnaduisitly, a youngwoman, angry,
offendit, and ane of great innocence of life till this time, has slain a
lewd youngman, an adulter, an unkind husband and a cruel king. If not any
ane, but all these respects together, were in this matter, they ought not to
avail to shift of all punishment, but to raise some pity of the case. But
quhat say you that none of these thingis can sa mickle as be falsely pretendit?
The fact it self, of it self is odious: in a woman, it is monstrous: in a
wife not only excessiuely louit, but also may zelously honorit, it is
vncredibill: and being co^mittit against him quhoes age crauit pardon, quhoes
hearty affectioun requirit love, quhose nighnesse of kinrit askit reverence,
quhose innocence might haif deseruit favor, upon that youngman I say, in
quhom there is not sa mickle as allegit any just cause of offense, thus to
execute and spend, yea to exceed all torme^tis due to all offencis, in quhat
degree of cruelty shall we account it? But let these thingis avail in other
personis to raise haitrit, to bring punishment, and to make examples to
posterity. But in this case let us bear mickle with her youth, mickle with
her nobility, mickle with the name of a Prince. As for mine own pait I am not
ane that think it always good to use extreme strictness of law, na not in
private, mean, and commoun personis. But in a may heinous misdeed, to
dissolve all force of law, and quhair is na measure of ill doing, there to
descend beneath all measure in punishing, were the way to the undoing of all
laws, and the overthrow of all human society. But in this ane horribill act
is sic a hochepot of all abhominabill doingis, sic an egernesse of all
outrageous cruelty, sic a forgetfulness of all natural affectioun, as
nathing mair can be faynit or imaginit. I omit all former matters. I will not
curiously enquire upon princis doingis, I will not wey thaim by the co^moun
beam. I will not restrain thaim to commoun degreis of duties. If there be any
thing that without great offense may be passit over, I will gladly leave it
unspoken of. If there be any thing that may receive excuse, either by respect
of age, or of womankinde, yea or of vnaduisitnes, I will not urge it. And to
pass over all the rest, two heinous offenses there be, that neither according
to their greatness be fully expressit, nor accordsng to their outrage be
sufficiently punishit, I mean the violating of matrimony, and of Royal
majesty. For matrimony (as the Apostle says) does truly co^teine a great
mystery. For as being obseruit, it compriseth within it all inferior kinds of
duties, sa being broken it overthrows thaim all. Quho so has misusit his
fathar, seems to have cast out of his heart all natural reverence: but for the
husbandis sake, ane shall leave both father and mother. Of all other duties
the degreis or like obseruancis, either are not at all in brute creaturis, or
not sa plain to be discernit: but of matrimonial love there is almaist na
living creature that has not some feling. This mystery therefoir quho so not
anely violateth, but also despises, he does not overthrow all the foundations
of humayne fellowschip, but as mickle as in him lies, dissolueth and
confounds all order of nature. Quhosoeuer, I do not say hurts the king that
is the true image of God in earth, but slays him with strange and vnwontit
sort of cruelty, sa as the vntempera^t and vncredibill outragiousnes is not
contentit with simple torment, seems he not, as mickle as in him lies, to
have a desire to pull God out of heaven? Quhat refuge have they then left
themselfis to mercy that in satisfying their lust of unjust hatrit haif
excedit not only all measure of cruelty but also all likelihode that it can be
credible?

But they will say, we ought to bear with and spare her nobility, dignity,
and aige. Be it sa, gif sche haif sparit him in quhom all these respects were
greiter, or at leist egall. Let the majesty of royal name avail her. How
mikle it ought to avail to her preserving, her self has shewit the example.
May we commit our safety to her quho a sister has butcherly slaughterit her
brother, a wief her husband, a Queen her King? May we commit our* safety to
her, quhome never shame restraynit from unchastity, womankinde from cruelty,
nor religion from impiety? Schall we bear with her age, sex, and
unadvisedness, that without all just causis of hatreit, despisit ^ll these
thingis in her kinsman, her King, her husband? Sche that has sought sic
executioun of her wrongful wrath, quhat shall we think sche will do being
provoked by reproaches to men not knit to her by kindred, subject to her
pleasure, not matchit with her in egall fellowschip of life, but yeldit to her
governance, and thrall to her tormenting cruelty? quhen rage for interrupting
her pleasure, and outrage of nature strengthenit with armor of licentious
power, shall ragingly triumph upon the goods and blude of poor subiectis?
Quhat is then the fault quhereof we are accusit? quhat cruelty haif we shewit?
That a woman raging without measure and modesty, and abusing to all her
subiectis distructioun the force of her power that sche had received for their
safety, we haif kept under governance of her kinsmen and well willing friends:
and quhom by right we might for her heinous deides haif executit, her we haif
touchit with na other punischment, but only restraynit her from doing mair
mischief. For we depriuit her not of liberty, but of vnbridelit licentiousnes
of evil duing. Quherin we mair fear among all good men the blaime of too mikle
leuitie, than among evil men the sclander of cruelty.

These were the causis that mouit the Queen to this* matter. Bothwell also had
his reasons, quhilk not a little troublit his mind. For quhen that same
infamous acquitall rather encreasit than abatit the suspicioun, and the matter
could not be always kept close, he flees to his last refuge, to obtain of the
queen a pardon of all his offenses. But quhen by the law of the land in sic
charters of pardon, the greatest offense must be expressly mentionit, and the
rest it sufficit to include in general words: and expressly to confess, the
murder of the king semit to stand neither with his honor nor with his safety:
he was driven of necessity either to invent or commit some other crime, either
maire grievous, or at ye least as heinous, under quhilk the sclaughter of ye
king might lurk in shadow of general words vnexpressit. They could devise
none other but the same counterfeit rauishment of the Queen, quhairby both the
Queen prouidit for enjoying her pleasure and Bothwell for his safety.

MEmorandum that in the castle of Edinburgh there was left by the Earl Bothwell
befoir his fleing away, and was sent for by one George Daglish his servant,
quho was taken by the Earl Moreton, one small gilt cofer not fully ane foot
lang, being garnishit in sundry places with the Roman letter F under ane
kyngis crown, quhairin were certain letters and writings well knawin, and by
oaths to be affirmit, to have been written with the queen of Scotts own hand
to the Earl Bothwell.

Beside those writings there was alswa extant a writing written in Roman hand
in French, to be auowit to be written by the said queen of Scotts her self,
being a promise of marriage to the said Bothwell: quhilk writing being without
date, and though some words therein seem to the contrary, yet is upon credible
grou^des supposed to have been made and written by her befoir the death of her
husband, the tenor quhair of thus begins.

Nous Marie par la grace de Dieu. etc.

We Marie by the grace of God. etc.

There is also ane other writing in Scottish auowit to be quholly written by
the Earl of Huntley, datit the v. of April. 1567. containing ane form of
contract for marriage betwixt the said queen and Earl Bothwell, subscribit
Marie, quhilk is to be auowit to be the proper hand of the said queen, and
underneath it James Earl Bothwel, quhilk alswa is to be auowit to be the proper
hand of the said Earl Bothwell, at quhilk time he was commonly defamit of the
kyngis slaughter and not cleansit or acquitit thereof befoir the xij. of April
followyng. The tenor of quhilk contract here ensues.

AT Seyton the v. day of April, the year of God. 1567. The richt excellent,
richt high and mighty Princess Mary, by the grace of God Queen of Scottis,
considering the place and estait quharin almighty God hes constitute her
highness, And how by the decesse of the king her husband, her Majesty is now
destitute of ane husband, living solitary in the staire of widohede. In the
quhilk kind of life her majesty may willingly wald continue, gif the weill
of her realm and subiectis wald permit it. But on the other pairt considering
the inco^ueniencis may follow, and the necessity quhilk the realm hes that
her Majesty be couplit with ane husband, her highness hes inclynit to marry.
And seeing quhat incommoditie may cum to this realm, incace her Majesty should
join in marriage with any foreign prince of a strange natioun, her highness hes
thought rather better to yield unto ane of her awin subiectis. Amangis quhome
her Majesty findis nane maire able nor endued with better qualities than the
right noble and her dear cousing James Earl Bothwell. etc. Of quhais
thankful and true service her highness in all times bypast hes had large pruif
and infallible experience. And seeing not only the same good mind consta^tly
perseuering in him, but with that ane inward affectioun and hearty luif toward
her Majesty, her highness amangis the rest hes maid her choice of him. And
thairfore in the presence of the eternal God faithfully and in the word of ane
Prince by these presentis takes the said James Earl Bothwell as her lauchfull
husband. And promittes and oblissis her highness, that how sone the process of
divorce intentit betuix the said Earl Bothwell and Dame Jane Gordon now his
pretensit spouse beis endit by the order of the lawis, her Majesty shall God
willing thairefter schortly marry and take the said Earl to her husband, and
compleit the band of matrimony with him in face of haly kirk. And shall never
marry none other husband but he only during his life time. Item to the Duke of
Norfolk. etc.
And as her Majesty of her gracious humanity and proper motive without
deserving of the said Earl hes thus inclynit her favor and affectioun toward
him, he humbly and reverently acknawledging ye same according to his bound
dewtie, and being as free and able to make promise of marriage, in respect of
the said process of divorce intentit for diverse reasonable causes, and that
his said pretensit spouse hes thairunto consentit, he presently takes her
Majesty as his lauchfull spouse in the presence of God. And promittis and
oblissis him as he will answer to God and upon his fidelity and honor, that
in all diligence possible he shall prosecute and setforwart the said process
of divorce already begone and intentit betuix him and the said Dame Jane Gordon
his pretensit spouse unto the final end of ane decreit and declarator thairin.
And incontinent thairefter at her Majesty's good will and pleasure, and quhen
her highness thinks convenient shall compleit and solemnizat in face of haly
kirk the said band of matrimony with her Majesty, and luif, honor, and serve
her highness, according to the place and honor that it hes pleasit her Majesty
to accept him unto, And never to have any other for his wife during her
Majesty's life time. In faith and witnessing quhairof her hyghnes and the said
Earl hes subscribit this present faithful promise with their hands as
followis, day, year and place foirsaidis, befoir these witness, George Earl of
Huntlie, and Master Thomas Hepburne Parsoun of Auldha^stock. etc.

Sic subscribitur. Marie R. James Earl Bothwell.


Here note that this contract was made the v. of April within viij. wekes after
the murder of the king quhilke was slain the x. of the February befoir. Also
it was made vij. days befoir that Bothwel was acquitit by corrupt judgment of
the said murder.

Alswa it appears by the words of the contract it self that it was made
befoir sentence of divorce between Bothwell and his former wife. And alswa in
very truth was made befoir any suit of divorce intentit or begone between him
and his former wife, though some words in this contract seem to say vtherwise.
Quhilk is thus proned. For this contract is datit the v. of April, and it
plainly appears by the judicial acts befoir the two several ecclesiastical
ordinary judges, quhairin is contained the hale process of the divorce
between the said Earl and Dame Jane Gourdon his wife that the one of the same
processes was intentit and begone the xxvi. day of April, and the other the
xxvij.

Alswa there be extant the records of the Justice court holden at Edinburgh
the said xij. day of April, some copies quhairof have been examplifijt and
signit with the hand of John Bellenden Justice clerk, among quhilk is the
dittay or enditement of Bothwell. The tenor of quhilke records with the
assise and verdit do here follow.

Curia Iusticiariae S. D. N. Reginae, tenta and inchoata in praetorio de
Edinburgh duodecimo die mensis Aprilis, An. 1567. per nobilem and potentem
Dominum Archibaldum Comitem Ergadiae, Dominu^ Campbell and Lorne Iusticiarium
generalem eiusdem S. D. N. Reginae, totius Regni sui vbilibet constitutum Sen.
vocatum and curia legitime affirmata.
IN the quhilke Court comperit personally in judgment Maisteris Iohne Spens of
Condie, and Robert Creycghton of Chok, advocates to our sovereign Lady in her
name, and their the said master John Spens producit our sovereign Ladies
letter execute and indorsit, togider with the dittay. Of the quhilk letters,
indorsing thairof, and Dittay, the tennouris hereafter followith, that is to
say: Mary by the grace of God Queen of Scottis to our louittis William Purwes,
master Williame Lawson, Gawine Ramsey messengeris, our Shrifis in that pairt
coniunctly and severally specially constitute, greeting. Forasmimikle as it is
humbly meant and schewin to us by our louittis, familiar clarkis, and
Counselors, maisteris Iohne Spens of Condye, and Robert Creycghton of Chok our
aduocatis: yt quhareas they are informit our trusty cosen and counsaillor
Matthew Earl of Leuenox fader to the King our deirest spouse hes delatit Iamis
Earl Bothwell, Lord Hailis and Creycghton etc. and certain vthers of the
treasonabill, cruel, odious, and abominable slauchter and murder of his
grace, committit upon the nynth day of February last bipast, under silence of
the nicht within his lodging for the time within our bour of Edinburgh, beside
the kirk of field upon prouisioun, set purpose, and forethought felony. And
hes declarit unto us the suspicioun had of the said Earl and vtheris as
committers of the said odious, cruale and abominable deid. Quhare-through we
being may earnestly bent, mindit, and willing to have trial taken therein by
order of justice with all diligence and expedition possible, hes with advise of
the Lords of our secret counsill, and also of the humble desire of the said
Earl Bothwell made in our and their presence, quhilk offerit him self ready to
underly the trial of ane condign assise, according to the laweis of our
realm for declaring of this part hes, ordainit ane court of Iusticiarie, to be
set and halden in the tolbuith of Edinbrough, the xij. day of April next to
come, for duing of justice upon the said Earl, and vtheris, for the said
crewale, odious* foul, and abhominabill crime and offense: like as it at mair
length is contenit in ane act maid in the bukes of our secret counsel
thairupon.

Our will is herefoir, and we eharge you straictly and command that
incontinent these our letters seen, ye pass, and in our name and authority,
warn the said Matthew earl of Leuenox personally, or at his dwelling place, and
all vthers our lieges hauand or prete^dand to have intres in the said matter,
by open proclamation at ye market crosses of our burrowis of Edenbur,
Dunbertane, Glasgw, Lanerk, and vtheris places needful, to compeir befoyr our
Justice, or his deputis in our tolbuith of Edinburgh, the said xij. day of
April next to come, to pursew and concur with us in the said actioun: with
certificatioun to them, and they fail, that our Justice or his deputteis will
proceed and do justice in the said matter the said day, conform to the lawis
and consuetude of our realm, without any longer delay or continuatioun: And
that ye summond ane assizes heirto, ilk person under the pain of forty
pounds, as ye will answer to us thereupon. The quhilk to do we commit to you
coniunctly and seueraly our full power by these our letters, delivering them
by you duly execute and indorsate again to the bearer. Geuin under our signet
at Edinburgh, the xxvij. day of March, and of our reign the xxv. yeire. 1567.

Ex deliberatione Dominorum Consilij Reg. Sic subscribitur, Mary.

Indorsations of the said letters.
Upon the xxix. day of March, the yeir of God, 1567. yeires, I Williame Purwes
Messenger, one of the shriffes in that part within constitute, past at
command of these our souerane Ladies letters, and in her graces name and
authority warnit Matthew Earl of Leuenox, and all vtheris her maiesteis liegis
hauand or pretendand to have intres in the matter within specifyit by open
proclamatioun at the marcket cross of the burough of Edinburgh, to compeir
befoyr the Justice or his deputes in the tolbuith of Edinburgh the xij. day of
April next to come, to pursew and concur with our said souerane Lady in the
actioun within expremit, with certification as is within mentionat, after the
form and tenor of these letters, quhairof I affixt ane copy vpoun the said
marcket cross. This I did befoir these witnessis, Iohne Andersoun and David
Lant, with vthers diverse. And for mair witnessing to this my execution and
indorsation my signet is affixt.

Upon the penult day of March, first and secound days of April, the year of
God above written. I Gawine Ramsy messenger, ane of the Shreffis in that part
within constitute, past at commandment of these our sovereign Ladies letters,
and in her gracis name and authority, warnit the said Matthew Earl of Leuenox
at his dwelling places in Glesgw and Dunbertane respective, because I serchit
and socht and could not apprehend him personally, and all other her majesty's
liegis hauand and pretendand to have intres to pursue in the matter within
expremit, be proclamation at the marckat crosses of the burrowes of Glesgw,
Dunbertane, and Lanerk, for to compere befoir the Justice or his deputies in
the said tolbuith of Edinburgh the said xij. day of April next to cum, to
persew and concur with our said sovereign Lady in the actioun within written
with certificatioun as is within mentionit, after the form and tenor of these
letters quhaireof I affixt ane copy vppoun every ane of the said marckat
crosses. This I did befoir these witness, George Herbesoun, Nicholl Andro,
Robert Letterik messenger, William Smollet, David Robertsoun, James Smollet,
John Hammeltoun, James Bannatine, and Robert Hammeltoun, with diverse other. And
for mair witnessing hereof, my signet is affixt, Subscriuit with my hand,
Gawine Ramsy messenger.

Upon ye first day of April. The year of God 1567. year. I William Lawsoun
messinger, Shriefe in that pare within constitute, Past at command of these
our sovereign Ladies letters, to the markat cross of Perth and their, be open
proclamation lawfully warnit Matthew Earl of Leuenox and all vthers our souerane
Ladies liegis, hauand or pretendand ta have intres, to pursue James Earl
Bothwell, Lord Hailes, and Creyghtoun. etc. and certain vthers, for ye cruall
slaughter and murder of the kyngis grace, and affixt ane copy upon the said
crosses, after the form and tenor of these letters. And this I did befoir
these witnesses, James marschell, Alexander Borthuike, and Iohnne Andersoun
messingeris, with others diverse. And for the maire witnessing of this my
execution and indorsatioun, I have subscriuit this with my hand. Williame
Lawsoun messenger with my hand.

The dittay.
James Earl Bothwell, Lord Haylis, and Creychtoun* etc. Ye are inditit for act
and part of the cruel, odious, treasonabill, and abhominabill slauchter and
murder of ye vmquhile, the right excellent, right high and mighty Prince the
kyngis grace, dearest spouse for the time to our souerane Lady the Quenis
majesty, under silence of night in his own lodging beside the Kirk of field
within this borrow, he being taking the nightis rest, treasonably raising fire
within the same, with ane great quantity of powder. Through force of the
quilke, the said hole lodging was raysit and blown in the air. And ye said
vmquhile king was murtherit treasonably and may cruelly slain and destroyit
by you thairin upon set purpose, provision, and forethought felonye. And this
ye did upon the ninth day of February last by past, under silence of night, as
said is. As is notoriously knawen, quhilke ye can not deny.

Upoun the quhilk productioun of the foirsayd letters execute, indorsit and
dittay, the said advocate askit an Act of Court and instrumentis, and desirit
of the Justice process conform thairto.

The said letters being openly red in judgment with the indorsations thaireof,
the Justice by virtue of the same causit call the said James Earl Bothwell as
defender on that ane part, and Matthew Earl of Leuenox and all vthers our
souerane Ladies liegis, hauand and pretendand to pursue in the said matter, to
compere befoir him in this court of iustitiarie, to pursue and defend as
accordes of the law.

Comperit immediately thairefter in judgment, the said James Earl Bothwell, and
enterit as parsonale, and tha^ chusit Master David Borthuike of Luchthill, and
Master Edmund Hay prolocutoris for him, quho also comperit personally in
judgment, and were admittit by the Justice to that effect.

Comperit also Master Henry Kinrof alleging him procurator for Andro master
of Errole, and producit in judgment the writing and protestatioun under
written, desiring the same to be registerit and insert in the bukes of
adiornale, quhairof the tenor followis.

The quhilke day comperit Master Henry Kinrof procurator for Androw master of
Errole Constable of Scotland, and allegit that the Constabillis for the time of
this realm has been at all times bypast only judges competent to al sic
persons as hes been accusit criminally for committyng of slaughter murder of
blude drawing nere to the Prince chamer, and within four miles for the same.
And thairfoir the said Master now being Constabill of this realm, aught and
should be Judge competent to James Earl Bothwell and vthers his allegit
accomplices callit this day, and to be accusit for act and pairt of the allegit
cruel, treasonabill slaughter of vmquhyle Henry king of Scottis. And in caise
Archebald Earl of Argyle as Justice general of this realm or his deputies
proceid and cognosce in the said cause, the said Master Henry procurator
foresaid protestis solempnlye that the same proceeding therein on na ways hurt
nor preiuge the said Constabill his office rightis, title of rightis, intres,
iurisdictioun, or inuestiment thairof in any sort, but that he may use and
exercise his said iurisdictioun in all sic caisses in times cumming, conform
to his inuestiment of the said office, and use of cognoscing vsit by his
predecessors and him befoir in semblable causes. All quhilke time he makis it
knawen either by inuestime^t or other ways sufficiently him to have
iurisdictioun in sic casses. And desires the same protestatioun to be insert in
the buke of adiornale, and admittit under protestatioun that he affirm not my
Lord Justice iurisdictioun in any sort in procedyng in the said matter.

The Justice being aduisit with the said allegiance and protestatioun fande by
interlocutor, and ordaynit that process should be led by him in this matter.
Notwithstanding the same in respect that nathyng was shawin by the said master
Henry to verefie the co^tentes of the said allegiance and protestation.
Quhairuppoun the said Earl Bothwell askit ane note of court and instrument.

The said Matthew Earl of Leuenox and vthers our souerane Ladies lieges, hauand
or pretendand to have intres to pursue in the said matter being oftymes callit,
to have comperit and concurrit with the said advocates, in pursuit of the said
actioun, comperit Robart Cunningham, allegeing him servant to the said Matthew
Earl of Leuenox* and producit the writing under written, quhilke he subscriuit
with his hand in judgment. As he that had power to use the same, and protestit
and desirit conform thairto in all points. Of the quhilke writing the tennor
follows.

My Lords I am cum here, sent by my master my Lord of Leuenox, to declare the
cause of his absence this day, and with his power as the same beris. The cause
of his abscence is the shortness of time: and that he he is denied of his
frendis and servants, quho should have accompaneit him to his honor and surety
of his life, in respect of the greatness of his party. And he having assistance
of na friends but only himself. And thairfoir his L. hes commandit me to
desire ane sufficient day, according to the weight of the cause, quhairthrough
he may keep the same. And if your L. will proceed at this present, I protest
that I may without any displeasure of any man, use these things committit to
my charge by my Lord my Master. Quhairof I take ane document.

Item I protest that if the personis quho passis vpoun assyse and inquest of
these persons that shall enter on pannell this day, cleanse the said persons
of the murder of the king, that it shall be wilful error and not ignorance, by
reasoun that it is notourlye knawen these persons to be the murderers of the
king, as my Lord my master allegis, vppoun the quhilke protestatioun I require
ane document. Sic subscribiter. Robert Cunningham.

Upon the productioun of the quhilke writing and protestatioun, the said
Robert askit acts and instrumentis.

The Justice being auisit with the foirsayd writing and protestatioun producit
and vsyt by the said Robert Cunningham in respect of the letters and writings
sent to our souerane by the said Matthew Earl of Leuenox producit and red in
judgment, quhairof the copeis are under written. By the quhilke letters and
writings the said Earl of Leuenox desirit schort and summare process to be
deducit in the said mattter, and als of the act and ordinance of the Lords of
secret counsel grauntit thereuppon, and sic like in respect of the earnest
insisting of the advocates, desiring process and right suit of the said Earl
Bothwelles earnest petitioun and desire of trial to be had in the said matter,
with advise of the Lords and Barons assessors present, fand by interlocutor
that process should be deducit in the said actioun this day, conform to the
laws of this realm. Notwithstanding the writing and protestatioun producit by
the said Robart Cunningham, and als admittit him to concur and assist to the
said advocates in pursuit of the said actioun if he pleasit.

Followis the copeis of the letters and writingis sent to the Quenis majesty
by the said Earl of Leuenox.
I Render may humble thanks unto your majesty for your gracious and
comfortabill letter quhilke I have receiuit the xxiiij. day of this instant.
And quhairas I perceive by the same that it is your majesty's pleasure to remit
the trial of this late odious act to the time of a Parliament. Pleasit your
majesty although I am assurit your highness thynkis the time as long as I do
till the matter be tryit, and the auctours of the deid condignely punished, yet
I shall humbly crave your majesty's pardoun in troublyng your hyghnes so often
thairin as I do, for the matter touches me sa nere, besekand your majesty
may humbly to accept this my simple advise in good part as follows. Quhilk
is, that quhaire the time is lang to the Parliament, this matter not being a
Parliament matter, but of sic weight and opportunity quhilke aught rather to be
with all expeditioun and diligence socht out and punished to the example of the
hole world, as I know your majesty's wisdom considers the same far mair than
my wits can comprehe^d, yet forsameckle as I hear of certain tikkettis that
hes ben put on the tolbuith door of Edenbrough aunswering your majesty's first
and second proclamations quhilke names in special certain persons deuisers
of the cruel murder, I shall thairfoir may humbly beseike your majesty, for
the luif of God, the honor of your majesty, and your realm and well and
quietness of ye same, that it will please your majesty fourthwith not only to
apprehend and put in sure keepyng the persons namit in the said tikkettes, but
als with diligence to assemble your majesty's nobility, and than by opin
proclamatioun to admonish and require the writers of the said tikkettis, to
compere according to the effect thairof, at the quhilke time if they do not,
your majesty may by advise of your nobility and counsel releue and put to
liberty the personis in the tikkettis foirsayd. So shall your majesty do ane
honorabill and godly act in the bringyng the matter to sic ane narrow point as
either the matter shall appear plainly befoir your majesty, to the
punischment of thaim quho hes been the auctors of this cruel deid, or else the
said tikketis fand vain in their self, and the persons quhilke are
sclanderit to be exonerit and put to liberty at your majesty's pleasure. So
cummittis your majesty to the protectioun of almighty God, quho preserve you
in health and may happy reign. Of Howstoun the xxvi. day of February.


PLeasit your majesty, quhaire your highness in your last letter to me writes
that if there be any names in the tikkettis that was affixt upon the tolbuith
door of Edinburgh that I think worthy to suffer a trial for the murder of
the king your majesty's husband, upon my aduertisme^t, your majesty should
proceid to the cognicioun taking as may stand with the laws of this realm,
and being fand culpabill, shall see the punischment as rigorously executit as
the weight of the crime deseruis. Pleasit your majesty sens the ressait of
your highness letter I have still lukit that some of the bludy murderers should
have been opinly knawen or now. And seeing they are not yet, I can not find in
my heart to concele the matter any longer. But let your majesty understand the
names of thaim quhome I greatly suppect, that is to say, the Earl Bothwell,
Master James Balfor, and Gilbert Balfor his brother, Master David Chamer,
Blackmaister, John Spe^s, Seneor Frau^ces, Bastiane, John de Burdeau^x, and
Joseph David's brother. Quhilke persons I shall may intierly and humbly
beseik your majesty that according to my former petitioun unto your highness,
it will please not only to apprehend and put in sure keeping, but als with
diligence to assemble your majesty's hole nobility and counsel, and than to
take sic perfect order of the foirnamit persons, that they may be justly
tryit, as I doubt not but in so doing the spirit of God shall work in the said
matter as the truth shall be knawin. So shall your majesty do a may godly and
honorabill act, for your self being the pairty as ye are, And ane great
satisfactioun it shall be to all that belonges unto him that is gone, quho was sa
dear unto your highness. And now not doubtit but your majesty will take order
in the matter according to the weight of the cause, quhilke I may humbly
beseike, I commit your majesty to the protectioun of the almighty God, quho
preserve you in health, lang life, and may happy reign. Of Howstoun this
xvij. of March.

Assisa.
Andro Earl of Rothes. George Earl of Caithnes. Gilbert Earl of Cassillis. Lord
Iohne Hamiltoun, comandar of Arbroycht sone to the Lord Duke. James Lord Rosse*
Robert Lord Sunple. Iohnne Maxwell Lord Hereif. Laierence Lord Oliphant. Iohnne
Master of Forness. Iohnne Gordoun of Lothinware. Robert Lord Boyd. James
Cokburne of Lantoun Iohne Someruile of Cambusnethan. Mowbray of Berne Buxall.
Ogilbye of Boyne.



THe forenamit persons of Assise being chosen admitted and sworn in judgment,
as use is. And thairfore the said Earl Bothwell being accusit by the said
dictay of the crime aforesaid, and the same being denied by him, and referrit
to the deliverance of the said assizes, they remouit forth of the said Court,
and altogidder conuenit, and after lang reasoning had by them vpoun the same
dictay and pointis thairof, they and ilke ane of tham for tham selfis votit,
deliuerit and acquit the said James Earl Bothwell of act and part of the said
slaueghter of the King, and points of the said dictay.

And since the said George Earl of Caythnes Chaunceller of the said assizes in
his and thayr names askit instruments, that nouther the said advocates, nor the
said Robert Cunningham as haua^d commission of my Lord of Leuenox, nor na
vtheris brought into them any writing token or verification quhairby the
dictay above written might be fortefyit, nor the said assise perswadit to
deliver any vtherwise, than is above written. Nor yet was the said dictay
sworn, nor no party, except the said advocates, comperit to pursew the saim,
and tharfoyr in respect that they deliuerit according to thayr knawlege,
protestis that they should incur na wilful error in any wise heirafter. Quhilk
instrument and protestatioun immediately after the reentry of the said Earl of
Caythnes Chauncellor, and ane pairt of the named of the said persons of assyise
in the said court of iusticiarie, befoyr the pronunciatioun of thayr
deliverance foresaid at the desire of the said Earl of Caythnes was openly
read in judgment. And thayrupon he of new askeit actis and instrumentis, and
protests in manner above expremit.

Extractum de libro Actorum Adiornalis S. D. N. Reginae. Per me Ioannem
Bellenden de Auchnoule militem, clericum iusticiariae eiusdem generalem. Sub
meis signo and subscriptione mannalibus.

Ioannes Bellenden Clericus Iusticiariae.


Note that at the same time protestatioun was made by George Earl of Catnes
Chanceller of the said Assise that the said dittay or enditement was not in
this point true, vz. in allegyng the murder to be committit the ix. day of
February for that in deed the murder was committed the next day being the x.
day in the morning at two hours after midnight which in law was and ought to
be truly accomptit the x. day and so the acquitall that way but cauillously
defendit.

The writings and letters found in the said casket, which are auowit to be
written with the Scottishe Quenis own hand.
Certain French Sonnettes written by the queen of Scotts to Bothwell, befoir
her marriage with him, and (as it is said) quhile her husband lyuit, But
certainly befoir his divorce from his wife as the words tham selves show,
befoir quhom she here prefers her self in deserving to be beloved of
Bothwell.

O Dieux ayez de moy compassion,
Et m'enseignez quelle preuue certain
Ie puis donner qui ne luy semble vain
De mon amor and ferme affection.
Las n'est il pas ia en possession
Du corpse, du coeur qui ne refuse pain
Ny deshonneur, en la vie incertaine,
Offense de parentz, ne pire affliction?
Pour luy tous mes amiss i'estime moins que rien,
Et de mes ennemis ie veux esperer bien.
I'ay hazard pour luy and nom and conscience:
Ie veux pour luy au monde renoncer:
Ie veux mourir pour luy auancer.
Que rest il plus pour prouuer ma constance?
Enter ses mains and en son plein pouuoir
Ie metz mon filz, mon honneur, and ma vie,
Men pais, mes subiectz, mon ame assubiectie
Est tout a luy, and n'ay autre voulloir
Pour men object que sans le deceuoir
Suiure ie veux malgre toute l'enuie
Qu'issir en peult, Car ie n'ay autre envy
Que de ma foy, luy fair apperceuoir
Que pour tempeste ou bonnace qui face
Iamais ne veux changer demeure ou place.
Brief ie feray de ma foy tell preuue,
Qu'il cognoistra sans fainte ma constance,
Non par mes pleurs ou fainte obeyssance,
Come autres ont fait, mais par diverse espreuue.
Elle pour son honneur vous doibt obeyssance
Moy vous obeyssant i'en puis receuoir blasme,
N'esta^t, a mo^ regret, comme elle vostre femme.
Et si n'aura pour tant en ce point preeminence.
Pour son profit elle use de constance,
Car ce n'est peu d'honneur d'estre de voz biens dame
Et moy pour vous aymer i'en puis receuoir blasme
Et ne luy veux ceder en toute l'obseruance
Elle de vostre mal n'a l'apprehension
Moy ie n'ay null repos tant ie crains l'apparence
Par l'aduis des parentz elle eut vostre accointance
Moy malgre tous les miens vous port affection
Et de sa loyaute prenez ferme asseurance.
Par vous mon coeur and par vostre alliance
Elle a remis sa maison en honneur
Elle a iouy par vous la grandeur
Don't tous les siens n'ayent null asseurance
De vous mon bien elle a eu la constance,
Et a gaigne pour un temps vostre coeur.
Par vous elle a eu plaissr en bon heur,
Et pour vous a receu honneur and reverence,
Et n'a perdu sin on la iouyssance
D'vn fascheux sot qu'elle aymoit cherement
Ie ne la playns d'aymer donc ardamment,
Celuy qui n'a en sens, ny en vaillance,
En beauty, en bonte, ny en constance
Point de second. Ie vis en ceste foy.
Quant vous l'amiez elle vsoit de froideur.
Sy vous souffriez pour s'amour passion
Qui vient d'aymer de trop* d'affection,
Son doig monstroit, la tristesse de coeur
N'ayant plaisir de vostre grand ardeur
En ses habitz monstroit sans fiction
Qu'elle n'aucit paour qu'imperfection
Peust l'effacer horse de ce loyal coeur.
De vostre mort ie ne vis la peaur
Que meritoit tell mary and seigneur.
Sum de vous elle a eu tout son bien
Et n'a prise ny iamais estime
Un si grand heur si non puis qu'il n'est sien
Et maintenant dit l'auoir tant aim.
Et maintenant elle commence a voir
Qu'elle estoit bien de mauuais judgment
De n'estimer l'amour d'vn tell amant
Et voudroit bien mon amy deceuoir
Par les escriptz tout fardez de scauoir
Qui pourtant n'est on son esprit croissant
Ains emprunte de quelque autheur eluissant,
A faint tresbien un enuoy sans l'auoir
Et toutes fois ses parolles fardez,
Ses pleurs, ses plaincts remplis de fictions,
Et ses hautz cris and lamentations,
Ont tant gaigne qui par vous sont gardez
Ses lettres escriptes ausquelz vous donnez foy
Et si l'aymez and croyez plus que moy.
Vous la croyez, las trop ie l'appercoy
Et vous doutez de ma ferme constance,
O mon seul bien and mon seul esperance,
Et ne vous puis asseurer de ma foy
Vous m'est imez legier qui le voy,
Et si n'auez en moy null asseurance
Et soupconnez mon coeur sans appearance
Vous deffiant a trop grand tort de moy.
Vous ignor ez l'amour que ie vous port,
Vous soupconnez qu'autre amor me tra^sporte,
Vous estimez mes parolles du vent,
Vous depeignez de cire mon las coeur,
Vous me pensez femme sans judgment.
Et tout cela augmente mon ardeur.
Mon amor croist and plus en plus croistra
Tant que ie viuray, and tiendray a grandheur,
Tant seulement d'auoir part en ce coeur
Verse qui en fin mon amor paroistra
Sy tres a clair que iamais n'en doutra.
Pour luy ie veux recercher la grandeur,
Et feray tant qu'en vray cognoistra,
Que ie n'ay bien, heur, ne contentement,
Qu'a l'obeyr and seruir loyaument.
Pour luy iattendz toute bonne fortune.
Pour luy ie veux garder sante and vie.
Pour luy tout virtue de suyure i'ay envy,
Et sans changer me trouuera tout' vne.
Pour luy aussi ie iette mainte larme.
Premier quand il se fist de ce corpse possesseur,
Duquel alors il n'auoit pas le coeur.
Puis me donna un autre dur alarm,
Quand il versa de son sang mainte dragme,
Don't de grief il me vint lesser doleur,
Qui m'en pensa oster la vie, and frayeur
De perdre las le seul rempar qui m'arme.
Pour luy depuis iay mesprise l'honneur
Ce qui nous peult seul pouruoir de bonheur.
Pour luy i'ay hazard grandeur and conscience.
Pour luy tous mes parentz i'ay quite, and amiss,
Et tous autres respectz sont apart mis.
Brief de vous seul ie cerche l'alliance.
De vous ie dis seul soustien de ma vie
Tant seulement ie cerche m'asseurer,
Et si ose de moy tant presumer
De vous gaigner maugre toute l'enuie.
Car c'est le seul desir de vostre chere amie,
De vous seruir and loyaument aymer,
Et tous malheurs moins que riens estimer,
Et vostre volonte de la mien su^ure.
Vous cognoistrez auecques obeyssance
De mon loyal deuoir n'omettant lasciance
A quoy i'estudiray pour tousiours vous co^plaire,
Sans aymer rien que vous, soubz la subjection
De qui ie veux sans nulle fiction
Viure and mourir and a ce i'obtempere.
Mon coeur, mon sang, mon ame, and mon soucy,
Las, vous m'auez promis qu'aurons ce plaisir
De deviser auecques vous a loysir,
Toute la nuict, ou ie languis icy,
Ayant le coeur d'extreme paour transy,
Pour voir absent le but de mon desir
Crainte d'oublir un coup me vient a saisir:
Et l'autre fois ie crains que rendurcie
Scit contre moy vostre amiable coeur
Par quelque dit d'vn meschant rapporteur*
Un autre fois ie crains quelque adventure
Qui par chemin detourne mon amant,
Par un fascheux and nouueau accident.
Dieu detourne toute malheureux augure.
Ne vous voyant selon qu'auez promis
I'ay mis la main au papier pour escrire
D'vn different que ie voulu transcrire.
Ie ne scay pas quel sera vostre aduis
Mais ie scay bien qui mieux aymer scaura,
Vous diriez bien que plus y gaignera.
O Goddis have of me compassioun,
And schew quhat certain proof
I may geif, which shall not seem to him vain,
Of my love and fervent affectioun.
Helas, is he not already in possessioun
Of my body, of heart, that refusis no pain,
Nor dishonor in the life uncertain,
Offense of friends, nor worse afflictioun,
For him I esteem al my friends les the^ nathing,
And I will have good hope of my enemeis.
I have put in hasard for him both fame and conscience,
I will for his sake renounce ye world,
I will die to set him forwart.
Quhat remains to gief proof of my constancy?
In his handis and in his full power,
I put my son, my honor, and my lyif,
My contry, my subjects, my soul al subdewit,
To him, and has none other will
For my scope, quhilk without deceit,
I will follow in spite of all envy
That may ensue: for I haif na other desire,
But to make him perceive my faythfulnes,
For storm or fair wedder that may come,
Never will it chainge dwelling, or place.
Schortly I sall geif of my truth sic proof,
That he sall know my constancy without fiction,
Not by my weping, or faynit obedience,
As other have done: but by other experience.
Sche for her honor owes you obedience:
I in obaying you may receive dishonor,
Not being (to my displesure) your wife as she.
And yet in this point she shall have na pre-eminence.
Sche uses constancy for her awin profit:
For it is na little honor to be maistres of your goods,
And I for luifing of you may receive blame,
And will not be ouercumme by her in loyal obseruaunce.
Sche has no apprehension of your evil,
I fear so all appearing evil that I can have na rest.
Sche had your acqueintance by consent of her freindes,
I against al their will have borne you affection.
And not the less (my heart) you doubt of my constance,
And of her faithfulness you haif firm assurance.
By you (my heart) and by your aliance
Sche has restored her house unto honor,
By you she is become to that greitnes,
Of quhilk her freindis had never assurance,
Of you (my wealth) sche got the acquentance,
And has conquest the same time your heart.
By you sche has pleasure and good luck,
And by you has received honor and reverence,
And has not lost but the reioysance
Of one vnpleasa^t fool, quhilk she louit deirly.
Than I moan her not to love ardently
Him that has none in wit, in manhead,
In beauty, in bounty, in truth, nor in co^stancy,
Any second: I lief in the belief.
Quhen you louit her sche vsit coldness,
Gif you suffrith for her luif passioun,
That commith of to greit affectioun of luif,
Her sadness schew the tristesse of her heart,
Taking na pleasure of your vehement burning,
In her clothing she schew vnfaynitly,
That sche had na feir, that imperfection
Could deface her out of that true heart.
I did not see in her the feir of your death,
That was worthy of sic husband and Lord.
Schortly sche has of you all her wealth.
And has never weyit nor estemit
One so greit hap, but sins it was not hirs,
And now she says that she loves him so well.
And now sche begins to see,
That sche was of very evil judgment,
To esteem the love of sic ane lover,
And wald feign deceive my love,
By writings and paintit learning,
Quhilk not the less did not breid in her brain,
But borrowit from sum feate author,
To feign one sturt and haif none.
And for all that her payntit wordis,
Her tears, her plaintes full of dissimulation,
And her hye cries and lamentations
Has won that point, that you keip in store,
Her letters and writings, to quhilk you geif trust,
Ye, and love and beleuist her more than me.
You believe her (helas) I perceive it to well,
And callist in doubt my firm constancy
(O mine only wealth, and my only hope)
And I can not assure you of my truth.
I see that you esteem me light,
And be no way assurit of me,
And do suspect (my heart) without any appearing cause,
Discrediting me wrangously.
You do not know the love I bear to you.
You suspect that other love transporteth me.
You think my words be but wind:
You paint my weary heart, as it were of wax,
You imagine me an woman without judgment.
And all that increases my burning.
My love increases and more and more will increase,
So lang as I shall lief, and I shall hold for ane greit felicity
To have only pairt in that heart,
To the quhilk at length my love sall appear,
So clearly, that he sall never doubt.
For him I will strive against wan weard,
For him I will recerse greitnes,
And sall do so mikle that he shall know
That I haif no wealth, hap, nor contentation,
But to obey, and serve him truly.
For him I attend all good fortune.
For him I will conserve health and life,
For him I desire to ensew courage,
And he shall ever find me unchangeable.
For him also I powered out many tearis,
First quhen he made himself possessor of this body.
Of the quhilk then he had not the heart.
After he did give me one other hard charge,
Quhen he bled of his blude great quantity,
Through the great sorrow of the quhilk came to me that dolor,
That almost caryit away my life, and the feire
To lose the only strength that armit me.
For him since I haif despisit honor,
The thing only that brings felicity.
For him I haif hazardit greitnes and conscience.
For him I haif forsaken all kin and friends,
And set aside all other respects,
Schortly, I seek the aliance of you only.
Of you I say only vpholder of my life,
I only seek to be assuerit,
Ye, and dare presume so much of my self,
To win you in spite of all envy:
For that is the only desire of your deir love,
To serve and love you truly,
And to esteem all wan hap less then nathing,
And to follow your will with mine,
You shall know with obedience,
Not forgetting the knawlege of my leal deuty,
The quhilke I shall study to the fine that I may ever please you.
Loving nothing but you, in the subiectioun
Of quhome I will without any fictioun,
Live and die, and this I consent.
My heart, my blood, my soul, my care,
Helas you had promisit that I should have that pleasure.
To devise with you at leisure.
All the night quhair I lie and languishe here,
My heart being ouerset with extreme fear
Seeing absent the butte of my desire.
Fear of forgetting sometime takes me,
And other times I fear that louesum heart,
Be not hardenit against me
By sum saying of ane wickit reporter,
Uther times I fear sum adventure,
That by the way should turn abacke my love
By sum troublous and new accident.
O God turn abacke all unhappy augure.
Not seeing you as you had promisit,
I put my hand to the paper to write,
Of ane differens that I have willit copye.
I can not tell what shall be your judgment,
But I know well quho can best love,
You may tell who shall win may.
A letter written by her from Glascow to Bothwel proving her hate to her
husband and some suspicicions of practicing his death, quhilk letter was
written in French, and here ensues translatit word for word.
IL semble qu'auecques vostre absence soit joint l'oubly, veu qu'au partir vous
me promistes de vos nouuelles. Et toucesfoys ie n'en puis apprendre. etc.

IT appearis that with your absence there is alswa ioinit forgetfulness, seand
that at your departing you promisit to make me aduertisemet of your newis from
time to time. The awaytyng upon tham yesterday, causit me to be almaist in sic
joy as I will be at your returning, quhilk ye have delayit langer then your
promise was. As to me howbeit I have na further news from you according to my
commissioun, I bring the man with me to Cragmillar upon monday, quhair he will be
all wednisday, and I will gang to Edinburgh to draw blude of me, gif in the
mean time I get na news in the contrary fro you. He is mair gay the^ euir ye
saw him, he puttis me in remembrance of all thyngis that may make me believe he
luffis me. Summa ye will say that he makis love to me: Of the quhilk I take sa
greit pleasure, that I entir neuir quhair he is bot incontinent I take the
seiknes of my sore side I am sa troublit with it. Gif Pareis bryngis me that
quhilk I send him for, I trust it sall amend me. I pray you advertise me of
your news at length and quhat I sall do, in case ye be not returnit quhen I am
come their, for in case ye work not wislie I see that the hale burdyng of this
will fall upon my shoulders. Provide for all thing and discourse upon it first
with your self. I send this by Betoun, quha gais to ane day of law of the lard
of balfouris. I will say na further, sauffyng that I pray you to send me good
news of your voyage. From Glascow this saturday in the morning.


An other letter to Bothwell concerning the hate of her husband and practice of
his murder.
EStant party du lieu ou i'auois laisse mo coeur il se peult aysement iuger
quelle estoit ma contenance, veu ce qui peult un corpse sans coeur, qui a este
cause que iusques a la disnee ie n'ay pas tenu grand propos, aussi person ne
s'est voulu aduancer iugeant bien qu'il n'y faisoit bon. etc.

Being departit from the place quhaire I left my heart, it is easy to be iudgit
quhat was my countenance, seeing that I was even asmickle as ane body without
ane heart, quhilke was the occasioun that quhile dinner time I held purpois to
na body, nor yet durst any present thamselfis unto me, judging that it was not
good so to do. Four mile ere I came to the town, ane Gentleman of the Earl of
Lennox came and made his commendations unto me, and excusit him that he came
not to meet me, by reason he durst not enterprise the same because of the rude
words that I had spoken to Cu^ningham, and he desirit that he should come to
the inquisition of the matter that I suspectit him of. This last speaking was
of his own head without any commissioun. I aunswerit to him that there was no
recepte could serve against fear, and that he would not be afraid in case he
were not culpabill, and that I aunswerit but rudely to the doubtis that were in
his letters. Summa, I made him hold his tongue, the rest were lang to write.
Sir James Hammeltoun met me, quho schewd that the other time quhen he heard of
my coming, he departit away, and sent Houstoun to schaw him that he would
neuir have beleuit that he would have pursuit him, nor yet accompaneit him with
the Hammeltonis. He aunswerit that he was only cum but to see me, and that he
would neither accompany Stewart nor Hammiltoun but by my commandment. He
desyrit that he would cum and speak with him, he refusit it. The Lard of Luse
Houstou^ and Cauldwellis son, with xl. horse or thairabout came and met me.
The Lard of Luse said he was chargit to ane day of law, by the kingis father,
quhilk should be this day, against his own hand writ, quhilk he hes. And yet
notwithstanding, knowing of my cu^myng it is delayit, he was inquirit to cum to
him, quhilk he refusit, and swearis that he will endure nothing of him. Neuir
ane of ye town came to speak to me, quhilke causis me think that they are
his, and nevertheless he speakis good, at the least his son. I see na other
Gentilman but they of my cumpany. The king sent for Ioachim yesternight and
askit at him quhy I lodgeit not beside him, and that he would rise the sooner
gif that were, and quhairfoir I come, gif it was for good appointment, and gif
ye were their in particular, and gif I had made my estait, gif I had taken
Pareis and Gilbert to wryit to me, This berer will tell you sumwhat upon this.
and that I would send Joseph away. I am abashit quho hes schawin him sa far,
yea he spoke euin of the marriage of Bastian. I inquirit him of his letters,
quhairintil he playneit of the cruelty of sum, aunswerit that he was
astonyshed, and that he was sa glad to see me that he beleuit to die for
gladness, he fand great fault that I was pensive, I departit to supper, this
bearer will tell you of my arriuyng, he prayit me to return, the quhilke I
did, he declarit unto me his sickness, and that he would make na testament but
only leif all thing to me, and that I was the cause of his malady because of
the regrait that he had that I was so strange unto him. And thus he said, ye
ask me quhat I meyne by the cruelty conteynit in my letter, it is of you
alone that will not accept my offeris and repentance. I confess that I have
failed, but not into that quhilke I euir denyit, and sic like hes failed to
sundry of your subiectis quhilk ye have forgeuen. I am young. Ye will say that
ye have forgeuen me ofttimes, and yet that I return to my faultis. May not ane
man of my aige for lack of counsale ^all twyse, or thryse, or in lack of his
promise, and at last repent himself and be chastised by experience? If I may
obtain pardoun, I protest I shall never make fault again. And I crave na
other thing but that we may be at bed and bourd together as husband and wife,
and if ye will not consent heirunto, I shall neuir rise out of this bed, I pray
you tell me your resolution. God knows how I am punished for making my god of
you, and for having no other thought but on you, and if at any time I offend
you, ye are the cause, because quhen any offendis me, if for my refuge I might
plain unto you, I would speak it unto no other body, but quhen I hear any
thing, not being familiar with you, necessity constreynes me to keep it in my
breast. And that causes me to tyne my wit for very anger. I aunswerit ay unto
him, but that would be over long to write at length. I askit quhy he would
pass away in the Inglishe schip, he denies it and swears thairunto, but he
grantes that he spoke with the me^. After this I inquirit him of the
inquisitioun of Hiegait, he denyit the same quhile I showed him the very words
was spokin. At quhilke time he said that Mynto had aduerteist him that it was
said that sum of the counsel had brought ane letter to me to be subscriuit to
put him in pressoun, and to slay him if he made resistance. And he askit the
same at Mynto himself, quho aunswerit that he beleuit the same to be true. The
morn I will speak to him vppoun this point. As to the rest of Willie
Hiegaites he confessit it, but it was the morn after my cumming or he did it.
He wald very feign that I should lodge in his lodging, I refusit it, and said
to him that he behouit to be purgeit, and that could not be done here, he said
to me I hear say ye have brought ane lytter with you, but I had rather have
passit with you. I trow he beleuit that I would have sent him away presoner: I
aunswerit that I would take him with me to Cragmillar quhair the medicinar and
I might help him, and not be far from my son, he aunswerit that he was
reddie quhen I pleasit, so I would assure him of his request, he desires no
body to see him, he is angry when I speak of Walcar, and sayis that he shall
pluck the ears out of his head, and that he lies. For I inquirit him vpoun
that, and that he was angry with sum of the Lordis and would threten tham, he
denies that and sayis he luifs tham all, and prays me to give trust to nathing
against him, as to me he wald rather give his life or he did any displesure to
me. And after this he showed me of so many little flatteries, so couldly, and so
wyislie, that ye will abash thereat. I had almaist forgot that he said he could
not doubt of me in this purpois of Hiegaittis, for he would never believe that I
quho was his proper flesh would do him any evil, alsweill it was schawin that
I refusit to subscriue the same: but as to any vthers that would pursue him at
least he should sell his life dear enough, but he suspectit no body nor yet
would not, but would luif all that I luffit, he would not let me depart fro him
but desirit that I should wake with him, I make it seem that I believe that
all is true, and takes heed thereto, and excusit my self for this night that I
could not wake, he says that he sleeps not well, ye saw him never better nor
speike mair humblier. And if I had not a pruif of his heart of wax, and that
mine were not of ane Dyamont, quhairintill no shot can make breach, but that
quhilk comes forth of your hand, I would have almaist had pity of him. But
fear not, the place shall hold unto the death. Remember in recumpe^ce thereof
that ye suffer not yours to be won by that false race that will travel no
less with you for the same. I believe they have been at scholis together, he
hes ever the tear in his eye, he salutes every body, yea unto ye least, and
makes pitious caressing unto them to make them have pity on him. This day his
father bled at the mouth and nose, guess quhat presaige that is. I have not yet
seen him, he keeps his chamber. The king desires that I should give him meat
with my own hands. But give na mair trust quhair you are tha^ I shall do
here. This is my first journey, I shall end ye same to morrow. I write all
things, howbeit they be of littill weight, to the end that ye may take the
best of all to judge upon. I am in doing of a work here that I hait greatly.
Have ye not desire to laugh to see me lie so weill, at the least to dissembill
so weill and to tell him truth betuix hands. He showed me almaist all that is
in the name of the byschop and Suderland, and yet I have never toucheit ane
word of that ye showed me, but allanelie by force flattering, and to pray him to
assure himself of me. And by playning on the byschop I have drawn it all out
of him. Ye have heard the rest. We are coupled with two false races, the devil
sunder us, and God knitte us together for ever for the may faithful couple
that ever he vnitid. This is my faith I will die in it. Excuse if I writ evil,
ye may guess the half of it, but I can not mende it because I am not weill at
ease, and yet very glad to writ unto you quhen the rest are sleepand, sith I
can not sleipe as they do and as I would desire, that is, in your arms my
dear love, quhom I pray God to preserve from all evil and send you repose, I
am gangand to seek mine till the morn quhen I shall end my Bybill, but I am
fascheit that it stoppies me to write newis of my self unto you, because it is
so lang. Advertise me quhat ye have deliberat to do in the matter ye know upon
this point, to the end that we may understand vthers weill, that nothing
thairthrough be spilt. I am irkit and ganging to sleipe, and yet I cease not to
scrible all this paper insamickle as restis thairof. Waryed might this pokkish
man be ye causes me have sa mickle pain: for without him I should have ane far
plesander subject to discourse vpoun. He is not ouermickle diformit, yet he hes
received very mickle. He hes almaist slain me with his breath, it is werse
the^ your uncles, and yet I cum na nerar unto him but in ane chair at the beds
fute, and he being at the other end thairof.

The massage of the father in the gait.

The purpois of Sir James Hammeltoun.

Of that the Lord of Lusse showed me of the delay.

Of the demaundis that he askit at Ioachim.

Of my estait, of my cumpany, of the occasioun of my cumming, and of Joseph.

Item, the purpois that he and I had together.

Of the desire that he hes to please me, and of his repentance.

Of the interpretatioun of his letter.

Of Willie Hiegaittis matter of his departing.

Of Monseur de Leuingstoun.

I had almost forgot that Monsier de Leuingstoun said in the Lady Reres ear at
suppar, that he wald drink to the folk that I wist of, if I wald plege them.
And eftir suppar he said to me quhen I was lenand vpoun him warming me at the
fire: ye have fair going to se sik folk, yet ye can not be sa welcum to them,
as ye left sum body this day in regrait, that will neuir be blyth quhill he se
you again. I askit at him, quha that was? With that he thrustit my body and
said, that sum of his folks had seen you in fascherie, ye may guess at the
rest. I wrought this day quhill it was two houris vpoun this bracelet, for to
put the key of it within the lock thereof, quhilk is coupled vndirneth with two
cordwinis. I haif had sa littill time that it is evil maid: but I sall make ane
fairer in the mean time. Take heid that nane that is heir se it, for all the
world will know it: because for haist it was maid in their presence. I am now
passa^d to my faschious purpoes. Ye gar me dissemble sa far that I haif hor^ing
thairat: and ye cause me do almost the office of a traitores. Remember how gif
it were not to obey you, I had rather be deid or I did it: my heart bleides at
it. Summa, he will not come with me except vpoun conditioun that I will
promeise to him that I sall be at bed and bourde with him as of befoyr, and
that I sall leave him na oftar: and doing this vpoun my word he will do all
thingis that I pleis, and cum with me: bot he hes prayit me to remane vpoun him
quhill other morn. He spoke very bravely at the beginning, as this bearar
will schaw you, vpoun the purpois of the Inglismen, and of his departing: bot
in the end he returnit agane to his humility. He schewit amangis other
purposes that he knew weill anewch, that my bruther had schewin me that thing
quhilk he had spoken in Striueling: of the quhilk he denyis the ane half, and
above all, that euir he cum in his chamber. For to make him traist me it
behouit me to feign in sum thingis with him: therfoyr quhen he requestit me to
promeise unto him, that quhe^ he was hail we sold haif both ane bed. I said to
him, fayningly and making me to believe his promisis, that gif he changit not
purposis betuix this and that time, I wald be content therewith, bot in the
mean time I bad him take heid that he let na body wit thereof: because to
speike amangis our selfis the Lordis could not be offendit, nor will evil
thairfoyr. But they wald feire in respect of the boasting he maid of tham, that
if euir we aggreit togidder, he should make tham know the litil count they tuke
of him: and that he counsallit me not to purches sum of tham by him: they for
this cause wald be in ielosy, gif attanis without thayr knawlege, I sold break
the play set up in the contrair in thayr presence. He said very joyfully: And
think you they will esteem you the mayr of that? bot I am very glad that you
speike to me of the Lordis, for I believe at this time ye desire that we should
leif togidder in quietness: for gif it were vtherwayis greitter inconvenience
might come to us both than we are ware of: But now I will do quhat euir ye
will do, and will lufe all that ye lufe, and desires you to make them lu^e in
like manner: for sith they seek not my life, I lufe them al equally. Upoun
this point this berar will schew you many small things. Because I haif over
mikle to write, and it is lait, I gief traist unto him upon your word. Summa,
he will ga vpoun my word to all places. Alas, I neuir deceiuit any body: but I
remit me altogidder to your will. Send me advertisement quhat I sall do, and
quhatsoeuer thing sall come thereof I sall obey you. Advise to with your self
if ye can find out any mair secret inuentioun by medicine: for he should take
medicine and the bath at Cragmillar. He may not cum forth of the house this
lang time. Summa, by all that I can learn, he is in greit suspicioun: and yet
notwithstanding he geiues credeit to my word: bot yet not so far that he will
schew any thing to me. Bot neuirthelesse I sall draw it out of him, gif ye will
that I auow all unto him. Bot I will neuir rejoice to diffame any body that
trustis in me: yet notwithstanding ye may command me in all thingis. Have no
evil opinioun of me for that cause, by reason ye are the oecasioun of it your
self, because for my awin parciculer revenge I wald not do it to him. He geues
me sum checkes of that quhilk I fearit yea even in the quick, he sayis this
far, that his faultis were publeist, bot their is that committis faultis that
beleues they will neuir be spoken of, and yet they will speike of greit and
small. As towart the Lady Reres he said, I pray God that sche may serve you for
your honor. And said, it is thought and he beleuis it to be true, that I haif
not the power of my self into my self, and that because of the refuse I maid
of his offeris. Su^ma, for certantie he suspects of the thing ye know, and of
his lyif. But as to the last, how sone that I spoke two or three good wordis
unto him, he reioysis and is out of dout. I saw him not this evening for to end
your bracelet, to the quhilke I ca^ get no lokkis, it is reddy to tham, and yet
I fear that it will bring some malheur, and may be seen if ye chance to be
hurt. Advertise me if ye will have it, and if ye will have mair silver, and
quhen I shall return, and how far I may speak. He inragis quhen he hearis of
Lethington, or of you, or of my brother. Of your brother he speikis nathyng, he
spekis of the Earl of Ergyle. I am in feir quhen I hear him speike: for he
assuris him self that he hes not ane evil opinioun of him. He speikes nathing
of tham that is out nouther good nor evil, but fleis that point. His fader
kepis his chamber, I haif not seen him. All the Hammiltonis ar heir, that
accompaneis me very honorably. All the frendis of the other conueyis me quhen
I gang to se him. He desiris me to come, and see him rise the morn betime. For
to make schort, this berar will tell you the rest. And if I learn any thing
heir, I will make you memorial at euin. He will tell you the occasioun of my
remaining. Burn this letter, for it is ouir dangerous, and na thing well said
in it: for I am thinkand vpoun nathing but fascherie. If you be in Edinburgh at
the receipt of it, send me word sone. Be not offendit, for I gief not ouir greit
credeit. Now seeing to obey you, my deir lufe, I spare nouther honor,
conscience, hazard, nor greitnes quhatsumeuir, take it I pray you in good
pairt: and not eftir the interpretation of your false good brother: Huntley.
to quhome I pray you gyif na credit, aganis the may faithful luffar that
euir ye had, or euir sall haif. Se not her quhaies faynit tears should not be
sa mickle praysit nor esteemit, Bothwels own wife.
as the true and faithful trauails, quhilke I sustain for to merit her
place. For obtaining of the quhilke agains my natural, I betrayis them that
may impesche me. God forgyif me, and God gyif you my only lufe the hap and
prosperity, quhilk your humble and faithful luif desiris unto you, quha hopis
to be shortly ane other thing to you for the rewart of my irksum trauellis. It
is lait, I desire neuir to ceisse fra writing unto you, yet now after the
kissing of your hands I will end my letter. Excuse my evil writing and read it
twice over. Excuse that thing that is scribled, for I had no paper yisterday
quhe^ I wrait that of the memorial. Remember upon your luif, and write unto
her, and that very often. Love me as I sal do you.

Remember you of the purpoes of the Lady Reres.

Of the Inglishmen.

Of his mother.

Of the Earl of Argile.

Of the Earl Bothuile.

Of the lugeing in Edinbrough.


An other letter to Bothwell concerning certain tokens that she sent him.
MOnsieur si l'ennuy de vostre absence, celuy de vostre oubly, la crainte du
danger, tant prouue d'vn chacun a vostre tant aymee person. etc.

MY Lord if the displeasure of your absence, of your forgetfulness, the feir of
danger so promisit by every one to your so louit person, may gif me
consolation, I leif it to you to judge, seeing the unhap that my cruel lot and
continual misaduenture, hes hitherto promisit me followyng the misfortunes and
fears asweill of lait as of a lang time bypast, the quhilke you do know. But
for all that I will in no wise accuse you, nouther of your little remembrance
nouther of your little cair, and least of all of your promise broken, or of the
coldness of your writing, since I am ellis so far maid yours, that that quhilk
pleasis you is acceptable to me, and my thoghtes are so willyngly subduit unto
yours, that I suppois that all that comes of you, procedis not by any of the
causis foresaid, but rather for sic as be just and reasonable and sic as I
desire my self. Quhilk is the final order that you promisit to take, for the
surety and honorabill service of the only uphold of my life. For quhilk alone
I will preserve the same, and without the quhilk I desire not bot sudden
daith. And to testify unto you quhow lawlie I submit me under your
commandments, I have send you in sign of homage by Paris the ornament of
the head quhilk is the chief guide of the other members. A head.
Inferring thairby that by the saisyng of you in the possessioun of the spoil
of that quhilk is principal the remna^t can not be bot subject unto you, and
with consentyng of the heart. In place quhairof since I have ellis left it unto
you, I send unto you one sepulture of hard stone collourit with blake, sawin
with tears and bones. The stone I compare to my heart that as it is caruit in
one sure sepulture or harbor of your commandementes and above all of your name
and memory, that are thairin inclosit as is my hear in this ryng never to come
forth, The Quenis hear.
quhile death grant unto you to ane trophee of victory of my bones as the
ring is fullit, in sign that you have maid ane full conquest of me, of mine
heart, and unto that my bones be left unto you in remembrance of your victory
and my acceptable luif and willing, for to be better bestowit then I merit.
The amelyng that is about is blake, quhilk signifijs the stedfastnes of her
that sends the same. The tears are without number, so are the dreadoures to
displeis you, the tears of your absence, the disdain that I ca^ not be in
outwart effect yours as I am without feintnes of heart and sprite, and of good
reason though my merits were mekle greater then of the may profit that ever
was, and sic as I desire to be, and sall take pain in conditions to imitate,
for to be bestowit worthylie under your regiment. My only wealth resaue
thairfoir in as good part the same as I have received your marriage with extreme
joy, ye quhilk shall not part forth of my bosom quhile that marriage of our
bodies be maid in publik, as sign of all that I either hope or desiris of blis
in this world. Yet my heart fearyng to displease you, as mikle in the reading
hereof, as I delight me in the writing, I will make end, after that I have
kissit your hands with as greit affectioun as I pray God (O the only uphold
of my life) to gif you lang and blissit life, and to me your good favor as the
only good that I desire and to the quhilk I pretend. I have shawin unto this
bearer that quhilk I have learnit, to quhom I remit me, knawand the credit
that you gaif him as she does that will be for euir unto you humble and
obedient lawful wife that for euir dedicates unto you her heart, her body,
without any change as unto him that I have maid possessour of heart, of quhilk
you may hold you assurit that unto the deith sall na ways be eschangit for
evil nor good sall neuir make me go from it.


An other letter to Bothwell of her love to him.
IAy veille plus tard la haut que ie n'ousse fait, si ce n'eust este pour tirer
ce que ce port^ur vous dira, que ie treuue la plus belle commodite pour excuser
vostre affair qui ce pourroit presenter. etc.

I Have wakit laiter their up then I wald have done, if it had not been to draw
sum thing out of him, quhilk this bearer will show you, quhilke is the fairest
commodity, that can be offerit to excuse your affairis. I have promisit to
bring him to him the morn. Put order unto it if ye find it good. Now Sir. I
have broken my promise because ye commaundit me nouther to write nor send unto
you: yet I haif not done this to offend you. And if ye knew the feire that I
haif presently, ye wald not haif sa many contrairie suspiciounis in your
thought, quhilk notwithstanding I treat and chereish as procedyng fro the
thing in the world that I may desire and sekis fastest to haif, quhilk is
your good grace. Of the quilk my behavior shall assure me: as to me I shall
neuir dispayr of it. And prayis you according to your promeis to discharge your
heart unto me: vtherwayis I will think that my malheur and the good handlyng of
her that hes not the third pairt of the faithful nor willing obedience unto
you that I beir, hes won aganis my will that advantage over me, quhilk the
second love of Jason wan. Not that I will compare you to ane sa unhappy as he
was, nor yet my self to ane sa vnpitiful a woman as sche. Howbeit ye cause me
to be sumquhat like unto her in any thing that touchis you, or that may
preserve and keip you unto her, to quhome only ye appertain: if it be sa that
I may appropriate that quhilk is won through faithful yea only luffing of
you, as I do and sall do all the days of my life, for pain or evil that can
cume thairof. In recompense of the quhilk and of all the evils quhilk ye have been cause of to me, remember you upon the place heir beside. I crave with that
ye keep promise to me the morn, but yt we may meit together, and that ye give
na faith to suspitiouns without the certainty of thaim. And I crave na other
thing at God but that ye may know that thing that is in my heart quhilke is
yaurs, and that he may preserve you from all evil, at the least sa lang as I
have lite, quhilk I repute not precious unto me except in sa far as it and I
both are agreabill unto you, I am going to bed, and will bid you good night.
Advertise me tymely in the morning how ye have faren, for I will be in pain
unto I get word. Make good watch if the burd eschaip out of the caige or
without her mate, as the turtur I shall remain alone for to lament the absence
how schort that soever it be. This letter will do with a good heart, that thing
quhilk I can not do my self, if it be not that I have fear that ye are in
sleeping. I durst not write this befoir Joseph, Bastian and Ioachim, that did
but depart euin quhen I began to write.


An other letter to Bothwell concerning the departure of Margarete Carwood,
quho was privy and a helper of all their love.
MOn coeur helas! fault il que la folly d'vne femme, don't vous cognoissez
assez l'ingratitude verse moy, soit cause de vous donner desplaisir. etc.

MY heart, Alas, must the folly of a woman, quhose unthankfulness toward me you
do sufficiently know, be occasioun of displeasure unto you? considering that I
cauld not have remedijt thairunto without knawing it? And since that I
perceauit it, I cauld not tell it you, for that I knew not how to govern my
self thairin. For nouther in that, nor in any other thing, will I take upon me
to do any thing without knawledge of your will. Quhilk I beseech you let me
understand, for I will follow it all my life, mair willyngly the^ you shall
declare it to me. And if you do not send me word this night what you will that
I shall do, I will rid my self of it, and hasard to cause it to be
enterprisit and taken in hand, Quhilk might be hurtful to that quhairunto both
we do tend. And when she shall be married, I beseech you give me one, or else I
will take sic as shall content you for their conditions, but as for their
tounges or faithfulness towart you, I will not answer. I beseech you that an
opinioun of other persoun, be not hurtful in your mind to my constancy.
Mistrust me, but quhen I will put you out of doubt and clear my self. Refuse
it not my dear life, and suffer me to make you some proof by my obedience, my
faithfulness, constancy and voluntary subiectioun, quhilk I take for the
pleasantest good that I might receive, if you will accept it, and make no
ceremony at it, for you could do me na greater outrage, nor give mair mortal
grief.


An other letter sent from Stereline to Bothwell concerning the practice for
her rauishment.
MOnsieur helas pourquoy est vostre fiance mise en perso^ne si indigne, pour
soupconner ce qui est entierement vostre. I'enrage, vous m'auiez promis. etc.

ALas, my Lord. Why is your trust put in a person so unworthy, to mistrust that
which is wholly yours? I am woodde. You had promisit me that you would resolve
all, and that you would send me word every day quhat I should do, you have
done nothing thairof. I aduertisit you well to take heed of your false brother
in law: he came to me, and without showing me any thing from you, told me that
you had willit him to write to you that that I should say, and quhaire and
quhan you should cum to me, and that that you should do touchand him, and
thereuppon has preachit unto me that it was a foolish enterprise, and that
with mine honor I could never marry you, seeing that being married you did carry
me away, and that his folks would not suffer it, and that the Lordis would
unsay themselfis, and would deny that they had said. To be short, he is all
contrary. I told him, that seeing I was cum so far, if you did not withdraw
your self of your self, that no perswasioun nor deith it self should make me
fail of my promise. As touching the place you are to negligent (pardon me) to
remit your self thereof unto me. Choose it your self, and send me word of it.
And in the mean time I am sick, I will differ, as touching the matter it is
to late. It was not long of me that you have not thought thereupon in time. And
if you had not mair chaungit your mind since mine absence than I have, you
should not be now to ask such resolving. Well there wants nothing of my
part, and seeing that your necligence does put us both in the danger of a
false brother, if it succeed not well, I will never rise again. I send this
bearer unto you for I dare not trust your brother with these letters nor with
the diligence. He shall tell you in quhat stait I am, and judge you quhat
amendment these new ceremonies have brought unto me. I would I were deid, for I
see all goes ill. You promisit other manner of matter of your forseyng, but
absence has power over you, quho have two stringis to your bow. An other wife.
Dispatch the answer, that I fail not, and put no trust in your brother for
this enterprise, for he has told it, and is also all against it. God give you
good nicht.


An other letter to Bothwell for the practice and devise to excuse the
rauishyng.
DV lieu and de l'heure ie m'en rap port a vostre friar and a vous, ie le
suiuray and ne fauldray en rien de ma part. Il trouue beauc oup de difficultez.
etc.

OF the place and the time, I remitte my self to your brother and to you. I
will follow him, and will fail in nathing of my pairt. He finds many
difficulties: I think he does advertise you thereof: and quhat he desires for
the handling of him self. As for the handling of my self I heard it once well
deuisit. Me thinks that your services, and the long amity, having the good
will of the Lords, do well deserve a pardon, if above the duty of a Subject
you advance your self, not to constrain me, but to assure your self of such
place nigh unto me, that other admonitions or foreign persuasions may not let
me from consenting to that that you hope your service shall make you one day to
attain: and to be schort, to make your self sure of the Lords, and free to
marry: and that you are constraynit for your surety, and to be abill to serve
me faithfully, to use an humble request, ioynit to an importune action. And to
be short, excuse your self, and persuade them the most you ca^, that you are
constraynit to make poursute aganis your enemies. You shall say enough, if the
matter or ground do like you, and many fair words to Ledinton. If you like
not the deed, send me word, and leave not the blame of all unto me.


An other letter to Bothwell of the practice for her rauishement and to advise
him to be strange to do it.
MOnsieur depuis ma lettre escrit vostre beau friar qui fust* est venu a moy
fort triste, and m'a demand mon conseil de ce qu'il feroit apres demain. etc.

MY Lord, since my letter written, your brother in law that was, came to me very
sad, and has askeit me my counsel, quhat he should do after to morrow,
because there be many folkis here, and among vtheris the Earl of Southerland,
quho wald rather dye, considering the good they haif sa lately receiuit of me,
than suffer me to be caryit away, they conducting me: and that he fearit there
should sum trouble happen of it: of the other side that it should be said that
he were unthankful to haif betrayit me. I told him that he should haif resoluid
with you upon all that: and that he should avoid, if he could, those that were
most mistrustit. He has resolved to write thereof to you by my opinioun: for
he has abasshit me to see him sa vnresoluit at the neid. I assure my self, he
will play the pairt of an honest man. But I have thought good to advertise you
of the fear he has that he should be chargeit and accusit of treson, to the
end that without mistrusting him, you may be the more circumspect, and that
you may haif the more power. For we had yisterday more then iij.C. horse of
his, and of Leniston. For the honor of God be accumpanyit rather with more
then less: for that is the principal of my caire. I go to write my dispatch,
and pray God to send us a happy enteruiew schortly. I write in have to the end
you may be aduisit in time.


Of the Bills of proclamatioun and combat, set up by Bothwell and the
aunsweres.
Immediately after the death of the king quho was murtherit and his house blown
up with gonnepoulder the ix. day of February in the night. 1567. Proclamatioun
was made that quhosoeuer could bewray the murderers of the king should have
two thousand pound. Unto the quhilk proclamatioun, reply was made and set up
privily vpoun the tolbuith door of Edinburgh the 16. of February in this manner.

Because proclamatioun is made that quhosoeuer will reveal the murder of the
king shall have two thousand pound, I quho have made inquisitioun by them that
were the doers thereof, affirm that the committers of it were the Earl
Bothwell, If this be not true spear at Gilbert Bawfoord
M. James Balfoure, the Persoun of Flisk, M. Dauy Chambers, Black M. John
Spence quho quhas principal deviser of the murder, and the queen assentyng
thairto through the persuasioun of the Earl Bothwell, and the witchcraft of the
Lady Bucklowgh.

Upon this, new proclamation was made the same day, desiryng the setter up of
the said Bill to come and auowe and subscribe the same, and he should have the
sum promisit in the first proclamatioun, and further according to his
ability, and sight of the queen, and her counsel.

The answer thereunto was set up in the place aforesaid, the morrow after,
being the xix. of the same month.

FOrasmekle as proclamatioun has been made since the setting up of my first
letter, desiryng me to subscribe, and auow the same, For answer, I desire the
money to be consignit into an eeuenly man's hand, and I shall compeere on Sunday
next with iiij. some with me, and subscribe my first letter, and abide thereat.
And further I desire that Senior Frauncis, Bastian, and Joseph the queen's
goldsmith be stayit, and I shall declaire quhat every man did in particular,
with their accomplices.

To quhilk bill none answer was made.

The xiiij. day of April the Earl Bothwell coming to the Sessions at
Edinburgh with antesigne displaide and the streets full of armed men of his
factioun, was arreynit for the murder of the king, and acquit of the same by a
pariurde jury: quhairupon he set up a challenge to fight hand to hand with any
man (being no person diffamed) that wald auow the matter. Hereunto answer was
made by an other Bill set vy in the same place anon after. That for asmickle
as the said Earl Bothwell had set up a writing subscribed with his own hand,
quhairby he did challenge any man (not diffamed) that would or durst say he was
guilty of the kyings death, and therwithal did give the ly in his throat to him
that wald avouch the quarrel: a gentleman and a man of good fame did by those
presents accept the offer and offers, and wald prove by the law of arms that
he was the chief author of that foul and horrible murder, albeit an inquest
for fear of death had slyghtly quyte him. And because the king of France and
the queen of England had by their Ambassadors desired that trial and
punishment might be had for the same, he may heartily thairfoir craved of
their Majesty's, that they wald desire of the queen his souereine, that by her
consent they might appoint the day and place within their dominions for the
trial thereof according to the law of arms, in their presences or in their
deputies. Quhilk day and place he promised by the faith of a gentleman to
appear at, and to do his deuoyre, provided always that their Majesty's by
open proclamatioun shall give assurance too him and to his company, too pass
and repasse through their countries, without hurt or impediment. Quhat just
cause he had too desire the king of France and the queen of England too be
judges in the case, he remitted too the judgment of the readers and the
hearers, warnyng by those presents the rest of the murderers to prepare them
selves, for they should have the like offer made unto them, and their names
given in writing that they might be knawin too all men.

The confessioun of John Habroun, Young Talla, Dagleish and Pourie, upon quhom
was Justice execute the 3. of January, the year of God. 1567
John of Bowton confessit that nine was at the deid doing, my L. Bothwell, the
Lord of Ormistoun, Hob Ormistoun, himself, Talla, Dagleish, Uilson, Pourie, and
Frentch Paris, and that he saw na more, nor knew of na other companies.

Item, he knowis not other but that that he was blowin in the air, for he was
handillit with na men's hands as he saw, and if he was it was with vthers and
not with tham.

Item, as touching Sir James Balfour, he saw not his subscriptioun, but I
warrant you he was the principal tounsallar and deviser.

Item, he said, I confess it is the very providence of God that hes brought
me to his judgment, for I am led to it as an horse to the stall, for I had
schippis prouidit to fly but could not escape.

Item he said, let no man do evil for counsel of great men, or their
masters, thinking they shall save tham, for surely I thought that night that
the deid was done, that although knowledge should been gotten, na man durst
have said it was evil done, seeing the hand writtis and acknowledging the
Quenis mind thairto.

Item speaking of the Queen in the Tolbuith he said, God make all weill, but
the langer deirt is hydden it is the stronger. Quho lives, our daithes will
thought na newis.

Item, hinmest he confessit, he was ane of the principal doers of the daith,
and thairfoir is justly worthy of daith, but he was assurit of the mercy of
God, quho callit him to repentance.

ITem Talla confessit vt supra, agreing in all points as concerning the
parsons, number, and blowing in the air.

Item, he affirmit that in Setoun my Lord Bothwell callit on him and said,
quhat thought you quhen thou saw him blown in the air. Quho aunswerit, alas
my Lord quhy speak ye that, for quhe^ ever I hear sic a thing, the words
wound me to death, as they ought to do you.

Item, that same time he saw Sir James Balfour put in his own name and his
brothers unto my Lord Bothwelles remissioun.

Item he knew of the deid doing three or four days or it was done or thereby.

Item he said, after that I came to the court I left the reading of Gods word
and imbrasit vanity, and thairfoir hes God justly brought this on me.

Quhairfoir let all men flee evil cumpany, and to trust not in me^, for ready
are we to embrace evil as ready as hardes to receive fire. And further in the
Tolbuith he requirit John Brande minister of the congregation to pass to my
Lord Lind say, and say, my Lord heartily I forgive your L. and als my Lord
Regent and all vthers, but specially tham that betrayit me to you, for I know
if ye could have sauit me ye would, desiring you as ye will answer before God
in the latter day to do your diligence to bring the rest qhuo was the beginners
of this work to justice, as ye have done to me, for ye know it was not begun
in my head, but yet praises God that his justice hes begun at me, by the
quhilk he hes callit me to repentance.

ITem Daglishe said, as God shall be my judge I knew nothing of the kings
daith befoir it was done, for my Lord Bothwell gangand to his bed after the
taking of of his hose, quhilke was stockit with velvet, Frenth Paris cum and
roundit with him, and thairefter he tarried on me for other hose and claithis,
and his riding cloak and sword, quhilke I gave him, and herefter cum up the
gait to the Lord of Ormistouns lodging and taryit for him, and therefter that
he passit to ane wynd beside the black Friars, and cum to the slope of the
dike quhaire he gart me stand still, and as God shall be my judge I knew nathing
quhill I heard the blast of powder, and after this he cum hame, lay down in
his beid, quhill M. George Hakit cum and knockit at the door, and if I dye for
this, the quhilke God judge me gif I knew maire, quhat shall be done to tham quho
was the deuisers, counsallars, subscriuers, and fortifiers of it?

Now judge Englischmen if it be good to change Quenis.

O vnityng confounding.

Quhen rude Scotland hes vomited up ane poisoun, must fine England lick it up
for a restoratiue?

O vile indignity.

Quhile your Quenis enemy lives, her dangir continues. Desperate necessity
will dare the uttermost.

O cruel mercy.

O ambitioun fed with prosperity, stre^gthned with indulgence, irritated with
adversity, not to be neglected, trusted, nor pardouned.


