The Judgment of the Godly and learned Father, M. Henry Bullinger chief
Preacher and Pastor of the Church of Zurich in Swicerlande, declaring it to be
lawful for the Ministers of the Church of England, to wear the Apparel
prescribed by the Laws and orders of the same Realm.

IMPRINTED at London by William Seres, dwelling in Paul's Church yard, at the
sign of the Hedgehogge.

To the Reader.
SEEING THAT Master Bullinger himself of special good will and zeal toward
the Church of England, and the Ministers of the same, having trauayled, and
taken pain to write his judgment in this matter, thought it expedient to
communicate the same, not only with those two brethren here, at whose request
he wrote his mind herein: But also with certain Bishops of this Realm, as by
his letter to them directed and hereunto annexed, apeareth: and that for the
peace and quietness of this Church of England, as he himself affirms: And
considering also, that the judgment of two notable learned men, Master D.
Bucer, and master D. Peter Martyr touching this controversy, has already been
set forth and published, It is therefore thought good also to publish in print
the said judgment of Master Bullinger, being a man singulerly well learned
and Godly, and a worthy Minister in Christ's Church, not doubting but that
much good shall ensue thereof, both to the stablishing of weak consciences
troubled about this matter, and also to the satisfaction of those which without
contention or affection seek only the truth of doctrine in this behalf.

To the Reverend Fathers in Christ, D. Robert Horn B. of Winchester, D.
Grindall B. of London, D. Parkhurst B. of Norwitch in England. etc.
Reverend Fathers, Honorable, and dearly beloved brethren. The Lord Jesus
bless you, and keep you from al evil. We send you the copy of our writing
concerning the matter of Apparel, sent by us to N. and M. men learned and
godly, our worshipful brethren. And therefore send we it unto you, that ye may
understand, how that we deal not privately with your brethren, without the
knowledge of you, which are the principal Ministers, and that we to the
uttermost of our powers do seek the peace and quietness of your Churches in
all things. And we pray the Lord always to save the state there, and keep
you in concord. We also exhort you our right Reverend, and dearest brethren,
to have good regard unto faithful Ministers, and learned men: for such also
commonly have their affections. Wherefore the Apostle also warned men to bear
one an others burden. Ye by your authority may do much with the most excellent
Princess your Queen, entreat ye her Majesty, that the good brethren may be
reconciled and restored. And we pray you honorable, and dear brother M. Horn
to whom these letters may be first delivered, that ye will cause them
forthwith to be carried to the Bishop of Norwich, and so communicate them with
M. Jewel, M. Sands, and M. Pilkington, to whom by Gods grace I mean to write
the next Frankford mart. These letters I wrote in all haste as well in mine
own as in Gualters name, and sent them to Basile, thence to be conueighed to
Andwerpe. We pray you heartily to signify whether ye have received them. Fare
ye well right Reverend. The Lord bless you and your labors.

At Zurich the third of Maij. 1566. Your Bullinger.

The Copy of Master Bullingers Letter to N. and M.
RIght Worshypfull and well-beloved brethren the Lord Jesus bless you, and keep
you from all evil. I have received your Letters, whereby I perceived you N. to
complain, that mine answer made to your question seemed over short. Albeit I
good Brother, then saw no cause, neither now do, why I should write any long
letters. For ye required only my judgment concerning the matter of Apparel,
where about there was contention in England. To that question I thought good
to answer you briefly. For I could well in few words declare my mind.
Furthermore I knew that D. Peter Martyr of blessed memory, had often and at
large handled the same question both at Oxeforde and here with us, whereunto I
had not what to add. And I remember that mention was then made of my mind
also, in the letter which I wrote to you Brother M. And again to say what I
think in a word or two, I can never allow it, if ye be commanded to execute
your Ministry at an Altar, burdened rather than garnished with the Image of
the Crucifixe, and in a Massing garment, that is, in an Albe and Vestment
bearing on the back also the Image of the Crucifixe. But as far as I can
perceive by Letters brought out of England, there is now no contention for
such apparel. But the question is, whether it be lawful for the ministers of
the gospel to wear a round or square cappe, and the white Vesture which
they call a Surplesse, by ye wearing whereof your Ministers may be discerned
from ye people? And whether they ought to forsake the ministry, and their
sacred place, rather than wear such apparel? To this question, I answered ye
right Reverend D. Robert Horn Bishop of Winchester the last Mart, and that
briefly repeating the words of D. Martyr. To him had my fellow Minister, and
dearly beloved Alliance Rodolph Gualter written a little before, the copy of
whose letters I send to you, and our other brethren, enclosed in these.
Therefore if ye will hear us, and yt ye require our judgment concerning the
matter of Apparel, as in your last letters ye signified unto me, behold, ye
have in that Epistle our judgment, whereunto if ye can not agree, we truly are
most heartily sorry, and having no further counsel, we do heartily and without
ceasing pray unto the Lord whom we must in all things and always have respect
unto, that he with his grace and might will ease the present troubles.

You brother N. have propounded certain questions, and our brother M. has
gathered more of the same argument. And albeit I according to my simple
rudeness never liked to have matters drawn into so many questions, and
entangled in intricate doubts, which otherwise being of themselves more
simple, might in few words and plainly enough be answered: yet will I note
somewhat upon every one, that I may herein also gratify you my worshipful
and most dearly beloved brethren, as far forth as my poor skill and
ability will give me leave. And I beseech you to receive these of me your
brother and hearty lover in good part, and judge of them with a quiet mind and
free from all affections. I utterly abhor contentions, and nothing do I
more humbly crave at the Lords hand, than that he will remove far from the
Church all contentions, which from the beginning and always have greatly
annoyed true Godliness, and rent a sunder the Church when it was reasonably
quiet and in good case.

Where ye ask, whether laws of apparel ought to be prescribed to
Ecclesiastical persons, that thereby they may be discerned from lay men? I
answer that there is doubtfulnesse in the word Ought, for if it be taken for
necessary, and pertaining to the obteyning of salvation, I do not think the
law makers them selves to be of this mind. But if it be meant, that this may
be done for comeliness and beauty, or estimation and order, to be a certain
civil observance, or some such thing be understood, as that is that the
Apostle would have a church Minister or Bishop to be Cosmion, yt is comely, I
see not what he offends that uses such Apparel, or that commands to use
such.

Whether the Ceremonial obseruaunce of the Leuitical Priesthood be to be
called again into the Church? I answer, If a cappe and garment not uncomely
for a Minister, and void of superstition, be commanded to be used of
Ministers, no man verily can truly say, that Iudaisme is restored.
Furthermore I repeat here that I see D. Martyr to have answered to this
question, who when he had showed that the Sacraments of the old Law are
abolished, which may not be brought again into the Church of Christ having
baptism and the holy Supper, he added: There were nevertheless in the
Leuiticall law certain actions of such sort, as they could not properly be
called holy, for they served for comeliness and order, and some commodious
use, which things as agreeable to the light of nature, and helping somewhat to
our commodity, I judge may both be restored and retained. Who sees not that
the Apostles for the peace and better agreement of the faithful, commanded the
Gentiles to abstain from blood and strangled? These things without
controversy were legal and Leuiticall. And none of us is ignorant that Tithes
also are at this day in many places appointed to find the Ministers. It is
manifest that Psalms and Hymns are song in the Church, which things yet the
Levites also used. And not to omit this, we have holy days in memory of the
Lords resurrection, and others. Now shall all these be done away because they
be monuments of ye old law? ye see then that all the Leuiticals are not so
abrogate, but that some of them may still be used. Thus much he.

Whether it be lawefull to communicate with the Papists in apparel? I
answer. It is not yet proved that the Pope brought difference of apparel into
the Church. Nay, it is certain that difference of apparel is far more
ancient than the Pope. Neither do I see why we may not communicate with the
Papists, in apparel not superstitious, but politic and comely. If in nothing
we might communicate with them, then must we forsake all Churches, receive no
stipends, use no baptism, read neither ye Apostles, nor Nicene Creed, yea,
and then must we away with the Lords Prayer. Neither do ye borrow of them any
ceremonies. Apparel from the beginning of your reformation was never removed,
and is still retained, not by Popish order, but by force of the Princes law,
as a thing indifferent and politic. So verily, if ye use as a civil thing the
Cap and distinct Apparel, it sauoureth neither of Iudaisme, nor Monkerie. For
these seek to seem separate from civil life, and put merit in their
peculiar habit. So Eustachius Bishop of Sebastia was conde^pned, not simply
for his peculiar habit, but for that he put holiness in it. The Cannons of
the Council of Gangra, Laodicea, and of the sixth Synod are well known. If so
be that some of the common people be persuaded, that this sauoureth of Popery,
Iewishnesse and Monkerie, let them be admonished, and better taught concerning
these matters. And if by the indiscreet clamors of some, blown out about this
matter among the Common people, many are made unquiet, let them that do it
beware, they pull not heavier burdens upon their own necks, and provoke the
Queens Majesty, and finally bring many faithful Ministers into danger,
whence they shall hardelye be able to wind out.

Whether such as have hitherto enjoyed their liberty, may with safe
conscience wrappe both them selves and the Church in this servitude, by force
of the Queens Injunctions? I answer. I think best to provide that there be
no odious disputations, clamors, and contentions about the matter of Apparel,
and so by such importunity occasion be given to the Queen's majesty no longer
to leave it free for them ye hitherto have used their liberty, but being
exasperated with their outcries be in manner forced to command either to
receive the ecclesiastical Apparel, or give over their rowmes. Surely me
think it a strange thing (I speak it under your correction right worshipful
and well-beloved Brethren) that ye persuade your selves, that ye may not with
safe conscience submit your selves and the Churches to the servitude of
Apparel, and do not rather weighe, that if ye will not use a thing mere
pollitike and indifferent but still contend odiously, into what a servitude ye
then bring both your selves and your Churches, by leaving of your rowmes, and
setting of the Churches wide open unto Wolves, or at the lest to more unfit
Teachers, which are not so furnished as ye be to instruct the people, have ye
then well defended the liberty of the Church, when ye minister occasion to
oppress the Church with more and heuier burdens? ye are not ignorant what a
number seek for, how they be affected toward the preaching of the Gospel,
what manner of persons shall succeed in your places, and what is to be looked
for at their hands.

Whether the Apparel of the clergy be a thing indifferent? Verily it
seems a thing indifferent, being a civil thing, and having regard to
comeliness, order and beauty, without putting any Religion in it. Thus much
briefly I thought to say to your questions my right well learned and well-beloved
Brother N.

Now I come to the questions of our brother M. also, in declaration whereof I
will paraduenture be shorter. Whether peculiar Apparel distinct from lay men
were ever appointed for ministers of ye Church? Whether at this day such ought
to be appointed in reformed Churches also? I answer: That in the old Church
there was distinct Apparel of priests it appears by the ecclesiastical
history of Theodoret lib. 2 cap. 27. and Socrates lib. 6. cap. 22. And yt they
used Pallium in ministratio^, none yt has but over seen the monumentes of
old writers, can be ignorant. Therefore I signified before that diversity of
apparel had not his beginning of ye Pope. Eusebius at the least records out
of ye most ancient writers, how that John the Apostle wore at Ephaesus a
Bishops attire upon his head, terming it: Pelatum seu Lamina pontificalis. As
touching saint Ciprian the holy martyr, Pontius the Deacon writes, that a
little before he should be beheaded, he gave unto him that should beheade
him, his vesture called Birrus, and to his Deacon, his vesture called
Dalmatica, and so stood himself in linen. Furthermore Chrysostom makes
mention of the white vesture of ministers of the Church. And it is certain
that Christians when they came first unto Christ's religion, and to the Church,
for a gown put on a cloak. For which cause when they were mocked of the
Gentiles Tertullian wrote a very learned treatise de Pallio. I could bring
forth many other things of this sort, if these were not sufficient. In deed
I had rather have nothing laid upon the ministers against their wills, and
that they might use the manner of the Apostles, but for as much as ye Queens
Majesty requires the Cap only and the Surplesse, wherein (as is oftentimes
said already) she puts no Religion, and the same things have been used of
the ancient Fathers, when the Church was in better case, without all
superstition and fault, I would wish good Ministers not to put all the going
forward of Religion in these things, as if they were all, and sum, according
to the proverb, but yield somewhat to the time and not odiousely to strive
about a thing indifferent, but judge soberly that these things may be borne,
but we must go forward with the time. For that such are nearer to the
simplicity of the Apostles as know no such differences or enforce them not,
and yet in the mean while abhor not discipline in Apparel.

Whether prescription of Apparel agrees with christian liberty? I answer:
That things indifferent admit sometime prescription, and enforcement also, as
I may term it, as touching the use, and not for necessity, so as that which
is by nature indifferent should be thrust upon the conscience as necessary,
and so ye minds driven into scrupolositie. Times verily, and places of holy
assemblies, are rightely compted among indifferent things, and yet if these
then be no set order, what confusion I pray you, and disorder would grow
thereupon?

Whether any new ceremonies may be heaped beside the express rule of the
word of God? I answer, that I like not heaping of new ceremonies, and yet I
deny not but that some may be ordained, so that the service of God be not put
in them, but appointed for order and discipline. Christ himself kept the feast
or ceremony of the Encoenia or dedication, and yet we find not this feast
prescribed in the law. To be short, the greater part of ye propositions or
questions concerning Apparel, stands in this, whether laws for Apparel
ought or be lawful to be made in the Church. And it brings the question to a
generality, to wit, what order may be taken for ceremonies. To these
propositions I answer briefly, that I for my part I had rather have no
ceremonies, but such as are necessary, thrust upon the Church, yet in the
mean season I grant, that laws concerning ceremonies, paradue^ture not very
necessary, and sometime unprofitable, may not straight way be condemned of
impiety, and so troubles and schisms raised in the Church, so long as they be
void of superstition, and the things are in their own nature indifferent.

Whether it be lawful to restore the abolished rytes of the Jews, and to
translate ceremonies properly dedicate to religion of Idolaters, to the use of
reformed Churches? To this question I answer before, when I entreated of
Leuiticall rytes. And I would not have Idolatrous rytes unpurged of errors,
translated into reformed Churches. And again, and on the contrary part, it
might be demanded, whether received Rytes, superstition being removed, may not
by discipline and order be retained without sin.

Whether conformity in ceremonies, be of necessity to be exacted? I answer,
That conformity in ceremonies is not paraduenture necessary in all Churches.
In the mean season if a thing not necessary be commanded, so that the same
be not ungodly, it seems not that therefore the Church should be forsaken.
There was not conformity in rytes in all the old Churches. Yet such as keept
not conformity, reproved not the keepers of uniform rites. And I am easily
persuaded that pollitike wise men urge this uniformity of rytes, because they
think it makes unto concord, and because the Church of al England, is one
Church, wherein if there be no impiety mixed, I see not how ye can so
fiercely set your selves against such orders being not evil.

Whether Ceremonies openly offensive may be retained? I answer, that offense
ought to be avoided. In ye mean time, we must beware that we cover not our
own affections under the name of offense. Ye know there is an offense given,
and an offense taken, and as it were sought of our selves. I dispute not now,
whether you can for a thing indifferent without giving of grievous offense,
forsake the Churches that Christ dyed for.

Whether any orders are to be borne in the Church, which in their own nature
in deed are not ungodly, but yet make nothing for edificatio^? I answer, if
the orders which the Queen's majesty enioyneth you be void of impiety, ye
ought rather to bear them than forsake your Churches, for if the edifying of
the Church is chiefly to be sought in this matter, verily we shall sooner
destroy the Church by forsaking it than by putting on the Apparel. And where
ungodliness is not, neither the conscience offended, there must we not give
over, though we should bear some servitude. And here again it might be
demanded, whether Apparel may justly be compted servitude, so far forth as
it serves to comlynesse and order.

Whether ye Prince ought to prescribe any thing to the Churches in Ceremonies
without the good will and free consent of ecclesiastical persons. I answer,
if the Prince should always have stayed for the good will of his clergy,
paraduenture the most wise and godly kings Iosaphat, Ezechias, Asa and Josias
and other good Princes, had never brought the Levites and Ministers of the
Churches into order. Albeit my mind is not at all, that Bishops should be shut
out of consultations for the Church. Again I would not have them challenge such
authority to themselves as they have usurped against Princes and Magistrates
in Papacy. Neither would I have Bishops to hold their peace and agree unto
unjust ordinances of Princes.

The last two questions touch the matter nearer. Whether it were better in this
order to serve the Church, or for these things to be cast out of
ecclesiastical function? And whether good Pastors may for the neglecting of
such Ceremonies, justly be put from the ministry? I answer, if there be no
superstition nor impiety in the rytes, and yet they are enforced, and enjoined
good Pastors, which had rather be discharged of them, in deed I will grant,
and that more liberally than needs, that a burden and servitude is laid
upon them, but I will not grant, and that for most just causes, that therefore
they should forsake their place or ministry, and give over unto Wolves, as
it has been said already, or to unfitter Ministers, specially when liberty to
preach is not taken away, and provision may be made that no further servitude
creep in, and many such like things.

I have said what I thought to be said of the matters propounded in question,
knowing that other men for their learning could have better and more finely
discussed them, but because it was your minds, that I should answer, I have
done as I could, leaving to others at liberty both pen and judgment. To
end, my mind is not with these, to force or entangle any man's conscience, but
I offer them to be examined, and I advise, that no man in this controversy,
frame himself a conscience, of a desire to contend. And I exhort you al by
Jesus Christ our Lord, the Savior, Head, and King of his Church, that every
one well weighe with him self, which way he shall more edify the Church of
Christ, by putting on the Apparel as a thing indifferent, for order and
comeliness sake, and so far somewhat making to concord and profit of the
Church, or for Apparel to forsake the Church, and leave it to be possessed
afterward if not of manifest Wolves, yet of unfitter and worsse Ministers at
the least. The Lord Jesus grant you to see, savor, and follow that which
makes to his glory, and the safety and peace of his Church. Fare ye well in
the Lord, together with all the faithful Ministers. We will heartily pray
to the Lord for, you that ye may think and do, that is holy and wholesome.
D. Gualter has him most heartily commended unto you, and wishes you all
prosperity. And so do the rest of the Ministers also.

At Zurich the first day of Maij In the year of our Lord. 1566. Henry
Bullinger, Minister of the Church of Zurich: in his own, and Gualters name.

Imprinted at London by William Seres, dwelling in Paul's Church yard, at the
Sign of the Hedgehogge.

Reuerendis in Christo Patribus D. Roberto Horno Winton. D. Grindallo
Londonien. and D. Parcurstho Noruicen. Episcopis in Anglia, Dominis nostris
colendissimis, and fratribus charissimis.
REVERENDI VIRI, Domini honorandi, and fratres charissimi. Dominus Jesus
benedicat vobis and seruet ab omni malo. Mittimus scriptu^ nostrum de re
vestiaria datum a nobis ad N. and M. viros doctos and pios, fratres nostros
colendos. Ideo autem mittimus ad vos, vt intelligatis, inscijs vobis primarijs
ministris, nihil nos priuatim agere cu^ fratribus, and quod per omnia pacem
ecclesiarum vestrarum, quantum quidem possumus, quaerimus. Oramus quoque
dominum, vt rebus vestris semper consulat, and vos seruet in concordia. Vos
hortamur viri reuerendi, and fratres chariss. ri rationem habeatis fidelium
ministrorum, and doctorum hominum, habent hi sere suas affectiones: vnde
Apostolus quoque monuit, vt alij aliorum onera portent. Vestra authoritate
plurimum potestis apud sereniss. D. Reginam, apud eius maiestatem efficite, vt
boni fratres reconcilientur et restituantur. Rogamus item vt tu D. Horn
obseruande domine, and frater charissime, cui primum hae literae dari possunt,
ilico cures eas perferri ad D. Noruicensem, easque co^munes habeatis cum D.
Iuello, D. Sando, and D. Pilchinthono, quibus proximis nundinis Frankford. deo
volente scribam. Has festinatissime exaraui, tam meo, quam Gualtheri nomine,
and Basileam misimus inde transportandas Antuerpiam. Vos sedulo oramus, vt
significetis, an receperitis. Optime valete viri reuerendi. Dominus benedicat
vobis and vestris laboribus.

Tiguri. 3. Maij. 1566. Bullingerus vester.

Dominis N. et M.
DOMINVS Jesus benedicat vobis, viri ornatissimi and fratres charissimi, ac
seruet vos ab omni malo. Accepi literas vestras, ex quibus intellexite. N.
conqueri, quod mea responsio data ad tuam quaestionem, nimis videatur accisa.
Ego vero, mi frater, tunc non vidi, neque nunc video quorsum oportuerit
copiosiores scribere literas. Nam rogabas tu duntaxat, quae esset mea de re
vestiaria, de qua contendebatur in Anglia, sententia. Ad hanc quaestionem
breuibus tibi respondendum putaui. Nam breuibus meam sententia^ dicere potui.
Dein sciebam beatae memoriae D. Pet. Martyrem and Oxoniae and hic, eandem
quaestionem tractauisse saepius and fusius, quibus quod adi cerem non habebam.
Memini vero in literis ad te. M. fratrem daias, meae quoque sententiae factam
tunc quoque fuisse mentionem. Et vt iterum vno and altero verbo quod sentio
dicam: Nunque probauerim si iubeamini vestrum exequi ministerium. ad aram
crucifixi imagine oneratam magis ^ ornatam, and in vest Missatica, hoc est, in
alba and Casula, quae a tergo quoque ostentet crucifixi imaginem. At quantum ex
literis ex Anglia allatis intellego, nulla nunc est de eiusmodi vest
contentio: Sed question est: An liceat Ministris Euangelicis portare pileum
rotundum vel quadratum, and vestem albam, quam nuncupant superpellicium, qua
minister ornatus, a vulgo discernatur? Et an oporteat ministeriu^ vel stationem
sacra^ citius relinquere, q^ huiusmodi vestibus vti? Respondi ad hanc
quaestionem preteritis nundinis Reuerendo viro Domino Roberto Horno Winton.
Episcopo, and quide^ breuibus repetens verba D. Martyris. Scripserat eide^
paulo ante Symmista, and affinis meus charissimus D. Rodolphus Gualtherus,
cuius exemplum hisce inclusum ad vos and ad alios fratres nostros, mitto. Ergo
si nos audire vultis, nostrumque iudicium de re vestiaria expetitis, sicut
vltimis vestris ad me literis significabatis, en habetis in illa Epistola
nostrum iudicium, cui si acquiescere non potestis, dolemus sanc qua^
vehementissime, and cu^ nullum nobis amplius supersit consilium, Dominum, qui
in omnibus and semper respiciendus est, ex animo and incessanter oramus, vt
ipse gratia sua atque potentia rebus afflictis consulat.

Quaestiones aliquot tu N. frater proposuisti plures vero eiusdem argumenti M.
noster contexuit. Licet vero pro mea simplici ruditate, nunque probauerim res
in tot distrahi quaestiones, and nodis innecti implicatioribus quaealioqui
simpliciores per se, breuibus and satis perspicue expediri potuerant, aliquid
tamen annotabo ad singulas, vt hac quoque in re, vobis Dominis meis obseruandis
and fratribus charissimis, quantum per meam possum infantiam acumenque retusum
magis q^ acutum, inserutam. Vos autem oro vt benign haec a me fratre vestro
vestrique amantissimo accipiatis, and de his animo iudicetis ab affectibus
purgato atque tranquillo. A contentionibus abhorreo prorsus, and nihil magis
supplex peto a domino, quam vt ab ecclesia long remoueat contentiones, quae ab
initio and semper plurimum nocuere vera pietati, and ecclesiam vtcunque pacatam
and storentem, lacerarunt.

Cum quaeritur an debeant ecclesiasticis leges praescribi vestiariae, vt ijs
distinguantu^a laicis. Respondeo, Ambiguitatem esse in verbo Debere. Si enim
accipiatur pro necessario, and quod ad salutem consequendam pertineat, non
arbitror hoc velle vel ipsos legum authors. Si vero dicatur posse hoc fieri
decoris ornatusque, vel dignitatis and ordinis gratia, vt sit ciuilis quaeda^
obseruatio, aut tale quid intelligatur quale illud est quod Apostolus vult
ministru^ vel Episcopu^ ecclesiae, Cosmion, compositu^ inque vel ornatum esse,
non video quid peccet qui vest huiusmodi vtit^^, aut qui eiusmodi vest vti
iubet

An ceremonialis cultus Leuitici sacerdotij sit reuocandus in ecclesiam?
Respondeo, Si pileus and vestis non indecora ministro, and quae superstitione
carent, iubeantur vsurpari a ministris nemo sane dixerit vere Iudaismum
reuocari. Praeterea repeto hic quod ad hanc quaestionem video respondisse D.
Martyrem, qui vbi ostendisset sacramenta veteris legis esse abolita quae non
oporteat reducere in ecclesiam Christi, quae habeat baptismum and sacra^
coenam, subiecit: Fuerunt nihilominus in lege Leuitica actiones aliquae ita
comparatae, vt proprie sacrame^ta dici non possent. Faciebant enim ad decorem
and ordinem and aliquam commoditatem, quae vt lumini naturae congrua, and ad
nostram aliquam vtilitatem conducentia, ego and reuocari and retineri posse
iudico. Quis non videt Apostolos pro pace and conuictu credentium faciliori,
mandasse gentibus vt a sanguine and prasocato abstinerent? Erant haec citra
controuersiam legalia and Leuitica. Decimas quoque hodie multis in locis
institutas esse ad alendos ministros nemo nostrum ignorant. Psalmos and Hymnos
cant in sacris coetibus manifestum est, quod tamen Leuitae quoque vsurparunt.
Vtque hoc non omitta, Dies habemus festos in memoriam Dominica resurrectionis,
and alia. An vero illa omnia erunt abolenda, quia sunt vestigia legis antiquae?
Vides ergo non omnia Leuitica sic esse antiquata, vt quaedam exijs vsurpart non
passint. Haec ille. An vestitu cum papistis communicare liceat. Respondeo, non
dum constar Papam discrimen vestium induxisse in Ecclesiam. Imo discrimen
vestium constat esse Papa long vetustius. Nec viden cur non liceat restitu non
superstitioso, sed politico and composito communicare cum papistis. Si nulla re
cum illis communicare liceret, oporteret and templa omnia deserere, nulla
accipere stipendia, non vta baptismo, non recitare symbolum Apostolorum and
Nicenu^, adeoque abijcere orationem dominicam. Neque vos mutuatas ab ris vllas
ceremonias. Res vestiaria ab initio reformationis nunque fuit abolita, and
retinetur adhuc non lege papistica, sed vi edicti Regij, vt res media and
politica.

Ita sane, si vt re civilly vt amini pileo and vest peculiari, non hoc redolet
Iudaismum neque Monachismum. Nam hi volunt videri a civilly vita separati, and
constituunt meritum in peculiari sua vest. Sic Eustachius. Sebastiae Episcopus
damnatus est, non simpliciter propter peculiarem vestem, sed quod in vest
religionem constitueret. Noti sunt Gaugreu. Concilij canones, Laodiceni, and
VI. Synod. Quod si ex plebe nonnulli sunt persuasi redolere hoc papismum,
Iudaismum and Monachismum, admoneantur, and recte de his instituantur. Quod si
importunis quorundam clamoribus hac de re ad vulgus profusis, multi inquieti
redduntur, videant qui hoc faciunt, ne grauiora sibi oner a imponant, Regiamque
Maiestatem irritent, denique multos fideles Ministros in discrimen adducant, ex
quo vix emergere queant.

An qui liberate sua hactenus acquieuerunt, vt edicti Regij, hac seruitute
implicare and se and ecclesiam, salua conscientia possint? Respondeo, Cauendum
ego censeo ne odiosius disputetur, clametur, and contendatur de re vestiaria,
atque importunitate hac detur occasio Regiae Maiestati, vt liberu^ amplius
illis no^ relinquat, qui liberate hactenus vsi su^t, sed clamoribus
necessarijs irritata, mandet vel sumere vestes illas ecclesiasticas, vel cedere
statio^e sua, Miru^ sane mihi videtur (vestra pace viri ornatissimi, and
fratres charissimi dixerim) quod vobis persuadetis, salua conscientia vos and
ecclesias seruituti vestiariae subijcere non posse, and non potius expenditis,
si re politica and indiffere^ti vti nolitis, and perpetuo cotendatis odiosius,
cui usmodi scruituti and vos and ecclesias subijciatis, qui vestra statione
cede^tes, lupis exponitis eccleas, aut saltem paru^ idoneis doctoribus, qui non
aeque vt vos ad docendu^ populum sunt instructi. An vero ecclesias in
libertatem asseruistis, quando occasione^ suppeditatis, ecclesiam pluribus
grauioribusque oneribus opprimendi? Non ignoratis quid multi quaerant, quomodo
erga Eua^gelij predicatione^ sint affecti, and quales vobis successuri sint,
and quid de illis sperandum sit.

An vestitus clericalis sit res indifferens? Videtur sane res indifferens cum
sit res ciuilis, ac decori, ornatus, ordinisque habeat rationem in qua cultus
non constituitur. Haec breuibus ad tuas volui respondere Doctissime and
dilectissime, mi Frater N.

Iam venio and ad M. nostri quaestiones, in quibus exponendis ero fortasse
breuior. An vestitus peculiaris a laicis distinctus, ministris ecclesiae nunque
fuerit constitutus? an and hodie in reformata ecclesia debeat co^stitui?
Respo^deo, in veteri ecclesia fuisse peculiarem presbyterorum vestitum apparet
ex historia ecclesiastica Thedoreti lib. 2. ca. 27. and Socratis lib. 6. ca.
22. pallio in sacris vsos esse ministros, nemo ignorant qui veterum monumenta
obiter inspexit. Ideo antea submonui diuersitatem indumentorum non habere suam
originem a papa. Eusebius certe testatur ex vetustissimis scriptoribus Iohannem
Apostolum Ephesi petalum seu laminam gestasse pontificalem in capite. Et de
Cypriano martyr testatur Po^tius Diaconus quod cum iugulum carnifici praebere
vellet ei prius birrum dedisse, diacono vero dalmaticam, atque sic ipsum in
lineis stetisse indutum. Praeterea vestis candidae ministrorum meminit
Chrisostomus. At certum est Christianos cum a Gentilismo conuerterentur ad
Euangelium and ecclesiam, pro toga induisse pallium: Ob quam rem cum ab
infidelibus irriderentur, Tertullianus librum de pallio scripsit cruditissimum.
Alia huius generis plura proferre possem, nisi haec sufficerent. Mallem quidem
nihil inuitis inijci ministris, and eos ea vti posse consuetudine, qua
Apostoli. Sed quando Regia Maiestas pileum tantummodo and candidam vestem
inijcit, in qua cultum (quod saepe iam repetitum est) non constituit, eademque
res apud veteres, dum meliores adhuc ecclesiae res essent, vsurpatae sunt
absque superstitione and culpae, optarem bonos ministros in his, non vt in
prora and puppi, quod dicitur, totum constituere Religionis profectum, sed dare
aliquid tempori and de re indifferenti non odiosius altercari, sed modeste
iudicare, haec quidem fieri posse, sed proficiendum cum tempore. Propiores enim
esse Apostolicae simplicitati, qui discrimina illa ignore^t, aut non vrgeant,
interim tamen a disciplina in amictu non sunt alieni.

An vestium praescriptio congruat and Christiana liberate? Respo^deo, Res
indiffere^tes admittere aliquando perscripti nem adeoque coactionem, vt sic
dicam quo ad vsum, and non quo ad necessitatem, vt aliquid scilicet quod natura
sit indifferens, vt necessarium conscientiae obtrudatur, and ita animis
inijciatur religio. Tempora certe and loca sacrorum coetuum recte habentur
inter indifferentia, and tamen si hic nulla sit praescriptio, quanta obsecro
confusio co^turbatioque orietur?

An vllae ceremoniae nouae praeter expressum praescriptum verbi Dei cumulari
possint? Respondeo, me non probare si nouae cumulentur ceremoniae: sed tamen
aliquas institui posse non negarim, modo in eis non statuatur dei cultus, sed
instituantur propter ordinem and disciplina^. Christus ipse Encaeniorum festum
vel ceremoniam seruauit, nec tamen lege praescriptum legimus hoc festum. In
summa, propositionum vel quaestionum de re vestiaria potior pars de eo
disputat, An de vestibus leges in ecclesia condi vel debeant vel possint? Ac
quaestionem reuocat ad genus, quidnam videlicet de ceremonijs statucre liceat?
Ad has propositiones paucis respo^deo, me quidem malle nullas ceremonias nisi
necessarias obtrudi ecclesiae, interim tamen fateor non posse statim leges de
his, forte non adeo necessarias, aliquando and inutiles, damnari impietatis,
turbasque and schisma excitare in ecclesia, quum videlicet superstitione carent
and res sunt sua natura indifferentes.

An ritus Iudaeorum antiquatos renouare, religionique Idololatrarum proprie
dicatos, in vsus reformatarum ecclesiarum liceat transfer? De haec quaestione
antea respondi, vbi disserui de Leuiticis ritibus. Nolim vero ritus
Idololatricos no^ repurgatos ab erroribus transferri in ecclesias reformatas.
Rursus vero and ex aduerso quaeri poterat, an recepti ritus, remota
superstitione, propter disciplinam and ordinem retineri sieve peccato non
possint?

An conformatio in ceremonijs necessario sit exigenda? Respondeo,
Conformationem in ceremonijs in omnibus ecclesijs sort non esse necessariam.
Interim si praecipiatur res non necessaria, rursus tamen non impia, ob eam,
ecclesia non videtur esse deserenda. Non fuit in ritibus conformitas in omnibus
ecclesijs vetustioribus. Quae tamen conformibus vtebantur ritibus, eas non
vituperabant conformitate carentes: facile autem credo viros prudentes atque
politicos conformationem rituum vrgere, quod existiment hanc facere ad
concordiam, and quod vna sit ecclesia totius Angliae: In quare si nihil impij
misceatur, non video quomodo eiusmodi non malis institutis, hostiliter vos
obijciatis.

An ceremoniae cum aperto scandalo coniunctae retineri possint? Respondeo,
scandalum vitari oportere. Videndum interim ne sub scandalo nostras affectiones
contegamus. Non ignoratis aliud quidem datum, aliud vero acceptum and vltro
accersitum esse scandalum. Non disputo nunc an vos sinc graui scandalo dato
descrere possitis ecclesias, pro quibus Christus mortuus est, propter rem
indifferentem.

An vllae constitutiones ferendae in ecclesia, quae natura sua impiae quidem
non sunt, sed tamen ad aedificationem nihil faciunt? Respondeo, si
constitutiones impietate carent, quas vobis imponere vult Regiae Maiestas,
ferendae sunt potius quam deserendae ecclesiae. Si enim aedificatio ecclesiae
hac in re potissimum est spectanda, deserendo certe ecclesiam plus
destruxerimus ecclesiam, quam vestes induendo. Et vbi abest impietas, nec
laeditur conscientia, ibi cedendum non est, licet aliqua imponatur seruitus.
Interim vero quaerirur sus poterat an sub seruitutem just referamus rem
vestiariam, quatenus facit ad decorem and ordinem.

An quicque ecclesijs a principe praescribendum in Ceremonijs sine voluntate
and libero consensu Ecclesiasticorum? Respondeo, Si voluntas Ecclesiasticorum
semper sit expectanda principi, nunque forte sapientissimi and pijssimi Reges
Iosaphat, Ezechias, Asa, and Josias, alijque principes boni, leuitas and
ministros ecclesiarum redegissent in ordinem. Quamuis nolim prorsus excludi
Epscopos a consultationibus ecclesiasticis. Nolim rursus eos eam sibi potentiam
vendicare, quam sibi vsurparunt contra principes and magistratus in papatu.
Nolimitem tacere Episcopos and consentire ad iniqua principu^ instituta.

Postremae quaestiones duae propius ad rem ipsa^ accedu^t, An consultius
sitecclesiae sic inseruire, an propterea ecclesiastico munere eijci? Et, an
boni pastores iure ob huiusmodi ceremonias neglectas a ministerio amoueri
possint? Respo^deo, si in ritibus nulla est superstitio, nulla impietas,
vrgentur tamen, and imponu^tur bonis pastoribus qui mallent illos sibi non
imponi, dabo sane, and quidem ex abundanti, onus and seruitutem ipsis imponi,
sed non dabo, idque iustissimis ex causis, stationem vel ministerium propterea
esse desere^du^, and locum cedendu^ lupis, vt antea dictu^ est, vel
ineptioribus ministris, presertim cu^ maneat libera predicatio, cauerique
possit ne mayor obtrudatur scruitus, and multa huius generis alia.

Dixi quae mihi videbantur dicenda de propositis quaestionibus, non nescius
alios pro sua eruditione long elegantius meliusque potuisse excussisse, sed
quia ita voluistis vt responderem, feci quod potui, liberum alijs relinquens de
his and calamum and iudiciu^ Quod superest, nullius ego his conscientiam vrgere
and irretire volos sed examinanda propono, moneoque ne quis in hac co^trouersia
ex co^tentionis studio sibi faciat conscientia^. Hortor item vos omnes per
Iesum Christu^ Dn^m nostru^, Ecclesiae suae seruatorem, caput and Rege^, vt
probe quisque apud se expendat, vera nam re plus aedificarit ecclesia Christi,
si propter ordine^ and decore^ vestibus vt atur, vt re indifferenti, and
hactenus ad concordia^ vtilitatemque ecclesiae nonnihil faciente, an vero
propter rem vesti aria^ deserat ecclesiam, occupandu^ postea si non a lupis
manifestis, salte^ a ministris minime idontia and bonis, Dominus Jesus det
vobis videre, sapere, and sequi quod facit ad gloria^ eius, and ecclesiae pacem
and salutem. Valete in domino vna cum omnibus fidelibus ministris. Orabimus
sedulo pro vobis dominum, vt ea sentiatis and faciatis, quae sa^cta sunt and
salutaria. D. Gualthcrus amicissime vos salutat, and omnia foelicia vobis
precatur, faciunt hoc ipsum reliqui etiam ministri.

Tiguri Calend. Maij Anno Domini. 1566. Henricus Bullingerus Tigurinae
Ecclesiae minister, suo, and Gualtheri nomine.

EXCVSVM LONDINI APVD Guillihelmum Seres. Anno. 1566.


