A compe^dious letter which Ihon Pomerane curate of the congregation at
Wittenberge sent to the faithful christen congregation in England.

1536.

GRace be with you, and peace from god our father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ. We could not but rejoice, when we herd that in England as in other
cou^tres the joyful message of ye glory of God was very well taken of diverse.
Not wythstondynge, this also is showed us that many weaklynges yet be drawn
bake again because of unknown rumors that there be noysed of us by them that
withstonde the gospel of God, This is our reioycynge: Nevertheless I think
it not need to withstonde such lies as be uttered against the preachers of the
gospel. For whereto should this blessing be mete else, namely Blessed be ye
Math. 5.
when men curse you, and reuyle you, etc. But we do not allow, and supporte if
any body under pretense of Christen liberty behave himself vnchriste^ly: for all they that have taken upon them the name of Christ, have also put on Christ.
And this we maruayle of, why some with you fear to take upon them the holy
gospel of Christ by reason of the mysreporte that we are mysreported not
remembrynge yt it behooves the son of God to be reproved of the world and
the preaching of Math. 16. 1. Corin, 1.
the cross to be counted folishnesse Though it were true that men do falsely
surmyse upon us, for Christ's cause, should not they therefore accept the glad
tidings of health so freely offered the^ of God? What point is more folysshe
tha^ this, na^ly yt you be more curious unto my wykednesse than to your own
health. Wylt thou therefore be no Christian, because I am a sinner? Why do not
they rather follow the rule of Paul saying: Prove al 1. Tessa. 5
things, and keep that which is good. If I shall heue respect to man's
righteousness or unrighteous, when shall I be delivered from error
(whereby the whole world did near perysshe) and know the ryghtwysnes of god?
Now will the rude say who ca^ perceive this doubtful things? for men dispute
of man's fre will, of vows, and monastical sects, of shryft and
satisfactio^s, of the abuse of the blessed sacrament of worshyppinge of saints
that be dead, and such like. Some other say we fear lest under this variaunce
be some poison hid, and mychefe. As though we went about with entysynge
words of man's wisdom, 1. Cor. 2.
and not with euydent scryptures against whom the gates of Math. 16,
hell hitherto could not preuayl? Or as though our adversaries brought any
thing else for them against us save statutes, and tradicions of men, the which
God does damn Esaye. xxix. and Christ Math. xv. But what poison do ye fear
here, whiles we attempt nothing in secret: but we propone all our doings
to ye whole worlds judgment And because thou shall not excuse thy self with
the diuersyte of Ioh. 18,
doctrynes, to be short, we teach but one artikle, though we preach much
daily, and write much, and do many things for our adversaries, that they
also may be saved. And this is the artykle, namely:

Christ is our ryghtuysnese.
(...) he is become unto us of ^od the father, wisdom, justice satisfaction,
and redemption. Ephe 1, 2.
He that does not grant us that, is no Christen man, and he that does grant
us it, will sone ge ue over all ryghtwysnesse of me^. Here shall the heresy of
Pelagius nothing avail, wherewith (though they have altered the words) those
persons are infecte, which boast themselves only to be Christians. The con
fydence of sects, and outward works as are now adays shall not profit us,
the which our Pharisees have brought unto us refusing the shame of Christ's
cross, in that they set our works in Christ's stead.

Against whom, and against the whole kingdom of Satan, we bring forth this
most sure argument with Paul saying: If ryghtwesnesse come by ye law Gala, 2,
and our own fre will, than dyed Christ in vain Gala. ii. This ryghtwysnesse
which is Christ, has witness of the law, and prophets. But they that follow
Romans iii
their own ryghtwysnesse, do never attain to the true rygh Romans 9.
twysnesse as the Jews did. For they can not be brought subject under the
ryghtwysnesse of God Rom, 10
This ryghtwysnesse of Christ is thine if thou receive Christ by faith. For
Christ dyed not forhymself 1. Petri. 2.
or for his own sins, but for the and thy sins. There fore, what other
thing soever thou attemptest to be made righ teous by (that is) to be made fre
from the dyspleasure of God, from sin, from death, and from hell, it is all
but hypocrysy falsede, and wickedness, has it never so fair a pretense of
holiness. For yt shall strive against the grace of God, and deny Christ.
Peradventure thou will ask what our opinion and teachig is of costumes, of worcester
shyppynge of God, of the sacraments, and such like. To this I answer, that
Christ which is become our ryghtwysnes, is al so our teacher: What soever he
has taught us by his word yt council we to be observed, like as he himself
has commanded in the last chapter of Matthew. First of all he has taught this
to be the work of God, that we Ioh. 6.
believe in him whom the father has sent us. And who so believes in him he is
a good tree, and Math. 7
can not but bring good fruit at his season: not yt fruit which hypocrisy
faineth, but that fruit which the spirit of God brings forth there, of his
own accord. For they which be led Call. 4 1. Petri. 4
with Christ's sprete, they be the children of God. Wherefore he shall live
soberly, godly, and ryghteously: he shall worship God in sprite and treuth,
and Ioll. 2.
not in elements of this world, not in change of meats, and dyuersite of
vesture, or other hypocrisy. He shall believe or feel of the sacraments that,
which God has taught and ordained. He shall serve his neghburei tea chige,
counsel, prayer, in his substance, ye with the parell of his life also, not
to his friend only, but also to his enmy. These thiges has Christ taught. To
the se draws the nature of ye sprite the hearts of the^ that believe: and all
these teach we to be done. And for as much as we be yet in the flesh,
whatsoever is not done by ye motion of these, does not satysfye and recompense
God. And because we sin day ly, therefore we teach with christ yt
forgiveness of sin be co^tynually desired. Christ's co^maun dement to pray
was: Forgive us our dettes. etc. And for this faithful trust i god we assure
the^ that the sin which rests yet in the flesh shall not once be imputed
unto them. Paul says: I find in me (that is in my Romans 7
flesh) no good. But thanks to God that Christ is not Mat. 9. Luc. 5.
come hither for ye rightwyse, but for the vnrightwyse and sinners. For
publicanes and whores shall enter into the kingdom of heaven before the
Pharisees supposing them ryghteous by their works. What will the wicked mouth
babbell and say skornfully, seeing we preach, nor teach other things? God
says by Moses: Whosoever does not hear Deuteronomy. 1^
yt prophet (meaning Christ) I will be avenged upon him: Let these enmyes of
the gospel thike this sentence spoken against them. The father also says of
Christ: Hear him. And Christ Math. 17. Ioh. 10
himself says: My sheep shall hear my voice and not ye voice of strangers.
This have I written to you brethren in few words, to testifye unto you the
reioycynge that I have of you Phi. 4 1. Petri. ^
and also to give accomptes unto you of the good hope that we have to God
against them, that with on shame fast lies peruerte and overthrow all that we
buyl de. Pray ye to God for us, and for all the saints, and for all our
adversaries, that the word of God be known and grow Coll. 4
in ye world, to his glory and the health of men, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and saueour To whom be glory and power for ever and ever.

Amen.
Psalm. xxx.
Let the lyenge lyppes be put to silence, which cruelly, dysdaynedly, and
despytefully speak against the ryghteous.


