A DIALOGVE both pleasant and pietifull, wherein is a goodly regimente
against the fever Pestilence with a consolacion and comfort against death.

Newly corrected by Willyam Bulleyn, the autour thereof.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kingston.

Marcii. Anno salutis. M.D.LXIIII.

TO THE RIGHT VVO^shipfull and his singular goo^ friend, master Edward Barret
of Belhous of Essex, Esquier: Willyam Bulleyn sends salutacions.
RIght worshipful sir, if any chamber, haule, galerie, or any new decked
house were apparelled or hanged, all in one mourning dark color, it would
rather move sorrow then gladness: but no pleasure to the beholders of the same.
Therefore, the diuersitee or varietee of pleasant colors, do grace and
beautify the same, through the setting forth of sondrie shapes: and as it
were, to compel the comers in, to behold the whole work. Even so I do
commend unto you this little book (wherein I write part thereof in your
own house) which do entreat of sundry things, to you I do hope not
unprofitable, wherein I have shortly described our poor nedie brother his
pouerte^. Calling upon the merciless rich, whose whole trust is in the vain
riches of this world, entangled as it were among Briers. So that in the hour
of death, God is fardest from his mind, and the gooddes evil gotten, are
worse spent, and come to nothing, at what time no Phisike can prevail. I have
also not forgotten the shameful sin, which reigns in this world called
ingratitude which linially came from the loins of that false vilain Judas:
neither the Sicophantes, G^atos, Liars and Flatterers of this world, the very
poison of the soul. Oh better says Solomon, is the wounds of the friend,
then the kisses of the flatterer. Further, how many means may be used against
the Pestilence, as good air, diete, medicenes accordingly: the which if it do
not prevail, then comes on the merciless power of death over al flesh:
fearing no King, Queen, Lord, Lady, bond or slave, but rather makes all
creatures a like to him. Then do I conclude with the divine, Gods chief and
most best instrument in the church. etc. And as I do well consider, a
gentilmanne of your good nature, can but take your freindes simple token in
good part. Even so I am sorry that it is no better to pleasure you, yet geuyng
GOD most humble thanks for the same, who keep you in good health and worship.

This.xij. of March. 1564. Yours ever William Bulleyn.

Nullus vnquam hominem mortalem beatumindicet, antequam been defunctum viderit.
TO THE Reader.
GOod reader, when adversity drawethnere to any city or town, and the
vengeance of GOD appears, either by hunger, sickness or the sword, then
man's nature is most fearful, but yet worldly providence to help the^
selves: which in the time of prosperitee or quietness is careless and
forgetful, neither mindful to fear God, nor pitiful to help their
neighbor in aduersitee. And when they are touched by the fearful stroke of
the Pestilence of their next neighbor, or else in their own family, then
they use medicines, fly the air. etc. Which in deed are very good means,
and not against Gods word so to do: then other some falls into sudden
devotion, in geuyng almose to the poor and neadie, which before have dooen
nothing else but oppressed the^, and have done the^ wrong: Other do look from
their hearts Gods lively word, and refuse grace, offered by Christ's
spirit, thinkyng there is no GOD. Some other are prevented by death in their
flourishyng years, which in the Cross of death, have their only consolacion
in Jesus Christ. All this is discribed here in this plain Dialogue: praiyng you
pacientlie to take it in good part. From him that is yours to command.

W. Bulleyn.

gloriosior est quam mala vita.


A DIALOGVE The interlocutours are twelve persons.
Mendicus. Ciuis. Vxor. Medicus. Antonius. Roger. Chrispinus. Auarus. Ambo
dexter. Mendax. Mors. Theologus.
Mendicus. GOd save my good Master and Maistres, the barnes, and all this haly
houshade, and shilde you from all doolle and shem, and send you comfort of
all things that you waud have good of: and God and our dear leddie, shilde and
defend you from this Peste. Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be your
name, your kingdom come, your will be done in earth as it is in heaven. etc.


Ciuis. Me think I do hear a good manerlie beggar at the door, and well
brought up, how reverently he says his Pater noster, he thoues not GOD, but
you hynt, Gods blessing on his heart. I pray you wife, give the poor man some
thing to his diner.


Vxor. Sir, I will hear him say the Lords prayer better, before I give him
any thing.


Ciuis. What a reconyng is this? Dame do as I command you, he is poor, we
have plenty, he is very poor and hongrie, therefore dispatche him a Gods name.


Vxor. Soft fire makes sweet Malte, he shall tarry my leisure.


Mendicus. Maistres, if you Ie angry with the saying of my Pater noster in
English, I will say it in Latin, and also my Deprofundis. But so God help me,
I do not ken nene of them beth.


Vxor. I think the same: soche Carpenter, soche thippes, your curate is some
honest man I warraunt you, and takes much pain in feding his flock, as
seems by your learning. I pray you what country man be you?


Mendicus. Saving your honor good Maistres, I was borne in Redesdale in
Northumberlande, and came of a wight riding surname called the Robsons, good
honest men and true, saving a little shiftyng for their living, God help them
silly pure men.


Vxor. What do thou here in this country, me think thou art a Scot by thy
tongue.


Mendicus. Trow me never mare then good deam, I had better be hanged in a
Withie of a Cowtaile, then be a rowfooted Scotte, for they are ever fare and
fase: I have been a fellon sharp manne on my hands in my yo^g days, and
brought many of the Scotts to ground in the North Marches, and gave them many
greislie wounds, ne man for man durst abide me luke I was so fell. Then the
limer Scotts hared me, burnte my gudes, and made dedly feed with me, and my
barnes, that now I have nethyng but this sary bag and this staff, and the
charity of sike good people as you are, good maistres* ause I have many of my
surname here in the city, that wade think no shem on me, yea honest
handcraftie men.


Ciuis. How got you in at the gates, my good friend?


Mendicus. Dear sir, I have many cuntrith men in this fair city, that came
of honest stock in our land, and some a little beyond us twenty or
threttie miles, that can make pure shifte in the city, and in the countres
ause. I came in ne place but either the person, Bailie, Conestable, or chief
of the parish is of our countrith borne: and some pure men as mine own self
God ken. Among whem the Bedle of the beggars being a Ridesdale man borne, a good
manne and a true, which for ill will in his youth, did fleen the Country, it
was laid to his charge, the driuyng of Kine hem to his fathers byre: But
Christ knaweth he was sackles, and live as honestly in his age, as his sire
did when he was young, good master.


Ciuis. I was borne in the North my fellow, and do live here in this city,
I came hither when I was young, and when I was very poor, but now I am in
good case, to live among the rest of my neighbors.


Mendicus. Gods benison on you, and our dear ladies, I come hither purely in
mine age, I have nethyng but wedom.


Vxor. Give God only thanks, for so is his holy will and commandments,
that we should call upon him in the days of trouble, and only honor him:
we have no commandment to honor our lady.


Mendicus. I think one woman wade take an other womannes part, do as it shall
please you I am ne clerk, but an ingram man, of small cideracion in soche
arogant buke farles.


Ciuis. What news in the Country, as you come by the way? Country man.


Mendicus. Nene, but aude manners, fair sayings, fase hearts, and ne devotion,
God amend the Markette, much ^oilyng for the purse, deceiuyng of each other:
in the Country, strief, debate, runnyng for every trif^e to the Lawiers,
having nething but the nutshelles, the Lawiers eat the Carnelles, ause much
reising of re^tes, causing great dearthe, mucle pouertee. God help, God
help, the ward is sare changed: extorcioners, covetous men and hypocrites
do mucle prevail, God cut them shorter, for they do make a black warlde,
even hell upon earth, I think the great fend or his deam will weary
them all, nene other news I ken, but that I did see micle providence made in
the country for you in the city, which do fear the Pestilence. I met with
wagons, carts, and horses, full lade^ with young barnes, for fear of the
black Pestilence, with their boxes of medicines, and sweet perfumes. O God,
how fast did they run by hundredes, and were afraied of each other, for fear
of smittyng.


Ciuis. I have some of my children forth, God send them well to speed.


Mendicus. Master, why go you not with them your self?


Ciuis. No, youth are apt to take the Plague, and further, parents are more
natural to their children, then children to their fathers and mothers. Nature
does descend, but not ascend: also if the citeze^ should depart when as the
Plague do come, then there should not only be no plague in the city, but
also the city should be void and empty, for lack of the inhabitours
therein, therefore Gods will be dooen among his people. I do not intend to
flee, notwithstanding I pray God of his mercy, deliver us from this Plague,
for if it do continue GOD knows, it will not only take away a number of
poor people, but many wealthy and lusty merchants also.


Mendicus. If soche plague do ensue, it is no great loss. For, first it shall
not only deliver, the miserable poor man, woman and barn, from hurt and
carfulness, into a better warlde: but ause cut of many coueteous usurers,
which be like fat unclean swine which do never good, until they come to
the dishe, but wroote out every plaute that they can come by. And like unto
great stinking mucle medin hills, which never do pleasure unto ^he land or
ground, until their heaps are cast abroad to the profits of many, which
are kept neither to their own comfortes, nor others, but enely in behadyng
them: like unto cruel dogs, liyng in a Maunger, neither eating the Heye
themselves, ne suffering the horse to feed thereof himself. And in sike
Plagues, we pure people have micke good. Their loss is our gain, when they do
become naked, we then are clethed against their wills: with their dooles and
almose, we are relieved, their sickness is our health their death our life.
Besides us Beggars, many me men have good luck, as the Curate, Parish
clarke, and the bell man, often times the executours be ne losers by this game.
And in fine, in my fantasy it is happy to the huntman, when he have nethyng
of the Catte but the silly skin. We beggars, covet not for the carcas of
the dedde body, but do defy it, we look for aude cast cootes, dublettes,
hose, cappes, beltes and shoes by their deaths, which in their lives they
waude not depart from, and this is our hap.


Ciuis. Go thy ways to Antonius Mantuanus gates: For thither, even within this
two hours, I did see Master Antonius Capistranus, solemnly riding upon his
Mule, with a side goune, a great chain of gold about his neck, his
Apothecarie Senior Crispinus, a neighbors child, borne here by in Barbary,
and his little Lackeye, a proper young applesquier, called Pandarus, which
carries the keye of the chamber with him. These are all gone in at the gates to
that noble Italian: his aulmner this day, because his master was very sick,
applied the poor men with the purse, with much devotion for the time, being
without hope of his Masters recovery.


Mendicus. I pray God send us many sike prays, for it is merry with us, when
ene man's hurt, do turn to many men's gains: I will go thither, fare you
well good Master. I will draw nere, and herke^ what master doctor will say,
if I might be in place.


Ciuis. Farewell, for thou do not care, which end do go forward, so that
thy turn may be served.


Medicus. How do you good Master Antonius? Lord God how are you changed?
How chances this? What is the matter, that you look so pale? You did send
for me by your servant Johannes de Corsica, a gentle young man, which lamented
much for you: and when I heard it, with all speed I came from my other
pacientes, of whom I think I have taken mine vltimum vale.


Antonius. You are welcome Master dectour with all my heart, now help at a
pinche: or else never, for I do fear my self very much. O^ my heart.


Medicus. I warraunt you man, let me feel your pulse, and then shall I proceed
to the cure, with Medicine and diete accordingly.


Antonius. Take your pleasure good Master Doctor, here is my hand: feel my
pulse, and then you shall see mine urine, and know the time of my sickness.


Medicus. These are no very good tokens, neither in your urine, pulse, stool.
etc. But I will do the best for you that I can do by art.


Antonius. And then you shall want no gold, for though I lack help, yet I
want no gold of every coigne, and silver also. My warehouses are well filled
with wares of so^derie kinds, which I do sell unto the retalers. Further I
have wares of most ancient service, which owe me nothing, both in packes,
vessels and chestes. etc. which are not fit for the retalers. The^ do I keep
for shifts, when any gentilmen, or long suter in the law, are behind hand,
and know not what to do: then by good suretees, or assured lands by statute
merchant. etc. I do sometime make.xxx. or.L. in the hundred by year. I have
diverse soche honest ways to live upon, through the witty and secret
handlyng of my brokers here in the city, and my factours, which are at
Antwarpe. etc. By whom I do understand the state, and what commodity is
best. Further I have extended upon ancient lands in the country, for the
breche of couenauntes That to conclude with you master doctor, I could never
have died in a worse time, my business is soche. I would of all things live
still, for here I do know what I have, and how I am used: but when I am gone,
I do not know what shall happen unto me, nor who^ to trust with y^ which I
have gotten with travel, and obtained by fortune.


Medicus. You do speak like a wise man as ever I hard, and most things
that you have taken in hand, have great profit with you: of my part I would
be loathe to lose you, both for an unfeigned love that I do bear unto you for
your wisdom, and also for your liberalitee and gifts given to me many a
time. Lo, here is the Damask goune yet in store. Here is also a Flagone chain
of the hundred Aungelles that you did give me, in your last great Fever.


Antonius. Who is able to resist soche a multitude of Aungelles, I think few
Doctors of Phisike? But rather then I would dye, I will let fly a thousand
more.


Medicus. That is the way I assure you, to perfect health: and for that cause
the Phisician was ordained, as it is written. Honor the Phisician, with the
honor that is due unto him, because of necessity, for the Lord have created
him, and he shall receive gifts of the king.


Antonius. That is a good sweet tert for Phisicians, but why do you leave out
these words, in the mids of the matter? Which is: of the most higheste
comes learning, and so I do remember, I heard our curate read in the church,
as by chance I came in with a Sargeant, to arest two Bankeroutes.


Medicus. What your curate pleased him to read, I care not, for I meddle with no
Scripture matters, but to serve my turn: But I know that, which I have
said, is written in the Bible.


Antonius. Be all things written in the Bible true: I pray you tell me?


Medicus. God forbid Master Antonius, then it would make a fraie among
Merchants, for it is written. Psalm. xv.
None shall enter into gods dwelling, or rest with him upon his Mountain,
that lends his money upon usury, or to usury, whereby to hinder his
neighbor: And this is now become the greatest trade. And many be vndooen by
borowyng, and few do lose by lendyng, specially men of your worshipful
experience. And how like you this text?


Antonius. Text how they will text, I will trust none of them all, say what
they will: there be many soche sayings against men, as the ten
commandments. etc. Well, for my part, I have little to do in these
matters, Marie I would be glad to live orderly and Ciuillie, so that the
world should not wonder at my doings: but if dampnacion should arise, when
the Scripture do threaten it to men, then should witti^ words in bargaining*
with facing oaths, and pleasant venerous table talk, with reuiling of our
enemies. etc. be accounted damnacion. The^ I warrant you, hell i^ well
furnished with courtiers, merchants, soldiers, housebandmen, and some of
the clergy, I warrant you also. Among whom there are many more spiteful then
Spiritualle, even as there are among the Phisicia^s, many more covetous then
kind har^ed. I mean not you master doctor.


Medicus. Sir, I do know you do not. But so God help me, one thing does
much rejoice my heart, in your communicacion.


Antonius. What is that?


Medicus. I think that we two are of one religion.


Antonius. What is that I pray you? For I know not mine own religion.


Medicus. Command your folks to depart out of the chamber, and your young
scapes also which you have gotten by chance medley, for want of marriage: for
the old proverb is, small Pitchers have wide ears, and the field have iyes,
and the wood have ^ares, therefore we must commen closely, and beware of
blabbes.


Antonius. Well, now the doors are sparred, say on your mind, of what
Religion are you? Be plain with me man.


Medicus. Herke in your ear sir, I am neither catholic, Papiste, Protestante,
nor Annabaptiste, I assure you.


Antonius. What then? you have rehearsed choice and ple^tie of religions. What
do you honor? the Son, the Moon, or the stars, Beast, S^one, or Foul,
Fish or Tree?


Medicus. No forsothe. I do none of them all. To be plain, I am a Nulla
fidian, and there are many of our sect.


Antonius. Oh. Qui dixit in cord suo non est deus. Well, we differ very
little is this poincte, but if I do live, we shall draw nere to an unity: in
the mean time, let your Pothicarie provide some good things for the body. I
pray you open the door.


Medicus. Masters, I pray you call Crispinus hither into the Gallarie, and
Leonardus de Montano with him.


Crispine. What is your pleasure master doctor?


Medicus. How do you like this Garden?


Crispine. There are ple^tie of goodly herbs, both clensing, healing, losing,
binding, and restoring. I never did see more choice of sondrie kinds of
strange flowers, most pleasant to the iye, and sweet also. The fine knottes
are done by good art, Geometrically figured. A sweet conduite in the midst,
made of fine stone, plentifully, casting forth water, like fine silver streams
many ways. In which condite, I did behold by the space of one hour a
marvelous thing, the meaning thereof I know not.


Medicus. What was it Crispine?


Crispine. The pillar was eight foot square, and eightene foot high, with
compartementes of connyng Masonrie, curiously covered with fine gold. Upon
the top a Tiger fearfullie, having a young child in his arms ready to kill
it, the child had a croune of gold upon his hedde. And in his left hand a
Globe, figuring the whole world and was called Microcosmos, about which was
written Globus conuersus est.


Medicus. This gentleman came of a great house, this is the crest of his
arms, for he descended of the most ancient Romans I warrant you, he is no
vpstrat, assure your self.


Crispine. I had thought it had rather signified the conditions of a cruel
tiraunt, or some bloody conqueror: which by usurpation gettyng the victory
of any commonwealthe* as Lands, Countrees or Citees, eftesones do spoil the
true heirs and owners of the land, which do wear the croune change the
state of the Commons to the worser part, spoiling them with sword and
bondage, which appeared by these words: Globus conuersus est: the world is
changed or turned.


Medicus. A good obseruacion: what did you se then?


Crispine. I did behold on the one side the.ix. Muses, with strange
instruments of Music sittyng under the hille Parnasus, and the Poets sittyng
under the grene trees, with Laurel garlandes, besette with Roses about their
heddes, having golden pens in their hands, as Homer, He^iodus, Ennius. etc.
writing verses of sondrie kinds. And Lucanus sa^te there very high, nere
unto the Clouds, appareilled in Purple: saying.

Quantum sermotus ego:
Cardine Pernasus gemino petit ethera colle.
Motis Phoebo Bromioque sacer:
And nere them satte old Moral Goore, with pleasaun^ pen in hand,
commending honest love without lust, and pleasure without pride. Holiness in
the Clergy, no tirannie in rew^ers, no falshode in Lawiers, no Usurie in
Merchants, no rebellion in the Commons, and unity among kingdoms. etc.

Skeleton satte in the corner of a Pillar, with a froste bitten face, frowning,
and is scante yet clean cooled of the hot burning cholour, kindled against
the cankered Cardinalle Wolsey: writing many a sharp disticons, with bloody
pe^ne against him, and sent them by the infernalle rivers Stvx Flegiton, and
Acheron, by the Feriman of hell called Charon, to the said Cardinalle.

How the Cardinal came of naught
And his prelacie sold and bought,
And where soche Prelates be,
Sprung of low degree:
And spiritual dignitee,
Farewell benignitee,
Farewell simplicitee,
Farewell humanitee,
Farewell good charitee.
Thus paruum literatus,
Came from Rome gatus,
Doctor dawpatus,
Scante a bachelaratus.
And thus Skeleton did end,
with wolsey his friend.
Witty Chaucer sat^ in a chair of gold covered with Roses, writing Prose and
Rhyme, accoumpanied with the spirits of many Kings, Knights, and fair
ladies. Whom he pleasantly besprinkeled with the sweet^ water of the well,
consecrated unto the Muses, ecleped Aganippe. And as his heavenly spirit
commended his dear Brigham, for the worthy intombing of his bones, worthy of
memory, in the long sleping chamber, of most famous kings Even so in
tragedy, he bewailed the sudden resurreccion of many a noble man, before
their time: in spoiling of Epitaphes whereby many have lost their inheritance
etc. And further thus he said lamenting.

Coueteous men do catch, all that they may have,
The field and the flock, the toumbe and the grave:
And as they abuse riches, and their graves that are gone,
The same measure they shall have every one,
Yet no burial hurts holy men, though beasts them devour,
Nor rich grave prevails the wicked, for all yearthly power.
Lamentyng Lidgate, lurkyng among the Lilies, with a balde skons, with a
garlande of Willowes about his pate: booted he was after Saint Benettes
guise, and a black Stamell robe, with a lothlie monsterous hoode hanging
backward, his stooping forward bewailing every estate with the spirit of
providence. Forese^ng the falls of wicked men, and the slipperie seats of
Princes, the ebbyng and flowing the risyng and falling of men in aucthoritee,
and how virtue do advance the simple, and vice overthrow the most noble of
the world. And thus he said.

Oh noble Princes conceive and do lere,
The fall of kings for misgouernere,
And prudently peisyng this matter,
Virtue is stronger then either plate or maile:
Therefore consider when wisdom do counsel,
Chief preservative of Princely magnificence,
Is to almighty GOD to do due reueren^e.
Then Bartley with an hoopyng Russette long coat, with a pretty hoode in his
neck, and five knottes upon his girdle, after Fraunces tricks. He was borne
beyond the cold River of Twede. He lodged upon a sweet bed of Chamomill,
under the Sinamon tree: about him many Shepherdes and sheep, with pleasant
pipes: greatly abhorring the life of Courtiers, Citezens Usurers, and
Banckruptes. etc. whose old days are miserable. And the estate of shepherdes
and country people, he compted most happiest and sure. etc. Saying: Who
enters the Court in young and tender age.
Are lightly blinded with folly and outrage:
But soche as enter with wit and grauitee:
Bow not so sone to soche enormitee:
But or they enter if they have learned naught,
Afterward is virtue the lest of their thought.


Next them in a black chair of Get stone, in a coat of arms satte an
aunciente knight, in Orange Tawnie, as one forsaken, bearyng upon his breast a
white Lion, with a Croune of rich gold on his hedde: his name was sir Dauie
Linse, upon the mount, with a hammer of strong steel in his hand, breakyng
a sonder the counterfeicte cross kaies of Rome, forged by Antichriste: And
thus this good knight of Scotland said, to England the elder brother, and
Scotland the younger.

Habitare fratres in vnum,
Is a blesfull thing,
One God, one faith, one baptism pure
One law, one land, and one king:
Clappe hands together brethren dear
Unfeigned truce together make,
And like friends do ever accord,
But French and Roman do first forsake,
You are without the continent,
A sole land of ancient fame,
Ab origin a people old,
Bold Britains ecleped by name,
S^cut erat in principio:
Grant oh God it may be,
In saecula saeculorum,
That we may have peace in thee,
Then we shall fear no foreign power,
That against us shall advance,
The Tartre cruel, the curse of Rome
Ne yet the power of France. etc.
On the second square was a fair dial for this Orison, unto which was added
the hours of the planettes, upon the same was written in large letters of fine
gold, Tempora labuntur.


Medicus. There stop and lay a Straw. For Tempora labuntur, is to say: by
little and little, time do slip away. I will hear^ the rest of the matter
at leisure. What is it a clock?


Crispine. But early day, skant.viij. of the clock.


Medicus. Well I pray you, dispense all things in order Contra Pestem, in
the same sort, both noumber of the Simples, Dose and quantitee, even as you
did it yesterdaie, which was given to Paul.


Crispine. Sir, I have spente all my fine Myrrh, what shall I do?


Medicus. You are a wise manne, put in Quid pro quo, called (...). Hoc est
simplicia que aliorum facultati similium penuria subponi possunt medici
consilio. Intelligis?


Crispinus. Etiam domine Doctor.


Medicus. Move te otius, and quicquid agas prudenter agas.


Crispine. By God he shall pay for the malt grinding, he have enough, he know
none end of his pelf, it will come to an evil end. God send me more soche
cheates. What, me think I se two men in long gounes, with short beardes at
the gates, what are they a Gods name?


Medicus. I know them very well, they are two petti foggers in the Law, the
one is called master Auarus, a good gentleman, and of a great house, a man of
good conscience, in deed he is my c^sen german, on my mothers side: Surely
he can give good counsel, and is ^itte to be with soche a man, as master
Antonius is, in deed they have been long acquainted, and will never give over
unto the end.


Crispine. Who is the other on the left hand, he seems to be a proper
gentlemanne and a studious, he is lean, an handsome clenlie man. Me think he
have on each side of his goune a bag, and his hand in them.


Medicus. Every man have his grace and gesture: I promise you, I durst
commit a great secret unto him. Oh he is a peragon.


Crispine. What means he by winckyng like a Goose in the rain, and biting of
his lip.


Medicus. A constaunte manne by his gesture.
Do you note that? It is a good sign of a constante man, mark it when you
will, he is a witty fellow, and one that is in great estimacion, fit for
master Antonius, his name is Ambodexter. Go doun^ with speed, and say you
have given master Antonius his purgacion, and this day he have no leisure to
speak with any man, and also how that he is amended: for, if the curate were
here for the soul, we for the body, A black sanctus.
and Auarus for the purse: here were but a mad company, we should never agree
together, but fall into discordes. Dispatche them with speed, fare ye well. I
will go and cause him to be letten blood, and keep him from sleep, then shall
he be purged to morrow in the morning. Bring the powder against the plague
with you.


Crispine. GOD give you good morrow gentille master Auarus: what master
Ambodexter, how fare you both? master Antonius did much desire to have
spoken with you, eight hours paste. In deed within this two hours, saving
your worshippes, he has taken a purgacion, which have cast such air
abroad, that I was not hable to abide in the chamber, I had forgotten my
perfumes, to make all well.


Auarus. What think you of him, shall he escape or no? Who is with him? I
pray you tell me.


Crispine. None but Doctor Capistranus, which also desire your absence,
because he have him in cure: and trust to make him sleep after his lack of
rest, and to morrow take your pleasure with him.


Auarus. Fare ye well: we have drawn and engrossed his books, commend us to
master Doctor, it were a good pastyme, ^o take the foot clothe from his
Mule, for.ij. or three hours in pastyme.


Ambodexter. I had rather have the Mule.


Auarus. What the devil does this doctor here? If this purging were not, we
would cleanse and erpulse with our resettes, that which should serve our turn
well enough.


Ambodexter. I warraunt you the Doctor do make work for us both: we shall
bring our matters to pass in good time, take no care man for the matter, we
will preuente the doctor to morrow, when he comes hither with a present, and
bring him some pretty things, wherein he deliteth: we shall find soche means
to persuade with him by little and little, to be executors of his will,
according to his old promise. Further, he will take it kindly, that we do
claim kindred on him by his mothers side, which was a kind hearted woman, and
full of metrix, ha, ha, ha. She was in deed of those qualitees, her son is
like the mother, as seems by one in the house.


Auarus. I fear that damsel will mar all together: she does rule the
roast, she ware the ke^es. He ca^ never have her out of his sight yet Reinold
his man thinks himself, in more estimacio^ with her, then his master.


Ambodexter. The last year I counterfeeted a sickness of purpose, as I can when
I lust, I framed my Physician to my fantasy, no man thought that I should
have lived two days, when I was a lone I laughed. You remember whom I made
mine executor, even Antonius Mantuanus, I then prouidentlie by three things,
did foresee this time and cause. The first was, his great surfeictes in
banquetyng: the second, his watchyng at Chesse and Cards, the third you know
what.


Auarus. Well, well, be as be may is no ba^ning* I do fear many things.
First the medicines may chance recover him, then we shall have nothing.
Well, Reinolde and the damosel be ever in presence, and watch him: she cheares
her master with a loving countenance. Reinold says, that he has done true
service a long time. etc. Well, I smelle an other padde in the straw: when all
this is done, the curate is a crafty Rhetorician, well can he persuade and
rehearse Gods vengeance, threats and plagues, by examples most fearful, like
thonderboltes, describing the scalding house of hell, ve, ve, ve, with the story
of Dives and Pauper, and the day of judgment, reading the Homely of death,
criyng out al is but vanity, vanity, and vexacion of mind, damnacion, except
repentance, and true confession from the heart, restitucion of wrongs, he
will keep a stire, and bring our cousin into a fools paradise. It is he that
will raise up all the beggars in the town: he will cry, give with your own
hand, for the day you are a man, to morrow earth and ashes.


Ambodexter. A crafty villain.
First, let us be sober, and seem to be sorrowful for him, desiring nothing but
only his life. If he stand in great danger, the doctor shall have his leave,
and tarry no longer with him, in who^ I think he have no hope to recover, let
him be well rewarded. Secondly let Reinold be sent into the country, to the
debtours for money: tell him it shall turn to his great profit, and how his
master does inte^de to take him as his son, and will trust none but only
him, to fetch the money in the country. Thirdly, I will seem to fantasy the
minion, wishyng her to be my wife, alleging what broken slepes she has
caused me to have, and the cause of my coming hither only for her stay. Then
I will practice for the keys of the great black cheste, and of the steel
caskette. Fourthlie, master Curate shall be gently saluted with a Barnardes
blow, we will commend him, we will pray with him, and also receive the
Communion with our cousin, that he may have a good opinion in us, and deliver
him a bag with five pound in pence to give to the poor, in whose absence,
peradventure our Scribe and we shall frame the will: how like you this
practice? If this will not serve, I have a shifte of descante in store, that I
learned in Bosoms Inn.


Auarus. The Devil take altogether, so that we had the gold, practice this I
pray you: you have a good wit, by my troth I could not sleep all this night
for this matter, if you were not, I could do nothing, but stand like a sheep.


Ambodexter. I warrant you, I have had long experience in this trade,
euerywhere within this Realm, I can do the like with the help of Auarus,
which is a very good pen man, close and honest, he writes sonderie hands,
Petty Foggers, sit for the Pillerie.
and is a lively grauer of Seals himself, also is a kind hearted fellow: for
he will not stick to lend his friend an oath if need do require.


Auarus. The world is full of starting holes, me^ may skant know how to
trust men now a days, but for the good report that I do hear of this honest
fellow, I will be glad to have his acquaintau^ce. I knew diverse of his
kinsmen.xx. years ago: GOD have mercy of all Christen souls, it was then a
merry world, and will never be so good again, until this Gospellyng Preachers
have a sweating sickness in Smithfieled, and their Bible burnte, well, would
some were at libertee for their sakes. Well, well.


Ambodexter. Oh I do remember that reverent mortified father, that holy man
bishop Boner, that blessed catholic confessor of Rome, if he were again at
libertee, he would not daily to make the^, but trimly would rest these
fellows, and after burn them, you know his workmanship very well.


Auarus. He is my cousin Germain, and Per^urus that honest fellow, was his boie,
and brought up with him in his youth, and your grau^dfather did pen his
prologue, in the book called De vera obedientia, when as they laughed merely,
Honest fellows.
saying they had rather put to their hands, then either their heddes or
hearts, wise men, wise men.


Ambodexter. Yea, soche wisemenne will serve the time, Prudenter agere, and be
as wise as Serpents, and simple as Doves.


Auarus. To have the nature of a serpent, I will stand with them: but beshrowe
my heart, if I would be as simple as a Dove, either so simple, fearful, or
doltishe, but rather as my good lord Boner. Quasi Leo rugiens quere^s quein
deuoret. And thus he would expound that text, which must have soche a gloss
upon it.


Ambodexter. I am a lone upon gloses, Gloses.
I have art in store to sophist. I was brought up.iij. year with a Friar of
mont Pillar, he taught me how to handle prosa, obscurum, inordinatu^, and
barbarum, with genus and species: full well I can handle the matter, both pro
and contra. Commonly these are my figures, and serve well to my purpose, as
Enigma, proaemiae, ironiae sarcasimus, antephrasis, and chatientismus. I have
many rotten rules, which do serve for the purse: I learned them at Paris,
they are written in an old Barbarous French book. When we are at more
leisure, I will show thee all my cu^nyng, my gains and profits. Now let us
confer both together, this after noone about our matters.


Auarus. Contented in that case, as for terms and tricks in Logike, I forse
not of them, they will pay for no horse bread: A good compaignie.
it is gold that makes a glad heart. He deserves reverence and rule, that
has it and kept it: go let us dine together, and send for our friends,
Rapax, Capax, and Tenax, to keep us company an hour or two, for they are
good fellows.


Ambodexter. Agreed, I like their company very well they are my friends, and
kind hearted men


Auarus. And mine also, go let us depart, and not be seen much together
abroad standing in counsel, because our matters are not curraunte.


Medicus. Crispinus, where have you been so long? I thought it a year since
your departure, but I have shorted the time, in beholding this pitiful
picture of Lucretia, and this fearful siege of Pauie, but this Map of the
discripcio^ of Terra Florida in America, have reioysed me, there the gold and
precious stones, and Balmes are so plentiful, silver and spice are nothing
with them, no labor is in that land, long life they have: one thing there is,
which likes me not among the^.


Crispine. What is that master Doctor?


Medicus. They have never sickness until death do come: therefore there is
no good dwelling for us in soche a land. Further, it is said, that they have
no debate nor strief in their common wealths.


Crispine. Marie then it is as unprofitable for Lawers, as for Phisicians. I
trust we shall never be in that case, in this our country.


Medicus. God defend us from soche a Common wealth, it would mar
altogether. Now let us go to the chamber door, and se how the world goes
with master Antonius, and take our Phlebothomer with us, to let him blood.


Crispine. I will wait on your maistership.


Medicus. How do you good master Antonius, have you taken any rest, since I
was with you


Antonius. No more Master Doctor, then if I had been laid on hot coals. A
dreadful case.
Oh sir, there was never manne in soche a case, as I am in. I have had most
fearful dreams of thieves to rob me: me thought I was in the top of a high
tower, tellyng of money, and sodeinly there came an yearthquake, and shook the
tower in pieces, and cast me down upon weapons all bloody, which a great
number of Morians had in their hands, from the^ I fell in the fire, which was
like high mountains about me, whereas was much noise, and a cruel battaill.
I did see there many of mine old acquaintance, which sometime were of great
honor, both men Spiritualle and Temporal, and the Pope himself, with many of
his friends. They were in extreme wretchedness, and sore handled of fearful
Monsters, and worms gnawyng upon their breasts, upon whom was written:
Conscience has accused me, and hell devoured me. Ve, ve, ve, and thus I am
tossed to and fro, A troubled conscience.
alas what shall I do. Also I did hear many ragged and sick people, cry
vengeance on me^ and men in prison also, that said I had undone them, to
inriche my self, oh good God.


Crispine. Sir I pray you let me hacke^ in your ear.


Medicus. What is the matter?


Crispine. I will depart: his talk does so much trouble me, me think he
does wound my conscience. Also, I will home, and cast away a great number
of rotten drugges, wherewith I have gotten much money, in deceiuyng the people,
God forgive me.


Medicus. The vicar of saint fools be your ghostly father, are you so wise?
Tarry still with me, let him pay for your rotten drugges, for I may say to
you, that he is almost rotten already himself: me think your conscience is
to much spiced with sudden devotion.


Antonius. What mean you Master Doctor, to wisper in the Apothicaries ear?


Medicus. Nothing sir, but I have appoincted at what time that you should
receive your^ Clister, and how your Ptisa^^te should be made: and in what
order that your frontarie should be applied to your forehedde, to cause you to
sleep quietly. These dreams are nothing, but proceading of the abundance of
choler, you are hot and dry: also the time is very hot: the Son is now xx.
degrees in Leo, the Dog days are to be observed. Notwithstanding, fear
nothing, I warrant you, life for life, discomforte not your self, a man or a
Mouse.


Antonius. You are a merry ge^tleman, do your pleasure with me, I will put my
self into your hands I tell you: hold here are.xx. old Angels, that did se
no Son this ten year. Your Pothicarie shall be well considered, he seems to
be an honest man, and a cunnyng fellow: let him set up all the boxes and
glasses in the window, and put on his bonette.


Medicus. What mean you sir, I pray you remember your self: so God help me,
you are to blame: well, I will not contrary you. My chief desire is to help
you, without the respect of money or gold, or other of your commoditee.
Crispine set the boxes in the window: and you Surgean, prepare your lace,
staff and lance, with your ounce vessels, that I may consider his blood in
order and due quantitee, for hither unto he is but in the augmentyng of his
fever. Further, he had no fit this ten hours, let him blood by little and
little, and although he do fall into Lipothimion, it is no matter, let him
blood until it partly do change into a good color. Oh Lord, how might you
live? if this blood should have remained any longer, did you ever see the
like? what a good heart he has, the worst is past this would have been a great
sore, or apo^^umacion: stop up the vein a Gods name.


Crispine. I did never see the like, but ones where as your Maistership did a
great cure, upon a noble man.


Medicus. Oh, are you advised of that Crispine, he is a good friend of mine, I
have twenty pound yerelie of him. He sent me a fat Bucke upon Mondaie
last, and gave me my Mule also, with a Ueluet foot clothe.


Crispine. Sir, when you sent me home, I left your mule standing at the door,
but as I returned, I met a lackei clothed in Orange taunie and white, with a
pair of bare ta^ned legs, and a blewe night cap, with a plume of feathers
riding on him as fast as he might gallop.


Medicus. Oh the passion of Christ, my mule is stolen, I will hence, I had
rather lose.xx.li. I will tarry no le^ger: A great loss.
my Mule, I will teache him to ride on my Mule, I warrante him.


Crispine. Sir, he needs no teaching, he can ride well I warrant you. I heard
him say to a young manne with a long cloak, lined with yellowe, that his
master sent him to carry a letter, to a merchant venterer, that was
crossailed into Terra Florida.


Medicus. Give me my goune, fare ye well Master Antonius: as evil luck as
ever I had in all my life.


Antonius. I had thought the loss of your friend, and of your Mule, had not
been both a like to you. What for.xx. pound, I will pay it double: the knave
shall not escape, Crispine has taken good marks upon him. I will send to
every Ward, blind lane, Innes Woods and fields, after the villain. I will
take the matter on me, because you come to me so gently: quiet your self,
sit down again in the chair, I were cast away if you were gone, good
master doctor.


Medicus. I care not so much for the mule, but that my lord will take much
unkindness, and think I should set light by his gift, and the Ruffians will
laugh me to skorne, when they know how I am handled of the knave boie. Well, I
am contented with your offer I pray you beware you sleep not, you shall suppe
the thin broth of a chicken by and by, made with the.iiij. great cold
seeds and cordial Herbs. Crispine, I pray you make the broth in some stone
or silver vessel. Copper or Brass is not good for Master Antonius: soche
vessels are Leprous.


Antonius. If you will have it made of gold, you shall.


Medicus. We shall make shifte with other things: gold shall serve to deaurat
or gilde your losinges, electuaries and manus christi withal.


Antonius. Contented, so that it makes on my side whatsoever it be. But me
think I feel sleep approaching, what shall I do?


Medicus. Draw the Curtains, open the lukette of the Window: set Sallowes
about the bed, besprinkled with vinegar and rose water. Take of that hot
mantell, let his hedde and shoulders be bolstred up, lie not on your back,
lean toward this side, let us talk together like friends, why are you so
heavy and yearthlike.


Antonius. I must needs, I was made of earth, but where is the earth placed,
of which I was made, and of what fassion is it, although I walk upon the same,
yet do I stand in doubt of the matter.


Medicus. The earth is most heavy, Aristo. de c^l^ and mundo.
and can be in no place, but in the midst of heaven, not moveable, but round
and hangs continually, about the which are the lands and countries of the
world fixed, which Aristotle does call Medium terrae, medium mundi.


Antonius. Ar there not bodies, which are called simple.


Medicus. Yes forsooth, The four Elements.
those are the iiij. the fire hot and dry, the air hot and moiste, the water
cold and moiste, the earth cold and dry, and these are called the Elements.


Antonius. Are there not bodies called mixed, what are they?


Medicus. Animalia: as man, beast, fish, Mixed bodies.
foul and Worms, Vegetabilia, as Herb, Grass and Trees, and mineralia,
things under the earth, as metalles.


Antonius. Lord, how is this world stayed?


Medicus. The two Pooles Articus and Artarti^^^ South and North, are the
extreme limits about whom the whole frame of heaven is wrapped, and is called
Axie coeli^.


Antonius. Men says that certain stars do govern the things beneth here
in earth.


Medicus. They do so in deed, as it is well proved when as the Sun and
Moon do enter into any of their circles, in those great bodies, then our
little bodies in earth do feel the goodness or euilnes of them, as Aries,
Leo, and Sagittarius, are hot, dry and bitter, cholorike, and are gouernyng
hot and dry things, and this is called the fiery triplicitee. The second
triplicitee, is of air hot and moiste, sanguine, sweet, and do govern
Sanguine people. And other tirplicitee is of water, cold and moiste,
flegmatike, having the government of cold raw bodies. The last is the earth,
the mother of all things, cold and dry melancholy.


Antonius. What do the knowledge of these things profit to Physic, I pray
you tell me?


Medicus. Most chiefly: for where, as the Philosopher do leave, there the
Physician do begin. That is, he must be first a good natural Philosophier, he
must have ye knowledge o^ times and seasons, and be acquainted with complexio^s
of men, observing the nature of things, and the climates under heaven, with
the course of the Son, Moon and Stars, Air and diet. etc.


Antonius. I pray you, is there a soul in manne?


Medicus. Yes forsothe.


Antonius. Why then, there must needs be a greater thing, as the cause of every
living soul which I take to be GOD, God.
which has made all things, and when you and I talked together, you seemed
that, No^ est deus.


Medicus. I professed to follow Aristotle, but my meaning was, that I credit
not the Bible matters, I am no Divine, I find no reasons there for my turn:
they are to hard things for me, I commend them to Darbell and Duns. etc.


Antonius. Why, does Aristotle show any better reasons then is in the Bible?
Then I pray you: what is the power of the soul?


Medicus. In the soul says Aristotle in his book of Ethiques, The three
parts of the soul.
it has.iij. sondrie powers. The one is named vegitable, in which every man
takes part with herbs, trees, and plants. The second part of the soul is
named sensible: in this part man and beast are both a like in moving. etc. The
third part is more, which is racionall, or having reason. And this part of
reason, has both act to do well, and power to do evil. And these ij. are
called Intellectiue, which learneth, deserves and judges in every thing that
may be seen, felt, heard, or understood: but the power unreasonable, as
sudden raging, criyng. etc. Is ascribed unto the Lion, Horse, Hog. etc. How
like you this manner of talk, yet here is no scripture, but Aristotle, I assure
you.


Antonius. Then it should appear, that the soul has virtues: how many I pray
you?


Medicus. The first virtue is called Intellectual, from which springs
wisdom, science, and prudence. And the.ij. is called moral, which is the
mother of many good things, as chastitee, liberalitee, humanitee, and good
manners.


Antonius. What is the cause of these two virtues in the soul.


Medicus. The virtue Intellectual, ingendereth and is nourished by learning of
good tutours, and men of experience, or readyng of good books of Philosophy:
which is a secrets virtue in the soul. And also the moral comes by good
custom, and not by nature, as if one manne had two soonnes, the one brought
up in keeping cattelle, the other in daily learning good lessons, Example.
although nature did frame their bodies like in shape, yet they should not be
like in conditions: moral provides, that natural things in them both, can
not be moved by contrary custom. For stones naturally, though they be cast
never so high by art, yet must they naturally fall down again. Even so of
fire being driven down, yet it will cast his flames upward: so virtue is not
in us by nature, but only by power to receive them, for every thing that is
in us by nature: first it is in us by powers, and after comes to act, as it
comes to the senses of mankind. For none can deny, but first^ manne has
power to hear, see, feel. etc. So the power does preuente, and comes before
the act in nature.


Antonius. Then if power goes before thacte, then a man is called honest,
good, or chaste, before: either nonestie, goodness, or chastity appears in
him.


Medicus. In things moral, evermore the act goth before the power. An
example: a Schoole-maister is called a Teacher, because of his learning, which
is the work going before the power. And the cause of a good man is his good
works: and so of the eiuill, whose work is either drunkenness, aduitrie,
theft. etc. they make him evil.


Antonius. Then it should appear, that this thing called Actus, or work,
brings virtue and vice in man.


Medicus. What else, does not every man that lives eat? But if he eat to
much or to little, does it not bring sickness? Even so of to much labor
or idleness, of to much boldness or cowardnesse, are not these acts vicious
and evil? And does not one mean moderate them both. Extremes are ever
hurtful.


Antonius. What remedy then I pray you?


Medicus. Nothing is better then a mean, called temperaunce, Temperance
which is governed by prudence, which is ever content between both, and
reioyseth in it.


Antonius. So then, Aduersitee.
if a man fell into extreme adversity, and sustain it patiently in his
sickness, poverty, or cause of grief, call you this a mean, or no.


Medicus. In every work or sufferyng, there is pleasure or displeasure. If a man do rejoice in trouble, in chastity, Prudence.
in bearyng of cruel words or slander, the same is a prudent manne, and his
suffering makes it a mean to him: but other men that are chastised, and will
suffer outwardly, and it greueth them in so doing, the same is vicious, and
lacks mean, or prudence.


Antonius. Has the soul any delites in her or no?


Medicus. Yes truly, in three things. The first^ profitable, Profit.
whereof springs housebandrie to nourishe the earth, as also Physic to help
the body, knighthod to go to battle. etc The second is delectable, Pleasure.
as taking pleasure in things done, which is chiefly nourished of the soul,
in which consists al^ the pleasures of the world. The third is called
good, Virtue.
that is to be virtuous, loving, sober, pacie^t, and also to the soul or
mind, are enjoined, habit, power and passion.


Antonius. Have young children the soul in all poinctes as women have or no, in
operacio^ or eleccio^


Medicus. Aristotle. says: that operacion of the will of the soul, is common
to children, but the eleccion or choice, be not in them to will.


Antonius. What is will in the soul?


Medicus. The will is the entente, but eleccion is the antecedent to the
entente, for eleccion goes before operacion or work, and the work does
follow the same, as doing of things, buiyng, selling, and all the arts and
sciences, are so to be considered. Frste, by eleccion, then by operacion, First
eleccio^, then operacio^
as by art I do prove you to have the pestilence, experience has taught me,
which young children can not know, as Gramer, Rethorike, Music, Physic,
before they have learned the^, or begun with their principles.


Antonius. Now I will stop and lay a straw, and commen as yet no more of
the matters of the soul, but only of the body, and namely in this poinct of
the pestilence. Pestilence.
What is the cause of the same, good Master doctor?


Medicus. That which we do se, we do testify, and that which we do testify
is true. The cause of the pestilence
Therefore no man ought in matters, which apperteineth to the estate of life, to
write fables or lies, but that which is of great aucthorite^ and of good
experience. This pestilent fever, says Hipocrates, Hypocrates de flatibus.
is in two parts considered: the first is common to every man, by the
corrupcion of air. The second is private or particular to some men through
evil diet, replecion, which brings putrifaccion, and finally mortificacion.
And Galen in the diffrences of fevers, does affirm the same, saying: Vnam aerem
viciatum ac putridum, Gale^^^ libri. i. De differen^^^^* Feb. Cap. v.
altera^ homoree corporis virioso victu colectos, and ad putrescendu^ paratos.
Auicen also, Tractus quartus de febribus pestilentialibus. cap. i. When there
does come a sudden alteracion or change in the quality of water, from cold
to heat, or transmutacion from swetenes to stincke, as it chances in waters,
through corrupted mixture of putrified vapor, inf^ctyng both air and water,
which of their own simplicity are clean, but through evil mixture are
poisoned: A^tius de remedica. libri. v. Paulus libri. ii.
or when strong winds do carry pestilent fume or vapors from stinkyng places,
to the clean parts, as bodies dedde of the plague, unburied, or mortality in
battle, death of cattle, rotten fennes, coming suddenly by the impression of
air, ^afis ^ li. de pest. Gal^. libri. i. De diffe^^^^* ca. iiii.
creping to the heart, corrupting the spirits, this is a dispersed pestilence,
by the inspiracion of air. Also by replecion, Uenus, bathyng, or openyng the
pores, rotten food, frui^t, much Wine, or immoderate labor, or the time
being hot and moiste. These are great causes.


Antonius. At what time of the year does the Pestilence cast forth her
poison?


Medicus. In the time of Harvest says Hypocrates, are most sharp and dedlie
sicknesses, Hyp. (...). xix.
but less danger in the Spring time: and in the time of sondrie change of
Winds when the weather is hot and moiste.


Antonius. To what persons I pray you, does the Pestilence come?


Medicus. Most chiefly to them, under the place infected, then to slotishe
beastly people, that keep their houses and lodginges unclean, their meat,
drink, and clothyng, most noisome, their labor and travel immoderate, or
to them which lack provident wisdom, to preuente the same by good diete,
air, Medicine. etc. Or to the bodies hot and moiste. And these bodies do
infecte other clean bodies, and whereas many people do dwell on heaps
together, as Auicen says: Et communicate multitudine hominum. etc. Fen. j.
Tra. iiij.


Antonius. By what sign or token is this perilous plague or stripe of the
Pestilence, best known among the Phisicions. Go not about the bushe with
subtle words, but plainly speak the truth to me, being in this fearful
danger, as you do well know that I am in.


Medicus. Causes and signs of Pestilence.
The signs are most manifest which are the stars running course or raze
after their causes. Oh the most fearful eclipses of the Sun and Moon, those
heavenly bodies are manifest signs of the pestilence among men, and the
stars cadente in the beginning of Harvest, or in the month of September, or
much South wind or East wind in the Canicular days, with storms and
clouds, and very cold nights and extreme hot days, and much change of
weather in a little time, or when birds do forsake their eggs, flies or things
breding under the ground, do fly high by swarms into the air, or death of
fish or cattelle, or any dearth going before, these ar the signs of the
pestilence, and evident presages of the same


Antonius. These are good signs generalle, but particulare: what manifest
tokens do signify the Plague or Pestilence in a man's own proper body.


Medicus. They which are smitten with this stroke or plague, Ruff. ^uict^
Fatetur. Actiu^. Cap. xcv. ^ibr. v. viii. Paulus Libri. Cap. xxxv.
are not so open in the spirits as in other sicknesses are, but strait
winded, they do swone and vomit yellowe chollour, swelled in the stomach
with much pain, breaking forth with stinking sweat. The extreme parts very
cold, but the internal parts boiling with heat and burning, no rest, blood
distillyng from the nose: Urine somewhat watrie, and sometime thick with
stincke, sometime of color yellowe, sometime black, skaldyng of the tongue,
ordure most stinkyng, with read iyen, corrupted mouth with blacknes, quick
pulse and deep, but weak, hedache, altered voice, loss of memory, sometime
with ragyng in strong people. These and soche like are the manifest signs, how
the heart has drawn the venom to it, by attraccion of the air: by the
inspiracion of the arters to the heart, and so confirming it to be the perilous
fever Pestile^ciall. This is most true: of this comes foul bubos, antaxis
and carbuncles, sores, through putrifaccion, as Galene says: li.iii. De
presage. Auicen. Fe. i. tract. iiii. Gal. lib. i. De diffe. cap. iiii. and
Rasis de constitutione pestile^tiae ad mansorem. Also this fever is skante to
be recovered, and almost past help, when these Symptomatas do appear, as
Galene says.iii. De praesage ex pull. qua propter neque hos curare tentandum
erit.


Antonius. You have declared unto me a fearful tale of the Plague, whereof
thousands have and shall die: a pitiful case how it comes among people
suddenly, even as you have showed, the cause primative in thaire. The
antecedent, Primatime. Antece lent. Coniuncte. Causes of the Pestilence.
when the same air is drawn into the heart by attraccio^ of the arters: the
coniunct, when it with boiling heat, does change by putrifaccion, nature into
the worse part, and almost paste cure of any Phisician, when it is come to
this poincte, as I gather by your late talk, which does put me in great
fear of my life. But I will common with you for others, which are not
infected, how may they be most safely defended, master Doctor?


Medicus. Would you fain know? Surely I will declare thee, the best defense
that I can, I will hide nothing. First of all, let all men, Good air, Gale. de
ter. i. ad Pi^o. Cap. xvi. Ptul. li. ca. xxxvi Auicen de preser. a peste. f^u.
ii tract. iiii. Rasis ad almon. libr. de pest. Cap. ii.
women and children, avoid out of the ill air, into a good soil: and then,
according to their age, strength of nature and complexion, let eueryone of
them, with some good Medicene, draw from the body, superfluous moisture, and
deminishe humor hot and dry, and use the regimente of diete to driyng,
sharped with vinegar or tart things, and lesser meats, not so much wine as
they have used in custom, neither Potage, Milk, unripe fruictes: hot
Spices, dates or Honey, or sweet meats, wine with Sugar are not tolorable. No
anger or perturbacions of the mind, Trouble of monde or fear.
specially the passion called fear: for that do draw the spirits and blood
inwardes to the heart, and is a very mean to receive this plage. Neither use
acts venerous, nor bathyng, either with fume, Stoue, or warm water (for this
cause): they all do open the poores of the body, neither quassyng or much
drinking: even so thirst or drines is not tolorable, or immoderate exercise or
labor, specially after meat: A goodly rule against the Plague.
Music is good in this case, and pleasant tales, and to have the meats well
sauced with clean sharp^ vinegar. Forget not to keep the chamber, and clothyng
clean, no priues at hand, a soft fire with perfumes in the morning. Shift
the lodgyng often time, and close in the South East winds, specially in the
time of mistes, Note also ye Clisters are good, before the openyng of veins.
Clouds and winds. And use to smell upon some pleasant perfume and to be
letten blood, a little at ones, and to take Pills contra Peste^: that is a
good preservative against the plague.


Antonius. These are good rules, and happy are they that do wisely observe
them in time, place and manner accordingly: but if one be new lie infected, what
remedy then, as when a man is sick, and the sore appears not.


Medicus. Libri Epid. Sect. ^i. Apho. iiii.
A coming forth like a bubos, are signs of those parts from which they do
swell as example, in the left side, hedde, neck, flanckes. etc. but often
times the plage sore will not appear, the very cause is this: nature is to
weak, and the poison of the infeccion to strong, that it cannot be expelled
and this is most perilous of all, when soche a cruel conqueror does rain
within the heart, the principal part of life, now possessed with death. The
causes of this, I have declared before with signs to ye same. Consider two
speciciall things.
Not withstanding, consider two things: first whether it is in bodies
sanguine and cholerike, or them which are flegmatike, or melancholy, or not.
The first two, blood is the cause: the second.ij. abundaunce of evil
humors. Therefore let blood, Auicen. C^rati. f^bri Pesti. ^i.iiii. ^en. i.
tract. iiii.
whereas it has the victory, and purge whereas other humors have
predominacion, or chief rule: in some men, that have very strong bodies,
first purge, tha^ let blood. Note this, that what side be infected, Leo. Actus
de med ^d. mor. Lib^i. iiii.
let blood on that side: if it be above the hedde, open Cephalica: if it be
under the arms, Basilica, or heart vein: if it be about the throat, then
open Malleola, about the flanckes, bealie, legs. etc. open Iecoraria: if they
are very weak or young, then boxyng is good to the neck, shoulders, back and
thighs: if the stomach be full, then with speed vomet^e and these things
draw the venom from the heart, and remove the poison.


Antonius. This is good in the cure of the Pestilence, for I do praise this
blood letting very well, in the beginning of the sickness.


Medicus. Blood must be letten in the beginning of the sickness: Example.
for example, like as a pot is cleansed of the scum or foam, in the beginning,
when it plaieth on the fire, and thereby the liquour is cleansed within the
pot: even so, blood lettyng and pills, do help and cleanse the Pestilence,
Who may not be letten blood.
when it begins first to boil within the body. Howbee it, certain people
may not bleed: as women which have their times abundantly: or men
having flux of the Hemoroides, children very young, or people weak and aged.


Antonius. I pray you, what quantitee of bloodde must be letten?


Medicus. Quantitee of blood letten.
Forsooth sower vnees, or little more, and must be done every month, sometime in
the Median, sometime in the Basilica. etc. And not to sleep after the same,
during six seven, or eight hours.


Antonius. What Pills do you use against the Plague.


Medicus. The best Pills generally under heaven, and is thus made: Ruff.
contra pest. Auicen. libri. iiii. Fen. i. tract. iiii. Paul. Libri. ii. Cap.
xxxvi.
take the best Yellowe Aloes two ounces, Myrrh and Saffron, of each one ounce,
beat them together in a Mortar a good while, put in a little sweet Wine,
then roll it up, and of this make five Pills, or seven of one dragme, whereof
take every day next your heart, a Scruple, or more, it will expulse the
Pestilence that day. etc.


Antonius. Have you any good pocio^ in store for the Pestilence: to be drunk
a Mornings, when the Pills are not taken.


Medicus. None better then this: take Theriaca, of the making of
Andromachus.ij. Scruples which is a Triacle incomparable, Galenus libri. ix. de
simplic.
passing against both poison and Pestilence, and the Antidotari of
Mithridatis.i. Scruple. bole Armoniacke prepared, half a Scruple and the waters
of distilled Roses, Fuch. de mede. morbis. libri. iiii.
Scabious and Buglosse, of each one ounce mingeled together: but this Medicene
must be had of Crispine, or one of his companions, which use no rotten ware.


Antonius. Have you any good powder?


Medicus. One better, I assure you, then a kings ransom, and thus it must
be made: take the leaves of Dictamnus, and the roots of Turmentil, of
Pimpernell, of Seduall, of Gentian, of Betonie, of each half an ounce bole
Armoniacke prepared an ounce, Terra sigillata.iij. dragmes, fine Aloes and
Myrrh of each half an ounce, Saffron a dragme, Mastike.ij. dragmes: beat them
together finely and fearsed, this is the powder. Of this must a dragme be
drunk in.iiij. or.vi. sponfull of Rose or Sorel water, when danger approaches,
or in the time of danger.


Antonius. These ar strong things for many weke stomakes: is there any other
holsom things?


Medicus. The siruppes of Uiolettes, of Sorell, of Endive, of sower Limondes,
of each like, mingled with Burrage water, and a Ptisane made of Barlie, mingled
together, is very wholesome to drink, put in the powder of bole Armoniack,
which is of a singular virtue to cool: for Galen did help thousa^des at Rome
with the same Bole, and the Theriaca mingled together, in a great pestilence,
but in the pestilence time, one being infected therewith, let him sweat by
warm things, as hot tiles. etc. and let not the pacient eat, sleep, nor
drink, and eat light meats, as Hen, Capon, Cheken, Partriche, eating
often, and little at ones, with sause, made sharp of vinegar, Oringes, sharp
Limo^des, or Sorell, and in the first day of the sickness, that the pacient be
kept from sleep, by talkyng, sprinklyng of sweet water, rubbing of the body,
as nose ears, or soft pulling of the hears, as they may be suffered, or a
sponge dipped in vinegar, applied to the nose: and if vehement dryness, or
heat does approach, then drink the Syruppes last rehearsed, and have the
Chamber clean kept, and also parfumed four times of the day, beware of
stincke, let the perfumes be made with Olibanum, Mastike, wood of Aloes,
Benjamin, Storax, Laudanum, Cloves, Juniper, or so^^^ like, and sprincle all the
chamber about with vinegar: Auicen. libr. iiii. (...) i. tract. iiii. Ras.
roses in the windows, or green branches of Sallowe, or of Quinces, are
good, sprynkeled with Rose water and Uineger.


Antonius. I have heard say, that Garlike and new Ale, should be good for the
Plague.


Medicus. You do say truth, Garlike is good for to bring it, but not against
it, it is so hot, and has power attractiue, and that is very evil, and a
mean to bring the plague^ so are Onions, Good obseruacions.
Leekes, Rocket, Radishe, and s^che baggage, which are sold about, in every
streate in Plaguie time, as means for to bring the same, it is pity to suffer
soche things. Further, the multitudes of infected people among the whole,
infecting them, or wearing the apparel of the dedde bodies of the Pestilence,
which should be burned: for it is like a fire, when it have gotten the
victory, and can not be quenched. Priueis, filthy houses, gutters,
chanilles, unclean kept: also the people sick, going abroad with the plague
sore running, stinkyng and infectyng the whole, or unwise ^ashe passing with an
empty stomach out of the house: Neither to sit tipplyng and drinking all the
day long, nor use running wrestlyng, Daunsyng, or immoderate labor, which
do not only open the pores but also cause the wind to be short, and the
pulses to quick, and the Arters draw to the heart when it pants, the
pestilenciall air and poison. And what is worse tha^ fear of mind, when one
does hear ill tidings, the death of father, mother, child. etc. By it the
spirits and bloodde are drawn inwardes to the heart. Also of care, anger,
wrath. etc. These are all perilous: The best remedy, the worst mean.
Mirthe must be used, specially in this case: Cattes, Dogs, Swine, Duckes,
Doves, Hens or Gese, are very unwholesome nere unto the place or mansion of
dwelling, or lie ded in diches nere the town: or many people liyng together in
one bed, or long watching in the night, or co^ti^nes of the bealy: shut up the
hot house doors, and tennis play, which are most venomous. Be never
without the electuarie of nuttes, thus made, Fuch. libri. iiii. de mo^b.
Elect^arii de nucibi^.
cleue walnuttes.xx. fat figs.xiij herb Grace.ij. handful Wormewoodde
Fetherfu, or rather Cotula Foetida, called Buphthalmus, called Ore ^ye, and
Scabios of each one handful: the roots of Aristolochia longa, half an vnse:
Aristo^lochia rotunda, an ounce and a half. The roots of Turmentill, and of
the lesser Burre, call- Petasitus, Pimpernell, of each two ounces and a half,
the leaves of the very Dictam ni one handful, Baie beries three Dragmes, the
powder of Hearts horn two dragmes and a half, Maces, Morrhe, Bole
Armoniacke, and the earth of Limodes, of each Dragmes three, Salt of the Sea
a dragme and a half, Nux vomica, dragmes two, Buglos flowers one handful,
sta^ped together by art, and with clarified honey make it: this is good to be
eaten a dragme every morning. Forget not the Pills of Ruffi, of them may be
taken one at ones.


Antonius. After, or with this Pestilence, there will a fearful sore appear,
as we have ye knowledge universal, by painful experience, which we do call
the plague sore, what do you say to the same sore?


Medicus. Carbo and Anthrax are one.
This sore is called Carbunculus, of Carbo a Cole, or Anthrax: they are both
one, and not two, and is ingendered of most sharp, hot and gross blood,
which nature does cast forth through the skin, to one particulare part,
with extreme pain and perille to the body: whose Primatiu^ cause was, the
corrupcion of air or diete, drawn to the heart, of which pestiferous smoke,
or poisoned fume, this sore has his cause, and the same sore is theffect
following.


Antonius. What are the signs: when it comes nere hand?


Medicus. A fever going before, Signs of the plague.
noisome and lothsomnesse of stomach, wambleyng of the heart, pulse not
equal, urine stinking, desirous of sleep, perilous dreams with startyng,
through the sharpness of hot and burning humors, and then a little pushe
will creep forth like a scabbe, sometime more then one, then it will
increase and shine like pitche or Bptumen, with passing pain, and then it will
have a crust like unto the squanies or flakes of Iron, when they fall of, when
the Smith does work, and in color like ashes is this crust, wrought by
extreme heat and burning, therefore it may be called the burning cole, or
Ignem persicum. Further, there are four colors to be observed in the sore
besides the crust, yelowe, read, grene and black. The first two are not so
dangerous as the second two are. Yet says Rasis in his book of the
pestilence, to Mansor the king, that the Carbuncle is deadly, and most
perilous. And Auicen affirms the black to be incurable, specially when a
Fever Pestilence do reign. Sometime it is drawn back again into the body,
then no remeadie. Sometime it happens in the most noble places, Where the
plague sore is placed.
as nere the heart, the throat, most perilous, with sudden stopping the
spirits of life. Some pestilent sores do come in the clensing places, as arm
holes, flanks. etc And when nature is so strong, to cast it forth with a red color, palishe, or yellowishe, the cure is not then very hard.


Antonius. It should seem to be most hard: you have showed more periles then
helps hither unto: But if there be any remedies, what are they? I pray you
tell them, for in that poincte you may do much good.


Medicus. Even as I have rehearsed before, so will I again begin in the cure of
the carbuncle of the openyng of a vein, and if none other thing do let, as
extreme weakness. etc. then let the pacient bleed, until the defeccion of
the spirits, or nere hand swoning. Let it be done on that side grieved or
afflicted, as I have said before in the fever Pestilence of the Mediane. etc.
Also forget not viij. special things. First the substance, as compass,
length, depthe, hardness. etc. Second, the matter whereof it is bread, as
blood. etc. The third as accidente, through the dolor, as a fever, redness.
etc. Fowerth to know it from a cause, whereof a doubt might arise thereof. Gal.
^ttribu^^^ alter ^in ^midi^. To know the Anthrax from the Cancer.
And this is the difference between them. A Carbuncle in the beginning is
very hard, flaming read, extreme pain. etc. As I have said before, and
will come quickelie to his hedde. But Cancer is not so read, neither so
painful, yet much harder, and longer time or it comes to the hedde. But when
it begins to wa^e soft, then it ripeth faster then the Carbuncle. The fifth,
of the causes efficie^t, whether it be ripe through co^coccion or no or the
qualities of the corrupted humors or hardness. etc. The sixte, in what place
it is, in place of perille or no. The seventh is to work by incision, plaster.
etc. The.viij. is good diet, as air, meat, drinks, sleep. etc. These are
very good obseruacions, worthy of memory in this case. And now follows a
perille to the Chirurgian, which must be richly rewarded, for he puts
his life in danger, in that, that he helps the sore body infected, he ought
to be provident, that does take this matter in hand, and before he comes to
the pinche, to eat his antidotari of Methridatum, A cauiate for the Chyrurgian.
or to have a Sponge with strong vinegar, applied to his nosthrilles, to arm
himself against the poisoned air: and to take his lance in his hand,
according to the art, taking heed that in launcyng, he cut no vain or
Senewe, which have society with each other therefore lance not very deep.
This is no strange thing after bloodletting, to lance the sore, to let forth
the matter, in some it will come forth aboundauntly, when it is ripe or rotten:
in other some not, because the humors are gross, and baken together, or the
runnyng matter far in, or skante ripe, and nothing will come forth but
salt, sharp, filthy, stinckyng water: then beware of any thing that might
drive it back again into the body, as cold, bole armen. etc. then thinsicion
must be made in the lowest place, so that thereby the matter mate the sooner
avoid, and must be made in the form crooked, if it be not in a place full of
senewes, if it be, then make the insicion long: after the matter is run forth,
tha^ cover it with lint dipped in this following, which is excellent good, yea,
if the matter be stubborn in the sore. Take Quinse seed, Note this well.
Galls, of each. iij. dragmes, Myrrh, Olibanum and Aloes, of each.ij. dragmes
and a half, Alom.ij. dragmes, Aristolochia the round roots, Calamenthe, as
much: Calamenth, i. dragme and a half, Calcanthum a scruple, all beaten
finely, then temper it together in a little Red Wine, made in small rolls:
you may keep them dry, and then in this case dissolve it, or part of it in
the water of stilled milk, apply this with lint into the sore, To wash the
place.
also in this case to wash the sore with a sponge dipped in the warm waters of
Drago^s, Scabious, sweet wine, Aaristolochia and Comphori, or their decoccio^.
And to have the roots of Compho^^, of Lillies, of Mallows, sodden in white
wine until they be soft, then stamped and drawn through a strainer, put
thereunto barlie meal and honey of roses, this is a very good thing to apply
to the sore, A good medicen for the sore.
after the washing for.xij. hours, and will digest it. An other good medicen,
both to ripe and assuage the pain: mallows, violets, cham^ mill, A good
medicene to ripe.
of each half an handful, dill, half as much, sees them and braie the^,
then adt^ them barley meal, and oil of roses, flax sede bean meal, of
each.iij. ounces. Sees them in sweet wine, until they wax thick, and make
plaster. And to the places about the roots of the carbuncle, round about it,
this is good both to eradicate and defend the same Sees sower oringes in
vinegar or sorell, For the roots of the sore
and put a little bole armen to it, dip a cloth or flax in it, and apply it
round about the sore: many times renew it in this cure, read M. Thomas Gailes
worthy book.

M. Gaile.
And to take away the hard crust of the carbuncle, To take away the crust and
the pain
do thus. Take ceruse, dermilion, sublimated of each.iij. dragmes, beaten
finely in powder, and part of this may be cast upon the same. And to this
may follow mallows, violets, lettes, of each one hand full, sodden in mutton
broth, the yolks of three eggs, barlie meal, oil of roses, and fresh
butter, of each three ounces, this plaster applied on, will take away the
Pestilent crust. Also the emplastrum of Diachilo^ paruum, two ounces with
Amoniack, and Galbanu^, of each one ounce, made in a plaster, applied to the
place, or a plaster of figs, Doves doung and Uallerion roots, and the
roots of mallows, made and applied upon the sore, are very good ripers, and
do much preuail in this cure, and further to bring the cicatrice if need
require. Take oil of Myrrh, of roses, of violettes, A cicatric^ most (...).
of each two ounces, shepes Tallowe three ounces, gotes tallowe one ounce and a
half, juice of Colewortes three ounces, sees the^ together softly, until the
juice be consumed, then put thereunto half an ounce of Uermilion, ceruse as
much, and.ij. dragmes of letharge of gold, and sees the^ unto a blacknes,
stiere them with a stick, then put to them six ounces terpentine, and as
much Wax as shall suffice to make it in the form of a cerot. And this will
make a strong cicatris: and when the matter has run much and is past venim,
then this is a powder most precious to cast in, and dry it by little and
little. A most noble powder.
Take Ashes of Dill of burnt lead, of Terra lemnia, of each one dragme,
litharge of silver, flowers of pomgarnates, and galls without holes, of each
ij. dragmes, Ceruse, Creuishels, Snailes horns, roche Alome burnt, of each ij.
scruples beaten in powder: An healyng ointemente.
this is the powder, and hereafter follows a good ointmente to heal the
sore. Oil of Roses.ij. ounces, Ceruse, burnt lead, Litharge, of each one a
scruple, red Roses.ij. scruples in powder, the roots of the grease Comphori,
and the flowers of Pomegranates, bole Armen, of each one scruple, the seed of
Purslen tw^^ grains, white wax asmoche as shall suffice: and make this
ointmente in a Leaden mortar if it may be. Among al simples Simphatum called
Co^phori, is greatly lauded for the healing or helpyng of the Carbuncle, being
ground or beaten between.ij. stones, Good notes for the Pestilence.
and warm applied to the place. So is the herb called Scabios in the same
manner: so is the Lilly roots roasted and bruised and warm laid on. (Let not
the great white onio^ roasted, and the pith in the midst being taken forth,
stopped with good Triacle or Mythridatum warm, and applied to the place, be
forgotten) for some use none other things for the Carbuncle, to cure it. Also
consider this to keep the body temperate in eating. Beware of replecio^, light
Fish, with tarte sauces, Limondes, Sorell, Oringes, thin wine with water but
no Sugar or sweet things. Forgette not sweet perfumes of Rose water, Perfume.
cloves Maces, Uineger in a perfumyng pan, and have the stomach anointed with
oil of Maces, and the complet ointment of roses, of each.ij. scruples, and
Gallae muschata, x. grains, and dippe in a line^ cloth in white wax, oil of
Roses, white and red Saunders, and the powder of oriental Pearls, fine bole
Armen, and the sweet woodde of Aloes with Rose water, made warm in a little
vessel upon charcole, and be not without a good Pomeamber made of Storax,
Pomeamber against the Pestilence.
Calamite three dragmes, Laudani, half an ounce, flowers of water Lillies,
Uiolettes, the wood of Aloes, Spikenarde, of each a dragme and a half, the
three Saunders of each half a dragme, Sinamon two scruples, Masticke.xx.
grains, white Poppie seed, Campher, of each a scruple, Amber and Musk, of
each three grains, with rose water, in a warm Mortar, make Pomeamber,
Cordial.
make a hole in it, and put a silk lace through it, and wear this against
corrupted air. The body must have benefit by purgacion, with clister or
suppositer, or some pocion, as the syrup of roses solutiue iij. ounces, Purging.
confeccion of Hamech, v. Dragmes, and water of Endive.iiij. ounces, mingled
together, and drink at ones in the morning, or Benedicta laxatiua, with water
of Buglosse. Be not without Manus Christi, to eat oftentimes: and the
conserve of Roses, to eat before meat daiely. Beware of much ^lepe, which
will make the heat double about and within the heart, for sleep draws in
heat: and in time of wakyng, it is spread abroad, and the heat draws to the
extremes, as hands, hedde and feet. Sir, forget not this I pray you.


Antonius. No master Doctor, I warraunt you, I have noted it well, and though
it help not me, yet I trust it shall do good to others, when I am gone.


Medicus. Now sir, I will take my leave for a time my calling is soche that I
must depart, and diverse of my pacientes, which diligently do look for me, as
the hirdes do for the day after a cold Winters night. And as time and occasion
shall serve, I will return. I have hidden nothing from you, that may be a
means to your health: for when life is gone, farewell altogether, wife,
children, gold, lands, treasures, and all the golden glory of this world, and
friends also. Therefore, seeing life is the best jewel, An Epicures ta^ke.
which brings delites to the heart, pleasures to the iye and ear, sweet
savors to sense of smelling, and many hidden treasures knowelege to the virtue
of understanding, what is he that would make soche an exchange, if it were
possible to the contrary? To forsake his golden be decked bed with sweet
slepes, to lie utterly lost, rotten, forgotten, and stinking, in a filthy pit
of darkness, enclosed and wrapped with Worms. As by example, we may see the
multitude of graves in every church yard, and great heaps of rotten bones,
whom we know not of what degree they were, rich or poor in their lives.
Therefore sir, to conclude, pluck up that weak heart, rejoice* be glad and
cast away all care, I warraunte you.


Antonius. Gramercies master doctor, I have put you to pain with much talk
and questions: I will keep them in memory, they shall not be forgotten of my
part. Eue^ so forget not your promise in coming to me again, my trust is in
you: we shall make daily exchau^ge, cunnyng for gold, and love for labor,
yours I am. Have, take you that to bie you a new Mule, a foot clothe, and a
goune.


Medicus. A nice gentleman.
What mean your maistership? well, give me your hand, and here is mine with mine
heart also, ever yours at commandment as your own. Thus fare you well, until
my return: in the mean while, pass the time with some pleasant company Eat
good brothe made of Chickens, Diete.
lean Mutton, roste a little Partriche, eat light leauened bread, beware of
gross meats, Bief, Porke. etc. And Sallettes, strong wine, Spise, sweet
meats, and raw fruits. I pray you remember this, and drink your Diacodion at
night, to reconcile sleep again, and be somewhat laxatiue.


Antonius. I thank you most heartily: fare you well.


Medicus. Crispine where are you? Is is not time to depart? We have tarried here
very long, but not without gain.


Crispine. Sir, I have thought it a month since our coming hither: you have
been sent for eight times this after noone, and two of your pacientes are
dedde this day.


Medicus. That is no marvel, for who can hold that will away? I shall have
more work then I can put my hand unto. It is now a golden world with me, and
with you also.


Crispinus. God continue the same: No wind, but it does turn some men to
good.
I would thousands were sick, but I would have none dedde, but the beggars
that do trouble the world, and have no money to pay. I pray you what think
you of master Antonius shall he escape it or no?


Medicus. I have his plentiful reward, and money for you also. I have had
long talk with him. But to be plain with you, I think never to se him again
alive. He was paste cure or I came to him, and he could not skape, therefore I
kept him with long talk, but I spoke but softly.


Crispine. Then I perceive your talk was unprofitable to him. Yet I wrote it
in a little paper book in my hand.


Medicus. Not unprofitable, if the Physician come in the beginning or
augmentyng of the sickness. But in the full state of this sickness, it is
most dangerous, because death will preuente it, or it comet^ to the
declinacion. Oh it is a strong poison if the Pestilence crepe to his heart.


Crispine. This man loved you well in his life: will you not be at his burial
Master Doctor?


Medicus. He loved me as I loved him. He me for health, Worldly fre^dsh^ppe.
and I him for money: And they, which are preseruers of the life of man
ought not to be present at the death or burial of the same man: therefore I
have taken my leave, I warraunt you Crispine, I will return to him no more.
Thus fare you well til the morrow in the morning.


Crispine. I must also depar to my shop, I have much business to do: I
will come to you at your commandment master Doctor. Thus fare you well.


Ciuis. Good wife, The citezen his fear.
the daiely iangling and ringing of the belles, the coming in of the minister
to every house, in ministryng the communion, in reading the Homely of death,
the digging up of graves, the sparring in of windows, and the blasing forth of
the blewe cross, do make my heart trimble and quake: alas what shall I do to
save my life?


Vxor. Sir, we are but young, His wife hes counssaile.
and have but a time in this world, what does it profit us to gather riches
together, and can not enjoy the^, why tarry we here so long? I do think every
hour a year, until we be gone, my heart is as cold as a stone, and as heavy
as lead, God help me. Seeing that we have sent our children forth three
weeks paste into a good air, and a sweet country, let us follow the^: we
shall be welcome to your brothers house, I dare say my sister will rejoice in
our coming, and so will al our friends there: Let us take leave of our
neighbors, and return merelei home again, when the plague is paste, and the
dog days ended, and there you may occupy your stock, and have gain thereof.


Ciuis. Oh wife, we know not our return, for the Apostle says to you,
James. iii.
that will say: to day or to morrow, we will go to soche a city, and buie
and sell, and have gain, and know not what shall hap to morrow, what is our
life? It is as a vapoure, that appears for a little time, and afterward^
vanishe away, for that ye ought to say, i^ the Lord will, and if we live,
we will to this, or that place: and if it please God, we will both depart,
and return again, at his good will and pleasure, for we are in his hands,
whether so ever we do^e go: and I trust it is not against Gods
commandment or pleasure, that we depart from this infected air.


Vxor. I know not what God will in our departing, but my flesh trimbles, when
I do hear the death belle ryng.


Ciuis. Ephe* v.
Yes surely, we have the Apostle saying (for our defense in fliyng) no man ever
yet has hated his own flesh, but nurished and cherished it, therefore who
can nurishe his flesh in a corrupted air, but rather do kill it? Further, I
heard a doctor of Phisike say that one called Galen, in a book of Triacle to
one Pison his friend, that the Pestilence was like a monstrous hungry beast,
deuouryng and eating not a few, but sometimes whole citees, that by respiracion
or drawyng in their breath, do take the poisoned air. He lauded Hypocrates,
which says, that to remove from the infected air into a clener, thereby
says he, they did not draw in more foul air, and this was his only remedy
for the plague, to them that did remain: Galen. (...) non aliter ^^ruauis qu^
ae^ri^ mutatione. etc.
He commanded not only simple woodde to be burned, with in the city of
Athenes, but also most sweet flowers and spices, perfumes: as gummes and
ointementes to purge the air. And wife, fear of death, enforced many holy
men to fly: as Jacob from his cruel brother Esau: Gene. xxii.
David from Saul: Elias from Iesabell: the christian men for fear of death,
did fly the tyranny of the Papists: and although these men did not fly
the Pestilence, (...) they fled all for fear of death, and so w^^ we by
Gods grace, observe soch wholeso^ means, and obeie his divine providence:
also I will leave my house with my faithful friends, and take the keys of the
che^^es with me. Where are our horses?


Vxor. Our things are ready, have you taken your leave of your neighbors?
Man.


Ciuis. I have done: so now let us depart a gods blessyng good wife.


Vxor. Give me my horse Roger.


Roger. Maistres, he is here ready at your hand, a good gelding, God bless him
and sweet saint Loye.


Ciuis. Bring forth mine also, and let the servants forget nothing
behind them, specially the steel Casket: let us ride fair and softly, until
we be out of the town.


Vxor. How pleasant are these sweet fields, ^arnished with fair plants and
flowers, the birds do sing sweetly and pitifully, in the bushes: here are
pleasant woods: Jesus manne, who would be in the City again? Not I for
an.C. pound: oh help me, my horse starteth, and had like to have vnsadled me,
let me sit faster for falling.


Ciuis. He is a burde iyed lade, I warrant you, and you are no good horse
woman, for I did never se you ride before, in all my life, but exercise will
make you perfect: your mother was a good horse woman, and loved riding well, as
any gentle woman that ever I knew in my life: well, she is gone, and we must
follow, this is the world.


Vxor. I never was so far from London in all my life: how far have we ridden
already sir I pray you?


Ciuis. Wife, we have ridde^ x. mile this morning


Vxor. What town is this: I pray you sir?


Ciuis. This is Barnet, whereas Samuel your son was nurssed: and yonder is
Richard Higmers house, we will see him as we do return home again, we will not
tarry now because every Inn is pestered with Londoners and carriers, and it is
early days: how like you this town Dame?


Vxor. A pretty streate, but me think the people go very plain, it is no city
as I do suppose by their manners: what house is this at the tounes end,
compassed with a Mote?


Ciuis. Here dwells a friend of ours: this is called the fold.


Vxor. What great smoke is in yonder wood God grant it be well.


Ciuis. It is nothing but making of Charcole, in that place.


Vxor. A wise coc^^^.
Why, is Charcole made? I had thought all things had be made at London, yet I
did never see no Charcoles made there: by my truth I had thought that they had
grown upon trees, and had not been made.


Ciuis. You are a wise woman, they are made of wood: but how like you this
Heath? Here was foughte^ a fearful field, called Palm Sondaie battle, in
King Edward the fowerth time, many thousands were slain on this ground, here
was slain the noble Earl of Warwick.


Roger. If it please your maistership, my grau^dfather was also here, with.xx.
talle men of the Parish, whereas I was borne, and none of the^ escaped, but my
graundfather only I had his bow in my hand many a time no man could stir
the string when it was bente: also his harnes was worn upon our saint Georges
back in our church, many a cold Winter after, and I hard my grandame tell
how he escaped.


Ciuis. Tell Roger I pray thee: how he did escape the danger.


Roger. Sir, when the battle was pitched, and appoincted to be foughten,
Barnet field.
nere unto this Windmill, and the Somons given by the Harottes of arms, that
spear, polax, black bille, bow and arrows, should be set a work the day
following, and that it should be tried by bloody weapon, a sudden fear fell on
my grandfather: and the same night when it was dark, he stale out of the earls
camp, for fear of the kings displeasure, and hid him in the Wood, and at
length he espied a great hollow Oak tree, with arms somewhat green, and
climbed up, partly through cunning, for he was a thatcher, but fear was worth
a ladder to him and then by the help of a writhen arm of the tree he went
down, and there remained a good while, and was fed there by the space of a
monethe, with old Ackors, and Nuttes, which squirelles had brought in, and
also did in his Sallet keep the rain water for his drink, and at length
escaped the danger.


Ciuis. So he might for any stripes that he had there: he was well harnessed
with a Tree, but I never read this in the Chronicle.


Roger. There be many things [and it shall please your Maistership] which are
not written in the Chronicles: I do think are as true, as Ihon your man do
read unto me, when we do go to bed* almost every night, I shall never
forget the^, farewell good Ihon


Ciuis. What are they Roger?


Roger. Marie sir, he told me in the old time, how Horses, Sheep, Hogs,
Dogs, Cattes, Rattes, and Mise did speak, and I do partly believe that,
for as much as our Parate will say, Parate is a minion, and beware the Catte:
and she will call me Roger, as plain as your Maistership, and although Dogs
have lost their speech, yet they do understand: when I do whistell, Trowle
will come, he will fetch my glove, my bolte in the water, or stoop, or lie
down when I bid him. And surely he which do understand, and here what I
do say, may speak also: but that there are so many languages now adays,
Dogs and women.
he ca^ not tell which to speak, and to leave all a lone, and turns all to
plain barkyng, as women do, when as they do fall from reasonyng into scoldyng.


Ciuis. Thou foolish knave, Three things ^onsidered in all creatures.
what meaneste thou to speak thus? Dogs did never speak, they do want
reason. For there are three things to be considered, in each living creature:
the first is vegitable, wherein man, Dog and tree, are all one. The second is
sensible, in this, man and dog are all one. The third is, where man excels
al other creatures, where he have reason and judgment, having act to do
well, and power to do evil: through this reason man do speak. The beast
wants reason, therefore he speaks not. etc. But Dogs are taught by
custom, and not moved by reason.


Roger. Well sir, our Ihons book shall confound your talk, for I did se it in
writing, and that which is written, I will believe and follow by Gods grace,
and no more.


Ciuis. Why, will you do no more for me, then I have commanded you by writing:
you are an honest fellow?


Roger. Rogers writing.
When I came to you first, you gave me a scroll of parchment, wherein said you,
do no more but as this commands, and I will ask no more of thee, but allow
thy service Now in case your Maistership with your horse, fell both into the
mire over the ears: if it were not in my writing, to help you both forth, I
have done you no evil service. Ha, ha, ha, how crack you this nutte?


Vxor. It were a good deed to crack your pate you saucie verlet: Gods dentie
Jack sauce whence came you?


Roger. Forsothe out of the country, Maistres nisibecetur, as fine as
fippence: how pretely you can call verlet, and swear by Gods deintie. God
bless you, I did never se you stomble before.


Vxor. Out roge and slave, auaunte villain, out of my sight knave.


Roger. I think you learned your Rhetorike in the vniuersttee of Bridewell:
you were never well wormed, when you were young.


Vxor. Sir, you do ride to fast: have you not heard what this honest man have
said to me?


Ciuis. Dame, all things must be taken in good part, I heard nothing^ if any
thing be amiss, at our return it shall be amended, we must have one riding
fool by the way, so that it be dooen merrily, and exceade not. Well, fellow
you do believe that beasts will speak, because it is written so of the^.


Roger. That I will, if that my Maistres will hold her peace, I will prove it.


Vxor. I pray you give ear to no soche trifles and lies, good housebande.


Ciuis. I pray you be content, it is as good to hear a lie, which hurts
not: as sometime a true tale that profits not. Tell on gentle Roger a Gods
name: ride nere, and let us be merry.


Roger. The tale of the Lion.
It so chanced in the pleasant time of May, a lusty young Lion after his
pray, or new eaten spoil, did lie him down to sleep, and yet being a sleep,
the beasts that were nere hand, did quake and tremble in beholding of his
most fearful cou^tenau^ce, and fled away. The poor cillie Mouse, crept out
of her small cave, and came softelie, thinkyng no harm, and played about the
Lion, and piped merely, wherewith the Lion awaked suddenly, and was angry,
caught the Mouse fortwith, thinking to have devoured it: Patience in poverty.
but this poor Mouse kneled down upon her knes, and held up her hands,
saying: I have offended your lordship, I pray you therefore forgive me, and
let me have my life, and ones I shall requite it you, whereat the Lio^ smiled,
and let her pass away in peace. Within few days, the same Lion was taken in
a strong Net, thinkyng never to have been delivered: and cried most
fearfully with desperacion. But gentle* Margerie Mouse, withal speed came
runnyng, and with sharp filed teethe, did gnawe and shred the strong cords,
which intrapped the Lion: wherewith he stood at liberty, and went his way.
This is true, when Mise and Lions did speak: I will abide by the same, sir if
it shall please your Maistership.


Ciuis. No surely, Lions nor Mise did never speak, Roger: Note this.
but some wise manne have written this to this end, that like as cruelty is
to be utterly avoided, even so ingratitude is to be abhorred. We may here by
consider, that very poor men in the time of trouble, may help the mighty
and strong, Ingratitude
and often times do in deed. Why should then the great lord, forget the
benefit of a poor grome, which many ways may pleasure him: (if ye simple
Mouse were from the Lion) then the gentleman were most wretched, in occupacion
and drudgerie most vile. If poor and simple men, in the time of extreme
persecucio^, by Gods providence have delivered the oppressed, which persecuted
or oppressed, since are come to great promocio^, both spiritual and
temporal, do forget the same benefits again It were not only the parts of
infidels, but also more ungrateful then beasts, as horses, which have
rescued their masters in battaill, and dogs, which would never eat after
their masters death, but die upon their graves. An other kind of ingratitude
is with Judas, when one bestow a benefit upon a man, the same manne to inuente
to murder his friend. Knauishe ingratitude.
As if a man in the time of cold, should find a snake; and for foolish pity,
put him into his bosom to warm him, I think his nature is to sting the man
Or if a Shepherde should bring a young Wolf up among his Lambs, and give him
Milk, surely he would fall to blood at length, and kill the Shepherde
himself? Mark this.



Roger. Sir, you have well expounded my tale, now I know your meaning: I
perceive it is not good keeping of soche unkind beasts, they are very costly
and perilous, and would have Jack Drakes medicene. Sir, Jack drake.
upon a time when quaklyng Duckes did speak, and He^hes kackling could talk,
which in deed are continual companions, because they are Fowls (Marie of
sondrie kinds, and names) for Duckes and all water fowls, do not only take
the benefit of goodly pondes, rivers, and pleasant waters, in the time of
hot Sammer, with many deintie meats, and at their pleasures, they do take
the commoditee of the land also. The land birds do but only live upon the
land as footmen: (as for Hawks and fleyng birds of the woodde, which daily
persecuteth each other, as murderers do innocents, or cruel rich men the
poor, that would live in rest, I meddle not withal.) Upon a time the Drake
with his Duck and his neighbors the Gese, Traitors.
being pleasantly disposed (as Judas was in plaiyng the traitor) only to
destroy the land fowls, to the end that they might enjoy, both land and
water together at their pleasure. Rogers obseruacion.
After the example of coueteous men, that would have all things in their
hands, and when one manne have any good profitable trade to live upon, they
will couette or use the same: although their poor neighbors do perish, and
that is the cause of much trouble good master, now adays that every calling
do pinche and poule each other, and where the hedge is lowest, that commonly
is sonest cast to ground, but the strong stakes, will stand in the storm. I
speak not of the lusty Lawiers, nor the mighty merchants, no, no, I will
observe nothing in them, let every Fat stand upon his own bottom.) Now
said the Drake to the land fowls: good cosins we are much bound unto you,
for your daily entertainemente in good chere, and daiely company: we with our
wives and children are much bound unto you, you are most natural unto us, we
daiely feed and take of your commodity, and come at our pleasures. Now
therefore, take part with us, and use your pleasure upon the Water, there is
plenty of young fry and fish, great store, Sallet herbs of sondrie kinds,
good against every wound or grief: both meat and medicen. etc. Oh Lord what
pleasure is there to be had, come sweet hearts, and let us take our progress,
to the pleasant river of Tagus, where as the sands of that s^od are precious
gold, there is both pleasure and riches, go and gather wealth and treasure:
here is poverty, there is sweetness, and here but stinkyng dunghilles, there
is liberty, and here in bondage, there is joy of the mind, and here daily
fear of the For that false traitor. Co^parisons.
This sweet tale pleased well the land fowls (as it is often times seen,
that fair words make fools fain) notwithstanding the Cock said unto the
Drake, Gossippe, our bringyng up, have been by land, and our fathers also, we
can not swim, we have no webbes in our feet to row withal as you have: we
fear drounyng. Whaat said the Drake? what needs these words among friends?
Use makes perfitenesse, we will teach you to swim by art, as well as we do
by nature (nothing is to hard to willing minds.) Well, let us go together,
have with you said the Cock, then very womanly the Ducke did take the Hen
by the hand following their housebandes, Merry when friends do meet.
which were arm and arm, walking before the Chickens, and the Ducklynges
followed in a goodly train, as it had been to a sumpteous Marriage, between
the Cocks eldeste soonne with the pale face, and the Drakes daughter with the
pretee foot: at the water side, the Drake with all the water fowls, did stope
low, and receive their carriage, and when they were all a kockehorse together,
Horsemen.
they went into the water. And eftesones, when the Drake gave his watch
word, the water fowls did all sincke at ones, and all the land fowls were
suddenly in a wrecke, and many of them perished, and some with much a do came
to land, as the Cock and the He^ne, which returned home with care and shame,
and lived long in lame^tacion, and remained solitary, without company of
water fowls: the For which had gains a both sides, made the league with a
learned oracion, painted full of Rhetorike between them: declaryng what unity
was between brethren, and the fruits and peace, and so reconciled the water
fowls to land, where was a feined truce, taken with much dissemblyng, yet
very good chere, shaking of hands, kissyng. etc. Great was the feast at the
Cocks place, the Nightyngale was there, to pleasure them with Music, much
daunsyng, and after the same a cosilie bankette: as you know the manner of the
water fowls, do commonly sit nere the ground, but land fowls do mount
up to perke, and so they did. And when all were at rest, secretly the Cock
sent by the Catte a token, to come and do execucion among the grateful
traitors: the Cat was glad, and ran to the Fox, finding him in sacrifice and
prayer, and shortly declared thambassage. The Fox at the first refused so
heinous and bloody a deed: declaryng his indifferency and rightousnesse like
a father, and also what eiuill opinion many creatures, causeles had in him.
Marie said he, I love the Cock and his wife very well: I also know how the
Water fowls have done, I have made the unity between them. I will therefore
not be seen in this matter my self, but two of my soonnes shall do the
feacte, go before, and clime in at the window, and open the door. So in fine
it was done, suddenly the water fowls paid for the Malte grindyng, and were
slain like flattryng ungrateful villains: and this is Ihon Drakes medicen.


Ciuis. This tale is well told Roger, I thank thee: ungrateful people and
flatterers be most wicked, and the children of Judas, if any man be
prepharred by an other man, and made rich: if this rich manne should forget
that benefit to his friend if he fell into poverty, whether would the poor
man's lack more vere him, or thingratitude of him that he has pleasured:
(which perhaps has said, if ever I have soche a Marriage, Note this note well.
yea or soche a ferme. And in case if he be of the clergy, soche a bishoprike,
prebe^darie. etc. thou shall not want as long as I can help, I will never
forget your courtesy, showed to me in these my days of trouble, how say
thou to this question Roger


Roger. ^nauerie.
Sir, saving your reverence, you may call it ingratitude: but slaundring no man
in my judgment, it is plain knauerie. Therefore it is good triyng of friends
before need do require, as the man which taught his son to kille a swine, and
put him in a sack all bloody, and secretly to prove his friends, which of
them would help, A friend at need.
not only to hide the slain man, but also help to co^uaie him in safety,
and to conclude, in the time of trouble, among many he found but one.


Ciuis. Marie God defend, Secret murder, openly punished.
that murder should be cloked by friendship, which although it be, yet God
often himself will take vengeance be it never so close, as example in Cain. I
like not this example of thine.


Roger. I have better in store, if you will here it.


Ciuis. Say on a Gods name, it is good passing the time, but me think we ride
to fast, we have day enough: how do you wife, what chere with you?


Vxor. Well sir, I thank you, I hear your talk well. God be with our fre^des
at home, and forgive our foes, and end these plagues at London, and amend al
people that through sin have moved God to plague us.


Ciuis. It is well said good wife. Amen. Amen. Remember your talk goodman
Roger.


Roger. A tale of a Friar.
Sir, in our country there was a man, which by occupacion was a Friar (or
Religion, whether you will) I did know him well, he wore a graie cote, well
tucked under his corded girdle, with a pair of trime white hose, the knave had
a good leg (for his brother was a Yeoman of the Guard, which was a great
wrestler) Marie this Friar although he did rise to the Quere by darcke night,
he neded no candell his nose was so read and brighte, and although he had but
little money in store in his purse, yet his nose and cheeks were well set with
currall and rubies: and I do remember, the gentleman had one great orient
perle in his right iye, he never traveled without Aquaeviti, and spectacles,
and fine Nedles with a quarter staff in his neck, which he called a bless
beggar, he had many proper colacions and pardons in store, he song his
prickesong very trime, he would have been loathe that any should have song one
note above him in the Quere, he was well-beloved in the country, specially
among women, a close man, he was never without a bale of dice, Marie he used no
foisting nor cogging, he played well at tables, The Friars delites.
and of all meats he most loved a fat Pigge and a pudding, but he might not
away to eat Communions, nor read the scripture, it ever went against his
stomach, but he was cockhope for Portas matters and cakes: I dare say he
could raise beelzebub and bring devils to crepe and crouche in a circle: also he
had the Foolosophers stone, and taught many his secrets therein. Upon a time
this holy Friar in the month of June traueiled in his pleasant prograce, with
his boie following him, which was in deed his sisters son, one young Renob by
name, Young Renob.
a pretty young stripplyng: and as they had walked from the morning, until
ten of the clock, after the Friar had said our lady Mattens, with a
Collect of s. Fraunces his patro^, he sat down under a hawthorne tree, to rest
with his boie also, and gave ear to the pleasant charm of sweet birds,
much commending the Coko, because she kept so constante her plain song, when
the Nightingale did sing the distant. Oh said the boie, this were Paradise, if
here were meat and drink for our relief, I would desire no better dwelling.
Yes said the Friar, it were better to be a Pope, which is above all men,
Angels and devils, which have the Keys of heaven gatts under his girdle: to
who^ the kings of the world do service. That is past my reche said the boy I
lack friends, age, and learning to take that dignity. Who will find fault
and if thou were the Pope my poor boie, said the Friar, by my preferment, what
kindness would thou show to me, being so much thy friend? sir said the
boie, you should be a Latro Cardinal on my right hand, (...) and Latro.
and be half with me in my kingdom, remember said the Friar your promise,
give me thy hand my lad. I promise thee I will make thee Pope. Uhe Popes
Patron.
Then he raised sir sathanas the patron of Popes, tra^sformed the tree where the
boie was into kyngly palace, with. S. Peter's throne, with infinite of the
clergy, among whom sat this young Pope, forthwith came the Friar in this
golden dream, very lowly he kneled and put the Pope in remembrance who he was,
and what he had done, hoping to be gratified, to whom sir Pope said, I know
thee not thou lousy beggar, and false Friar, I am descended of kingly
parentage, advanced by God and learning, away with thy black curse, away.
Pride will have a fall.
Forthwith the friar by subtle calculacion, withdrewe this delusion of his
master the devil, and the late pope with his po^pe became again the Friars
boie, sitting in a Birche tree, to whom the Friar said: now you false vile boie,
I know what you would have dooen, if you had been Pope. Come down in the
deuilles name, and carry my wallet. And first for your knauerie, I will make
you a ^anket of birche, and thus my young master was served in this sort.


Ciuis. Honors do change manners, yet pride will have a fall. I do remember
a poor young man, by fortune was advanced into promocion, to whom one of his
old fellows came, and spoke homely unto him, after the old fashion, as when
they dwelte together, in scorn the rich man answered disdainfully, after
this manner.

Take me as I am, and not as I was: We are now no fellows it is com to pass

To whom the other made answer thus again.

Sometime thou wart, yt now thou art not. And now thou art that tha^ thou werst
no^ And what thou shall be tell thou can not, A churl incarnate.
Although a churles heart, live you may not. Well, well, God send every ship
to a good Haven, and send us peace, and sease this plague, that we may
return home again to our old acquaintance, for this week I do remember.xx.
good fellows met together at one banquet, my very friends Merchants and
others: you know them well Roger, toward young men and honest, great doers,
close and just, witty I warrant you to prevent any prouiso in the love of
money, by month or year, no state or time will nip them, they can wisely color
the matter, for Roger, that is an art among merchants not to be reveled,
Closeness in Usurers.
God send me into their company again. Notwithstanding I have been no great
doer in lending forth money.


Roger. Master, it gives me in mine heart, that you shall never meet
altogether again.


Ciuis. Wherefore.


Roger. A tale of many Foxes.
Sir, upon a time a number of Foxes assembled together at a great banquet, where
as was great plenty of lambs flesh, hens. etc. In the end of the feast,
this blessed company loathe to depart, inquired of old Reinold the day,
wherein they should mete again to be merry: I will tell you said Reinard, when we
shall mete again, and so trained the^ up to an high mountain, where as there
were many high ways derived into sondrie countries, farewell said he my
children, and follow your fathers steps, go every one a sundry way, for we
shall never mete again at a banquet, until we do mete together in the Skineers
shop. Sir, I have wayed the matter, I warrante you it will prove so. One of
late departed, I will not name unto you, which is ded and buried, my fellow
Ihon did read his Epitaphe to me.


Ciuis. What was it I pray thee?


Roger. No sir, you will be angry then.


Ciuis. Surely, What wisemen should do to preserve health.
I will give no place to anger to chafe my blood: it is perilous in the
Pestilent time. For next to the seruyng of almighty God, and my Christian
duty to my neighbor: I will give my self only to mirthe, which is the
greateste iew^ll of this world.


Roger. Sir, thus it was, an Epitaph of one that was a great usurer, covetous,
merciless, and churlishe, but passing rich, he knew no end of his gooddes:
it made him look a lofte, and many louted full low at his presence. And thus
it was written of him.

An Epitaph of a covetous manne.
Here lies Gathrall that never did good, A gentlemanne degenerate, yet sprung
of good blood: Merciless, an usurer all the days of his life
An oppresser of poor me^, a mouer of strief:
A Papiste of religion, a soldiour of Rome,
Here dwells his carkas til ye day of dom
Deprived of riches, spoiled of fame,
Nothing left i^ memory, but an evil name
His judgment we co^me^de to ye s^at divine,
Yet he lived like a wolf, and died like aswine



Ciuis^ Who was this made upon, Roger I pray thee tell me.


Roger. Name no body.
No so God help me, I will not name him inquire it out: but I heard a friend of
mine say, that he had written a book against Extorcioners and Usurers,
which if they amend not, he will name them, and paint them forth, not only
them, but their parents, which are dedde, which used that vile trade of
usury, procuryng Gods vengeance, incasting the Pestilence upon citees,
tounes, and countrees. The fruictes of Usurie and Extorcion.
Causyng poverty, breaking up houses most auncie^te selling to lend upon
gain, destroiyng hospitality, with infinite incombraunces by forfitures
statutes. etc. Oh that the usurers goods were confiscated after their deaths
to the common poor, as in case they had slain themselves, and that they had no
power in law, to be will unto their children y^ which was gotten in seruyng the
devil, which would not prospere to the.iij. heir, for evil gotten goods are
evil spent said our eurat upon Sondaie. God grant.
Oh that the buriyng were turned into open castyng forth among ded cattle, and
not nombred in the christen fellowship after death, which in life have been
so wicked, so said our Eurate. Sir, you heard not how a man of late did let
forth his Cow by ye quarter, and by the year.


Ciuis. No, I pray thee tell me.


Roger. Of the Usurers Cow.
There was a man of late, which had one C. pound, which he called his Cow,
and secretly did lend her forth, sometime by the weke, and his price was.x.
shillinges the weke, and when her milk became derer, and many fasting days at
hand, he called for his Cow, and said that she gave in different milk. But
said he, I must put her into a better pasture, and she shall give more Milk
by.v. shilling in the weke. etc. and at length white meat became a little
better cheap, because of the great plenty of soche kiene in the town, Many
Usurers.
that his Cow was brought home again, because that she was letten so dear, now
because she had done him good service, and he had no more but her at home,
and calfe he had none by her to keep up the stock. His servant loved milk
well, and could get none of that Cow: when his master was from home, stale
the Cow and ran his way, and hitherto has not been found, neither Cow nor
man, and all the milk is gone.


Ciuis. A marvelous thing good lord? What would soche grasiers do, if they
had many cattle or Kiene in store?


Roger. They would destroy all a commonwealth, but we see what mischief they
have done.


Ciuis. It is time to bait our Horses in this town: if there be any good
meat, we will dine, prepare Roger, for we have far to ride this night.
Know what compaignie is in the Inn: and whether the house be infected or no?


Roger. Sir, I was in the haule, Of geastes in the Inn.
and there sits our host, a pleasant merry manne, and a good compaignion I
warrante him: I see by his nose, that of al potage he loves good ale, he is
mounsire graundpanche, he has chafed the Parsone woundrouslie, which with a
pair of spectacles, plaieth at tables with him, he steals fast the table men
from him. Our hosts has a sharp nose, thin lipped, a proper young woman,
with a shril voice like a Catte: but when she is pleased I warrant her to be a
pleasant woman, and full of meritrix. The good man of this house brings up
youth very well, Meritrix.
and is very loving to his soonne, and I perceive he will bear much with him.


Ciuis. Wherein?


Vxor. A young man well brought up.
When I came into the halle, my young master leaned upon his fathers shoulder,
with his cappe upon his hedde, sittyng and coughyng like a lought.


Ciuis. Call the chamberlain, and let us have a chamber severally.


Roger. With all speed a Gods name. Cha^berlain, prepare your chamber, with all
things accordingly in the same, for my master and maistres. Whip master
Ostiler with a cast of ligerdemain, bestirre you sirrah, and make.xij.d. of
three botles of stinkyng Haie and a pecke of Ottes. The honesty of an hostler.
You can make a stoned horse a gelding, and a long tail a curtall. You know
my meaning welenough: hem sirrah, I say nothing but mu^ I have seen you often
in Smithfielde.


Vxor. What, s^r sau^^, you take upon you to play the Comptroller: g^e qui^tly
about your own business, and let the Ostler alone.


Roger. Maistres, it is merry when knaves are met, I did see him ones ask
blessyng to xij. Godfathers at ones.


Ciuis. This is a comlie parlour, very netlie and trimly apparelled, London
like, A parlour.
the windows are well glased, and fair clothes with pleasant borders about
the same, with many wise sayings painted upon them.


Vxor. I pray you housband what is that writing in those golden letters.


Ciuis. Melius est claudus in via quam cursor praeter viam. That is, better is
an halting man which keeps the right way, then ye swift ronner besides, that
wandereth a straie.


Vxor. What is that man, I pray you?


Ciuis. Non hominis consuetudinem sed dei veritatem sequi oportet: which is.
The truth must be followed.
It behooves us not to follow the constitucions or customs of men, but to
follow the truth of Gods word. And also there is a good saying following
the same.

The best doctrine is Gods word.
Doctrinis varijs and peregrinis ne circumferamini. That is: be not led or
carried about with diverse or strange doctrine. Here is more following, written
upon the chimney good wife, which I will keep in store. Oh God what serpents
they are, lord defend me from them. I will read it to my self. O mulier omne
facinus ausa est plus quam omne, verum nihil est peius, nec erit vnqa^ mulierae
inter hominum calamitatis.


Vxor. Mulier is a naughty word, said the gentlewoman.
Well man, well, truth seeks no corners, I perceive there is some noughtie
matter, that I know not, but by one thing that I do here, you read, make me
think all the rest is not well, because the first word is stark naught: and
that is. O mulier, which I am sure is, nor ever was good. I pray you
husband, what picture is that following.


Ciuis. Oh wife, it was the picture or Effigium of a noble man, which in his
days served a most noble king, and was like the cutter down of trees by the
ground. But if God had not upon some see ete purpose, The Lord Crumwell.
prevented his labor in the wood of Antichriste, he would have utterly
eradicated the roots with all Papistrie, which daielie spryngeth out in every
corner, to the hurt of better fruictes, but by Gods grace they shall be
confounded as God will.


Vxor. What picture is that, This picture signifies great clerks evil
occupied in keeping silence.
which have a graie hoar head, a long goune, and a lock of gold linkyng his
lips together: with many goodly books before him, and a pair of blind
spectacles upon his nose, with a golden pen fallen from his hands.


Ciuis. Oh wife, wife, it is a Candell covered with a Bushel, and the noble
Talente of wisdom hidden, which must make great accomptes, for keeping
silence.


Vxor. Sir, in that table environed round with antikes of sondrie portratures,
the ground thereof is hoping Russet are three pictures black scholar like, or
in morning clothing the first of them with a Rake in his hand with teeth of
gold, do stoop very low, groping belike in ye lake after some thing that
he would find, and out of this deep water above the Rake a little steple. The
golden Rake.
The second gapeth up toward the heaven, holdyng the lap of his goune
abroad, A gaper. A catcher.
as though he would catch something, and to wards the same lap or spread goun
does fall, as it were a church with a stiple and quere. etc. The third man
stands in poor apparel, A poor man.
with a book in his right hand, and his left hand upon his breast, with a
lamentable countenance, in simple apparel: what means this housebande?


Ciuis. Dame, I dare say but little to this matter to others, but to you, I
will speak a little, I mean no honest or learned men.
and not so much as I do think. The first man is one, that has but a very
small learning, lesser wit, and less honesty, he has no virtue to prefer him
to living, but only the name and title of a priest or minister he would fain
have a benefice or personage of some pretty donatiue, he cannot get it at the
Bishops hands, he lacks Gods plough. This fellow raketh with the Devils
golden rake, Magus and Judas.
even in the conscience of the covetous patrons, or confounders heart which
gives the benefice, he plaieth Simon Magus, he will bie it, and with Judas the
other will sell it, and at length it is gotten for gold, and spent with
wickedness, to the slander of the church: God defend us from soche rakers and
Simoniakes. The second is sick of the mother, and like unto heirs, when as
the fathers have left them fair lands, they mourn of the chine, and are
never contented but wimper and whine, Children sick of the mother remedy is the
gallow^s.
until the mothers are ded, and when it so comes to pass, their wicked
covetousness by one means or other, comes to shame and poverty. This honest
man gapeth for a vouson of a benefice before it is fallen, and does catch it
or it comes to the ground, before the death of the discombent. He will not
suffer it to fall into relappe. This man is a steward to a great man, or keeps
his hall, garden or barnes, or is a wiseman and a good husband. Look where his
master is patron, there he hops to be person. He gathers for his young
masters, his patrons son: his patron must be his executour, or some of his
masters kinsmen. This fellow walloweth in benefices, as the Hedgehog does with
apples upon his pricks, and has the benefit but of the apple in his mouth:
he gets nothing of his promocions, but only one little benefice, yet his
master will snatche at that, either to save the wol or la^: Patrons Charlice.
And so he has only the shells or glorious tittes of promocion, Spiritual
promocion.
but the geuer has the sweet kernels: God amend this good wife. The third is,
one which shows the state of learned men, laboring long time in study and
divine virtue, which are wrapped in poverty, wanting the golden Rake, or
gaping mouth.
This man has very few to prefer him to that promocion, he smites himself
upon the breast, Symonie.
he wepeth and lamenteth, that vice should thus be exalted ignorance rewarded
with glory, coueteous men spoilyng the Church by the names of Patrones and
geuers, Note this.
which are extorcioners and sellers, they care not to who^, so that it be
raked. Well, well, God of his mercy, amend this evil Market.


Vxor. A Judges Skin.
Upon that wall is painted a man's skin, and tanned, colored like unto Leather,
with the skin of the hands and feet, nails and here remainyng, and the skin
is spread abroad, in the which is written certain words, which I do not
understand.


Ciuis. Wife, I wish more soche leather, or else fewer soche carcases, as soche
leather has contained in it. It is the Skin of a wicked Judge, a Lawier,
which played on both hands. A wicked Judge his reward.
This ge^tleman loved gold above God, and cruelty above Justice: both his
ears were stopped, his iyen open, he had respect of persons: specially who
brought in lucre, and made him humble courtesies, them he would defend, although
their causes in righteousness deserved it not. The innocent he oppressed that
wa^ted, A good prince
and undid many a man. His master being a great prince (in the whole multitude
of the people, and specially of the Lawiers, to certify them. Money do great
mischief in this world
And to decline from evil and do good, to have the ears open, to hear both
rich and poor alike, in the seat of judgment, to have lame hands in
taking of money, which is the root of al evil among them.) Commanded his
Skin to be flain from his flesh, he being yet living, roaryng with blood
runnyng from his body, and died in a case most miserable. Upon whose Skin is
this writing, hangyng in the Judgment halle, before the place of Justice.

Iudex qui non queret veritatem, debet excoriari. A Judge which will (for
lucre) not seek out the truth (in the law) ought to have his Skin flaine from
his body.


Vxor. Here stands a woman of most excellent form in shape, and fairenes in
beauty, with a croune of rich gold, with seven precious stones, fixed in the
border of her croune, covered with a costely mantell from her pappes dounward,
her breasts naked the right breast gives milk unto ye mouth of the young child
on the right side. And from the left breast flows blood, into the mouth of an
other child: what means this?


Ciuis. It is a goodly picture, and signifies the estate of an university, or
multitude of scholars, which comes to be nourished in lerning. Uniuersitee,
the fruictes thereof.
Which mother the university, being crouned with the seven liberal arts,
fixed in her croune: and as many as taste of her doctrine, in the better part
in virtue, to this end to do well be blessed, they do taste upon the right
breast, but the left breaste, yeldeth forth doctrine of Errors, Magiches,
Papistrie. etc. To this end to persecute, rob and spoil Christ's Church:
God grant that both these breasts may give good milk, One pure well, gives
but clean water.
to nourishe the people of God, in one holy doctrine to each vocacio^, to agree
in unity like brethren, and that the vniuersitees may teach the learned
acts, and ^ne true religion in this Christ our lord.


Vxor. What is that picture, which graffeth a golden Impe, upon a Leaden
stock, with a bag of money of great bigness, hangyng about his neck?


Ciuis. It should seem to be a pitiful case, it is a noble covetous Senior,
which for goldes sake, do make dispargiment of his blood, mariyng and sellyng
his son and heir, unto some Extorcioner, or shameless usurers daughter,
Note also ye virtue and gentleness makes a gentlemanne.

Euenso ancient bloodde wrapped in vice* is but gross gentleness.


whose fruits are so infected on the mothers side, that they will become as
counterfecte, crafty compounded metal, and never come to the true touch
stone again. The fine metal is so corrupted through coueteousnesse and
natural^e coniunccion, as we do se graffes of trees, (fix young Impes)
although the Impe be of a fine Pippin, and graffed into an evil stock. You
shall know that fruit by the tree, a plague prepared for gentlemen, for their
abuse.


Vxor. Upon that Table before you, is painted a naked manne, liyng down
wounded, upon whom feeds many Flies with fulle bealies, and there comes an
other man, which with a green branch of Rosemarie, beat them away.


Ciuis. A Metaphor
It should appear by the circumstaunce, that it is not hurtful to keep
officers still in place: for when they have filled their purses, and have all
things accordingly, The hongrie Fly will fill his beal^^e.
they are well, and if they be removed eftesones, the new hongrie Flies will
vere the body of the common wealth, and never cease until they be also
satisfied. etc.


Vxor. Yet what is that man I pray you, that sits in a rich throne a
sleep, and one do blow in his care, with a pair of golden bellows, and an
other do pick his purse?


Ciuis. Flattery of noble men.
That same is a mighty person, overcome with adulacio^ or flattery, careless,
swimmyng in pleasure and vainglorie, whom his men do use like an home Comb,
and daiely spoil him of his riches, by sondrie frauds, which he perceives
not.


Vxor. And what means yonder Mule, holding his hedde so low: with a plain
black foot clothe, shodde with golden shoes?


Ciuis. Wife, silence now is best: I will say nothing to the matter. Who shall
shoe the Mule.
The Mule carries a Master, that will do nothing but for gold, and the
fools of the world, that love debate and strief, must shoe this Mule.


Vxor. Here is a row of pictures like Prelates painted one by an other in the
border, in three parts. The first are barefooted men barehedded, long
garments, and books in their hands, some of them are bloody. The second
company are mitred, and shode with Shepherdes hooks in one hand, and books
in the other hand. The descripcion of the Romish Church.
The third sort have Sw^ordes in their hands, crouned with triple crounes,
clothed in kyngly robes, with frounyng faces, and books under their feet: and
next after them sits an old mangie slave naked, with a triple croune,
making or patchyng of a Net, from whom goes as it were, men laden with
tounes, wooddes, and treasure.


Ciuis. The description of the prelates of the Roomishe Church.
Wife, this is the true Church of God, and the malignaunte Sinagoge of
Antichrist figured: first the true Preachers and martyrs of Gods church,
simple men, which followed most nerest the testament of Christ. After this
persecucion, then entered Confessors, good men, which lived well, and
according to the Apostles doctrine: were good Shepherdes, withstoode the Wolves
of heresies. etc. Kept hospitalitee, and live accordynglie, and were as Lambs
and good Wheat. Then for the sins of Princes, and wickedness of men, came in
Wolves among Lambs, Darnell choked the Lords field: oppressors of Princes,
emptiers of Purgatory, and ^illers of hell, raisers of debate, shedders of
bloodde, makers of Martyrs, men of war, destroiers of the true church,
erectours of Idolles, usurpers of kingdoms, and treaders of Gods truth under
their vile sect: The Popes meekness.
which sect kings have kissed soche is the pride of the Pope.

Then the Pope sits all naked woorkyng: now through Gods word, Antichrist
is reveled, and seen what he is, foul lothlie clothed in shameful decrees,
wicked laws and filthy life, and is despised of many nations, save of his
own children. Now patcheth his old Bottelles, which will keep no new wine:
neither ca^ he well piece Christ's pure clothe, and his ragged tradicions
together. The Popes practice.
Neither will his Net pleasure the Church, in which Net he have taken the
servants of Christ, shed their bloodde. He may be rather called a murderer,
then a fisher, he never had saint Peter's Net, since the Pope came to the
church of Rome: now clouteth he a net, with his rotten Decrees, Counsels,
glosing it with Gods word. Like the Angel of darkness, transeformed into
the similitude of an angel of light: but his nakedness is seen, for all his
title of his holiness, and rich Croune. The Popes almose deeds.
Now as many as will not obeie his maistership, he gives away their
kingdoms, dukedomes, provinces and gooddes, after the example of his patron,
not Peter, which forsook worldly things, but rather satan, which would have
given Christ much riches, to have honored him. But the lands of Princes,
Popes Portars.
are so heavy to be carried with his Portars: and also to hot to be trodden
upon, of any of his messengers, his Net is very good, to catch the great
Onele withal, and some of his lawless country men, to store the Popes holy
pondes at Rome.


Vxor. I will ask but one or.ij. questions, and now our diner is ready, I pray
you. What means yonder Shepherd to clippe the Sheep so nere, that he bledeth:
it is well painted.


Ciuis. Coueteous Landlordes.
It seems a coueteous land lord, that do so oppress the tenant with fine,
rent, bribe. etc. whereby he and his family, doo^ live in great misery like
slaves, with continual penury, and affliccion of mind, and he will never
suffer the woll to grow, to the full staple, at length to his own decay


Vxor. A fool.
What means yonder fool that stand upon the tree, and cutteth the arm a
sonder, whereupon he stands, with a sharp axe, and is falling down?


Ciuis. Under that predicament is comprehended all traitors against Princes:
children against parents, Rebels and knaves.
servants against Masters, poor against rich, tenau^tes against lords.
etc. Whereupon they do live, and have their stay in this world, and will sek^
their hurtes, which in deed is their own decaie, loss and destruction in the
end.


Vxor. Good God, what means that bloody naked picture, with a sharp rod
in each hand, woundyng his body, and spoiled of all his apparel.


Ciuis. God send peace in the christen realms good dame. That do signify
by the circumstaunce of some old wise painter, Peace and unity God send us.
that when the body or state of any Realm, or Realms of vicinite or
nerenesse together, being as hands to one body, or helpers to each other. If
they be at strief, the whole body, whereupon they are derived, shall eftsoon
through the same be ruinated and brought into peril. In this matter I will
talk no further as now: let us go to diner a Gods name. Roger, what good fellow
is here, to keep me and your maistres company


Vxor. Houseband, in this fine border is curiously painted a house builded of
stone, and with many strong doors and windows, barre^ and railed with strong
iron bars. Ludgate.
And before one of the doors standing a man, with a yelowe cappe, in a plain
poor coat with white sleues, and a little boie stands behind him with a
fair goune in his arms, Make shifts
merchant like, in a fine black cap, and over the door is written. Veritas
non querir angulos. I know not the meaning.


Ciuis. In deed truth seeks no corners, as these evil disposed vile thieues
do, although it was meant to help some honest decayed citezens, that they
should not be utterly destroyed of pitelesse creditours, but after they might
rise up again. Seignior w^^ters.
Now the ba^kerote is induraunce, has lost his credence, he is in prison,
where as his crede^ce is spoiled and gone, Happy privilege, and subtle
practice.
no man will trust him. But that inn has a privilege to increase many
gestes by this means. That they may have liberty, with a little Applesquire
to be his keeper, which changes his apparel and countenance, crepyng into
corners, making bergaines in every place, taking up every commodity, refusing
nothing, al is fish that comes to the net, he sets hand and Seal to
every thing, Perilous th^euish bankeroutes.
he swears he would not loose his credence for thousands, he gives sweet
words, he knauishly robs, undoes, spoileth, the widow and the honest
pitefull marchaunte or true citezen, and when he has undone them, he runs
to his place again, as the Fox does to his hole, and lives by the spoil.


Vxor. What means this strange picture, here stands a man double, or
in.ij. twins, back to back, the one side is lusty, fair, rich and young,
and beautiful. Young and folishe, old and beggarly.
The other side seems sick, ^oule, poor and old, in the young man's hand was
a grasshopper, and in the old man's, an Ante without fete.


Ciuis. In that table is lively declared mankind, both the time of his youth in
felicitee, with the careless grasshopper, gathers nothing but spoileth: house,
land. etc. in bankettes, dice, apparel and harlottes. etc. And when age
comes, he would be thrustie, and then ca^ get no more, then the lame
footeles ante. Then makes he exclamacio^, saying oh what gooddes did my father
leave me? A wretch that refused good counsel in time.
What good counsel my fre^des gave me, but I esteemed none of them both, but
in fine lost both riches and friends. And now I am in great poverty, sickness
and age Let other men take example by me, and remember the wisdom of
Solomon, saying: Vade ad formicu^ o pigar and considera vias eius, and disce
sapientiam. etc. Go thou idle body to the Ante, consider and mark well her
ways, A lesson for ^ ^ubber.
and learn wisdom, she has no gide, prince, nor law geuer, but gathers in
so^mer, to keep her in winter. etc.


Vxor. There is also painted a lusty young man, (...) down to a vessel, in
which swimmeth both Eles and Snakes, he seems ^o catch one of them: what
means that?


Ciuis. Ha, ha, ha, it is merrily handled forsothe it is one that is overcome,
either with love or coueteousnesse. ^.
He goes a woyng, my dyng, dyng: and if he spedeth my darlyng, what gets he
my swetyng? Forsooth, either a serpente, that will styng him all his life with
cruel words, or else sweet heart with pleasant speech, that when he thinks
her most sure, Well fished.
he has but a quick Ele, you know where. Ha, ha, ha.


Roger. Sir, there is one lately come into this hall, in a grene Kendale cote,
with yellow hose a bearde of the same color, only upon the upper lip* a
russette hatte, with a great plume of strange Feathers, and a brave scarf
about his neck, in cut buskins. Mendax is described.
He is plaiyng at the trea trippe with our host son: he plaieth trick upon
the gittarne, and dance Trechmore, and Heie de Gie, and tells news from
Tera Florida. He looks a squinte, I did see him give the good man, a piece of a
Unicornes horn, good against poison: he seems a pretty Scholar. But I heard
him pray the chamberlain in his ear, to lend him.vj.d. upon a pressing iron,
which cha^berlain refused the gage.


Ciuis. Roger, call him into diner, it is some pleasant fellow, and lacks
money belike, through travail, Well taken.
the poor man is driven to his shifts, and would make other men merry, when
he wepeth in his heart.


Vxor. Good housebande, A good wife.
call in some grave compaignie. What should soche Iackes and tossepottes do
here? He seems to be some thief or ruffin. Fie on him varlet, fie, fie.


Roger. By our lady I will fetch him into diner: he is a good companion for
me. We shall hear news. News.



Ciuis. Go thy ways quickly.


Roger. A gentle gretyng.
Sir, my master and my maistres, pray pour maistershippe, to take the pains
to come to their chamber: where as you shall be heartily welcome, to their diner.


Mendax. Sir, I will wait upon the^: but first I will upon this Whetstone,
sharp my knife.


Roger. Sir, here is this gentleman come: to keep you compainie.


Ciuis. He is most heartily welcome, set him a chair, give him a trencher and
a napkin: I pray you take part of soche as God have sent, if it were at London,
I might make you better chere, but here I can not.


Mendax. Here is good chere. Mendax do begin.
I was there within these.x. weeks, that I would have given x^. shillinges for
soche a lofe as this: whereas no soche chere was to be had.


Ciuis. Where was that, I pray you gentle Master: I can not tell what to call
you, nor of what country you are?


Mendax. Sir, I was borne nere unto Tunbrige, where fine knives are made, my
name is Mendax, a younger brother, linially descended of an ancient house,
Mendax his arms.
before the Conquest. We give three Whetstones in Gules, with no difference,
and upon our creste a left hand, with a horn upon the tho^be and a knife in
the hand. The supporters are a Fox on the one side, and a Friar on the other
side. And of late I travailed into Terro Florida, whereas I felt both wealth
and woe: the black Ox never trod upon my foot before, a Dog have but a
day. A Ruffian.
We are borne all to travail, and as for me I have but little to lose: yet I
am a ge^tleman, and can not find in my heart, to play the slave, or go to
Carte. I never could abide it by the Mass.


Ciuis. You speak like a wiseman, I perceive by your behauor, Ironia.
you have been well brought up. I pray you where is that land?


Mendax. Many.c. miles beyond Torryda Zona, or the Equinoctial line: In the
longitude nere unto the Pole Antartike. Terra Florida^ described by Master
Mendax.
It is.xvij. M. miles long, and is in the part named America, and by the way
are the Islandes called Fortunata, or Canaria, whose West parts be situated in
the third climate.


Ciuis. It was a dangerous travail into that country: where landed you, at
what place?


Mendax. We sailed to the Islandes of Portum sanctu^, and then to Medera, in
which were sondrie countrees and Islandes, as Eractelentiae, Magnesortis,
Grancamariae, Tenereffe, Palmae Ferro. etc. And our Capitain went with his
soldiers to land, and at our first coming nere unto a river, in one of these
Islandes: as we refreshed our selves among the Date trees, in the land of
Palms, by the sweet Wells, we did to the great fear of us all, se a great
battle between the Dragon and the Unicorne, A battle very profitable.
and as GOD would, the Unicorne thrust the Dragon to the heart: and again the
Dragon with his tail, stonge the Unicorne to death. Here is a piece of his
horn, the blood of drago^s is rich: that battle was worth two.C. marks to
our capitain. Then we traueilled further into Tenriffa, into an excedyng high
mountain, above the middle region: whereas we had great plenty of Alom. And
might well hear an heavenly Hermonie among the stars, He was nere the
stars.
the Moon was nere hand us with marvelous heat. And when we came down at the
hill foot, grow many gross herbs, as Lo^ege, Laserpitium, Acanthus, and
Solanum, and whether it was by the eating of Solanum beries or no, there was a
very mighty man naked and hearie, in a great sleep, whom we ge^tly suffered
to lie still. He had a great ^earde, in which a bird did breed, and brought
her young ones meat. No lie, no lie
Our capitai^ declared unto us, that the spialles had vewed the la^d, and how
that our enemies were at hand. The next day most fearful people, painted
with sondrie colors, approached in strange beasts skins, with Flinte, so
were their shaftes and Darts, with whom we fought and slew, and took some:
and yet the people so assaulted us, that with much difficultee, we recovered
our barks. And then we sailed forth, and chance to let fall our soundyng
lead new ^allowed, whereupon did slicke gold, with all speed we sent down
our Deuers, and so within three days we gathred thirty hogsheddes of five
gold: besides two buttes of orient Pearls, all the shore was full of
Currall. From thens we sailed to the great Isle, Me^dax brings good tidings
of treasure and richesse, and where it is.
called Madagastat in Scorea, where were kings, Mahumitaines by religion,
black as Deuilles: Some had no heddes, but ^yen in their breasts. Some when
it rained, covered all the whole body with one foot. The land did abound in
Elephantes teethe: the men did eat Camiles and lions flesh. Musk and Zeuet in
every place did abound: and the mother of perle the people made their
platters, to put in their meat, they dwell among spice, the ground is moist
with oil of precious trees. Plenty of wine out of grapes as big as this
loffe: much Peper, they can not tell what to do with sugar: but that their
merchants of Maabar, twenty days journey of, do come and take of their
gooddes frankly for nothing, but some of them do bring iron, to make edge
tools, for which they have for one pound, twelve pound of fine gold. Their
pottes, pannes, and al vessel is clean gold, garnished with Diamondes. I did
see swine feed in them.


Ciuis. Did you see no strange Fowls there, and Fishes?


Mendax. In the Isle called Ruc, in the great Canes land, I did see Mermaides
and Satyrs, with other fishes by night, come sower miles from the sea, and
climed into trees, and did eat Dates and Nutmegges, with whom the Apes and the
Babians had much fightyng, yellyng and criyng. The best meat and the worste
meat.
The people of that land do live, by eating the flesh of women. In this
land I did see an Ape play at ticke tacke, and after at Irishe on the tables,
with one of that land: and also a Parate, give one of their gentle women a
check mate at Chesse.


Ciuis. God keep me from those cruel people.


Mendax. Birds of strange kinds.
But sir, as for birds they are not only infinite in no^bers, but also in
kinds: some voices most sweet, and some most fearful. Nightingales as
big as Geese, oules greater then some horse: and there are birds that do
lie in a rock, where Dragons are, whose Feathers in their wings are thirty
foot long, the quill as big as a Canon royal. Also I heard Parates despute
in Philosophy. Fresh in Greek.


Ciuis. I pray you, is there any plenty of precious stones?


Mendax. Uerie many, but hard to come by, but in the Island Zanzibar, is much
plenty of Ambergrise, Ambergrise as plentiful as claie.
that they make claie for their houses withal, there if we had holden
together like friends, we might have gotten a great kingdom. Oh my heart, it
makes it blede, when I do remember it: every man is but for himself, you may
consider what division is. Emeroddes, Rubbies, Turks, Diamondes and Saphires,
Precious stones most plentifully.
were sold when we came thither first, for the weight of iro^ A.M. rich
Turkesses were sold for.iiij.d. to be short, one with an other after three
shillynges and four pence a pecke. Our men gathered up Carbuncles and
Diamondes with rakes, under the spice trees. Diamondes gathred with Rakes.



Ciuis. How chance you brought none home into this realm?


Mendax. Oh sir, we filled.ij. ships with fine gold, A great loss, it have
undone all England.
iij. ships with Ambergrise, Musk and Unicornes horns: and.ij. talle barks
with precious stones, and sailed by the Adama^t stones, which will draw iron
unto them and so cast away the greateste riches in Heathenes or christendom.
After that euel chance, we came upon the main land of Cuba, in the great and
mighty land of America, where as the people called the Canables, do dwell in
caves, rocks and woods, there as women will eat their own children, and one
man an other, and they ar Giauntes most high and fearful: Cruel women
all go naked, they neither know good humanitee human policy, religion,
law, nor chastity. One is equal with an other, the strongest of body are
chief, A good common wealth.
for there all is ruled by force, and not through reason: after the manner of
swine. Children love their fathers no more then pigges do the boores, for they
say, lust causes generation. And when their parents are very old, they
bring the^ to an exceeding high mountain, whereas is a great tower builded upon
a rock, under which tower is the golden mine, in which mine there be ij. great
monstrous drago^s keeping the same, The price of gold.
which will never suffer the children to come to receive the benefits of that
place, until soche time as they have slain their parents, and cast their
flesh into the cave, and wash the Dragons Images, which are within that tower,
made of precious wood, with the blood of their said parents. From thence we
traue^led into an Islande, where as it never raineth but ones a year, and that
is in the month of July, whereas Nylus runs, by giving benefit unto the
plain country, where as spice of all kinds does grow. In that Island does
grow Hoppes most plentifully, which they do call Lupilu^. A little before
our coming, was a great wind, which had shaken down much fruit and
precious spice, A miracle of double Bear.
and many hundred carte lodes of good Hoppes: after which fell down ple^tie
of rain, raising a mighty flood, incontinent succeeded a burning heat, for it
is under the Equinoctial line, or Torrida Zona. Where it remains double Bee^.
In fine, through this concoction of the sun moving this boiling of the water,
through the help of much Spice, I never drank soche Hippocras, Wine, nor
Beer. The Flemynges have found out the commodity, A feast for Fleminges.
and caren to transport no more Hoppes hither unto us. And if good luck had
been our good lord, we had made our selves and all the christian kingdoms for
ever.


Ciuis. Alas, alas, what was that I pray you tell me, I am sorry that you and
your friends have traueled thus long, and have been in daungier for nothing.
But I perceive you have been a great traueler, and have seen many Countrees,
Woods and Rivers.


Mendax. Non finis erit si prosequar omnia verbis, Loquax.

Flumina and specos, ca^pos siluasque lucusque*
Colles apricosque siunosque vndeque portus.
Omnia sunt vidi. Now let them go, I have seen those things and manymo. Sir
in the lands beyond Cuba, or as the Cosmographars call Lamiam or Ianica^,
where as the people do curse the Sun at noone because it burns them. There
are many Islandes among them. There is a fletyng Island, A new Ilelande that
swimmeth, coming from Paradise.
swimming above the sea, by what means I know not, whether occasioned by
corcke, Wolle. etc. it would by the wind shift from place to place. Some said
it was a shreed of the banks of Paradise, broken through the forse of ganges,
and so in continuau^ce brought down: it was not broad. In that Isle were but
few people, and the men of that place do by proper art, with a sharp Flinte
stone worm the women, and pretelie cut their tongues, Women have worms in
their tongues.
and take forth a small Serpente a live, and heal their tongues again with
herb Grace. This Island has many rich stones, gold and spice in it, with
precious trees, as Agallicum and Guiacum. Guiacum.
In that Isle, there had been some French men, whose skins were clean cast
of, in the manner of Snakes, Marie they were full of hooles. This Guiacum did
much pleasure to the^ belike. But as we were deuisyng how to steal this
land away, and bring it forth to the maine Sea with our Pilottes, two
things let our purpose. A great loss.
The one was, the haven mouth was to straight. The second, the people were to
vigilant, and let our purpose. But I trust, I and my compaignio^s will
make one lusty voyage and give an onsette for all: we will either win the
saddle, or lose the horse. We are none but good fellows, of my part I will do
what lies in me, to make many prentises free, An honest fellow.
and cause other good young gentlemen in sellyng their land, to get thousands.
If men knew as much as I do in this matter, they had rather venture the
best iointe, then be from thence, it is almost heaven, and if we do want
by the way, let every man keep close, and there we may chance to find
some little fletyng Islandes by the way, Pirates, heirs of wapping for their
snappyng.
wherein good Sugar, spice, Silk, Linen. etc. do grow, ready made, and that
will make ready money: and money makes a man. Oh that young men would
believe me, and follow me, I would make them Lords.


Vxor. Good housebande bearken in your care, I would speak with you sweet
heart.


Ciuis. Speak on your mind good Susan: what is the matter woman?


Vxor. Sir, this is a blind iyed shameless ruffe^, a roge, I warrante him, and
a thief. This knave is hable to make children run from their parents,
servants rob their masters, young heirs to sell their lands, men to run
from their wives, and women also. You may know by his Arms of what stock he
comes, She describes a ruffian
I warrant him from drouning, and diyng of the Pestilence. Oh villain, he
will be hanged. I dare say he knows al kinds of thieves, vagabondes, rouers
and hasarders. I like not his words, nor his braggyng countenance, let us
hence.


Ciuis. Well, much good do you, you have taken much pain, but small
profit, you have travailed far, and may speak by aucthoritee. Come take
away, pay the reconyng: Roger, horse, horse, and away.


Roger. All things are ready sir.


Ciuis. Well rid of evil store.
Fare ye well gentle friend.


Mendax. I thank you of your gentle company, good gentleman.


Vxor. Whose fair field is yo^der, Fair fields
I would fain know it, and let trifles pass, I will not believe them: let
foolish things go, and talk of matters profitable.


Roger. Maistres, do you not know it? it is my masters, I am his baily there:
he had a good bargain, I assure you, it was in morgage to him this ij. years,
I would he might find the like purches: al yonder town is his, he has raised
the rent one.C. marks a year more then it was. There were good liyng in the
plague time: Honest landlordes, God amend them
for there are large pastures, and the houses are down, saving the manner
place, for the carles have forfeited their leses, and are gone a begging like
villains, and many of the^ ar ded for honger.


Vxor. Whose Oxen are these, Roger.


Roger. My masters also, for he yt has money shall have land and worship: my
master is a close wiseman, A net for fools.
and lies in the wind of the^ that will buie money for land: he can handle a
young ge^tleman trimly, and ride him with a golden snaffle, A horse master.
he knows upon which side his bread is buttered well enough, I warraunt
you, my master rised so earelie this morning, that he noddeth as he rides


Vxor. Sir, me thinks you totter as you ride, what are you a sleep? Do you
not hear your man's praiyng? He is pleasantly disposed, he would make me
believe, that you were a great landed manne, and had much cattle in store:
why sir, how do you that you speak not to me?


Ciuis. Feaer and dread.
Wife, wife, God send us good luck, do you not see yonder cloud in the West
toward the North, coming hither?


Vxor. Most fearful God send us good luck sir, it is a sudden change, I
will hide my face, it fears me so much.


Roger. I am forty years old, but I did never se the like, but ones, and
that was between Godmichester and Gogmanshill, a little from Cambrige, as I
traueiled to Wolpit fa^re, Roger did se visions.
to buy Coltes, and there appeared a strange form, as me thought, a great
number of steples were broken: and many naked Friars, Bishops, and the Pope him
self did wring their hands, A pitiful case
in ragged clothes, they looked all very lean: and then it thundered and
lightened, in which storm many Geese were killed, and also sheep and Lambs.
The year after was the tumbleyng down of Abbaies, and the reformacio^ for the
Church matters: but this passes, for the precious passion of Christ, let us
ru^ away with speed. I do se a fearful thing in ye clouds appering, a
black lene naked body, very long, ridyng upon a pale miserable foul jade,
Death appears with.iii. Darts.
he has also.iij. darts in his left hand, the one is cole black, the other
blood red, and the third is a dark pale, he has no flesh upon him: me
thinks that I do se a great fire, and many fearful monsters in the same
follow him, with a fearful voice, saying: all the wicked shall come to us. We are swallowed in the second death.


Ciuis. Let us take this house, ride apace; the storm does begin most
fearful, God help us, what shall we do, or whether shall we fly? Jesus,
Jesus, what a thu^der is this, A great thunder.
as heaven and earth should go together: Lord how the lightnyng falls from
heaven, all this regio^ is upon a flaming fire, the birds fall from the trees,
look how the cattle tremble, and trees are pulled up by the roots, and the
houses are burnt with celestial fire.


Vxor. Let us depart from these trees, for I have heard say, to sit under a
white thorn, is most safe and surest in a tempeste: I have many goodly iuels
against lightnyng, as the Carbuncle, Witchcrafte.
Hemoralde, Hiasinthus, with Amber and gold: God and S. Barbara defend us: I
have a S. Iho^s Gospel about my neck, and a pair of braselettes of Coral
about mine arms, Oh God defend us: I am sorry that we came forth.


Roger. Master and Maistres, come into this vallie, and let us sit in that
same deep close pit, under the hill side, until this storm be past:
saint George to borrowe, merciful God, who did ever se the like.


Ciuis. Sudden fear
I think it be the day of judgment, the earth does quake, the heaven does
burn, and me think I do see the fearful horseman lighted in the valey, with
a meruaillous fearful saying: En (...) vobis, mors vltima linia rearum. etc. Oh
where shall we hide us from him? Death destroieth all creatures, none can resist
him.
He casts forth his.iij. darts, and takes the^ up again. He is in a great
rage: behold, how he destroieth man and beast in this valey. This is come in a
momente, who would have thought it in the morning? none of us, he draws nere,
I know him well, it is merciless Death most fearful: I am afraied of his
presence he bends his black darte against me, I have no target to bear it
of.


Vxor. Good housebande, The condition of a woman.
remember that I am young, and with child, also you are well stricken in years:
therefore play the man, and take Roger with you, and entreat him, and if he
will needs have you, yet for Gods sake be not acknowen that I am here, for
fear that he kill me, and your child also.


Ciuis. Keep you close under that Cloak, and stir not I pray you.


Roger. I can not abide him, I will run away: Gentle Roger
for poverty and death, will part good fellowship, Sir, shift for your self,
and draw your sword against him.


Ciuis. A friend at need.
Alas, my wife in my trouble is to faint hearted, and will not keep me company,
my servant is run away from me, whether may I sly from death? If I do run,
he is to swift for me, if I turn my back, he will cowardly kille me: if I do
submit my self to him, he is merciless: I perhaps shall persuade him with my
gold, I have an hundred pounds in Angels, Death will not be entreated.
I will give it him to save my life: Oh he is here. Sir, most humbly here upon
my knees, I desire your lordship to pardon me, and suffer me to live still in
this world, and here I offer unto you this purse of gold, I shall always do
you service, and love you with all my heart, and be at your Lordships
commandment, and to my power seek to please you, as my good lord and
Master.


Mors. You are well overtaken, I am glad that we are met together: I have seen
you sins that you were borne, I have thretened you in all your sicknesses, but
you did never see me, Death comes not before his time.
nor remembered me before this day, neither had I power to have taken you with
me until now: For I have commission to strike you with this black dart,
called the pestilence, Pestilence.
my master has so commanded me: and as for gold, I take no thought for it,
I love it not, no treasure can keep me back the twinklyng of an iye from you,
you are my subject, and I am your lord: I will cut of your journey, and
separate your marriage, but not cut of your years, for they ar determined when I
should come: Our days are set.
this is your appointed time, and when the time shall be appointed me, I will smite
your wife, children and servants, they shall not be hidden from me, I will
find them forth, be they hidden never so secret, or flee never so swift or
far of, for I am so swifte, that in the momente of an iye, I can compass the
whole world, and am of so wonderful a nature, that I can be in sondrie places
at ones, and in sondrie shapes, in flames of fire, What death is.
I oftentimes do consume mankind, in the water I do kill the^, I am marvelous
in work: I spare nothing that has life, but I bring to an end, and to mine
own nature, which is death.


Ciuis. Sir, I most humbly desire you to suffer me to return home again into
the city, and let my goods in order, to thuse of my wife and children, to
pay my debtes, and then godly to depart this world, I desire no more.


Mors. I must dispatche, and strike you with this black darte: I have much
business to do with the other two darts.


Ciuis. Oh fearful Death: what is these two^ other darts in thine hand?


Mors. I will smite thee with this pestilent dart, as I have done to many
kingdoms, citees and people, both man and beast, young and old. Honger.
With this pale dart, I will destroy infinite nombers with honger: they shall
perish for lack of food, in destruction of corn, cattle, wine, oil,
fruit, herb, grass foul and fish. Great vengeance.
I will make them eat their own flesh, and make their own children to be
sodde^ and roasted for them. With this third dart, I will in battaill slaie in
number, more then the Stars of heaven, and bathe my self in blood. I spare
not one, neither Prince nor Peasant, against whom I do cast this dart. I have
no respect of any person, be they never so noble, rich, strong wise,
learned, or cunning in Physic, they shall never preuaill against me: but I
will overcome them. I come into the Kings chamber at the time appoincted, in
force of Phisike, and cast my darte, that none shall se but feel. I often come
into the counting house, and suddenly kille the money teller. I overthrow the
Daunser, and stop the breath of the singer, and trippe the runner in his
race. I break wedlockes, and make many widows. The greatest cross of all.
I do sit in judgment with the Judge, and undo the life of the prisoner:
and at length kill the Judge also him self. I do somone the great Bishops,
and cut the^ through their rotchettes. I utterly blemishe the beauty of al
Courtiers. And end the misery of the poor. I will never leave until all
flesh be utterly destoied, I am the greatest cross and scourge of God.


Ciuis. What is the cause, O fearful Death, that thou do scourge the face
of ye earth with thy Darts: and who has sent thee for that purpose?


Mors. Neither is the saying of the Philosophers, Note this.
or Poets true, which count that I come by chance, to mortal things, or
inquiring the cause of the matter, or Depriuatione in materia, or of generation
and corrupcion. And some other do affirm, that I do come through the co^corse
of the stars infecting the air, and poisonyng living things. And therefore
the Heathen in fearful Tragidies and stories, have admonished the vain world
to repent, by setting forth of me Death. Some of them daily had the dedde
heddes of their parents brought to their tables, to mortify their vanitees
withal. And al these men whom I have slain, were Heathen men. But I am the
messenger of God, his scourge and cross to all flesh good and bad: and am the
end of life, which do separate the body from the soul. I am no feigned
thing by the wise brains of the Philosophers: but only through the
disobedience of your first parents Adam and Eua, Adam caused death.
through whose fault all flesh is corrupted and subject to me Death: for
through sin came death. Truly my masters anger was so great in your
parents, that he suffered me to plague with my hand the best in his church,
as Abell, Esaic, Jeremy, Zachary, Ihon Baptiste, and Jesus Christ his only
son, which suffered me, and seeing that my master has commanded me not to
spare his only child, with his Apostles and holy Martires. Dooest thou think
that I should bear with thee, or suffer any in this wicked world? He sent me
to Sodom with his Angels to burn the^. To droun bloody Pharao. And to slay
the kings of the Heathen. Death is horrible.
Also I was at their ends, although al flesh does abhor me. Yet Judas and
all desperate men, did call upon me. Thus do I end both good and bad, but
precious in the sight of the lord is the death of his saints: and many be
the scourges of wicked men. I am in gods hands, as the sword is in the man of
wars as it is written. Death works.
The lord does kill and quicken again. And it is he that did create evil, that
is pain or death, light and darkness. And whereas he has not set his strong
angel to bridle me, I am merciless, and will kill all where as the token is
not set up, or his mark upon them whom he does forbid me to touch. And that
is not upon thee nor upon many thousands that live most wretchedly. Thy days
ar but a span long, Ezech. ix.
thou art like a flower in the field, thy days are passed like a shadow. Job.
xiiii.
Thou haste run thy race, and thy days are consumed like smoke, and thou shall
scante live to draw thy breath. I must destroy this thy ye^ this mansion, I
am so commanded: have here is thy reward, suffer it patiently, I must go
presently to visit a gre^te number suddenly, that do not remember me. I will
cut them down with my sith like grass and kill them with my three fearful
darts. Hell comes after death.
The pains of hell do follow me, to swallowe up all flesh, that does not
repent them of their wickedness.


Ciuis. Psalm. cxxxviii
Oh wretched man that I am, whether shall I ^^ie for succoure? Now my body is
paste cure, No policy against death.
no Phisike can prevail, the sorrows of death does compass me round about,
the policy of the world with fear bad me fly and use Gods means, as Lot
did, when Sodom was a fire. But now do I se, who so escapes honger and the
sword shall be overtaken with the pestilence. I am at the pittes brinke, now
begin I to wax weak in body. I am very dry, my pain does increase, he
is gone that did strike me, but I do feel his wound that he gave me. Alas, woe
is my vile stinkyng carkas, and filthy flesh, conceived and borne in sin,
deprived of original justice: compared to a beast in Adam, fallen as a rotten
Aple from a living tree. What have I gotten, my Lord God by my fall, nothing
else but only darkness, care, misery, Remember this good reader,
affliccion, sickness, pain, agues: and now in mine heart, Death most
painful it self. Now for all my pomp, health, wealth, riches and vain
pleasures of this world: this my body, which I have both costl^e clothed,
well fed, and garnished with all delites, for whose sake I have been
covetous, and sinned against Jesus Christ, to maintain the same body. Man
most vile carien.
From he^ceforth therefore now shall I be turned into a stinkyng carrion, for
worms delight, dust, claie, rotten, most vile, forsaken of al me^, poor,
without substance: naked without clothing: sown in dishonor, forgotten of my
posteritee. ii. Cor. xv.
Not known from henceforthe, vanishe like a shadow, wither like a leaf, and
fade as a flower. Oh uncertain life, but most assured death fie on this
filthy shadow of this world, and flattryng of the same, with all the
instruments of the flesh. Psalm. ii. and.Cxix.
Oh Lord, although I be in this extreme trouble, yet have mercy upon me,
according to thy great mercy and loving kindness. For I do make my prayer in
the time of trouble: trustyng that thou will hear me.


Roger. Maistres, the fearful thing that talked with my Master, is gone. Let
us go hear what news with him?


Vxor. I am glad it is past, thanks be to God, I will go with speed, to se my
housebande, for he has been in great danger.


Roger. Sir, I am glad that he is gone, the devil go with him: has he taken
all your gold?


Ciuis. No, I have my gold in store, for in the world I found it, and in the
world I must leave it, it is but vain, and can not help in the time of this
my trouble: We can carry nothing away,
God has prevented me, and somoned me to appear before his seat. This death
has smitten me, I must dye.


Vxor. Alas my good sweet housebande, what aileth you? Or what would you have
me do for you, to help you in this case?


Ciuis. Help me into some house, where as I might send for some manne of God,
The best way.
to be my heavenly Physician, teaching me the way to the kingdom of Christ.


Roger. Here is a house at hand, and here is your horse also: we will help
you up, and carry you to this place.


Vxor. Now sir, you be come here into this place, for gods sake disco^fort not
your self: I trust you shall do well, you shall want nothing that may be had
for money, gold and silver, Past remedy
I will send for your own brethren and sisters. You shall have withal speed
the best learned Phisicians in this Realm, in the mean time drink Dragon
water, and Mithridatu^ mingled together, to put this passion from your heart.
Ride Roger and seek a Phisician with all speed, spare not the horse


Ciuis. Soft sir, and speak with me, and do what that I do command you,
in the name of Jesus Christ.


Roger. Sir, look what your maistership shall command me to do: that will
I do with all speed, and tarry not.


Ciuis. Go thy ways, and pray moister Theologus to come to me, that I may
have his counsaille, pray him to come with speed, deliver him this token.


Roger. I shall, in the mean time good master be of good cheer, for Gods
sake.


Vxor. Alas what shall I do, and my poor children.


Ciuis. I have set my worldly things in order, for so has Gods word taught
me to do, A wiseman.
I thank God, and my debtes shall be truly paid: and whatsoever any poor man
does owe me I, do forgive them: and restitucio^ shall I make with all speed,
to as many as I have wronged. And I shall leave plenty to you and my children,
requiryng you to live according to Gods commandment obeiyng him all ye days
of your lives, Tob. x^i.
and remember death, and to do to all men, as you would be done unto. To live
chaste, either in Marriage, or a life sole: use prayer, Admonision to his wife
and children.
and chaste your bodies with abstinence. Be pitifully minded, and hate vice:
beware of wicked company, love well the temple of god visit the prisoners and
helpelesse, this is good Religion in the iyes of God. As nere as you can keep
the commandments of the almighty God, and beware of idleness and pride of
heart, lamente no more good wife. For who can keep that must needs a way? me
think I hear Theologus come.


Theologus. Sir, God the heavenly Physician bless you, Good things
and give you the perfect consolacion of conscience in Christ his son, and
give you grace mekelie to bear this his cross.


Ciuis. You are heartily welcome dear Theologus, I have thought it long, since
I did send for you.


Theologus. Your man declared to me by the way, a pitiful story, which
happened to you this day. Further, I had sooner been with you, but one master
Antonius sent for me, but or I came he was dedde: To late.
and Auarus and Ambodexter is in his house, preparyng a solemn funeral for
him.


Ciuis. Oh sir, then I have no cause to reherase the matter new again, but
seeing my flesh is nere the pit, and in a manner my breathe fails me, being
wounded with death, and that I am of two parts, body and soul, the one
paste all cure, the other in hope of salvation, I desire, if it please God,
that I may live to the end of your oracions. Declare unto me, what is the cause
of sin?


Theologus. The Devil was the first cause of sin, as it is written in
Genesis, Satan's work.
how with a lie he deceived the woman, and they that commit sin, are of the
Devil, for he has sinned from the beginning of the world, and is the first
aucthour of sin. The second cause was manne, Man's wretchedness
declinyng from God, and credityng the Devil, by which man, sin entered into
the world, and all the calamities and crosses therein, as sorrow, dread,
fear, poverty, sickness and death it self, all to punish sin.


Ciuis. Oh lord, how I have erred, I had thought God had been the cause. As
when I read these words. Indurabo cor Pharaonis, I will indurate ye heart of
Pharao, with soche like places: and his induracion was the cause of his sin,
and who did indurate him but God? And when it is said, ne nos inducas i^
tentationem, neither led us into temptacion. etc. Here I gathered, it was God
that led us into temptacion, for which cause, we desire him not to lead us into
te^ptacion. etc.


Theologus. You have mistaken those places, for God is not the aucthour or
cause of sin, for he did so much abhor the same, that nothing could pacify
his wrath under heaven, no merit or work, but only the blood of Jesus
Christ his son. Christ's death.
And for this word I will indurate, the very word in Ebrue is: I will suffer
Pharaos heart to be hardened. And so it was in the Lords prayer, it is Ne
sinas nos induci, neither suffer us to be led or fall into temptacion. etc.
Therefore my brother, it was the will of Satan and man, that caused sin.


Ciuis. Why, Man's wi^
has not manne will to do good again, if he lust?


Theologus. No, if he had the eleccion to will, as first he had, he would do
the like: therefore it is in a sure hand, even in Gods, and not in ours. Math.
x.
As when men do speak the truth, it is not of their own will or power, but
the heavenly spirit in them, and by almighty God, are all the steps of men
directed: though man fall into sondrie temptacions he shall not be cast of, for
the lord puts under his hand, Psalm. xx.
which is a great comfort to us in trouble, when we are underneath the cross.
Without him we can do nothing that is good. No man can take any good thing
upon him, Ihon. xi.
except it be given to him from heaven: and no man dear brother, can come to
the son of God, unless the father has drawn him, and not his will, which
is most wicked from his youth upward, as appears in our vile nature,
thought, word, and deed. And who so ever has not the spirit of Christ,
Roma. viii.
is not of Christ but those, which are led of the spirit of god are the soonnes
of God: and this comes not by man's will and power. For, the worldly minded
man, does not understand or perceive those things, that are of Gods spirit,
without which he can not be saved, be he never so learned, and can dispute of
the soul: making distinctions of knowledge and judgment, What the soul is.
calling it the mind, or intelleccion, or reason, or desire, which is the
will, under whom the affeccion is governed, whose spring is the heart. All these
make not to the heavenly purpose but rather standing upon soche trif^es, does
hinder the way to salvation in Christ: and rob him of his passion, when we
do attribute fredome or frewille, Of free will.
to come of our selves, but that we are in Gods hands, as his instruments,
through him to work soche things, as best may please him, and he withdraw
his holy hands, we can do no good: therefore submit your self to Christ and
his will, for our wills are malignaunt, and dampnable in his iyes. Forsake
your praue will, and humbly submit your self to Jesus Christ, saying: now
before our death. Prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed (...) name, thy kingdom come. Thy
will be dooen in earth as it is in heaven. etc. And thus I do conclude of
free will in us, and faithfully look for the reward, not of works, but of
mercy only: only purchaced by the Sacrifice of Christ, Mercy and not
works.
thankyng him that he has made you mercifulle to your brethren in this
world, which was the fruictes of faith, by which faith in his blood we are
saved, and shall receive our almose or reward, and not our duty: for we are
unprofitable, when we have done our best.


Ciuis. What reward is that, I pray you? Or what promises are granted by
Christ?


Theologus. The reward is the remission of sins, and life everlasting,
granted by the father for Jesus Christ's sake, Reward in Jesus Christ
frelie without our works, for there is none other salvation under heaven
given to men, but only Christ. In him we do merit: as when we are
merciful, we have a promise of this present life, and the life to come. And
in this world also an.c. fold: Matthew. x.
and in the world to come everlasting life. And who that gives one of these
little ones, a cup of water for my names sake, shall not lose his reward. And
he commanded to give, promising it shall be given to them again. And further he
says: break the bread to the poor, and it shall be to thee like a gardein.
He says not, let thin executors or assigns give the poor when thou art
dedde, but thou must do it thy self in this world: Luke. xv.
Now while it is light, for the night is at hand, I mean death, when thou
can not work. Remember Dives lost the time, and could not call it back
again, which waileth in hell, has no reward, for he trusted not God, nor
rewarded any man. Further, reco^cile thy self to thy brother, for else thou can
not please God, though thou wrough test all good works, and gave thy body to
be burned: i. Corin. xiii.
for charitee is so precious in Gods iyen, that who so want it, can not reign
with Christ. Therefore forgive from thy heart, and thou shall be forgeuen. Make
not thy will upon goods gotten by usury, nor by any thing that falsely in
bargening, thou have taken from thy brother, Psalm. xiiii.
for then thou shalt not dwell in Gods tabernacle. Neither shall thy children
prospere upon the earth, but God will hate them to the.iij. and iiij.
generation for thy sin: Psalm. iiii.
examen well thy conscience, death has wounded thee, which is common to al
flesh: in thus doing, thou shall pass from death to everlasting life by
Christ, and never taste upon the second death, among the impious or
castawaies: Contesse thy sins from thy heart, ask mercy, be they never so
red, and many in number, Psalm. ii.
Jesus has washed the^ in his blood, and sprinkled them with Hysop, and made
the^ as white as snow: now play the man in Christ, fear not to depart this
world. Christ is gone before with his holy Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs,
Co^fessours and Uirgines, penitente thieues and harlottes also, there is the
army of angels before his throne, with joy incessantly honoring him. Hell
gates are sparred, satan beaten down, thy ^innes rased, the good Angel at
hand to conducte thee to that blessed land of rest: ^^oc. vltimo.
here is nothing but labor, days of care, sin, wretchedness, a thousand
crosses, the snares of the devil, and many vanitees, the flesh most
inconstaunte, the world a place of misery and sin, bid it farewell, taking
thy leave with the badge of a christen man, of Christ crucified: A Christian
man's badge.
remember that promise made in thy Baptism, arm thy self with the breast plate
of faith, continewe to the end, and thou shall receive a croun of life, thy
cross taken away: cast thy hole care upon Christ, ii. Cor. xv.
and he shall deliver thee at hand, and give thee, the holy resurreccion of
body and soul to dwell in one for ever with him.


Ciuis. Oh what comfort in conscience I have received: Comfort in conscience.
first I render thanks to God the father, the son, and the holy ghost:
secondly, blessed be the hour of your coming hither, in this time of my
trouble, with this holy consolacion in Christ, in whom I do believe,
renounsing the world, the flesh and the devil, believing all the articles of
my Christen faith, acknowleging the blessed Sacraments to be the
instruments to everlasting life and salvation in Christ, Sacraments
by the which God does work in his Church to the worlds end, to them
that shall be saved: one Trinitee, The holy Trinitee.
and three distinct persons coequall in unity, in one essence and being is my
God: the father created: ne, the son redeemed me, and the holy ghost
sanctified me, and inspired me, where by I know that I am his elected, and one
undefiled mother the Church, has thus taught me, in that blessed book of
Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, The holy Church.
and Jesus with his Apostles, which is Gods work: now master Theologus, my
time is at hand I pray you say some thing of the resurreccion, and then let
us pray in the name of God together, that it may please him, to forgive me my
sins, which I have committed against heaven and earth, and to receive my
soul into his blessed hands.


Theologus. Good brother, not only the doctrine of Prophets and the
Evangelists, do promise the Resurreccion to come, of some to salvation, and
some to damnacion, but the same resurreccion is most manifest. Math. xxvii.
As for example: Christ himself and other, did rise, and were seen to many in
Jerusalem: and by the space of.xl. days, he taught the Apostles, and was
conuersaunt with the^: and then ascended into glory, until the time appoincted
to judge the quick and the ded when he shall send his angels to gather all
flesh under heaven, Math. xiii.
from the.iiij. winds, and sit down in judgment, saying: come to me you
blessed of the father, and receive the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning. Further he says, this is the will of my father, which has sent me,
that all that do see the soonne, and believes in him, shall have everlasting
life, and I will raise him in the last day: and the holy Apostle saint
Paul most heavenly does preach the resuraeccion to the Corinthia^s Thy
dedde shall live, says Esaie, Esaie. lviii.
and thy slain shall rise again: and those which sleep in the duste shall rise:
Daniel. xii.
the earth shall cast forth their dedde bodies: I will creat both heaven and
earth new, says the Lord, and put the old out of my remembrance: many
says Daniel, that lie a sleep in the dust, shall be wakened again, some to
life everlasting, and other to reprobacion. God says, Math. xxv.
I will open their tombs and bring them forth: and the holy man Job says:
Job. xiiii.
I know that my redeamer lives, and that in the last day, he shall raise me
again out of the earth, and shall be clothed again with my Skin, and in my
flesh I shall see God, who^ I shall see with these same iyes, and with none
other. These are comfortable, and most true places of holy scripture for the
resurreccion of the dead, you are assured in conscience of this blessed
resurrection, and life everlasting in Christ Jesus our lord.


Ciuis. Yea forsothe dear Theologus, but my speech is almost paste, yet I
thank God I know you all, and I beseech him to bless you: and when my
spirit is gone, I pray you bury my body with comelines, not with pomp, and
use it as an instrument, wherein the soul has dwelled, and which the soul
shall posses again in honor, in that blessed resurreccion.


Theologus. Let us most humbly here upon our knees, with our hands lifted
up toward the heaven: desire God the father for Christ's sake, to receive
your soul into his glorious kingdom.

An exhortacion to death.
O dear citezen rejoice and be glad, that thy labor is almost past: rest is at
hand, fear not the pain of death. For it is impossible to escape that,
which can not be fled, or avoided. For it is written, who is that man that
lives, and shall not see death: none, no not one, therefore, suffer it my
sweet heart pacientlie, and that is an argument of good ronscience, and of an
heavenly mind. Your wife mourns immoderatly, oh God: all flesh was borne
to die. All flesh shall dye.
This happened to our pare^tes, as father, mother. etc. And shall not fail to
all that shall follow, unto the end of the world or coming of Christ. For
surely sweet life, was never without the excepcion of bitter death, it is no
novelty, therefore when we do hear tell, of the departure of any of our
friends: let us not fall into a sudden passion, as only the high priest did,
which hearing of the death of his children, fell down and brake his neck. A
constaunt wiseman in aduersitee.
But rather co^stauntlie with wise Anaxagoras, which hearing of the death of
his beloved son, said to the messenger: this is no new tidings, nor
strange to me, as soon as he was borne, I knew that he should die: for of
natures law is learned, life to be taken and resigned, and no man dye, but he
which have lived. Oh leave your lamenting good maistres, why rage you like
one, which have no hope. Be absent, or use moderacio^ remember holy Job, Of
Jobs patience.
the same days when the Lord permitted Satan, not only to destroy his
servants and cattle, but also before age, in the lusty time of youth, in
the feast day, at one table, his dear children of his body, were all broken
in pieces and slain, with the violent fall of the house. What did he, rende his
here or flesh, no, no: he considered who sent them, and who did take them,
even the Lord, whom he most obedientlie suffered, and reverently thanked.
Further good sister, remember. S Hieromie, taking GOD to witness of an holy
woman, whose housebande was ded* whom he most tenderly loved: A constant
wom^n in trouble.
by whom she had but two sons of singular beautee, wanting no gift of grace
or of nature, which both died the same day, wherein their father departed.
When this Cross was, says. s. Hierom, who would not have thought that she
would have fallen madd, in rending her here, breasts, clothes and skin,
running up and down, wailing and criyng, with pitefull wringing of hands.
What did she? First, she weeped not one tear: but most soberly, with a
womanly countenance, she humbly kneeled upon her knees, holdyng up her
hands, renderyng thanks, and making prayers to almighty GOD, saying: most
humbly I thank thee good lord, for that that it have pleased thee, to take me
into thy service, I am sped, oh lord, for thou haste discharged me. Counsel.
etc. Take also for an example, the most worthy constauncie, A blessed woman,
ii. Match. vii.
of that paciente woman, which without much lamentacio^, did with her own
iyen, behold her dear children slain, their members cut in pieces, and boiled in
caldrens. Mark how constantly of late years, children did se the flesh of
their fathers, mothers. etc. burn in the fire most pacientlie sufferyng. And
again, fathers beholding their children do the like. What did they r^re like
Lions. etc. No, no, but reioysed, that God had of their blood and stock
erected a people, to reign with him in life, which witnessed him in death. The
examples should move al christians, perfect mortificacion is not much, to
lamente for our friends diyng: Remember our end.
but rather by the example of their deaths, to remember our end, and then we
shall not sin. Therefore, better it is to go to the house of mournyng, then
to the house of banquettyng. And when it shall please God to call your
housebande away, and the days of forgetfulness shall approach, as every thing
under heaven have the time, both of mourning and rejoicing When you do behold
your self in a glass remember your face shall be lean and pale your nose
rotten, A glass.
your teeth stinkyng and black, your iyen dim and blind, your ears deaf
and running, your heeres fallen away, your veins broken, your senues relaxed
and wasted, bones corrupted, bowels full of rooms, and all your flesh
consumed. A glass for fair gentlewomen.
Behold, behold, you damos^ls of vanitees and lusty youth, the pleasure of
this world how it ends, with stincke, filth etc. not reserved after death
to any good purpose: as timber when it is cut down, but because it is so
vile, and will infecte the air. The corpse is enclosed in a pit, as we daily
se, where as it consumes, as I have said. Remember this, be not proud of
noble pare^tage, of riches, beauty or cunning but rather consider where are the
old lusty kings, Where are the old noble persons.
queens, lords, knights, ladies: where are the old courtiers and valiaunte
men of war? where are the Majors of cities, lawiers, bisshops, Phisicions?
where are all the pleasant Musicians? where are become the old commons in every
kingdom where is become the Popes rotten holiness, with all the infernal
maligna^t sinagoge of antichrist. etc. al are gone and passed like shadows,
wasted and come to nothing, as S. Augustine affirms. De va^i (...)
Oh man says he go to the channel house or graves, The greatest of the dedde.
take up the bones, mark well if thou can know the master from the
servant, the fair from the foul, the rich from the poor, the wise from the
fool. etc. thou can not do it, it is impossible to know the^. Well world:
well. What dooest thou promise unto all them which do love thee, perhaps much
riches or dignitee. The hurt of rithesse.
How noisome to ye soul is riches, the very minister of, or to all, civil
rule and mischief, as damnable usury, adultery, treason, murder, it makes one
proud, high minded, and forgetful of him self. It deludeth him with
flatterers, and curtises of Hypocrisy, it is the mother of vainglorie, and
nourisher of pride and idle life, and lothlie glotonie. Spend all succedyng
Gathrall.
It is remembered by our master Jesus Christ, which calls it thorns: and
by his Apostles, which names it the root of all ill. It is the master of
some rich men and women, which keeps it to their great hurt. And the
foolish prodigal waster, which commonly succedeth the gatherer, spends it
sone away in wickedness, as it is said: easy gotten goods are sone spent.
Therefore sufficient or a mean, is well to a christen man (for sondrie
causes.) For they that will be^ rich, fall into sondrie temptacions, cares,
broken sleeps: he gapeth and looks for much, and spends little, he can
not be merry (for fear of loss. Coueteous men, still do couete.
) The more he gets he is never satified, that is a covetous man but still
desires and never pacified, like unto the dry man in a hot burning fever.
Riches has poisoned the church, and transformed the clergy: specially in
Room among the Popes, and many great men, whose auncitours did keep
plentiful houses of the one half. Which now is come to pass, that now a
days in keeping hospitalite, or ministering of charity, but breaks up houses,
and hurt many poor, even for the love of one glotton, himself which will not
well spend it, Riches help not in the day of vengaunce
nor for his children which can not well use riches. For we do se how God does
plague the seed of extorcioners vile usurers. etc. What if they had mountains
of gold, so increased dolor of mind and death steals on all flesh like a
theif, and smites the money lover, the usurer, the oppressor, the golden
watcheman, the great officer, merchant, the wise gentleman, that has
purchased so much. What is the end of this gere, a dedde carkesse, and scant a
good winding shete, out of the door he must to grave, he shall fare well Gloria
mundi, and welcome silie worms. I pray God that this tourneth not to
damnacion. Oh what is become of rich Senior Antonius Treasurers, Capax, Rapax,
Tenax, Ambodexter (ill gotten goods are worse spent.) Sower swetenes, and
slipping Ise, the golden entangled hoke, and the drink of Midas has utterly
destroyed him, and or ever he was aware, death has slain him. He loved so well
this world, What pains man will suffer to fly death
and life in the same: that if his Physician might have saved his life, he
would have lost one of his hands, and suffered his flesh to have been cut
with some broken bones, with the co^tinuaunce of pain, ache and grief, with
dreadful slepes. And when he did se no remedy, the terror of conscience
tormented him, vexed him, and overcame him, made him rage and curse the time of
his birthe, his life was so horrible in the iyes of God and manne, whose
judgment I do commend to God, but surely great plagues do remain for the
ungodly. Therefore let us be converted, and turn clean from our sins and
wickedness, Forgive enemies.
and so there shall no sin do us harm. Let us fast and pray hate evil, and
clean to good: make restitucion, forgive our enemies, abhor vice, and be
sorry that we can not be sorier. Remember our accomptes, and come be times
unto the Lord, make no tariyng to turn unto the Lord: put not of from day
to diae. Suddenly comes vengeance.
For suddenly shall his wrath come and in time of vengeance shall he destroy
us, and except we do all repent, we shall perish says Christ. Let us
repent therefore, and turn unto god, that he may forgive us, that our sins
may be dooen away: that we may say. From plague, pestilence and famine,
from battaill and murder, and from sudden death, oh lord deliver us. From
hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment: which is the
greatest cause of the wrath and indignacion, oh good Lord deliver thy people,
for thy holy names sake. Amen. Ame^.

A prayer in trouble or death.
Almighty and most dear father of heaven, we most humbly beseech thee for
Jesus sake, have mercy upon this thy servant, which now is nailed to the
painful cross of death, for Adams offense: impute no sin unto this
penitente, Hebre. xi.
which most willing has submitted himself to thy fatherly correccio^: but
behold thy son on the right hand, the only mediator for all the elected,
whose names are written in the book of life. Let this thy servant, we beseech
thee most mighty God, have clean remission and forgeuenes of all his sin, by
thought, word and deed, committed against thy divine Majesty: The best
medicene.
now in this perille of death, assiste him with thy holy angel, command
Satan to depart, make clean his conscience, with a glad mind to rejoice
only in thy mercy, for vain is the help of man, but thy mercy does
endure for ever: we are thy people, and the Sheep of thy pasture, to thee we
shall give praise for ever and ever. Amen.


Ciuis. Amen. Amen: Lord receive my soul into thy hands: thou God of truth.
A blessed end.



Theologus. THe mighty God of Angels, and the former of al things, visible
and invisible: in whose hands is only life and death, light and darkness, A
prayer in the time of death.
and all the mocio^s of the soul and body, without the most mighty God, all
things had been nothing, and of nothing all things are made by thee: Through
the holy Trinity is creacion and salvation.
without thy Christ, and thy blessed spirit, which is one coeternall trinitee,
all flesh were accursed, all consciences molested, and all souls utterly
dampened. From light into darkness, from fredome into everlasting reprobacion:
but by Jesus Christ thine only son, we thank thee dear father of all mercy,
that now it has pleased thee, to take to thy mercy at this present time our
brother, whom thou haste elected, consecrated, and now he shall by thy mercy
and pitee be sanctified unto thee, A prayer.
to be a citezen of eternal glory, now dode flesh and blood forsake him,
and all his worldly strength fails him. Now is the Orgaines yeldyng up, the
heavenly sound, his soul comes now unto thee, good Lord receive it to thy
mercy, into thine everlasting glory: where as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are
continually, to thee, oh heavenly father, be incessaunt honor and glory.
AMEN.


The end of the Dialogue.
A Copy of a letter, to Frances Barlowe, by W. B.
When the time of trouble draws nere (good Frances Barlowe,) as death, which
shall separate the soul from the body, if we be not ware, and wisely
provident, we shall stand in great danger of losses: first we shall lose our
health, strength and beauty, Uanitee pla^n vanitee in this world
wherein we have delighted, and all our censes, as pleasure of sp^che joy of
heart, and the comfortable sight of the eyes, wherewith we do daily behold all
the pleasures of this world etc. we shall lose all our further treasures, lauds
and substance, and also our lives, and as dung be cast into the earth: and
finally our souls banished from Gods blessed presence or resting place.
Therefore let us call my Fraunces, to our remembrance, the fearful curses of
almighty God, against our sins, and the cause of our plagues, which is our
abominable living, in sinning against God, in thought, word and deed, against
heaven and earth, in pride, wrath, idolatry, fornication, swearing, lust
gluttony, and stopping of our ears against grace, and the word of truth:
let us call to remembrance, how that we have done wrong to each other, in
word, and deed, in flau^dring or in hindering by bargaini^g. etc. Our
brethren, for whom Christ has died whom we have hated and not pitied in their
extreme sorrows and adversities, and have not paid their labors and travels:
let us repent and call for grace, Restitucion.
and restore now while we are in the way of grace, and in that that we can not
make satisfaction for our sins, by no merits of alms, prayers, oblations.
etc. which are unclean in Gods eine, as concerning the remission of our
sins, Job. xxiii.
as Job says: how can he be clean that is borne of a woman? behold, he will
give no light unto the Moon, and the stars ar unclean in his sight, how
much more man, a worm, even the son of a man, which is but a worm, which
in beholding of his sin has no cause, but to despair, and to be dampened,
what remedy in this case? none but with all speed by faith, lift up your head,
and behold even Jesus Christ on Gods right hand, pleading our case, excusing
us to his father, which prays to him for us, and is heard, and Satan beten
down, and Gods Angels set at our bedside with spiritual armor, for us in
this battle of death against Satan, to conducte us to that happy landerlet
us knele down, and first say, whatsoever God does send to us, life or
death, his name be praised, Gods will.
his will be done in earth as it is with his Angels in heaven, desiring him
to be fed with his lively word, and blessed sacrament, the immortal fode for
the soul, passing al worldly treasures or physic for the body: and that it
would please him to pardon our trespasses and offenses, in thought, word and
deed, against his divine majesty, even as we do forgive our enemies, soche
faults as they do here in earth against us, and that in the time of agony or
pains of death, he suffer us not to fall into temptation, or be ouerladen
under our cross: The land of the living.
but that his hand may help us, and deliver us from this vile life full of
miseries, and bring us into the land of the living: in doing this, you shall
be most happy and blessed: let us submitt our selves to him that has made
us, we have not made our selves, we are his vessels, and are in his sight, and
can not flee from his presence, nor run beyond that raze, Genesis. ii. Sapi.
x.
which he has appointed us: he brings death, and restores again to life in
the resurrection. Oh be content to render the same talent, Tob. xiii. Math. xxv.
which was but lent unto you, even your body, the gifts of nature and grace:
commit wife, children, and all to him. He does no wrong, Yield all to God.
he takes but his own. Remember he brought you in hither naked, and how you
do live but a small time, and ar full of misery: Like a flower for the time and
shall pass away like a shadow. Job. xiiii.
Alas we do deserve great punishment, but he plageth us not according to the
grauitee of our sins, for then were we dampened, or like unto Sodom, that
perished without hands in the day of Gods wrath and ve^geaunce. Consider
Fraunces, that this is no news or marvelous chance that you should change
your life, Lamen. iiii.
well, it happened to al your forefathers from Ada^, to kings and all the
nobles of the earth, and to the poor also. Al flesh is grass, and worms
are the companions to the corse, All flesh is grass.
in dark grave or house of claye. Yet there is a day which God has
appointed which none can tell but himself, Math. xviii. Luke. xix.
in which he will judge both the quick and dead, and call all flesh before
him: both his very elect and the merriles reprobates, and then body and soul
shall remain immortal together, and have life everlasting. This hold fast
dear Frau^ces, as an anchor in this storm, from death to life everlasting.
Hold fast the.xij. articles of the Christian faith, pray to the end, only to
God the father by Christ, remember his promises, that at what time soever a
sinner does repent, he will forgive. Call, he will answer unto thy soul:
knock and he will open. This time of your aduersitee and plague of the
pestilence, Eccle. xi.
does make you forget all pleasures and delites paste, even so remember this
world is the more slippry, and the pleasures do compass all understanding to
Gods elected. Because I will conclude, the time draws at hand of our
deliverance, cast your care only upon God almighty, look not back
again, beware of by paths, either upon the right or left hand, but tread in
the true path or very way of Jesus Christ himself. I pray you let Ambrose
Barnes, read the xj. Chapter of saint Ihons Gospel, and the first Epistle
to the Corinthians, Chapter.xv. If the time had not been somoche spent, and
the venime so dangerous, and the parties so weak and feeble, I would have
caused you to have been letten blood and given you pills contra pestem, with
cordials accordingly by Gods grace, if that would have done you any good, but
take this cordial in good part. Thus God give you the croune of life, which
Jesus Christ without our deseruinges, has purchased for us in his precious
blood. His name be praised. Amen.

Your W. B.
Fare ye well. We must follow when it pleases God.
To his loving friend and brother, M. Willyam Conscience, Minister, W. B.
sends Salutacion.
Luke. xii. Math. v.
IF the almighty God do take care for the fowls of the air, and flowers of
the field, and provides nourishement for them, how much more for his beloved
men, that do faithfully serve him in the holy ministry of his word and
sacraments, visiting the sick, and buriyng the dedde? The Captain that
does but serve a mortal Prince, how so ever he spedeth, life, or death,
behauing himself wisely and valiauntly against the enemy, is worthy of
worldly fame and honor, much more the Lords armoured knight, Gods messenger.
Mala. i.
being his Aungel and mouth, between him and his people, that stand in
danger, is worthy in Christ to be noumbred, crouned, and placed among his
Aungelles immortal: by this I know that you are no hireling, but (under
Christ) the true Shepeherde, in that, that you fly not from your fold, when
that Wolf Satan with his companion Death, do work their violence against
the flesh and soul: Ihon. x.
In this case remember these words. Nolite eos timere qui occidunt corpus.
etc. Fear not the^, which do kill the body, they can not kill the soul. In
this we do see what the power of death is, not only to kille in us the four
Elements, whereof the body is framed (by sword, fire, water, sickness. etc.
But the soul is not made of any of them, but the Creator of al thing, has
made it most pure of nothing, upon which soul death has no power, because
it is of nature immortal. But so long as body and soul are together, and not
divided, that is called manne. August. de (...) and anima. Cap. xliii. etc.
And whatsoever things ar seen with bodily iyen, are ordained for the same
body, and the body for the soul, and the soul for God. The life of the
body is the soul, and the life of the soul is God: so for sin the body is
ruinated, and shall be in dust, until the resurrection. But in the fall or death
of the body, the soul dies not but is delivered, when the snare of this
flesh is broked. Psalm. cxxiiii.
The flesh with the senses are dedde, but Anima cum ratione sua, do still
live: The soul dies not.
therefore I trust and know, that you do consider wisely three things. The
first is, the world with the wretchedness therein, worthy to be despised. The
second, our own knowledge of our selves, our sin, our sickness, and whereof
we are made, even of repugnaunte eelementes. Thirdly, is to lay hand of
eternal blessedness, remembering the merciful promises of God: As come to me
all you that are heavy lade^ either with affliction of mind, Math. xii.
poverty in Christ, sickness or death, and I shall refreshe you. The best
Physic.
This is the very Physician of the soul, even Christ, and the perfect
quietness of conscience. God has given you a talent full godly, you do
lucrifie the same and hide it not. Therefore, it shall be said most joyfully: it
is well dooen good servant and faithful, thou haste been faithful in little,
Math. xxv.
I will make thee ruler over much, enter into thy masters joy. And again,
he which does continue to the end, shall have the croune of life. Be paciente
my brother (Conscience) and settle your heart, James. v.
for the coming of the Lord draws nere: and blessed are the dedde, which
dye in the Lord, for they shall reign with Christ in glory, his name be ever
praised: and his will be fulfilled. Amen. Be of good comfort, and cast away
fear: be merry, let not the Pestilent corses, nor the noise of belles,
terrify you.

Inter mortales te non mihi charior vllus:
Te plus, quam verum diligo amoque fratre^.
Finis.
COLENDISSIMO FRATRI* SVO IN CHRISTO, MAG^STRO Richardo Turnero Theologo,
Guilhelmus Bullenus. S. P. D.
REuerendissime, and obseruandis sime frater, puto te literas meas recepisse,
in quibus tibi scribebam, regimen contra pestee^, ac idcirco modo non ero
prolixiori^ febre pestilenti. Na^ omnis febris quam pestilentem vocamus
prouenit e putredine quae fit ab excessum humidi. Hac vero [vt inquit Galenus]
febre^ ex plurima humiditate putrefacta, Causa pestis.
prouenire prutrefacta sine dubio potius quam a calore aucto fatendu^ est
humiditas. Sign^ pest^s.
Ideo materia est putrescens in venis vnde calor naturalis valde afficitur and
vno die omnes virtutes decidunt vrinae sunt foetentes etc. Galenus, Auic.
Rafis, Trallianus. etc. affirmant: in febre pestilenti est multitudo
obstructionum and praecipue vbi materia vrgit ad cutim and caput. Multitudo
materiae and cruditatum in causa est.

Curatio in quam c^n^iderandum*
Cura est, prohibere putredine^. Obstructiones igitur sunt aperiendae, cum
humoru^ euacatione. Sed si natura mouit, tunc nihil mouendum est.
Hoc est autem remedium vt inquit. Johannes Baptist. Monta. Vironensis.. Syrup.
de Cichorio cu^ Rhabarbaro 1. ss. aq^a Boraginis, acetosae 3. in quibus citrum
sit impositum and decoctum deinde vnguentum pectorale contra peste^, vnguenti
Rosacei confortatiui mesues. j. specierumcordialium, j. Sandalorum alborum j.
Rosarum siccaru^ ss. misce simul artificiose and fiat linimentu^ pro cord, and
pro toto regione ventris. Dicta in temporac pestis.
Mirum est hoc remedin^ co^tra venenum pestis. Quod ad rationem victus attinet,
vbi est maxima putredo [vt i^quit Hyppo. 17. Aphoris.] vbi coruptihumores and
putridi nihil, perniciofius quam instituere tenuem victu^, quia inter, exhibeas
ius pulli, and ponas semper in tuo cibo praeter acetosam succu^ citri. De
reliquo velim tibi persuadeas quemadmodu^ legisti i^ Galeno. etc. Vale and vale
iterum [eruditis. vir] sisque bono animo. Nunc literas co^cludo. Nam plura non
opus habeo scribere, ne tuis optimis occupationibus [in vi nea domini]
importune nunc obstrepere vi dear.

Martij. Incarnati. 1564. Tuus ad o^a Guil. ^ullenus.

AMANTISSIMO AC PRObissimo viro magistro T. Gaylo Chyrurgo. Guilihelmus
Bullenus. S. P. D.
BOnam valetudinem, cum corporis tum animi* a deo opt. max. tibi precor (optime
vir.) Nihil est hoc te^pore quod tibi scribam, quam quod libellum quem mihi
donasti, legi, et iteru^ legipro quo tibi ago gratias and habe^ vt pro sumno
munere. Nam ex eo and intellexi amorem et animu^ quem erga me geris, and operam
tuam perspexi no^ solum mihi sed omnibus qui vbique sun^ Anglis futuram
vtilitati. Nostrum eui^^ omnim^ haberi possunt amatores and cultores, libri tui
insignissimi. Qua^ obrem quid magis mihi gratu^ esse potuit hoc munere,
praesertim cum a tali Chirurgo mihi datu^ sit? cuius rei nu^quam me capiet
obliuio, sed quantum potero gratias referri libenti animo faciam. Opto te been
valere, ac interim me tibi comendo doctissimo viro magistro Bactero humillime
meis verbis gratias agi meque plu rimum comendare desidero.

Martij. 28. Anno incarnati. 1564. Tibi deditissi^^^ Gui^^helmus Bu.

The Table of this present book.
A Poor manne seking relief. Fol. 7. A wives answer to the poor man. idem A
tale of the poor mannne against coueteousnes. 2.^.4. Antonius Capistranus the
richeman. 5. Antonius the Phisician. idem A subtle merchant man. 6. Antonies
aungelles. idem. A sweet text idem. A medler with no scripture. 7. A good
indifferent man. idem. An infidel. idem. A man of good religion. 8. A papist,
a protestant. idem. A nulla fidian. idem. A fine garden. idem. A pillar in a
garden. 9. Antonies armies. idem. A good obseruacion idem. An exclamacion of
Skelto^. 10 A saying of Chaucer 11. An admonishion of Lidgat. ide^ A young
Courtier. idem. A saying of sir Dauie Linse to England and Scotland. 12. A
saying of the Physician. 13. A^arus a petty fogger. idem. Am^o dexter. idem. A
black Sainctus. idem. Am^o dexter gapeth for Antonius death 14. A maide^ in
Antonius house. 14 A simple practice. 15. A crafty villain. idem. A cousin
made. 16. A periurer. idem. A serpent. idem. A good company 17. A land where
as no sickness is. 18. America. idem. A dreadful case. 17. A troubled
conscience. 19. A Pothicaries repentance ide^ A time to purge. idem. A yearly
reward 20 A great loss. idem. A knauishe lackey idem. A mule lost 21.
Aristotle de coelo and mundo. 22. A description of the soul. 23. Actus what it
is. 24. Aduersitee 25. Actr^^ de rei medic^.26. Auicen notes of the pestil.
27. Anticedent of the pestilence 28. Air infected idem. Auicens counsel. 30.
A powder for the plague. 31. A drink for the pestilence ide^. A perfume for
the pestilence 32. A medicen for a carbuncle. 34. A cauiat for a Chyrurgi^n.
35. A lotion for a sore. 36. A medicen for the plage sore 16 A Cicatrice most
best. 39. A healyng ointment idem A Cordial idem. An Epicures talk. 40. A
horsewoman 42. A nise cockney of London. 43. A churl incarnate. 53. A tale of
Foxes idem An epitaph of a covetous. 54. A young man well nurtred 56. A parler
with many things 57 A taker, a catcher 57. A wicked judge. 60. Note aduersitee
62. A lesson for a lubbar. 65. A wretch which refused good counsel. idem. A
russen. 67. Amber grice. 69. A great loss to England, 70. A good common
wealth. idem A swimmyng land. 71. A prayer in death. 82, A letter to master
Willyam Aileward called Conscience 85. A letter to master Richard Tu^ner of
Canterbury. 83. A letter to master Thomas Gaile Chyrurgian. idem.
B
Beasts did speak. Fol. 45 Borders in a cloth. 57. to 86 Barnit field. 44
Birds of strange shapes. 68 Bankruptes. 65
C
Clisters. ^^ Closenes in usury. ^^ Children sick of the mother. Fol. 59
Cruel women. 70 Christ's death. 82 Carbo and antrax. 33 Causes of the
pestilonce. 27
D
Dogs and women. 45 Death kills. Fol. 78 Death works. Fol. 78 Death
horrible. Fol. 78 Death will not be entreated. 75 Death what it is. 76 Death
ends all. 7^ Death destroieth all. 75 Death apereth with three darts. 74
F
Flatterers of noble men. ^1 Fair fields. 73 Fear and dred, ibi. Fre will in
man. 83
G
Gloses. 17 God. 23 Golden raake. 58 Good air. 29 Good observations. 32 Gentle
Roger. 75 Galen ad Pisonem. 42 Gentleman what he is. ^3 Galen de diffe. feb. ^^
H
Honest landlordes. 9 His wives council. 33 Honger. 76 Hosteler. 56
I
Ingratitude. 48 Jack Drake. ibi. Ionge Renob. 52 Jack a napes played at
tabies* 69 Ionge and folishe. 67
K
Knavery. 50
M
Money does great mischief. 60 Mulier a naughty word. 57 Many usurers. 55 Magus
and Judas. 58 Makeshiftes. 66 Mendax is described. ibi. Mendax kindred and
arms. 63 Mendax has been in florida. ^^ Me^dax bri^geth good news 8 Mixed
bodies. 22
N
News from Florida. 63 No w^nde but turn some to profit. 45 No^e this well.
48.50
P
Phisitio^ does well. 25 until 40 Pirates undoes. 27 Promotion spiritual. 59
Ponicamber. 38 Perfu^^ idem Peace and unite. 64 Prudence. 25 Pestilence. 2^
Petty foggers. 1^ Purging the body. 36
R
Rasis de peste. 2^ Ruf. contra pestem. 28 Rogers writing. 46 Rogers pleasant
talk by the way. 46. etc. Reward in Christ no merit in us. 83 Resurrection
of the dead. 84.85
T
The iii. elements. 22 Trouble of mind, 29 The best remedy of ye plague. 33
To know the Antrax. 35 The tale of a Lion. 46 The ^rutes of usury. 55 The Lord
Crumwell. idem The discriptio^ of To. prela. 60 The Popes practice. 61 The
gretest cross. 77 The holy trinite. 85 The holy church. idem
W
Weome^ have worms in their tongues. 7 Witchcrafte. 75 What the soul is. 83
We can carry nothing away. 79 Where it taineth double bear. 74 Who shall shoe the
mule. 62 Who may not blede. 30 Well fished. ^^
FINIS.

