A SHORT AND PLAIN Discourse. Fully containing the whole doctrine of
Evangelical FASTES.

By GEORGE BVDDLE, Bachelour of Divinity, and Parson of Whikkenby in
Lincolne-shire.

Orae, ieinua -- LONDON Printed for MATTHEW LAW, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard, near unto Saint Austines Gate, at the Sign of the
Fox. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, WILLIAM BARLOVV Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, strength of faith in this last sinful age.
RIGHT Reverend Father, in the common congratulation and great rejoicing of the
Clergy of this Diocese, at our very first most joyful hearing of your
Lordships designation unto this Episcopal Sea of Lincoln: The merciful
Providence of God has assigned me this as my Peculiar, that my
Vniuersitie-father is become unto me my Diocesan-father. My earnest desire is,
that in the common judgment of the best of our Clergy, my commending of this
present Discourse, concerning Evangelical Fasts, unto so fit a Patron, may be
accepted, as a Peculiar of duty, fitly answerable unto so fortunate a
Peculiar of the Providence.

It is indeed a Part of an annual Rent, which for some years yet to come. I
have heretofore promised in private to our Second Jewel of Salisbury, The
Earl of Salisburie
out of my Diuinity-studie. But that which once in our Cambridge Philosophy
Schools, I sung out of Pindarus, with a younger voice, as a Dittie possibly
prophetical, (...) the same I may now in riper years, more truly sing out an
higher chair: Howsoever my qiuer full of sharp-headed arrows may sound well
in the hearing and understanding of them, Not to judge Virtue according to the
skill of common people.
who have learned with Socrates of Aesop, (...), Yet surely I shall please the
multitude neither in the manner nor in the matter thereof. For my experience of
the Country is even the same that good Hooker, a faithful minister of God in
the parts of Kent, and of worthy memory, sometimes complains of. Neither do
they please the many, neither do the many please them.
It has unto me, as it did unto him, verified Trismegistus and found him a
true man of his word. (...).

Howbeit, with the same worthy Hooker, after the example of the Apostle, I
labor in all things, and have labored specially, what I could in this, to
please also and satisfy even our common multitude of my brethren in Christ, to
their best understanding and profit, so far forth as I might, without hurt or
prejudice unto the matter of my Discourse, which has been too unfaithfully
dealt withal by many before me, who, by serving humorous people too much, have
been too undutiful unto their Text.

The Lord Jesus, who has doubled outward honor in his Church, unto you his
(...), his wel-ruling Elder, double, treble, multiply his Elizaeus like spirit
upon you, that by your profitable labors night and day, in the Word and
Doctrine, you may, as a second John Baptist, joining with the rest of our
zealous Bishops, in your united force of zeal, against the Schisms and
shameless sinning of this last ungodly world, prepare the way of the Lord unto
his second coming. Amen.

Whikkenby, 1608. Iunij. 6. Your Lordships right humbly devoted. GEORGE BVDDLE.

To the Christian Reader, The death of Sin, and the life of Christ's
righteousness.
THey that are Christ's (says the Apostle) have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts thereof. Galat. 5.
The right Christian moderation of Fasting, used in the Primitive Churches, is
Christ's Decumanus Clauus, that is to say, is Christ's great Nail, wherewith
(Christian Reader) thou having the good example of the Orthodoxall Fathers, and
of their most orthodoxal Children, the learned Protestants of this Age, as an
Hammer in thy hand, do crucify and nail these affections and lusts of thy
flesh, to the Cross of Christ. The Forge of this Nail, and the Head of this
Hammer, is the Word of God. Take only this Manual for thy Manubrium, or Handle
of the Hammer it is so sinned for thy hand, if thou have any sensible
understanding of Christ, or strength of Grace in thee, as as that thou may
soon drive the Nail to the head, and strike the dead stroke of true
Mortification into thy fleshly heart. The Lord Jesus direct thy stroke, that no
fond prejudice cause thee to miscensure or handle it amiss.

Farewell.
A SHORT AND Plain Discourse, concerning Evangelical Fasts.
Upon these words, But the days will come, The Harmony Mat. 9, 14.15.16.17.

Mar. 2.18.19.20.21.22.

Luke 5.33.34.35.36.37.38.39.


when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast

Mat. 9.15.
CHAP. I. Containing the Coherence and the Analysis.
THe seed of the woman, The Coherence, in which is showed very briefly how
hitherto the Serpent and the seed of the Serpent, had showed his Antipathy
against the seed of the woman and how the seed of the woman deals with him in
this Text.
the true Messiah Christ Jesus had hitherto, till toward the end of this his
first years public preaching of the gospel, sought only the destruction of
the works of the Serpent, and of the Devils mischievous power. No otherwise
the^ accidentally, had our blessed glorious Savior destroyed the person either
of wicked Angel or wicked man: But the Devil the Serpent by himself, and his
seed had hitherto first wrought against our Saviors person to destroy it, by
Violence and Infamy; Violence, against his soul by suggestions in the forty
days temptation in the wilderness; against his body by Herod in his infancy, by
the Pharisees ( Job. 4 1.) when he first baptized: by the barbarous Clownes of
Nazaret ( Luke. 4.29.) when he first preached publicly. Infamy, by having
objected the baseness of his trade. Is not this the Carpenter Mary's son? of
his kindred and parentage, Are not James and Ioses, Judah and Simon his kinsmen?
Mar. 6.3) Is not this goodman Joseph's son? ( Luke 4.22.) And when nothing
would fadge either by Violence or Infamy to the destroying of Christ's person,
then, even before the end of this his first years public preaching, against
his public and private work to destroy it. It is two fold, Saving doctrine;
Good life. Against Christ's doctrine, That it is blasphemous. Luke 5. and this
Cha. 3. ver. This man speaks blasphemies, who can forgive sins, but God?
Against Christ's life, That Moses never broke the two material tables more
plainly with his two hands, then Christ has broken the two moral tables of
the law both by his sins of Commission against the Negative prohibitions
thereof, and by sins of Omission against the Affirmative commands. By sins
of Commission against the first table: For ( John the 5.) by uttering
blasphemy at the feast of Tabernacles, and by making himself the son of
God, he breaks the three first commandments; by breaking the Sabboath at
the same feast, and by healing a bedred man upon the Sabboath day he breaks
the fourth commandment, By sins of Commission and Omission against the
second table: For (this Cha. 11. v.) in that he companieth with gluttons and
drunkards, in Leui a common tol-gatherer a bad fellows house, he breaks the
negative part of the sixth and seventh commandments to the manifest murdering,
and effeminating, or corrupting the pure souls of men, destroying that opinion
of necessary austerenes which John the Baptist, and the Pharisees had by their
austere lives inured the people unto; and in that he omitteth all kinds of
Disciplinary Fasts, very necessary for the mortification of the sinful flesh
of his Disciples, he breaks the affirmative part of the same commandments.

This last objection is of my text. And (that which heretofore I have showed at
large, to be the very depth of Sathanisme, and of all deuilish policy) it is
uttered against Christ not by the Pharisees Disciples, who might be suspected to
object of malice, and whom in Leui his house, Christ had already answered; but
it is uttered in the open hearing of thousands, by the deuoutest Disciples of
his undoubted and best friend that most famous living sanctimonie John Baptist.
The Disciples of John say unto him, not, Verse. 14.
The Disciples of the Pharisees say unto him: Why do we and the Pharisees Fast
much ((...)) or most severely, nay not only fast, but pray; Luke 5.33.
not only fast and pray much ((...)); but (as Saint Luke has it more fully
(...), that is to say, very thickly and often: but thy Disciples Fast no
disciplinarie Fasts at all, but eat and drink and take their ordinary meals
every day.

The Analysis.
Unto this so subtle, so weighty, so grave and true accusation in regard of the
Antecedent (though most false and frivolous, in regard of the Consequent) our
glorious Savior in these two parables gives two Apologies worthy of himself;
the former in this former Parable, taken from his own person, The former
Apology taken from Christ's person.
the other in the other Parable, taken from the Quality and person of his
Disciples and followers. He himself, was now not only the husband, but even
the Bridegroom of his Church in the honiemoone, and sweetest feruencie of her
first love. As for the children of his Bride-chamber, his Disciples and near
attendants, he was able to keep them in his Fathers name, without any
paedagogicall or disciplinarie exercise, of sorrow and humiliation for sin,
John 17.12. To fast, to mourn, to eat the bread and water of affliction, was
now the portion of his festival bride Cup. To be wed to all kinds of sorrows
and penance, was his (...), his own proper work alone, as he now came to be
man's whole and alone Redeemer, a work not (without manifest derogation
thereof, nor without a necessary infeebling and weakening of the Christian
faith) any ways communicable to the shoulders of his followers. They should
indeed hereafter (when that which he counted his Bridal feast of afflictions
was once ended, and fully solemnized by him) all of them, above all other men,
with the two sons of Zebedee, be baptized with his bloody baptism, Math.
20.2^.
wherewith he was now to be bathed and baptized; They should indeed hereafter
all drink heartily and soundly of his Bride Cup of penance and of death, whereof
he was now to drink first himself. But before, his Bride or they could taste
any whit deeply or kindly of this his Bride Cup, it was first his honest and
necessary duty, to be himself, in himself, as Moses was to Zipporah, a
bloody husband unto her, and as her true loving Bridegroom and Redeemer, to
begin therein unto her himself, drinking the hartiest draught, even to the
bottom of the dregs, of all the just punnishments of sin. If they or his
Bride her self did now, whilst the Bridal lasted, bride it (as it were) and
sip a little thereof; that surely might be all, that could yet upon so high a
feast day, well become her. In a word, he was now to tread and to be trodden in
the wine press of his Fathers wrath alone; He alone, Isa. 63.3. and 53.10.
John. 11.

Solomon was a type of Christ in this. For Judah and Israel were many in his
days, even as the ^and of the sea in number, eating, drinking, and making
merry. 1. king. 4.20.


and no other with him was now to give his soul an offering for our sins, as
the Prophet, Isay, had fore prophesied. He now was that one man, of whom
Caiaphas so extraordinarily prophesied, that it was expedient, that one man
should die for the people, that the whole nation perish not. Seeing then, that
all cause of mourning or humbling of the soul, which is the first and chief
end of Fasting, is by his bodily presence with them, so necessarily absent from
them; Can any reasonable man make the children of the Bride-chamber fast, while
the Bridegroom is with them? Thus stands Christ's former Apology, taken from
the majesty and greatness of his own person.

On the other side, in regard of the weakness and unfitness of his Disciples, The
other Apology taken from the person of Christ's Disciples.
and even of the Disciples of John, and of the Pharisees themselves, to fast
Evangelical Fasts, his other Apology is this. His Evangelical or
Gospel-fasts are as shreds of new cloth, strong, durable, able and fit to mend
a rent or a decay in the strongest and most holy souls. But they, who had
fasted none but legal or prophetical Fasts, were yet as old, worn, thredbare
cloth, worn out with the observation of the old customs of the ragged,
beggarly, vndurable rudiments of the ceremonial law, which law was not now to
endure, or to be me^ded and stitched up any longer. His Gospel-fasts again are
as new, vigorous, spiritous, virtuous strong wine, full of Spirit and truth.
But they yet were not Sanctified with his truth; They knew not yet, whether
there were any holy Ghost, and new renewing spirit or no; They were yet, as
old leaking, vnstancht bottels, not able so (...), so to contain and abstain,
as (after his Ascension and bodily departure from them) The promise of his
Father, and the Grace and truth of his Gospel should instruct and enable them.
The rent in the fasters through this vnsuteablenes would now be made worse, if
such fasting should be applied* The Fast it self, being too strong would take
vent, and run out into manifest loss. What reason then, that such fasters
should be set in the paedagogie, or disciplinarie exercise of such a Fast?

This double Apology I take to be thus rightly meant in these two parables,
and thereby the deuillish and slanderous consequent, of the diffamation of our
Saviors offensive, or dissolute breach of the affirmative part of the sixth and
seventh commandments, to be most notably and clearly overthrown. He did
not with his disciples, omit the keeping of the general or essential duties
of mortification, absolutely commanded in the affirmative part of those two
commandments: Only in regard of his own quality and person, and in regard of
the quality and person of his Disciples, he did together with them intermit,
rather then omit some duties, tending to the Been esse of mortification, which
were not universally and absolutely commanded.

My text therefore thus: But the days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be
taken from them, or The days will come, when new shreds shall be applied to new
cloth, new wine shall be put into new bottels, that both may be preserved; and
then shall they Fast: is to be annexed in common too, and with both the parts of
this double Apology, as a necessary anticipation and preuercion of that
objection, which might yet further worthily have proved our glorious Savior to
be an obstinate patron of fleshly liberty. For though in regard of the
present state of his person, and of the persons of his Disciples, their (...)
fasting could not prove him a resolute or absolute adversary (...)
mortification: yet seeing that fasting has such power in it to mortify the
flesh, found out by the continual practice of Moses and the Prophets, and of
him, that was greater then any Prophet, John the Baptist; if he should have
took no order, nor given any command at all of religious fasting unto his
followers, his temporary intermission of so necessary and expedient an
exercise, would have bin soon defined by Satan his accuser, and the accuser
of the brethren, to have been an absolute omission of mortification. That
therefore at the length the bawling mouth of Cerberus, might be soundly musseld
and stopped for ever, As John (says Christ) by authority more then prophetical,
which he received in the wilderness by Oracle: as the Pharisees and Doctors of
the law, by authority of the law of Moses, and by the authority of the examples
of so many Prophets, do gravely, and soberly, trusse up the loins and guts of
their followers, and do set unto their Disciples a diet and order of religious,
much, and often fasting: so I will and command these my children of the
Bride-chamber My disciples and followers by my Legal, Prophetical, more then
prophetical, Evangelical authority (For it pleases the Father, that in me
all fulness of authority should dwell, Colosse. 4.12. Iam. 4.12
and that I should be the only lawgiuer able to save and destroy) that
presently after my bodily departure, they also Fast and Pray: (...) (for those
two words, (...) must be repeated) Much and often. I dare boldly say, that they
who have made, do make, or shall make any other meaning either of these words,
or of this whole answer of Christ: they have, do and shall (...), they have
do and shall therein show the infirmity Alienae mentis, at least, they have
abalienated, do abalienate, and they shall abalienate Christ's right meaning
from Christ's sure words. Thus much touching the most necessary Analysis.

Out of the first view of this Legal, Prophetical, The Thesis or general
Doctrine, necessarily gathered out of this right meaning of the Text.
more then Prophetical, Evangelical authority of Christ: commanding
Disciplinary Fasts, to be observed in his Church after his departure, who does
not presently gather the great necessity of our obeying the Church
constitutions, concerning Church Fasts, Cross, Surplice, night watchings, or
concerning any expedient matter else, of the like indifferent nature making to
piety, mortification or Christian honesty? who does not presently gather also
a plain distinction betwixt matters commanded absolutely, as essential duties
of the affirmative parts of the moral law, and betwixt matters commanded
conditionally, when, where, and as they shall be judged by gods spirit in his
children to be expedient and necessary? Who does not presently gather, how
gross headed and slowharted humorous Schismatics are, who either with T. of
Aquin and his Scholars the Papists, have counted some Church fasts, Praecepta
naturae, as absolute and vnvariable commands: or with Aerius and Iouinian those
fleshly Libertine damned Heretics, have esteemed Church fasts so indifferently
indifferent, as though it were lawful, though neither sickness, nor business,
neither impotencie, nor importance urge us, to omit them notwithstanding and
break them, whenever it may please our wanton humorous flesh.

For the full therefore and more particular declaration of this Text: The two
parts of the more particular declaration of the text.
First, Concerning the nature and authority of Christ's Command: [Then shall
they Fast] What Fasts it does command. Whom it does authorize and command to
command them: Who are to be commanded the keeping of them: With what rigor
the party delinquent are to be punished. Secondly, Concerning the obeying of
this Command, as it is further determined, [Then shall they Fast much and
^ften their religious Fasts,] with what Severity, in regard of the word
[(...)] Much, and in regard of the word [(...)] Often: with what Holiness, in
regard of the Six holy ends of religious Fasting, intimated in this Scripture,
by the words, (...), Mourn, (...), Pray, (...), Both are preserved, it ought
to be obeyed: by Gods special assistance, and by the entreaty of the
Christian patience of the understanding ear, I will briefly deliver, that
sound and necessary doctrine, which no one Writer, either new or old, has so
sufficiently and plainly taught us, as was requisite.

CHAP. II. The first general Part. Concerning the Nature and Authority of
Christ's Command.
TO the first Question ( What Evangelical Fasts are directly commanded by it:
The Nature and Authority of the Command. [Then shall they Fast.]
) I answer, as partly I have answered already, that this Command is not
Absolute, but Con^ultatorie: neither are these Fasts here commanded vnvariable
and vnomissible; but they are such as may be changed, and omitted also for a
time. In a word, the Evangelical Fasts here directly commanded by Christ's
authentical command, The first Question: what Fasts are commanded here. Not
Fasts of Absolute command.
are our solemn or public disciplinary Fasts, which we call our Church-fasts,
being in nature and essence altogether correspondent and answerable to these
approueable Fasts, wherein John the Baptist, and the worthiest Pharisees had
publicly trained and exercised their disciples. To make this Part of the
distinction of Fasts and of their command more sensibly plain: we must know,
that a Fast of absolute command, whether private or public, is of the essence
of mortification, and is altogether vnvariable and vnomissible. Such a Fast,
till Christ was ascended, was the Fast of Reconciliation, upon the Upon this
day Eve and Adam f^ll by inordinate desire of the forbidden fruit, as many
Deuines do very probably conjecture. And no doubt even in king Salomons time,
Judah and Israel fast^d upon this day.
tenth of the seventh Month, Leuit. 23, 29. Whosoever humbles not himself,
(that is, as S. Cyrill does truly interpret it) Whosoever does not fast from
Euentide to Euentide, upon the feast of Reconciliation, that person shall be
cut off from his people. Our Savior Christ with his Disciples, kept this Fast
every year duly and truly; neither could these Disciples of John and of the
Pharisees, have taxed them justly, for any remissenes in the breach of the
same. Nay, no doubt, if Pilate the chief Deputy, Governor of Jury, should,
as sometimes wicked Ahaz did, have shut up the doors of the Temple, that
they could not have kept it before the Lord in the Temple: yet Christ would
certainly have caused them (as he did afterward cause them, contrary to the
will and guise of the Jewish Elders, to keep his last Passover) to have kept
it with him upon that very day, which his Father had absolutely commanded, and
that even in their private houses or in the open fields. Such a Fast of
Absolute precept, is still our Evangelical Fast of extraordinary Repentance,
appointed by God absolutely, for the necessary removing of his extraordinary
judgments and wrath, from our extraordinary sins. The Apostles indeed and
near attendants of Christ (as I have declared already) had no cause to keep
this Fast, so long as Christ was with them, and kept them continually in his
Fathers name, least any part of the merit of his passive obedience for our
Redemption, should have been imparted and attributed unto them, as well as to
him. Yet he himself, for the removing of Gods Ordinary and Extraordinary
wrath, both from us and from them, held it 40. days and 40. nights together in
the wilderness, and did oftentimes keep it, though not in sackcloth and
ashes, yet by lying whole nights upon the ground in the dust, and sometimes by
sweating and weeping drops and tears of his heart blood. It is not surely in
the power and consultation of the Church, either particular or universal, to
omit or repeal this kind of Fast. For example, The primitive Churches,
immediately succeeding the Apostles, made a Catholic Canon, that Festis diebus
nemo ieinnet: No man should fast upon holy days, unless the holy day fell
upon Ashwednesday or upon good Friday. Jgnat. ad Ph(...)lip. (...). Ad
^agnenses in eandem senten^am seribit.
But for the Lords day, our Christian Sabbath, which Ignatius in his Epistle
ad Magnenses, worthily terms (...). The Empress of all other days; be
says in another Epistle written ad Philippenses, that Whosoever fasteth upon
it, is (...), he is a Christ murderer. what? shall we think with S. Austin,
who in his Epistle to Casulan, admits no excuse of the breach of this
catholic Canon, that he is a Murderer of Christ, who fasteth the
extraordinary Poenitentiall Fast upon the Lords day? God forbid. S. Cyrill has
better taught us to restrain the fasting forbidden by the Canon, upon our
Christian Sabbath, unto the Church-Fast, or unto the private ordinary
Penitential Fast only. For as touching the Extraordinary Penitential Fast,
both solemn and private, which, whosoever omitteth, he is certainly, both
(...) and (...), both a murderer of Christ, and a murderer of his own soul:
S. Cyrils words are most orthodoxall and sound, Extraordinary penitential
Fasts whether private or public, are of absolute command. 2. Sam. 12.
when he says; that Libertas est homini Christiano, omni tempore ieiunandi: A
Christian has liberty to Fast upon any day. If David had not presently cried
Peccaui, when Nathan told him of his extraordinary sin, if he had not
presently cast himself out of his throne into dust and ashes, and refrained
his ordinary meals, and all thinking of the ordinary observation of Church
feasts. If the King of Niniue, his Nobles, his people, even to the beast that
perishes, had not also at Jonas first opening his mouth, against their sins,
For the Thief upon the Cross had not time to exercise this kind of
humiliation.
kept that their public Fast of extraordinary Repentance; Alas, alas, where
had David, where had the Ninevites been at this day? So necessary (
Necessitate praecepti, though not Necessitate medii,) is this kind of
extraordinary Repentance, unto the salvation of all them, who have either
sinned extraordinarily, or are extraordinarily afflicted.

But Fasts of conditional or consultatorie command, not of the Being, but
only of the well being of Mortification.
But on the other side we must know also, that a Fast of Consultatorie command,
whether it be a Church fast or a Private Fast, is not of the Essence, but of
the well being of Mortification, and that it is both Variable and also
Omissible, unless it be Votiue. And surely, if it be solemnly or properly
Votiue, it must be vowed both solemnly by the Church, and properly by private
men; always with this cautelous restraint, that we do not tie our selves by
vow unto it, if God shall extraordinarily visit us his people, with such a
mercy, upon out Votiue-Fast-day, as that our Nehemiah and Ezra, our Prince and
Bishop, have just cause to forbid us to Fast, and to say unto us, Nehem.
8.9.10.12. This day is holy unto the Lord your God: Mourn not, neither weep;
but go ye and eat the fat, and drink of the sweet, and send part thererf
unto them, for whom none is prepared. The joy of the Lord is this day your
strength. Such a Fast was this Variable and Omissible Fast, commanded by John
and the Pharisees unto their followers, in this Text of Scripture. For the same
John, the same Pharisees, who had commanded such fasting, might also, upon
weighty causes, have changed, intermitted or omitted them for a time, as
Christ himself by his example teaches them, and as the continual practice of
the Church of God, both universal and particular, have both before Christ and
after Christ taught us. Such a Fast is our ancient Catholic and most
approueable and necessary Fast before the Communion of the Lords Supper. Aquin
in his dispute De ieinnio, 147. Quaest. calls it Praeceptum Naturae, that is,
as I here interpret it, A Fast of absolute precept, included in the affirmative
part of the sixth and seventh commandments of the moral Law. S. Austin in his
Epistle to Ianuarius says, Epist. 11 ^.
that it is Ieiunium Moris Christi, qui v(...)iari non debet; that it is a Fast
of Christ's own fashion and special appointment, because S. Paul says in the
1. Cor. 11.34 Tha^, if (...) man be hungry, he should eat at home, least the
Church come together to their condemnation. But this their reason is too weak,
to ground any thing demonstratiuely upon it. For the Apostle does only by
evident demonstration of words, forbid their vnreuerent eating in the public
assembly. Verse. 22. And so all those Primitive Apostolic Churches did
understand him, Hom. in 1. Cor. cap. 11.
who (as S. Chrysostom writing upon the same words, does clearly witness)
had even till S. Chrysostomes age, which was the fourth from Christ, always
received the Communion after their Charistia, or common Christian
Charityfeasts, called by S. Jude ver. 12. (...). To conclude therefore my
answer, to this first necessary demand, What Euangelical Fasts are directly
commanded by Christ, in this Consultatorie Precept, [ Then shall they Fast:] I
answer briefly, That such Public Church-fasts are here authorized and
commanded, as may be, and ought to be changed and intermitted, when they
chance to hinder or to cross any christian Duties, commanded by the absolute
precept of Christ, either in his Law or in his Gospel.

Sect. 2.
The second Question, Who, and how straightly they are commanded to command them.
COncerning the Nature and Authority of this command [ Then shall they fast,]
To the Second question, Whom it does authorize and command to command or
inioyne these publik Ordinary paenitential Church-fasts, as also How straightly
such authorized Commanders are bound (in foro conscientiae) to command and
inioyne them: I answer, first, that not only the Church governors, (such as
are here John Baptist, 1. Church-Gouernors.
and the Pharisees; such as is Ezra in the 8 Chapter of Ezra, the 21. verse: At
the River by Ahana, ^ Ezra proclaimed a Fast.
such as are the children of the Bride-chamber themselves, in the 13. and 15.
chap. of the Acts: such as were the Fathers of the Church, when the christian
Emperors, like Gallio, Act. 18.17 cared not for Church-law matters. 2. High
Magistrates.

3. Whole Councels.


) But also the High magistrates, and the whole Council of the Church, either
Catholic or National, consisting both of the Clergy and of the Laiety of
Christ may and ought to command them. The King of Nineuie and his Nobles in
the third of Jonas, Esther and Mordecay in the fourth of Esther, the godly Wife
and godly Husband counseled by S. Paul, 1. Cor. 7.^. to defraud themselves for
a time, that they may the better give themselves and employ their household in
fasting and p^^i^r, are Demostratiue precedents to the Supreme Magistrate; the
whole comminaltie of the (...) Tribes of Israel, together with their Elders,
and Phinees the High Priest in the 20. chapter of the Judges, Ver. 23. and 2^:
and the euiled Jews, joined in one as one man, in the tenth of Ezra, are
authentical proofs, Verse. 7.8.
to authorize whole Councels and Synods. But yet there is one kind of
Church-Fasts, which now a days we call I^^^nia quatuer temporum, called in
times past, The Quart(...) Fa(...).
(...) sacrorum Ordinum, the Fasts of holy Orders; the command whereof, does
most properly and principally lie upon the charge of our Bishops and Clergy,
whenever they either ordain or institute Ministers. For it is plain out of
the story of the Apostles Acts, Act. 13. and 14.
that these children of the Bridechamber, did never lay their hands upon any
Minister of the word and Sacraments, either at his ordination or Institution,
before they had first appointed solemn fasting an prayer, And surely, although
such fasting be not of the Esse; yet it is of the Been esse and melius fieri
of holy Institutions and Orders. 1. Tim. 3.
It pertains also most principally to Saint Paul's (...), abstemious temperate
Bishop, that he call upon the supreme Magistrate, and upon the whole people of
Christ, and be a lively precedent unto them, for the execution of this
consultatorie command, [Then shall they Fast.] From whom did S. Austin and his
mother Monica, private persons, take their right pattern of fasting, when they
lived in Millaine, but from Saint Ambrose the Bishop of Millaine? Church
governors must play the most careful part in seeing to the execut on and
obedience of this command.
whom does S Austin counsel his friend Casulan to follow in the order of
Church fasts, but chiefly his Provincial or Diocesan Bishop? Episcopo tuo in
hacre, noli resistere: Quod ipse facit, sine vllo scrupulo aut disceptatione
sectare. Cross not thy Bishop in this matter of a Saturday Fast, but in this
and the like, what thou see thy Bishop do, that do thou without any scruple
or controversy.

Secondly, if it be demanded, whether as it is in the consultation of the
Church to repeal, intermit, or change these public Fasts of ordinary
Repentance; so it is in their consultatorie power altogether to omit and
disannull them: The second Article of this second Question, whether Omissible
fasts may be altogether omitted.
and whether Catholic Fasts may be intermitted or repealed by Particular
governors, of Particular Churches or by National counsels, I answer first to
the former part of the demand; that there are in the Scripture, two kinds of
indifferent things not commanded by absolute precept, left unto Christian men's
free consultation, as the Spirit of God in his children, shall judge them to be
expedient or inexpedient to be done. Indifferent actions warranted only, and
not commanded.
Of the first kind are such indifferent matters and duties, as are made lawful
unto us only by Warrant, and not also by any so much as consultatorie command
or counsel. And these again are of two sorts: For either they are both
warranted and commended, as are the Voluntary vows of perpetual Virginity
and widowhead, of Poverty, of paying all, or part of our goods to poor
Christ, whether they be proper voluntary vows, or solemn and public
voluntary vows; or they are permitted only, Indifferent actions warranted and
commended, but not commanded.
and tolerated in the book of God, as lawful, but no where commended also as
laudable, as is that best kind of Usury, where a man does no otherwise deal
with his brother, the^ he himself in the like case, Things warranted, and only
permitted, or tolerated, are in the Church governors power
would be very willing to be dealt withal. It is in the consultatorie power of
the public governors of Christ's Church, either altogether to disannull and
abrogate, or at their discretion to restrain and correct the abuse of this
latter, either by civil punishment in their civil government, or by
Excommunication or suspension in their Clergy government. But as touching
the former, which are both warranted and commended in the Scripture, it is not
in the consultatorie power of Christ's Church governors, either publicly to
command them, or publicly to disannull and altogether forbid them, whether
they be private and proper voluntary vows or solemn and public voluntary
vows of perpetual continency, poverty, or such like. When thou absteinest
from such proper or solemn vows (says the only lawgiuer, able to save and
destroy Deuter. 23.22.) it shall be no sin unto thee: who then can bind me (
in foro conscientiae) either to vow single life, though a thing warranted and
commended, or forbid me to vow it publicly, I say, either to command these
commended holy Voluntary vows, or to disannull, and altogether forbid them,
is not in the power of any public governors whatsoever. Only it is in their
power to restrain and correct the abuses of them, if either the Votarie do
vow that rashly, which is not likely to be in his power and ability to
perform, or do vow that wickedly, or to a wicked, ungodly, superstitious
end, which he ought not to perform. Certain young Widows, made a solemn
vow of perpetual widow head in Saint Paul's time. But Saint Paul seeing, by
experience of them, their great unableness to perform such vows: discommends
them greatly in the fifth chapter of his former Epistle to Timothy, To restrain
the abuse of indifferent actions, warranted and commanded is in the power of
the Church governors. To command them, is not at all in the Church governors
power.
and charge Bishop Timothy to restrain the solemn vows of such Votaries,
until they came to the age of threescore years. Certain also of the lewd
Hypocrites, amongst the Israelites in the time of Moses law, as it is plain in
the 18. ver of the 23. of Deuteronomie, had wantonly brought the hire of their
Whores, and the prices of their Dogs, for holy solemn Voluntary vows into
the house of God, as many superstitious, wanton Votaries have done, and do
still under the reign of Popish superstition, and as idolatrous people, do
and have done, who have solemnly dedicated, and bequeathed their money, lands,
goods, unto Mass Priests, to sing Dirdges for their souls, or to say Prayers,
for the deliverance of their souls out of Purgatory, or to the maintenance of
the Supremacy, and Hierarchy of the Judicial and Donatisticall,
Pseudocatholicke Church of Rome. God would have these solemn Voluntary vows
both restrained and corrected. For so says the Law: Deuteronomy. 23.18. Thou shall
neither bring the hire of an whore; nor the price of a Dog into the house of
the Lord thy God for any vow. For even both these are an abomination unto the
Lord thy God.

Thus have I showed how things of indifferent nature warranted only, but not
at all commanded in Gods word are to be held, or not to be held to be under
the consultatorie power of the public governors of Christ's Church. Another
kind of duties, Indifferent things warranted commended, and also by
cousultatorie precept commanded, if they be publicly commanded, are wholly in
the Church governors power: and if the Church governors do altogether omit
them, they disobey God and his Christ, because they are never altogether
inexpedient.
and things indifferent, not commanded by absolute precept, but left to
Christian men's free consultation, is of those which are not only warranted in
Gods word, but are also commanded by that kind of command and precept, which
I have termed Consultatorie. These again are of two sorts. For either they
are by such Consultatorie commandment, commanded only unto private men; or
they are also commanded both to private men and to public officers. Of the
former sort is Continency, commanded unto them who have the gift thereof, in
that consultatorie private precept Math. 19.12. He that can receive it, let him
receive it. Of the same sort is the renouncing of all wordly business to follow
the study of Christ's heavenly Doctrine, commanded unto them, unto whom it is
expedient, by that Consultatorie precept, Math. 19.21. If thou will be perfect,
Go sell thy goods, and give them to the poor, and come follow me. But of the
latter sort is Decency of apparel, and a discreet constitution of
Church-orders, commanded in general by that Consultatorie precept, (...): Let
all things be done comely and in order. Of the same sort is this Ordinary
penitential fasting, or this Fasting of ordinary repentance, whereof we now
speak, commanded here in special, Then shall they fast. Now, as it is not in
the free power of a private man's consultation, who has the gift of
Continency, or to whom it is most expedient to leave the world and to follow
Christ, altogether to disobey Christ's private consultatorie commands; as it is
evident by Saint Paul, who says in the 15. ver. of the 9. Chap. of his 1. Epi.
to the Corinthians, that it was better for him to die, then that he should take
a lawful stipend of the Corinthians, which was not then expedient: so much
less is it in the power of a public Officer, or of the supreme Magistrate,
to suffer the Church of God to be ruled without all outward Decency, or to
disobey Christ in not observing that, which he has specially commanded by
this special Consultatorie public command: Then shall they fast. And thus
have I showed also, how things of indifferent nature, left to man's free
consultation, not only by warrant of the word, but also by Consultatorie
private, or by consultatorie public commandment, are to be held or not to
beheld, to be under the Consultatorie power of the public governors of the
Church. For although those indifferent duties, which are commanded to private
men, only by Consultatorie private command, be to be performed by private
men, so only as the spirit of God in them shall exact, (as it did of Saint
Paul,) their Consultatorie obedience in the exact performance of them: yet
those indifferent duties, which are commanded also to public Officers, by
the special Consultatorie public command of Christ, the most loving
Bridegroom of his Church: these in different duties, I say, of this so
special Consultatorie public command, cannot without neglect of duty unto
Christ their Lord and master, the only lawgiuer, able to save and destroy, be
either intermitted upon an humor, or omitted and disannulled altogether by the
public governors of Christ's Church. The neglect of these Church fasts then,
in any Church whatsoever is a token of some want of that feeling, which the
Church as a true loving wife should have of the bodily absence of her loving
husband: according to the speech of our Savior in this my Text: But the days
will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they
Fast. Surely as Solomon says, Eccle. 7.6. The heart of Fools, (who laugh in
the face as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 5.12.) is in the house of mirth, but
the heart of wisemen, who laugh in the heart, and are soberly and truly wise
unto salvation, is always in the house of mourning, that is (as our Savior
here in my Text does (...), does confound and turn the terms of Fasting,
15. Ver. Then shall they fast, or, Then shall they mourn.
and mourning making them all one) in the house of fasting, because it is
better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of feasting, and
because by a sad look the heart is made better. And thus I have assoiled the
former doubt, which might worthily arise, touching the governors of the
Church, their absolute omission and repealing of all Church fasts* To the other
doubt thus much I speak briefly, that though the Fast be Catholic, No
fasting, no mourning.
as is the Fast before the Communion, and all our other Church-fasts except two
only, that is to say, though the Fast be Universally constituted, 3. Articles
whether Catholic Fasts, may be repealed or changed by particular Churches.
and decreed to be kept in all the particular Churches of the world, by the
Universal decree and sentence of an Oecumenicall counsel; yet the
Oecumenicall counsel does always with this Prouiso decree it, that no
particular Church shall be further bound unto it, then as it is an help and no
ways an hindrance unto true mortification. If it be found either through the
superstition of this doting old world, or through any other enormitie,
wherewith Satan and man's corruption does often stain and defile the best
exercises of godliness, to be any whit prejudicial to those holy duties of
absolute necessity, which are commanded by absolute precept; then the practice
of the best particular Churches, and even of some Diocesan Bishops, have taught
us, that our righter way to obey the Oecumenicall counsel is to obey rather
the meaning then the bare and dead letter of their decree. I confess that
Saint Austin says wisely and well, speaking of these Universal customs of
fasting, decreed by the Plenary counsel of the whole church; Si quid horu^ tota
perorbem frequentat Ecclesia, hoc quin ita faciendu^ sit desputare,
insolentissimae insaniae est. If any of these things be used by the custom of
the whole Church, for a man to hold that such a thing ought not, or may
indifferently not be done, it is a part and a trick of most siely fondness
and madness. But he gives this reason intimated both in his words following,
and in his words before going, where he had set down his formal difference
between particular Church customs, and betwixt Universal Church customs to
be the cause of this his speeach, for that the Universal Church never decrees
any thing, that is Contra fidem and bonos mores, against the Faith and good
manners, but the particular Churches may be supposed to decree some new customs
both Contra fidem and bonos mores. Out of which reason we may plainly see, how
Saint Austin did understand the decrees of Universal counsels, and the mind
of all Churches, when they chanced to have the same custom in the use of an
indifferent duty amongst them all, Namely, that the intention, and mind, and
meaning of the Universal Church is this to keep or to decree no custom, that
is, Contra fidem and bonos mores: yet that his meaning is not; neither was it
the Catholic meaning of the whole Church, that the customarie use of any
indifferent thing, not commanded by absolute precept, should therefore never
be altered, because it was once decreed by so Universal a decree and consent
of all Churches. The Catholic Constitutions are to be obeyed, so long as they
are commanded. But none of them were even commanded as perpetual and
altogether vnvariable.


Though indeed, whilst such indifferent matters are in vigor and force, and
are commanded by the Church, he is worthily to be esteemed Schismaticus
schismate charitatis in the highest degree, who does not obediently yield unto
them; and also Schismaticus schismate fidei, if he dispute against the
authority of the Church, in giving out such constitutions: yet no such
indifferent matters of Catholic constitution and command, are to be held to be
perpetual, constant, and invariable or unalterable for ever. For that
Prerogative Saint Austin in the sixth chapter of the same Epistle to Ianuarius,
attributes only to those customs, which either Christ himself by special
command, or his Apostles from Christ, have immediately in some part of the new
Testament ordained and constituted: Quod nulla mor^m diuersitate variari
poterunt: That they are not, nor may not be varied or altered by any
diversity of times or manners. Which Prerogative, I say, that the Church of God
universal has not ascribed nor assumed unto her self or to her universal
customs, it is plain, by comparing that which Epiphanius writes of the
Catholic customs of his time, with the particular practice of the Church of
Rome, and of our Western Churches in later times. He testifies constantly
and plainly in the conclusion of the eighty heresy, that Communiones sieve
synaxes fieri ordinatae sunt ab Apostolis, Quarta feria and Prosabbato and
Dominica. Quarta vero and Prosabbato ieiunium institutum est vsque ad horam
nonam. Et per totum annum quidem ieiunium hoc seruatur in eadem sancta
Catholica Ecclesia, Quarta inquam feria and Prosabbato vsque ad horam nonam,
excepta sola Pentecoste per totos quinquaginta dies, in quibus neque genua
flectuntur, (neque ieiunium imperatum est, and exceptis diebus Epiphaniorum,
quando Christus natus est. Communions were ordained by the Apostles to be
received upon the Wednesday, Friday, and the Lords day. And upon the Wednesday
and Friday, no meat was ordained to be taken, until three a clock in the
afternoon. Which Fast until three a cloak in the afternoon, upon Wednesdayes
and Fridayes, is kept in the same holy Catholic Universal Church, throughout
the whole year, excepting Also the counsel of Elibert in Spain Can, 23.
(which Council was more ancient then Epiphanius) forbids and restrains
all Church-fasts in the Months of July and August.
only the Pentecost with her fifty days after Easter, (in which days, no
knees are bowed in the Church, neither is there any Fast commanded,) and
excepting the twelve days of Christmas. In these words of Epiphanius, we have
these Catholic Customs set down: First, Communions received throughout the
year, thrice every week. 2. Communions received fasting at three a clock in
the afternoon. 3. Fastings not observed within the fifty days after Easter,
nor within the twelve Christmas days. 4. Knees not bowed publicly in any
Church, within fifty days after Easter. These customs were some of them
(says he) set down by the Apostles themselves. Apostolic customs specially
commanded from Christ, are vnvariable. Apostolic customs not specially but
only generally commanded from Christ are variable.
But for all this, that the Church of God has not accounted so of these
customs as of Apostolic customs ordained from Christ, by absolute
vnvariable command; as S. Austin does well admonish us to distinguish, it is
plain, by the practice of these future Ages, wherein we neither ^oure
Catholic customs altered and omitted in particular Churches* ^ro morum and
^emporum diuersitate.
first keep our Communions thrice, or only thrice in the week, nor secondly
observe the determining and ending of our Fasts upon Wednesdayes and Fridayes,
at three a clock in the afternoon, nor thirdly abstain from al fasting, and
fourthly kneeling in the Church within the fifty days after Easter.

Thus much to the two first and principal Questions, and to the inferior
demands or doubts, which do necessarily arise from under them.

Sect. III.
COncerning the Nature, and Authority of this Command, [ Then shall they
Fast] To the third Question, The third Question, Who are to be commanded these
Fastings out of this next parable.
Who are to be commanded the keeping of these public Fasts of ordinary
Repentance, I answer easily and readily out of this next Parable, that our
Savior Christ would have both the shred and the garment both the wine and the
bottle, that is, both the Fast and the Fasters to be [ Adaequatae] to be both
measurably proportioned together, to the end, they may both be preserved
together. The Governors therefore of the Church, as it is plain out of Jerome
and Austin their Epistles, have never imposed harder tasks of ordinary Fasting,
upon the vessels of their inferior brethen then they themselves were either
able in their sickness or other impotencies, C(...)l El^bertinum Can. 23.
setunta per singulos m^ns^s plaru^t celebrari, exceptis diebus ^uorum mensium
Iul^i and Augusta ob eorundem ^xfirmitatem ab aest^ orituram.
or willing in their best health to undergo. Sint moderata ^eiunia, ne
debilitent stomachum, says Jerome to Rusticus: Let thy ordinary Fasts be with
moderation, and not to the weakening of thy stomach. And in his Epistle to
Laeta, he sets down another cautionarie Rule: Ante annos robustae aetatis,
periculosa est teneris, and grauis abstinentia: Fasting is very dangerous and
hurtful to them, that are not come to their full growth. (This growth, Thomas
of Aquin in the 4. Article De ieiunto, according to the order of the Church in
his time, defines to be Finis tertij septennij: The full age of 21. years.)
The same Aquin puts us in mind of a Exemption, to be added according to the
Analogy of the word, to the two former Rules of Saint Ierom: Non est intentio
Ecclesiae statuentis ieiunia, impedire alias pias and magis necessarias causas:
It is not the mind or intention of the Church, by appointing Fasts, to disallow
or hinder any other more godly and weighty matters, or necessary causes. For
the confirmation of which Rule, we may remember that which Saint Austin
summarily sets down, as the common sentence and resolution of Gods Spirit
in the Church of God, and even in those most devout and most severe Fasters of
his time. Ita pietatem sedulo exercent, Corporis vero exercitationem, vt ait
Apostolus, De morib. Ecclesiae Catholicae cap. 33. 1. Tim. 4.8.
ad exiguum tempus pertinere nouerunt: The sum of their discreet managing of
their Fasts, is this, says Austin; They do exercise godliness, [which is of
absolute Precept, having the promise of this life and of that which is to come,
without which godliness also, all Fasting is but irreligious, as hereafter I
shall fully declare, when I come to speak of the right holy ends of true
Fasting,] They do exercise godliness attentively, studiously, carefully,
diligently. But bodily exercise, as the Apostle says, (Saint Austin has
special reference to ordinary Fasting then practiced) they know, how it of it
self, or in comparison of more worthy parts and exercises of the mind in
godliness, is profitable but for a small time. These then are the terms of
just Exemption from Church fasts, and these two kind of persons are to be
exempted from them, upon the appearance and clear manifestation of the
justness of their cause to the Governors of the Church. 1. Laborers, and men
employed in high, weighty and necessary business, 2. All impotent persons,
whether impotent in goods, fasting ieiunium ieiunij, as our Divinity school
speaks, fasting for want of meat, as common Beggars, and they, who are known
to want food, wherewith to break their fast, when the Church-Fast is ended;
or Impotent in body, as young folks wanting growth, old folks decaying in
growth, sick folks wanting health, and having (...), 1. Tim. 5.23.
often infirmities, and many bad fits, as Bishop Timothy himself had.

Sect. IIII.
COncerning the Nature and Authority of this Command: The fourth Question,
with what rigor these Fasts are to be exacted upon them, who are liable unto
them, either in regard of their observance, or of their penalties.
[ Then shall they Fast] To the fourth and last necessary Question, With what
rigor it is to be exacted of them, who are liable unto it, and With what
rigor the parties delinquent are to be punished: I answer, that as the Fast
of Extraordinary Repentance has been taught, to be oppositely distinguished
from this kind of Fast of Ordinary Repentance, whereof this Command is
directly given, in all those determinations already mentioned and specified in
the three former Questions: so in this answer, an opposite distinction is to
be made betwixt the same two kinds of Fast. Extraordinary sins, whether
private or public, cannot easily be forgiven unto men, unless they do
Repent extraordinarily, and Fast extraordinarily, either in private, for their
private extraordinary sins, or in public, and in private also, for their
public extraordinary sins. Therefore, I have either expressly, or by
implication, of necessary consequence determined Extraordinary public Fasts
thus. First that they are of A solute command for the mortification of
Extraordinary public sins, and are absolutely commanded in the affirmative
part of the sixth and seventh commandments. Secondly, that the public
governors of the Church, The differences of Extraordinary Fasts from these in all the answers to these four questions.
are public murderers of themselves and their brethren, and common bauds of
open sin, and fleshly filthiness, if they themselves both by their own
example, and also by severe iniunction of extrarodinarie Fasts, do not
presently take order, that the guilt of extraordinary sins be mortified and
taken away from themselves and their people, but most principally from Achan,
that is from the notorious sinner or sinners themselves, who with Achan, Zimti,
Cosbi, and such like, do provoke and incense the jealousy of Christ's wrath
against the whole commonwealth, where they sin notoriously. Nay farther,
that if Satan has shut the eyes or enclosed up the hearts of fleshly
Magistrates, so in their own fat, and in the well liking of sin, as that
they either see not, or dare not, or will not solemnly sound Ioels Trumpet to
call the assemblies to a public Fast: such is the necessity of this
humiliation by extraordinary fasting for public sins, and for the removing
of all public calamities, and extraordinary judgments whatsoever, as that
all private Christians that know the way of Righteousness, 1. (...). 12.23.
Iere. 13.17.
are with Jeremy the Prophet bound [in foro conscienciae] by absolute
command to weep, Fast, pray, and drop down tears extraordinarily even in
secret, and not only in secret, but with those godly Israelites in the five
and twenty of Numbers, when they see Gods vengeance begun, and yet Moses and
Phinees, that is, the high Magistrate, and high Priest remaining still acedious
or slouthful, and not begun to do their duty in proclaiming a public
Fast: Then also in more open view, as in their tent doors, and at the door of
the Tabernacle, as it were, to show and signify unto the high Priest, or high
Magistrate, their earnest desire of a lawful Fast in public. And although,
it be a furious, Corah like, and an Anabaptisticall attempt, odious both to God
and goodmen, if any private persons, or people being under the government of
others, do proclaim or set up a public Fast: yet it is the necessary duty
of all Gods people in this case, which now I have propounded, to stir up and
say in the public audience of many unto Gods Maiestrate or Gods bishops, as
those zealous Jews did to Ezra, the high priest in the 10. chapter of Ezra the 4.
ver. Arise Ezra. For the matter, belongs unto thee. We will also be with
thee: Be thou of comfort and do it. Thirdly I have determined, by implying a
Contra diuisiue opposition, (...)
in the assoiling of the third question, betwixt Extraordinary Fasts, and
Ordinary Fasts in public, that no importance of business, no impotencie of
person, but only Impotentia facti ( as the Canon law speaks) that is to say,
the Impotencie of fact, when there chances to want seasonable weather, or a
convenient place for a public assembly to meet in, (as it chanced Ezr.
10.12.13.) can exempt, or excuse the child, that sucketh on the breast, Joel.
1 and 2. Jonas 3.
or the old man, that leans on his staff, or the Pilgrim, that is
travailing on the way, or the Beggar, that lives upon the daily alms of good
people, from bearing some part of extraordinary humiliation and fasting, for
the removing of the guilt of extraordinary sin, or for the removing of Gods
public extraordinary vengeance. As these determinations therefore have bin
either expressed, or necessarily implied already in the resolution of the
three former questions, and by these determinations, much sound knowledge
gained of the true and right distinction of public ordinary, from public
extraordinary Fasts: so in the resolving and assoiling of both the Articles or
doubts arising, as it were, under the knees of this fourth and last question,
touching the Nature and authority of this command [ Then shall they Fast] we are
lastly to know, that neither the observation of these Church Fasts, or public
Ordinary Fasts is with like rigor to be exacted, nor the breach of these
Church Fasts or public Ordinary Fasts (unless contumacious and obstinate
contempt be adjoined unto it) is with the like rigor to be punnished by the
Church governors, the right Heirs, and worthy successors of these children of
the Bride-chamber, as the observation and breach, or neglect of Extraordinary
public Fasts are.

The Extraordinary Public Fast, Zach. 7.3.5 6. This was called in ancient
times, Inclusio. a shutting up* as appears by many Canons of the ancient
Councels.
must be a separation of all persons whatsoever, from all worldly business;
which Separation, is to be employed as it were in sackcloth, and ashes, and
dust cast upon their heads, necks, loins, in the lowest both inward and
outward humiliation, by lying upon the ground, before the Lord, in some
public place of the assembly, without all meat and sustenance, for the space
of 24. hours at the least, after the example and demeanor of those true
Penitents, Joshua and his people, Josh. 7.6. Of Phinees and his people, Judges
20. 23.26. Of Samuel and his people, 1. Sam. 7.6. Of David and his people, 2.
Sam. 3.31.35. 2. Sam. 12.16.17.20. 22.23. 2. Sam. 15.30.32. and 19. 2. 2 Chr.
21.16. Of Hezekiah and his people, 2 King. 19. 1 2.3. Of Iehosaphat and his
people, 2 Chronicles. 20.3.4.5.1^.14.18.20. Of Mannasses and his people, 2. Chro.
33.12.13.19. Of Josias and his people, 2. Chron. 34.19.29.30 Of Ezra and his
17. hundred exiles, Surely, had not the Superstitious Church of Rome abused
sackcloth, ashes, dust, etc, all these circumstances had still been fittest
humiliations, even at this day.
Ezra 9. and 10. Of the Church at Jerusalem, praying solemnly for Peter, in
the 12. Chap. of the Acts; lastly of Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Austin,
Chrysostom, Leo, Gregory, Bernard and their Christian people, whose humbliest
Penitential fasting, together with all the circumstances and whole order
thereof, is faithfully and fully testified unto us in Tertullians discourse de
Paenitentia, in S. Cyprians godly Epistles, in Ambroses 2. books de Pententia,
in the Homilies and popular Sermons of Chrysostom. Austin, Leo etc. and in the
Epistles of Austin, Leo, Ierom, Bernard. The breach of the Extraordinary
public Fast, may also be punished with some grievous or capital punishment,
as with Confiscation of all the goods a man has, and with Excommunication,
Ezr. 10. cha. 8. ver etc. For as the transgression of one ignorant or mutinous
Soldier, is the destruction of the whole Army, so one impenitent Achan, All
must fast the extraordinary public Fast.
one sinning David; as a little leaven sowreth the whole lump of dough, if his
sin or impenitencie be notorious and public. David's Has not one man
sinned? Is it not I that commanded to number the people? but these sheep, what
have they done? would not prevail with God to the removing of the destroyer.
1. Chron 21 15.16. No, no: The Text says, that the Elders of Israel were also
clothed in sackcloth, and fell upon their faces before the Lord, as well as
David. Ahabsrenting his clothes, putting on sackcloth, going barefoote,
extraordinary fasting, 1 King 21.27. being but a private extraordinary Fast,
prevailed with God, but for a private, and a partial, not a plenary remoueall
of those fearful destructions which God had threatened against him by Elias.
Private extraordinary Penance does little good, when the calamity and sin is
public.
It did Iesabel his wife, and his idolatrous filthy Issue, little or no good
at all, because Iesabel and they did not humble themselves and Fast with him.
The people of Samaria, their seeing of Iehoram their King his renting his
clothes, and his privy wearing of his privy coat of sackcloth, when that
cruel Famine was public, condemned them and him of deep hypocrisy, in the
sight of Elizeus, accidentally extolled Gods mercy, toward an ill deserving
people, magnified the office of his Prophet, but did them no more good, toward
the obtaining of the forgiveness of their sins, then the sight of that
miraculous plenty of victuals did Iehorams unbelieving Courtier good, 2. King
6.7.
who was suddenly pressed and crowded to death in the Gate, and saw only the
abundance of victuals, which Elizeus had promised, but eat not thereof at all.
In a word, all the godly kings of Judah and Israel, knew and practiced this
absolute necessity of Extraordinary Fasting, except Solomon, who was a fore
type of our Bridegroom: but the ungodly Hypocrites, who fasting either
partially with Ahab, or privily with Iehoram, 1. King^ 4.20.
did all show themselves cold and untoward in the practice and appointing of
it, are together with their wanton and ungodly subjects, left unto us in the
Scriptures as examples of Gods dreadful vengeance upon our Christian
commonwealths, if in the time of any extraordinary notorious sins, or in
the time of any extraordinary Judgment upon us, as of the Sword, Famine,
Pestilence, our public governors, either Fast not with that rigorous
humiliation, in regard of all those circumstances, which I have named, or after
their proclamation of such a Fast, do not sometimes [ ad terrorem] capitally
and most severely punish all those enemies of the cross of Christ, who will
not subject themselves to the precise observance thereof. My brief answer
therefore unto this fourth and last question, touching the Rigorousnesse, to
be used by Church governors in the observation, and in the punishing of the
contempt and neglect of the observation of our Ordinary penitential Fast,
which we make, Membrum contradiuisum and an opposite part in the division of
Fasts unto an Extraordinary Fast; is this, that neither a whole days
separation from all worldly business, The ancient law of the counsels,
censuring by Deposition, and Excommunication, is to be understood, to have
proceeded against contumacie.
and the consuming of an whole day in public prayer, before the Lord, and as
it were in Sackcloth, dust, ashes, in lying upon the ground, or in hearing the
word preached, is to be exacted in the observation thereof, nor any capital
punishment is to be enjoined upon them, that being liable unto it, do through
infirmity, and not maliciously, nor schismatically break it. As Epiphanius
tells us, some godly ones in his time did indeed in their private houses
upon their Church fasting days lie upon the ground, In the conclusion, of his
last book Dehaeresibus.
and bestow the whole night in prayer, other (as I spoke of Iehoram) did sew
Sackcloth to their loins, next to their skin, as a private coat known only
unto God, and not unto man, other did separate themselves for the space of 24.
hours from all worldly business: but none of them did any of these things in
the public congregation, nay (he says) that the public governors of his
time, would not suffer Sackcloth to be worn openly and outwardly upon the,
Ordinary Fast days. And touching the too severe punishing of the delinquents,
either by Confiscation of all the goods a man has, or by death, or by that
which is more grievous then death, by Excommunication as Jonathan said of his
Father King Saul, his rash and tyrannical folly, 1. Sam. 14.
both in tying the people by an oath to his Ordinary Fast in the pursuit of
the Philistines, and especially in threatening death unto Jonathan, for reaching
a little honey in his faintness with the end of his spear, My Father has
troubled Israel this day: Soter, Austin, Aquin, and only, either private men,
or particular Churches have been the authors of this absolute necessity of
Fasting before the Communion.
so surely the superstitious fathers and governors of the Romish Church, have
troubled gods Israel, and rather weakened their faith, then any whit
strengthened the^ by Ordinary Fasting, in their Christian pursuit of their
spiritual Philistines, the sins of their flesh, who for their peoples
tasting so much as a little water before the Communion, do for that day
excommunicate them, as it were, and deny the Communion unto them, saying that
they are damned, if they Receive it not Fasting, or do so persecute them by
censures, and other punishments for eating an egg, milk, cheese, butter, or
any Lactici^ia, that is, any kind of white meats, coming of the Cow in their
Lent-fasts, or in any other ordinary Church-fast whatsoever, as that they make
poor people through trouble of conscience, and distress of mind to be weary
of their lives, and to serve God with an vncheerefull heart. And thus you have
the Nature, and authority of this command [ Then shall they Fast] together
with the differences of the kind of Fast thereby commanded from all other
kinds of Fast clearly and fully determined.

Now follows the second necessary part of my declaration of this Text,
Namely, as this command, [ Then shall they Fast,] is further determined by
Christ, both in the words (...) and (...), which do further command the
Severity of these Disciplinary public Fasts, It is Synonymall, with (...);
to Fast.
or Church-fasts, and also in the Synonymall word (...), Then shall they
mourn, which does further command the Evangelical holiness of Gospel
Church-Fasts, or of Church-fasts under the Gospel, which ought now to be far
more holy, as it is plain by that which Christ immediately adds in the next
parable, then the paedagogicall, Disciplinarie, Ordinary penitential Church
fasts, either of the Prophets, or of John's Disciples, or of the Pharisees under
the Law had ever been.

(...)
Chap. III. Of the other General Part. Touching Obedience unto this Command,
[Then shall they Fast] as the Quality thereof is further determined, in the
words [(...).]
Touching the Severity commanded in (...), much.
FIrst, The Severity of Church-Fasts, or of Ordinary Penitential Fastes, under
the Gospel, commanded here by the word (...), [ Then shall they fast much]
does require my orthodoxall and sound answer unto these three necessary
Questions: How long the shortest Fast is to be continued; How the hours of
such Fasts are to be bestowed; with what moderation, and with what kind of
meats they are to be broken, when they are ended.

To the first Question I answer, that the Shortest and weakest Church-Fast, is
to continue 24 hours. 1. How long the shortest and weakest Fast of Ordinary
Repentance is to be continued.

See our Church Homily, touching the time how long to fast.


Look over all the examples of Religious Fasting, either in the book of God,
or in the stories of the Church, and you shall find this plain, that if any
man, from Supper time to Supper time, or from Dinner time to Dinner time, took
any thing Ad Nutritionem, For the nourishment of his body, unless it were a
little Anniseed, or a moderate draught of ordinary drink, Ad Digestionem and
depellendam Vertiginem. only for the remoouing of raw humors, from his cold,
weak and queazie stomcke, or for the expelling of wind, causing giddiness in
the head, The Papists Fish-feast, with wine and the finest manchet, is neither
Christian Fast nor Christian Abstinence, as our Church Homily worthily
censureth them and all other hypocrites like unto them in fraudulent Fasts.
he was censured to loose the Religion of his Fast for that day. Our mourning
for sin, which always accompanies religious Fasting, is very weak, if it
break us not both of our meals and also of our sleep for one day. The godly
Monasteries in Saint Austins time, when the Church of God was indeed the right
House of mourning, and kept as it were, her continual funerals of sin,
sowing in tears, that they might reap with joy, had in each of them
severally, three thousand godly persons at the least, and those even Lay men
also, who after the example of Saint Austin himself, and of all the devout
Clergy men of those times, kept this shortest Fast of twenty four hours,
and eat but one Meal a day throughout the whole year, keeping besides (if
occasion were given) their Extraordinary Fasts after the example of Esther and
Saint Paul, Esther 4.16. Act. 9.9. three days and three nights together, that
is, seventy two hours, without either meat or drink, or any kind of bodily
sustenance.

Sect. II.
2. How the hours of Ordinary penitential Fasts are to be bestowed.
TO the second Question I answer, that first Prayers, and especially those
mournful Prayers, which we call (...) or Supplications, are always to be
joined solemnly with Church-Fasts of Ordinary Repentance, and privately with
our private Fasts of Ordinary Repentance; otherwise it is no Religious Fast,
but only a profane Fast. (...): says Christ in this Anticipation [ Then
shall they Fast and make Supplications, Luke 5.33.35.] Secondly, unto our
Prayers and Supplications, we are always to join Alms; Beatus est, qui
ieiunat, vt alat pauperem. Blessed is he from Christ, who fasteth not, nor
puts less into his own belly, that he may put less also into the pot,
and more into his chest, but does Fast, with a mind to ^east the poor, and to
be able to put more into the poor man's belly and purse: Is the speech of one
of the Apostles, delivered by Tradition, ^ib. ^0. in Louiti^um.
and reported unto us by Saint Cyrill. Thirdly, upon that day, whereon we Fast,
we ought, after the example of the Jews, in those their four Church-Fasts,
held all the time of their seventy years captivity in Babylon, Zach. 7, 3.
to separate our selves precisely from al bodily pleasures, and fleshly
delights of Gaming, Dicing, Carding, Horse-racing; from all light exercises of
Bowling, Hawking, Hunting, A Separation from worldly and fleshly pleasures.
Foot. ball-play and such like, and (as Saint Paul 1. Cor. 7.5. has counseled
us) from our wives, and (as the better Churches of Christ did, for the space of
the first thousand years, in their chiefest solemn Fasts) even from our
natural sleep. For they watched often in Prayer, either at the beginning or
ending of their Fasts; or at the crowing of the second Cock, which they
usually called S. Peter's Cock; Ambros. ^exa^. Lib. 1, Cap. 24.25.
did rise out of their Beds, to weep with Saint Peter, for their sins,
always keeping their souls waken out of the dead deep of sinning to death,
through fleshly presumption, always listening to hear the soft stealing and
coming of the feet of the Thief of the night, the Day of Judgment upon
them,; always hathening, 1. These. 4.16.
and zealously desiring to hear the first sound of the last Trumpet of God;
the first descending of our Lord from heaven with a showt; the first word of
the voice of the Archangell, crying, Surgite Mortui, and venite ad Iudicium:
Arise ye Dead, and come unto Judgment. As for our worldly business and
ordinary labors in our Christian callings, we are not, when we fast these
ordinary Fasts, No intermission of worldly business (which is necessary) in thee
ordinary Fasts.
so absolutely and totally to abstain and separate our selves from them, as
we are from all worldly pleasures and fleshly delights. Those religious
Monasteries, consisting of three thousand Laymen in S. Austins time, have
taught us by their example, how far to relinquish our worldly business in
these Fasts. For they fasting and eating but one Meal a day through the year,
rather Gained then lost time from their necessary labors. They had indeed
every day throughout the year, a learned and godly Sermon, made unto them
about three a clock in the afternoon, before they broke their Fast (which was
their Supper) by the learned and godly Father of their Monastery. But all the
other hours from Sunrise, they had first bestowed in those their several
labors, which their Decani, Epiph. in haer. 80.
their Deanes appointed as Taske-masters over every ten of them, had enjoined
them, and whereof the Deanes gave up their just account every night after
Breake-fast unto the Father of the Monastery. August de morib. Ecclesia Cathol.
cap. 33.
And surely, it is reported by Saint Austin, that God so blessed their
industriousnesse in their daily labors, that they did not only not live upon
the sweat of other men's brows, as our Popish secular Moncks, and irregular
Regulars, have done these many ages; but they also yearly maintained the poor
Saints of Christ in other places, and (as he says) sent over whole ships every
year, laden and fraught with linen, money, cloth and other commodities, which
they freely gave away to the relief of those, whom they heard of to be
impouerished, banished or imprisoned for the Gospel.

Sect. III.
TO the third question I answer, according to old Saint Martin, that godly
famous Bishop, 3. Of the quantity and quality of meat, to be used at the end
of our Fasts, when we break and end them.
who lived in godly Justinian that famous Emperors time, his Disciplinarie rule
of Devotion; That as our ordinary religious fasts, so also their Break fasts
ought indeed to be [ Seuera, but yet not Saua]: They ought to be Severe, but
they may not be Savage, neither Savage by too hasty and gluttonous ravening
upon the crea^ures of God, which are first offered to the pray of our hungry
appetites, as the greedy people did at the end of Sau^s Fasts, who being
sharp sete at the flesh with the blood contrary to Moses law, and and fasting
two meals made their third meal a glutton; nor yet Savage by Aquins
superstitious abstinence [ ab onis and lactio^^ijs] from eggs, and all white
meats, which abstinencie was but a temporary constitution of one particular
Church, the Church of Rome, and ought not therefore by a gross kind of
Iudaisme, and Donatisine to hold all other particular Churches obnoxious unto
it. The strongest bodies and deuoutest minds, have broke their Fasts, always
with the two Austere dishes of Continence, and Abstinence, and have contented
themselves (as those forenamed Monasteries did) with [ Parca, (...). Contine
and Abstine.
and Vilissima] with a very spare diet, which was their Continence, and with a
very homely and course diet, which was their Abstinence. Saint Austen has this
Apostrophe to Christ in his tenth Book of Confessions, the 31. Chapter. Hoc me
docuisti, Domine Jesus, vt quemadmodum medicamenta; sic alimenta sumpturus
accedam, O Lord Jesus, thou have taught me far otherwise from that which I
had learned in the school of Manichaus, namely, that I should come to the
taking of my meat, as to the taking rather of a necessary medicine to keep me
from sickness and from death, then as to the taking either of cates to feed
me, or of delicates to delight me. And out of this 13. Chapter De Morib.
Manichaeorum, it is evident, that this ordinary fare was one meal a day
throughout the year, consisting of Lardum and olusculae cum duabus veltribus
meracissimi vini potionibus: A little brewesse of fat bacon, and a few roots
drunken down with two or three moderate draughts of the thinnest and smallest
Wine, which in those South-countries ( as Plutarch informs us in Catone
Maiore) was the common laborers Wine. Saint Hierom says in his Epistle to
Nepotian, that Fortissimum ieiunium est Panis and aquae; The strongest and
deuoutest Fast is that, which is broken with bread and water only. Daniels,
Ananiahs, Misaels, Azariahs ordinary in Babylon was Bean bread and water. If
any man say, that this their ordinary was miraculous and Extraordinary: let
us hear what Daniell says of his usual fasting, when now he was a great
Prince, and had changed his bean bread, and water, into wheat bread and wine,
Dan. 10.2.3. I Daniel was in heaviness three weeks of days, I eat no
pleasant bread, Dan. 1.12.
neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth. Lastly, our Savior Christ the
Bridegroom, in the time of this first day of the marriage of the Lamb, Apoc.
19.
howsoever at other men's marriage or feasting days, he turned their water into
wine, and (as it is likely) being bidden to their feasts, did partake sometimes
with them in eating of the fat (as Nehemiah speaks 8.10.) and in drinking
of the sweet, yet had he for his common ordinary fare (as it is probable out of
the fourth and sixth of John) nothing else but water for his drink, and a
little barley bread and with it sometimes a few fishes for his meat: Yet
notwithstanding, this severity by continent and abstinent breakefast used by
Christ, and his holy ones these children of his bride-chamber and their
successors; they kept themselves I say, from all savageness: for they first
had always Diligentiam salutis to use Saint Austins terms: they had always
a special care of their bodily health; This I speak, as a probable conjecture.
and their greatest fasters, (as Anna the Prophetess, who lived 112. years at
the least, S. Hierom, who lived 92. years, Saint Chrysostom, and S. Ambrose,
who lived above fourscore years, Saint Austin who lived threescore and
sixteen years etc.) were their longest livers.

Secondly, they break their Fasts always with the unleavened bread of
Sincerity and Truth: The old Pharisaiecal and Herodian leaven either of
malice and wickedness* or of covetousness and niggardliness, or of
hypocrisy and fraudulencie, or of Superstition and fond devotion, was not to
be seen in any of their dwellings, where they kept their religious Fasts. 1.
Charity.
Of their Charity, when they Fasted, Saint Austin gives this worthy
testimony, Charitatem violare, tanquam Deum, nefas au^itur: To break the rule
of Charity, is accounted with them, as if one should offer violence to God
himself. And therefore the deuoutest Fasters, such as were their Clergy men,
who neither De morib. Ecclesiae Cath.] cap. 33. and contra Faustum Manichaeum,
lib. 30.
eat flesh, nor q drank wine, when they fasted, miscensured not, nor thought
any whit worse of them, who were not either able or willing to hold out in the
severity of Fasting with them: Nemo vrgebatur in aspera, quae far non
potuit; nulli, quod recusauit, imponebatur; nec ideo condemnabatur acaeteris,
quod in ijs se imitandis fateretur inualidum: No man amongst them, was urged to
endure more, then he was well able to endure; nay, no man had any hardness
imposed upon him, which he refused or was any thing unwilling unto: neither was
he any whit worse thought on by the rest, because he plainly bewraied and
confessed, that he was not able to go with them or follow them, in the
severity of their disciplinary exercise of true Mortification, their godly and
severe Fasting, He adds yet further a memorable note, of the kindelinesse of
their Christian Charity, where he says; that Quibusdam languidioribus
humanissime ac modestissime praeberi vinum faciunt, and stulte nonnullos
recusantes fraterne admonent, ne vana superstatione debiliores citius quam
sanctiores fiant: They did cause wine to be given most kindly and courteously
unto some of the weaker minded and feebler bodied brethren: and when some weak
ones nicely and foolishly refused it, they did brotherly warn them to take
heed, lest through fond and deceitful superstition, they made themselves by
their religious and nice abstinence, sooner to become weaker in their bodies,
then any whit holier in their minds. Of their avoiding of the very suspicion of
Covetousness and Niggardliness, 2. Liberallity.
when they Fasted, Leo his godly Sermons made concerning [ Legitima Ieiunia]
these Law-fasts or Church-fasts as he terms them* are an immortal and
everlasting witness. In distributione Eleemosynarum and pauperum cura nostra
pinguescunt Ieiunia. Deliciae nostrae sunt opera pietatis. Our Fasts are fatted
with bestowing of alms and providing for the poor. Our delicates are the
works of pity and mercifulness. Of their common detestation of hypocrisy and
fraudulencie, used in Fasting, 3. Infraudulenci^.
Saint Jerome in his Epistle to Nepotian, where he says, that Melius est haec
ommia in mente portare quam in corpore, vt ostentui habeantur: A man does much
better, to Fast inwardly in his mind only, then to Fast out wardly in body, to
the end, he may get glory by it. Quid prodest oleo non vesci and molestias
quasdam difficultatesque ciborum qu^rere, caricas, piper, nuces, palmarum
fructus, similam, mel, pistacia? Tota hortorum cultura vexatur, vt cibario non
vescamur pane. What does it better a man to make a false show of Fasting, by
abstaining from a grosser and feebler kind of mea^, and at the same time
notwithstanding to eat fine and lustier meats? what does it better a man not
to eat oil, and yet to search out the most curious dainties, which are both
troublesome to the Cook to dress, because he has not been acquainted with
so strange eats, and also very hard to come by in the whole side of a
Country, as the Caricke Figs, so much commonded by Julian the Apostata, Epist
ad Serapionem.
the costliest Pepper, Almonds, Dates, the finest Flower, bread called Simnels,
Honey, and the most dainty Bladder nuts, used by wantons to provoke lust? what
a Madness is this? we do not only trouble and vex our selves, our Caterers,
Cooks and other servants, but we do trouble and vex Nature, by forcing her in
our Orchards and Gardens, to bring forth some kind of feed or fruit, which we
may eat in stead of our ordinary bread, from the which, in our fasts, we are
commanded by the Church to abstain: and from which, 4. Faith.
Daniel and the holy ones of God have abstained in their ordinary Fasts. De
mori^. Manichaearum and contra Fatustum Manichaeum.
Lastly, of their hating superstitious and foolish abstinence, with a perfect
hatred, Saint Austins learned and large discourses against the Manichaeans, [
Delicata Abstinentia, as Erasmus does fitly term it] are a plentiful
witness. For the mad, Mannichaeans did, as our fond superstitious Papists do
at this day, abstain altogether from flesh (yea and from wine too, which the
Papists do not:) but yet even in their deuoutest Fasts, they glutted them
selves with the costliest banketting dishes, and with other the strongest
drinks, that their Parasiticall Caterers, Apothecaries, Brewers could possibly
devise to provide for them in the whole Country, where they lived. So that, as
Cato in Plutarch complains of the Bellie-gods of Rome in his time; the same
might truly have been spoken of the Epicurisme of the Mannichaeans, and may
be truly verified at this day of the Romish Clergy, making their belly
their god, and their glory their shame; More is given for some dainty strange
Fish, then for a sed Ox.

To shut up therefore my answer to this third question, Touching the severity of
Church-fasts, namely with what moderation they are to be broken and what
abstinence is fittest to be used, when we break them: the practice of the
Saints of God, wherewith I have now confirmed my Answer, that the breaking of
them ought to be Severe but not Sauadge, is sufficient to resolve and settle
him, who has any wit in his head, and is not fondly contentious. And surely
herein I cannot but by the way greatly commend the good wisdom, and
happiness of the Governors of our English Church, ever since the purity of
Gods truth, and the ancient manners of the best ancient Churches, and Counsels
have been restored and reformed in it. For who sees not, De morib. Ecclesia
Cath. cap. 34.
how wisely and happily they have with those ancient Fathers seen and showed
unto the world: Quid intersit (to use still Saint Austin^ words) inter portum
religionis and sirenas superstitionis: What necessary difference there is
betwixt the haven of true religion, and betwixt the Sirens or the Syrenian
Rocks of Popish superstition. The Papists had so nuzled us up in the
admiration of their church authority, as that the people of this land, thought
their decrees to be the very unvariable Oracles, decrees and customs of the
Son of God, and that to disobey them was as mortal a sin, as to break the
absolute commandments of the moral law. Whereas therefore at this day we are
commanded to fast upon the Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, etc: our Church
governors do teach us, that this command is to be obeyed as an exercise of
Religion, commanded conditionally by Christ, Look the Church homilies of
Fasting.
as pertaining to the well being of that Mortification, which is absolutely
commanded by him. But in that we are commanded, when we break our Fasts at
night (for our governors would have us to follow the example of better times
and not to eat any thing [ adnutritione^] for the space of twenty four
hours,) in that I say, we are commanded when we break our fasts at night to
abstain from flesh, and to eat fish; our Church governors do set down this
distinct kind of abstinence, and this positive command, what in special we
shall eat, not as an exercise of Religion, but as an exercise of our Civil
obebience to the Civil Magistrate, whom for conscience sake also, and that
even to the shedding of our dearest heart blood, much more in the restraint of
shedding the blood of Sheep, Calves, Bullockes, and in the killing seething
and broyling of a few seely fishes, we are to obey as the undoubted Deputy of
Christ. So that Turbae imperitorum, Proletaria plebe A. Gelli^.
quae vel in ipsa vera religione superstiosae sunt (as Saint Austin says of
them) The unlearned Fry of multitudes, who are still prone to superstition
(especially in this old doting age of the decrepit dimsighted world) even in
those Churches of Christ, where the truth of Religion is taught most reformedly
and sincerely, cannot now in England Fast superstitiously, though they would,
nor any longer in a stubburne mind, to show their good will toward the
Church of Rome* and their traitorous hearts against the Church of England, upon
out Fasting days abstain from Eggs, and white meats, as it is an abstinence
enjoined superstitiously in the Church of Rome, a particular Church and not the
Catholic Church of our Creed, no ways at all binding their consciences, who
are not visible members of the same particular Church.

Sect. IIII.
Touching the Severity commanded in the word (...) often.
TO the fourth Question, Touching the severe obeying of this command of
Disciplinarie Ordinary Fasts, as it is further determined by Saint Lukes,
(...) [ Then shall they mourn, pray, Fast often:] I answer, that although
many religious men even to the number of three thousand together in each
Monastery, Revenge. 2. Cor. 7.11.
have fasted all the year through, and although in regard of the great
necessity of our common and ordinary (...) to be taken by us of our
inordinate appetite, whereby Adam and Eve did first transgress, and brought
this miserable estate of sin and the wrath of God upon us, their posterity, it
were to be wished, as not only Diogenes an heathen man, but also Saint Hierom
one of Christ's Saints sometimes wished, that we could always Fast and live
without meat: yet the Church of God considering the frailty and weakness of
man, have thought their obedience to be acceptable unto Christ, and answerable
enough unto this his consultatorie command, if they appointed Fasts at some
times only, and not at all times of the year. These Fasts (briefly) are
either Conceptiua ieiunia (to borrowe terms [ Docendi causa] from Macrobius)
or they are Statiua and Stata ieiunia. Conceptiua ieiunia are Fasts appointed
at an uncertain. Such were those Primitive Fasts, 1. Conceptiue Fasts.
Sacrorum ordinum, appointed and kept first at an uncertain, by these children
of the Bride-chamber, these near Attendants of Christ, these blessed Apostles.
For it is plain, out of the 13. and 14. of the Acts that because the Church of
God was then as Noah's Arc, floating upon the waters of affliction, and was as
the Dove of Noah's Arc, carrying the Olive branch of spiritual Peace and rest
in her mouth, Pacalis Oliua.
but finding no bodily peace or rest, for the rest and abode of the sole of her
foot; therefore they could set no certain time for the Fast of holy Orders,
when they either ordained or instituted Ministers. 2. Set Fasts.
Statiua Ieiunia are Fasts appointed at a certain: Such were those four Fasts
kept every year, all the time of the seventy years Captivity in Babylon,
mentioned Zachar. 7.5. and 8.19. Such are at this day all Church-fasts, whether
they be Catholic and Universal, Either Catholic and Universal.
commanded and frequented by all Churches, (as is the Fast before the
Communion: This forty days Fast of Lent, howsoever in diverse circumstances
very variable: Eusebius. 5.23. Epiph. haer. 8 3. Socr. Sch. 5.21. Apud Leo^em
sermon. 8. de Ie. iunio. Dec^uni mensis.

Epiph. ^0. haer. August. ad Caesul.


The Fasts of holy Orders, termed also Ieiunia Quae ^or Temporum, of the
Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter quarters: The Fasts in Vigilijs praecipuarum
Festiuitaturo, that is to say, upon the chief Saints days Euens, and the
weekly Fasts of Wednesdaies and Fridayes, appointed first, as Epiphanius and
Austin tell us, to put us in continual remembrance of my Text, and of the
causes of our Bridegroomes first taking away from us.) Or whether they be
Local and particular Fasts; Or Local and particular Fasts.
Such as is the Fast of Saturday, which in Saint Ambrose time was kept every
week, at Rome, and in all Africa beyond the Sea, but was not kept at Millaine,
where Saint Ambrose himself was Bishop, nor in any of the Eastern Churches.
Such as is also our new Ember-weeke Fast in Rogation week, which is kept
within the fifty days after Easter; within which days, as Cyrill, Austin,
August. ad Casul. and ad Ianuar.
Epiphanius, do all jointly witness, no Church in their time did Fast at all.
Thus have we the division of the frequent or often Fasting, commanded and
commended unto us by Christ himself, in this Consultatorie Precept, [ Then
shall they Fast often] and thus have the Governors of the Church of Christ,
from age to age, continued their obedience unto the Command of their
Bridegroom, by commanding straightly, and practicing severely, all these
Legitima Ieiunia, as Leo an ancient Father terms them, besides their
Voluntaria Ieiunia, (as he also speaks) their Voluntary private Fasts, which
after the example of Cornelius in the 10. of the Acts, and of Saint Paul, 1.
Cor. 7.5. and 1. Cor. 9.27. they daily imposed upon themselves in their
private houses. Amongst these Church-law-Fasts, (as Leo calls them) the
Catholic Fasts, not only by reason of their Vniuersallitie and Antiquity
vltramemoriall; (for even in regard of their antiquity, many of the Fathers
have dared to call them Apostolical) but also by reason of the weighty causes
and special holy ends, for the which they were first ordained, have been held
in highest account, and kept with greatest Severity, But amongst these
Catholic and Universal Fasts, the Fast before the Communion has been of
greatest Religiousnesse; next unto it, the Fasts of Holy Orders, and of these,
the most religious has been, the Fast of the seventh Month, in which Month
only, amongst all the Months of the year, God commanded his people of
Israel, by special absolute Precept, to keep their feast of Reconciliation
with Fasting, from Euentide to Euentide, because (as Leo and some other Fathers
not improbably have imagined) upon that very same tenth day of September, The
Fast of the seventh Month, a Fast of high account with all the people of God
in all Ages.
Adam and Eve did first transgress in Paradise, by eating the forbidden fruit.
Next unto these in account, have been the Fasts of Lent, especially of Caput
Quadragesima, which we call Ashwednesday, and (...), which we call Goodfriday
Fast. For upon these days, not only the Competentes or Catechameni, and the
public or private extraordinary Penitents, but even every devout Christian in
the time of the Fathers, if not openly, as the Extraordinary Penitents and
Competentes had, yet privily (as before I noted concerning Iehoram) had
sacke-cloth or hair cloth sewed about their loins: Lastly, the next unto
these, of principal account, were the Fasts [ in Vigilijs praecipuarum
festiuitatum] the Fasts held upon the chief Saints days Eeuens, as it is
plain out of Leo his Sermons, De Ieiunio Decimi Mensis, and out of the
Homilies and Sermons of Ambrose, Austin, Bernard and others. For to the end
they might humbly and reverently prepare themselves unto the blessed and
joyful keeping of Christmas, and other high Festival Days, they did
solemnly and publickely bestow the whole nights in Prayer, Thereupon it came,
that the Saturday Fasts and Vigils were so th^ckly and often frequented by the
Church of Rome, when she was in a good name, and by the Churches of Africa in
Saint Austin and Leo his time, that people might be the more holily prepared
unto the observation of the Christian Sabbath.
and in singing of Psalms, and in hearing the word of God preached or read
unto them. Surely, (to the just condemnation of our fleshly and more dissolute
times I speak it) Those ancient Fathers and their people, in whom there was
that Primitive vigor of the spiritous new wine of the Gospel, did keep these
and other their Ordinary and Voluntary Fasts, with far greater humiliation of
their souls and bodies before God, then we at this Day, or rather dead night
of all Christian godliness, do keep our most piacular Extraordinary Fasts,
when the Sword, Famine, Pestilence, or other more grievous causes and curses
have smitten us down to the place of Dragons. And yet they never fainted, or
were any thing at all weary, with the weekly (if not daily) observance of
them, neither did they intermit or loose any time, but rather gained time for
the following of the necessary works of their outward callings. So truly, so
wisely, so zealously obedient were they, in the most severe practice of this
Commandment [ Then shall they mourn, fast, pray and make Supplications
Often.] The hypocritical, foolish, filthy and wanton breach or ignorance of
which Commandment amongst us Christians at this day, in all the Churches of
the world, is, as the Poet speaks, (...), the unhappy mother of all
disobedience, Atheism, Barbarism, which now do grow so fast upon this
delicious last Age of this second ungodly world, the gluttonous and fleshly
humorousnesse whereof, must very shortly be dried and licked up with the fire
of Gods last vengeance.

Sect. V.
(...)

Math. 9.15.
THere now remains but one thing more to be added, for the full and faithful
Explanation of this Text, and of this whole Doctrine, The formal holiness of
these Evangelical Fasts.
concerning Evangelical Fasts; that is, Their Holiness intimated in the word
(...) Mourn, and defined in the next parable to be far above the Holiness
of Legal, Prophetical, or More then Prophetical Fasts. For our Savior
Christ's Gospel Fasts commanded here, Seven Profane ends.
and commended in the next parable must be, as new cloth fit to mend a decay
in the best and strongest deuotioned minds, and as new wine to be contained
only in the best seasoned and holiest, and purest Vessels, or bottels of his
Spirit. In a word, They must not therefore be defined and esteemed to be
truly Religious and holy, because both fasting and abstinence, are
phisicionall, and very wholesome for man's body, (for then Aurelian the heathen
Emperor, who having a strong body is chronicled to have cured all the
ordinary diseases of his body by much Fasting, might have been canonized for
a Saint;) nor because they are very praiseable amongst men, and very commodious
to commonwealths. (For then the Philosophers, and the niggards fastings might
be accounted Religious;) nor because God hates the flesh or fat of our bodies
(for then Baals fanaticall Priests, and the mad Mannichaeans might have been
in the number of holy Fasters;) nor yet, ex opere operato, because they are
Fasts, or because they are Severe Fasts (for then Catilin that famous traitor,
as Salust witnesses of him, and Asses, and Mules, as Saint Austin shows,
might carry away the prize, (...).
and praise of holy Fasting from us;) nor because they are commanded by God
without all specifying of their holy end, without the which they being things
indifferent, and not simply or actually good of themselves, cannot be said to
have any constitutiue form of holiness (for then the abstinence from swines
flesh, etc. and the old unprofitable shreds, or the old fugient low running
sour wine of Phansaicall Fasting might now have been worth the applying to
new garments, and the putting into new bottels, and might still have been in
good request with Christ for the children of his Bride-chamber;) nor because
we abstain from eggs, and all white meats, and therein Canonically obey the
false Catholic Church of Rome, (for that were with the Donatists to bring in
Iudaisme again, and to make the Church of Rome, which is but one particular
Church, and at the best but one part only, of the whole body of the Catholic
Church in our Creed, Surely this were to reedifie the partition wall, which
Christ brake down, and to set up a new Jerusalem at Rome.
to be the only Catholic Church:) nor because our Gospel Fasts are perfect
virtues, or bona opera primi meriti, properly meritorious either Ex congruo or
ex condigno, as the blind Owls of the unclean eage of Popery have not been
ashamed to teach in their Supererogatorie School Divinity (for then these
very children of the Bride-chamber might worthily have fasted, whilst the
Bridgroome stayed in person with them;) For none of these seven profane ends (
I say) must or ought the Gospel Fasts of Christ to be esteemed Religious. But
then, then and only then they become indeed the Fasts, which Christ has
chosen as his new shreds, and new wine fit for the new vessels of his spirit,
when they have all these six holy ends, or some of the chiefest of them
propounded unto them.

The First formal end sanctifying our Gospel Fast, is hearty mourning, Six
holy ends.
and humbling of the soul before God, both in the Sensitive soul, and also
more especially in the two parts of the will (...) The desire and Motion, which
are the proper seats of Concupiscence, the Foster mother of all sin. In this
regard, Fasting has been counted by the Fathers one of our christian nails
of mortification, whereby our flesh is nailed to Christ's cross, and Saint
Ambrose calls Fasting, Venenum vitiorum, In Hexane^.
the poison of vices. For as he says, that the natural Serpent is found by
experience, to be killed oftentimes by licking up the spittle of one, that is
Fasting: so we that are of years, do find by experience, that the spiritual
Serpent, the Devils suggestions, and these common vices of Drunkenness,
Gluttony, Baseness, Timerousnesse, Venereousnesse, Wantonness against
Christ, Lightness, Inconstancy, Pride, Talkatiuenesse, Blasphemies,
Forgetfulness of God and his wrath against sin, Ignorance of our selves and
our betters (For as it is Pro. 30.21. A servant, when he reigns: and a fool,
when his belly is full, who is able to bear?) we, I say, that are of years,
do find by Experience, that all these vices are soon ouercommed, and killed
in us by the through decoction of the superfluous abounding humors of
Melancholy, Choler, Rheum, Sanguineousnes, in our discreet and Religious
Fastings.

The Second end, is the fatting of the soul with Etsi ieiumium perfecta Virtus
non sit: est tamen fundamentum Virtutum omnium: Although Fasting be no perfect
Virtue, says Saint Hierom, yet it is a foundation unto all Virtues. Semper
Virtuti cibus est, Ad Rusticum.
says Leo in his second Sermon, De ieiunio decimi mensis: It is always as
foison and nourishment to Virtue. And in his first Sermon De Quadragesima:
Parum est si carnis substantia tenuatur and animae fortitudo non alitur: It is
to small purpose, if the flesh be abated by Fasting, and yet the Virtue and
constancy of the mind be nothing better fed. Temperance, Patience, Humility,
Tolerance, Hardiness to endure Famine in time of persesecution, when with
Master Bradford, we shall be brought to an Egg a day, and to eat Mice, as
our banished Saints did at Strasborough, in the days of Queen Marie,
especially our right Christian fellow-feeling both what Christ himself
suffered for our sins, when he hungered in the wilderness, and dieted
himself with barley bread and water, in Villages and Towns with his Disciples,
and also what our poor brethren, our fellow members in Christ do endure, when
in a most uncharitable Age, they are driven to run to the water kit for their
drink, and to the beane-stacke for their bread. These and many other virtues
and graces of Gods Spirit, are bred and fed in us by Fasting. For this outward
Fasting in the body, is the cause of that, which our Church-Homily calls the
Inward or Spiritual Fasting, and the Saints of God in those ancient
Prime-dayes of godliness, Master Calvin does in this regard call Fasting (
Adminiculum precum) the under prop of our heavy hearts to make them more fit
for prayer, which being vnhumbled, and fed with sensuality, do sildom pray
devoutly or zealously*
did more especially use Fasting, as an help of their devotions these three
ways. First, (as Saint Cyrill testifies) they used it to make them the better
able to keep their vows of Chastity. Secondly (which was their most common
use of Fasting) they used it, as Saint Chrysostom did, to the Elevation of
their vnderstanstandings, and to raise up their (...). their earthly drooping
thoughts unto the meditation of the highest heavenly mysteries and happiness.
Thirdly they used it commonly for the more holy and happy preparing of their
souls and bodies, not only, to the worthy receiving of the holy Communion,
but also unto all other great and weighty employments, wherein Gods glory, and
the good of many, Ezra. 8.
was principally procured. Ezra, when he led seventeen hundred of the Jews
his brethren, out of Babylon to Jerusalem, he first proclaimed a Fast, and
caused them all to Fast with him, to the end, that God might defend and
prosper them in their journey toward Jerusalem. Nehem. 1.4.
Nehemias, when he attempted that great hazard, in desiring Arlaxerxes favor,
to repair the walls and the houses of Jerusalem, he first Fasted and Prayed.
Saint John the Evangelist, when he began to write his Gospel, he first Fasted
and Prayed, and caused (as some report) the whole Church of Ephesus to Fast and
pray with him. Saint Paul, that chosen vessel, when he was now to preach that
Gospel, which before he had persecured to the death, first Fasted and Prayed
three days and three nights together. The Apostles, these children of the
Bride-chamber, when they first ordained or instituted Ministers, they first
Fasted and Prayed. Lastly, our glorious Savior, the holy one of God, when he
first began his public Ministry and Work of our Redemption, Fasted his
forty days and forty nights Fast in the wilderness, and as it is probable
(out of the sixth of Luke 12. verse) before he called his twelve Apostles, and
sent them forth to the public Function of their Apostleship, he first had
spent a whole day and a whole night in Fasting and Prayer upon that Mountain,
where he gave that long charge, and made that long Sermon, recorded in so many
places, by the three Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, unto them

The third end of Religious Fasting, is the more Among these, we may number
Tobaccho, which is more sauadgely abused, then any other creature.
his wife, children, servants, their common finding, an whole twelve month
together. Nature, and the God of Nature, The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who gives us al things abundantly to possess, has not given us (as Master
Calvin says) his green herb, his bladder-nut; his fish, soul, pullen; his
oil, corn, wine; his calves, beeues, sheep, swine, and other more noble
Creatures then these: as those Quails and that Manna to the Israelites, in
this wilderness of sin, to raven wildely and unsatiably like merciless
Vermin, Vultures, Woolues, Kites, upon them, or (...), contumeliously and
riotously to abuse them at our pleasure: but (as Nemesius an ancient Greek
Father tells us) (...), (...). cap. 1.
for the filling of the Gomer and reasonable measure of our necessary and
temperate appetite. We cannot then have abundance, no, nor sufficiency of
maintenance, in this swilling-tankerd-tinkerly drunken time, where all goes up
for the filling of the bladder and the guts [not in Requisita naturae, These
are the honest Semnologies, of these two honest Authors, commonly known to the
learned.
as Tacitus speaks; but according to Seneca's terms, in Effusa and reliquias
ventris] we cannot possibly, I say, have any mean sufficiency of common
maintenance, for our selves and Christ's poor, unless some men and women in
the world have very frugall bellies, and do Fast every other day. For nature
being measured and proportioned by Gods number, line and measure (...) only,
only for the honest relief and sustenance of the moderate appetite of his
reasonable creatures, and yet not one man being found amongst a thousand, who
contenteth himself with this his Gomer or Dimensum, that is, with this his
necessary allowance and stint allotted him by God, Luc. 16.19. (...).
but every man seeking with Dives in the Gospel, to fare deliciously and
courtly every day, without intermission, giving (as Prudentius our Christian
famous Lyricke speaks) no rest at all to his jaws, Venture Saturionis nullas
residet esuriales ferias.

Such a glutton, his beli^e has no Holy-dates nor Sabboths of rest. Plaut.


stomach, belly, which are tired with their continual gorges: it comes to
pass, that Nature becomes often defective unto us, and Diogenes is proved too
true a man of his word, that (...) man's belly is the notable privy thief and
devouring guife of all man's necessary provision, so that many unnecessary
dearths are still brought upon us Christians our selves, who are Christ's
inheritance, and Christ's household, and who should otherwise (no doubt) have
meat enough in due season given unto us. Therefore Beatus est, qui ieiunat, vt
alat pauperem, the state of things being thus, Blessed is that man, who
thinks to sanctify his Fast, with this holy end, and considers the poor
and needy, when he fasteth to feast them. Is not this the Fast, that I have
chosen (says God Isa. 58.6.7.) to loose the bands of wickedness, to take of
the heavy burdens of rent raising, and rent racking, to let the oppressed go
free, and that ye break every yoke? Is not this my Fast to deal thy bread to
the hungry, to bring the poor, that wander, unto thy house? When thou see
the naked, that thou cover him, and bide not thy self from thine own flesh?
God would have his Fast to be a Iubilee Fast.

The fourth worthy end of our ordinary Fasting, 4. 2. Cor. 7.11.
is by it and in it to show our (...) our ordinary and hearty indignation, and
revenge against that our first parents Adam and Eve, their sinning by their
inordinate and immoderate appetite of that forbidden taste, The Fast of the
seventh month.
of the fruit of the Tree of knowledge, of good and evil. As I have already
declared, God himself seems to have propounded this end to that his special
anniuersary Fast, which he so straitely charged the Israelites to keep upon
the tenth day of September. Hoc tempu^ habemus aptissimum sanationi illius
vulneris quod nobi^ inflictum est in prima vetiti degustatione, quod tempus
ieiunandi and Apostolicis and legalibus institutis videmus electum. This time
of Fasting in the seventh month (says Leo Sermon. 8. De ieiunio septimi
mensis) we have as the fittest time wherein to cure that wound, which was given
us all in that first taste of the forbidden fruit; which time also we see, was
chosen both by the constitutions of the Apostles, and by the institution of the
law of Moses. Cum enim per illecebram cibi irrepserit prima causa peccati, Quo
salubriore dei munere vtatur redempta libertas, quam vt nouerit abstinere a
concessis, quae fraenare se nesciuit a vetitis? And seeing (as the same Leo
excellently reasons in his Sermon de ieiunio Pentecostes) that the first
cause of sin crept in through the alluring bait of necessary food, what more
wholesome gift of Gods gracious spirit can our Redeemed liberty, of eating all
the herbs in our gardens, use in remedy of the abuse of that partial and
half demili-bertie of eating but some things in that garden of Eden, then that
it know and remember always to be able, and willing to abstain from things
lawful and granted, which remembered not to refrain it self at the first from
things unlawful and forbidden? Calu. inst. lib. 3 cap. 3 sect. 15.
Quo enim Seueriores in nos sunius and aeriore censura quaestionem habemus de
peccatis nostris, eo debemus sperare magis propitium ac misericordem Deum. For
it is Master Caluins good and sound Divinity, discoursing in general of the
necessity of the seventh part of Contrition, which the Apostle calls (...), 2.
Cor. 7.
Revenge; That the more severe we are against our selves, and the more hardly
and sharply we correct, examine, and torture our sinful flesh and our sins,
we ought to hope certainly to have God the more propitious and merciful
toward us. But especially this revenge by Fasting, is most necessary of all
other, For he that washes himself, because of a dead body and touches it
again, what avails his washing (...) So is it with a man, that fasteth for
his sins and commits them again, who will hear his prayer: or what does
his fasting help him: Eccl 34.
because man being corrupted, especially with the distemperature of this
inordinate appetite, whereby Adam and Eve did sin, has now a greater
pronenesse to sin by the same, both in eating and in drinking, then by any
other fleshly appetite, or desire whatsoever. And for the same cause Fasting
ought to be continual, severe, rigorous against all fleshly appetites, as Ben
Syrach warns us. Ec. 34.27.

The fifth worthy end of our Fasting is (...), the adorning of the Doctrine of
the Gospel by it, when we remember, what the Apostle says 1. Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink or Whatsoever ye do else, Tit. 2.10.
do all to the glory of God, and what Zachary complains against the
hypocrisy of the Jews in Babylon for omitting this end of Fasting in their
Fasts: These 70. years in your four devout Fasts, ye have not Fasted unto
me, says the Lord Zachar. 7.5.

We bring honor to the truth of the Gospel, which we profess either
priuatiuely by stopping the slanderous mouths of the adversaries thereof, as
Christ does here in my Text, by adding this Anticipation [ Then shall they
Fast,] or Positiuely by confirming to the consciences of all men, Sancta
hypocrisis, in the Fathers of the Church dialect is, when a man does practice
more then he teaches.
that our Hypocrisy in words, is that which the Fathers term, Sanctam
Hypocrisin, the odd kind of holy Hypocrisy, when we speak indeed much of
mortification of the flesh by Fasting, but practice more in Fasting then we
speak. First we stop the blasphemous mouths of Gentill Philosophers, who brag
so much of their Pythagoras his (...): his eating but about a pint of meal in
a day, and of Julian that famous Apostata, who in one of his extant Greek
Epistles says, that the Christian life in his days was (...) was but a
swinish life, in comparison of his own austere life, and of the austere lives
of Iamblichus, Plotine, Maximus and other his fellow Sophisters. These
Cerberean mouths of hell are presently stopped, when they hear us tell them of
Moses, Elias, Christ, their forty days, and forty nights Fasting: or of the
abstinence and austerenesse of David, Ionadab, Daniel, John Baptist, Anna the
Prophetess, Saint Paul: or but of the Ordinary and Extraordinary Fasting of
common Christians: S. Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hierom, Austin; or but even of their
followers, either in monasteries or in secular states, who besides their
contenting themselves with the stint of their one Gomera day, that is, with one
spare homely meal a day throughout the year, did oftentimes Fast
extraordinarily for the removing of Gods judgments from themselves and their
neighbors three days, and three nights together. Saint Ambrose witnesses of
his people Lib. 1. De paenitent. Chap. 16. That they did Sulcare continuis
fletibus genas, ieiuno ore semper and pallido mortis speciem spiranti in
corpore praeferentes; That they did make deep furrows in their Lenten-cheekes
through the continual dropping and falling of tears from their eyes, and
hearts for their sins, and the miseries of this life, carrying always about
with them a very ghastly picture of death in their weak breathing bodies, and
in their pale Lenton faces. The remembrance and true evidence of these Fasters,
puts to silence the outward Adversary, the Gentile, the Apostata, the
Atheist. The like remembrance and true evidence of Christian Fasting in the
Orthodoxall Protestant at this day, charmeth the lawless tongue of the Inward
Adversary, the schismatic Brownist, or haereticall Papist. Calvin, Latimer,
Bradford, Jewel, Whitgift, Whitakers, Fox, who have in their Extraordinary and
Ordinary Fasts, and in the perpetual moderation of a temperate appetite, far
excelled the superstitious, fraudulent, hypocritical Mannichaean Fast of the
Church of Rome, are worthy and true Evidences hereof. What should I speak of
these principal worthies of our David, Christ Jesus, or of any of their
Compieres, the kindliest children of the ancient Fathers, and the rightest
successors of these children of the Bride-chamber. Surely, I am persuaded, that
even we, who keep but our Ordinary Church-fasts throughout the year, and
do especially, all these forty days of Lent, (I mean the week days) take
unto us only a morsel of brown bread, and a draught of ordinary drink after
our daily Morning prayer, and at night again take our meals meat (as we call
it) moderately and sparingly, making it to consist of the homeliest dishes and
smallest drink, are able to beat the deuoutest Papist at this his best
spiritual weapon, religious Fasting. For mine own part, give me leave to
speak somewhat fondly of that, which my self have often experienced truly. I
could never yet, for the space of these ten years, meet with any Popish
favorite, or proselyte, 1608. Annus est hic aetatir nostrae 38. Ordinibus
sacris initiatus eram. Anno aetatis 28. Them. 1598.
since I first began to know, what Fasting meant, either in the University or
in the Country, who has been either willing or able to hold out with me in
this, which I take to be our right Canonical English Church-Fast. Namely in
this vnfraudulent eating but one course meal a day, whilst Lent lasts. How
much more then, will stricter Abstinence and Fasting, of stronger deuotioned
Protestants amongst us, confound them, and al their great Brags, of I know not
what, their Great Fasting.

But not only Priuatiuely do we honor Christ's Truth, by keeping that
calumnious Retortion of Jobs speech, Job, 40.11.
spoken of Behemoth, understood of the Devil and of all fleshly Epicures, Vires
eorum in Lumbis eorum, and virtus eorum in vmbilico ventris sui; Their strength
is in their lascivious, venereous Loins, and their virtue consists [in a been
curata cute] in their belly timber and in their soft pubble skins: Not only
(I say) when we fast Christ's Fasts, do we keep this devilish calumny and
reproach, from being retorted upon Christ's Church and Christ's Truth amongst
us: but Positiuely also we confirm unto Gods Saints and unto our selves, all
these principal Conclusions of our Christian Religion; namely, That we are
here, as in the house of mourning, absented from the bodily presence of our
souls Bridegroom: That we here, as Pilgrims, I^ha^a, the Paradise of Christ:
That we live Manna and heavenly Moses, Elias, Christ did principally Fast) the
Law, the Ieromes Rusticus) by living [ in carne sine carne] in the flesh (as it
were) without the flesh, we may begin already to have our conversation in
heaven, being already translated from death unto life, conforming our vile
bodies (what we can) to Christ's glorified body, making our earthly fleshly
bodies, a certain type in themselves unto themselves, of their undoubted and
certain future being hereafter heavenly spiritual bodies, according to Gods
promise, in which dwells righteousness.

The sixth and last safe intention and lawful end, of our Religious Fasting, in
the time of the Gospel, is the assured Purchase of that great undefiled Reward,
which by a kind of Metalepsis, is out of Gods promises, Imputatiuely due unto
our Fasting, but properly is due only unto the only true and proper Merit and
Condignitie of Christ's Fasting. One part of this Reward, is intimated in this
next Parable. The new shred suteably and rightly applied in the mending of
Christ's new cloth; the new wine being put orderly into Christ's new bottels
shall both be preserved together, that is to say, Both Gospel Fast and Gospel
Faster shall be jointly preserved from loss and hellish destruction An other
part is set down by Moses unto Gods Israel, in the 8. Deuter. 16. God fed thee
in the Wilderness, with that dry Manna, which thy fathers knew not, to humble
thee and to prove thee to the end, that he might do thee good at thy latter
end. A third part is prophesied by Isay 58.8. Then shall thy light break forth
as the morning, and thine health shall grow speedily; thy righteousness shall
go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee; Then shall thou
call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I
am. A fourth Promise is made again by Christ, in the sixth of Matthew 17.18.
verse. and that even to private and domestical Fasters. When thou do Fast
(says Christ) thy secret private Fast truly and vnfraudulently, as unto God,
and not unto men, Thy Father, and the Father of thy Fast, who sees thee and it
in secret, will reward thee openly, as he did Cornelius in the tenth of the
Acts.

Fifthly and lastly, not only are excellent Promises made unto our Public and
Private Fasting, in regard of the Blessings, which shall thence redound unto
our own souls and bodies, or unto our wives, children, servants, neighbors,
kindred, friends, but also in regard of a plentiful Harvest of spiritual and
temporal blessings, which shall thence redound to the whole Diocese, Province,
Country, Nation, Church, where we Fast. Eccles. 10.16.17. Woe, we to thee (O
Land) when thy King is a child, and thy Princes (like unto those worse kind of
Persian kings) eat in the morning (as though they were borne of Sardanapalus,
that is, for nothing but bed and board:) But Blessed, blessed art thou. (O
Land) when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in time (like
chaste Hippolyti, with Hunters stomachs in the afternoon) Ad Robur, non ad
compotationem; for the necessary strengthening of their exercised and toiled
bodies. If the Magistrates, their temperate eating, which oftentimes is even
natural unto many men, bring such a blessing with it, to the Land and Country
where they rule in what Vintages of all kinds of Blessings, will not their
right Religious Evangelical Fasting commanded and commended here by the King
of kings, and Lord of lords, the Son of God, procure and purchase to Gods
Church, at Gods most merciful and boundtifull hand?

CHAP. IIII. The Peroration or Hortatorie conclusion of this Discourse.
ANd thus at length have I hasted, what I could, to finish my Lenten penance,
this lean and tedious discourse of Fasting, which is (to use Quintilians
term) exossata oration, nothing but hard and harsh skin and bone: thus at
length have I hasted to pay my long vows to this short Text, which few do
understand, many have misunderstood, none of us with that Severity and
Holiness, do Christianly practice, wherewith Christ himself, the only Law
giver able to save and destroy, in these two parables would have it to be
practiced, and wherewith not only these children of the Bridechamber, but also
the Bride herself in the first thousand years after her Bridegroomes
departure did most devoutly, and discreetly and obediently practice it.

Christ the Bridegroom, has seen and known, how I have behaved my self in
the handling of this Text. Before him I do in all humility of spirit
protest, that I have not prophesied anything out of mine own brain, nor
usurped violently upon the Text, as if it were Nasus cereus, a nose of wax to
wrest or descant upon at my pleasure; neither have I uttered any thing
unnecessary or impertinent; nor could I more briefly handle it, unless I
should have plaide the part of a deceitful workman and been unfaithful unto
it.

What now remains, but that as our understandings have suffered their
Lent-penance, in taking the tedious information of so unpleasant a discourse:
so now our wills and affections, do take their Lenten penance, also by
suffering the words of exhortation, That, if the Devil, the world, or the
flesh have caught any hold, and made any dangerous rent in the^, as in Christ's
new garments; we would be wise and careful presently to make it up again with
the shred of this new piece, out of Christ's wardrop, this Evangelical Fasting:
If the Devil, the world or the flesh, have vented, abated or any whit
diminished the vigor, strength, quantity or substance of Christ's new wine,
the graces of his spirit of Regeneration in them, being as Christ's new bottels*
we would presently restore, and repair the loss again by the ready supply
of this new wine, this Evangelical Fasting, which the Church of God
publickely, we our selves privately are to draw out of this Cellar, so called
in the second of the Canticles, this Gospel command and word of Christ [
Then shall they Fast.] If we be not able to follow or imitate the miraculous,
and extraordinary Fasts of Christ himself, of Moses, of Elias: yet strive we
to keep those Fasts, which the children of the Bride-chamber, kept and
appointed to be kept, when the Bridegroom was taken away from them. If their
new piece also be vnsuteable; if their now wine be of too strong a grape,
because they were men of an extraordinary spirit: yet let us not shrink or
refuse to hold out our Fasts with Tertullian, Cyprian, Austin, Leo, Gregory,
Bernard; or but with their people and lay men, men altogether of our own size,
strength, metal and fashion. These are but one meal a day throughout the
year. If we be not able to humble our selves so low, and to mourn with them
so long as the whole year through; yet let it not grieve us in this former
spring of the year, to consecrate with them this tenth part of the year I
mean, This forty days Fast of Lent, as an holy tenth unto Christ the
ancient of days, The great necessity of faisting all the weeke-dayes of Lent.
that the first fruits of our blood being purged, and holy in the first
beginning of the year, the whole year following may be sanctified and
blessed unto us. We are every year very careful in the latter spring of the
year, to sweat and toil to the great hazard of our healths forty days
together at the least, that we may inn a plentiful harvest, for the
sustenance of our bodies the whole year following. Surely we have far
greater reason to plie this Lent time (which the Fathers usually call the
Christian harvest of our souls) and even to hazard our healths by swearing
drops of our heart-blood, at the sight of Gods wrath against our ordinary, and
extraordinary sins, by weeping, Fasting, and praying, and by continual
hearing, and reading the word of God, to the end, we may inn a rich and
plenteous crop for the whole years sustenance of our souls. The heathen
people (as Athen^ns one of their Greek writers tells us) had every year a
Spring-song, which they did use to sing in their streets at the first sight of
the swallow; (...). The swallow, the swallow is come bringing the good hours
and the good year with her. The like Spring-song does Christ himself sing
unto his spouse the Church, in the second of the Canticles the tenth verse:
Arise my Love, my fair one, and come thy way. For behold (says he) the Winter
is past. The rain is changed, and is gone away, The flowers appear in the
earth, The time of singing of birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is
heard in our land. What is this Window song, this May-song, this Spring-song [
Arise my Love, my fair one, and come away etc:] but our Savior Christ his
rouzing of us out of our dead Winter sleep of sin, by the preaching of the
Gospel of Repentance at the windows of our ears, which he opens with his
own hands, and the power of his spirit? what is this first appearing, and
opening of the Spring-floures out of the winter prison of the earth, which was
fast-bard, and lock with cold frosts, before the sun returning began to
resolve the frozen cold, and with his heat to make a g^ole-deliuerie of the
fruit of the vegetative life of earth: but the first appearing and opening of
the flowers of Faith and Repentance, by the comfortable and lively heat of the
Sun of righteousness Christ Jesus, who with the heat of his zealous Spirit,
resolves the frozen vnfallowed ground of men's sinful hearts dead in sins
and trespasses, and with the cold blasts of Gods desertions, mollifieth and
quickneth them, through their Lent-fast, delivers them out of the
winter-prison of ignorance, infidelity, presumption, security, forgetfulness
of God, acediousnesse, vnzealousnesse, into which, natural concupiscence,
Satan's suggestions, the evil examples and continual custom of sin in the
world, had either subtly or by strong hand cast them? What Is lastly this,
which Christ calls Our Land, but the Place of his feet, his Vineyard, his Native
Soil, his Church, whereof he himself is the chief Member, the chief Vine,
the best Plant, and of whose Sion it is said, that He was borne there? What Is
this voice of the Turtle, Catechumeni, are they, who being baptized amongst us,
when they were children, do now in Lent first prepare themselves to the
receiving of the Communion at Easter. Competentes* I call those who in former
time have desired baptism at Easter.
heard in this his and our Land, but the mournful voice of the Catechumeni,
Competentes; Ordinary and Extraordinary Penitents, mourning (all the time of
this forty days Fast of Lent) as a Turtle, or chattering all together, as
Swallows, in the dust of Ordinary and Extraordinary Repentance? Like a Crane
or a Swallow, so did I chatter; said Penitent Hezekias, Isa. 38.14.) I did
mourn, as a Dove.

But besides this great Conueniencie of having this forty days Harvest for
our souls Humilation and Sanctification at this time of the year; we are
further for this cause to be very desirous to follow the Saints of God in the
severe keeping thereof, because (as Saint Austin says) it may be, and ought to
be kept, as a Resculptiue and Memoratiue Fast. The four Fasts in Zachary,
Zach. 7. and 8.
kept by the Jews in Babylon, were all Memoratiue. For the Fast of the tenth
Month, was kept in remembrance of Nabuchodonosor his first laying of siege
against Jerusalem: The Fast of the fourth Month, in remembrance of the
grievous famine and taking of their City, and killing of their Nobles: The
Fast of the fifth Month, in remembrance of Nabuzaradan the King of Babylons
Steward, his burning of the Temple and the City: The Fast of the seventh
Month, in remembrance of the cutting off of the last hope of their comfort,
namely, of good Gedaliah his treacherous slaying, by that ambitious and cursed
Ishmael, Jeremy 40. 14.16. and 41. 1 2.3. After the same manner, this our
forty days Fast of Lent, is Memoratiue, and is kept by the Churches of God,
to put us into a lively and sensible remembrance of the forty days Fast of
Moses, Elias, Christ; of the forty days and forty nights Rain, which
brought in Noah's Flood, upon that former ungodly world; and of that
Extraordinary and most humble Fortie-dayes Fast of the Penitent Ninevites,
whereby they did prevent the Universal Deluge of destruction threatened by
Jonas, at the forty days end.

To use no more reasons, to set out unto our consciences, The great necessity
of this our Lent-fast in all Churches: Let not this still, still be the
Egyptian shame of our Church of England, that, when Moses is forty days and
forty nights twice told, Fasting in Mount Horeb, Deuteronomy. 9 9. and 18, 25.
the Mount of God, partly at the sight of the glorious pattern of Gods true
Worship, partly at the sight of the Israelites idolatrous and false worship:
we, with those beastly, profane, idolatrous, wild headed, irreligious,
fleshly, wanton, caluish minded. Israelites, worship Our golden Calves, and the
vanities and lusts of our fleshly appetites, Eating and drinking, and rising up
to play; That, when Elias is in his grievous Fast of forty days and forty
nights, walking to the same Mount of God Horeb, we, with Ahab and Iesabel run
a whoring from God, to the mountain of Samaria, the hautinesse and
stubburnesse of our irreligious and impenitent hearts: That, whilst Christ
himself, is for our sakes in the wilderness, fighting upon all disaduantages,
with the greatest punishment of our sins Famine, and with the greatest enemy
of our Salvation, the Devil; we, after the example of the Devils instruments,
the fleshly Jews, altogether mindelesse of our Salvation, fight for the Devil
and the flesh, against Christ, by our impenitencie, in practicing our customary
manner of sinning all manner of sins, of drunkenness, gluttony,
licentiousness, wantonness, strife, envy, oppression of our poor people and
tenants, following the world and our suits in Law, more fiercely and griedily
at this time of the year, then at any other time besides. That lastly, whilst
godly Noah, Shem and Iaphet are lamenting and exercising Continency and
Fasting, at the fearful fight of the destruction of an ungodly world, whose
dead carkases were continually beaten by the waters and knocked against the side
of the Arc* to put them in mind of Gods just wrath against sin; whilst the
King of Niniue, descending from his Chair of State, into the dust and ashes of
Extraordinary Repentance, Fasteth in Sackcloth with his Nobles and penitent
People, even to the beast that perishes, because it is the instrument of man's
sin: whilst Tertullian, Cyprian, Austin, Leo, Gregory, Bernard, and all the
godly Fathers, for the space of a thousand years and more after Christ, are
every year marshalling themselves, their Extraordinary Penitents, Al these
things are truly gathered out of the Fathers writings.
their Catechumeni, their Competentes after the example of so worthy Precedents
in dust, sack cloth and ashes, for their Ordinary and Extraordinary sins,
preaching once at the least every day, so long as Lent lasts; frequenting
public Prayer thrice every day, laying aside a great part of their worldly
necessary business, watching some nights, and lying upon the ground, to listen
if they might chance to hear the soft and sudden coming of the feet of the
thief of the night, the stealing of the day of judgment upon them, or to
hear the first blast and sound of the last Trumpet of God, or the first showt
of our Lord, at his last descending in the Clouds, or the first word of the
voice of the Archangel, or at least the crowing of S. Peter's Cock, to call
them out of their dead sleeps or light slumbers of fleshly security, that they
might go out and weep bitterly for their sins; taking but one spare homely
meal on the week day all this time of Lent, reconciling themselves to their
adversaries, in any suite of law, or in any offensiuenesse whatsoever, and
giving largely to the poor, especially abating their poor debtors their
debts, and tenants their rents, as an Easter Iubilee, and as a true fruit of
that Christian fast which God has chosen: Let not this, this, I say, be still,
still the burning Egyptian shame of our Church of England, that so many make no
difference at all betwixt Lent, and Christmas, hauking, hunting, carding,
dicing, Horsracing, playing at Football, letting loose the reins of our flesh
to all things lawful or unlawful, casting nets over our simple brethren,
following and hoately pursuing all vantages, quarrels, demands, actions about
worldly matters, never thinking of the nearest nearenesse of the great day of
the great judgment, continually forgetting the continually gasping mouth of
hell, which every other year by Popish treacheries, either at home, or abroad
is gasping, and opening upon us, never thanking the Lord, for so miraculous,
and often shutting it, accounting our selves to be with John the Apostle, whom
Christ loved, impaled within the arms, and breast of Christ, the Bridegroom;
shut in there (as it were) out of the peril of all gunshot, and out of all
danger of Plagues, inundations, unseasonable weather, terrible Tuesdayes
(terrible by the Gouraean conspiracy, terrible by that Gun powder treason,
terrible by our late strange winds, winds of that breath of Gods wrath,
wherewith the fire of hell is kindled.)

If we cannot Fast with one spare and homely meal a day all the week days
of Lent, The great necessity of Fasting the last week of Lent, which is
Christ and his members, their Passion week, called by the Fathers, Hebdomada
pa^osa.
so long as Lent lasts (as our Church would have us) yet at the least let us
hear the word of God read or preached unto us, and let us in truth, and no
longer in profane and childish Hypocrisy (according to the words of our common
Leiturgie) Turn unto the Lord by weeping, fasting, and praying, This whole
last week of Lent, which we call Hebilomadam paenosam, the Passion week, in
which we ought (if ever) to redeem our ill-kept Lent, and to prepare our
selves by nailing our sinful flesh unto Christ's cross of mortification, to
the end, we may rise again with him at Easter unto justification, with whom
we have died by mortification, that also after our suffering with him, we may
one day ascend and enter into glory with him. As Leo says truly of the whole
Lent fast: Quanto sanctius quisque hos dies inuenietur egisse, tanto probabitur
pascha Domini honorasse religiosius: The more holily a man shall be found to
have kept all the Fasting days of Lent, the more devoutly will he be found,
and find himself by Experience to have honored the feast of Easter, or of the
resurrection, which follows and ends Lent: so the same also may be said,
even of the holy and devout keeping of this last week of Lent. For surely now
the Devil is most buisie to draw us from our worthy celebration of this week
unto all profaneness, worldliness, The Devils passion-weeke.
security and wantonness, and at no time of the year, does he so earnestly
seek our destruction by forgetfulness of God, and of our duties of love one
toward another, as he does this week of Christ's passion, to the end that he
may still in the same week crucify Christ in his members, and make us
altogether unworthy, through our profanations, and fleshly contentions, both of
the merits of Christ's death, and of the virtue of Christ's resurrection: as the
same Leo therefore says of the whole time of Lent, That Parum religiosus alio
tempore demonstratur, qui in his diebus religiosior non inuenitur: He has
little or no religion in him at other times, who is not more religious on the
Lent days, then he was other common days: so I may truly say, that he has
little or rather no religion at all, who is not now contented with those
Capernaits in the sixth of John, in so short a time before the Feast of the
Passover, to Fast three days and three nights, together, or at least to Fast
every 20. four hours for the space of six days in hearing Christ preach
unto him, That is, every day in passionweeke, taking but one spare and homely
meal within 24. hours.
that after such humiliation Christ, may by his spirit restifie, and
comfortably say unto him, as he testified and said unto them: Cause this man
to sit down, who is faint with hunger after righteousness, and has followed
me Fasting now six days together, that I may refresh him with food at my
table because I have compassion on him. To conclude; a chief cause (I say it
again) of pride in Magistrates, of wantonness in rich folk, of self
wilfulness, and worse then heathenish disobedience and stubburnesse in rude
people amongst us at this day, is this our common, unregarded, undisciplined,
wanton, humorous, irreligious, rude disobeying of Christ and his Church their
consultatorie commands of this Fast of Lent, and other Fasts whatsoever. The
Lord Jesus, who has the keys of David upon his shoulders, open our eyes and
hearts to the seeing and embracing of the truth of the great necessity of our
obedience to this Command [ Then shall they Fall.] Amen. Amen.

Ignatius. (...)


FINIS.

