AN APOLOGY FOR THE RELIGION established in the Church of England.

BEING AN ANSWER TO T. W. HIS 12. Articles of the last edition. In this impres
sion recognized and much enlarged.

Also Answers to three other writings of three several Papists.

By ED: BVLKLEY Doctor of Divinity.

Proverb. 14. 15. The foolish will believe every thing: but the prudent will
consider his ways. Lamenta. 3. 40 Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again unto the Lord. Chrysostom. in Genes. (...). ^. Quocirca diuinae Scripturae
vestigia sequamur, neque ^^ramus eos qui temer^ quiduis blaterant. i. Let us
follow the steps of the holy Scripture, and not endure or abide them that
rashly babble euery-thing. AT LONDON Printed by George Eld for Arthur Johnson,
and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the white Horse, oueragainst the
great North door of S. Paul's Church. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON KNIGHT, LORD Keeper of the great
Seal of England, Chamberlain of the County Palatine of Chester, and one of
his Majesty's most honorable privy Council, grace and peace be multiplied.
WHen I consider (right Honorable) the estate of England in these our days, I
cannot better compare it, then with the estate of the kingdom of Judah under
K. Josias, expressed shortly yet effectually by Sophonie the Prophet, who lived
and preached in that time. For as then God gave to that people that worthy and
godly King, who zealously 2. King. 25.
rooted out Idolatry, and planted Gods true worship agreeable to his law* so
God in great mercy has given us our most gracious Queen Elizabeth, by whose
godly means Idolatry has been abolished, Gods true religion and service
restored, his holy word truly and sincerely preached, and peace and
tranquillity among us long maintained. And as in those days under King Josias,
notwithstanding that godly and zealous reformation, there was great wickedness
among the people, as the said Sophonias shows. For there were then which
worshipped Sopho. 1. 5.
upon the rouffes of their houses the host of heaven: and which worshipped and
swear by the true and only God Iehoua, and by Malcha^ their Idol: and 6.
such as were turned back from after the true God, and sought him not, nor
inquired after him: and 8.
that did wear strange apparel: and others that filled their masters houses
with robbery and deceit: 9.
and such as were frozen in their dregs, and said in 12.
their hearts the Lord will neither do good nor evil. And Jerusalem was then
a filthy and spoiling Chap. 3. 1. 2.
city, which heard not Gods voice, received not instruction, trusted not in
the Lord, and drew not near unto her God, etc. Even so how these sins abound
at this time in this land, I think there are but few, but do see: and none
that truly fears God, but does lament. To omit other sins here mentioned,
as then there were which worshipped Iehoua the only true God, and Malcham
their Idol: even so there be now not a few, which to please the Prince and
State pretend outwardly to like of religion established, and yet inwardly in
their hearts favor Idolatry and wicked worshippings repugnant to the same.
And as then many were turned back from after God, and sought him not, nor
inquired after him: even so now there are many which be revolted from Gods holy
worship agreeable to his word, and utterly forsake the holy assemblies where
Gods word is truly preached, the Sacraments are according to Christ's
institution rightly ministered, and Gods holy name faithfully called upon. These
with Lots wife look back unto Genes. 19. Numb. 14.
Sodom: and are with the Israelites in heart turned back into Egypt, desiring
rather to eat onions and garlike there, then to feed upon the heavenly Manna
of Gods blessed word.

Of these thus turned back from seeking after God, they be most dangerous,
which being deceived themselves, endeavor by all means both by speaking and
writing to seduce and deceive others. Such be the Seminary Priests and
Jesuits, who although they be at this present time (at leastwise in outward
appearance) at deadly fewd among themselves, writing most bittely one against
another: yet they all agree in resisting Gods truth, seducing the simple and in
laboring most earnestly to set up again their Dagon of the Mass fallen down
before the Arc of Christ's Gospel. To this end they write lewd, lying, and
slanderous Pamphlets, wherein they traduce the truth, and faithful favorers
thereof, deceive the ignorant, and confirm in error their over affectioned
favorers, who without trial or examination over rashly receive, and over
lightly believe whatsoever is broached by them.

Of these lying Libels there came one to my hands a year past and more,
pretended to be printed at Antwerpe 1600. wherein is boldly affirmed, but
faintly proved, that we have no faith, nor religion: that of us both the
learned, and ignorant of the Greek and Latin tongues be Infidels: that we
know not what we believe: that we are bound in conscience both never to ask
forgiveness of our sins, and also to avoid all good works: that we make
God the author of sin, and worse then the devil. These and such other
shameless assertions and false slanders when I read, it came into my heart, that
Master Thomas Wright (with whose spirit I had been acquainted) was the venture
of this ware. In which opinion I was afterward confirmed, for that both some of
his favorers could not deny it, and in a written copy thereof taken in a
search in Shropshire and sent unto me, these two letters, T. W. were set in the
end of it.

This lewd Libell although in respect of the matter void both of truth and
learning, deserved rather to be despised, then earnestly answered: yet because
the author of it, thinks so highly of himself, and so basely and
contemptuously of us, giving out in certain written conferences, which he has
dispersed abroad in this land, and some faithful men have seen, that we be
unlearned, and so given to wordly affairs, that we bestow no time, or but
little in study: I (although the meanest and vnmeetest of many) was moved to
wtite this answer, thereby to confute these calumnies, to clear the truth, to
confirm the faithful, and if by Gods gracious blessing it might be, to
reclaim and reform the ignorant and seduced. Whereof I have the less hope,
for that as they imitate those wicked Israelits, which refused to hearke^,
turned away their shoulder, stopped their Zach. 7. 11.
ears that they might not hear, and made their hearts as an Adamant stone,
least they should hear the law and the words which the Lord of hosts sent in
his spirit by his Prophets: So they do fully follow the perverse Pagans, which
most obstinately refused to read godly books written by Christians, as that
ancient eloquent Christian Lactantius, in these eloquent words declares: Non
est apud me dubium, Constantine Imperator Lactant. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Maxim, quin hoc opus nostrum, quo singularis ille reru^ conditor, and huius
immensi operis rector asseritur, si quis attigerit ex istis inepte religiosis
(vt sunt nimia superstitione impatientes) insectetur etiam maledictis: vt vix
lecto fortasse principio, affligat, proijciat, execretur, seque inexpiabili
scelere contaminari atque astringi putet, si haec aut legate patienter aut
audiat. One Be or egg is not liker to another, then to these Pagans be our
peevish Papists, in shutting their eyes from reading godly and learned books,
tending to the confutation of their errors, and the instruction of them in the
truth. Whom yet I am to entreat with Lactantius words immediately following: Ab
hoc tamen, si Idem ibidem:
fieri potest, humanitatis iure postulamus, vt no^ prius da^net quam vniuersa
cognouerit. Nam si sacrilegis and proditoribus, and veneficis potestas
defendendi sui datur, nec praedamnari quenquam incognita causa licet, non
unjust petere videmur, vt si quis erit ille, qui inciderit in haec, si leget,
perlegat: si audiet sententiam differat in extremu^. This reasonable request I
would that I might obtain at our Romish Catholics hands, that they would
first read and examine this my answer, before they condemn it. For what is
more unjust, then to condemn that which a man does not know. Howbeit I doubt
least with the same Lanctantius I must say: Sed noui hominum pertinaciam,
nunquam ^bidem.
impetrabimus. Timent enim ne a nobis reuicti, manus dare aliquando clamante
ipsa veritate cogantur. Obstrepunt igitur and intercedunt ne audiant: and
oculos suos opprimunt, ne lumen videant quod offerimus Even so our untruly
termed Catholics do follow this froward peruersitie of the Pagans, in whom
that saying also of the Prophet (as it is alleged by Saint Luke) is verified:
The heart of this people is waxed Act. 28. 27.
gross or fat, and their ears are dull of hearing, and they have shut their
eyes, least they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I might heal them.
The which is a fearful judgment of God; when men refusing the love of the
truth that they might be saved, be given up to a 2 Thessalonians. 2.
strong delusion to believe lies.

But if these blinded with error and ignorance, for whose sake especially I
have written this answer, will not vouchsafe to read it, nor make any use and
profit of it: yet if it may some what serve to edify the faithful, and
confirm the weak, I shall think my labor not altogether lost. The which how
small or simple soever it be, yet as I have written it for the good of Gods
Church: so I have bin by your Honors courtesy encouraged to offer and present
it unto your Lordship, as a true testimony of my loving heart and dutiful
affection toward your Honor, for your favor showed me. The God of all grace
and mercy bless your Lordship and all yours, increase his good graces and
gifts in you, and long preserve you to the benefit of this Church and
Commonwealth, Amen.

Your Honors most humble to be commanded, EDWARD BVLELEY.

To the Christian Reader.
GOod Christian Reader, whereas the author of these reasons upon his good
conceit of the forciblenesse of them to persuade to Popery, has thought them
worthy of a second impression, and a new augmentation: I am partly thereby, and
partly by the request of the Printer and others, moved to publish again in
Print my answer to them. The which I have recognized, and in many places
enlarged, by adding not only more testimonies, but also some discourses. I have
also in the end adjoined answers to some frivolous cauillations which S. R. in
his answer to Master Bells downe-fall of Popery, and others have made against
it. And hereof I must certify thee good Reader, that I have inserted into the
said reasons the Authors new additions, the which that thou may discern from
the other, I have put this mark unto them: the same mark also I have put to
my answers made to the same. I have also in this impression added an answer to
certain Popish questions written fifteen or sixteen years past, the which
although it was long ago allowed to be published, yet it has until now lien
by me: howbeit now for the reasons in the Preface before it declared, I have
thought good to join it unto this.

Now although this my answer will bring no profit to them, that being wedded to
will, and bewitched by a strong delusion, will not vouchsafe to look upon it,
much less will wholly read, compare, and examine it, but will condemn it,
before they know it: yet if it may serve to the defense of Gods truth, and to
the confirming of thee good Reader in the same: as I shall therein obtain that
I do seek, so my desire is, that thou will remember me at the throne of
grace in thy faithful prayers. The Father of all mercy give us true
understanding in all things, and guide us by the light of his holy word
outwardly, and by his blessed spirit inwardly to believe his truth, and obey
his will to his own glory, and our eternal comfort. Amen. April 22. 1608.

Thine in Christ Jesus, ED: BVLKELEY.

AN ANSWER TO AN UNLEARNED, SLANDEROVS, AND LYING PAMPHLET, INTITVLED: Certain
articles, or forcible reasons, discovering the palpable absurdities, and most
notorious errors of the Protestants Religion, pretended to be Printed at
Antwerpe 1600.
TO the sayings of the Prophet Esaias, chap. 59. 10. and Elizeus 4. King. 6.
20. set in the first front of this peevish Pamphlet, whereby he would insinuate
and signify us to be blind: I answer, that if we be blind, which give our
selves daily and diligently, both pastors and people, to the reading and
hearing of Gods holy word, and do endeavor to make that a light unto our Psalm.
119. 105
feet, and a lantern unto our paths: in what estate be they, which keep the
light of Gods word under the bushel of a strange tongue, and read the same
both little themselves, and dissuade and withdraw others from it? Aeneas
Syluius, who was Pope called Pius Secundus, writes thus of the Italian Priests
in his days, and of the good people in Bohemia: Pudeat Italiae Sacerdotes,
quos ne semel quidem Commenta. de dictis and sactis Alphonsi Reg. lib. 2. 17.
nouam legem constat legisse: apud Thaboritas vix mulierculam inuenias quae de
Nouo Testamento and veteri respondere nesciat. i. The priests of Italy may be
ashamed, who are known not once to have read the new Testament, seeing with
the Thaborites one can hardly find a silly woman which cannot answer out of
the old and new Testament. John Gerson Chancellor of the University of Paris,
who lived Anno 1415. and was a great dealer in the Council of Constance, Tom.
1 Sermon. coram Alexan. Papa in die Ascensionis. Nicol Clemang. de corrupto
Ecclesiae statu. fol. 5. b.
writes thus: Nam quem e Sacerdotum numer^ mihi dabis non ignarum legis
Christi? Whom among the multitude of Priests can thou show me, which is not
ignorant of Christ's Law? Nicolaus Clemangis a Doctor of Paris, who lived in the
same time that Gerson did, complains in like manner of the gross ignorance
of the popish Clergy in these words: Non tamen a studiis aut schola, sed ab
aratro etiam and seruilibus artibus ad Parochias regendas, caeteraque beneficia
passim proficiscebantur, qui paulo plus Latinae linguae quam Arabicae
intelligerent, etc. i. Yet they commonly came to rule parishes and other
benefices, not from schools and Universities, but from the plowe and servile
arts; who did little more understand the Latin then the Arabike tongue, yea,
and such as could not read, and (which is shameful to be spoken) could scarce
discern A. from B. And again: Nam quotus quisque Ibid. fol. 10. b.
hodie est ad pontificale culmen euectus, qui sacras vel perfunctorie literas
legerit, audierit, didicerit, imo qui Sacrum codice^ nisi tegumento tenui
vnquam attigerit, cum tamen iureiurando illas in sua institutione se nosse
confirment: i^ How many are there now advanced to be bishops which have but
lightly read the holy Scriptures, heard, or learned them: yea, who has touched
the holy Bible, except it be the covering of it? Again: Ibid. fol. 13.
De literis vero and doctrina quid loqui attinet, cum omnes fere presbyteros
sine aliquo captu aut rerum aut vocabulorum morose syllabatimque vix legere
videamus: i. But what should I speak of learning, for that we see in a
manner, all Priests can hardly spell and read, being without understanding of
the matter or words. I might allege the like complaints of Erasmus and others,
but to omit them: if we who with the Council of Toledo condemn ignorance
Did. 38. ex conc. Tole. Contra Manichaeos Haere. 66 Hier. in Esaiam did. 38.
si iuxta Pr^^. 2. 4.
as the mother of all errors; and say with Epiphanius: Nihil peius imperitia,
multos excaecauit ignorantia: i. There is nothing worse than ignorance, which
has blinded many: and with S. Hierome, to be ignorant of the Scriptures, is to
be ignorant of Christ: and do with Solomon exhort all men to seek for
knowledge as for silver, and for understanding as for treasures: if we (I say)
be blind, in what estate are they which hold ignorance the mother of devotion,
as Doctor Cole In the conference at Westminster in the beginning of her
Majesty's reign. See the beginning of the Praeface of the new Testament set
out by them 1582.
at Westminster said, and who to this day have not published the whole Bible in
the English tongue, for the instructing and inlightning of Gods people,
although they writ eighteen years past, that they had long before that time
translated it, and yet to this day they have wanted means to publish it. They
have had means since that time to print and publish D. Stapletons great book,
de Principiis doctrinalibus, and many such others of the like sort, but they
can or will find no means to publish the blessed Bible and book of God: for
it serves not so well for the defense of their doctrine and doings, as the
others do. But to conclude this matter, I also do both pray with the Prophet
David, and say; Open our eyes that we may see the wonders of thy law; and Psalm.
119. 2. Timoth. 2. 7. Ephesians. 1. 18.
with Saint Paul, The Lord give us understanding in all things, that the eyes
of our understanding being lightened, we may know what the hope is of Gods
calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in the Saints, etc.
and also exhort this man and his fellows to take heed they be not of the
number of them, of whom our Savior Christ said, If John. 9. 41.
ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, we see: therefore
your sin remains.

The Pamphlet. The copy of a Letter, written by a Catholic to a worshipful
Protestant Gentleman his special friend, concerning certain reasons, why the
Protestants Religion is false and absurd.
Loved and reloued friend, I have received your courteous letter, wherein you
greatly wonder, that I wondered so much in our last discourse; that any man in
England endued with a good judgment, conioined with a religious conscience,
could either accept, or affect the Protestants new coined gospel. You request
me to set down briefly such reasons as induced me thereunto: the which suite I
could not deny: for both religion and affection urged me to satisfy so just a
desire. For I must confess, I love you as a man, and as an honest civil
Gentleman, and most gladly I would have occasion to love you as a Catholic
Gentleman: for it is great pity that such a multitude of detestable errors,
and heinous heresies should lodge in so rarely qualified a soul. I have penned
them after an accustomed manner following the fashion of schools, in most of
them after a syllogisticall method: to the intent that if you should show them
unto your Ministers, which swarm about you, they might not have such free
scope and liberty, to range abroad with their idle discourses (as they use to
take) veiling their confused conceits with a multitude of affected phrases:
thereby more easily to deceive the simple, and loath the learned. Wherefore I
beseech you if any such itching spirit shall attempt an answer, to entreat him
to perform it briefly, orderly, and seriously. This I request, for that I
perceive that Protestants cannot answer with breuity, because their religion
lacks both certainty and perspicuitie: And extreme hard or impossible it is
to reply without prolixitie, where there is no truth nor verity. And therefore
I request you as you love me, to will them to consider well, before they answer
ill: and not to reply with rashness, least they retract with deliberation, to
their utter shame and confusion. And that you may perceive how my wonder rather
deserved approbation then admiration and for that order is a fauorit of memory:
I thought good to reduce all my reasons into two heads; wit and will, knowledge
and affection, faith and good life: because the nature of heresy has ever
been such as did not only inueagle the wit with errors, but also seduce the
will with occasions of inordinate affections. I say then that no excellent good
wit, linked with a religious conscience, can accept nor affect the Protestants
new coined gospel: for good wits and judgments, assisted with Gods grace, may
easily conceive the truth, yea by the force of their very natural faculties,
they may judge credibly of the truth once proposed; and without great
difficulty discern the absurdities of an untrue religion. Virtuous and well
inclined affections which are the base of quiet, secure, and religious
consciences, abhor and detest such principles as either dishonor God, abase
man's nature, occasion sin, favor iniquity, or any sort diminish devotion, or
piety: And therefore all the insequent articles shall stand upon these two
foundations, to wit, that the Protestants religion debarreth the wit from right
understanding the true faith, and the will from following of any virtue or
godliness.

Answer.
YOu wonder that any man in England endued with a good judgment, conjoined
with a religious conscience, can either accept or affect the Protestants new
coined gospel. But why do you not show what is the new coined gospel, which
the Protestants preach and profess. The Gospel is the good and joyful
message of our salvation, through Gods mercies purchased unto us by Jesus
Christ. This Gospel God preached to Adam, that Jesus Christ the seed of the
woman should break the Serpents Genes. 3. 16.
head. This he renewed to Abraham saying, In thy seed shall all the nations of
the world be blessed. This Gospel was Genes. 22. 18.
preached by all the Prophets, who bear witness unto Christ, that through his
name all that believe in him, shall Act. 10. 43.
reciue forgiveness of sins. Now if you can prove that we preach or
maintain any other gospel then this, then you may well call it a new coined
gospel: if otherwise, take heed you do not belch out blasphemy, in calling
this old and true gospel of Jesus Christ, a new coined gospel. And let the
Christian reader, which tendereth his own salvation, well consider who they be
that coin a new, false, and counterfeit gospel. Do not they which teach us
to ascend into heaven by the blood of Thomas Becket, coin a In the Popish
Primer printed 1557.
new and false gospel: Tu per Thomae sanguinem etc. which they Englished in
Queen Mary's days thus: By the blood of Thomas, which he for thee did spend,
make us Christ to come, whither Thomas did ascend. Again, Jesus bone per Thomae
merita, nostra nobis dimitte debita: O good Jesus for the merits of Thomas
(Becket) forgive us our sins. Do not they, which teach us to seek to be
delivered from the fire of hell by the merits and prayers of Saint Nicholas,
maintain a new coined gospel? Thus they prayed: Quesimus vt eius meritis and
precibus a gehennae incendiis In the same Primer.
liberemur: Grant we beseech thee, that by his merits and prayers we may be
delivered from the fire of hell. Do not they which say and believe of an Agnus
dei, that is to say, a piece of wax and balm consecrated by the Pope, Tollit
and omne malignum, peccatum frangit, vt Lib. 1. Caeremo. titul. 7. page 91.
Christi sanguis and angit, It takes away all evil, it breaks and
strangleth sin as does the blood of Christ: do not they (I say) coin a new,
false, and blasphemous Gospel? Yes surely, for to attribute remission of
sins, or any part of salvation to the merits of any other, but only of Jesus
Christ crucified, is to coin a new and false gospel: for it is not that
gospel of God, which he promised before by his Romans 1. 2.
Prophets in the holy scriptures, which is concerning his son Jesus Christ
our Lord, etc. To conclude this point, I say woe, woe unto them that accept or
affect any new coined gospel. Script. Brita. Centur. 4. p. 308.
How your Friars went about above 300. years past to bring in a new coined
gospel, which they called the everlasting gospel, and said, that it excelled
as much the Gospel of Christ, as the Sun in brightness excels the Moon,
and the kirnell the shell, Master Bale out of the Books of that execellent
man William de Sancto amore, who in those days did withstand their devilish
devises, did largely declare. And whereas you wonder that men endued with
judgment and a religious conscience, could affect or accept the gospel that we
preach, which you falsely call a new coined gospel: we may well wonder, that
any man that has any spark of knowledge or conscience should believe these
foresaid false gospels. We may also wonder that men endued with reasonable
souls and senses, being the handy work of God, should bow down and worship a
stone and stock, which has neither soul nor life; has eyes and sees not;
ears and hears not, etc. and is the workmanship of man's Psalm. 115. and 135.
hands, especially being so plainly and expressly forbidden in Gods
commandments, and infinite places of the scriptures. We may wonder that any man
should be so mad, as to worship, and think that which he does eat, to be his
God and maker: which is so absurd, that even Tully not without Cicero de Natura
d^orum lib. 2.
reason could say, sed ecquem tam amentem esse put as, qui illud quo vescitur
deum credat esse? Do thou think any man so mad as to believe that to be his
God, which he does eat? yet into this madness, by a spiritual frenzy, be
these men fallen. We also may wonder, that they should believe such false
fables, and lying miracles, as abound in popery: as for example, (to cast the
dung of their abominations upon their faces). That Images did speak, did
sweat, did roll their eyes, did bleed: that the head of a dog being cut off
from the body by thieves, which upon Saint Katherines day came to rob a Priest,
who was a devout Inter sermones discipuli Sermon. de S. Katherin.
worshipper of her, did still bark? That the Virgin Mary did for many years
in a Nunnery keep the keys, and supply the place of one Beatrix, whilst she
went away and played the whore. These and many such absurd fables were
preached, published, printed, and believed, as may appear by Sermones
discipuli, Antoninus the Archbishop of In promptu. discipuli.
Florence stories, Mariale, Summa praedicantia, the festival, Vitas patrum,
and that monstrous book the Legend, written by Iacobus de Voragine, Archbishop
of Genua: Which Supplementum Chronicorum Bergomens. li. 13. fol. 205.
yet was in so great reputation with them, that it was published in print in
the English tongue, when the holy Bible was suppressed, and had this title set
before it, The golden Legend: for as gold excels all other metals, so this
book excels all other books: to the which title that worthy and right
worshipful Knight Sir Andrew Corbet of blessed memory, did add these words,
In lying, and so of a false and blasphemous title, made it a most true title.
Yea I have a book in English in Folio, translated out of French, and printed
in London in King Henry the eights days Anno 1521. entitled, The flower of
the Commandments, fully fraighted with such sottish and worse then old wives
fables, which yet in those days were preached and believed of which to give
fol. 251.
the reader a taste, I will set down two or three. It is there said that John
Damescene having his hand cut off for writing letters against the Emperor, the
same was suddenly set on again to write a prayer, which he had made to fol.
254.
the Virgin Marie. Also, that a thief which used to fast the vigiles of the
feasts of our Lady and used to pray unto her, being hanged by the space of
three days could not die, for the Virgin Marie sustained him on the gibet;
infinite such other fables swarm in that book. And we may wonder that men of
any wisdom, knowledge, or judgment, should be deluded and mocked with such
false, fained relics, as were and are in Popery, as with Saint Peter's finger
at Walfingham, as big as if it Erasmus in Colloquio. peregriergo. Blondus de
Roma instaurata lib. 3. prope sinem. Holingshead in Henry 8. p. 946 Caluinus
admonitione de reliquijs.
had been of some Giant: and also the virgin Mary's milk there, which seems
by Erasmus to have been the white of an egg and chalk mingled together, and
a vessel of the same at Rome as writes Blondus: the blood of Hales, the which
was proved and declared at Paul's Cross by the Bishop of Rochester in king
Henry the eights days, to have been clarified honey colored with saffron. In
Geneua there was worshipped for the arm of Saint Anthony, that which
afterward was proved to be the pisle of a Stagge, for a piece of Saint Peter's
scull, that which was found to be a pumish stone. But this will not be
believed of this writer and of his fellows, because Calvin did write it. But
why Calvin should write and publish even in the French tongue in Geneua, such a
thing of Geneua, unless it were true, which the Inhabitants thereof might know
to be false, I see no reason: it could purchase no credit to him or to his
doctrine. But why might not that as well be true, as the things before
alleged, or as that which Gregorius Turonensis who lived sundry hundredth
years past, writes Greg^^. Turo^ens. lib. 9. ca. 6
that there was found in a box of relics, of a certain Saint, roots of
trees, the teeth of a Mole, the bones of Mice, and the claws of Bears, which
were worshipped for holy relics. But of these iuglings I will write no more at
this present, GOD may give occasion hereafter more largely to entreat of them.
At these things we may wonder, but yet we do not overmuch marvel and wonder
at them, for that the spirit of GOD by Saint Paul has foreshewed us, that the
time would come, when men should 2. Timoth. 4. 4
turn away their ears from the truth, and be given to fables: and that the
coming of Antichrist should be by 2. Thessal. 2. 9.
the effectual working of satan, with all power and signs, and lying
wonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, amongst them that
perish, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be
saved, therefore GOD should send them a strong delusion to believe lies, that
all they might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Whereas you request that he that shall answer this your
pamphlet, will do it briefly, orderly, and seriously, I will endeavor to do
the two last as GOD shall enable me. But concerning brevity, I will use my
liberty, and peradventure more largely lay down your absurdities, then you
would be willing I should do. But whereas you say, that you make this
request, for that you perceive that the Protestants cannot answer with
brevity, because their Religion lacks both certainty and perspicuitie: I
say that with one breath you do utter two untruths. The first that we cannot
answer with brevity, which how untrue it is, let it be tried first by the
brief and pithy answers of that great learned man Doctor Fulke: who answering
many of their books, which yet to this day stand undefended, how briefly and
pithily he answered the same, let any man that has but a grain of
indifferent judgment, consider and judge. And particularly I refer them to
his answer to Rishtons challenge, and to Allens book of Purgatory, both in
one volume: yea many times in his writings he called them from long and
impertinent discourses, to short syllogismes, whereunto ^ee could never bring
them. How closely that precious Jewel and excellent ornament of this Church of
England did hold himself to the matter, and how unlike he was to Doctor
Harding in his long discourses and digressions, who in his book entitled, A
detection of lies, etc. discoursed two hundred and six whole sides of paper,
only in preambles and prefaces, before he once stepped into his matter, as
Master Jewel truly told him; let the upright Preface to the defense of the
Apology edition 2.
reader indifferently judge. The like I may say of that worthy man of famous
memory, Doctor Whitakers, who how briefly, soundly, and learnedlie he has
answered Campion, Saunders, Duree, Stapleton, William Reynolds, and Bellarmine,
any man that has an incorrupt eye may see and discern. And if T. W. be the
author of this pamphlet (as I nothing doubt but he is) he may remember* that
one which had conference with him, did write a brief Epistle unto him, and did
therein set down short sillogismes concerning the controversies of prayer to
Saints, and the sacrifice of the Mass, and required to have the like short
syllogismes set down of him for the defense of his assertions, and could not
receive one, but along tedious discourse concerning prayer to Saints, which was
confuted, and never defended. But whether answers be brief or long, it makes
no matter, so that they be learned, sound and true, to the effectual confuting
of the error, and satisfying of the reader. Now as touching certainty which
you say, but do not show, that our Religion lacks: I answer and avouch that
our Religion is far more certain, consonant, and agreeable to it self, then
the doctrine of the Church of Rome is: the which if I do not effectually prove
hereafter in place more convenient, I will not require any man (to use your
own words) to accept, or affect it. But with what forehead can this man charge
our doctrine with want of perspicuitie, seeing he cannot be ignorant how
obscure, dark, and intricate the popish Religion and doctrine is; as may
appear by their manifold, both curious questions, and intricate distinctions,
which be their chief shifts, to elude the plain truth. And if any would see
how dark the doctrine and writings of Papists are, let him look into the
Schoolmen, Tho. Aquine, Io Scotus, Alexander de Hales, Gabriel Biel, and many
such other, amongst whom he may find as much certainty, unity, and
perspicuitie of doctrine, as he may in hell. But how we study for
perspicuitie, and seek to make all matters plain, both in our preachings, and
in our writings, avoiding all curious questions, and intricate and needless
distinctions; we appeal to the consciences of all that read, and hear us. As
touching your method concerning errors in doctrine, and inordinate affections
in manners, if you can prove, that our wits be inueigled with them, and our
lives stained with these, more then we can prove even your holy Fathers the
Popes, forsooth Peter's successors, and Christ's vicars have been, you shall
win the victory. You seem to attribute too much to our very natural
faculties, to the judging and discerning of truth proposed, not considering the
corruption of our natural faculties by sin, how both the mind is blinded,
and the will perverted. Our Savior Christ says, The light shines in
darkness, and the darkness John 1. 5. 1. Cor. 2. 14.
comprehends it not: Saitn Paul says, that animalis homo, the natural man
perceives not the things of the spirit of GOD, for they are foolishnes unto
him: neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned. But of
this I forbear to speak any more, and also will leave the other wast words in
your letter, and do come unto your articles of faith.

The Pamphlet. The first article concerning knowledge and faith.
The Protestants have no faith, nor Religion.
THe Protestants have no faith, no hope, no charity, no repentance, no
justification, no Church, no alter, no sacrifice, no Priest, no Religion, no
Christ, the reason is; for if they have, then the world was without them, for a
thousand years (as they themselves must needs confess: videlicet all the
time their Church was eclipsed) and 1500. as we will prove by all records of
antiquity, as Histories, Councels, monuments of ancient Fathers: Whereby it
plainly appears, that the synagogue of the Jews was more constant in
continuance, and more ample for place, then the Church of Christ. For the have
had their sinagogue visible in diverse countries, ever since Christ's death and
passion, even until this day; which is the very path to lead men into
Atheism, as though Christ were not as yet come into the world Isa. 60. 11.
whose admirable promises are not accomplished, Math: 16: 18.
whose assistance has failed in preserving his Church, unto the worlds end,
whose presence was absent many hundred years, before ^ cap, 28: 20.
the final consumation: and consequenetly they open the gap to all
Machiuillians, who say that our Savior was one of the deceivers of the world,
promising so much concerning his Church, and performing so little.

Answer.
LOoking in this first article to have found a syllogism, which this worthy
writer uses in some articles following, but here for want of a good medium
(as it may seem) to frame one by, has omitted; I found a false assertion, and
a foolish probation. The assertion that we have no faith. Have we no faith? The
Devils have some faith: Saint James says, The Devils believe and tremble and
have we no faith? we are much beholden Ia^: 2: 19.
unto you for your charitable opinion of us. You are by the doctrine of Saint
Paul, not to think so evil, but to 1: Cor. 13. 7.
hope the best of them that profess Jesus Christ, and his holy Gospel. But to
this your false and slanderous assertion, I will oppose a true affirmation and
confession. We believe all that God has delivered to us by Moses, the Faith.
Prophets, and Apostles, in the old and new Testament: yea we believe the
contents of the Creeds of the Apostles, Nicene, and Athanasius: and yet have we
no faith? We hope Hope.
to pass hereafter from death unto life, and to be partakers of that kingdom
of glory, which God has promised, and Jesus Christ has purchased for all
those that truly believe in him. We trust that we have Charity, and love both
toward God and man, although we confess not in such Charit^e:
full and perfect measure as we ought to have: We with Saint John say, He
that loves not his brother abides in 1. John. 3* 14.
death. We acknowledge repentance to be one of those Repentance.
chief heads wherein the sum of Christianity is comprised. Saint Mark
setting forth the sum and substance of Christ's doctrine, comprehends it in
these two, Repent Mark 1* 16. Acts 20 21.
and believe the Gospel: so did saint Paul, witness sing both to the Jews,
and to the Grecians the repentance toward GGD, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ. We believe to be justified not by our own works of righteousness
(which we unprofitable servants, and prodigal Justification. Luke 17. 10. and
15. 21.
children have done) nor by the merits of any Saints in heaven or in earth, but
by the mercies of God, purchased unto us by the blessed and bloody merits of
Jesus Christ, and applied unto our souls by the band of faith, by the John 3.
36. Romans 3. 25. and 4. 5. Ephesians 2. 8. Ephesians. 3. 17. Church.
which Christ does dwell in our hearts, and is made ours. We believe that we
are true members of that holy Catholic Church, which is Christ's mystical
body, and whereof he is the head, which is the spouse, and he the
bridegroom: which is his flock, and he the shepeard: which is the heavenly
Jerusalem the Mother of us all: Galath, 4. 26*
finally which is the number of Gods elect and chosen people, that shall rest
with Abraham Isaac and Jacob, in the Math. 8. 11*
Kingdom of Heaven. And we know that we have particular and visible
Churches, wherein Gods word is more truly preached, the Sacraments seals of
the word, are more purely ministered, and Gods name more faithfully inuocated
and called upon, then in any or all the Romish Synagogues. Indeed we have no
Idolatrous Alters, to offer either carnal or external sacrifices upon, as
though Altars.
Christ's sweet smelling sacrifice were not yet offered: but we have Mensam
Domini the Lords Table, whereupon we minister the Supper of Christ, which is a
holy Sacrament 1. Cor. 10. 21.
of Christ's body and blood given for us, a memorial of his death and passion,
and a pledge of our redemption and salvation purchased thereby. We have that
sweet smelling and sufficient Sacrifice, which Jesus Christ by his eternal
spirit offered without fault unto GOD, to purge Sacrifice. Hebre. 9. 14.
our consciences from dead works to serve the living GOD. As for the sacrifice
of the Mass, as being injurious to the said sacrifice of Jesus Christ, which
he once, for all, and for ever offered upon the Altar of the Cross, we deny,
and defy. We have no shaven nor greased Priests to offer the Priests.
said false and forged sacrifice of the Mass: but we have priests, pastors,
or ministers, how-so-euer we term them, according to the ordinance of Christ,
to preach his holy Gospel, and to administer his sacraments to his Church. We
have and use that religion which has the testimony of Religion. Romans 3.
the law and prophets, and wherein the true worship and service of God,
according to his will revealed in his holy word is contained: your (...), and
superstition we flee and forsake. Finally, we have that Christ, which came
Christ. 1. Tim. 1. 15. John. 1. 29.
into this world to save sinners, and which is that Lamb of God, that takes
away the sin of the world, whom we acknowledge more soundly to be our only
high prophet, Matthew. 17. 5.
to instruct us in the will of his father, whose only voice we must hear;
our only high priest, with the sacrifice of his body and blood once offered to
redeem us, and reconcile us unto GOD; our only mediator and intercessor to
sit for ever at the right hand of God to make intercession for us; and our
only high King, to deliver us out of the hands of our enemies, to give laws
unto our consciences, and to rule us with the scepter of his holy word, then
the Pope, and all his adherents do. This our true confession whereunto God
and our consciences be witnesses, we oppose to your false and slanderous
obtrectation and accusation, saying with Saint Paul; We pass very 1. Cor. 4.
3.
little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment: and with him also exhort
you, not to judge before the time, until the Lord come, who will lighten
things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the hearts
manifest, and then shall every man have praise of God. Further I do exhort you
that take upon you so severely to censure and judge others, carefully to take
heed to your selves, that you have not a false faith, grounded not upon Gods
promises, Faith.
contained in his word; but upon man's devises and traditions, which as
Epiphanius says, is worse then no faith. Epipha. in An^^rat^.
(...): and that you be not void of true hope, by teaching the doctrine of
doubting (whereof Hope.
I shall speak hereafter) and by fearing to be after death thrown into the
fiery torments of purgatory: and that you want not true charity, in judging
so falsely and maliciously, Charity.
and persecuting us so cruelly, as you use to do, when time and power serves
you: and that you have no true repentance, nor remorse of conscience for sin,
in Repentance.
persisting so obstinately in damnable doctrine, and abominable idolatry: and
that by leaning to your own righteousness, and the merits of other men,
which were sinners themselves, you loose not that true justification
Justification.
which is the righteousness of GOD, by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all and
upon all that believe, which is only Romans 3. 22.
able to stand and discharge us before the judgment seat of Jesus Christ, and
is the only strong staff to lean upon, to leap over the ditch of damnation,
and beware (I say) that you leaning upon the weak reed of your own merits
and others, fall not into the midst thereof, from which there is no rising:
take heed you be not of the malignant Church, which hears not the voice of
Christ, Church. 2. Thessalo. 2.
and wherein that man of sin, and son of perdition sits and reigns:
and that you have not such Idolatrous altars, as Iereboam had, against which
the man of God cried, and upon which the like judgment of God fell, Altars. 1.
King. 13. 2
as has done upon yours now: And that you have not a false forged sacrifice,
which appeaseth not, but daily provoke Sacrifice.
Gods wrath against you, and that you be not without Priests to teach the law
of God truly, but have Priest. Ierem. 2. 8. Malach. 2. 8.
swarms of such Priests, as say not where is the Lord, and know not GOD, but
prophecy in Baal, which have gone out of the way, and have caused many to fall
by the law etc. Beware that you be not without Religion, remembering Religion.
Lactant. de origi. erroris lib. 2 cap 19. Christ. August. de ciuitate dei lib.
18. cap. 2.
the saying of Lactantius: Quare non est dubium, quin religio nulla sit,
vbicunque simulachrum est: Wherefore there is no doubt, but that there is no
Religion, wheresoever an Image is. Finally, I say again and again, beware
that you forsake not the true Christ, and worship Antichrist, sitting in the
western Babylon built upon seven hills, which in the days of Saint John
reigned over the Apoc. 17. 9. 18
Kings of the earth: wherefore be not so rash in judging so hardly and
uncharitably of others, but examine and judge your selves, that you be not
judged of the Lord. But I now come to your pithie probation of this your
uncharitable 1. Cor. 11. 31. 1
and shameless assertion. The reason you say is: For if they have, then the
world was without them for a thousand years (as they themselves must needs
confess, videl. all the time their Church was eclipsed) and for 1500. as we
will prove by the testimony of all records of antiquity, etc. Whereunto I
answer, that if we take the world in that sense, which the scripture
sometimes does, for the multitude and society of them, Whereof the devil Ioh.
14 30. 2. Cor. 4. 4 Job. 15. 18. 19 1. Joh. 5. 19 Io^. 17 9 Ioh. 14. 22
is prince: which hates Christ and his true disciples, which is set upon
wickedness: for the which our Savior Christ refused to pray saying, I pray
not for the world: and whereof Judas ( not Iscariot) did say, what is the
cause, that thou will show thy self to us, and not unto the world? In this
sense I may grant that the world has not had these gifts of Gods grace these
thousand years, and put another thousand and more unto them. But if we take
the world more generally for this great Globe, and all the inhabitants thereof,
then prove by the testimony of all antiquity that the doctrine which we
teach and profess has not been these 1500. years in the world, and we will
yield, and you shall win the victory. But it is usual with you and your
fellows to make great and brave bragges to amaze the simple and ignorant; and
to bring small and poor proofs (as you do here none at all) to persuade the
wise and learned: great braggers are no great doers. In deed we confess that
the Church is well compared by Saint Augustine to the Moon. For as the August.
in Psa. 10
Moon receives her light from the Sun: so does the true Church receive her
light from Jesus Christ the son Malach. ^, 2
of righteousness. And as the Moon is sometimes in the full, and shines in
full brightness, and sometimes is in the waine, and sometimes is eclipsed, and
does little appear: even so the Church is sometimes in the full, and shines
in full brightness and glory as in the Apostles times, and diverse hundredth
years after it did: sometimes it is in the waine and eclipsed, as for many
hundred years last past it has been, in which that Apostasy from the faith
is come, which Saint Paul by the spirit of God foreshewed, 2. These. 2. 3. 1.
Tim: 4. 1.
and the event has proved by Mahometisme in the East, and Papisme in the West.
During which time although the Church has been driven into the wilderness, and
the Apoca. 12.
light of true doctrine (which is the soul of the Church) has been eclipsed,
yet they have never utterly perished. For in all ages God in mercy has
reserved a remnant according Romans 11. 5.
to the election of grace, by whom the light of his truth has been
preserved, and in whom those admirable promises of his mercy have been
performed. These have been, not proud Popes treading upon Emperors necks,
deposing them from their Crowns and Kingdoms, raising bloody battles, and
pouling and spoiling Christian countries with grievous and horrible exactions
and devises, as might be showed: not carnal Cardinals, Princes, peers, having
200. and 300. benefices a piece, as Gerson Gerson tom. 1. de defect. Virorum
ecclesiast. Nicol. Clama. de corrupto statu ecclesi^. Hebre. 11. 36.
and Clamagis Parisian Doctors before named do affirm, not Popish blind
prelates, Abbats, Monks, priests, etc. wallowing in all worldly wealth, and
for the most part in great filthiness of life, as hereafter I will show: but
such as the Apostle speaks of, that have been tried by mockings and
scourgings, yea by bonds and prisonment, which were stoned, hewn asunder,
tempted, slain with the sword, wandered up and down in sheep-skinnes, and in
goates-skinnes, destituted, afflicted and tormented, whom the world was not
worthy of, which wandered in wildernesses and mountains, and dens, and caves
of the earth. Such were these good people (in the time of the foresaid
apostacy) the Waldenses and Pauperes de lugdun^ dispersed in diverse countries,
as namely Calabria, Sauoye, Prouence in France, of whom many both long ago in
sundry places and diverse times were burned, as it is written in the old book
called Fasciculus Temporum: and also Actale. 6. fol. 84.
of late years were most cruelly and unmercifully persecuted in Merindoll, the
valley of Angrone, Luserne, and See acts and monuments tom. ^. Ibide fascicul.
temporum.
Saint Martin: Such were they that were called Begardi, of whom to the number
of 114. were burnt at Paris, as the foresaid book Fasciculus Tempo. shows.
Such were they that were called Albigenses inhabiting especially about Tholossa
in France, of whom by the procurement of that false Friar, and superstitious
Hypocrite Dom nicus Vince^t Bellua. Spec. Histor. lib 2^. cap. 103. Auton.
hist* part 3. titul^: 19. cap. 1. Sect: 4. Crant. an metropo: lib: 8. cap. 18.
and li^ 10. cap 9.
an hundredth thousand were destroyed, as writes Bernardus Lutzenburgus, and
anno 180. were together burned, as both Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence
writes, and Bellarmine himself confesses. Such were they of whom Albertus
Crantius writes, which in Sueuia publicly preached, that the Pope, bishops
and prelates were heretics and Simoniakes; that the begging Friars did pervert
the Church with their false preachings, for the which they were persecuted and
some burned. Such were they in Bohemia and Morauia in great number, with whom
Aeneas Syluius (who was Pope called Pius the second) having had conference,
writes thus of one of them. Finitis sermonibus istis assurrexit vnus de
primoribus Thaboritarum, Aeneas Syluius epist. 130. page 677.
and animo satis inflato, quid tu nobis, inquit apostolicam sedem tot verbis
amplificas? Nos Papam and Cardinales auaritia seruos nouimus, impatientes,
inflatos, tumidos, ventri ac libidini deditos, ministros scelerum, diaboli
sacerdotes, and Antichrsti ^raecursores, quorum deus venture est, pecunia
caelum. That is, when th^se speeches were ended, there did rise up one of the
chief of the Thaborites, and with an hautie mind said, What do thou amplify
to us in so many words the Apostolical seat? we know that the Pope and the
Cardinals be slaves to covetousness, impatient proud, arrogant, given to the
belly, and filthy lust; the ministers of wickedness, the priests of the
devil, and the forerunners of Antichrist, whose God is their belly, and whose
heaven is money: such also was Arnoldus Brixianus, Frosard fol. 54.
persecuted by that proud English Pope Adrian the fourth, anno 1155. John
Rochetailada burnt at Auinion by Pope Clement the sixth 1345. Michael Cesenas
burnt 1322. John Wickliffe, who died 1387. and after his death his body was
burnt. Two Franciscan Friars burnt at Auinion by Pope Polychron. lib 6. Polidor
Virg. lib. 19.
Innocent the sixth 1354. Two others burnt at London 1357. William Swinderby
burnt 1401. William White burnt 1428. Peter Clarke, and Peter Pain 1432.
persecuted and forced to flee into Bohemia. Thomas Rhedonensis burnt at Rome
1430. Matheus P^lmerius burnt at Florence, as witnesses Sabellicus. Dulcinus
of Nouaria and Margaret his wife Anton part. 3. titull. 22. cap. 10. Sah^ll
E^ne. 10. lib. 4.
burnt about the year of our Lord 1304. John Hus and Hierome of Prage burnt at
Constance 1415. 1416. Hieronimus Sauonarola burnt at Florence 1499. These and
many such other that might be produced with their faithful favorers and
followers, were the true Church of God, in whom his merciful promises were
performed. These are they that have mourned in Zion, that have lamented Isa.
61. 3. Ezech. 9. 5. Apoc. 6. 9. 19.
and cried for all the abominations that have been done in Jerusalem, or
rather in Rome, that were killed for the word of GOD, and for the testimony
which they maintained, and which came out of great tribulation, and Apoca, 7.
14. Isa. 61. 3.
have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb. But these now have beauty
for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garments of gladness for the spirit
of heaviness, and are trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, in Apoca.
6. 9.
whom he is glorified, they be now under the altar, and are in the presence
of the throne of GOD and serve him day and night in his temple, and he that
sits on the throne does dwell among them, neither does the sun light on
them, neither any heat. But this man will say, 7. 15.
that these were condemned and punished by the Church for heretics. I confess
they were so, even as the Prophets of God, Christ our Savior, and his holy
Apostles were before them condemned by the Prelates and Priests of the Church
of Israel, which carried the countenance of the Church of God, as much and more
rightly then the Pope and his prelates now do. Neither were these so few in
number, but that by confession of some popish writers, the Romish false faith
was sometimes in danger to have been subverted by them. Wernerus a Charterhouse
Monk Fascicu Tempo. aetat. 6. fol: 7. 8.
of Colen in his foresaid book called Fasciculus temporom writes thus:
Fuerunt nihilominus postea quidam subtilissimi Fascicu. Tom. a tat 6. fol. 78.
hae^etici qui istam haeresim Waldensium defendere conabantur, and plura regna
and populos deceperunt: that is, notwithstanding there were afterward some
most subtle heretics, which went about to defend this heresy of the
Waldenses, and deceived (or rather truly instructed) many kingdoms and
nations. And again, having made mention of certain Popish doctors in those
days, as Hugo Cardinalis etc. he has these words: Quos diuina bonitas 1233.
misit pro fidei defensione, alioquin tota pene fides perusset propter Fol. 80.
haeret little multiplioitatem, and subtilitatem simul and potentiam: that is,
whom God sent for the defense of the faith, for otherways it had like wholly
to have perished by reason of the multitude, subtlety and power of heretics.
It appears by the testimony of this Popish Monk, that in those days there
were very many of them whom he falsely calls heretics. And whereas these
detested the enormities and abominations of the Church of Rome, and maintained
the same substantial and fundamental points of doctrine that we do, (as it
appears by the articles objected unto them that they did) how does this man
say that our religion was not these 1500. years in the world? It was in the
world, but hated of the world, which hated Ioh. 15. 18. 19
Christ: yet was it constantly confessed even to death of them whom God the
Father has given to Christ out of Ioh. 17. 6. 9.
the world. Hereby it may sufficiently appear, that the Synagogue of the Jews
has not been more constant in continuance, nor more ample in place, then the
true Church of Christ has been. In deed it may be, that the Synagogues of
the Jews have continued in some certain places more constantly, then the true
Churches of Jesus Christ have done: Yet hereupon it does not follow, that
either Gods admirable promises have not been performed, or that the true
Church has perished. It is not the Synagogue of the Jews, but the true Church
of God, that is clothed with Apoca. ^2. 1.
Christ the Son of righteousness, treads under her feet earthly things,
which be mutable as ye moon, and is adorned with the doctrine of Christ's
twelve Apostles, which is forced Chrysostom in psalm. 114.
to flee into the wilderness. Chrysostom says well: Ecclesia est tabernaculu^
a deo fixum non ab homine: ab vno loco in alium fugit, sed non a pietate ad
impietatem fugit, that is. The Church is the tabernacle which God has pight
and not man, she flees from one place to another, but she never flees from
Godliness to impiety and wickedness. As Barrabas found here more favor with the
prelates and priests of Judah and Jerusalem, then Jesus Christ the Son of God
did: So the Popes and Jews Synagogues have found more favor, and more quietly
rested in this wicked world then the true Church of Jesus Christ has done. As
even in Rome the Jews, professed and open enemies of our Savior Christ, have
had and yet have their synagogues, and live (paying their tributes) in as great
quietness and safety; as the Curtizans and Whores of Rome do, which pay
yearly to the Pope twenty thousand duckates. It is written in the pontifical,
Cornel. Aprip. de Vanitate Scient. cap. 64.
that at the coronation of the Pope, and in his procession to ye Church of
Laterane, the Jews use to meet him, and making courtesy do offer the law to
him, to whom he gives a gentle answer. But whereas the foresaid Arnoldus
Brixianus a great learned man reproved the errors and enormities of the Church
of Rome, Adrian ye fourth our proud Platina in Adriano 4.
countriman (who rebuked the Emperor for holding his wrong stirrup) would not
go up the Church of Laterane to Platina in Honorio. 2.
be consecrate, until he were driven out of Rome. There was also one Arnulphus
in Rome a Godly man, whom many of the inhabitants thereof acknowledge for a
true disciple of Christ, that was there murdered by the priests for inueighing
Platina in Paulo. 2. Sabellicus Ennead. 10. l. b. 7.
against their wickedness. Also in a town near Rome called Pole, the Lord
thereof with many others were counted heretics, for saying that none of them
which followed Peter were ye true vicars of Christ, but such as followed the
poverty of Christ. These Pope Paulus the second persecuted and contumeliously
entreated, as Platina and Sabellicus do write. Hereby we see that it is a
thing more allowable in Rome, to deny Christ as ye Jews do, then to meddle
with ye Popes triple crown, or to reprove his pride, and enormities.

This our doctrine of performing Gods admirable promises not in proud Popes,
and wicked worldlings, but in the faithful which fear God, tremble at his
word, and are for the most part hated and persecuted in the world, does neither
show the path to Atheism, nor open the gap to Machiuilian devises, which by
the testimony of some Papists themselves are no where sooner learned then in
that school, wherein T. W. the author of this slanderous libell, has been
(as I suppose) too much and too long trained. I mean the school of Jesuits,
of whom William Watson a Popish secular Priest in his book of Quodlibets
lately published Quodlib 1. art. 9 page 21. Ibidem.
does thus write; Many Atheal paradoxes be taught in the Jesuits conclaue, or
close conuenticles. Aga. Questionless the Jesuits want neither art nor evil
will, nor yet malicious means to effect it, as having used from the beginning
more Machiuilian devises, and Atheal practices in secret conference by their
inferior agents with schismatikes, yea and with our common adversaries, then
with catholics. Again: It must Quodlib. 4. art. 4. page 112.
needs follow, that there is not a Jesuit in all England this day, but has a
bitter smack of father Parsons impiety, irreligiosity, treachery, treason, and
Machiuilian Atheism. Again: neither Machiuel, nor any that ever yet was in
Europe came near Quodi. 9. art. 7. page 314.
unto the Jesuits for Atheal devise to pre^e^t he stopples of their
stratagems, and to further their proceedings. Again: But I call them
Jesuitical (that is, the faction of the Jesuits) In the appendix to the
Quodli. page 346.
by abbreuiation to avoid circumlocution, in one word expressing them to be a
factious, seditious, ambitious, auaritious, treacherous, traitorous,
Machiuilian, Athe^ll consort, that abusing the rules of their society, etc. By
the judgment of this Popish Priest, let the good Reader consider who they be,
that show the path to Atheism, and open the gap to Machiuilian devises.

The Pamphlet. The learned Protestants are Infidels.
2. Article.
Whosoever builds his faith voppn his own private and singular exposition of
Scripture, is an Infidel. But all learned Protestants in England build their
faith upon their own private exposition of Sripture: Ergo, all the
Protestants of England are Infidels. The Mayor cannot be denied: Because faith
must he infallible, and impossible to be erronius or changeable: But faith
which is builded upon private exposition of Scripture, is subject to error and
change, and consequently upon better advice and consideration may be altered.
The Minor I prove: for either they build their faith upon their own private
opinion, in expounding of Scriptures, the exposition of the Church, the
Fathers, or Councels: but not upon these three: Egro, upon their own private
exposition.

Some Protestants allow the Fathers, and their expositions, so far forth as
they agree with Gods word, and no farther: but this is nothing else but to
delude the world: for what mean they when they say they will allow the^ so far
forth as they agree with the Scriptures? Mean they perhaps, that if the
Fathers bring Scriptures to prove any point of Religion now in controversy, to
allow that point as true? If so, why then reject they S. Augustine Aug: lib: de
^ura. Again: pro mortuis.
and other Fathers, who bring Scripture to prove prayer for the dead? yea and
all controversies almost in Religion, the Fathers prove by Scripture when they
dispute upon them. Or perhaps they mean to admit the Fathers, when they allege
Scripture, but in such matters as every Protestant shall allow of, or that they
be doubtful, or seem in some sort or show to be conformable to their
fancies, and fit their new coined Gospel, and in this sense who sees not,
that every paltry companion will make himself, not only expositor of Christ's
word, but also will prefer his exposition before all ancient Fathers, when they
dance not after his pipe, and consent not with his heresies.

Answer.
HEre we have a syllogism, to the Mayor or first proposition whereof, I
answer that they which universally in all matters and doctrines of salvation do
follow private and false expositions of the Scripture, be Infidels: but in
some places of Scripture a man may follow a private and false exposition of the
Scripture, and believe Hilarious in Matthew cap. 16 Ambros. in Luc lib. 10.
the same to be true, and yet be no Infidel. Hilary followed a private and
false exposition of the place, Come behind me Satan, and Ambrose of Peter's
denial of Christ, and Hierome in like manner of Peter's dissembling with the
Jews, Galat. 2. yea, and all the Fathers have in sundry places of Scripture
followed private and untrue expositions, and have believed the same to be true,
and August. de Doctri Christ. lib. 1. cap. 36.
yet they were no Infidels. Saint Augustine says well: Quisquis igitur
Scripturas diuinas, etc. Who-soeuer therefore does think himself to
understand the holy Scriptures or any part of them; so that by that his
understanding, he does not edify and build this double love of God and of his
neighbor, does not yet understand them. But whosouer does draw such a sense or
exposition from them, as may be profitable to the edifying of this love, and
yet does not deliver that which he whom he reads shall be proved in that
place to have meant, is not dangerously or wickedly deceived, neither does he
at all lie. And again, Ibidem.
Sed quisquis in Scripturis aliud sentit quam ille qui scripsit, illis non
mentientibus fallitur: sed tamen vt dicere coeperam etc. But whosoever in the
Scriptures does conceive any other sense, then he that did write it did mean,
he is deceived although the Scriptures do not lie: yet as I began to say, if he
be deceived by that sense which does edefie love and charity, which is the end
of the commandment, is so deceived, as if a man missing and leaving his way,
yet goes by the field thither, whither the way does lead him. Hereby you may
perceive that every one which follows a private or false exposition of some
place of the Scripture is not an Infidel.

But to leave this, and to come to your Minor or second proposition, I avouch
the same to be false and do deny that we build our faith upon private or false
expositions of the Scripture. We say with Saint Peter, that no prophecy of 2.
Tet. 1. 20:
the Scripture is of any pruat interpretation. But we are to take that sense
which the holy Ghost intends and means. And we say, that many things be
most plain and evident in the holy Scriptures, so that the simplest may
understand them, and get knowledge and comfort by them. So Chrysostom says:
An ista aliquam expositionem desiderant? Chrisost ad Romans Hom. 19.
an non clara sunt, etiam vehementer stupidis: i. Do these need any
exposition? are they not clear and manifest, August. in Euang. Ioannis tract.
50.
even to those that be very dull. So Saint Augustine- says, Quaedam in
Scripturis tam manifesta sunt, vt potius auditorem quam expositorem desiderent:
i. There be some things in the Scriptures so manifest, that they require rather
a hearer, then an expounder. So says Justinius Martyr (...) Just. Martyr dialo.
(...). page. 68 edit. Robert. Stephan.
(...): i. Mark and give heed to those things which I shall recite out of the
holy Scriptures, which need not to be expounded, but only to be heard. And
whereas we confess that there be some things hard in the Scriptures, we say
that the same are to be understood and expounded by conferring them with
other places of the Scriptures. And that no foreign or private exposition is to
be brought to them, but that which is gathered out of the Scriptures
themselves. So Chrysostom says: Scriptura seipsam exponit, and lectorem
errare Chryso. in Gent homil. 12.
non sinit: the Scripture expounds it self, and suffers not the reader to
err. Again, Semper enim quando In 2. Cor. homil. 9.
quid obscurum loquitur seipsum iterum interpretatur. Whenever Paul does
speak any thing obscurely, he does always expound himself. So says Saint
Augustine, Magnifice August. de doct. Christi. lib, 2. cap. 6.
igiter and salubriter, etc. that is, The holy Ghost has so excellently and
holesomely tempered the holy Scriptures, that with plain places, he does put
away hunger, and with obscure places take away lothsomnesse. For there is
nothing gathered from those hard places, which is not to be found most plainly
uttered in others. So Saint Basil says: Quae ambigua sunt and tecte dicta esse
in quibusdam diuinae Basil Quaest. comp. explic. quaest. 267.
scripturae locis vide tur, ea ab aliis locis manifestis declarantur: that is,
What things be doubtful, or seem to be covertly spoken in some places of
holy scripture, the same are expounded by other plain places. Again: Ecce
nunc audi ipsam seipsam declarantem scripturam. Behold now, hear Idem Hexam.
homil. 4. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 12.
the Scripture expounding it self. So says Irenaeus, Ostensiones quae sunt in
scripturis non possunt ostendi nisi ex scripturis: The expositions which be in
the Scriptures cannot be showed but out of the Scriptures: So Theodoretus
says, (...). Theodor dia. log. 1. Hilarious de trinitate lib. 9
i. Thou need no strange exposition. For the Evangelist expounds himself.
So Hilarious says: Dictorum intelligentia aut ex praepositis aut ex
consequentibus expectetur. The understanding of the sayings is to be looked for
either of those things which go before, or those that follow after. So Clemens
says: Ex ipsis scripturis sensum capere veritatis oportet. From the scriptures
themselves we must take the sense and Distinst. 37. cap. Relatum.
exposition of truth. Finally, so Pope Pius the second: Ab ipsa scriptura
reciptendus est sensus veritatis: The understanding of the truth is to be
received from the scripture it self. Aeneas Silui^^ epist. 130
Now how carefully and diligently we endeavor to do this, that is to expound
the holy Scriptures truly and sincerely, by the Scriptures themselves, God
knows, our writings and sermons do show, and the consciences of those that
read and hear them can witness with us. And this is also an argument hereof,
that you cannot bring forth any places of the Scriptures which we falsely
expound, or seek violently and wickedly to wrest from the true and simple
sense of the holy Ghost, contained in the holy scriptures. The which this
cauiller should have done, and thereby declare how we build our faith upon
private and false expositions. But let us see and examine his proof of his
Minor, which is, that because we build not our faith upon the exposition of
the Church, the Fathers, or Counsels; therefore we build upon our own
private exposition. I answer, that although we reverence the judgment of the
true Church of God, the holy Fathers and Councels, yet by this that I have
before alleged it plainly appears, that we are to fetch the sense and
exposition of the Scriptures, not from them, but from the scriptures
themselves. And whereas you by the Church do mean the Romish Church, I will
show hereafter that she has corrupted and falsely expounded the scriptures.
As touching the Doctors, we are not bound unto their expositions, which
sometimes be Card. Caietanus in praefatione in lib. 5. Mosis.
not sound, and sometimes differ among themselves: Yea Cardinal Caietanus
plainly avouches this, and doubts not to bring sometimes senses and
expositions to the scriptures which be not in all the Doctors. His words be
these: Nullus itaque detestetur nouum sacrae scripturae sensum, ex hoc quod
dissonat a priscis doctoribus. Sed scrutetur perspicacius textum ac contextum
scripturae, and si quadrare inuenerit, laudet Deum, qui non alligauit
expositionem scripturarum sacrarum pristorum doctorum sensibus, etc. that is,
Let no man hereupon detest or dislike a new exposition of the holy scripture,
because it dissenteth from the old Doctors. But let him more sharply search
the text and Coherence of the scriptures, and if he find it to agree
therewith, let him praise GOD, who has not bound the exposition of the holy
Scriptures to the senses and expositions of the ancient Doctors. Yea Bishippe
Fisher a great patron of the Popes, doubts not to affirm, that many things
in the Io. Roffens. Assert. Lutheran. artic. 18. fol. 206.
Gospel and other scriptures be now more exactly discussed, and more plainly
understood, then they were of old time of the Fathers, and that there be yet
many obscure and hard places which will be much better understood of the
posterity Andradius also the Jesuit, as he does defend Caietane in the one,
so does he join with B. Fisher in the other, as the learned may read in his
defense of the tridentine faith, lib. 2. page 160. et 161. where by it
appears that their judgment was, that the exposition of the scriptures is
not to be tied unto the Fathers, and then much less to the Counsels, which
do not expound in order the books of the scriptures (as the Fathers did) but
only examined some places, and discussed some Doctrines which were in
controversy. Moreover, whereas Saint Augustine in his four books de doctrina
christiana entreats largely of the exposition of the Scriptures, and gives
many good and learned lessons concerning the same, and namely seven rules of
Ticonius the Donatist which he commends, and calls them keys to open the
scripture: neither he, nor Ticonius do make mention of these rules, which the
author of this pamphlet does here set down, nor refer us unto them.
Therefore these be new coined rules of your own, void of the testimony of
antiquity. But that the Christian reader may see, who they be that build their
faith upon private and false expositions of the scripture, let us come to the
examination of some particular places of the scripture, and see who they be
that follow private and false expositions. The words of our Math. 26. 27
Savior Christ: drink ye all of it, they expound that Christ spoke them only
to his Apostles, which (as they term them) were Priests: and therefore this
binds Priests to drink of the Cup, but not the lay people. So says John
Fisher Io. Rossens. Assert. Luther. confut. arti. 16
the Bishop of Rochester: Bibite ex eo omnes. Quae verba procul-dubio solis
erant dicta sacerdotibus, quibus and potestas tum fuerat collata conficiendi
sacramenti, nimirum hijs verbis, hoc facite in meam commemorationem: Drink all
of this, which words without all doubt were spoken only to Hosius de com. sub
vtraque specie and Confess. Petri. cap. 40. and contr. Brentium lib. 3 Doct.
Hard. in his answer to M. Jewel arti. 3 Andrad. ortho. explicat. lib. 7 page
606. Aenas Syluius epist. ^30. page 672.
Priests, to whom power also was given to make the Sacrament, that is, by these
words, do this in remembrance of me. The same in effect wrote Cardinal Hosius,
Doctor Harding, Andradeus, Aeneas Siluius, and others. This exposition although
peradventure it will not be counted private, for that it is maintained by so
many great men, yet it is a very false and absurd exposition, and easily to be
discerned by any simple man. For if these words, Drink ye all of it, were
spoken only to Priests; then likewise these, Take ye ate ye, were spoken
only to Priests. And so (by your wise exposition) as none but Priests, by
these words are bound to drink of the Cup, so none but Priests are bound to
take and eat the bread, as it was the manner and custom of Jo. Gerson tom. 1.
declar. defect. viro ecclesiast.
the common people in Liuonia not to receive this Sacrament at all, as Gerson
writes. But if our Savior Christ did speak the one to all, both Priests and
people, why not the other? If the one do bind all, why not the other?
Moreover Saint Paul delivering to the Corinthians the supper of our Savior
Christ, according to the institution which he had received of Christ, delivered
not only the bread, but also the Cup to the whole Church of Corinth, which I
suppose you will not say were all Priests. 1. Cor. 11. 25 26. 27.
This Cup is the new Testament in my blood. As often as ye shall eat this
bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. Wherefore
whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the Cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Paschasius expounds these
words thus: Bibite ex hoc omnes, hoc est, tam ministri quam reliqui credentes,
Drink ye all of this, that is to say, both ministers and the rest that
believe. The gloss as it is alleged Cassan. de vtraque specie.
by Cassander thus. Bibite ex hoc omnes scilicet sine personarum acceptione,
Drink ye all of this, that is, all without respect of persons. So does
Chrysostom: Omnibus vnum corpus Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. hom. 18 Theoph in 1. Cor.
11.
proponitur and poculum vnum. One body and one Cup is propounded to all. So
says Theophilactus: Tremendus calix pari cunctis condition traditus est. The
fearful Cup is in like sort delivered unto all. Yea this absurd exposition of
theirs is contrary to the practice of the Primitive Church, and to all
antiquity, as might be showed, and of some Papists is confessed.

But to proceed and to show how they handle other places, I will join two
places together, because they do often allege them together to prove the
Popes supremacy over the whole Church of God dispersed over the whole world.
The one Hosea. 1. 11. Then shall the Children of Judah, and the Children of
Israel be gathered together, and appoint themselves one head. The other place
is John 10. 16. There shall be one fold, and one shepherd. These places be
alleged Joan. de Paris. de potest regia. and Papali. ca 3.
by Pope Pius the second, Epist. 288. by Johannes de Parisijs, by D. Harding,
etc. expounding the same not of D. Hard. confut Apolog. cap. 3. d^^s. 2.
Christ, but of the Pope, to be this one head, and one shephard. The which what
a private and false exposition it is, I need not greatly to show, it is so
plain and apparent. The Hieron. in Oseam. cap. 1.
first place of Hosea, Saint Hierome expounds thus: Haec omnia fient, quia
magnus est dies seminis Dei, qui interpretatur Christus: i. All these things
shall come to pass, because it is the great day of the seed of God, which is
expounded (not the Pope) but Christ: so also does Friar Lira; Congregabuntur
filij Iudae, idest, Apostoli, etc. There shall assemble Nicol Lira in Oscam.
cap. 1.
together the Children of Judah, that is to say the Apostles: and the Children
of Israel, that is to say, the heathen converted: together, that is to say, in
one Church: and shall appoint vno, themselves one head, that is to say, one
Christ: So does S. Augustine de ciuitate Dei, lib. 8. cap. 28. Whose words for
shortness sake I omit. The other place is so plain, that a Cobbler by hearing or
reading of it, may perceive that our Savior Christ spoke it of himself, and
not of the Pope. He says, I am the good shepherd and know Ioh the 10. 14.
mine, and am known of mine: I lay down my life for my sheep. Other sheep I
have also, which are not of this fold: them also must I bring: and they shall
hear my voice: and there shall be one sheepefolde, and one shepherd.
Therefore does my father love me, because I lay down my life that I might take
it again. Who is so blind as sees not these words to be spoken of our Savior
Christ himself, and not of the Pope. Yet that doughty or rather doltish
Doctor, Johannes de Paris^^s is not ashamed to say, that it is not to be
understood of Christ, but of some other Minister, which should rule in his
place. His words be these: Congregabuntur filii Judah, and filii Vbi supra.
Israel, vt ponant sibi caput vnum: and. Joan. 10. fiet vnum ouile, and vn^s
pastor. Quod quidem de Christo intelliginon potest: sed de alio aliquo ministro
qui praesit loco eius. i. The Children of Judah and the Children of Israel
shall be gathered together, and shall appoint themselves one head: and Ioh. 10.
There shall be one fold, and one shephard, which cannot be understood of
Christ, but of some other minister that must rule in his place. Behold the
absurdity of this saying and exposition, and let this cauiller, who in his
questions and challenge so disdainefully despises our learning, consider what
a blind, ignorant, and vnlcarned Doctor and writer this was, that so absurdly
expounds this place, and contrarily to the plain words denies them to be
understood of our Savior Christ, and blasphemously attributes that unto the
Pope, which is only proper and peculiar to Nic. Lir^ in Ioha. cap. 10.
Jesus Christ. Friar Lira was of better judgment, who writes thus: Fiet vnus
pastor, idest Christus: i. There shall be one pastor, that is to say, Christ. I
will show another place or two in like manner, expounded for the proof of the
same matter. In the book of the ceremonies of the Church of Rome, the which I
wish were in English, that our English Catholics might see the goodly
ceremonies and orders of the Church, it is thus written: Papa in nocte Lib. 1.
Caerem. titul: 7.
natiuitatis domini benedicet ensem, quem postea donat ^^cui principi in signum
infini ^ potentiae pontifici collatae, iuxta illud, data est mihi omnis
potestas in coelo and in terra. Item dominabitur a mari vsque ad mare, and a
flumine vsque ad terminos orbis terrarum: i. The Pope in the night of the feast
of Christ's Nativity blesses a sword, for a sign of the infinite power given
to him; which he afterward bestows upon some Prince, according to that
saying: All power is given to me both in heaven and in earth: also, He shall
rule from the sea unto the^ sea, and from the flood unto the ends of the world
Are not these sayings think you finely expounded of the Pope, whereof the one
our Savior Christ himsefe spoke, In Council. L^teron sub Le^. 1^ page 671.
and the other the Prophet David prohesied of Jesus Christ himself? And the
former of these places, Stephen the Archbishop of Patraca applied unto Pope Leo
the 10. in the Council of Lateran, in the audience of the Pope himself, who
thankefully accepted it, and suffered it to be published, and printed; and so
to this day was never by any Papist disliked. By these places any man may
discern and judge, whether this Romish prelate be not that man 2 Thessalonians. 23. 4.
of sin, and son of perdition, an adversary, that exalts himself
against, or above all, that is called God, or that is worshipped, sitting as
God in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God (of whom S. Paul
before prophesied) in taking these things unto himself, which Gods spirit
spoke properly, and peculiarly of Jesus Christ? The place of Saint Peter 1.
chap. 4. Love or charity covers the multitude of sins: they expound in this
sense, that charity makes sattisfaction for our sins, and covers and
hides our sins before God. John Fisher the Bishop Assert. Luthe^ (...) cap
17.
of Rochester writes hereof thus: Tertius modus est per vehementis charitatis
affectum. Nam vehemens vtique charitatis affectus peccatorum etiam expurgat
reliquias, quum dicat diuus Petrus: Charitas operit multitudinem peccatorum: i.
The third means (to purge away sin) is by the affection of vehement charity,
for surely the vehement affection of charity, does also purge out the remnants
of sins, for S. Peter says, Charity hides the multitude of sins. That
this is a private and false exposition, a simple and mean man may see,
especially if he look upon the place, in the Proverbs, chap. 10. 12. from the
which Saint Peter does allege it, and is commonly quoted in the margent.
Hatred stirs up contention: but love or charity covers all trespasses,
Where Solomon shows, that as envy and hatred moves men to contention, and to
blow abroad the faults of their brethren to their infamy, so love and
charity should move us to cover and hide their faults and infirmities, and
rather seek to amend them, then to defame them: and therefore these words are
not meant of satisfying for out sins, or covering them before God; but of the
^^ Proverb. 10
covering of them before men. And so does D. Baine, Bishop of Lichfield in
Queen Mary's days, expound them. What should I show how privately or rather
falsely they expound the places of Genesis 14. 18. touching Melchisedeck bringing
forth bread and wine, and that of Malachy. 1. 11. of the incense and pure
offering, which in every place shall be offered to GOD, by which they seek to
maintine their Mass, and the false forged sacrifice thereof. I would have
passed these places over in silence, but that D. Harding does so hardly handle
us, and so grievously charge us for them, in these words. The Scripture it
self ministering evident proof for the oblation of Christ, to his father by
the Priests of the new Testament, in the institution of this holy Sacrament,
in the figure of Melchisedeck, and in the prophecy of Malachy the Prophet, the
authorities of the Fathers needed not to be alleged, were not the same
Scriptures by the ouertwhart and false interpretations of our adversaries,
wrested, and turned to a contrary sense, to the heretical seducing of the
unlearned. In his answer artic. 17.
These be Master D. Hardings modest words. Let it therefore be examined and
tried who they be that thus ouertwhart these places, and turn them to a
contrary sense. As touching the first place out of Genesis, they expound it
that Melchisedeck offered bread and wine, for he was the Priest of the most
high God, and that was a tipe and figure of the sacrifice of the new Testament,
wherein Christ is offered unto his father, under the form of bread and wine.
Pighius Controuers. 5. Hosius Confess. Petriconiensi. cap. 41. Who says that
this is the opinion of all the holy Doctors of the Church, that this bread and
wine was offered for a sacrifice to God, and not for a refection to Abraham.
But this both exposition and assertion is false: for both Turtullian Contra
Iudaeos, and also Epiphanius, Haeres. 55. expound it Epiph. H^ref. 55.
of his bringing forth of bread and wine to Abraham. Epiphanius says: Abraham
suit 88. aut 90. plus minos tunc Me^chisedec ipsi obuiam venit and proposuit
ipsi panem and vinum: i. Abraham was about 88. or. 90. years old when
Melchesedeck met him, and brought forth bread and wine Joseph. antiq. lib. 1.
cap. 11.
unto him. So does Josephus expound it: Melchisedec milites Abrahami^h
spitaliter habuit, nihil illis ad victum deesse passus; simul ipsum adhibuit
mensae: Melchisedech used hospitality to Abraham's soldiers and suffered them
to want no victualles, and did take Abraham to his Table. That this is the true
sense it appears by the Hebrew word (...) which does never signify to offer
and sacrifice, but to bring forth: and the force of truth forces some of
Caiet. in Genesis cap. 14.
their own side to confess this to be true. Cardinal Caietanus upon this
place writes thus: Nihil scribitur hic de sacrificio seu oblatione: sed de
prolatione seu extractione, quam Josephus dicit factam ad refectionem victorum.
Quod autem in vulgata editione subditur vt causa oblationis, erat enim sacerdos
de^ altissimi: in Hebraeo non habetur vt causa, sed vt separata clausula: that
is, There is nothing here said of sacrifice or oblation, but of bringing forth,
which Josephus says was done to the refection of them which had gotten the
victory. And that which in the vulgar edition is put after as a cause, for he
was the priest of the most high God; in the Hebrew is not set as a cause, but
as a clause separated from it. Andradius also the Jesuit does herein forsake
his friends, and acknowledges this to be the true exposition, his words be
these: De offerendi autem vocabula non est Kemnici Andrad. defensfidei Trident.
lib. 4.
quod digladeremur, cum and in correctioribus latinis examplaribus, and sanctis
patribus qui locum hunc Eucharistiae accommodant extet proferens, at que ego
cum illis sen iam qui lassos Abrahae milites, and diuturna pugna fractos
Melchisedecum pane vinoque refecisse aiunt: that is, We need not Kemnicius to
strive aboutthe word of offering, seeing that both in the best corrected Latin
coppies, and also in the holy Fathers which apply this place to the Eucharist,
it is, proferens brought forth, and I in judgment agree with them, which say
that Melchisedech refreshed Abraham's soldiers wearied and fainted with long
fight. Their exposition of the other place of Malachie is as absurd, in
applying it to the sacrifice of the Mass, which is neither a pure sacrifice,
nor is offered in all places. And the Fathers Tertullian, Hierome, and others
expound it of the spiritual sacrifices of the faithful which they offer in all
places to God. Tertullian in three places does so expound it, whereof I will
set Lib. aduers. iudaeos lib. 3. ad^ers. Marcionem, and lib. 4
down but one: Et in omni loco sacrificium nomini meo offeretur, and
sacrificium mundum, scilicet simplex oration de conscientia pura, and in every
place a sacrifice shall be offered to my name, and a pure oblation, to wit,
simple prayer from a pure conscience. S. Jerome expounds it thus: Dicit
orationes Hierom. in Ma^ach. cap. 1
sanctorum domino offerendas esse, non in vna orbis prouincia Iud^ae, sed in
omni loco. i. He says that the prayers of the Saints shall be offered to God
not in Judea, one only province of the world, but in every place. But I will
forbear to write any more, of the perverse exposition of this place, and will
refer the reader to that most learned conference, Cap. 8. pa. 454* 146. 562
of that excellent ornament of this Church of England Master Doctor Reynoldes
with John Heart, where he shall find this place fully discussed, and Cardinal
Allens reasons, which he braggingly called validae and plane bona; strong and
very good, fully confuted: Which book I marvel that neither this challenger,
nor any other of our Jesuits could as yet find leisure to confute. I might
allege many more places most falsely expounded by these Romanistes, b^t I will
forbear them, and will show you one place out of the 26. of Jeremy, trimly
applied by Bonauenture a Seraphicall Doctor, a Bishop, a Cardinal of Rome, and
a Saint De vanitut. Scient. cap. 64 Benau^nt. part. ^. operum in exposi.
missae. fol. 100. G.
canonized by Pope Sixtus the fourth, who did as holy an act in Saincting of
him, as he did in building nobile admodum Lupana, a noble stews in Rome, as
Agrippa a Papist writes. Bonauentures words be these: Septimo eleuatur Corpus
Christiad ostendendam bonitatem Christi. Quae enim mayor bonitas quam quod
Christus dignatur captiuus esse in altari, vnde ipse dicit in persona Hieremiae
prophetae. Ecce ego in manibus vestris sum, quod bonum and rectum est in oculis
vestris facite mihi. Nota quod, dum aliquis dux propter suos captiuus tenetur
non dimittitur nisi det magnam pecuniam. Sic nec nos Christum captiuum
dimittere debemus nisi remissionem peccatorum nobis tribuat, and regnum
coeleste abe^ accipiamus. Eleuat orgo sacerdos Corpus Christi in altari. q. d.
Ec^e quem totus mundus capere non potest, captiuus noster est. Ergo eum non
dimittamus nisi quod petimus prius obtineamus: that is, Seventhly the body of
Christ is lifted up to show the goodness of Christ: for what greater goodness
is there, then that Christ vouchsafes to be prisoner upon the Altar:
whereupon he says in the person of Hieremi^ the Prophet, Behold, I am in your
hands; that which is good and right in your eyes, do ye unto me. Note that
when any captain is kept prisoner for his people, he is held prisoner, and
not let go, unless he give a great sum of money. So also we ought inot to
let Christ our prisoner go, unless he give unto us forgiveness of sins,
and that we receive of him the kingdom of heaven. Therefore the Priest does
lift up the body of Christ upon the Altar; as though he should say: behold,
he whom the whole world is not able to contain, is our prisoner, therefore
let us not let him go, unless we do first obtain of him that which we
require. This place I thought good the more largely to lay down, that the
reader may see what divine doctrine these Romish Saints have delivered, and how
finely they have applied the scriptures. By this doctrine Christ is prisoner in
the Mass, and he must not be let go until he have paid his ransom. And
this is substantially proved out of Jeremy chap. 26. where Jeremy having
preached the word of God, and denounced his fearful plagues against Judah and
Jerusalem, the Priests and people took him and went about to kill him, to
whom Jeremy spoke saying: The Lord has sent me to prophecy against this
House, ^erem. 26. 12
and against this City all the things that ye have heard, therefore now amend
your ways and your works, and hear the voice of the Lord your God, that the
Lord may repent him of the plague, that he has pronounced against you. As for
me, behold I am in your hands: do with me as you think good and right. But
know ye for certaint^e that if ye put me to death, ye shall bring innocent
blood upon your selves, and upon this City, and upon the inhabitants thereof:
For of a truth the Lord has sent me unto you, to speak al these words in your
ears. Is not this place finely expounded, and applied, and does it not
substantially prove that Christ is in the Priests hands at Mass, when he
holds him over his head, and belike goes about to kill him as they did
Hieremie? Indeed by their doctrine they tear him with their teeth, and devour
him. Yea the Popes themselves in their Canon law, by which they rule the
Church, do most falsely and absurdly expound the scriptures, as for example:
God made two great lights, Genes. 1. 16
the greater light to rule the day, and the less light to rule the night. By
the Popes exposition the greater light is the Popes authority, and the lesser
is the Emperors dignity, and thereupon gathers that as the sun is forty
seven times greater then the Moon, so the Popes power is as much greater then
the Emperors. De ma^orit. cap. solit and the gloss there. God says to
Jeremy: Behold, Ierem. 1. 10
this day have I set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms to pluck up,
and to route out, and to destroy and throw down, to build and to plant; by
the Popes exposition of these words, all Kings and Monarchs are the Popes
vassals, and that he may advance whom he will, and put down whom he list.
De maiorit. ibidim. Christ cured the withered hand of a man upon the Sabbath
Mat. 12. 13
day. By the Popes exposition hereof, he would prove that he is to be
tied by no law. 25, Quest. 2. Cap. ideo permittente. Whereas it is said:
Behold here two swords, by the Popes exposition it is proved, Luke 22. 38
that both swords as well temporal as ecclesiastical, do belong unto him.
Where Saint Paul says. The spiritual 1. Cor.
man judges or discerns all things; by the Popes exposition all men and
matters are to be judged by him, but he is to be judged by none. De maiorit.
Cap. vnum solit. Infinite such other places there are so falsely and absurdly
expounded and applied, that sundry Papists, yea even the Jesuits themselves be
now ashamed of them. Thus we see, how these Romish divines and Saints have
handled and expounded the word of God, of whom that may be well said and
verified, which Polidore Virgil (a fauorer of the Romish religion) writes of
the popish Lawiers and canonists. Vide non secus isti iurisconsulti aliquoties
Polido Virg* de invent. rerum lib. 4. cap. 9.
detorquent sacras scripturas quo volunt, ac sutores sordidas solent dentibus
extendere pelles: See how these Lawiers (we may say Divines yea and Saints)
do sometimes no otherways wrest the holy scriptures, then cobblers use to
stretch out with their teeth their filthy leather or skins. And that also
which Theophylactus says: Ita exponere In John. 14.
scripturas, manifest^ delirare est: So to expound the scriptures is to dote or
be mad. I might show infinite other places which they have most falsely
expounded and applied, yea and also which they have corrupted, mangled and
altered (which I mind hereafter somewhat to do) but this shall suffice at
this present to let the reader see, who they be which follow private and false
expositions of the Scriptures; and consequently be infidels. And if the author
of this pamphlet, or his companions, can charge us with the like, then they may
truly say that we have followed private expositions, and be Infidels. But it is
the usual manner of these men to make many vehement accusations, and to bring
few sound proofs.

Where you say that we reject Saint Augustine, and other Fathers, who bring
Scripture to prove prayer for the dead, I answer, that we refuse not the
alleging of Scriptures by any, but upon good and sound reason, which we will
be ready to justify and maintain. If you think either Augustine in that
book de cura pro mortuis which you quote (which is more full of doubts, then
of sound proofs out of the Scripture) or other Fathers have any plain places
of Scripture to prove prayer for the dead, you may produce them, urge them,
and make syllogismes of them, and we will answer them. But you speak many
things generally, and prove few particularly and pithily: For us to prove and
examine by the Scriptures, the expositions of the Fathers, is no fault. For if
the spirit of God commend that good people of Berea for examining Paul's
preaching by the Scriptures, we cannot be worthily blamed Act. 17. 11.
for examining the writings and expositions of the Fathers by the Scriptures,
as long as it cannot be proved, that we do otherways, then accept the good,
and reject the evil. So Saint Augustine speaking of the writings of Godly
Fathers says: Hoc genus literarum ab autoritate canonis disting uendum est,
etc. This kind of writing is to be distinguished from the authority of the
canon of the August. epist 48.
Scriptures. For they be not so read as though a testimony were so aleaged out
of them, that we may not think or judge other-wise, if they have any where
other-waies thought then the truth required. For we are of the number of them
which do not disdain to accept to our selves that which was said of the
Apostle. If you be otherwise minded GOD shall reveal the same unto you. The
like he writes in his 111. epistle to Fortunatianus, and in his 112. epist.
and in his second book against Cresconius, cap. 31. and 32. which I forbear
to allege. To conclude, if you can produce any expositions of the ancient
Fathers (whom we reverence, and whose works we read as diligenty as you do)
which we reject, if we do not show good reason for the same, let us bear the
blame, and shame of it. Nevertheless we do not allow every paltry companion
(as you term them) either to be an expositor of Christ's word, or to prefer
his exposition thereof before all ancient fathers. Neither do I know any man
so to do: but we allow all men to read and hear GODS holy word, and as they
may be much edified and comforted by the things that be plain, so if they
understand not some places, we exhort them to do as the nobleman the Act. 8.
Hierom. in ep^taphio Fabiolae. August. de mo* rib us eccles. Catho. cap. 1.
Queen Candaces Treasurer did, to seek to a faithful Philip, that is a godly
and learned man, and by him to seek to have them opened and expounded: so did
Fabiola and other godly women to Saint Hierome. So Augustine says;
Scripturarum expositio ab ijs petenda est qui earum doctores se esse
profitentur: that is, The exposition of the Scriptures is to be sought of them,
which profess themselves to be doctors and teachers of them. Yet with Saint
Paul we say, that as 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. 21. 22.
we are not to despise prophesying, that is, the expounding of Gods word, so we
are not rashly to receive whatsoever is diliuered to us, but we are to prove
all, and to hold that which is good, and to abstain from all appearance of
evil, for the ear tries the words, as the mouth tastes meat. Job. 33. 3.
Basil Quaest. compend. exptica. Quaest. 279.
So also Saint Basil says: Quod in edulijs est sensus qualitatis vniuscuiusque
edulii, hoc in verbis sanctae Scripturae est intellectus. Gula enim, inquit,
cibos gustat, men's verbi diiudicat: That which in meats is the taste of the
qualitity of every meat, the same is the understanding or mind in the words
of the holy Scripture. For the throat, says he, tastes the meats, and the
mind judges the words.

Now I will retory your argument upon you in this manner, Whosoever builds
his faith upon private and false expositions of the Scripture is an insidel.
The Papists build their their faith upon private and false expositions of the
scripture, as I have showed before, and can prove in many places more: ergo the
Papists be infidels. And thus much to your second article of faith.

The Pamphlet. All Protestants who are ignorant of the Greek and Latin In the
2 edition he puts for Latin, Hebrew.
tongues are Infidels.
3. Article.
Whosoever relieth his faith upon the ministers credit and fidelity, has no
faith at all.

But all those in England, who are ignorant of the Greek and Hebrew tongues,
rely their faith upon the ministers credit. Ergo.

All those in England who are ignorant of the Greek and Hebrew tongues, have
no faith at all.

The Mayor is manifest: because they themselves confess that every man may
err, and does err; neither have they any warrant why the ministers do not
err, since they constantly do defend, that whole general councels, yea and
the universal Catholic Church may err and has erred.

The Minor I prove: for all such Protestants ground their faith upon the
Bible, translated into English, the which translation they know not whether it
be true or false, whether the minister Tindall for example erred or no, either
upon ignorance as Broughton one of the greatest linguists among the precisians
affirms in an Epistle dedicated to the Lords of the Council, or upon malice
to induce the people to Protestancie, or to cause them to leave the Catholic
Religion: as Gregoy Martin in his discovery most pregnantly proves. And for
that all the old translations are false, and the Geneuians the worst, the
ministers are now in moulding a new one the which will have as great immunitie
from falsity, as the former were void of verit^e, that is, both be subject to
semblable incertaintie. These errors I say they know not, and consequently
cannot discern a true translation from a false, and therefore must needs
rely their faith upon the silly ministers faithless fidelity: which
conuinceth they have no faith at all.

Answer.
IDeny the Minor or second proposition of this Syllogism, and say that we
rely not our faith upon the Ministers credit and sidelitie, but upon the word
of GOD translated, the which we know to be true and holy, not so much for
that it is by public authority, and general assent of men allowed, as for
that it contains most holy doctrine agreeable to true faith, and Godly
life, whereby any that reads or hears it may behold the Majesty of Gods
spirit appearing in it. As for example, I believe these sayings to be true:
That Jesus Christ came into this world to save sinners: that he is the Lamb
1. Tim. 1. Job. 1. Tit. 2. 11.
of GOD, which takes away the sins of the world: that the grace of GOD which
offers salvation to all men has appeared, and treacheth us, that we deny
ungodliness and worldly lust, and live soberlie, righteously, and Godly in
this present world, etc. not for that this, or that man has translated them,
but because the spirit of God does bear witness unto my heart, that most
holy, pure, and divine doctrine is contained in them. And therefore to say
that those which understand not the Hebrew, and Greek tongues, because they
use the word of God translated to them into other languages, do rely their
faith upon the Ministers credit and fidelity, and have no faith, is most
foolish and absurd. And let the Christian reader mark and confider how this
sottish reason tends to the discrediting not only of us, but also of the
most part of all Godly and faithful Christians in all ages; yea and to the
most of the Godly Doctors and Fathers of the Church, who were almost al
ignorant of the Hebrew tongue, and some of the Greek also. The holy scriptures
were translated into many tongues, in the which the people of God did read and
hear them. As Theodoretus writes: Hebraici vero libri, non modo in Graecum
idioma conuersi sunt, sed in Romanam quoque Theodor. de cu. vatione Graecarum
affectionum lib 5.
linguam, Aegyptiacam, Persicam, Indicam, Armenicamque, and Scythicam, adeoque
Sauromaticam, semelque vt dicam, in linguas omnes, quibus ad hanc diem nationes
vtantur, that is, The Hebrew books be translated not only into the Greek
tongue, but also into the Roman, Egyptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, and
Scythian, and also the Sclauonian tongues, and to say at a word, into all
languages which the nations use unto this day. Did the ancient faithful
Christians which read and heard the holy scriptures in these sundry languages,
rely their faith upon men that did translate them, or upon the divine doctrine,
and precious promises of God contained in them? And let this cauiller show
sufficient reason, why were are not either to be acquitted with them, or they
condemned with us. They could no more judge of the truth of the translations,
then our people can: yet they did to their great comfort, and Godly instruction
and edification read and hear the holy scriptures, grounding their faith not
upon the translators, who might be, and sometimes were evil men; but upon the
sound, holy and heavenly doctrien therein contained. Saint Hierome exhorted
ladies, and gentlewomen Hieron. ad Gaudentium de pacatulae In^^tulae educat.
and ad letam de institut. filiae.
not only to read the scriptures themselves, but also to bring up their young
daughters when they were but seven years old in that holy exercise. They were
not able to judge of the translations otherways, then to discern and perceive
that the doctrine by them delivered was pure and holy* agreeable to true faith,
and Godly life. And even so they that be Godly in these days, although they,
having not the knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek tongues, cannot judge so
exactly of translations, and of the truth of them, as those that understand
them can; yet they may discern whether the translations deliver sound and holy
doctrine consonant to true faith, good manners, and the general heads and
principles of Christianity or not. I need not here ask upon what or whom
your (...) Catholics do rely their faith, when they read either the old
vulgar Latin translation, of the Remish English: seeing they can no more, nor
better judge of these translations whether they be true or false then we. I
do not (I say) ask whereon they rely their faith, for it seems that they
build not their faith so much upon Extrauagant. Ioh. 22. cum inter in glossa.
and did 96. satis euidenter.
the written word of God in the scriptures, as upon unwritten traditions of
men* customs of fathers, decrees of councels, and especially upon the will and
pleasure of their great GOD (as his own friends call him) the Pope of Rome:
Whose will is the rule of their faith and life. If he give a dispensation for a
man to mary his own sister as Antoninus Sum. part. 3. titu. 1. cap. 11. 55.
quod papa. and summa Angelica, in Papa. fol. ^32.
Pope Martin the fifth did, it is lawful: if he give a dispensation for one to
marry his sisters daughter (which is as unlawful as the other) as a late Pope
gave to the late King Philip of Spain, it is lawful. But yet if any of these
counted Catholics will pretend to build their faith upon the Scriptures, and
being ignorant of the Hebrew and Greek tongues, reads either the vulgar
Latin or English Remish translation of the new Testament, I would ask how he
does know whether these translations be true or false, or whether he will say
that his faith depends upon the credit and fidelity of the translator or no?
But I know Counc. Tride^t* Sessi. decretum* 2.
what they will answer, that the Latin vulgar translation is allowed by the
Church, that is to say, by the council of Trident which represents the
Church, which has decreed the same to be taken for authentical in readings,
disputations, sermons, or expositions, and that no man be bold or presume upon
any pretense to reject or refuse it: Whereunto first I say, that as this decree
does allow the Latin, so it does not approve the English. Now how shall an
English Catholic, that understands not the Latin know whether the same be
truly translated out of the Latin or no, or shall his faith here rely upon
the credit and fidelity of the translator? I would know what difference there
is between such a one reading or hearing that translation, and one of us
reading or hearing ours: And why the faith of the one does more depend on the
credit and fidelity of the translator, then the other. Surely this difference
there is, that our translations be true, and agreeable to the original of the
Greek, wherein the holy Ghost indicted, and the Apostles did write the new
Testament: and their said Remish translation is false differing from the same,
in contradictions, addiitons, and detractions in very many places, as I have
showed in a discourse thereof added to the confutation of the ten foolish
reasons, which the Remists use in the preface of the Testament by them set
forth, which moved them in translating to leave the original fountain of the
Greek, and to follow the corrupt stream of the Latin, which has been extant
in print these twelve years, and yet to this day never answered. Now as
touching the decree of the council of Trident for the Latin, made by about
forty blind Bishops or Bussards, I say, it is a shameful decree, and a fit
one for such a council, and such a one as cannot be showed in any of all the
councels, that have bin before in the Church of Christ, to authorize a
translation so much differing and dissenting from the Hebrew and Greek as it
does, to be authentical, that is, to have authority of it self, and not to be
refused in any readings, preachings, etc. the which translation is so corrupt
and full of faults, that Isiodorus Clarus a Spanish Bishop professes that he
found eight thousand faults in it: the which preface of his as they have since
suppressed, so it is written that the Spanish inquisitors Amand. Po* lanus in
didascalia page 49.
plagued him for it. But to admit that this Latin translation is authentical
as the Tridentine council has decreed: I would ask one of these Catholics
upon what edition thereof they will rely their faith, whether that which of
late years was set out at Rome by Pope Sixtus the fifth, or another two or
three years after, by this present Pope Clemens the eight. The which editions
do greatly differ in alterations, additions, detractions, contradictions, as
Master Thomas James has very diligently, and largely showed. The former, Pope
Sixtus the fifth had as he professes such care to have the Bible vncoruptly
set fourth and printed, that he corrected the faults with his own hand, and
charged that none should after-wards be printed but according to that copy, Ne
minima quidem particula mutata, addita vel detracta, as he in his preface
says, that is, not the least particle changed, added or detracted: yet this
Pope Clemens the eight has, as I have said made many great alterations,
additions, and detractions in the same. Hereof I will allege an example or two
for a taste, Iosue. 11. 19. Sixtus edition has: Non fuit ciuitas quaese non
traderet filiis Israel praeter Hiueum. i. There was not a City which did not
yield it self to the children of Israel besides the Hiuite. Clemens thus: Non
fuit ciuitas quae se traderet filiis. etc. There was not a City which did
yield it self to the children of Israel, etc. the one negatiuely, the other
affirmatively, Lib. 1. Esdr^. cap. 3. Sixtus says, S^rsum aut^m ad portam
equorum aedificauerunt: that is, they built upward to the gate of the horses.
Clemens a porta equorum, from the gate of the horses. Lib. Sapientiae, cap. 2.
11. Sixtus has iustitiae justice Clemens has iniustitiae, injustice. 1. Sam.
(or as they count. Reg. 24. 7) Clemens has taken all these words out of Sixtus
exact edition. Viuit dominus, quia nis^ dominus percusserit eum, aut dies eius
venerit vt moriatur, aut descendens in praelium perierit, propitius mihi sit
dominus, vt non mittam manum meam in Christum domini: that is, as the Lord
lives, that except the Lord smite him, or his days come that he dye, or
going down to the battle he perish, the Lord be so merciful to me, that I
will not lay mine hand upon the Lords anointed. The like detractions you may
read. 2. Samuel or. 2. Reg. 6. 12. and ibid 21. and cap. 88, and ibid. verse.
13. and many other places, as the reader may see in the said editions, and in
Master James collections, upon which of these so greatly differing will the
Catholic rely his faith: And here let him consider whether the Pope may err,
or not, for that one of these Popes erred, especially Pope Sixtus,
notwithstanding alll his great care, and diligence in correcting the Bible
with his own hand, it cannot be denied. Such great variety, diversity, and
faithles infidelity I am sure that the author of this worthy pamphlet and all
his companions cannot show in our translators, which he seeks so much to
discredit. As for Gregory Martines pregnant proofs in his discovery, they be
long ago effectually, and learnedly confuted by D. Fulke, and to this day
stand undefended. Whereas you say that our old translations be false and the
Geneuians the worst: if you had either any taste of Gods fear, or regard of
your own credit, you would not utter such a slander without some proof. If
it be a great crime to falfefie the records of men which concern (...)
earthly and transitory inheritance: what great impiety, and horible iniquity is
it to falsefie the records of almighty GOD, which concern our eternal
inheritance of Heaven? And therefore none ought to be thus charged with it,
unless he be effectually convinced of it. We do not deny but that there be
some imperfections concerning words and In my answer to the 10. reasons in the
preface of Rhem Testam.
phrases in our translations which may be reformed: but we utterly deny and
you shall never be able to prove, any such wilful and foul corruptions to be
in them, as I have now 19. years past proved to be in your Rhemish translation
of the New testament, the which all this long time you have not answered.

But must it needs follow, that because some be moulding (as you term it) a
new translation, that therefore the former were faulce and naught? Christian
charity might have moved you to judge otherwise, and to think that although
they others were good, yet by the great knowledge in the tongues as heretofore
much neglected, so now by the merciful goodness of God greatly increased, and
by the learned labors of others which have trauayled herein, a better and more
perfect) in respect of apt words and phrases) might be made and that the Kings
Majesty's Godly care, and the labors of learned men in indeuouring to refine,
yea if it were seven times; this precious gould, and to make it as pure as the
gold of Opheir, were rather to be greatly commended, then thus to be scorned.
But herein it is according to the proverb Canis in praesepi, the dog in the
crib, which would nether eat the hay himself, nor suffer the Ox to eat it:
even so these Lucifugae scriptura rum (as Turtullian speaks) flyers of the
light of the Scriptures will nether translate into our native tongue, the whole
and holy Bible, themselves, nor (If they could hinder it,) would suffer others
to do it, yet there Popeholy devotion has moved them to translate into
English, and to publish in print above an hundred years past there golden
Legend fully fraughted with lying fables, as is before signified, and is by
some papists confessed.

More-ouer will you confess, that because your Popes Sixtus the fifth and
Clemens the eight have been moulding a new your vulgar latin translation (as
I have showed) that therefore it was before false and naught? Surely whatsoever
you will herein confess, both this their moulding, and the book it self did
plainly show, that it was become very moldy and corrupt, and full of foul
faults as sundry Papists have acknowledged. And why may not we as well be
moulding again our translations, as these Popes have been moulding this their
moldy translation, which when their kingdom most flourished, by little use and
much rest had gotten much rust.

And therefore until you have answered the same, you may be ashamed to brag
of his pregnant proofs, which were so weak, and cauils so greatand many, that
he rather discovered his own folly; then discredited our translators. What
Master Broughton writes concerning our translation I do not know, neither
do I greatly care: yet this I say, although that our translations were made in
the fear of God, to profit Gods Church and people, according to the measure of
the grace of God bestowed upon the laborers in that holy work, and be void of
wilful corruptions either for doctrine or manners: yet I do not think them to
be void of imperfections, in respect of propriety of words, and phrases,
wherein they may be somewhat reformed, and amended. And hard it is to have a
translation so exact and perfect, but that some such imperfectnes may be in it,
which yet be not repugnant either to holy doctrine or good life. And for as much
as this man of malice would feign if he could discredit our translations, and
cause the Reader to doubt of the truth of them, I will show not only the good
Christian, but also the Romish Catholic y^ has understanding of the Latin
tongue, how he may discern and know the truth and faithfulness of our
translations, and so not to rely upon the credit of our Ministers. There is a
Latin translation of the old Testament made from the Hebrew very well and
learnedly by Sanctes Pagninus an Italian, and a dominicke Friar, a man
excellently learned in the Hebrew tongue (for I will give him and his work
their due and deserved praise, and commendation, and not do as this libeller,
and his fellows use to do, who of enui^ and malice, wherewith their hearts
be infected and possessed, cannot give a good word to any thing we do, though
it be never so good and Godly.) This translation he did dedicate to Pope
Clemens the feauenth: Let the Reader compare our translations, especially of
the latter editions with the said translation, and see whether in any
substantial matter of faith and life, he can find any corruptions and any
great and notorious dissensions from the same. And the like I may say of
Erasmus translation of the new Testament dedicated to Pope Leo the tenth, and
allowed by him. Let (Isay) the Reader compare our translations with these, and
although he may find some difference in words and phrases, yet in matters of
substance which concern either the doctrine of faith, or precepts of good
life, I am sure he shall find a goodly and Godly harmony and agreement to
his comfort and contentation. And lastly I will offer to this challenger, (who
offers challenge of disputation with us) and to al his partakers, that for
one fault of moment or weight, that they shall find in our translation,
especially, as I said of the latter editions, wherein they differ from the
original fountains of the Hebrew and Greek; I will undertake to find six,
yea ten greater and fouler in that vulgar Latin translation, which the
council of Trident has most absurdly confirmed and made authentical: And
therefore let neither the Godly Christian Reader, nor the seduced Catholic, be
dissuaded from reading of our translations, nor doubt of the truth of them. But
this has been in all ages the drift of the Devil to seek to discredit and
diffame those Godly men that have labored in Gods vineyard, and have endeavored
to translate his holy word to the comfort and salvation of his elect and chosen
people. How Saint Hierome of old; and Erasmus of late were used, I have
elsewhere showed. So this cauiller deals now, with that blessed man of God,
and constant Martyr of Jesus Christ Master Tindall, who as he did patiently
and constantly bear and abide their furious cruelty, and confirmed the truth
of God which he had taught, with the shedding of his blood in flaming fire, so
he needs not my defense. Who was a man of such mortification and Godly life,
that I have known some of great credit, and authority that knew him, and
lived with him at Antwerpe, that would say of him, that if a man could be like
God, it was Tindall. I doubt not but he was endued with much more Godliness then
a hundredth of your Popes, whom their own friends and favorers call for their
horrible wickedness, Monstra and Portenta, Monsters of mankind. But he that
justifies Platina in Benedioto 4. and Christophoro: 1. and Joan. 13. prou. 17.
15. Psalm. 1 16. Romans 3.
the wicked, and he that condemns the innocent, even they both are
abhominatio^ to God. That al men may err we do confess, Omnis homo Mendax:
all men be liers: and general counsels which consist of men may err, and
have erred we do not doubt. But of this it shall be impertinent to speak at
this present: I will only now retort your argument upon you: Whosoever
relieth his faith upon man, has no faith: but all English Papists that
understand not the Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and read the Remish translation,
rely their faith upon man, videl. the translator of that Testament: ergo all
such English Papists have no faith. The like may be said of them that read
the Latin, which rely their faith upon the council of Trent who were men.
Again, whosoever relieth his faith upon man, has no faith: all Papists rely
their faith upon the Pope, who I trow is a man: ergo all Papists have no faith.
And this shall suffice for answer to your third article.

The Pamphlet. The Protestants know not what they believe.
4. Article.
THe Protestants know not what they believe, nor why they believe: that they
know not why they believe, I have showed before. For that the ground of their
belief is not the authority of scripture, of counsels, of Doctors, nor of
the Church, but their own fancy. And that they know not what they believe is
manifest, because they have no rule, whereby to know what is matter of faith,
and what is not Some say the sphere of their faith is extended solely and wholly
to the word of God set down in holy writ: what there is delivered that they
believe, what there is co^cealed lies without the circumference of their
belief. Alas poor ignorance! What heretic believes not so much? certainly
few or none, so that by this means al damned heretics, which believe the
scriptures, believe alike: and they believe as much as our Protestants, and
ours no more then they: But the Protestant will reply that he believes the
Scripture in a true sense, truly expounded, and all other heretics in an
erroneous sense and falsely interpreted. And they will say as much of their
Religion and belief, and hold you^ exposition heretical, and theirs
orthodoxall. Again are you not bound to believe the canticles or song of
Solomon as a part of your faith, and where find you in the scriptures
delivered that such a book is Gods word, and as such an one ought by faith to
be believed? That Sunday should be kept holy-daie, and Saterdaie the Jews
Saboth prophained, in Gods word is not revealed, and yet by Protestants
believed. Moreover to believe whatsoever is contained in the scripture, is a
general, confused, folded implicitie faith: when we demand what a man is
bound to believe, we ask what he is obliged to believe expressly,
distinctlie, explicitlie. To believe all the scripture distinctly, explicitly
cannot be preformed by all Protestants, since it supposes a perfect and
distinct knowledge of all the scripture, whereunto never mortal man attained,
the Apostles perhaps excepted. Some will limit their belief to their creed,
saying, that nothing ought to be believed which is not in the Apostles creed.
But then I would demand of them, whether that we ought to believe that the
scripture is the word of God? that baptism is a sacrament? that in the
Eucharist is the body of Christ by faith? to what article should these be
reduced, seeing they are not contained in the creed? or how shall we know
infallibly, how these be matters of faith: since they are not contained in the
creed? others deny some articles of their creed also: for the Protestants
deny three articles of our creed, and the puritans five. The first is the
Catholic Church. Credo ecclesiam sanctam Catholicam: I believe the holy
Catholic Church, the which in very Math. 26. Isa. 60.
deed they do not believe: because Catholic is universal, and so the Church
of Christ which we are bound to believe, must be universal for all time
comprehending all ages, and universal for place, comprehending all nations:
but that Church which the Protestants believe, was interrupted all the ages
betwixt the Apostles and Luther, which was 1400. years, or in very deed was
never seen before Luthers days, therefore that Church they believe, cannot
be Catholic. Neither is it universally in place, being contained within the
narrow bounds of England, which is accounted but as a corner of the world, for
the Lutherans in Germany, the Hugonotes in France, and the Gues in Flanders
detest their Religion as much as the Catholics; neither will they join issue
with them in diverse essential points. And therefore the Protestants Church
which they believe, can no more be called Catholic or universal, then England
the universal world: or Kent the Kingdom of England: or apruned bough a whole
tree, or a dead singer a man, or a rotten tooth, the whole head. The second
article is the communion of Saints, the which they many ways deny. First by
not believing that Christ has instituted seven Sacraments, wherein the Saints
of the Church communicate: and especially the true and real presence of our
Savior Christ in the Eucharist, by which all the faithful receivers
participating of 1. Cor. 01. 17.
one and the self same body, are made one body, as all the parts of a man's
body, are made one living thing by participating one soul. Secondly they deny
the communion of the Church militant Genesis 48. v. 16. Apoca. 1. v. 4.
and triumphant by exclaiming against invocation of Saints, by which holy
exercise the blessed Saints in heaven and we in earth communicate; we by
prayer glorifying them, and they by meditation, obtaining our request. Thirdly,
they deny the communion of the Church militant, and the souls in purgatory,
bereauing them of that Christian charity, which charitable compassion and
merciful pity requires, and by natural affection the members of one body
help one another. The third article is remission of sins, for they
acknowledge no such effect in the Sacrament of Baptism: but only count it as
an external sign, or seal of a prereceiued grace or favor of God, Ad Tit. 3.
by his external predestination, against the express word of God: which
therefore calls this Sacrament the lauer of regeneration, Ioh. 20.
for that in it the soul (dead by sin) is newly regenerate by grace.
Moreover they allow not the Sacrament of penance, wherein all actual sins
committed after Baptism are cancelled, and that which exceeds all in
absurdity, is to deny that our sins are all perfectly forgiven, but only
not imputed, and as it were veiled or covered with the passion of Christ: all
the botches, and biles the filth and abomination of sin still remaining, and
as it were exhaling a most pestiferous sent in the sight of God: for let them
shift themselves as they list, and scarf their sores according to their
fancies, yet no veil, nor mantell can cover their deformity of sin, from
the piercing eyes of Jo^. 8. ver. 24. Ioh. 16. v. 13. And D. Bu^ ley contendeth
to prove it in his answer to this article, albeit he understands not the
reason here alleged, for if he did he were to absurd to deny it. Isa. 66.
ver. 24.
Gods perfect understanding, from which nothing can be concealed. Fourthly, the
Puritanes in effect deny that Christ is the Son of God: for they peremptorily
affirm that Christ is God of himself, and not God of God: So that he received
not his divinity from his father. The which position flatly takes away the
nature of a son, for the nature of a son is to receive his substance of his
Father, and it implies contradiction: that the Son receives his person of
his Father and not his substance and essence, for the substance of God is
essential to every person in trinity. Fifthly, finally they deny the
descension of Christ into hell, and desperately defend that he suffered the
Pains of hell upon the Cross, whereby they blaspheme most horribly that sacred
humanity: as if Christ had dispaired of his salvation, as if God had hated him
and he had hated God, Mark. 9. 48. Math. 25. 41.
as if he had been afflicted, and tormented with anguish of mind for his
offenses: for which he was deprived of the sight of God* and eternally to be
deprived: all which horrible punishments are especially included in the pains
of Hell, and whosoever ascribes them to Christ, blasphemeth more horribly then
Arius who denied him to God, for less absurdity it were to deny him to be God
then to make God the enemy of God.

Answer.
IN this fourth article the Sylogisme promised is not performed. but in steed
thereof, here is an accusation that we know not what we beleeeue, nor why we
believe. Your proof before I have examined and what we believe I have
declared, whereof the rule is not our own fancy as you say, and show not, as
the rule of your faith and life is the Popes folly, as has been in part
showed. You say we have no rule, whereby to know what is the matter of faith.
We have the word of God contained in the canonical Scriptures of the old and
new Testament, and is that no rule? I pray you what does (...) signify but a
rule? and why be Thom. Aquinas in 1. Tim. 6.
the scriptures called canonical, but because they be the rule of our faith and
life? Thomas Aquinas says: Doctrina en^m Apostolorum and Prophetarum dicitur
canonica, quia est regula intellectus nostri: The Doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets is called canonical because they be the rule of our understanding.
David when he said; thy word is a light Psalm. 119* 105.
unto my feet; and a lantern unto my paths: what did he but make that same,
the rule, direction, and guide of his faith and life? when Moses said: Now
therefore hearken O Israel unto the ordinances and to the laws which I teach
you Deuteronomy. 4. 1.
to do, that yea may live and go in, and possess the land, which the Lord God
of your Fathers gives you: ye shall put nothing to the word, which I command
you: neither shall take ought therefrom, that ye may keep the commandments
of the Lord your God, which I command you: what did he but make Gods word
declared to him, and written by him, the rule of Ios^. 1. ^.
their faith and life? When God said to Joshua: Let not this book of the law
depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou may
observe and do according to all that is written therein: for then shall thou
make thy way prosperous, and then shall thou have good success: What did he
but make his written word the rule of his faith, and whole life? When Abraham
said to the rich man condemned in Hell, They have Moses and the Prophets let
them hear them, what Luke 16. 29.
did he but show that the writings of Moses and the Prophets were the only
rule which his brethren should follow to avoid damnation, and consequently to
ataine eternal salvation? Chrisostom says: Ne igitur multorum opiniones
habeamus, Chrisost. in 2. Col. hom. 13.
sed res ipsas inquiramus. Quomodo autem non asurdum propter pecunias alijs non
credere, sed and ipsas numerare and supputare; pro rebus autem amplioribus
aliorum sententiam sequi simpliciter, praesertim cum habeamus omnium
exactissima^ trutinam and gnomonem ac regulam diuinaru^ inquam legum
assertionem. Ideo obsecro and oro vos omnes, vt relinquatis quidnam huic vel
illi videatur: deque hijs a scripturis haec omnia inquirite etc. i. Let us not
seek the opinions of many men, but let us search the things themselves: for
how is it not absurd not to believe men concerning money but that we will count
it; and for matters of greater weight to follow simply the mind and opinion of
others, especially seeing we have the most exact balance, square and rule, the
doctrine of Gods laws? Therefore I request and beseech you all to leave and
forsake what seems good to this or that man, and of these matters Idem in
Genes. homil. 58. Jdem hom. de Adam and He^a
search ye al these things, by the Scriptures. The same Chrisostom has these
words Vides in quantan absurditate^ incidunt qui diuinae scripturae canonem
sequi nolunt sed suis cogitationibus permittunt omnia. i. Thou see into how
great absurdity they do fall which follow not the rule of the divine
Scriptures, but permit all things to their own fancies and devises. And
again: Satis sufficere credimus quicquid secundum pre^ictas regulas Apostolica
scripta nos docuerunt, vt prorsus non opinemur catholicum quod apparuerit
praefixis Then is not the doctrine of the Church of Rome Catholic.
sententiis contrarium, we believe that that is sufficient enough whatsoever
according to the foresaid rules, the writings of the Apostles have taught us so
that we do not at all judge that to be Catholic which shall appear to be
contrary to the foresaid rules. Theodoret says: Thedor. dialog. 3. page 268.
(...) i. We have learned from the holy Scripture the rule of doctrines Saint
Augustine says: Sancta Scriptura nostrae doctrinae regulam August. de bono
viduitatis cap. 1.
figit ^ne audiamus sapere plusque oportet. The holy Scripture does set a rule
to our doctrine that we may not presume to be wise abue that we ought to be.
Beda has anexcelent saying hereof, which is recorded in Gratians decrees.
Beda. 8. quest. 1. Ne^ sufficere.
Nobis sacris literis vnica est credend^ pariter and viuendi regula
praescripta: The only rule both of faith, and also of life is prescribed unto
us in the holy Scriptures. This rule we have, and will you say this is no
rule? If you have a better rule let us know it. Whereas in your second
cogitations upon these your forcible reasons, you affirm that some say the
sphere of their faith is extended soly and wholly to the word of God set down
in holy writ; and how-so-euer you pity our poor ignorance, and say that
herein we do no more then all heritiks do: yet we be not abashed to
profess our selves to be of this number, and desire to have our faith ranged
and restrained within the circumference of this Sphere of the holy Scriptures:
and herein if our poor ignorance do not deceive us, we think that we join
with S. Paul, who being by Tertullus falsely charged with heresy, as we now
are; answered in these words: But this I confess unto thee, that after the
way, which they call herisie, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing
Act. 24. 14
all things which are written in the law, and Prophets. In which words Saint
Paul expels that acusation of herisie with this argument.

He that believes all things that are written in the law and the Prophets is
not to be accounted for an heritike, but I believe all this written in the law
and in the prophets:

Therefore I am not to be accounted for an heretic. But in the profound
knowledge of this writer, this was but poor ignorance, and a silly reason.
For what Heretic (says he) believes not so much? And so Saint Paul's reason
by this man's deep divinity is not worth a rush. For Tertullus might have
replied and said, that notwithstanding his believing all that is written in the
Law and Prophets, he was an Heretic, for all Heretics do as much.

But Master T. W. (for I will not misname you by H. T.) dic sodes, tell us in
sooth and sadness. Do Heretics believe the scriptures? I in my poor
ignorance have heretofore thought, that Heretics believed erroneous and false
doctrines repugnant and contrary to the scriptures, and that thereupon this
argument would have holden water, viz. that they which believe false doctrines,
do not believe the holy Scriptures, (which contain nothing but new
doctrine): but Heretics believe false doctrines ergo they believe not the
holy Scriptures.

Tell us also, will Heretics have the sphere of their faith extended solie and
wholly to the word of GOD set down in holy writ? Then this saying of
Tertullian, which in my poor ignorance I have thought, that never any misliked
unless he were an Heretic, will not go for current. Aufer deniquae
haereticis etc. Take away from Heretics Tertul. deresurrect. carnis.
whatsoever the Ethnikes have thought and taught, that they may try their
questions, Only by the Scriptures, and they cannot stand. For how can this
be, that they which believe the Scriptures, cannot stand, if their doctrines
be tried only by the scriptures.

But you will say, that Heretics profess that they believe the scriptures.
But is this all one with you, for Heretics to profe^^e the belief of the
scriptures, and in Ti^. 1. 16.
deed to believe them? Saint Paul says that some profess to know GOD, and by
works do deny him. Some also professed themselves to be Jews, that is to
say, worshippers Apoca. 2. 9.
of GOD, as you do now profess yourselues to be Catholics, and some to be
of the society of Jesus, when both they were, and you are the synagogue, and
of the society of satan. Some professed themselves to be John 8. 39. 40.
the Children of Abraham, which did not the works of Abraham, but their
faither was the devil as our Savior Christ told them. Even so Heritikes may
profess Psalm. 44.
that they believe the Scriptures, when indeed they believe them not, but
reject the truth of them, and believe false and damnable doctrines repugnant
unto them. Heretics be thieves which endeavor to steal away the truth from
the people, of whom Saint Chrysostom says: Q^i sacra non vtitur scriptura,
sed ascendit aliunde Chrysostom in Iorm. hom. 58.
idest non concessa via, fur est. He is a thief that uses not the scripture
(he says not, that believes the scripture) but clymeth into the sheepefold
by an other way which is not allowed.

Of the true sense and exposition of the Scripture I have entreated at large
before. Only now I will join this issue with you upon these words of Saint
Hierome recorded 24. Quaest. 3. Hae^sis.
by Gratian in the decrees: Quicunque aliter scripturam intelligit etc.
Whosoever expounds the scripture otherways then the sense of the Holy Ghost
by whom it was written, does require, although he have not departed from the
Church, yet he may be called an Heretic. Let them with good will of us and
you that shall soundly be proved to expound the Scriptures other-waies then
the sense of the Holy Ghost requires, be called, accounted, condemned, and
punnished Heritikes; yea your Expositions be so false, and for ours true, that
some Papists, and even some of your sweet brethren the Jesuits, are forced
by the evidence of Apa. Cathel. part. 2 lib. 5. cap. 17. 18. 19. etc.
truth to forsake yours, and to approve ours, as M. D. Morton has learnedly
and largely declared. What you or any other Heretics say of our Religion,
belief, and expositions we little regard, as long as you cannot prove them
to be heretical: and we are by the word of GOD well assured that they be
orthodoxall. As touching the book of the Canticles of Sollomon we by the
Scriptures do believe that it is the word of God. Saint Paul speaking of the
Scripture contained in the canonical books of the old Testament, and received
by the Church of Israel says, that the whole Scripture is inspired of God.
But this book of the Canticles was with the other books both of Sollom^n, and
of the rest of the old Testament received by the Church of Israel, therefore
by Saint Paul's 2 Timothy 3. 16.
judgment it was inspired of God, and so consequently the word of God as well
as others. But if we did join herein either with some wicked Anabaptists now,
or with some old Hertikes heretofore who have denied this book to be of the
Canon of the Scripture, as Phylastrius writes some did, (whose opinion we
abhor) yet from this particular Jn Catall cap. 133.
you could not infer the proof of your article being general; that the
Protestants know not what they believe. But herein you do as soundly and
substantially reason as Bellarmine and others of you do, that because the Enuch
did not understand that obscure prophetical speech of Isaias, which he was
reading when Philip came to him, therefore he understood nothing in the
Prophet Isaias: Yea and that all the Scripture is so hard and obscure, that it
is not expedient for the lay people to read it.

Concerning the alteration of the Sabbath, we gather by the Scriptures, and
thereby do believe, that it was made by the Apostles 1. Cor. 16. 2. Apoca. 1.
10. As your own fellows of Rhemes in their annotations upon these places do
confess. And therefore the Sabbath we now observe is warranted by the
Scriptures.

As for that idle speech of yours of general and particular believing things
in the Scripture, little pertinent to the proof of your article, I answer
briefly, that although neither all Protestants nor Papists have perfect and
distinct knowldge of all the Scripture: Yet God has so manifestly expressed
therein all things needful to our salvation, that it is a most perfect rule
of faith and life, as is before out of Beda alleged: although some men blinded
by sin and malice, do not see them no more then men blind in body see the
clear light of the Sun: nor do rightly use this right rule given of God
unto them. Chrysostom says: Quaecunqu^ necess^ria sunt, manifesta sunt.
Whatsoever In 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 3.
things are necessary are manifest. Again: Scripturae et seru^ etc. The
Scriptures are easy to be understood both of servants, and mystical people,
of widows, In Math. Hom. 1.
and boys, and to him that is very Ignorant: And whereas you would have the
Councels, Doctors, and Church the rule of our faith and life, bring such like
plain places out of the Scriptures and Doctors for the proof of it, and then
we will yield unto you. As touching the Apostles creed, we acknowledge it to be
a brief abridgement of the especial and principal points of Christian faith
and doctrine, yet there be some truths, which are not particularly expressed
in the same. But whereas you say, or rather falsely slander, that the
Protestants deny three articles of our creed, and the Puritanes five, I say
that you affirm much, and prove little. But first you might well enough have
forborne this distinction of Protestants and Puritanes; for although some have
differd in some outward matters concerning ceremonies and external orders in
the Church; yet these all greatly agree and consent in all points of the
doctrine of faith, and Articles of Christian Religion: Neither do I know any
that deserve so well of this name of Puritanes as you, who glory that you after
Baptism be pure from all sin; and for actual sins after committed, can
make so full satisfaction to God for them, that he can request no more of you,
as hereafter I will show: and therefore it is you that may well be called
Puritanes, of whom that saying of Sollomon may be* well verified; There is a
generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet are not washed from
their filthiness. Prou* 30.


But let us come to the examination of your proof of this your absurd and
slanderous assertion. The first you fay is the Catholic Church, Credo
Ecclesiam sanctam Catholicam: do we deny this Article? Why do we then not
only print it and rehearse it in our Creed, but also expound it in our
preachings and Catechizing? I have said before that which may seem sufficient
concerning this matter, andd article: yet the better to satisfy the Christian
Reader, and to stop the mouth of this malicious accuser, I say again that by
the holy Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed, is meant the company of all
Gods elected and faithful people, whom he calls, justifies, and
sanctifies to be vessels of his mercy, and heirs of his kingdom of glory,
which is the body of Christ, and he the head; the spouse of Christ, and he the
bridegroom; the house of Christ, and he the foundation; the flock of Christ,
and he the shepehard. And this Church we confess to be Catholic, that is
to say universal, both in respect of time, for that it consists of all them
that are written in the book of life, which have been* from the beginning of
the world, and shall be to the end thereof, and also of place, for that it is
not now contained in any one country, Act. ^o 35.
but as S. Peter says In every nation be that fears God, and works
righteousness is accepted with him, and is a true member of this Catholic
church. That this is the holy Catholic Church which we confess and believe,
whereof the profane wicked hypocrites, and reprobates be no part, besides that
which I have said before, I will further prove it by the holy Scriptures, and
ancient Fathers. Saint Paul says, Let us follow the truth in love, and in all
things grow up Ephesians. 4. 15.
unto him, which is the head, that is Christ, by whom all the body being
coupled and knit together by every joint, for the furniture thereof (according
to the effectual power, which is in the measure of every part) receives
increace of the body, unto the edifying of it sefe in love. Again Christ loved
^he Church Chap. 5. 25.
and gave himself for it, that be might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the
washing of water through the word, that he might make it to him self a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it
should be holy and without blame. These things belong only to the elect people
of God, who shall reign with him in his eternal kingdom of glory. For they
only be the body of Christ knit together in him, sanctified here, to be
without spot or blemish hereafter. The Apostle to the Hebrews says: Whose
house we are, if we Heb. 3. 6.
hold fast that confidence, and that rejoicing of hope unto the end. Where he
shows that they belong to the house of God, which is the Church of the living
God, the pillar and 1. Timth. 3. 15
stay of truth, which unto the end hold fast their confident faith, and hope of
Gods glory, whereof they rejoice, which belongs only to the faithful and
chosen children of God. This is that Church whereof he speaks after: But Heb.
12. 22.
ye are come unto the mount Sion, and to the city of the living God, the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the
assembly and congregation of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and
to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men. To whom
can these Galat. 4.
things pertain, but only to the Jerusalem which is above the mother of us
all, which is the holy Catholic Church that we believe?

Hereunto I will add a few sayings of the Fathers. Saint Augustine says:
Corpus huius capitis Ecclesiaest, non quae hoc loco est, sed quae hoc loco and
pertotum orbem terrarum: nec August. in Psalm. 81.
illa quae hoc tempore, sed ab ipso Abel vsque ad eos qui nascituri sunt vsque
in finem, and credituri in Christu^, totus populus sanctorum ad vnam ciuitatem
pertinentium* quae ciuitas corpus est Christi, cui caput est Christus: The body
of this head is the Church, not which is in this place only, but that which is
in this place, and through the whole would, neither that Church which is at
this time, but that of them which from Abel shall be borne unto the end, and
shall believe in Christ, eue^ the whole company of Saints pertaining to one
city, which city is the body of Christ, whereof Christ is the head. And in
another place: Ille caput est, nos membra sumus: tota ecclesia quae vbique
diffusa est corpus ipsius est, cuius Idem in Psa. 62
est ipse caput. Non solum qutem fideles qu^ modo sunt; sed and qui fuerunt
ante nos, and qui post nos futuri sunt vsque in finem seculi, omnes adcorpus
eius pertinent, cuius corporis ipse caput est, qui ascendit in coelum: He is
the head, we are his members: the whole Church which is dispersed every where
is his body, whereof he is the head. And not only the faithful which be now,
but also they which have been before us, and which shall be after us unto the
end of the world, all pertain to his body: of which body, he which has
Idem de Catech. rud. c. 20.
ascended into heaven is the head. Again, Caelestis Jerusalem ciues sunt
omnes sa^ctificati homines qui fuerunt, and qui sunt, and qui futuri sunt: All
sanctified men, which have been, which are, and which shall be Citizens of
the heavenly Jerusalem. Cyprian says: Ecclesia nunquam a Cyprian lib. 1.
epist. 3.
Christo discedit, and ii sunt ecclesia, qui in domo Dei p^rmanent: The Church
never departs from Christ, and they be the Church which continue in the
house of God. Again, Jdem de vnitate ecclesie.
Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi: incorrupta est and puaica: vnam domum
nouit, vnius cubiculi sanctitatem casto pudore custodit. Haec nos Deo seruat,
haec filios regno quos generauit assignat: The spouse cannot be defiled: she
is vncorrupt and chaste, she knows one house, and keeps with chaste
shamefastness the holiness of one chamber, she keeps us to God, she
assigns the children whom she has borne unto this kingdom. Saint Hierome
says: Ipsa Hieron. in Job cap. 28.
ecclesiae quae est Sanctorum omnium congregatio pro aeterna sibi in Domino
stabilitate, columna and fundamentum dicitur veritatis: The Church which is the
congregation of all Saints by reason of her eternal stedfastnes in God, is
called Chrysostom in Ps. Hom. 114.
the pillar and ground of truth. Chrysostom says: Ecclesia est tabernaculum a
Deo fixum, non ab homine: ab vno lcco in alium fugit, sed non a pietate ad
impietatem fugit: The Church is the tabernacle which God has pight, and not
man, she flies from one place to another, but she never flies from Ambros.
in Ephesians. cap. 1
Godliness to impiety and wickedness. Ambrose: Apostolus omnem ecclesiam dicens,
summatim totum comprehendit quod in coelo est and in terra: The Apostle meaning
all the Church, briefly comprehends the whole which is both in heaven Bern.
in Cant. sermon. 78. Clem Alexand. Strom. lib. 7. page 35. Bedain Cant. 6.
and in earth. Terna^d says: Electi Dei sunt ecclesia Dei: The elect of God be
the Church of GOD. So says Clemens Alexandrinus: Non nunc locum, sed electorum
congregationem appello ecclesiam: I call not now the place the Church, but the
congregation of the elect. So says Beda, vna est columba perfecta mea: vna
est, inquit, catholica el^ctorum omnium multitudo peromnia et mundi Loca, et
tempora seculorum deo patri subiecta. 1. my perfect dove is one: he says,
that there is one Catholic multitude of all the elect by all both places of
the world, and ages of times, subject to God the father. Yea Friar Lyra says:
Lyra in Mat. 16.
Ex quo patet quod ecclesia non consistat in hominibus ratione potestatis vell
dignitatis ecclesiasticae vel secularis, quia multi principaes and summi
pontifices and alii inferiores inuenti sunt apostatasse a fide: propter quod
ecclesia consistit in illis personis in quibus est notitia vera et confessio
fidei et veritatis: Whereby it appears that the Church consists not in men,
in respect of their ecclesiastical or secular power or dignity: for many
Princes and Popes, and others of lower Popes Apostates.
degree have been found to have been Apostates, and to have fallen away from
the faith. Wherefore the Church consists in those persons in whom is true
knowledge, and the confession of faith and truth. So says the Friar Alphonsus
de castro: Ecclesia ex omnibus fidelibus constat, Aduers. Hares. lib. 1. cap.
5. fol. 11.
non solum presentibus, verumetiam preteritis, et in posterum futuris. 1. The
Church consists of all the faithful not only them that be now present, but
also heretofore have been, and hereafter shall be.

This is that holy Catholic Church, which we in the Creed confess, and
believe, even the whole number of them whom God has elected and chosen to
eternal life, whom God has had in all ages, and of all nations: Of which
Church every true and faithful man and woman, must believe himself to be a
true and lively member, whereof he may be assured, if he find and feel
that GOD has lightened his mind with the knowledge of his truth, has wrought
in his heart an unfeigned faith to trust in his mercies, and to believe that his
sins be forgiven him for Christ's names sake: and that God has sanctified
his soul and body to hate sin, and to have a care and conscience to serve
him in true holiness and righteousness all the eaies of his life. This being our
confession and b^ liefe, with what conscience and truth can this man say, that
the Church which the Protestants believe has been interrupted all the ages
betwixt the Apostles and Luther? and in very deed was never seen before
Luthers days: or that we imagine the same to be comprehended within the
narrow bounds of England? I can say no more, but that a false witness shall
Proverb. 19. 5.
not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall not escape. But now let
us see what this man and his fellows hold, believe, and call the Catholic
Church, forsooth the company of all them that receive and profess the
religion and doctrine of the Church of Rome, and submit themselves to be ruled
and governed by the Bishop and Pope of Rome. They that do not this, be
Heretics, Schismatikes, out of Noah's Arc, and out of the Catholic Church.
And hereupon it follows, that the Christians in Graecia, Muscouia, Armenia,
Ethiopia, etc. where Christianity has continued unto this day, and among whom
no doubt but some have been of Gods elect and chosen people, yet be they no
Catholics, nor of the Catholic Church, nor in the state of salvation: and
why? because they neither have been nor be subject to the Pope of Rome. For so
it is with many words sollemnely defined and determined by that holy Pope
Bonniface the 8. Subesse Roman opontifici, omni humanae creaeturae Extra. de
mayor. and obedien. una^ sanctam.
declaramus, dicimus, and definimus, and pronuntiamus, omnino esse de
necessitate salutis: that is, We declare, say, define and pronounce, that it is
altogether of necessity of salvation to be subject to the Pope of Rome. Where
the Gloss helps out the matter with these words: Quicquid saluatur est sub
Gloss. ibidem.
summo ponitfice: Whatsoever is saved is under the Pope. And on the other side,
All they that profess the religion of Rome, and submit themselves to the
Bishop thereof be Catholics, and of the Catholic Church, how profane,
wicked or ungodly soever they be.

Pope John the 8. the whore, John the 12. or as some reckon him, the 13. who
was an adulterer, and of two Cardinals, did cut out the tongue of the one, and
the hand of the other, and at dice-play would call upon the Devil, and made
the Palace of Laterane a stews of strumpets, as Luithprand. lib. 6. cap. 7.
Luithprandus Ticinensis, writes: Syluester the second a coniurer, who gave
himself to the Devil to be made Pope, Gregory the 7. a coniurer and monster,
Bonniface the 7. Platina in Syluest. 2.
who robbed Saint Peter's Church, and put out the eyes of John a Cardinal,
Bonniface the 8. who entered into his Popedom like a fox, reigned like a
wolf, and died like a dog, Jdem.
Alexander the sixth, and Julius the second, and al they whom Platina calls
monstra and portenta, monsters and wonders Platina.
for their wickedness, were not only Catholics, but also heads of this
Catholic Church. And he that married (as I said before) his own sister, and
Ferdinando a king Naples, who married his Aunt, and king Philip of Spain that
married Phil. Comiueus.
his Niece, because they did see these things by the dispensations and alowing
of holy Popes of Rome, were Catholkes, and good sons of the Catholic Church.
Now whether of these doctrines concerning this article of our faith, I believe
the holy Catholic Church, be the sounder and truer, let the Christian reader
uprightly judge. I doubt not but wisdom Math. 11.
shall be justified of her children.

And whereas you would make men believe, that the Church whereof we are, is
contained within the narrow bounds of England, and that the Lutherans in
Germany, the Hugonotes in France, and the Gues in Flanders (as you term
them) will not join issue with us in diverse essential points of Religion,
you do to the offending of God, and deceiving of your ignorant reader, utter
two notorious untruths. For we (as I have said before) confess our selves to
be members of that holy Catholic Church, which has been in all ages, and is
dispersed over the world, and we have communion and fellowshippe with all them
in all nations, that fear God, and obey his truth, especially in the
fundamental Doctrines of Religion and salvation. But how do you truly
confess the Church to be Catholic, that is, universal, comprehending all
nations, in restraining it to the religion and subjection of the Pope of Rome,
and so consequently to a small part of Europe? unless you will now of late
add the West Indians, where the Spaniards have committed more horrible
murders, then they have made good proselytes. And what an improper speech it
is, that you call the Church of Rome the Catholic church, as if a man should call
the church of Corinth or Ephesus the Catholic, that is the universal Church,
which if they were holy, are but members of the Catholic Church. This is
therefore that which you untruly attribute to us, to call England the
universal world: or Kent the kingdom of England, etc. But the Church of Rome
now committing fornication with stocks and stones is so far from being the
Catholic Church, that it is no true member thereof, as M. Doctor Raynolds has
learnedly proved. Which short Thesis being published in latin about twenty
six years past, and in English nineteen years yet to the shame of all
Papists stands to this day vnconfuted although it tends to the cutting of
the throat of their religion, and overthrows the maine pillar thereof. And
that these whom you contemptuously call Lutherans, Hugonotes, and Gues, do
dissent from us in essential points of religion, you may easily affirm, but
shall never be able to prove. Some indeed in Germany, whom you call Lutherans,
do dissent from us in one point concerning the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood: howbeit you cannot be ignorant, but that many Churchs and countries in
Germany join with us in that matter. And let the reader read and examine the
confessions of faith set out by the Churches in France, and in the low
countries, and they shall see both how great their agreement in Doctrine is
with us, and also what a shameless slander this is, which this author has)
acording to his accustomed manner) avouched, but not proved. And moreover I will
offer this issue to this man, who thinks so highly of himself, that whereas
he shall prove that there is dissension among us in one essential point of
religion and doctrine; I will prove that there is in three at the least among
them. And this much for this article.

The second article of the communion of Saints you say we many ways deny.
First, by not believing that Christ has instituted seven Sacraments, wherein
the Saints of his Church communicate. But why do not you bring some plain
proof that our Savior Christ iustituted these seven Sacraments? seeing you
say that the denying of them is the denial of this Article of our faith. Saint
Paul going about to terrify the Christians of Corinth from going to idolatrous
feasts, by the example of Gods fearful judgments and plagues poured upon the
Israelites for the like sins: to prevent an objection which the Christians of
Corinth might have made, that the Israelits were not the Children of God so
much as they, and had not such Sacraments of Baptism and of Christ's supper, as
they had; and therefore God would not deal so hardly with them as he did with
the Israelites: to take away, I say this objection, he shows that they were
Gods people, as well as the Christians of Corinth were, and had the same
sacraments in substance that we have. For the Fathers were under that cloud,
and all passed through the sea, and were all baptized by Moses in 1. Cor. 10. 1
that cloud, and in that sea, and did all eat the same spiritual meat, and
did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of the spiritual
rock that followed them: and the rock was Christ. Where Saint Paul making
mention of the Sacraments, which are tokens of Gods grace, and marks of his
people, names but these two, Baptism and Christ's supper. Saint Augustine also
writing of the Sacraments whereby Christ has tied his people together, makes
mention but of the same two, in these words: Primum itaque tenere volo quod est
huius disputationis caput, dominu^ nostrum Iesum Christum, sicut ipse in
Euangelio loquitur, Leui August. ad. Ianuar. Epist. 108.
iugo suo nos subdidisse, and sarcinae leu^, vnde sacramentis numero
paucissimis, obseruatione facillimis, significatione praestantissimis
societatem noui populi colligauit, sicut est baptismus Trinitatis nomine
consecratus, communicatio corporis and sangu^^is ipsius, and si quid aliud in
scripturis canonicis comme^datur, etc. 1. First therefore, I would have thee
hold that which is the head of this disputation, that our Lord Jesus Christ
has, as he speaks in the Gospel, put us under his easy yoke and light
burden, whereupon he has bound together the society and communion of his
people by Sacraments in number fewest, in observation easiest, in signification
most excellent, as is baptism consecrated in the name of the Trinity, the
communion of his body and blood, and if there be any thing else commended in the
canonical scriptures. The like he writes in his 3. book de doctor.
Christiana. cap. 9. by ye which it appears, that he thought these two
Sacraments to be sufficient for faithful Christians to communicate in. And if
he had acknowledged any mo, it is marvel, y^ writing of purpose of the^, he did
not name them: yet S. Augustine did not deny this article of the communion of
Saints. Bessarion, a Cardinal of Rome, and a learned man dissenteth Bessar. de
Sacram. Eucharistia.
from you, and says: Haec duo sola sacrame^ta in Eua^gelio manifest tradita
legimus: i, We read that these only. 2. sacraments are plainly delivered to us
in the Gospel: yet did he not deny this article of faith. Your own doctor
Alexander de Hales flatly affirms y^ neither Christ, nor his Apostles did
Alexand. de Halis par. quest. ^4. men. 1.
institute and ordain the Sacrament of Confirmation, but y^ it was afterward
ordained in the council called Meldense: yet he denied not this article. And
therefore you ouershot your self in saying, that they which believe not y^
Chtist did institue. 7. sacraments, deny this article of faith, The communion
of Saints. But to proceed with you concerning ye true and real presence of
Christ in ye Eucharist, we deny the same, not to the faith of the godly and
worthy receiver, but to the mouth and teeth of ye carnal eater. We believe and
say that Christ's body and blood, in as much as they were offered upon the cross
for our redemption, are the spiritual food of our souls, without which we can
neither live unto God hear, nor live with God hereafter: and that ye same is
offered to us partly in the promises of the Gospel, and partly in the sacraments
of Baptism and Christ's supper: and is in both apprehended of us by faith,
without which neither the word nor Sacraments can profit us. But here I must
put you in mind, that you corruptly allege a place of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 10. 17.
foisting in this word Body for Bread, S. Paul's words be thus: we that are many
are one bread, and one body, because we are partakers of one bread.

This shifting of the words of the holy Ghost is too usual with your
companions. Bounderius a Louaine Friar alleging Compend concept. titul. 21.
act.
the words of Saint Paul in the next chapter, verse. 27. Quicunque manducauerit
panem hunc, etc. He that eats this bread. etc. puts out the word panem,
and foisteth in the word carnem, flesh, alleging it thus. Qui manducat carnem,
and bibet calicem Domini indigne, etc. He that eats the flesh, and drinks
the cup of the Lord unworthily, etc. D. Harding in his confutation of the
Apology entreating Confut. Apolo. cap. 16. diuis. 1
of Purgatory, alleging the words of S. Paul, 2. Cor. 7. 1. to prove
satisfaction for sins, by that fained fire, puts out Sanctification, and
in place thereof puts Satisf^tation alleging it thus: making perfect
satisfaction in the fear of God. Cardinal Hosius changes the words of Saint
Paul alleging them thus: Neque far possunt vt per verbum Deisigno Cons^.
Petri 10 cap. 13.
crucis vlla creatura sanctificetur. They cannot abide that any creature should
be sanctified by the word of God and sign of the cross. He puts out
prayer, and puts in the sign of the Cross as a more holy thing. The
foresaid Bunderius does most shamefully allege a Ibid titul 3. 0. arti. 5.
place of the Apostlein this sort: Nam si cinis v^t^lae conspersas populum
sanctificauit atque mundauit: quanto magis aqua sale conspersa diuinis precibus
sacrata poulum sanctificat atque mundat: If the ashes of an heifer sprinkled
have sanctified and cleansed the people, how much more shall water sprinkled
with salt, being hallowed with divine prayers sanctify and cleanse the people,
etc. The words of the Apostle be these: If the blood of bulls and goats, and
Heb. 9. 13.
the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling them that are unclean, sanctifies as
touching the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ,
which through the eternal spirit offered himself without fault to God, purge
your conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? Is not this horrible
handling of Gods word, and blasphemous attributing that to their salt water,
which is proper and peculiar to the blood of Christ? I could show in like
manner, how they have clipped the coin of Gods word, in leaving out words of
purpose, which serve not their turn, but I will omit them: only this I say, y^
if they which counterfeit and clip the kings coin deserve ha^ging, what do they
deserve y^ counterfeit and clip the word of the eternal God king of all kings?
but corrupt doctrine cannot be maintained without corruption of Gods word. But
to return to S. Paul's place: he there disswadeth the Christians of Corinth
from going to Idolatours feasts by a reason taken from the supper of our
Savior Christ, showing that as the faithful by eating that bread which there
is broken, and drinking that Cup, are made partakers of Christ Jesus: so they
that did eat those feasts ordained to the honoring of Idols, were partakers of
Idolatry there committed, or rather of the Devil that was there served. And
as the faithful by being partakers of that bread have communion together, and
be made one body, to wit, the mystical body of Christ: so they that receive
those Idol bankets, have communion together, and show themselves to be of one
body, videl. of the Diuil, Now as there needed no transubstantiation of the
one, no more there does for the other. Also this bread which Saint Paul calls
the communion of the body of Christ is broken; yet I trust they will not say,
that Christ's body is broken, although Pope Nicholas De consecra distinct. 2.
E^o Berenga.
caused that excellent man Berengarius so to confess. But of the gross and
absurd doctrine of transubstantiation I will speak no more at this present.
You say moreover that we deny the communion of the Chuch militant, and
triumphant, by exclaming against invocation of Saints, by which holy exercise
those blessed Saints in Heaven, and we in earth communicate, we by prayer
glorifying them, and they by meditation (I think it should be mediation)
obtaining our requests. Hereunto I answer, first that this invocation of
Saints is unlawful, and cannot be proved by the holy Scriptures. And this
offer I do make you, that if you can bring one plain place out of all the holy
scriptures, wherein it was ever commanded, or of any faithful man or woman
used, I will yield unto you not only in this, but also in matters of Religion.
You quote in your margent Genes. 48. 16. and Apoca. 1. 4. which make as much for
proouing invocation of Saints, as Tityre tu patule does. The words of the
place of Genesis be these: The Angel which has delivered me from all evil
bless the children, and let my name be called or named upon them, and the
name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac, that they may grow as fish into a
multitude in the midst of the earth. Out of this place the Papists take two
arguments to prove prayer to Angels and to Saints. The first out of these
words, The Angel which has delivered me, etc. The other out of those, let my
name be called upon them, etc. But yet let the reader note this, that of the
Papists some do find the one saying, and some the other so weak, that some
allege the one, and some the other, and I have not read any one, that does use
them both. T W. in a discourse of this matter alleged the former words of the
Angel: and Ecchius the latter. To the which I will briefly answer: By the
Angel is meant Jesus Christ the Angel of the covenant, as Malachie calls him,
and the Angel of the great council of God. So does Aloisius Lipomanus that
great Catholic Bishop of Verona both out of Cyrillus, and of himself expound
it in these Cyrillus. Alois. Lipoma catena in Genes 48.
words: Cyrillus, Jacob pueris benedicens deum and pa^rem and nutrientem se,
and Angelum liberantem nominat, illum nempe Angelum, qui Angelus magni consilij
ab Esaia dicitur, quia omnis benedictio, omnis gratia non aliter quam a deo per
Iesum Christum in homines descendit. Considera^dum quod dictio hagoel vel
redimens vel qui redimit proprie reddi potest, quo loquendi modo clarissime
filius dei, mundi generalis redemptor denotatur. Et si di^igenter aduerseris,
tacit propheta domini sanctissimam inuocat trinitatem, patrem scilicet, and
spiritum S. sub nomine dei bis repititi, vnigenitum vero dei filiu^ sub nomine
Angeli: Angelum vero intelligit redemptorem, verbum diuinum, saluatorem
nostrum, vel auxilij aispensationis diuinae ministrum, ipse, inquam ille
benedicat pueris istis: That is, Cyrill. Jacob blessing thy children does name
God both the father which did nourish him, and the Angel which did deliver
him, to wit, that Angel, whom Esaias calls the Angel of great counsel,
because all blessing and all grace descends no other ways from God upon men,
but by Jesus Christ. We must consider that the word Hagoel may be translated
either redeeming or he that redeemeth, by which phrase of speech the son of
God the general redeemer of the world, is most manifestly signified: and if
thou dilligently mark, thou may perceive, that the prophet in secret sort
calls upon the most holy Trinity, to wit, the father and the holy Ghost,
under the name of God twice repeated, and the only begotten son of GOD,
under the name of the Angel. For by the Angel he understands the redeemer,
the word of GOD, our Savior or the minister of GODS help and dispensation;
even he, I say, bless these children. Hitherto Lipomanus. who with that
ancient Father Cyrill truly understand by this angel Jesus Christ, and not
any other ministering spirit or created Angel. And therefore this place proves
the invocation of Christ, but not of other Angels. By the other words, Let my
name be called upon them, etc. Jacob meant nothing else, but that Manasses and
Ephraim Joseph's sons should be counted amongst his sons, to make up the
twelve tribes of Israel. And even so Friar Lyra does Lyra in. 48. cap Genes.
truly expound it in these words: Inuocetur super eos nomen meum, quia vocati
sunt filij adoptiue Jacob, and facti sunt capita duarum tribuum, sicut alij
filij Jacob: that is, Let my name be called upon them, because they were called
the adopt sons of Jacob, and were made the heads of two tribes, as were his
other sons. This phrase of speech is so used in other places of Scripture as
Isa. 41. In that day seven women shall lay hold of one man, saying, we will
eat our owe bread, and we will wear our own garments: only let thy name be
called upon us, and take away our reproach. Whereby is meant, that he should
be their husband, and they counted and called his wives. The like phrase is 2.
Sam. 12. 28. Hierem. 7. 10. etc. And therefore that this exposition of this
place, whereby they go about to prove invocation of Saints, is a private and
false exposition, any man may easily perceive, And this is the more evident,
for that some great Papists are forced to confess that invocation of Saints is
not commended nor commanded in all the Scriptures. There is one Francis
Hamilton a Scot, a Papist, and fugitive prior of S. James at Herbipolis in
Gemany, who in a discourse concerning invocation of Saints writes thus: Porro
libenter hic concedimus, disertis scripturarum verbis ipsam (inuocationem
sanctorum) non commendari. Quibus enim? cuius authoris? cuius libri? cuius
instrumenti? Noui an veteris? commendantur Sancti, commendatur oration, quam pro
nobis ad deu^ faciunt vt ipsos inuocemus, atque vt pro nobis orent, rogemus
Francist. Hamiltonius de Iunocat. Sanct. demonstrat. priore in appendice page
3^ 81.
nullo loco commendatur. Vbi consulatur, locus demonstrari non potest. Sed
neque cou^eniebat, vt aut commendaretur aut consuleretur, nascentis maxim
ecclesiae exordiis: ne plures sibi deos more gentium fingere aut constituere
existimarentur christiani, quando etiam in suspitionem Idolatriae venerunt du^
sub specie panis and vini verum deum colerent. 83. praecepta ne est? Non est
praecepta, etc. that is, Moreover we do here willingly grant, that
invocation of Saints is not commended to us by express words of the
Scriptures. For by what words? of what authors? of what book? of which
testament? the new or the old? Saints are commended, prayer which they make to
God for us is commended: but that we should call upon them, and that we
should entreat them to pray for us, is in no place commended. No place ca^ be
showed, where it is counseled. Neither was it couenient that it should be
either commended or counseled, especially in the beginning of the Church
arising, lest christians should be thought to make unto themselves after the
manner of the gentiles more Gods: seeing they were suspected of Idolatry for
worshipping the true GOD under the form of bread and wine. 83. Is it
commanded? It is not commanded. Hitherto the words of this Papist Hamilton,
by which it appears that invocation of Saints is not commanded nor
councelled in the Scriptures, and therefore they do wrest them, and bring a
private and faulse exposition to them, which seek to prove it by them. You
quoate also in the margent. Apoc. 1. 4. whereat a man might well wonder, that
you would quote a place so impertinent for this purpose, but that it is ever
usual amongst you and your fellows in such sort to abuse the word of God. The
words of Saint John be these: John to the seven Churches which are in Asia,
Grace be with you and peace from him, which is, and which was, and which is to
come, and from the seven spirits which are before his throne, and from Jesus
Christ, etc. What means this man to allege this for invocation of Saints?
will he by these seven spirits understand the Saints? either he knows
little, or he cannot be ignorant that this is expounded of the holy Ghost, who
although he be in person one, yet by the communication of his virtue, and
demonstration of his divine works in those seven Churches, does so perfectly
show himself, as though there were so many spirits, every one working in his
peculiar Church. Ambrose set out by Doctor Tunstall Bishop of Duresme writes
upon these words thus. Hic tota trinit as demonstratur: Here the whole
Trinity is showed: and a little after: Per septem autem spiritus, spiritus
sanctus co quod sit septiformis intelligitur: By the seven spirits the holy
Ghost is understood, because he works seven manner of ways. And hard it
were, or rather absurd, to pray for grace and peace from Saints, and that
before Jesus Christ. But upon this I will not stand; only the reader may
consider how barren this cause is, which has no plainer proofs, and drives
this man to such private and false exposition of Gods word. Now whereas you say
that by prayer you glorify the Saints in heaven: I say, that by prayer we do
glorify God. Call upon me in Psalm. 50. 15.
the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. But
that by prayer we should glorify Saints, I do not find in all the holy
scriptures. If this man can, why does he not show it? I find that God will
not give his glory Isa. 42. 8. Psalm. 115. 1
to any other, and that the Saints with David say: Not unto us, O Lord, not
unto us, but unto thy name give the glory for thy loving mercy and thy truths
sake. And that the Angel Apoc. 19. 10 2^. 8.
would not be worshipped or glorified, but said unto John worship God. As
touching the Saints mediation, when Jesus Christ shall cease to be our
mediator, and to sit at the right hand of GOD to make intercession for us, then
we will seek to your mediation of Saints. In the mean time take you heed,
that in attributing that to the Saints, which is proper and peculiar to the
son of GOD, yea which he has bought with his blood, you do not deny the
Lord which has bought us, and that you do not horribly dishonor those Saints,
and make Idols of them. Furthermore you say that we deny the communion of the
Church militant, and the souls in purgatory, etc. Whereunto I answer, that
when you shall plainly and pithily prove this your fained fire of purgatory
(which the Greek Church always has denied) then we will yield unto you, and
grant our selves to be to blame, in not helping these seely souls with
dirges, masses, etc. out of the pains of this forged fire. You quote in your
margent for proof thereof, 1. Cor. 3. v. 15. and 15. v. 29. Alas poor
purgatory, that has no better proofs. The words of S. Paul in the first place
be these: If a man's work burn, he shall lose, but he shall be saved himself:
nevertheless yet as it were by fire. Here is mention of fire, and therefore it
must needs be the fire of purgatory: for such is the great judgment of these
worthy writers, that if they read in the scriptures or Fathers this word fire,
it is none other but the fire of purgatory: if sacrifice, it is the sacrifice
of the Mass: if confession, it can be nothing but auricular confession to the
Priest: if tradition, it is unwritten verities or vanities. But touching these
places of Saint Paul, because the author of this Pamphlet does not aledge them,
but barely quote them, I will but briefly touch the^. To the first I say, that
Saint Paul there speaks not of all men, but only of teachers and preachers,
which be builders of Gods house and Church, which even Bellarmine confesses.
Tom 1. contr. 6 de purgat. lib. 1 cap. 4.
Secondly, he speaks not of all their works, but only of their doctrine
whereby they build the Church of God. Thirdly, he speaks not of the purging
of works or persons but of the probation of doctrines. Fourthly, the works are
said to be proved, and not the persons. Lastly, if this place should be
understood of purgatory, then every man should be thrown into it, for it is
said the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is: but this is
contrary to the doctrine of the Papists, who will not have all men come into
purgatory. These things plainly show that this place cannot be understood of
purgatory: Saint Augustine in many places does understand it of the
afflictions and troubles sustained in this life, and not of the pains of
Purgatory after this life, Enchir. ad Laurentium cap. 68. de ciuit. Dei lib.
21. cap. 26. de fide and operibus cap. 16. in Psalm. 80. But S. Paul speaks of
trial of doctrine, showing that as the fire tries metals, so the light of
Gods truth tries doctrines: and as gold and silver abide in the fire, and hay
and stubble be consumed: so true, sound, and holy doctrines abide the light
and trial of Gods word; when either untrue doctrines or vain speculations
perish and be comsumed. So does Saint Ambrose expound it: Mala doctrina Ambros.
in 1. Cor. 3.
in igne omnibus apparebit, nunc enim quosdam fallit: Evil doctrine shall
appear unto all in the fire, for now it deceives some. Again, Mala enim and
adultera doctrina idcirco in ligno, foeno, and stipula significata est, vt
ostenderetur ignis esse esca: Evil and counterfeit doctrine is therefore
signified by wood, hay, and stubble, that it might be showed, Idem. in Psalm.
118. in haec verba, ignitum eloquiu^ tuum.
that it is but meat to be consumed of fire. And again, Ignis ergo hic
Christi sermo est: and bonus ignis, etc. This fire is the word of Christ, and
it is a good fire, which warmeth, but burns not but only sins. By this
fire that gold of the Apostle laid upon the good foundation is tried. By this
fire that silver of manners or works is proved. By this fire those precious
stones are lightened: but the hay and stubble is consumed. Therefore this fire
cleanses the soul, and consumes error. Hitherto Saint Ambrose: whereby we
may see that neither Saint Augustine, nor Saint Ambrose expound this place of
Purgatory, much less the Greek Fathers, who never acknowledged it. Therefore
to expound it of Purgatory, as the Papists do, whether it be not a private
and false exposition, let ye godly reader uprightly judge.

The words of the other place here quoted are these: Else what shall they do,
which are baptized for the dead: if the dead rise not at all, why are they then
baptized for dead? To pick Purgatory pickpurse out of this place passes my
skill. Here is mention made of baptism for the dead: but neither of
Purgatory, nor of prayer for the dead. I am not ignorant that there be
sundry expositions of this place: yet I do not remember that ever I read it
expounded of Purgatory, or applied unto it. And therefore I will write no more
at this present of it, but will expect a syllogism to be made of it for the
proof of Purgatory, and then I shall further consider what to say unto it.
We do believe that they only be members of that body whereof Christ Jesus
Coloss. 12. ^
is the head, which be either triumphing with him in heaven: or be fighting
for him against Satan, sin, and the world here upon earth. Saint Paul says,
that Christ came to make peace by the blood of his cross, and to reconcile the
things which are in earth and the things which are in heaven. That is to say,
his whole universal Church, whereof part was already in heaven, and part
remained behind upon the earth. They therefore that be in Purgarorie, be no
members of his body, nor are to be delivered by him: but being the Popes
creatures, are either by him (who can at his pleasure empty and scour
Purgatory) to be delivered, or else still in that fained fire to be
tormented. Neither has true Christian charity so much, as the cursed
covetousness of Priests, been the bellows to blow that forged fire for the
heating of their kitchens.

Now that I have answered your reasonlesse reasons of our denying this article
of Christian faith, the communion of Saints, I will briefly show what is our
belief of it. We believe that all the Saints of God, and members of the holy
Catholic Church have communion and fellowshippe with Jesus Christ, and are
partakers of all his benefits. Of this communion Christ speaks: I am the
vine, ye are the Joh. 15. 5
branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit. Of this speaks S. Paul: God is faithful, 1. Cor. 1. 9.
by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of his son Jesus Christ our Lord.
This communion or fellowship is wrought by faith, by the which Christ dwells
in the hearts of all Ephesians. 3. 17.
his elect and faithful people, and by which we be graffed into him to
receive all grace and goodness from him as the branch does from the vine or
stock. And we believe that all the faithful and Godly be knit together in
love, as the Coloss. 2. 2
Apostle speaks, whereby they are to communicate those graces and gifts,
which God has bestowed upon them, to the edifying and helping of others, in
such sort as GOD has appointed. Yea we believe that all the faithful have
communion and fellowship together in that they have all one heavenly father,
one Jesus Christ their redeemer and mediator, one holy Ghost their sanctifier,
are justified by one faith common to all the elect, dedicated to GOD by one
baptism, called by one Gospel to be partakers of one kingdom of glory. This
is the sum of our belief concerning this article, wherein we would know
what fault you can find? But your communion and union consists in being
under one Pope of Rome, under whose obedince whosoever is not, you think he
cannot be saved, as is before showed; neither will you have communion with him:
And therefore whereas Christianity has continued (as I said before) in Greece,
Russia, Aethiopia, Armenia, and other countries amongst whom no doubt but God
has had, and now has his elect and chosen people, yet you have no communion
or felloship with them, because they be not under your one Pope. And much less
have you communion with the Saints in heaven, because you have not the faith of
Gods elect. For did the faithful Patriakes, Prophets, Apostles and others
believe to be delivered from the fire of hell by the merits of Nicholas,
Titus. 1. 1.
or to ascend into heaven by the blood of Thomas Becket? Nay Jesus Christ is
the only mercy seat, into the which the two Cherubins did look, that is, as
I take it, both the faithful before his coming in the flesh, and they that be
after do look only upon Christ, in him only to seek and find mercy.

Now let us see the third article of our Creed, which you say we deny, which is
Remission of sins. Here I beseech the Christian reader to consider who they
be that deny this article, containing a principal point of Christian religion
and salvation, whether we or this accuser with his partners. We believe, that
whereas we be children, of wrath, unprofitable servants, and prodigal children
that have sinned against heaven and our heavenly father, and are so deeply
indebted to God, that we be never able to make payment, for the which he might
justly throw us into the dungeon of damnation for ever: we I say believe that
he has given his only begotten son, that whosoever Job. 3. 16. Ephesians. 17.
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, by whom we
have redemption through his blood, even the Coloss 2. 14. 1. Ioh. 2. 12.
forgiveness of sins, according to his rich grace, and that our sins are
forgiven us for his names sake. And we believe that God of his great mercy in
Jesus Christ does forgive us not only our sins, but also the punishment due
unto them, and which we have deserved by them, accepting us for vessels of his
mercy, and heirs of his glory. Now this accuser of us, and his companions do
first believe, that they do make satisfaction to Gods justice for their
sins. For whereas our sins be called debts, and satisfaction is a payment;
it follows, that if we do make satisfaction for them, then we neither need,
nor can have forgiveness of them. For our satisfaction, and Gods forgiveness
cannot stand together. For even as if I owe a man a hundredth pounds, and I pay
him, he does not forgive it; and if he forgive it, I do not pay it: So if we by
satisfaction make payment to GOD for our sins, then he does not forgive
them; if he forgive them, then we do not make satisfaction for them.

Now let us see, what is the doctrine of these men concerning this their
satisfaction, whereby they make payment themselves to God for their debts.
Bishop Fisher, whom I suppose the Pope has fainted for standing so John
Fisher in Psa. 1. poenitent
stiffly in his cause, writes hereof thus: Thirdly, some there be, which by
grace in this life have so punished themselves for their offenses, that they
have made a sufficient recompense for Jbidem.
them Again: So does hearty weeping for sin, expel sin, and is a
sufficient and just recompense for it. And again: But whereas In Psa. 2.
poenitent.
any creature has made due satisfaction in this life, he never after that
shall suffer more pain and also is clean out of debt, and nothing after that
shall ever be claimed of him. Again, They be called recti cord, that have
made satisfaction so Jbidem.
plentifully, that God can ask no more of them. And in his Latin book
against Luther he has these words: Secundo supponimus, quod quanquam nemo sit
cui non cumulatius praemium in coelis Deus largiatur, quam hic in terris ipse
meruit, Idem in confut assert. Luther. articulo. 17.
innumeri tamen sunt, qui long grauiores aerumnas pertulerunt quam ad suorum
suffecissent delictorum expiationem: Secondly, we make this supposition, that
although there is none, to whom God does not give a greater reward in Heaven,
then he has merited and deserved: yet there be many which have suffered
far more grievous griefs and punishments, then would have sufficed to the
expiation and purging away their sins.

This is their doctrine, and is this to believe the forgiveness 2. Pet. 2.
of sins? or is it not rather to deny the Lord Jesus that has bought us?
For I may say with Saint Paul, that Galat. 2.
if righteousness come by the law (or by our satisfaction) then Christ died in
vain. And with what face can these men accuse us of denying this article, the
forgiveness of sins, themselves teaching such blasphemous doctrine, so
manifestly opposite and contrary unto it? Again, they deny the forgiveness
of the punishments due for sin, saying, that Christ has delivered us a
culpa, from the fault or offense, but not a poena from the punishment; or at
leastwise he has delivered us from eternal punishment, but not from
temporal, which must be sustained in Pugatorie, whereby our sins or souls
must be purged, and Gods justice satisfied. And yet the Popes pardons, masses
and dirges may discharge and deliver from it. Wherein first, what do they but
extenuate, and greatly diminish the virtue and power of Christ's death? For if
our Savior Christ have not delivered us from the punishment due to our sins,
what great good has he done us? And if he have discharged us from eternal
punishment in hell, but not from the temporal in Purgatory, then is he not a
full and perfect Savior, but an half Savior. Have you the testimony of all
Antiquity for this doctrine? Tertullian says, Exempto scilicet reatu,
eximi^ur and poena: The guiltiness of sin being taken away, the punishment
Tertull. lib. de baptismo.
is also taken away. And Chrysostom says vbi enim gratia, ibi and venia: vbi
vero venia; illic nulla erit poena: Where grace is, there is forgiveness; and
where forgiveness Chrysostom ad Romans Homil. 8.
is, there shall be no punishment. Saint Augustine says, Ablato ergo peccato,
auferetur and poena pecati: The sin being taken away, the punishment of sin
shall also be taken away. By this let it be discerned who they be that
August. de vera relig. cap. 13
deny that article of the forgiveness of sin. Moreover, let the Christian
reader consider how they attribute first that to their Purgatory, which is
proper to the blood of Christ, which, as S. John says, cleanses us from all
sin: and secondly, more to their Dirges, Masses, Pardons, and such 1. Ioh. 1.
paltries, then they do to the death and passion of Jesus Christ. For they may
deliver from the pains of Purgatory, but Christ's death does not. O coelum non
sudas! o terra, non tremis! and.

But now let us come to your proof of this your accusation of our denying of
this article. Your first reason is, that we acknowledge no such effect in the
Sacrament of Baptism, etc. We acknowledge that baptism is a Sacrament of the
forgiveness of our sins, by the death and passion of our Savior Jesus
Christ, whereby our faith is confirmed, and we assured, that as water washes
away the filth of the body, so all the filth and guiltiness of our sins is
so purged in the blood of Christ, that we be accepted for just and righteous
before God. But we do not acknowledge that Baptism, or any other Sacrament,
do confer grace of themselves, or have grace included in them as in a
vessel: but we affiame that they be seals of Gods promises, and instruments
whereby God works in his elect and chosen people those graces, which he has
in his word promised, and Jesus Christ has purchased for them. But all that
be outwardly baptized, be not inwardly cleansed, as Simon Magus, who being
baptized, was yet Act. 8. 23.
still in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. For the spirit
of God works by them in whom, when and how much it pleases him. Neither do
we believe that Baptism serves only for the remission of sins committed
before it, as you say here, but that the use and benefit of it, pertains to
our whole life, continually to as^ure us, and confirm our faith in the
forgiveness of all our sins by Jesus Christ. And whereas you say, that this
our doctrine is contrary to the express word of GOD, which calls this
Sacrament the lauer of regeneration, for that in it the soul dead by sin is
newly regenerate by grace: I answer that Baptism is so far from being in
this place of Saint Paul expressed, that it is not mentioned, neither
necessarily to be understood. Saint Paul's sweet words be these: When the
hountifulnesse and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by the
works of Tit 3. 4.
righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of the new birth and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on
us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. Where is baptism here
mentioned, or expressed to the lauer of regeneration? Saint Paul does here
attribute this washing, whereby we be regenerate and renewed, to the holy
Ghost alluding as it were to the words of God, by the Prophet Ezechiel: Then
will I power ^xech. 36. 25.
clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: yea from all your filthiness,
and from all your Idols will ^ cleanse you. By this clean water is understood
the spirit of God, as it is expounded in the two next verses following. I
confess that Baptism is a Sacrament and pledge unto us of this washing and
clensing of the holy Ghost, to whom this washing is to be attributed, and not
to baptism, as though it were included in it, or affixed to it: for (as I
said) many be outwardly baptized, which be not inwardly cleansed, but only the
faithful children of God, in whom Gods spirit inwardly works that, which by
the word of God is promised, and in baptism sealed and confirmed. And
therefore this lauer is the spirit of God, by whom we be regenerated and
renewed. Saint Augustine says well: Ea demum miserabilis August. lib. 2 ^le
doct. Christ. cap. 5.
est seruitus signa pro rebus accipere, and supra creaturam corpoream oculum
mentis ad hauriendum aeternum lumen leuare non posse: This is miserable
servitude to take the signs for the things signified, and not to be able to
lift up the eye of the mind above the corporeal creature to receive eternal
light.

Your second proof is, that we allow not the sacrament of Penance, wherein all
actual sins committed after Baptism are cancelled. Your Popish penance
consisting in shriuing to a Priest, receiving absolution from him, and doing
some (...), wil-worshippings appointed by him, we allow not: but true
repentance, which consists in unfeigned sorrow for sin, earnest confession
with remorse of conscience both to God and man offended, and a true reformation
and amendment of life we allow and commend, and do judge that we can do
nothing acceptable to God, which proceeds not from this true repentance.

The third things whereby you would prove that we deny this article of
remission of sins, which you say exceeds all in absurdity, is that we
deny that our sins are perfectly forgiven, but only not imputed, and as it
were veiled or covered with the passion of Christ, etc. Whereunto I answer,
that you here bring an absurd distinction. For what difference is there
between forgiving, not imputing, and covering and hiding of sin? Surely it
seems that David could find no such ods betwixt them as you dream of, whose
words be these: Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered. Blessed is the man, unto whom Psalm. 32. 1.
the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. Does
not David here take these all for one, and attribute blessedness alike to every
one of them? When S. Paul says God was in Christ, and reconciled the world to
himself, not 2. Cor. 5. 19
imputing their sins unto them: what does he mean by not imputing of sin,
but forgiving of sin? Primasius expounds it thus: Non reputans illis delict ^
ipsorum: hoc est, indulgens Primasius in illum locum.
persolam fidem, qu^ gratis donata est: i. Not imputing to the^ their sins:
that is to say, pardoning them by only faith, which is freely given. And
whereas you so much extenuate, Not imputing, and make it not so much as
Forgiving; Chrysostom a man of greater judgment then you, affirms
Chrysosto. i^. 2 Corinthians. hom. 11.
the contrary, and makes not imputing greater then forgiving, in these words:
Attamen cu^m tanta sint nostra pe^cata, non solum non exposcit poenam, sed and
conciliatus est: non solum dimisit, sed neque imputa^it, etc. But where as our
sins be so great, he does not only not require punishment but also is
reconciled with us: and not only has forgiven, but has not so much as imputed
our sins to us. Bernard thinks not so basely of not imputing as you do,
his sweet words be these: Sufficit mihi ad omnem iustitiam Bernard. in Cant.
sermon. 23.
solum habere propitium cui soli peccaui: Omne quod mihi ipse non imputare
decreuerit, sic est quasi non fuerit. Non peccare. Dei iustitia est: hominis
iustitia indulgentia Dei: It is sufficient for me unto all righteousness, to
have him merciful, against whom only I have sinned: whatsoever he has
determined not to impute unto me, is so as though it had never been. Not to
sin is the justice of God: man's justice is Gods mercy. Bernard here says,
that the not imputing of our sins unto us, is as much as though they had never
been committed: And will you say that notwithstanding the not imputing of
them, yet their botches, biles, filth and abomination remain still, exhaling a
most Ephesi. 5. 2
pestiferous sent in the sight of GOD? Is not the sweet smelling sacrifice of
Jesus Christ able so to perfume them and us, that we and all our actions may
be sweet and acceptable Luke 15.
in the sight of God? And if the robe which the Father put upon his prodigal
son could so hide all his rags, that he was dear in his fathers eyes;
cannot the robe of Christ's righteousness so cover and hide all our rags, yea
our botches, and biles, that we may be dear Math. 22. 12.
and precious in the sight of God our heavenly and most merciful father? And
if those that had the marriage garment upon them, were admitted to the marriage,
without regard what the said garment covered: shall not we having ye marriage
garment of Christ's righteousness, be acepted to the marriage of the Lamb,
notwithstanding all the botches and biles which it covers? Yet we do not say
that we can cover or hide all our sins from the piercing eyes of God: but
this we say, that even God himself does hide them with this robe of Christ's
righteousness, and looking on us in the face of Jesus Christ his Son, does
accept us his members, for such as Jesus Christ himself is. And do you not
think that that which God hides is well hid, and shall never come to light?
David says of GOD, Psalm. 85. 2
Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, and covered all their sins.
Does not David here take forgiveness and hiding both for one? And therefore
this your distinction betwixt perfect forgiving, and not Imputing and covering,
is as substantial a one, as that is of your blind and barbarous Schooleman
Richardus de Sancto Victore: Christus Ri. de. S. Victore de potestate ligandi
and soluendi p^r. 1. cap. 14.
potuit dimittere peccata: nos vero non possumus dimittere peccata, sed tantum
remittere. As great difference as there is betwixt dimittere and remittere, so
much there is betwixt forgiving, not imputing, and covering in sin. This is
(as Erasmus says) Frigidissimis distinctionibus omnia confundere: with
frivolous distinctions to confound all Erasmus in vita Hieronymi.
things. And this much for this Article of the Creed, which you do as
foolishly prove, as you falsely affirm that we deny it.

Now I come to the fourth Article that you say the Puritans in effect deny,
which is no less, then Christ to be the Son of God. But who be these
Puritanes that be thus grievously charged? what are their names? why be not
their books named, and sayings produced? These things ought to have been
done, if you had been disposed Page 50.
rather ratiocinari qua^ calumniari, to reason, then to rail and slander.

But to this your malicious and false accusation I will first oppose the true
confession of faith concerning this Article, whereunto all the reformed
Churches whereof Ex. Gall. confessione.
I have either heard or read do assent and agree. We believe and acknowledge
one only GOD, who is one only and simple, essence spiritual* eternal,
invisible, immutable, infinite, incomprehensible, almighty, most wise, good,
just, and merciful; and that in that one and simple divine essence, there be
three persons subsisting, the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost. The Father
the first cause in order, and the beginning of all things; the Son his
wisdom and everlasting word: the holy Ghost his true power and efficacy. The
Son begotten of the Father from everlasting: the holy Ghost from everlasting
proceeding from the Father and the Son: which three persons are not
confounded, but distinct; and yet not divided, but coessentiall, coeternall,
and coequall. If you mislike any thing in this confession confute it: if you
know any of us that maintain any diverse doctrine dissenting from this, name
them, produce their sayings, and quote the places. But you say that these (whom
you term puritanes) peremptorily affirm, that Christ is God of himself, and
not God of God: So that he receives not his divinity from his father. I
answer, that if we consider of Christ absolutely in respect of the essence,
he is (...), God of himself, to whom all things do agree which are spoken of
the divine essence by it self: but if we consider of him in respect of his
person, he is not of himself, but son of the father, yet coeternall and
coessentiall. So says Saint Augustine, Christ us ad se deus August. hom. de
tempor. 38.
dicitur, ad patrem fil^us dicitur: Christ in respect of himself is called
GOD, and in respect of the Father is called son. S. Basil says that it was
an undoubted principle of divinity in all ages: (...) The Godhead to be
begotten neither of it himself, nor of Lib. contra. Eunomium.
any other, but to be (...) unbegotten. And that Christ is God of him self I
prove it thus: He that is Iehoua, is God himself: Christ is Iehoua; ergo
Christ is God of himself. The first proposition cannot be denied: for God is
called Iehoua, because he has his being of himself, and all others have
their being of him: And that Christ is Iehoua, I think you will not deny, and
if you do, it may easily be proved. For he that appeared to Esaias the
Prophet. cap. 6. and is there called Iehoua verse. 3. is said of Saint John
Job. 12. 41.
to be Christ in these words. These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory
and spoke of him. That which Esaias cap. 18. 13. 14. speaks of Iehoua, Saint
Paul Romans 9. 33. expoundeath of Christ. The Angel that appeared to Moses in
the Exodus 3. 27.
bush is called Iehoua: but Christ who is called the Angel of the covenant,
and the Angel of the great council, was that Angel, ergo Christ is Iohoua:
And so consequently is God of himself. And therefore Epiphanius (whom I trust
you will not term a Puritan) calls Christ, (...) GOD Epipha. haeres. 69.
of himself. The Fathers of the Nicene council in calling Christ God of God,
did thereby signify that he is coessentiall, and of the same substance with
the Father, and not as you falsely affirm that he received his divinity of
his Father, which is in effect to make Christ no God. For it is proper to God
to be of himself. The deity is the divine essence, which is one and singular,
and the same wholly in the Father, in the Son, and in the holy Ghost. And so
we acknowledge a Trinity of persons, and a unity of essence, that is one only
God. (...), says Saint Basil etc. it is Lib. 2. contra. Eunomium.
manifest that the names of Father and Son do not signify the essence, but
the proprieties of the persons. So Damascene says, (...). The De orthodox fide
lib. 3. cap. 11.
dietie signifies the nature (or essence) the word Father, the person. And the
essence is wholly in the Father, wholly in the Son, and wholly in the holy
Ghost, as even your great Master of the sentences Peter ^umbard confesses; so
that Peter Lumb. lib. 1. did. 5. cap. ^.
the Father is God of himself, the Son God of himself, the holy Ghost God
of himself: and not three Gods, but one true and immortal God. And therefore
with Athanasius we worship a unity in Trinity, and Trinity in unity.

Here in your margent you say that D. Bucley contendeth to prove it in his
answer to this article, albeit he understand not the reason here aleaged,
for if he did he were too absurd to deny it. What D. Bucley has proved let
the Godly Reader consider and judge: manifest it is that you have not here
disprooued any thing by him alleged, your bare assertion is not to be
accepted. You are not yet to be taken for Pythagoras, of whom his scholars
said, ipse dixit, he has said it: absurd be they that have such conceit of
you, to believe your bare assertions without any demonstrations.

The fifth article, which you say those whom you disdainfully call Puritaines
do deny, is the descension of Christ into Hell. Can you show and name any such
puritanes which omit this article either in rehearsing it, or in expounding it,
as you have done the second commandment of God? I am sure you cannot. Why do
you then say that they deny it? forsooth because they receive not your
exposition of it, to wit, that Christ descended in soul to hell, and was there
as long as his body was in the grave, and there harrowed Hell, and delivered
thence Catechis. Trideat page 69. In Act. 2.
the patriarchs, and all just men there houlden in bondage unto his death, as
your Rhemists write. And do all that teceiue not this exposition deny this
article? Then did your own Doctor Durand deny this article, who held Durand
in. 3. A. 27. 4. 3. 10. P^cus Apol. quaest. ^^^ The Aq^^. 3. quaest. 52.
and published in writing that Christ's soul did not in respect of the
substance and essence thereof, but by effect, efficacy and operation descend
into Hell. Then did John Picus that learned Earl of Mirandula, and Cardinal
Cai^tane, (whom the Pope sent into Germany to suppress Luther) deny this
article, who concur and agree with Durand: yea I might say that then either
Saint Cy^rian or Ruff^n denied this article, who expounds it of Christ's
burial. But you say that these nameles Puritans defend that Christ suffered
the pains of Hell upon the cross, whereby they bl^sp^eme most horribly that
sacred humanity, as if Christ had d^spaired of his salvation. as if GOD had
hated him, and he had hated GOD, etc. I answer that this doctrine of Christ's
suffering the pains of Hell upon the cross, is not so desperate, as your
collections thereof are false, and blasphemous. What desperatnes or absurdity
is this, that Christ our Savior, not in respect of himself, but in that he
became our surety, and took upon him our debts, and bare our sins in his
body upon the wood as Saint Peter says, did bear and endure in his humanity
1. Pe. 2.
the wrath of GOD, and the pains and torments which our sins had deserved, to
deliver us from the wrath of GOD which we by our sins had provoked, and from
the said pains and torments which we had merited. We are not to think, that
Christ did suffer only an external and corporal death, for then he had
showed greater weakness, then many mere natural men have done, who with great
courage and cheerfulness have gone unto Luke. 22. 44. ^ers. 43. Math. 27. 46.
^2.
death: but Christ our Savior was in such an Agony, that his sweat was like
drops of blood trickling down to the ground, so that an Angel appeared from
heaven comforting him: He cried, and said, My God, my God why have thou
forsaken me. Whereby it does evidently appear that he suffered not only an
outward death of the body, but did in his soul wrestle with the pains of
Hell, and bear the burden of GODS wrath, due to our sins, to deliver us from
the same, and to purchase the love and mercy of God unto us. And when the
prophet says of him: He has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows:
Isa. 53. 4. 5. 6.
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities: the
chastisment of our peace was laid upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
Alwe like sheep have gone astray we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid upon him the in^quity of us all. Did not our Savior Christ
here in suffer the punishment which was due to our sins? Saint Paul says,
that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law being made a curse for
us: for Galath. 3. 13.
it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on the tree* yet Jesus Christ
was never accursed of his Father; but he bare in his body and soul, the curse
that was due to our sins, to deliver us from the curse of God, aind to
purchase to us the blessing of God. But these men (who other-wayes are so full
of curious distinctions) do herein err, because they do not with Saint
Augustine put a difference between that which appertained to Christ's own
person, Augustine. psalm. 21 etc.
and that which he suffered in the person and place of us, the which if this
writer or rather slaunderer had don, he might have abstained from these his
blasphemous collections of his own, and not our assertions: As if Christ had
despaired of his Salvation or, GOD had hated him, etc. Where-unto I answer,
that Christ was far from such despair, which properly is a sin in the
reprobate, and not a punishment of Gods justice. And we hold that our Savior
Christ suffered in our person, and for us those torments, which are righteous
punishments of GODS justice against sin, and not such as properly be sins
in the devils, and in wicked and reprobate men, as are despair and hatred of
God. And therefore we confess with our mouths, and believe with our hearts,
that Christ was never hated of his Father, but always the dearly beloved
Son of God, in whom he was always well pleased. But he hated sin, the
which as man had committed, so in man's nature Gods justice was to be satisfied.
The which for that corrupt and sinful man was not able to perform, the Son
of God as I said, became our surety, took upon him our nature, and in the same
has suffered upon the cross, the punishment of Gods anger due to our sins,
and thereby has satisfied Gods justice, pacified his anger, and purchased his
love and mercy to all those that truly believe in him. And so Christ was
tormented with anguish of mind, nor for his sins, as you falsely gather, but
for out sins, which he bare in his body and soul upon the cross: and God
was not enemy to God, but enemy to our sins, which were imputed to Christ,
that his satisfaction and righteousness might be imputed unto us; To conclude
we believe that Christ suffered upon the cross those punishments of sin
which proceed from Gods justice, and be no sins, which in some sense may be
called the pains of hell, the which as Christ by his Deity overcame, and it
was impossible for him to be held and overcome of them: so the devil and the
reprobate shall eternally endure them. And this is no disperate doctrine, but a
most comfortable doctrine to assure us, that in Christ Gods justice is
satisfied, our sins are discharged, hell is conquered, and we from it be
delivered. So that we may with the Apostle say, O death where is thy sting? O
1. Cor. 15. 35.
hell where is thy victory?

The Pamphlet. The Protestants have no mean to determine controversies, and
abolish heresies.
5. Article.
AS the Protestants neither know what they believe, nor why they believe; so
have they no means in their Church to settle them in unity of belief nor to
d^termine controversies, nor to abolish heresies, as has the Catholic Church:
for our Savior Christ by his divine providence did foresee, that heresies were
to arise in his Church: as his Apostle S. Paul does warn us: the which as
plagues were to infect his flock, and therefore he not only forewarned us
of them, but also gave us means how to prevent and extinguish them. He willed
us to hear his Church, if we would not be accounted as Ethnicks and
Publicanes. He ordained Pastors and Doctors, lest we should be carried away
with every blast of vain doctrine. He promised to the Church the assistance of
the holy Ghost, in such sort as they which would not hear her, would not hear
him. The Catholics therefore believing certainly that the Church cannot err:
that the general Counsels cannot deliver false doctrine: that the Pastors and
ancient Fathers with joint consent cannot teach untruths, when heresies spring
up, presently with the voice of the Church pluck them up even by the roots,
and so ever has practi^ed: and after this manner has overthrown al
encounters, false opinions, and errors, which the devil by his ministers ever
planted, or established in the world, and so they have been freed from all
braules and quarrels, in matters of religion. But the Protestants admitting the
sole Scripture, as vmpire and Judge in matters of controversies; and allowing
no infallible interpreter thereof, but remitting all to every man's private
spririt and singular exposition, cannot possibly without error wind themselves
out of the laborynth of so many controversies, wherewith they are now
inueagled, and intricated. And the irreconciliable iarres betwixt them and the
Puritanes in essential points of faith, give sufficient testimony that they
will never have an end, or can have an end, holding those grounds of opinion,
which they obstinately defend. And albeit they go about to bleare the peoples
brains with I know not what unity and conformity in matters of faith and in
the substance of religion, and that their disagreement only consists in
points of ceremonies and trifles of small importance, yet in very deed they
differ in sundry essential points of religion, and although this shift will
perhaps serve to cast a mist over the confused conceits of silly fools, yet no
wise man will ever bleeue them I pray you tell me is not the Kings supremacy a
matter of faith and a chief point of religion, and do not all sound Puritanes
in the world deny it, and defy it. Ask Calvin the Puritanicall Patriarch
what he thought of King Henry the eight for assuming of such a pre-eminence
unto him: Read the Annals of Scotland and you shall find the prefumptious
presbiterie every foot opposing themselves against our Kings authority as
though he had nothing to do with the kirk. Look into the carriage of our
precifians at home, and you shall find them in show to profess it, but in
deeds and effects really to deny it. For if the approve his supremacy, with
what face can they deny his ordinances in matters of Religion? why wear they
not Vestimentes, Surplises, the Cappe and Tippet? Why refuse they to Baptize
with the sign of the Cross? Why subscribe they not to the Book of common
prayer? why obey they not the Ecclesiastical cannons established by his
Majesty's authority? no other reason of this obstinate repugnance can be
yielded, then that in very truth they do not in conscience allow of his
supremacy.

2. Is not the authority of Bishops, their power to create Ministers, their
degree in dignity above ordinary Curates and pastors a matter of faith? and
so neerelie touches the government of the Church, that if this Heretical
order be abolished, the whole form of Christ's Church is presently
confounded.

3. The observation of feasts and holy days infringed by Puritanes,
maintained by Protestants, is it but a ceremony? were not the obstinate
impugning thereof a sufficient reason to censure them for Heretics? Did not
the Council of Nice condemn the Quartoderimeni for Heretics, who would
only have observed their Easter day upon the foureteenth day of the month of
March? what if they had called our precisians to the bar who will have it
wholly abolished? Questionless they would have branded them in a far deeper
degree of heresy then the Quarto-derimani?

4. Is not the observation of Lent and other fasting days a matter of more
moment then trifles, or then things indifferent? Did not Saint Epiphanius
censure Aerius of heresy for denyning these prescript times for fasting? for
albeit they be not precisely set down in Scriptures, and therein commanded to
be observed, yet they being either ordained by the Apostles, or instituted by
the Church, which had authority to appoint fastes at least as well as the
Puritan Presb terie, without doubt he that call^th this holy institution,
either doctrine of devils, or torture of consciences, or restraint of
Evangelical liberty, ought by the judgment of all true Protestants to be
condemned for a Pagan and Infidel, who will not submit his soul to the
censure of the Church.

5. The Puritanes blasphemously pronounce and ignorantly defend that Christ
suffered the pains of hell upon the Cross and that in his passionall agony,
and agonizing grief did principally consist the satisfaction of Christ for the
redemption of man from those eternal torments of hell: and think you this is
a trifle, a rite or ceremony? This faith the Puritans profess, this blaspheny
the Protestants detest.

6. The descention of Christ to hell is (no doubt) but a trifle, a ceremony, a
matter of small importance, it is but an article of our Creed, and yet this
article the Puritanes really deny, the which all Protestants steadfastly
believe.

7. That the second person in Trinity received his divinity from his father is
but a trifle, a point not much material to our belief, and yet this being
denied, the mystery of the holy Trinity can not be believed, for it absolutely
takes away the nature of a son, and consequently the admirable procession of
the second person, and so over throws all the mystery of the Trinity. This
principal part of Christianity Protestants approve, and Puritanes improoue.

8. Iomit here many more petty differences in matters of faith the which were
sufficient to make them condemn one an other not only in accidents and
ceremonies, but also in the substance and principal parts of Religion, as in
that the Precisians deny that in Baptism our sins be remitted, but only
take it for a seal of that grace God gave them by his eternal election. That
Protestants confess that in the Sacrament we are washed by Gods spirit from
original sin.

9. The Puritanes condemn the communion book as irreligious and erroneous: the
Protestants commend it as Orthodoxall and Religious.

10. The Protestants use the Cosse in Baptism as a holy sign fit for the
profession of Christ his faith and Religion; the Puritans exclame against it,
as an humane invention, anda point of superstition.

11. Protestants defend that imposition of hands in confirmation is a sign of
the favor and goodness of GOD toward them. The Puritanes avouch that this is
a flat lie and that they testify therein that does that he never did.

12. The Protestants in fine will use Vestments, Music, Orgaines, Surplesses
and diverse other ceremonies in divine service and administration of Sacraments:
all which the Puritanes condemn as will-worshippe, and not being commanded by
God, to be superstitious. All these I say I omit, and many more which are to
be seen in the Puritanes supplication to the Parliament where two and thirty
differences are assigned, and only have thought good to advertise every
discreet protestant to consider the seven precedent differences for there is
never a one of them which the Puritan defends not to be a matter of faith,
and the Protestant is bound in cons^icence to condemn him, for obstinately
maintaining the contrary, to be an Heretic, and the reason is evident for
the rule and square that Protestants and Puritans both hold to know an heresy
is this, whatsoever is contrary to Gods word is an heresy, if it be
obstinatly defended: but all the foresaid seven points in controversy are by
the one part proved contrary to Gods word, and by the other avouched to be
grounded upon the same, therefore we may well conclude that if one error in
faith with obstinacy defended suffices to make an heretic, what shall we
judge of the Puritan who so manly defends so many? Sure this I will auerr
that they differ in substance of Religion, and not only in accidents and
ceremonies. And finally, they have no argument to prove, that they have the
true Church, true Religion, true faith, which all heretics which ever were,
will not bring to condemn the Church as well as they. For example, they
allege Scriptures, so did the Arrians: they contemn Councels, the Arrians
did not regard them: they challenge to themselves the true interpretation, the
same did all heretics to this day. And to conclude, they call themselves the
little flock of Christ, to whom God has revealed his truth, and illumited
them from above, all which the Donatists with as good reason, and better
arguments did arrogate unto themselves. The same I say of Pelagians,
Nestorians, Eutychians, with all the rabble of other damned heretics. And to
conclude these articles of faith, I say that if the principles of the
Protestants religion be true, Saint Paul himself exhorts us to infidelity,
which I prove thus.

Whosoever exhorts us to doubt of that which we are bound to believe by
faith, exhorts to infidelity. But S. Paul does exhort us to doubt of our
salvation, which we are bound to believe by faith, according to the Protestants
religion. ergo, S. Paul exhorts us to infidelity.

The Mayor is plain: for to doubt of matters in faith is manifest infidelity,
because whosoever doubts, whether God has revealed that which indeed be has
revealed, being sufficiently proposed, as revealed: vertually doubts whether
God says truth or lies.

The Minor is proved by the testimony of S. Paul: Cum timore and tremore
salutem vestram operamini: with fear and trembling work your salvation. All
fear whether it be filial fear or servile fear, inculdeth doubt, the one of
sin, the other of punishment.

Answer.
AS it is false that we neither know what we believe, nor why we believe (as
has been before sufficiently showed) so is it no less false, which is here
boldly affirmed, but faintly proved: That we have no means in our Church to
settle us in unity of belief, to determine controversies, and to abolish
Heresies. We have the word of GOD, which we acknowledge to be the only
touchstone of truth, concerning religion and salvation: We have learned, and
Godly Bishops and Pastors to teach the truth of Gods word, to confute both by
preaching and writing errors and heresies: And we have Synodes, although not
general, yet provincial, wherein controversies may be decided, and Heresies
condemned, as heretofore the truth has been maintained, and Heresies
confuted, and confounded in some provincial Councels, as that called
Gangrense, and some other Africane Councels, as well as they have been in some
general. I would feign know of you, what other and better means, the Church
of God had for the space of three hundred years after Christ's incarnation then
these, to determine controversies, and abolish Heresies. General Councels they
had not before Constantines time, which Pigh. 6. de eccle. Hierarch. cap. ^
Bellarm. tom. 1 contro. 4. lib. 2 cap. 13. Ae^cas Siluius epist. 28. page 802.
therefore your fellow Papist Pighius counts to have been an invention of
his; but your great Rabbin Rob. Bellarmine therein controlleth him, and says
it is false. So well these men be settled in unity of belief. And to your
great Master of Rome (whom you now would make the Oracle of the world) there
was before that time but small respect and regard had, as your own Pope Pius 2.
in these words confesses: Ante Concilium Nicenum sibi quisque viuebat, and ad
Romanam Ecclesiam paruus habebatur respectus: i. Before the Council of Nice,
every one lived to himself, and there was small regard had to the Church of
Rome. Show us therefore what means the Churches of God then had for
maintenance of unity of faith, which we want?

You say that Christ willed us to hear his Church, if we Matthew. 18. 17.
Bellar. contro. 1. lib. 3. cap. 5
would not be accounted for Ethnicks and Publicanes. The which place your said
Rob. Bellarmine (Reader) full wisely alleges to prove the Pope and his
Council to be the supreme Judge of controversies. As though our Savior Christ
there spoke of deciding of controversies in doctrine, or of expounding the
Scriptures; or by the Church meant the Pope and his council, and that every
man against whom his brother trespasseth, must go to the Pope and his council
to make his complaint. These be vanities and follies, which nullo impellente
ruunt, and need no confutation. You further allege out of Ioh. 14. 17. that
Christ promised unto the church the assistance of the holy Ghost: where, by the
church you mean the Pope and his council, as your Master Bellarmine has
taught you, who writes thus: Sed hic in genere dicimus, iudice^ very sensus
Idem ibid. ca. ^
Scripturae and omnium controuersiarum, esse ecclesiam, id est Pontificem cum
concilio, in quo omnes Catholici conueniunt: We generally say, that the church
is the judge of the true sense of the Scripture, and of all controversies, that
is to say, The Pope with the council, wherein all Catholics do assemble (or
rather dissemble together). But our Savior Christ made this promise to his
disciples, saying: I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Ioh:
14, 16, 17
comforter; that he may abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth,
whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him:
but ye know him* for he dwells with you and shall be in you. This promise
pertains not to all the successors of the Apostles, but to all them that
truly fear God, and believe and obey the holy doctrine which Christ delivered
to his Disciples, and which they preached: the which when you shall soundly
prove, that your Popes and councels do, then we will grant that this promise of
Christ belongs to them. In the mean time we will follow Chrysostomes good
counsel: Si videris aliquem Euangelica Chrysostom. Hom. d^ S^nc^o and adorando
spiritu.
repetentem, profecto spiritum sanctum habet. Veniet enim spiritus sanctus vt
recordari vos faciat eorum, quae docui Si quis igitur eorum, qui dicuntur
habere spiritum sanctum dicat aliquid a seipso, and non ex Euangelijs, non
credit, meam doctrinam sequimini: If thou see any man speaking out of the
Gospel, surely he has the holy Ghost. For the holy Ghost shall come to put you
in remembrance of those things which I have taught you. If therefore any of
them, which are said to have the holy Ghost, do speak any thing of himself,
and not out of the Gospel, believe him not, but follow my doctrine. Whereas
you say, that you believe certainly that the church cannot err, that the
general councels cannot deliver false doctrine, etc. I answer, that you
foolishly beg that which is in question. For as we acknowledge councels
assembled of Godly, learned, and modest men, which simply seek the glory of
God, and the profit of his Church, are good means to suppress errors and
heresies, and to abolish abuses and enormities, so to affirm that general
Counsels cannot err, or deliver false doctrine, is most false and absurd, as
by many both reasons and examples might be proved. But for shortness sake I
will touch but a few examples.

The council of four hundred Priests of Israel erred, and Satan was a false
spirit in the ^outh of them all to the 1. King 22. 6. 8 22. Matthew 26. 3. 65.
66. Act. 4. 5. 18.
destruction of Achab that cursed king of Israel. The council of the Priests
of Judah erred in co^demning Jesus Christ to death. The council of the high
Priest and other Priests, Rulers, Elders, and Scribes erred in forbidding
Christ's disciples to speak or teach in the name of Jesus. The council of
Neocaesarea erred in judging hardly and falsely of second marriages, which Gods
word allows. Rom: Council. Neoca sar. Can. 7.
7. 3. 1. Cor. 7. 39. the words of the council be these: Presbyterum conuiuio
secundarum nuptiarum interesse non debere, maxim cum paecipiatur secundis
nuptiis poenitentiam tribuere: A priest ought not to be present at the feast of
second marriages, specially because he is commanded to appoint Disti^st cap. 20
de libellis.
penance to second marriages. This council although it were provincial was
confirmed by Pope Leo the fourth, as appears by Gratian, and the Papists
hold, that provincial, Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 17.
councels confirmed by the Pope cannot err. The council of Ariminum, wherein
were assembled above four hundred Bishops, horribly erred, in maintaining
the blasphemous doctrine of Arius. The like did the Councels of Millaine,
Seleucia, and of Tyrus. The second Council of Ephesus erred, and maintained
the false doctrine of Eutyche^. These councels the Papists confess to have
erred, and why? because they were not allowed and confirmed by the Bishop of
Rome. A simple and shameless shift: as though the Bishop of Rome had in those
days power either to call or confirm Councels any more then the other
Patriarks had. In that second Council of Nice (most unlike unto the first) not
only the wicked worshipping of Images was allowed, and the Scriptures for the
confirmation thereof most shamefully abused and detorted as appears by the
said corrupt council, and Calvin and Calvin. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 11. Sec. 14.
Mart. Ci^mni. exam. Council. Tridet part. 4. de imagine. Action. 5.
Mart. Chemnicius have largely showed: but also in the same was decreed, that
the Angels have bodies, and that the soul of man is corporal, and therefore
they may be painted; the which be soul errors. If you will not allow the
worshipping of Images to be an error, then you cannot say but that the
Council of Constantinople under Leo the Emperor, where were present 338.
Bishops, and another of Frankford under Charles the Great, in which the
worshipping of Images was condemned, did err. Some of these Councels erred: To
omit for brevity sake Plati^a in Stepha. 6.
many other Counsels, a Council at Rome under Stephanus the sixth, or as some
reckon, seventh, condemned Pope Formosus and his doings. Another Council at
Rauenna under Pope John the tenth, restored Formosus, and Platina in. ^oan 10.
condemned Stephen and the acts of his Council. I hope you will not, or
cannot say, but that one of these Councels erred. Another Council at Rome
under Pope Nicholas the second caused that excellent learned and godly De
co^se. Inst. 2. Ego Bereng. S^ss* 13
man Berengarius to recant, and to confess that the very true body of Christ
is indeed handled, and broken by the Priests hands, and torn wtth the teeth of
faithful people. The which is a gross, false, and blasphemous doctrine. The
Council of Constance erred most wickedly in taking away the cup of the Lord
from the lay people, contrary to the word of God, and the testimony of all
antiquity. And that their last Council of Trident has foully erred, and
confirmed false doctrine, repugnant to the truth of Gods word, and the Canons
of ancient Counsels, both these excellent learned men Martinus Chennicius and
Innocentius Gentilletus have sheed: and we do, and will prove to the
consciences of all those, whom the God of this world has not blinded. I am not
ignorant what coullors the Jesuit Bellarmine seeks to cast upon the
foresaid errors of these Councels, and such others, and what simple shifts he
seeks to elude and avoid them, ye which I will not stand here to answer, but I
will refer the reader to the answers of Lamb. Danaeus and to that excellent
man of blessed memory D. Wbitakers, where he may find the weakness and
nakedness of Bellarmines said shifts plainly discovered, and the same fully
confuted, the which I thnke will stand (as other of his works have done) long
undefended.

Whereas you note in your margent the ancient Councels of Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus, and Chalcedon, wherein old heretics were confuted and condemned: and
thereby claim them to appertain to your Church. I answer, that as it is most
certain, that those Councels were not called, nor governed and directed by the
Bishops of Rome, as now by usurpation they are; so you shall never prove, that
those Godly and learned fathers agreed with you in many great and principal
points of Christian doctrine. It were easy to show that sundry things were
condemned by them, which be received and used by you: And therefore you vainly
brag of their names, whose doctrine and proceedings you have forsaken: neither
have you so much by disputation in Councels, as by cruel persecution through
fire and faggot, suppressed such as in all ages have complained of your idolatry
and abominations, as plainly appears by histories.

As it is true that we admit the holy Scripture, or rather the holy Ghost,
speaking in the scripture, to be the supreme vmpier and Judge in matters of
controversies, and acknowledge him to be the only infallible interpreter of
his own words; so is it false, that we admit no other judge, but remit all to
every man's private spirit, and singular exposition. We say, that as the holy
Ghost in the Scriptures is the high infallible judge and interpreter of the
Scriptures, so we acknowledge inferior Judges and interpreters both private
and public. Every man is a private judge to discern and judge of the doctrine
which he hears or reads in the Scriptures. So Saint Paul says: I 1. Cor
10. 15. 1. Io^. 4. 1. Ibid. 14. 29. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20.
speak as unto wise men, judge ye what I say, Let the Prophets speak two or
three, and let the other Judge. Despise not prophesying. Try al things, and
keep that which is good. Abstain from al apperance of evil. Beloved, beleeu:
not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God. The spiritual
man judges all 1. Cor. 2. 15. Heb. 5. 14 John. 10. 5.
things. Good Christians ought to have their wits excersised to discern both
good and evil. The true sheep of Christ hear and know his voyc^, and they
will not follow a stranger, but they fly from him; for they know not the voice
of strangers, whereby our Savior christ shows, that those which be his
sheep, and be truly gathered into his fold, can judge and discern between
his voye sounding in the Scriptures, and the voice of strangers, delivering a
strange doctrine differing and dissenting from the same, such is the false
doctrine of the Church of Rome. We also admit public judges of controversies,
both severally, as learned Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors; who may give their
sentences and judgments in matters in question: and coniunctly, when they be
assembled in Synodes and Councels to examine questions of greater difficulty,
and to decide the same. Howbeit their judgments be not infallible Psalm. 11 6.
(for all men be liars, and subject to ignorance and error) neither have they
any absolute power and authority to judge after their own spirit or mind, but
according to the canonical Scriptures: from the which if they be found to
decline and swerve, their judgments are not to be followed. But your meaning
is, that the Pope with his Council is the supreme vmpire and judge in matters
of controversy, and the infallible interpreter thereof. How they have most
falsely interpreted the Scriptures, I have in some part showed before: and that
he who is a party, and whom a great part of Christendom does accuse to be
Antichrist and guilty of most grievous crimes, as of impiety, idolatry,
tyranny over the Church, sacrilege, treason, etc. should be judge in this
his own cause, is against all law and reason. It is written in your own Canon
law, Si Vide Brutum Fulmen. 16. qu^st. consuctudo in glossa. Distinct 40. Si
Papa in gloss.
Papa cum aliquo causam h^bet, non debit ipse esse iudex. i. If the Pope have
matter with any other, he ought not himself to be judge. And again, Quando
Papa est in statu, qui plerisque est offendiculo and scandalizat Ecclesia^, nec
est corrigibilis, tunc non potest esse iudex, quia videtur male sentire de
fide. i. When the Pope is in that state, that he is an offense to many, and
scandalizeth the Church, and is incorrigible; then he cannot be judge, because
he seems to be of an evil faith. And even so not only we do, but also many
of his own favorers have justly accused the Pope to be.

You vainly and falsely exaggerate controversies and irreconciliable iarres (as
you term them) among us in essential points of faith. But why do you not
particularly express some of those essential points of faith? Surely because
you cannot. I confess there has bin in our Church some controversy
concerning external ceremonies, and form of government, as there has been
heretofore between good men; as between Peter and Paul between Paul and
Barnabas: between Anicetus Bishop of Rome Galat. 2.
and Polycarpus: between Chrysostom and Epiphanius, and many others: who all
were godly men, agreeing in unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God.
But you that are so eager in traducing our iarres, cannot see your own
manifold and irreconcilable iarres and controversies among your selves. As
between your Schoolmen, namely, your Thomists and Scotists, differing in
sundry matters of moment, as not only Erasmus has declared, but also John
Bishop of Rochester has affirmed. Also between Assert. Luth. art 36. page 339.
your Dominican and Franciscan Friars, about the conception of the virgin Mary,
debated not only by words, but also by blows, which controversy was never
yet decided, but in the Council of Basil, which the Papists count a
schismatic Council, and in the same was the false doctrine approved, to
wit, that the Virgin Mary was conceived without sin. You cannot see your
iarres between your great Master of Sentences Peter Lumbard (who iustled
Saint Paul out of the schools) and your Sorbonist Doctors of Paris, which
found and condemned 26. errors in him: nor the iarres between Ambrosius
Catharinus Archbishop of Minorien, and Dominicus de Soto confessor to Charles
the fifth, concerning assurance of Gods grace, predestination, original sin,
freewill, and induration of a sinner, as in their bitter books one against
another about these matters appears: nor ye iarres between the said
Catharinus and Cardinal Caietane, whom Catharinus charge with 200. errors,
of which he writes thus: Quae vt non solum euidenter falsa merito culpari
possent, veru^ etiam v^ Christian^ religioni perniciosa. etc. Which may be
worthily reproved not only as evidently false, but also as pernicious to
Christian religion. I might mention many mo iarres among the Papists, and
namely between the secular Priests and Jesuits, as appears by their bitter
books one against another, and particularly that of Willam Watson a secular
Priest lately published in print against the Jesuits, which this cauilling
exclamor cannot espy, who can see a moate in our eyes, but cannot behold great
beams in their own. but for shortness sake I omit them at this present, only
the learned may see how that great Rabbi Rob. Bellarmine iarreth with all other
his pewfellowes, and in very many essential points of doctrine dissenteth from
them, and controuleth them. Whereof also Johannes Pappus has made a large
collection.

Here in your later edition and addition, you make a particular declaration of
our iarres in matters of religion, but all grounded upon your own ba^e words
without any allegation of places and testimonies whereby they should be
confirmed, and the reader persuaded and satisfied. But you think your bare
assertion will be sufficient, for that your favorers (whom you have with a
strong delusion bewitched) will take your naked asseuerations for sound
probations.

You say that we go about to bleare the peoples brains with I know not what
unity and conformity in matters of faith. etc. But who have not only bleared,
but also stark blinded the brains of the people, heaven and earth can witness;
even they that have taken away the key of knowledge, have kept the light of
Gods word under the busshell of a strange tongue, and have taught ignorance to
be the mother of devotion, as before is declared. But let us come to the
particular iars which you say are amongst us. The 1. is the kings supremacy,
the which you say all sound Puritans in the world deny and defy. The which is
a most false slander, for there is neither Protestant, nor such as it pleases
you to call Puritans, so farre-forth as I know and believe, but as they deny
and defy the Popes wicked supremacy which he has usurped and whereby he has
tyranized over the Church of God and Sovereign Princes: so they do unfeignedly
confess and acknowledge the kings Supreme power and authority in his kingdoms
and dominions in all causes, and over al persons both ecclesiastical and
temporal or political. They all say with Saint Paul, that every soul ought
to be subject to the higher powers, whether they be (as Saint Chrysostom
says) Apostle, or Evangelist, or Prophet, or whatsoever he be; for this
subjection does not ouer-throwe God-linesse. They all confess that it
belongs to his royal dignity to see and procure, not only justice to be
executed, and peace mayntained: but also that God be truly and sincerly
served according to his will revealed in his word. And that he ought to
suppress and punish the transgressions not only of the first table of Gods
commandments, but also of the second in abolishing all Idolatry, superstition
and wicked worshippinges, and in removing and punishing those that do commit
them. They all confess that he is next and immediately under God subject to the
censure, of none upon earth. If you know any Protestant or Puritaine that
teaches or writes otherways, allege their words, and produce the places.

But you say that Calvin (whom it pleases you to call the Puritanicall
Patriarch) thought not well of King Henry the eights supremacy, I answer. that
Calvin (of blessed memory) well liked and allowed such authority in Kings and
magistrates, as we acknowledge to be in our gracious King, and his Majesty
claymeth and uses.

This Doctrine Calvin most soundly sets down both in many places of his
works, and especially in his Institutions lib. 4 chap. 20.

But Calvin justly misliked that power and authority which that great enemy of
Gods truth, and parasitycall flatterer Stephen Gardener did attribute to King
Henry, the same in effect which before they had acknowledged to be in the Pope,
to do in a manner what he would in the service of God: For Calvin says, that
Gardener being at In Amo^ cap. 7.
Ratisbone, and dealing about matters of religion disputed not by arguments,
nether greatly cared for the testimonies of the Scriptures, but said that it
was in the Kings will and pleasure, to abrogate ordinances and to ordain new
rites and orders. That the King might apoint the people to eat flesh this or
that day; that he might forbid Priests to marry wives, that he might take
away the cup from the Lay people in receiving the Sacrament of Christ's supper.
This was that which Calvin misliked, and our gracious Sovereign nether
challenges, nor exercises.

He acknowledges himself to be Gods minister and servant, and that it
belongs to his imperial crown and dignity (which he has received from GOD)
to see and provide that GODS word be truly preached, that GOD according to his
own will therein revealed be rightly worshipped and served, and that such
decent and holy orders be used in the Church, as truly tend to GODLY
edifications. Of the presbiteries dealing in Scotland I am ignorant. But that
they opposed themselves against our Kings authority, as though he had nothing
to do with the kirk you generally affirm, but do not particularly prove. It
may appear by their subscribing to the second Heluetian confession of faith,
that they ever have, and always will both subscribe See the 2. Heluet.
con^ession cap. 30.
and swear to the doctrine of the Kings authority over all persons, and in
all causes in such sort as here before is set down. Hereby I am moved thus to
conceive of them. If any be otherways minded I approve them not, nor their
adherents,

The same I say of those whom you call praecisions at home who not denying the
kings authority in eclesiastical causes yet forbear the things here by you
named, because they be not persuaded of the Lawfulnes of them, and for that (as
that most reverend and learned father Bishop Iuell says) they have b^ene of
them of your part foully abused to filthy purposes, and because they would not
gladly in any appearance show themselves like unto them, that have so Defen. of
the Apol. Part. 3. cap. 5. Di^^s. 1. Page. 400.
untruly and of long deceived the world. etc. But leaving these to their own
defense, certain it is, that neither the Presbitery in Scotland, nor these
praecisians in England, have ever made any show of such horrible, barbarous,
and traiterous practices against the Kings not only authority, but also life
and safety, as cursed Papists, and devilish Jesuits or rather Iebusites have
done.

As touching the second matter you object of the authority of Bishops: I do
know none that do so hardly and injuriously judge of it, as you here do, in
calling it (if your own fingers, or your Printer have not deceived you) an
heretical order. Howbeit we make it not so a matter of faith that salvation
depends on it. But we believe that God may be glorified, in that his holy
word is truly preached, and effectually received, and good order in the Church
used, where the authority of Bishops is allowed and received, and where the
same is not observed: for as in the political estate there be diverse orders of
government, as Monarchy Aristocratie, and Democratie, which have been, and as
yet are used to the good of the people: so in the Ecclesiastical estate there
may be diverse forms of regiment, under which God may be truly worshipped, the
people unto salvation edified, sin suppressed, and good order in the Church
observed. And although there be some diversity of opinions amongst us, which
is the best form of Ecclesiastical regiment; yet in this we al concur and
consent, that the meanest and worst which is in any of the reformed Churches is
better, and more to the glory of God, and true comfort of the people, then that
exorbitant, insolent, and tyrannical government is, which your great Monarch
the Pope has to the dishonor of Princes, and calamities of countries long
excersised.

For the third thing alleged concerning our iarring, it seems that you draw
very low, when you object unto us dissension about feasts and holy days. I
know neither Protestant (nor, as you distinguish them) Puritan, who accoumpt
them (the Sabbath day excepted) as matters of faith and salvation: but that
they may be used or refused, as to them in authority shall be thought meet.
Socrates the Ecclesiastical Historiographer says that neither Lib. 5. cap.
22. fol. 248.
Christ nor his Apostles did command any thing concerning holidaies: and that
it was the scope and purpose of the Apostles, not to give laws of holidaies,
but to bring men to good life and godliness. Your own friends and favorers
have misliked the multitude of your holy days. Annot. in Math. 1.
Erasmus says, that in the days of Saint Hierome there were but few Festival
days, Nunc feriarum neque finis neque modus est; but now there is neither end
nor measure of Ja argum. in Tertul. de corona militis.
Hollidaies. Beatus Rhenanus, writing of these holydaies says: Quarum
antiquitus mira paucitas. Holydaies in old time were very few.

As for that you write of the Quarto-decimani, I find that the Council of
Nyce did take order that Easter day should universally be kept after one sort
and order, and Ruffin. lib. i. c. p. 6
that not upon the fourteenth day of the Moon, as the East Churches had used
it, and many did still observe it. But that the Council did condemn them for
heretics, Haeres. 50. de Haeres. 29.
I find not in the Canons of it expressed. I am not ignorant that Epiphamus
and Augustin^ do number the Quaterdecimans among heretics. The which it may
seem they did, over obstinatly, partly to much follow the fashion of the
Jews; whose law concerning that matter was expired and nailed to Christ^
cross, partly resist the decree of that godly Council, which did therein
seek the peace and unity of the Church, which had been too much distracted
and troubled by it, especially by the means of Victor Lib 55. cap. 25.
Bishop of Rome as appears by Eusebius.

Concerning your fourth matter of fasting, neither you do make proof, nor I
do accknowledge any controversy in this Church of England: but that all will
willingly Defen. of the Apol. part. 1. cap. 2 diuis ^t part 2. cap. 14. diuis.
1.
subcribe unto and approve that which hereof both Bishop Jewel did write
heretofore, and Doctor Abbot of late in his answer to D. Bishops Epistle 55.
4. Page 33. and 55. 18. Page 142. etc. to whose learned writings by public
authority published, I do for shortness sake refer the reader.

Of your fifth matter I have entreated sufficiently before, and it has been
delivered by Doctor Fulke and others with approbation of public authority. If
any singular person hold any singular opinion dissenting from the same, it
ought not to praeiudice ye doctrine generally received and approved in the
Church. Yea this doctrine is not disliked by your Angelical doctor Thomas de
Aquino, as you may read Sum. part. 3. Quest 46. The same I say of your sixth
concerning Christ's discending into hell, in the exposition whereof, if there be
some diversity among us, there is the like in the followers and favorers of
the Church of Rome, as I have showed before of Durandus, and picus Mirandula,
to whom may be added the aforesaid Ibid. quest. 52.
Thomas Aquinas. Concerning the seventh doctrine which you object: I do
neither know, nor you by any proof do show any difference to be among us. We
al do accknowledge and believe Christ to be the Son of the Father, and (...)
God of himself as Epiphanius says, and is before declared. And as Bellarmine
dare not condemn Contro. 2. lib. 2. ca. 19
our doctrine herein uttered by Calvin, but cauilleth at the matter of his
speech: So his brother Gregory de Valentia a Jesuit, approves it, saying:
filius Lib. 1. de Trinita. cap. 2. and lib. 2 cap. 17.
vt est persona est ex alio: vt simplicissimum ens non est ex alio. The son
in respect of his person is of an other (Viz the Father) in respect of his most
simple essence, is not of an other.

You say, that you omit many ^o petty differences in matters of faith etc.
The which as you would not have spared, if you could have found them: So you
might have omitted these before mentioned, for any other proof you have made
of them besides your bare word, or any truth that is contained in them.
Touching the doctrine of Baptism, you would feign find a knot in a rush, a
difference where none is. We all believe that Baptism is a seal of Gods
covenant with us in Jesus Christ, and a sacrament of our regeneration in him^
and that God in due time, sometimes before, and sometimes after Luke 1. 15 Act.
10. 44
works inwardly by his spirit in his elect and chosen that which outwardly is
signified, Baptism, in purging them from the guiltines of their sins, and
sanctifying them to newnes of life. But neither one nor other of us believe
that Baptism does ex opere operato purge and cleanse all that be baptized.
Simon Magus was outwardly Act. 8. 13.
baptized, and yet remained still in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity. If you know any diversity among us herein, name the persons, set
down the places, and carry not matters thus in a clowd, to the diffaming of
the faithful, and the deceiving of your over affectionate favorers and
followers of you in your follies.

I know no Puritanes that condemn the communion book as irreligious or
erroneous although some do think of it as of translations, that some
imperfections be in it. And has not your Jupiter Capitolinus the Pope in
reforming the Missals and Primers, and in leaving out and altering sundry
things that were in them, confessed imperfections, yea and corruptions to have
been in them? What has bin ye judgment of your own Catholics of Espen. in
Com. in. 1. Timoth. di. gres. l. p 22. ex ^dan. lib. 3. de interpret. Scrip.
cap. 3.
them, appears by these words of Espenseus Lindanus proponit Episcopi
Lugdunensiis quaerelam de Missalibus etc. Lindan propounds the complaint of
the Bishop of Lions for the purging of Missals and Antiphonaries saying we
have corrected the Antiphonarie by cutting away such things as seemed to be
superfluous, false, and blasphemous. Which Bishop (says Lindan) if he did see
our Missals, and Antiphonaries, O good GOD With what name would he paint or
call them? in which secret pray^rs be defiled with most filthy faults? But our
sins do not suffer any amendment by the fault of the Bishops, which are
slack herein Hereby you may see, what was the judgment of three of your
own Catholic Bishops of your missalls and other books of divine service.
Set down if you can the names of any of them, whom you call Puritanes,
that have so sharply censured the Communion book, and have charged it with
such filthy faults, as these Popish prelates have imputed to your
Masse-bookes. etc. The sign of the Cross in Baptism is a matter in
comparison of matters of faith and salvation, of small moment: the which though
some refuse as not commanded in the word of GOD, and greatly by you abused to
Idolatry and sorcery, yet it is in our CHVRCH retained, not as appartayning to
the substance of Baptism, or that the want of it does any thing derogate from
the perfection of Baptism, but as an ancient ceremony which long and
universally has been retained in the Church of GOD. Concerning confirmation I
know none but that as they do all with one mouth and heart condemn your
making of it without any warrant of Gods word a Sacrament, and your attributing
more virtue to it, then to Baptism, and your defiling of it with superstitious
ceremonies, so they do in unity of Spirit acknowledge it to be a good and
lawdable order in the Church, for children after they have been baptized and
so well instructed in the Principles of christian religion, that they be able
in some good measure to render an account of their faith, to be by imposition
of hands confirmed, that is approved, and admitted to the receiving of the
holy Sacrament of Christ's Supper. Touching the use of Surplesses, organs, etc.
in divine service I say that men may differ in opinions of these things, and
agree in unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of God; Socrates before
named says well: (...), etc. No religion observes the same rites, although
they embrace the same doctrine, for they that be of the same faith, do differ
amongst themselves concerning rites and ceremonies. If Saint Peter after he
had received miraculoufly the gift and graces of the holy Ghost, was not fully
persuaded of the abrogation of the ceremonies of the law, and the vocation of
the gentiles: it is no marvel if men now (nothing to be compared to him) be
not fully persuaded of external ceremonies and orders, although they be
thoroughly settled in the truth of the doctrine of faith.

Thus these seven differences with the rest by you set down we have
examined, and find them light upon the balance. And although you auerre much,
yet you prove little. The GOD of patience and consolation give unto Romans 15, 5.
us and you, that we may be like minded one toward an other according to
Christ Jesus, that we may all with one mind and one mouth praise God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Whereas you say that we have no argument to prove, that we have the true
Church, true religion, and true faith, but such as al heretics have ever used:
I answer, that we have that argument and proof for these things, which
although Heretics have falsely pretended, as popish heretics now do, yet the
Godly learned Fathers have sincerely used. And that is the holy word of God,
the only touchstone of truth and pillar of the Church: for as the Church 1.
Tim. 3. 15
in one respect, is the pillar of truth as Saint Paul says: so in another, the
truth is the pillar and prop of the Church, as Chrysostom. in illum locum ho*
mil. 11. Math. 4. 4, 7 10. Math. 19. 4. ibid. 22, 29. Luke 24. 27. 32 44, 46
Romans 1, 2. and 3 21. and 4, 3.
Chrysostom says: For by what means else have the Godly and learned Fathers in
all ages confuted heresies, and proved the Church, but by the scriptures? by
them our Savior Christ* foiled the devil; and put him to flight. By them he
answered the Pharisees. By them he confuted the Sadduces. By them he proved
himself to be the promised Messiah, and Savior of the world. By them Saint
Paul confirmed the Gospel which he preached: By them he persuaded the Jews
those things which concerned Christ Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and
out of the Act. 21. 23. ibid. 18, 2, 8
Prophets. By them Apollos confuted the Jews, with great vehemency, showing
by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ. By them the Godly and learned
Fathers confuted and confounded the Arians and other Heretics, whom you here
name, as by their books and particular sayings it evidently appears.
Athanasius speaking of the Godly Athanas. de de. cretis Nicen. Synod. page 528
decrees of the council of Nice, against the Arians writes thus: Atque harum
rerum non aliunde nos quam ex scripturis persuasionem habemus that is, We be
persuaded of these things, by no other means but by the Scriptures. Epiphanius
says: In Scripturis sanctis Trinttas nobit Epip^. contra p^^umaiomachos
haeres. 7^.
annu^tiatur ac creditur citra curiositatem, etc. The Trinity is in ye holy
Scriptures preached unto us, and without curiosity believed. And that by the^
al doctrines are to be confirmed, and al errors and heresies to be confuted,
they plainly and plentifully show. Tertullian says, that if Heretics Tertul.
lib de resurrec carnes. E^iph. contra p^ulum Samosa haeres 66 Basii epist 80.
be brought to examine and try their questions only by the Scriptures they
cannot stand. Epiphanius says: that we are not to discuss questions, by our
own wits and reasons, Sedex Scripturarum consequentia. By the consequence of
the Scriptures. Saint Basil says: Let us stand to the arbitrament of the
Scripture inspired of God, and with whom be found doctrines agreeable to
those divine words, let the truth be judged to be with them. Constantine said
unto the Bishops in the Nicene Council. The Evangelical and Apostolical
books, and the Oracles of the Theod. lib. 8. cap. 7 sol. 284.
Prophets do plainly instruct us of GOD, wherefore laying away all enimitie
and discord, let us take the explication or resolution of the questions in
controversy out of those saying inspired of GOD. So says Saint Augustine:
Verum nos sacris literis accommodemus auditum, etc. August. in Euang Joan.
tract. 60. August. de cura pro mortuis cap. 2.
Let us hearken unto the holy Scriptures, and according to them let us help by
the grace of God to dissolve this question. And again. Non secundu^ opinionem,
etc. We must consider of this matter not according to y^ common opinion, but
according to the holy Scriptures of our religion. And of y^ Church he says
thus: Sed vtrum ipsi ecclesiam De vnitate ecclesiae. cap. 16.
teneant non nisi diuinarum Scripturaru^ canonicis libris ostendant: but
whether they have y^ church, let them show by no other means, but by the
Canonical books of the divine Scriptures. Chrysostom says y^ we cannot know,
Chrisostom in Math. Homil. 44.
which is the true Church of Christ, Nisi tantummodo per Scripturas: but only
by the Scriptures. Therefore by the Scriptures prove your doctrine, and show
your Church. Math, 4.
But you say the Arians and others Heretics alleged the Scriptures:
whereunto I add, that so did the Devil also, but in such sort as you and your
fellows do in mangling them, and falsely expounding and applying them, as I
have in some part before showed. I am content to join this issue with you,
that they with be proved, to deprave, detort, mangle, and falsely expound and
apply the scriptures, be heretics, and to be condemned with these old
heretics whom you here name. To whom whether you or we be more like, let
the upright Reader indifferently judge. The Arians seeing that they could have
nothing out of the Scriptures fled (as Athanasius says) unto the Fathers, and
even so do you. The Arians used subtle distinctions Athanas. tom^ 2.
to elude and shift of the truth, and so do you. They denied the person of
Christ: and you deny the office of Christ, in not acknowledging him to be our
only Prophet and teacher, whose only voice we must hear and obey: nor the
only King and head of his Church, nor our only high Priest with the sweet
smelling sacrifice of himself once for ever offered, to redeem and reconcile
us unto God, nor our only mediator to make intercession for us. The Arians did
cruelly persecute the true Christians, Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 17. Socrates lib.
1. cap. 17. zozo. in lib. 4. cap. 27. Gregor. Nazi. anz artic ad Arianos.
and so do Papists, when power is in their hand to do it. The Arians when they
could not prevail against that excellent man Athanasius, fell to rail upon
him, and to slander him, accusing him of adultery, murder, and sorcerie: and
even so do you now deal with such as for their godliness and learning may
well be compared with Athanaesiu^ I mean especially Caeluin, whom the Author
of that unlearned libell and beastly book entitled, A quartron of reasons of
Catholic religion, etc. is not ashmed 5. reason. pa. 30.
to call a sear backed Priest for Sodomie. O thou shameless man, or rather
monsterlart thou not ashamed to slander and belie such a man? of whom they
that knew him, did truly write of him, ips^ a quo potuit virtutem discere
virtus, Theo Beza.
that even virtue it self might (as it were) have learned virtue of him. How
do thou know that Calvin was such a man? I assure my self that thou did
never see him nor know him: yea, I nothing doubt but that thou wast scarcely
borne when he died. And how do thou know y^ he was subject to such filthy
sin? where was he ever accused or convicted of such a matter? In that City
adulteries be punished by death, and would Sodomie have bin winked at in the
Preacher? And if it were not known there, how do thou know it? But I will
not insist any longer in co^futing this shameless slander. For most true it
is which Tully says: Nonne vt ignis in aquam coniectus continuo restinguitur
Cicero p^o Ros^^o. Com.
and refrigeratur, sic referuens falsum crimen in purissimam castissimamque
vitam collatum statim concidit and extinguitur? As fire being cast into water
is straight ways quenched: so a fervent false crime and slander being cast
into a most pure and chaste life (such as Caluines was) forth with falls down
and is extinguished. And even so let this (...), i. slanderer, and Bolsec the
Apostata, and all other rail and slander what they can, yet Caluines memory
with God and all good men will be blessed for ever. And this raiser herein
shows himself like not only to the Arians, but also to that ancient enemy
to Christianiti^ Porphyrius, who, as Eusebius says, going about to reprehend
and find fault with the Scriptures and Preachers of the Word, not being able to
reprove their doctrine: (...): ^useh. Eccles. Histor. lib. 6. cap. 19.
wanting reasons, he fell a railing and slaundering the Preachers.

But to return to my matter, let the reader also with indifferency consider
who be like to the Donatists, Pelalagians, Nestorians, and Eutychians, we or
the Pap^sts. The Donatists affirmed the Church to have perished from the rest
of the world, and to have remained only with them in Africa: do not the
Papists in like manner affirm only them to be the Church of God, which in a
part of Europe be under the obedience of the Bishop of Rome, unless now they
will add the West Indians, of whom as the Spaniards have murdered many
millions: so peradventure a few be either persuaded or coacted to profess
Popery, and submit themselves to the Pope of Rome. But the Christian Churches
in Grecia, Aethiopia, Armenia, Muscouia and other countries, they acknowledge
not for the Church of God: because they do not subject themselves unto ye
Church of Rome: we acknowledge al them to be of the Church of God, which in all
the world hold the truth in the chief and sundamentall points of Christian
religion. The Pelagians held, first, that the grace of God, whereby we be
delivered, is given according to our merits. Secondly, that the law of God may
be fulfilled of us. Thirdly, that we have free will: the Papists herein be so
like to them, that as they maintain in effect the same matters so for the
defense of them that allege the same places of Scriptures now, as the
Pelagians of old time did, as appears by the writings of S. Augustine, and S.
Hierome Theodo. lib. 4. Haeret. ^abul.
against them. Nestorius did (as Theodoretus writes of him) trouble and
entangle the simple and plain doctrine of Christian faith with Greekish
Sophistications. How the Papists have herein joined with him, and by their
curious questions, and vain Sophistications, have troubled and perverted the
pure, simple, and plain faith of Christ, by their Schoolmen it does evidently
appear. Eutyches confounded the two natures in Christ, and the properties
peculiar to them: So do the Papists in making the body of Jesus Christ to be
at one instant in heaven and earth, and infinite places of the earth, which is
only proper to the Deity. This shall suffice to show that the Papists be liker
to these old heretics then we are, whose doctrine we abhor, and be far
further from it, then they be. Yea I may not only truly say, but can also
plainly prove Poper^e to be an hotchpotch of old heresies long ago condemned in
ye Church of God. The which as I did once in public place show, so I may (if
it be the will At Paul's Cross Anno 1590.
of God) heareafter more plainly and plentifully prove.

Now this worthy writer, or rather lewd libeller will prove, and that by a
Syllogism, out of the principles of our religion, that S. Paul exhorts us to
infidelity: This subtle Syllogism is thus framed.

Whosoever exhorts us to doubt of that which we are bound to believe by
faith, exhorts to infidelity. But S. Paul does exhort us to doubt of our
salvation (which we are bound to believe by faith, according to the Protestants
religion) Ergo. S. Paul exhorts us to infidelity.

As the assumption or second proposition of this sillogisme, as it now stands
is false: so by a small alteration, both it, and all the rest may be very true,
that is, by putting out the name of S. Paul, and putting Papists in place
thereof, in this sort.

Whosoever exho^teth us to doubt of that which we are bound to believe by
faith, exhort, us to infidelity.

The Papists exhort, or at leastwise teach us, to doubt of our salvation:
Ergo, the Papist exhort us to infidelity.

The first proposition of this sillogisme is affirmed by Sess. 6. page 29.
this writer to be plain. The second is the doctrine of the Papists concluded
and determined in that Tridentine Conuenticle, where it is said, that they
which be truly justified, cannot without all doubt account them-sel^es to be
justified. And again that no man can know by certainty of faith which is not
subject to error and falsehood, that he has obtained the grace of God. And
again S^ quis dixerit, omni homini, etc. If any shall say, that it is
necessary for every man to the obtaining ^^id. can. 73.
of remission of sins, to believe certainly and without doubt of their one
infirmity and indisposition, that their sins be forgiven them, be he accursed.
But more plainly and pregnantly do the Doctors of Louaine lay down this
doctrine of doubting: Fides, qua quis firmiter In articul. aduers Luther artic.
9.
credit, and certo statuit, per Christum sibi remissa esse peccata, seque
possessurum vitam aeternam, nullum habet in Scripuris testimonium, imo eisdem
aduersatur: The faith whereby a man does firmly believe, and is certainly
assured that his sins by Christ be forgiven him, and that he shall possess
eternal life, has no testimony in the Scripture, yea is contrary unto them.
Here-vpon I conclude by this writers own reason, that the Papists in
mainteining this doctrine of doubting, teach infidelity. But whereas these
Louainian Doctors say, that this doctrine of the certainty of forgiveness of our
sins by Christ, and of our possession of eternal life is not testified in
the Scriptures, but contrary to them: how false this is, I refer it to be
tried by these places here following. They that trust in the LORD, shall be as
mount S^on, which cannot be moved, but remains for ever. Being justified by
faith, we have Psalm. 125. 1. Romans 5. 1. 2.
peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom al so through faith,
we have had this access unto his grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice under the
hope of the glory of God. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear
again: but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father. Rom 8. 15.
The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Ibid. verse. 33.
Gods chos^^? it is Christ that justifies: Who shall condemn? etc. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ shall tribulation, verse. 35.
or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, etc.
I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor Verse 38.
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, neither height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. It is God
which stablisheth us with you 2. Cor. 1. 21.
in Christ, and has anointed us, who has also sealed us, and has given the
earnest of the spirit in our hearts. In whom also ye have trusted, after that
he heard the word of truth, even the Ephesians. 1. 13.
Gospel of your salvation, wherein also after ye believed, ye were sealed with
the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, etc. Let
us therefore go with confidence or boldness Heb. 4. 16.
unto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help
in time of need. So God, willing more abundantly Chap. 6. 17.
to show unto the heirs of promise the stablenes of his counsel, bound himself
by an oath, that by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God
should lie, we might have strong consolation, which have our refuge to lay hold
upon that hope that is set before us, which hope we have, as an ancre of the
soul both sure and sted^ast and it enters into that which is within the veil,
etc. Let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith, our hearts being
pure from an evil conscience, and washed Chap. 10, 22.
in our bodies with pure water, let us keep the profession of our hope without
wavering (for he is faithful that promised.) Therefore by faith* that by grace
the promise might be sure to all the seed. And he not we^ke in the faith
considered not his own Romans 4. 16. Verse 19.
body, which was now dead* being almost an hundred years old; neither the
deadnes of Sara^s womb: neither did he doubt of the promise of God through
unbelief, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God, being
fully assured that he which had promised, was able to do it, and therefore it
was imputed to him for righteousness.

Hereunto I will add to the confuting of this doctrine of doubting, two or
three sayings of the Fathers. Chrysostom Chrisost ad Romans Homi. 9.
says: Spes humana subinde intercidit, and sperantem pudore afficit: Nostra
vero eiusmodi non est, sed firma and immobilis perdurat, etc. The hope that is
had in man sundry times falls away, and shameth him that hops: but our
hope is not such, but abides firm and immovable August praefat. in Psalm. 123.
Augustine says: Gaudium ergo nostrum, fratres, nondum est in re, sed iam in
spe. Spes autem nostra tam certa est, quasi iam res perfecta sit: i Our joy O
brethren is not as yet in possession, but in hope. And our hope is so certain,
as though Bernard. lib. 5. de considera.
the thing were already done. Bernard says: Ergo, vt dixi, fides ambiguum non
habet: aut si habet, fides non est, sed opinio; Faith has no doubting: or if
it have, it is not faith, but an opinion. Again: Non est enim fides
aestimatio, sed certitudo: Epist. 190. Anton. hist. part. 2. Tit. 17. cap 1,
Sec. 5. fol. 217.
faith is not an opinion, but a certainty. And Antoninus out of the same
Bernard alleges these words. Clamat Apostolus, Scio cui credidi et certus
sum* Et tu mihi sub sibilas, fides est ^stimatio Tu mihi ambiguum garris quo
nihil est certius. etc. The Apostle cries out saying, I know whom I have
believed and am certain, and do thou whisper to me, that faith is an
opinion. Poest thou babble and tell me that that is doubtful, then ye which
there is nothing more certain. etc. Hereby the indifferent reader may see,
both how false this desperate doctrine of doubting is (against the which
Ambrosius Catherinus an Archbishop and a great doer in the council of Trent did
earnestly writ) and also that the Papists by this principle of their doctrine
teach infidelity. And withal let him consider, whether is a more true, godly
and comfortable doctrine to believe by faith our salvation, or to be uncertain
and to doubt thereof, as they teach.

But now let us see how S. Paul exhorts us (as this man says) to doubt of
our salvation. He says: Cum timore and ^remore salutem vestram operamini:
which is thus translated, With fear and trembling work your salvation. This
text was alleedged by hearesay, and not by sight. For this worthy writer, who
so highly thinks of himself, and so greatly disdaineth others, quoteth in
the margent 1. Cor. 2 whereas it is not in that chapter, nor in all that
Epistle, but it is Philip. 2. 12. But the fault hereof will be laid upon the
Printer. Yet that the Printer should so much err, and set 1. Cor. 2. for
Phillip. 2. it is not likely. And that this error is not of the Printer, but of
this man's fine memory, it may hereby appear* y^ it is not in the vulgar
editio^, which they both do, and are bound to follow cum timore, but cum metu.
Hereby the reader may see, with what care these men allege the Scriptures, not
looking upon the words, nor considering the simple sense and meaning, but
snatching at the words, and wresting them contrary to the purpose and meaning
of the Apostle. Whose intent is not to teach Rom 3. 28. and 4 2. 5. Gal. 2. 16.
Ephe. 2. 8. 9. 2. Tim. 1 9. Tit. 3. 4.
the Phillippians, that they be saved by their works, which is contrary to his
doctrine, in many other places; but to dissuade them from careless security,
and to exhort them to walk in good works, and to run on the race of their
life in the fear of God, until they come to attain that salvation, which God
has promised, and Jesus Christ for us has purchased. Saint Paul to the
Ephesians does as it were to the explication of this place make declaration
both of the true doctrine of salvation, and of the way whereby we are to walk
unto it. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it
is the gift of God; Ephe. 1. 8.
not of works, least any man should boast himself. For we are his workmanship
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained, that we
should walk in them. Thus good works, and holy obedience of life, which
cannot be joined with careless security, but do flow from the fear of God,
are not causes to merit and deserve salvation, which Jesus Christ by his
bloodshedding has purchased for us, but are ways to walk unto it, without
the which we Hebr. 12, 14.
shall never see God, as the Apostle says.

The Pamphlet. Articles concerning good life and piety. The Protestants are
bound in conscience never to ask God forgiveness of their sins.
Whosoever is assured by faith that his sins are forgiven him, sins most
grievously in asking God pardon for them: but all true Protestants are assured
by faith, that their sins are forgiven them. Ergo.

All true Protestants sin grievously in asking pardon of God for them.

The Mayor is evident: for who but an Infidel or a mad man, would demand of
God the creation of the world, which he is assured by faith that God has
already created? or Christ's incarnation, which is already performed? or the
institution of Sacraments, which already is effected? in like manner, who but an
infidel or mad man will demand pardon of his sins, which he believes already
by faith that God has forgiven? for it is a sign that he doubts of that
which he is bound by faith to believe, which doubting faith is Infidelity.

Moreover, whatsoever we demand, that we hope to obtain: but no man hops to
obtain that he already possesses, as no man will demand of God his own
soul, or body, because alalready he possesses them.

The Minor is undoubted, because this is that lively faith, whereby the
Protestants are justified, by this they apprehend Christ, by this they apply
his merits and passion unto them, and without this no man can attain unto
salvation. Hereupon I will infer, that no Protestant can with a safe conscience
say the Lords prayer, because he cannot pray as he ought without true faith,
and call God his father; and if he have true faith, he cannot without note of
Infidelity utter this petition, Forgive us our sins: for that most assuredly
he believes and protests in the first ingresse of that prayer that he is the
Son of God, and consequently believes by faith that his sins are forgiven him.

Answer.
TO the first proposition of this subtle syllogism, I answer, that the
assurance by faith, which Gods elect have of the forgiveness of their sins,
does well stand with the asking of forgiveness of them. For we are to ask
forgiveness of our sins, because God does command it, and require it of us.
Moreover, it is our duty to ask forgiveness of them: for otherwise we
cannot be assured by faith that they be forgiven us: for by asking pardon of
them, we do make confession of them, and do acknowledge our own guiltines,
the which if we should refuse to do, we can have no assurance of the remission
of them. For Solomon says, He that hides his sins shall not Prou. 28. 13.
prosper: but he that confesses them and forsakes them, shall have mercy.
And S. John says, If we confess our sins, God Mark. 9. 24.
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Moreover, we ask forgiveness of our sins, to confirm our
faith, and to increase the assurance we have of the forgiveness of them, and
that we may more and more have the feeling of the forgiveness of them
increased in our hearts. For we do not mean that any man has any such firm
assurance of faith, but that the same is mixed with weakness, and many times
shaken with temptations, against the which we must strive and pray, and Mark.
9. 24. Luke 17. 5.
say both with him in the Gospel, Lord I believe, Lord help my unbelief: and
with the Apostles, Lord increase our faith. Our faith is but as a grain of
Mustard-seede, which must grow and increase. Saint Paul says, that by the
Gospel the Romans 1. 17.
righteousness of God is reueeled from faith to faith. Upon which words
Cl^me^t Alexandrinus writes thus: (...) Clemens Alex. (...).
(...). 1. Apostle seems to declare a double faith: but rather one faith,
which receives increase and perfection. And therefore in praying for the
forgiveness of sins, we pray that our faith of ye forgiveness of them may be
more and more confirmed, and our assurance thereof increased in us. Lastly
seeing we daily sin both in doing that which God forbids, and omitting
that which he commands, why ought we not daily to ask forgiveness of them?
and in praying for the remission of our sins, we desire all those things
which be effects and fruits thereof, as sanctification and eternal life, etc.
And yet we must pray in a true persuasion of faith of Gods mercy toward us to
the forgiveness of our sins not only past, but also future and to come. and
so our praying for the forgiveness of them, is a craving of the continuance of
Gods mercy, to the continual pardoning of them, which we continually commit.

Now whereas he says, the Mayor is evident, and none but an Infidel or mad
man would demand of GOD the creation of the world, which he is assured by
faith that GOD has already created? etc. I answer that none that is well in
his wits would make such a foolish and absurd comparison, as is between the
asking of God the creation of the world, the incarnation of Christ, etc. and
the remission of our sins. For those are neither commanded, nor at all to be
asked: and will this man say that forgiveness of sins is not at all of any to
be prayed for? Of those things we need not further to be confirmed, but of the
forgiveness of our sins, our faith had need to be strengthened, and the
feeling thereof in our consciences to be increased. Moreover (as we said
before) for as much as we daily sin and offend God, we ought daily to crave
Gods mercy in pardoning our sins. What likeness has prayer for the creation
of the world, or for the incarnation of Christ, etc. herewith? And whereas
this man thinks it so absurd a thing to pray to God to forgive us our sins,
because we believe the forgiveness of them I would ask of him, whether S. Paul
praying both in the beginning, and in the end of his Epistles, for Gods grace
to ye faithful, did not assuredly believe, that they were even then, and
before those his prayers endued with Gods grace? No doubt but he did believe
yt they were endued with it, for else he would not have acknowledged the
effectual faith, the diligent 1. These. 1. 3.
love, and patient hope of the Thessalonians, and that they were elected of
God. Which gifts of Gods spirit could not be in them, without the grace of God.
Now by this man's divinity what madness was it, for him to pray for grace unto
them, whom he did believe to be endued with Gods grace already? And where
as Saint John says, 1. Ioh* 5 13.
These things have I written unto you that believe in the name of the son of
God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe in
the name of the son of God. By this man's deep doctrine, it might seem
madness for Saint John to write to them that did believe in the name of the
son of God, that they should believe in the name of the Son of God. But it
seemed not so to S. John, who writes to them that as they had blessedly begun
to believe in the name of the Son of God, so they might still continue, grow
and increase in the same faith. Moreover also I would ask of this man and his
fellows, whether they praying do believe ye forgiveness of their sins? if they
do not then are they Infidels, and deny the article of the creed, I believe the
forgiveness of sins, which before he falsely objected to us. If they do
believe ye forgiveness of their sins, why do they then (by this man's doctrine)
pray for it? If he say, that he believes that there is in generality, a
forgiveness of sins, but particularly he is not assured by faith, of the
forgiveness of his own sins; then what does his faith differ from the Devils
faith? who believes and trembles, as Saint James says: and what is Iame. 1^
this his doubting, but (as he himself here says) flat infidelity? And no
marvel though these men feel in their hearts no assurance of faith, for that
they ground it not upon ye immovable rock of Gods promise, but upon the
unsure sand of their own works and satisfactions, by the which indeed neither
can their faith be assured, nor their conscience quieted. The which false
doctrine, while they believe, I would know how they can ask forgiveness of
their sins? For whosoever makes satisfaction to God for them, needs not to
ask forgiveness of them. But the Papists maintain that they make full
satisfaction to God for them (as I have before showed) therefore I may much
more justly say, then he does here, that it is madness to ask forgiveness of
the^* For what man not being mad owinge a sum of money and paying it, will
desire the same to Romans 3. 28. Ephesians. 3. 17.
be forgiven him? concerning your scoffing in the proof of your Minor or
second proposition, we indeed believe that we are justified by faith without
the works of the law, and that Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, and
that by this hand of a true and unfeigned faith in Jesus Christ, we apply the
plaster of his precious blood shed for our sins, to cure all the sorances
and sores of our souls. And take you heed, that you trusting in your own
works and merits, in your Masses, Agnus deis, holy water, pardons, and
manyfold other such paltries, fall not into the ditch of damnation. And this
shall suffice for this article, which is so absurd that it deserves not so
much.

The Pamphlet. The Protestants are bound in conscience to avoid all good
works.
2. Article.
EVery man is bound upon pain of eternal damnation to avoid all deadly
sins. But fasting, praying, alms deeds, and all good works, according to
the Luther in assaer. artic, 31. 32, and. 36. Calvin. lib. 3. institu. cap. 12.
Sect. 4. and cap. 14. Sect. 4. 19. Melan. in Loc. tit de peccato.
Protestants religion, are deadly sins: Ergo, according to the Protestants
religion all men are bound upon pain of eternal damnation, to avoid fasting,
praying, alms deeds and all good works The Mayor is manifest: for the wages
of deadly sin is death, Romans 6. 25.
Stipendium peccati mors. The Minor is evident: for according to the
Protestants religion and common exposition of this text of Scripture: Isa. 64.
6.
Facti sumus vt immu^di omnes nos, and tanquam pan nus menstruatae omnes
iustitiae nostrae: We are mane all as unclean, and all our justices are as
stained cloth. That is to say, the best works we can do are infected with
deadly sin, and consequently deserve eternal damnation, and therefore to be
avoided.

I am not ignorant that some wranglers with some shifting euasions go about to
answer this Article, forsooth that the stains and imperfections, the sins
and spots ought to be avoided, but yet the good works to be prosecuted, A
silly shift, but put case it be impossible to wring out the stains, then is
not this menstruous cloth to be abhorred, put case I could not give alms but
I must steal, am I not bound in conscience to avoid the giving of alms? Admit
I could not see mine enemy but by experience long proved, I should fall a
quareling with him, am I bound in conscience to avoid his company? Say that I
could not eat flesh but I should Scandalize the behoulders, ought I not to say
non manducabo carnes in aeternum? I will not eat flesh for ever? Grant that I
could not relieve the poor but that I should stayne this action with vain
glory, should I not hear of him that cannot lie, he has received his reward,
and consequently that there remains no recompensation therefore in heaven? So
I say in like manner if the corruption of nature, if the poison of
concupiscence so stain my best actions that whatsoever I do or think I
cannot possibly affect them without these infections, and corruptions; then
certaienly I am bound in conscience to avoid these crimes and offenses, they
which cannot possibly be performed without these vicious circumstances, for,
bonum constat ex integra causa, malum nascitur ex quolibet defectu? a good
thing consists of al integrity, but an evil thing is caused by every defect:
that a man be in health every humor must keep his temper, that he be sick
it suffices one only to exceed, and keep not his just proportion, so that a
work be good it must be effected with all due circumstances, that it be ill,
one only will defile, as we commonly say one ill herb will spoil a whole
potfull of pottage.

Answer.
AS Hannibal said of Phormio, that he had heard many doting fools, but he
Cicer. lib. 2. de oratore.
never heard any that so much doted as did Phormio: so may I say, that I have
heard and read many foolish disputers, but any that did so foolishly dispute
and reason as this man does, I never heard nor read. For what man in his wits
will reason thus: that because the corruptions of men do creep into these
works of fasting, praying, and alms giving, therefore the works themselves be
deadly sins? Our doctrine is, first, that these works and such other, Psalm.
109. 7.
being done by unfaithful hypocrites and wicked men be turned into sin, as
David says: for they be so corrupted and defiled with their infidelity and
wickedness, that they be but splendida peccata: glittering sins before God, as
Saint Augustine terms them. For even as most pure water flowing through a
filthy sink or privy, is made foul, filthy, and stinking: even so these
works, prayer, fasting, etc. which be good works commanded of God, flowing
from their faithless and wicked hearts and bodies be so defiled, that they be
but filthy sins in in the sight of God. Pro. 15. 8.


Solomon says: the sarcifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord: but
the prayer of the righteous is acceptable to Esa. 1. 13.
him. God says by the Prophet Esaias. Bring no more oblations in vain: incense
is an abomination unto me: I cannot suffer your new Moons, nor Sabboths, nor
solemn days (it is iniquity) nor solemn assemblies. My soul hates your
^bid. 66. 3.
new Moons, and your appointed feasts, etc. He that kills a bullock, is as
if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs
neck, etc. These sayings show that even the sacrifices commanded in the law of
God, were wicked and abominable, when they were offered of wicked and profane
persons void of true faith and repentance. So it is in the Prophet Haggai: Thus
says the Lord of Hosts, Ask now the Priests concerning the law. If one
Hagg. 2. 12.
bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch the
bread, or the pottage, or the wine, or ale, or any meat, shall it be holy?
And the Priests answered and said no. Then said Haggai, if a polluted person
touch any of these things, shall it be unclean? And the Priests answered
and said, it shall be unclean. Then answered Haggai and said, so is this
people, and so is this nation before me, says the Lord. and so are all the
works of their hands, and that which they offer here is unclean. Agreeable
to this is that which Tit. 1. 15.
Saint Paul says: unto the pure are all things pure, but unto them that are
defiled, and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences
are defiled. Christ our Math. 7. 16. and 12. 33.
Savior says: Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? and a
corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
and without faith it is impossible Romans 14. 23. Heb. 11 6.
to please God. Hereof we conclude that even those works which God has
commanded and commended to us, in his word, being done by the ungodly and
reprobate be so corrupted by their infidelity and wickedness, that they be not
acceptable, but rather abominable before God. So says saint Augustine: Sine
qua (fide) quae videntur August. lib. 3 ad Bonnifac. cap. 5. Ambros. de vo cat
gentium lib. 1. cap. page 6.
bona opera, in peccata vertuntur: without faith those works which seem to
be good are turned into sin. Saint Ambrose says: Sine cultu very dei, etiam
quod virtus videtur esse peccatum est, nec placere vllus deo sine deo potest
without the worship of the true GOD even that which seems to be virtue is
sin, neither can any please God without God. Anselme says: Omnis vita
infidelium Anselme in Rom cap. 14.
peccatum est: and nihil bonum sine summo bono. i. The whole life of the
unfaithful is sin: and there is nothing good without the chiefest good,
which is God. By this ye Christian reader may sufficiently see, how false the
doctrine of the Papists, and namely of our fine and delicate Jesuits, who
teach (as their proctor Andradius one of that coat blusheth not to avouch
(that all actions of those Explicat. orthodox lib. 3. page 277. page 279. ^ulla
culpa co^aminata. page ^80.
which be v^yde of the true knowledge of GOD be not sin: yea that they may
do works defiled with no fault but worthy of great praise; and that we are
not to think, that all the works of them which be void of faith do so
displease God, that they be crimes worthy eternal punishments. Let the Godly
reader compare these sayings of this Iebusite, with those alleged before out
of the Scriptures and ancient Fathers, and discern which is more sound and
agreeable, not to the blind reason of man, but to the will of God reueiled in
his word. Secondly, concerning the works of the regenerate, that belong to
Gods election and mercy, we say, that although they be done with imperfection,
and not so fully, with their whole soul, heart and mind, as they should be;
but carry the touch of man's corruption, and are not able to abide the strict
and straight judgment of God: yet because they proceed from hearts purified by
Act ^5.
faith, and sanctified in some measure with Gods holy spirit, they please God,
and the imperfections of them being pardoned in Jesus Christ, they be accepted
for pure and holy. Math. 7. 16. and. 1^ 33. Pro. 15. 8. 1. Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 13.
16.
Christ says: A good tree brings forth good fruit: to the pure are all
things pure. The prayer of the righteous is acceptable to God. The faitifull be
an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrrfices acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ. To do good and to distribute forget not: for with such
sacrifices God is pleased. This therefore is a falsely, which this man with a
brazen brow affirms, that fasting, praying and alms deeds according to our
religion be deadly sins. These works be commanded of GOD, who commands no
sins. We say that the corruption of our nature, which is but in part and
imperfectly regenerate in this life, does creep into them; and therefore they
be not so purely and perfectly done of us as God requires: whereby we
acknowledge, that even the best works we do had need of Gods mercy. So Saint
Augustine says: Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, siremota misericordia
discutias eam: Woe be August. confess lib. ^ cap. 13.
to the laudable life of man, if thou O God examine it with out mercy. Now what
reasonable man, will reason or imagine us to reason thus, that because we do
good works not so purely and perfectly as Gods righteousness requires and
deserves, that therefore good works as prayer, alms deeds, etc. be deadly
sins, or are to be avoided of us.

But let us come to examine the proof of your Minor or second proposition. You
say that according to our religion and common exposition of this text of
Scripture: we are ma^e all as unclean, and all our justices are like a
stained Isaia. 64. 6.
cloth: the best works we can do are infected with deadly sin, and deserve
eternal damnation, and therefore to be avoided. We indeed expound this place
not only of wicked hypocrites, but also of the regenerate and faithful, and
say that all our own righteousness of works is so stained with the corruption
of our sinful nature, that it is not able to stand before Gods judgment
seat, nor abide his severe trial and examination. For when we have Luke 17.
10
done all th^se things which are commanded us, we must say, that we are
unprofitable servants. And if thou o Lord straightly Psalm* 130. 3.
markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? and therefore we must pray and
say: Enter not into judgment with thy Psalm. 143. 2
servant: for in thy sight shall none that lives be justified. And Daniel. 9.
8.
with Daniel we say: O Lord unto us appertains open shame to our Kings, to
our Princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee: yet
compassion and forgiveness is in the Lord our God. Whereupon we acknowledge that
our Justice and righteousness consists not in the perfection of our virtues,
but in the forgiveness of our sins. Bernard thus expounds and applies the
place of Esaias: Nostra si Bernard de verbis Esaia. Sermon. 5.
qua est humilis iustitia, recta forsitan, sed non pura: nisi forte meliores
nos esse credimus quam patres nostros, qui non minus veraciter quam humiliter
aiebant: omnes iustitiae nostrae tanquam pannus menstru^tae mulieris. Quomodo
enim pura iustitia, vbi adhuc non potest culpa deesse? i. Our humble or base
justice if it be any, is peradventure right, but not pure: unless we believe
our selves to be better than our Fathers, who no less truly then humbly said,
all our righteousness is as the cloth of a menstruous woman; for how can
righteousness be pure where sin as yet wanteh not? And again: Sed quid
potest esse omnis iustitia nostra coram Deo? Nonne iuxta Prophetam velut pannus
menstruatae reputabitur, and si distr^cte iudicetur i^iusta inuenietur omnis
iustitia nostra: i. What can all our justice be before God? Shall it not
according to the Prophet be reputed like the cloth of a menstruous woman, and
if it be straightly judged, all our justice shall be found to be unjust. How
you expound this place I know not, belike you satisfying Gods justice so fully
with your own pure works, that he can ask no more of you, as I alleged
before out of Bishop Fisher, think that this place is not to be understood of
you, and your justice, which is pure and perfect: but of the justice of
Lutherans, Caiuinists, and such other profane persons. Wherein take you heed
that you show not your selves to be of them whom Christ came not to call, who
says, I am not come to call the righteous, that is to say, them that be puffed
up with a vain and false persuasion of their own righteousness, but sinners
to repentance:: And that they whom you disdain and despise as Publicanes and
harlots, go not before you into the Kingdom of God. We take upon us the
person of the Publican, in acknowledging our own vileness and unworthiness, and
in respect thereof are abashed to lift up our eyes to heaven, but flee in all
our works to Gods mercy, and are content that you with the Pharisee glory of
your own works, merits, and righteousness. Salamon says: There is a
generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet are not washed from
their filthiness. Now briefly to answer your syllogism, I reason thus: No good
works are to be avoided: but fasting, prayer, and alms deeds, being
commanded of God, and proceeding from faithful hearts, are by our doctrine good
works: Ergo they are not to be avoided; but diligently in the fear of God to
be used of us: but the corruptions of our sinful nature which creep into
them, are to be avoided, and resisted, and we are to pray unto God in mercy to
pardone them. And so we may be assured, that as in mercy through Christ he
has accepted of us: so he will in like mercy accept our works as pure and
perfect in Christ-Iesus. Now I will retort your reason upon your own head in
this sort: Every man is bound upon pain of eternal damnation to avoid all
sin: but fasting, praying and alms deeds, as they be used by Papists to
make satisfaction to God for their sins, and to merit and purchase heaven,
be sins: Ergo, fasting, prayer, and alms deeds done in such sort are to be
avoided. The Minor or second proposition, I prove thus. He that attributes
that to his works, which is proper and peculiar to Jesus Christ, sins
grievously: but to make satisfaction for our sins appertains only to Jesus
Christ: Ergo, he that attributes the same to his works, grievously sins.
But I shall have occasion here-after more largely to handle this matter,
therefore now I omit it, and so I will also the quotations of Luther, Calvin,
and Melanchthon set in the margent, for that they deliver no other doctrine,
but that which I have before declared, the which I nothing boubt, but it is so
sound, that it will endure and abide this man's hammer.

Although I nothing doubt, but that this my answer to this article does seem
sufficient to men that be not of corrupt mind and judgment, and the same is
nothing impeached by this addition, yet I will, for the further stopping of the
mouth of this wrangler (who therewith charge others, but to much uses
himself) say somewhat more to the said article and addition. And to lay away
shifting euasions, and to go directly to the matter: I desire the Christian
reader to look to the article, and his proof of the same. The Article is,
that Protestants are bound in conscience to avoid all good works: his proof
is, because all good works according to the Protestants religion are deadly
sins. The which I have declared to be false, and to be no doctrine of ours,
for we teach that as the profane, wicked, and ungodly in whom sin reigns,
and do ^ give up their members servants to iniquity are with all their works
abominable before God: so the good works of the faithful and regenerate (in
whom sin remains, but reigns not) are in Christ acceptable to GOD, and
profitable to men. But this acceptance and profit comes not of the
pureness, and perfection, and merit of our own works: but in that the
spots and imperfection of them are by Christ's righteousness covered, for
his name sake pardoned, and in* him accepted for pure and perfect. For even as
men looking through a glass, be it green, blew, or any such other coullor,
the thing under it seems to be of the same coullor the glass is: even so GOD
our heavenly Father looking upon his elect and faithful people through his
Son JESUS CHRIST in whom he is well pleased, does accept and take them with
their works for such as JESUS CHRIST is. And therefore we say, that although
our best works are done in weakness, and be stained with the sin which
dwells in us, yet as long as we yield not to our corruptions, but strive and
pray for the mortification of them, our works do please and glorify GOD and
be testimonies to our consciences of our eternal election, and ways to walk
in unto salvation, and therefore are not to be avoided, but dilligently in the
fear of God to be used.

But the Doctrine of this man, and of the Church, whereunto he adhaereth is,
that they can do good works so purely and perfectly, void of stain and
corruption, that they may by them merit, and deserve his eternal glory
hereafter. The which he that holds is a proud Pharisiee and blind
hypocrite, knowing effectually neither the corruption of his own heart nor the
perfect purity and holiness which GOD who is most pure and holy in his law
requires. For whereas there is even in them that be regenerate both the new
man and the old: The spirit and the flesh: Galat. 5. 17.
and the flesh lusts against the spirit, and these be contrary one to ye
other, that what things they would they Romans 7. 14.
do not: And seeing that they be carnal sold under sin, so that they allow
not what they do. For that which they would, they do not: but that they hate
they do, so that they do it not, but sin that dwells Romans 15. 27. 20. 22.
23. 24.
in them: And that although they consent to the law of GOD according to the
inner man, yet they see an other law in their members fighting against the law
of their mind, and leading them captives to the law of sin, which is in
their members, so that they cry out and say O wretched men, who shall deliver
us from this body of death? whether the regenerate and best men being in this
estate, wherein Saint Paul after mercy and grace received, confesses himself
to have been, can do good works purely and perfectly, void of stain and
corruption: let any (whom the God of this world has not blinded) judge.

But to come to the cases which this man full wisely puts, to the first, say
that if he who makes the sins of those that truly turn to him, though they
Isai. 1.
were as red as blood, as white as snow, be not able to wring out of this
menstruous cloth the stains of it, and to make it clean in the blood of his
Son, 1 Iohu 1.
then is this menstruous cloth to be abhorred. And if you cannot give alms,
but you must steal, then is alms given to be avoided. For we must not do
Romans 3.
evil that good may come of it. For they that say and do so, their damnation
is just. And if malice so abound in your heart, that you cannot see your
enemy, but you must fall a quarrelling with him, then his company is to be
shunned. And if you cannot eat flesh, but you must scandalize and give
occasion of offending GOD to the beholder, then you ought not to eat flesh.
And if you cannot relieve the poor, but for vain glory, then have you your
reward, and such relief is to be spared. Sed quorsum haec? What of all this?
So says he, in like manner of the corruption of nature, if the p^ison of
concupisce^ce so st^in my best actions, that whatsoever I do or think, I cannot
possibly effeetcacute;t them without these infections and corruptions, then
certainly I am bound in concsience to avoid these crimes and offenses, the
which cannot possibly be performed without these vicious circumstances. For
answer hereunto I desire the reader to observe the manner of this man's
reasoning, that whereas by our doctrine even good and faithful men cannot do
good works without some infection of sin remaining in them: this man
entreats of wicked men, and of their works utterly defiled by sin reigning
over them. For he that steals to give alms, and in whose heart malice so
abounds, that he cannot see his enemy, but he must quarrel with him, etc.
is a wicked man, and sin reigns in him. And such men giving their hearts to
wickedness, as God will not hear their prayers, so will he not accept either
them, or any of their works. Moreover whereas the question is whether good
works for corruptions and Psalm. 66. 18.
infections in them are to be avoided, he concludes that crimes and offenses
are to be avoided. To the which I say Amen.

And where is he says that a good thing consists of all Integrity, but an
evil work is caused by every defect, and proves the same by health and
sickness, and by a potfull of pottage which one ill herb will spotle: I
answer that as evil humors may be in man's body, and not overmuch abounding and
dominering in the same, it may live, and do good actions profitable to
himself and others: So though evil humors of sin be in us, as long as
they abound not, and rule not over us, we may live unto God, and do works
acceptable to him in Jesus Christ, by whose righteousness they be perfumed, and
made sweet and sauory before his Majesty. And as in a pot of pottage, one
venomous and poysonable herb may spoil the whole: so one great and
poysonable sin reigning in man, may bring destruction and damnation to the
whole man both in body and soul. Yet as there may be evil herbs in pottage
which bring not death to the eaters thereof, so their may be imperfections and
corruptions in men's works and not be deadly to them that be in Jesus Christ,
For as there may be an Antidotum and counterpoyson against very perrillous
poisons to expel them and preserve life: so Jesus Christ who dwells in the
hearts of E^hes. 3.
his elect and chosen people by faith, is a most sure and safe Antidotum and
counterpoyson against not only imperfections, but also great and dangerous
sins, and offenses, to those that truly repent, unfeignedly believe in him,
and by his spirit do endeavor to mortify the evil afections of the flesh,
and more and more to grow in newnes and holiness of life.

As for that all Integrity wherein this man says good things consist, it is
in this corrupt estate of ours, sin dwelling in us, rather to be wished,
then attained. For when we have done the best we can, we must confess our
selves to be improfitable servants. True Contr. Pelagi lib. 1.
is this saying of Saint Hierom. Haec est hominis vera sapientia, imperfectum
se esse nosse: atque vt ita loquar cunctorum in carne iustorum imperfecta
perfectio est. This is man's true wisdom, to acknowledge himself to be
imperfect* and (that I may so say) the perfection of all that live in flesh is
imperfect. And again Haec hominibus sola perfectio, Ad Ctesiphont. aduers
Pelagi.
S^ imperfectos se esse nouerint. This is the only perfection of men, to
acknowledge themselves to be imperfect. Wherefore let us not glory of all
integrity, but let us unfeignedly confess our own iniquity, and even in
the best works we do flee unto Gods mercy in Christ JESUS, who has loved us,
and washed away our sins in his own blood, to whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost, three persons, and one only God, be all praise, laud, and glory
now and evermore.

Amen.
The Pamphlet. The Protestants have either no faith at all, or lie most
damnably, in denying that a man assisted by GODS grace, can keep the
Commandments.
3. Article.
Whosoever knows God, keeps his commandments: But all true Protestants
know God. Ergo all true Protestants keep his commandments. The Mayor is
express Scripture: qui dicit se nosse deum, and mandata eius non custodit,
mendax est, and in eo veritas non est. He that says he knows God, and
keeps not his commandments is a liar, and truth is not in him. The Minor no
Protestant doubts of: for this knowledge of God is nothing else but a lively
faith wherewith all zealous Protestants (as they say are indewed. Hence from,
manifestly it follows, that either most zealous Protestants lack a lively
faith, and so are Infidels: or if they have a lively faith, and deny that they
keep, or can keep Gods commandments, they are damnable liars: of they choose
the first, they are Pagans, Heretics or Jews: if they take the second, they
are damnable seducers, and impostors in religion, and consequently their faith
is false.

Answer.
THis Syllogism according to Saint John's meaning is wholly true. The Apostles
purpose is to show that the knowledge of GOD in the faithful ought not to be
idle, but effectual and fruitful in godliness and holy obedience, working a
care and conscience in them to keep Gods holy commandments, by dilligent
endeavoring both to avoid all wickedness which he forbids, and to yield
that holy obedience which he requires. The which they that do not, but live
profanely, wallowing in wickedness, and committing ungodliness with
greediness; and yet make a profession of the knowledge of God (as too many do)
their profession and knowledge is in vain. For as Saint James says: if any
seem religious, ^am. 1. 16.
and refraineth not h^s ^ongue, but deceives his own heart that man's reli^ion
is in vain. So if any seem to have the knowledge of God, and lives loosely
and wickedly, having no care to frame his life to the obedience of Gods
commandments, his religion, profession, and knowledge is in vain. For not
every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, Math. 7. 21.
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does my fathers will which
is in heaven. But your meaning is, that by keeking of Gods commandments is
understood an absolute and perfect fulfilling of them, in yielding without any
transgression at all that full and perfect rightecusnes which God commands.
The which never did any man 1. Peter 2.
yee^d, but only the man Iesuc Christ, who never did sin, and in whose mouth
was never guile. This your doctrine of the perfect fulfilling of Gods law in
this life is false, and you in maintaining of it, show your selves to be blind
and proud Pharisees, not knowing either ye perfect righteousness of God, nor the
corruption of our nature, against the which I reason thus: Whosoever sins
transgresses, and breaks Gods laws and commandments: but all men do
sin: Therefore all men transgress and break Gods laws and commandments.
The first proposition is manifest: for S. John says, sin is the
transgression of 1. John 3. 4.
the law. The second proposition cannot with any face be denied. Solomon says
there is no man that sins not. Saint 1. King 8 46. Rom 3. 23. James* ^ 2. 1.
John. 4. 8.
Paul says, all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God. Saint
James says, in many things we sin all. Saint John says, ^f we say that we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Moreover, S.
Paul says, as many as are Galat. 3. 10.
of the works of the law, are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things, which are written in the book of
the law to do them. Where Saint Paul does reason after this sort: Whosoever
does not continue to do all that is written in the book of the law, are under
the curse: but there is none that continues to do all that is written in the
book of the law: Ergo, there is none but is under the curse. The first
proposition Saint Paul proves by a place of the law, Deuteronomy. 27. The second
Saint Paul takes as a thing granted, and not to be denied, that there is no
man which continues to do all that is written in the book of the law to do
it, the which if it be not granted, Saint Paul's argument is nothing worth*
for it might be said, that some do fulfill the law of God, and therefore are
not under the curse. So that which seemed to Saint Paul absurd to be denied, is
now denied by these absurd and blind Pharisees. Furthermore, Saint Paul says,
That which was impossible to the law, in as much as it was Romans 8 3.
made weak, because of the flesh, God sending his own son in the similitude
of sinful flesh, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh. Does not S.
Paul here show, that whereas we could not be saved by the law, God has sent
his son in the flesh to save us? And he declares why we could not be saved
by the law, because the weakness of our sinful flesh, is not able to yield
that perfect righteousness which the law of God requires: the which if we could
do, we should live thereby. For God says, which if a man do he shall Ezech.
20. ^1.
live in them. And that even they that are regenerate with Gods spirit, do not
perfectly fulfill the law, and keep Gods commandments, it is most evident by
Saint Paul's confession of himself: I am carnal, sold under sin. I allow Romans
7. 14.
not that which I do: for that I would, I do not: but what I hate, that I
do. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me: For I know
that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will is
present with me. But I find no means to perform that which is good. For I do
not the good thing, which I would, but the evil which I would not, that d^e^. I
find that when I would do good, evil is present with me. I see another law in
my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, leading me captive to the
law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am who shall
deliver me from this body of death? If S. Paul that elect vessel of God, which
was taken Act. 9. 15. 2. Cor 12. 2.
up into the third heaven, and into paradise, and heard words which cannot be
spoken, did not fulfill the law, and fully without transgression keep Gods
commandments; who but a blind hipocrite and proud Pharisie will arrogate to
himself the same? Bernard says well: Aut te ergo si audes praefer ^ Apostolo
(nempe ipsius ista vox est) aut fatere ^ernard super Ca^ti sermon. 58
cum illo te quoque vitiis non carere: Either if thou dare, prefer thy
self before the the Apostle (whose saying this is) or else confess with him
that thou also art not void of vices.

I will add hereunto a few testimonies out of the ancient Fathers, to prove
that none in this life is assisted so fully with Gods grace, that he perfectly
fulfilleth the law, and keeps Gods commandments without any transgression
Justinius dialog (...). page 98.
or breach of them. Justinius Martyr says: (...) etc. And that none has
exactly done all things you your selves dare not deny: but there be which have
kept the things commanded, some more, and some less then others. S. Hierome
says: Facilia dicis esse Dei Hieron. ad Ciesiphontem a^uers. Pel^gianos.
mandata, and tame^ nullum proferre potes qui vniuersa complenerit. Responde
mihi, facilia sunt an difficilia? Si facilia, profer qu^s ea imple^erit: Thou
say Gods commandments be easy, and yet thou can not bring forth any that
has fulfilled all. Answer me, be they easy or hard? If they be easy, show
any that has fulfilled them. Again, Haec hominibus sola perfectio, si
imperfectos se esse nouerint: This is the Idem ibid.
only perfection of men, to acknowledge themselves to be imperfect. Again,
Tunc ergo iusti sumus, quando nos esse Idem lib. 1. ad. uers. Pelagianos.
peccatores fatemur, and iustitia nostra, non ex proprio merito, sed ex Dei
consistit mis^ricordia: Then we be just, when we confess our selves to be
sinners, and our justice consists not in our own merits, but in Gods mercy.
Saint Augustine says: Ipsa iustitia nostra tanta est in hac vita, August. de
ciui^ dei lib. 19 c. 27
vt potius peccatorum remissione constet, quam perfectione virtutum, Our
justice is so great in this life, that it consists rather in the remission of
our sins, then in the perfection of vour virtues. And again, Omnia mardata
Lib 1. Retract. cap. 19.
facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit ignoscitur: All the commandments
are then reputed to be done, when whatsoever is not done is pardoned. Again,
Gratia Dei Ad Bonis. lib. 3 cap. 7.
tribuit in hac vita studium praecepta seruandi: and eadem, si quid etiam in
illis pr^ceptis minus seruatur, ignos^it: The grace of God does give in this
life a desire to keep his commandments: and the same grace, if any thing in
them be not observed, forgiueth it. The like I might allege out of many other
places of his works: As, De natura and gratia cap. 36. Contra Iulianum lib. 4.
cap. 3. De liber^ Arbitr^o cap. 16. and such others, but for shortness sake I
omit them. Chrysostom says: Neque enim alios li^et in lege Chrysostom. ad Romans
Ham 17
i^st ficar^, n^si eum qui curcta ad^mpleuerit. Id vero ^emini dum possib^le
factum est: None can be justified by the law, but he that has fulfilled all.
And that has been as yet Bernard super Ca^tica s^r. 50
possible to no man. Bernard says: Quomodo ergo iubenda fuit quae implenda
nullo modo erat? etc. How was the law to be commanded, which can by no means
be fulfilled? De aff^ctuali.
or if thou rather think that the commandment was given for the ruling of our
affections, I will not hereupon strive, so that thou also do yield unto me,
that in this life it neither can, or ever could be fulfilled of any man. For
who dare arrogate that to himself, which Paul himself confesses that he had
not comprehended? Neither was the commander ignorant, that the weight of the
commandment exceeded man's strength: but he judged it to be profitable, that
thereby they might be put in mind of their own insufficiency, and so might
know that they ought according to their power labor to the end of
righteousness. Therefore by commanding things impossible, he made men not
transgressors, but humble, that every mouth might be stopped, and all the world
made subject unto God, because that by the works of the law no flesh shall be
justified before him: for we receiving the commandment, and feeling our own
want, will cry unto heaven, and God will have mercy upon us. Again,
Quantumlibet in hoc corpore manens profeceris erras vitia siputas Id^m ibidom
sermon. 58.
emortua, and non magis suppressa: velis nolis intra fines tuos habitat
Iebusaeus, subi^gari potest, sed non exterminari: sci^ (inq it) quod non
habitat in me bonum: How much soever thou do profit, whilst thou abidest in
this body, thou art deceived if thou think vices to be dead in thee, and not
rather suppressed: whether thou will or no the Iebusite will dwell within thy
coasts: he may be subdued, but not utterly banished. I know (says Paul) that
no goodness dwells i^ me. This was Bernards judgment concerning our keeping
of Gods commandments and fulfilling of the law. Ferus also a late Friar, but
yet a man of better judgment in many matters, then many others were, or be,
hereof writes thus: Per Christu^ implenda erat omnis iustitia, per quem solum
lex poterat impleri, nam maledicta erat natura humana, legemque implere non
potuit, iuxta illud: In cap. 19. Matthew
neque nos neque patres o^us hoc portare potuimus: All righteousness was to be
fulfilled by Christ, by whom only the law could be fullfilled. For man's nature
was accursed, and could not fulfill the law, according to that saying, neither
we nor our Fathers were able to bear this burden. Again, the same Ferus
says: Si nemo potest gloriari s^a pecca o immunem, nec quisquam gloriari
potest se legem seruass^: cum peccatum nihil aliud sit quam transgressio legis.
If no man can glory that he is free from sin, neither can any man glory that
he has fulfilled the law, seeing that sin is nothing else but the
transgression of the law. Hencefrom it follows, that zealous Protestants want
neither a lively faith in Gods mercies, nor true obedience to Gods
commandments, although they unfeignedly confess their manifold imperfections
and sins, by which they be far from perfectly fulfilling the law of God.
and now ( pro coronide) I will requite you with another Syllogism. They that
think they can fulfill the law of God, be proud Hypocrites and Pharisees: but
the Papists think that they Ferus in Math cap. 3.
can fulfill the law of GOD, yea can do superarrogant works, I should say
works of Supererogation above them that the law requires: Ergo, the Papists
be proud Hypocrites and Phraisees.

The Pamphlet. The most points wherein the Protestants dissent from the
Catholics tend to loosenes of life, and carnal liberty.
4. Article.
THis article may be proved by a general induction in all such matters, as
now the Protestants call in question. First, say that a man has not free will
to do good, but all goodness proceeds so from grace, that it lies not in
his power neither to have it, nor resist it, but of necessity it must have
effect.

To what other end tends this senceles doctrine and fatal fancy, but to
make men negligent in disposing and preparing their souls to receive Gods
grace, and rouse it up, and put it in execution after they have it? making man
not much unlike a sick ass, who neither can dispose nor prepare himself to
seek for his medicine, but of necessity must expect till his master
thrusts it into his throat, neither after he has drunk it, can cause it
cure his disease, but carelessly lets it work as it will.

Secondly they defend that men be justified by faith alone, the which
Solifidian position overthrows flatly true repentance* sorrow for sins,
mortification of passions, and al other virtues which tend to perfect
reconciliation of the soul with God, causing men only to procure a certain
false fantastical apprehension of Christ's death and passion, the which faith
although they erroniously auerre, cannot be severed from charity, virtues, and
good works; yet both experience teaches that it may, for also few or none have
faith, because few or none of them have these works: and the Scriptures
plainly prove that all faith, yea and the most noble faith which has force to
remove Mountains, may be without charity.

Thirdly they assure us that faith once had can never be lost, the which vain
security opens the gap to al libertine sensu^lity: for if a man be certain
that he has true faith, if it be impossible he should lose it, if he be
secured, that by it alone he shall be saved; why may he not wallow in all
licentious pleasures in this life, and never doubt of glory in the other? could
ever Epicurus have found a better ground to plant his Epicurisme? could ever
Heliogabalus have better patronised his se^suality? could Bacchus, or Venus
ever have forged better reasons to enlarge their dominion?

Fourthly, they say, a man cannot keep all the commandments: for what other
cause I pray you; but thereby to make men negligent in keeping of them, to
pretend an excuse of impossibilite, whenever they transgress them.

Fifthly why deny they the Sacrament of penance; but to make men careless how
they live, and never regard the avoiding of sins, as though they were never
to render an account of the^? to hinder that shame and blushing which men
conceive in discovering their sins, the which are most excellent means to
deter them from sinning another time: to shuffle up restitution and
satisfaction of injuries committed against our neighbors, to draw men from
remorse of conscience by burying their sins in eternal oblivion: the sores
whereof confession rubbeth, and causes remembrance:

Sixthly, why exclude they the true and real body of Christ from the blessed
Sacrament of the altar, but for that they perceive how by the presence thereof,
they were deterred from sin and wickedness? for they knew well that sinful
li^es consorted not with those sacred mysteries, and therefore they rather
resolved to banish Christ from the Sacrament, then sins from their souls.

Finally for what other cause have they coined a new negative religion, wholly
standing upon negation of sacraments, ceremonies, rites, laws, customs and
other principal points of the catholic Church; but for fasting, to bring in
feast^g; for praying, playing, for devotion, ^issolutio^, for religious f^are
of God, vain security* for zeal and mortification, a number of vain verbal
sermons: and to conclude, for a positive working a flat denial almost of all
points of faith and religion.

Answer.
COncerning this article, I will first answer these cauils, which this
cauiller obiecteth to the slaundering of our doctrine, as tending to looseness
of life, and carnal liberty: Secondly, I will show to what looseness and
wickedness of life the doctrine of the Church of Rome tends, and what fruits
or rather weeds of wickedness it has brought forth even in Popes and their
clergy, and namely in Rome that holy City, where that holy Father resideth,
and whereupon he especially breaths and blesses. He begins with free
will, wherein he neither sets down truly our doctrine, nor the state of the
controversy: which is a usual custom with his companions, to pervert and
alter the state of the question, as Doctor Whitakers shows y^ Bellarmine
uses to do. I will Epist. dedica. in contr. 1.
therefore lay down our doctrine truly as we teach concerning this matter we
believe, that although in worldly matters concerning this life, man have wit,
reason, and understanding to know; and will, for the choice of good and evil,
just and unjust: yet in spiritual matters pertaining to eternal life, and the
worship of God, we believe, that man's reason is so darkened, and will be so
corrupted, that he can neither truly know, love, nor covet, much less do and
perform, those things which be agreeable to Gods will, and acceptable unto
his Majesty, until God in his elect and chosen people do by his holy spirit
regenerate them, by lightning their blind reason, and forming their wicked
wills. This we prove by these places of Scripture here following. The Lord saw
that the wickedness Genes. 6. 5.
of man was so great upon the earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of
his heart were evil continually. And that the Ibid. cap. 8. 21. Math. 16. 17.
imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Flesh and blood has not
reueiled it unto thee, but my Father which is in John 1. 5. Verse 1^. John 3. 3.
heaven. That light shined i^ the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it
not. Which are borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God.
Except a man be borne again he cannot see the kingdom of God. That which is
born of the flesh 13
is flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. A man can 27
receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven. No man Chap. 6. 44. 65
can come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him. Therefore* I
said unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it be given unto him of my
Father* without me ye can do nothing The wisdom of the flesh i^ death. The
wisdom Cap. 15. 5. Romans 8. 6. 1. Cer. ^. 14
of the flesh is enmity against God. The natural man perceives not the things
of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnes to him, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually Cap, 4. 7.
discerned* What have thou* that thou have not received? No man can say that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. By Cap, 12. 3. Cap, 15. 10.
the grace of God I am that I am, Not that we are sufficient of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves: but our suffici^ncie ^ Cor, 3: 5. Philip, 2.
13. Hebr. 13. 21.
is of God. It is God that works in you, both the will and the deed, even of
his good will and pleasure. The God of peace make you perfect in all good works
to do his will, working in you that which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin: Joh, 8.
34. 36
If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. By these sayings
let the Christian reader consider of what value and force our wit and will is
in heavenly matters, until the one belightned, and the other reformed by Gods
grace and spirit. Hereunto I will add a few places of the ancient Fathers.
Saint Augustine says: Quid b^ni operari potest perditus, nisi quantum fuerit
perditione liberatus? Nunquid August. Enchir. ad Lani. cap* 30.
libero voluntatis ^^^itrio? and hoc absit: nam libero arbitrio male vt^ns homo
and se perdidit and ipsum. Sicut enim qui se occidit, etc. What good can he
that is lost do, but in as much as he is delivered from perdition? Can he be
restored by his free will? God forbid. For man using ill his ^ree will, lost
both himself, and it also. For as one killing himself, does kill himself
whilst he lives, but having killed himself, does not live, nor can raise
and restore himself being dead: so when a man sinned by his free will, sin
having gotten victory, his free will was lost. De Natura and gratia cap. 53.
Again, Quid tantum de naturae possibilitate praesumis? vulnerata, sauciata,
vexata perdita est: vera confessione, non falsa defensione opus habet. Gratia
ergo dei non qua instituatur, sed qua restituatur, quaeratur: What do thou
presume so much of the power of nature? it is wounded, maimed, vexed and lost:
it has need of a true confession, not of a false defense. Therefore the grace
of God, not whereby the will is ordained, but whereby it is restored, is to be
sought. Many such other sayings he has in his works against the Pelagans,
which I omit.

But this man says, that man may dispose and prepare his soul to receive Gods
grace; and this he proves not by Scripture, but (I will not say Assedly) by
the similitude of a sick Ass, that cannot dispose, nor prepare himself to
seek for his medicine. By this divinity men prevent Gods grace, and it does
not prevent them; men first seek God, and not God them. For answer whereof, I
would ask this man, whether it be not with all the of spring of Adam, as it
was with A^am himself after his fall. Now whether did Gene. 3.
Adam seek God first, or God him: the Scripture says, that GOD called upon
Adam, and that he was so far from seeking God, that he and his wife hid
themselves from the presence of the Lord God. So that if God in mercy had not
sought them, and called upon them, it seems that they had never sought nor
called upon God. And even so it is with all his posterity, as our Savior
shows by the lost sheep, whom the Shepherd seeks and brings Luke 15. 4.
home, the sheep nothing disposing or preparing it self to seek to the
Shepherd, or to return to the fould. So God says: I was found of them that
sought me not; Did Peter repent until Christ had looked on him, and the Cock
had Isai. 65. 1.
crowed? What disposition and preparation was in Paul to seek the grace of
Christ? Therefore I may truly say, that as Lazarus prepared himself being dead
in grave, to be raised up by Jesus Christ; so do men dead in sin, dispose and
prepare themselves to receive the medicine of Gods grace. Ephesians. 2. 4.
S. Paul says: God which is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead by sins, has quickened us together in
Christ, by whose grace ye are saved. To this doctrine the ancient Fathers
beat witness. Saint Augustine says: Vt totum Deo detur, qui hominis voluntatem
August. ^nchir. ad Laurent. cap. 32.
bonam and praeparat adiuuandam, and adiuuat praeparatam: All is to be given to
GOD, who both prepares the good will of man to be helped, and helps it
being prepared. Again Nolentem praeuenit vt velit, volentem subsequitur Idem.
ibidem.
ne frustra velit: GOD preuenteth him that is not willing that he may be
willing: and he follows him that is willing, that he may not will in vain.
Now if this our doctrine concerning the will of man be the truth of God
confirmed both by the word of God, and by the testimonies of the most learned
Fathers, then without blasphemy it cannot be said to tend unto loosenes of
life or carnal liberty: it teaches us both true humility, in acknowledging
our own misery and wants, and to attribute all to Gods grace and mercy, and to
attribute all to Gods grace and mercy, and to arrogate nothing to our selves,
and does it tend to carnal liberty, and careless security? We are both to
exhort others, and also to stir up our selves, to fear and serve God in
holiness of life. And yet we must acknowledge, that God works those things in
us, whereto he exhorts us. And therefore the same spirit that says: Turn
unto me with all your hearts, says also, Joel. 2. Lament. 3. Ezch. 28. 13.
Ezech. 11. 19.
Turn us O Lord, and we shall be turned. He that says Make you a new heart,
and a new spirit: for why will ye dye O house of Israel? says also, I will put
a new spirit within their bowels, and I will take the stony heart out of their
bodies, and will give the^ an heart of flesh. And again create in me a clean
Psalm. 51. 20.
heart, O Lord, and renew a right spirit within me. The same Isai. 1. 16.
Psalm. 51. 7. Ezech. 36. 25.
spirit that says, Wash you clean, says also, Purge me with Hyssope, and I
shall be clean: Wash me, and I shall be whiter then Snow. And again, I will
power clean water upon you and a new spirt will I put within you, and ye shall
be clean: yea from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse
you. The same spirit that says: Be ye holy, for I am holy, says 1 Thessalonians. 5.
23.
also, the God of peace make you holy. And so we must come August. confe. lib.
10. cap. 29.
to that saying of Saint Augustine: Da quod iubes and iube quod vis: Give us O
Lord, that which thou commaundest us, and then command us what thou will. And
therefore they reason like doltish Asses, which infer upon the exhortations
to grace and godliness which be in the Scriptures, that there is a power and
ability in us to perform those things, whereunto God in his word exhorts us.
Exhortations be Gods instruments and means which he uses to work his
heavenly graces in us, and they teach us not what we can do, but what we
should do. I would here end this matter, but y^ I must tell you, that you
write improperly and falsely in charging us, that we say al goodness proceeds
so far from grace, that it lies not in man's power neither to have it, nor to
refuse it, but of necessity in must have effect. Improperly you write, in
putting, having Gods grace, in steed of obtaining and getting it: we say, it is
in man to have it, when God does give it, without which gift it is not in man's
power to get it. But it is in man to resist it. For ye grace of God offers
salvation to al, but it is resisted Tit. 2, 11.
and rejected of ma^y, in that their hard and stony hearts will not admit it.
The grace of God is offered to men, when his word is preached, and they be
called to repentance; but it is with many, and namely you, as Zachary says:
They refused Zachar. 7. 11 As the Papists do now.
to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they
should not hear. Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant stone, least they
should hear the Law and words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by
the ministry of the former* Prophets. I know no man that denies, but such men
do resist the grace of God, which yet is received of them that are written in
the book of life, whose wills it reformeth and of evil wills makes good wills,
willing and coveting those things which be acceptable in Gods sight. Finally, I
thought good for the better satisfying of the reader in this matter, to let him
understand: that whereas Erasmus (a man as all men must needs confess of great
learning) was had in jealousy of the Papists, as too much leaning to Luther
and his doctrine, he was at the last provoked and set on by them to write
against him: who choosing this matter of free will, and writing in defense
thereof, yet afterward he retracted and revoked his former opinion and writing,
and was not abashed to confess the truth, as appears by these his words.
Verum vt ingenue ^rasm. lib. 19. ^pist. ad Ludo^^cum Vi^em.
dicam; perdidimus liberum arbitrium: illic mihi aliud dictabat animus, aliud
scribebat calamus: But simply to speak my mind. We have lost our free will:
in that matter my mind did indite to me one thing, and my hand did write
another. I come now to the second doctrine of ours, which you untruly charge,
and falsely slander to tend to looseness of life, and carnal liberty, that
men be justified by faith alone, which you scornefully call a solifidian
portion, and falsely say, but do not prove, that it flatly overthrows true
repentance, sorrow for sins, mortification of passions, and all other
virtues, which tend to that perfect reconciliation of the soul with God, etc.
Where first I would exhort you (if the same might any thing prevail with you)
to take heed that by scorning in this manner at Gods Psalm. 1. 1 Prou. 19. 29
truth, you show not your self to be one of them that sit in the seat of the
scornful. Solomon says, that judgments are prepared for the scorn^rs, and
stripes for the back of fools. Secondly as this doctrine which you deride is
true, Godly, and comfortable, confirmed by the word of God, and ancient
Fathers; so does it not exclude, much less overthrow repentance, or any other
good work, but shows the true and right use of them. Saint Paul says, We
conclude Romans 5, 28
that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the Law. And in the
fourth chapter he reasons thus from Abraham the father of the faithful: If
Abraham were justified Romans 4, 2
by works, he has wherein to rejoice or glory: But Abraham has not wherein to
rejoice or glory before God. Ergo, Abraham was not justified by works. And
after says; To him that works not, but believes in him that justifies
Galat. 2, 16
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. We know that a man is
not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even
we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the works of the law, because that by the works of the
law no flesh shall be justified. This doctrine was neither scorned nor denied
by the ancient Godly Fathers, of some of whom I will set down a few sayings.

Origene speaking of the thief that was hanged with Origin in 3. ad Romans
Christ, says, Pro hac sola fide ait ei Jesus, Amen dico tibi; Hodie mecum
eris in paradiso: For this his only faith, Jesus said unto him: Verily I say
unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in paradise. And of the woman that
had the issue of blood: Ex nullo legis opere, sed pro sola fide ^^ Ibidem.
ad eam. Remittuntur tibi pec^ata: For no work of the law, but for faith only
he said unto her, Thy sins be forgiven thee. H^larie says: Solafides
iustificat: Only faith Hilar. in Math. Ca^. 8. and Can 21. Ambros^n Romans 3.
does justify. Ambrose says, iustificati sunt gratis, quia nihil operantes,
neque vicem reddentes sola fide iustificati sunt done Dei: They are justified
freely, because working nothing, nor rendering any recompense, they are
justified by faith only through the gift of ^od. The like he writes in Romans
4. and 10. and upon the 1. Cor. 1. Praefat. ad Galat. and upon chap. 3. Saint
Hierome says: Conuerte^tem Hier. in Romans cap. 4.
impium per solum fidem iustificat Deus, non opera bona quae non habuit: God
does by faith only justify the wicked man, converting not by good works which
he had not. Many such other sayings I might allege out of Hierome, Augustinus
in Psalm. 67.
but I leave them. Saint Augustine says: Sine bonorum operum meritis per fidem
iustificatur impius: The wicked man is justified by faith without the merits
of good works. In Psalm 88.
Again, Quia sola fides in Christum mundat etc. Because only faith in
Christ, does make clean, they that do not believe in Christ, be void of
cleanesse. He has also E^chir. ad Laurent. cap. 117.
often this fine saying: Fides impetrat, quod lex imperat. Faith obtains
that, which the law commands: that is to say, the law commands a
righteousness of works, faith obtains the righteousness of Christ, which
only is able to hide and discharge all our unrighteousness.

This doctrine which this disdainful man so much disdaineth, is acknowledged
of the Greek Fathers. Basil says, This is perfect and sound glorying in God,
when a man does not boast himself for his own righteousness, Basil. (...) Page
^^^.
but knows himself to be void of true righteousness, (...): And is justified
by only faith in Christ: Chrysostom says: Nobis pro cunctis sola Chrysostom.
in Math Hom. 12. Idem de prod^tione Iudae.
fides sufficiat: Only faith is sufficient to us for all other things. Again
Illud vnum asseueraue^im, quod sola fides per se salvum fecerit: This I may
affirm that only faith by it self saves. Again, Rursus illi dicebant, qui
sola fide nititur, execrabilis est: hic contra demonstrat, qui sola Idem in
Galat. cap. 3
fide nititur eum benedictum esse: They said, he that leans only to faith
is accursed: but Paul on the contrary part shows, that he that leans to
faith only is blessed.

Many such other places out of the Latin and Greek Fathers I might produce,
but I omit them, I hope he will not say, that these Fathers which delivered
this doctrine of solifidian faith (as he disdainfully terms it) did overthrow
repentance, mortification, and all other virtues. Nay this true faith, which
neither falsely, nor fantistically, but truly and effectually apprehends
Christ's death and passion, and applies the same as a most sovereign salve to
cure all the sores of our souls, is that which gives life to repentance,
mortification, and all other ver^^es. For as faith without works is dead, as
S. James says: so works James 2. 26 Cyril in exposit. Symbol. N^^^n. tom. 1.
Council. page 543 Chry in 1 ad Timot* Hom. 5.
without faith are dead, as Cyril and Chrysostom say. And we truly auerre,
that this true faith in Gods merifull promises, by the which Christ does dwell
in our hearts, cannot be severed from charity, virtues, and good works, as
he falsely affirms, but faintly and foolishly proves that it may. His
first reason is taken from experience, because few or none of us have faith,
for that few or none of us have these works. How many or few of us have faith
and good works, you are no competent judge for to determine. And therefore we
appeal from your affectionate and erroneous judgment, to the true and just
judgment of God. I doubt not but before I have ended this article, to prove
that we be not so void of good works, and so full of abominable wickedness,
as your Popes and spiteful spiritualty has been.

Your second proof you will draw out of the Scripture, that all faith; yea,
and the most noble faith which has 1. Cor. 13.
force to remove mountains, may be without charity. I answer, that Saint
Paul speaks not there of the faith of Tit. ^^1. Math. 7.
Gods elect, but of that which is a gift to work miracles, which may be in
wicked reprobates, such as Judas was: and so does Oecumenius the Greek
Scholiast expound it in these words: (...). Oecumen. in 1. Cor. 13
He speaks not of the common and Catholic faith of the faithful, but of a
certain gift of faith. ^or there was a certain kind of gift, which by an
equivocation was called faith. So that S. Paul, as he had before compared
charity, with the gift of tongues, and with the gift of prophesying: so here he
compares it with the gift of doing miracles. And as those gifts may be in the
wicked severed from charity, so also may this. Some writers also in the former
chapter, where S. Paul says: To another is given ^. Cor. 12. 9.
faith by the same spirit, do expound it of the particular faith of doing
miracles, As Theophilactus: Non fides d^gmatum, Theophilact. in 1. Cor. 12
sed miraculorum, quae and montes transfert: He speaks not of faith of
doctrine, but of miracles which moves mountains. And therefore S. Paul
means, that if the whole faith which is in doers of miracles were in him
separated from charity, as it may be, he were nothing. But that faith by
which Christ dwells in the hearts of his elect, neither is, nor can be
separated from charity, but G^lath. 5. 6.
works by it. And therefore S. Paul in his gratulations in the beginning of
his Epistles, does always join them together, as being such graces of Gods
spirit, which be never separated asunder, Hearing of the faith, which ye have
in Ephesians. 1. 15. Coloss 14. 1 Thessalonians. 1, 3 2 Thessalonians. 1, 3 Philem. 1, 5. ^ebr. 12
the Lord Jesus, and love toward all the Saints. To conclude this point, that
this doctrine does not tend to loosenes of life, we teach that they which do
not follow peace and holiness shall never see God, and that good works are
the ways, wherein we must walk to the kingdom of God, and eternal life; to
the which, they that do not walk in them, shall never come. For without the
holy City shall be dogs, and enchaunters, and whoremongers, and murderers,
and Apocal. 22. 15
idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes lies. And although good fruits make
not the tree good, yet they be necessary effects of a good tree: so every tree
that brings not forth good fruit, shall be out down and cast into the fire.
M^th. 3, 10.


The third doctrine of ours, which you untruly charge to tend to loosenes of
life, is, That faith once had can never be lost: the which vain security (you
say) opens the gap to all libertine sensuality: and hereat you make great
exclamations. Here I will first clear the doctrine, and afterward answer your
vain cauillations, and needless exclamations. Faith is diverse ways taken in
the holy Scriptures. First, it is taken for the doctrine of faith, or the
Gospel which we believe: as, By whom we have rece^ued Romans 1, 5
grace and Apostleship, to the obedience of faith a^ong al Gentiles: that is,
that all nations might obey the Gospel. Also to the Galathians: This only
would I know o^ you, Received Galat. 3, 2.
ye the spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of f^^th, that is,
by hearing the Gospel preached. So we call the Christian faith, and the
Apostolical faith. In this sense faith being taken for the doctrine of the
Gospel: we confess that many may know it, make profession of it, and
historically believe it, and yet afterward may fall from it, as Judas and many
in Asia did. Secondly, it is taken for 2. Tim. 1. 15.
that promise which we make in Baptism, whereby we bind our selves to
profess true religion, and to believe in God, in whose name we be baptized.
Hereof S. Paul speaks, Refuse the younger widows: for when they have begun to
wax wanton against Christ, they will ^arrie, having ^amnation 1. Tim. 5, 11.
because they have broken the first faith. The which is to be understood of the
first profession of faith in Baptism, and not of the latter vow of single
life, as the Papists falsely and foolishly expound it. From this faith all they
do fall, which turn either on the right hand to false doctrine, or on the
left hand to wicked life. Many other ways faith is taken, but this question is
of that true, lively, and justifying faith, which is the faith of Gods elect,
whereby Christ Tit. 1. Ephesians. 3.
dwells in their hearts, and they receive nourishment and life from him. This
faith may be covered by temptations and falls, as fire in the night with
ashes, but never utterly extinguished. For they in whom this true faith is,
are like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that will Psalm. 1, 3
bring forth her fruit in due season, whose leaf shall not fade. And they
that tr^st in the Lord shall be as mount Psalm. 125. ^.
Sion, which cannot be moved, but remains for ever. They that by th^^ faith
are built upon the rock Jesus Christ, Math. 16. 18
hell gates shall never overcome them. Christ says, He that believes i^ the
Son of God has everlasting life. He that hearet^ my word and believes in
him that sent m^, has everlasting Io^. 3. 36. chap ^. 2^.
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed ro^ death to life.
He that believes in me shall never thirst. Chap. 6. 35. Ephesians 1. 13
Saint Paul says Wherein after ye believed ye were sealed with the holy spirit
of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, for the redemption of that
liberty purchased unto the praise of his glory. These places sufficiently
show, that that faith which is common to all Gods elect, and proper only to the
elect, can never perish, nor be utterly lost in them. And this true and
comfortable doctrine brings no vain security, nor opens the gap to any
libertine sensuality. For they that by this faith have tasted how sweet the
Lord is, cannot but love and fear God, and greatly delight in his
commandments. And that faith which swimmeth Psalm. 112 1
in men's lips, but is not printed in their hearts, nor shines by Godliness and
good works in their lives, is a dead faith, and is no more that true faith,
whereby we live unto God, then a dead man is a man. To conclude this matter,
although we distinguish between justification and sanctification: yet we
acknowledge that they be inseparable, and the one does necessarily follow the
other. For whosoever are justified by Gods grace and mercy through faith in
Christ Jesus, be also sanctified with Gods holy spirit, to abhor that which
is evil, and to clea^e to that which is good, and to serve God in tru^
holiness and righteousness all the days Romans 12. 9. Luk 1* 75
of their life. And therefore we teach that they which without repentance
persist in sinnne, wallow in wickedness, and commit ungodliness with
greediness, have no faith, nor have any assurance of the remission of their
sins: but may be assured that the wrath of God hangs over them, and ^f they
do not truly repent, and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life, will
fearfully fall upon them. So that you might have spared your vain and foolish
exclamations concerning Epicures, Heliogabalus, Bacchus and Venus, which are
more honored in Rome (as hereafter I will show) then allowed of us. For of
whom did Mantuan the Italian Carmelite Friar an 100. years past De calamitat
tempor. lib. 2
write this, but of your Popes and his favorers: Neglecto superum cult^,
spretoque tonantis im erio, Baccho indulgent, Venerique ministrant: Neglecting
the worship of God, they serve Bacchus and Venus.

Concerning the fourth point of doctrine, of keeping Gods commandments, I have
spoken sufficiently before. Only now I say that our doctrine tends hereunto,
to show us our misery by transgressing of them, that we may thereby be moved
to hunger for Gods mercy in Christ: and although we cannot perfectly fulfill
them (for in many things we sin all) yet we ought according to the Iamet 3. 2
measure of Gods grace given to us, have a care and conscience to walk in
them, and to frame our lives to the obedience of them.

Whereas fifthly you charge us, that we deny the Sacrament of Penance, thereby
to make men careless how they live: I answer, that although we deny your penance
to be a Sacrament, because it has no outward visible sign, and reject your
clancular confession, your absurd absolution, and your surperstitious or rather
blasphemous satisfaction, thereby to answer Gods justice, and discharge your
sins: yet we truly teach ye doctrine of repentance, as it is delivered unto us
in the word of God. We teach men to come to the knowledge of their sins, by ye
law of God, which is the Rom 3.
glass to show us our spots, and the first step to repentance: then to lament
their sins, whereby they have offended their gracious God, and merciful
father; to confess their sins with remorse of conscience, both to God and
men, whom they have offended: and especially we call upon men for amendment
of life, in bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance, without the which
there is no repentance. One part of which amendment is satisfaction to our
brethren for injuries committed and restitution of goods unlawfully and
vngoldly gotten. As touching our injuries against God, we plead not our own
satisfaction, but crave Gods mercy in Christ Jesus, who is our only
satisfaction, and by whom only we seek to have remission of them. Whereas you
say, that your confession rubbeth the sores of sin, and causes remembrance
of them, I say that this more truly and effectually is wrought by the
preaching of Gods word, whereby sin is more showed, and the wrath and
judgments of God against sin are more threatened, and thereby the conscience
more pricked 2. Sam. 12. 7
and wounded, then by your confession. So David was brought to repentance for
his foul sins of adultery and murder, by Nathans preaching, and thundering
Gods judgments against him, and not by his secret confessing. So the people
having heard Peter preach the word of Act. 2. 37 De poe^itent. did 5. cap. in
poe^itent. i^ g^ossa. Council. tom. 1 part. 1. P. 155. Socrat. lib. ^ cap. ^9.
S^zomen. lib. 7 cap. 16
God, were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the other
Apostles, Men and brethren what shall we do? This is Gods holy ordinance, the
other a plant which God has never planted, but an invention of man, as even
your own Canonists against your Schoolmen do confess. And what wickedness
has come of it, the ecclesiastical history partly shows, and God who sees
all secrets knows.

Your own Aluarus Pelagius Bishop of Sylueus in Portugale in his book de
planctu ecclesiae writes thus of your confession and confessioners: Saepe cum
paroch^anis mulieribus quas ad confessionem admittunt Scelestissime
fornicantur. Luk 2. cap. 37.
1. They Priests do often most wickedly commit fornication with the women of
there parishes which they admit to confession. The like writes Marsilius
Patauinus in his book entitled, Desensor Pacis part 2. ca. 6. page 286.

To your sixth accusation I answer, that we exclude and banish our Savior*
Christ, neither from the Sacrament of his supper, nor from the hearts of the
faithful; but acknowledge that as by faith he dwells in the one, so by
Ephesians. 3, 17 2. Cor. 13, 5
the same he is received of the Godly in the other. Your false and gross
doctrine of Transsubstantiation, which the Greek Church never believed, and
the Latin Church lately defined as Erasmus says, we justly reject and
condemn. ^r^s. Anno* ^^ in 1. Cor. 7
We exhort men, when they come to receive that holy mystery, the Sacrament and
pledge of our salvation in Christ, to examine themselves: and so to eat of
that bread, and drink of that cup: For he that eat hand drinks unworthily,
1. Cor. 11. ^8
eats and drinks his own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords
body. But if (as you say) sinful lives consorte not with his sacred mystery,
I marvel how your Priests lives consorted with it, which how holy they were,
I will show hereafter. Lastly, you charge us with a new negative religion,
wholly standing upon negation of Sacraments, ceremonies, rites, laws, customs,
and other practical points of the Catholic Church: whereunto I answer, that
we deny nothing that God has commanded, in the holy canonical Scripture, the
which as I have before showed, is the only rule of our Religion and life.
Indeed we deny and defy your trifling traditions and unwritten vanities, and
inventions, with the which you have gone a whoring as the Prophet says. If you
can show that we deny any thing, which Psalm. 106. 39
God has commanded, as we can plainly prove that you do, then spare not
to charge us with a new negative religion. You deny the sufficiency of the
Scriptures, and that all doctrine necessary to salvation is contained in them.
You deny the same Scriptures to be in the vulgar tongue, for all Gods people
to read and hear to their comfort. You deny prayer and the public service
of God to be in the same vulgar tongue. You deny Christ to be our only
mediator between God and us. You deny the Cup of Christ's supper to Gods people.
You deny the lawful authority which Princes have over their people, and
subjects, in all causes ecclesiastical and temporal. You deny marriage to
ecclesiastical ministers, whereby what great and horrible wickedness you have
caused, I will hereafter declare. You say we bring in for fasting* feasting;
for praying, playing, etc. Concerning your fasting, consisting in a
superstitious observing of times, and diversity of meats, and tending to the
honoring of Saints, and satisfying Gods justice for your sins, we deny it.
But fasting purely used according to Gods word, to humble our souls before
God, and to mortify the wicked affections of our sinful flesh, we allow; and
especially that great and principal fast, in abstayning from sin, whereof
Saint Augustine speaks in these words: Ieiunium autem magnum and generale
August in Joan tra^l ^7 and distinct. de consecra, cap. Ieiunium.
est abstinere ab iniquitatibus, and ab illicitis voluptatibus seculi, quod est
perfectum iei^nium in hoc seculo: The great and general fast is to abstain
from iniquities, and unlawful pleasures of the world, which is the perfect
fast in this world. Chrysostom says, Ieiunium dico abstinentiam a vitiis, I
say that fasting, which is to abstain from vices. Chrysostom. in Genes. hom 8.
Hereby let it be discerned, who do most truly fast. In deed I know that it
is your manner, much to glory in your writings and speeches, of your outward
fasting from meats, as the Pharisee in the Gospel did, who gloried Luke. 18.
12.
that he fasted twice a week, which neither God in his law had required, nor
the Apostles of Christ (for any thing we read) used. Whereby we may note,
that true Godliness neither is to be measured by such outward abstinece from
meats, nor is always joined with it. John Matthew. 11. 18
Baptist used greater austerity in his diet, and abstinence from meats, then
our Savior Christ did; yet was his life nothing so holy. John's Disciples used
more fasting Matthew. 9. 14.
then the Disciples of our Savior Christ did. Yet it is not to be doubted, but
our Saviors Disciples lived as godly or Tertul de I^i^nio adue^s. Psichicos
Hierom. in Aggaeum. cap. 1. page 230.
more, then they did. The Montanists Heretics were greater fasters then were
the true Christians, as Tertullian shows. And S. Hierome writes that they
observed three Lents in a year, and yet were Heretics condemned by the Church
of God, although then favored by the Bishop of Rome as Tertullian shows in
the beginning of his book against Praxeas. The Jews used such great
abstinence and fasting, that they brought weakness and sickness to their
bodies, as Saint Hierome writes, who neuerthe Hierorymus ad Algaesiam. quast.
10.
less were enemies to our Savior Christ. The Moscouites which never
acknowledged the Popes authority be as great fasters as Papists are. And so
also be the Turks. And therefore these men need not to boast so much of 1.
Tim. 4. 8.
their fasting. Saint Paul says, that bodily exercise profits little, but
godliness is profitable to all things, and has the promise of this life
present, and that which is to come. Howbeit, as I will not deny, but that there
may be less fasting, and more feasting, then were requisite: yet that there is
more feasting and superfluity in fare now, especially in ecclesiastical
persons, I think it will be to hard for this man to prove. Whence came these
phrases, As fat as an Abbot, he has a face like an Abbot, and an Abbey Lubber,
but of their immoderate fare and feeding; And how these men were given to
gluttony and excess, I will show at this time but by one example. Giraldus
Cambrensis in his Book entitled, Speculum Ecclesiae, writes, that the Abbot
and Monks of Saint Swithens in Winchester, came to King Henry the second,
hunting at Gilford in Surrey, and fell down in mire and dirt before him,
pitifully crying out. The King asked them, what was the matter. They answered,
that their Bishop had taken three dishes of meat from their dinners and
suppers. He asked them how many he had left unto them. They answered ten, but
from the foundation of their house they had used daily to have thirteen dishes
at a meal. The King turned to his Nobles and said: By the eyes of God (for
that was his oath) I thought their house had been burnt, and now I see it is
but a matter concerning their paunches. And then turning to the Abbots and
Monks said: If your Bishop deal not with you, as I have done with my court,
to bring you to three dishes, I would he were hanged. This was the remedy,
that these gluttenous Monks found at the hands of that prudent Prince. Where
the reader may note, not only the great gluttony, but shameless impudency of
these men or monsters, in making such a lamentable complaint, for want of three
dishes, having ten r^mayning. The same Cambrensis writes, that in some
Abbeies they had at every meal sixteen dishes, which slender diet Monks
bellies were Baccus barrels.
was a good means to preserve their holy vowed virginity. Hereof came the old
ryming verse. O monachi vestri stomachi sunt amphora Bacchi, etc. To come to
the next, I wish there were more praying, and less playing then there is: yet
this will I say, that there is now more true praying according to the will of
God, and less playing then was ever in popery. Dicing and carding is in some
reformed Churches abolished, and of those that truly profess the Gospel less
used, then it has been of Papists. But I will not stand to prosecute the
pa^^icularities that here you name. Cicero pro Ligario.
I will say unto you as Tullie said to Tubero, Habes Tubero quod est accusatori
maxim optandum, confitentem reum, etc. Thou have O Tubero that which an
accuser would most wish for, the party accused confessing himself guilty, yet
so confessing that he was on the same side that thou Tubero and thy Father
were. So we say and confess, that there is less devotion, and more
dissolution, less religious fear, and more vain security, less zeal and
mortification, then there ought to be: but I trust hereafter to show, that
these virtues have as much or more wanted, and these vices abounded among
Papists, as they do with us.

Now I will come to the second part of my answer promised to this article. To
show to what loosenes and wickedness of life, the popish doctrine does tend, and
what weeds of wickedness it has brought forth.

First their doctrine of keeping Gods word in a strange tongue, and restrayning
Gods people from reading and hearing of it, has been and is a great cause
both of error in doctrine, and wickedness in life. Our Savior Christ says, You
err not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of God. David says, That the
law of God gives wisdom to the Mat. 22, 29. Psalm. 19. 7, 8. Psa. 119, 105.
simple it lightneth the eyes, it makes Gods servant circumspect and that it
is a light unto our feet, and a Lantern unto our steps. He shows also
that it is a mean to preserve men from sin. For speaking of the righteous
man he says: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not
slide. Psa. 17, 21 Psa. 119. 11,
And again: I have hid thy words in my heart that I might not sin against
thee, That good Father Chrysostom, who was a most earnest exhorter of all men
to the reading of De Lazaro and diuite Homil. 3 and ad R^m. in praesatione.
the Scriptures says: Magna aduersus peccatum munit^^ Scripturarum lectio:
magnum praecipitium, profundum barathrum Scripturarum ignoratio. H^c hareses
peperit, haec vitam corruptam inuexit, haec sursum and deorsum omnia miscuit
The reading of the Scriptures is a great sauegard against sin: the ignorance
of the Scripture, is a slippery means to fall into sin, and a deep gulf of
sin. This has bred Heresies, this has brought in corruption of life, this
has turned all things vpside down. Again: Hoc Ad coloss. hom. 9. Hier^n. ad
Ru^
omnium malorum causa est, quod Scripturae ignorantur: This is the cause of all
evils, that men be ignorant of the Scriptures. Saint Hierome who exhorts
Ladies to bring up their young daughtres, being but seven years old in the
reading of the holy Scriptures, says Ama scientiam Scripturarum and carnis
vitia non amabis, Love the knowledge of the Scriptures, and thou shall not love
the vices of the flesh. Many such other sayings might be alleged out of the
Fathers, which plainly show, that the keeping of the holy Scriptures in an
unknown tongue, and the restrayning of Gods people from reading and hearing of
them is a doctrine tending to loosenes, and great wickedness of life.

Their doctrine of vowing chastity and single life, and prohibiting matrimony,
what an occasion it has been of horrible filthiness and wickedness of life, I
will briefly declare. Chrysostom. tom, 5 quod regulares faemi. tum viris
cohabitant.
Chrysostom of some women in his time which under a profession of virginity
lived wickedly, says thus: Virginitas ista cum viris plus ab omnibus arguitur
quam stuprum ipsum: This virginity of women with men is more reproved of all
men then whoredom it self. Saint Hier^me in his time complained of the like
women. Sanctum virginum propositum. etc. The evil name of some which behave
Hieron, ad virg, Demetriadem.
not themselves well, does slander the holy purpose of virgins. Saluianus the
Bishop of Massilia, who lived in the year of our Lord 480. writes thus: Nouum
est prorsus religionis genus. Licita non faciunt and illicita committunt.
Saluianus lib, 5. de prouiden. tia.
Temperant a concubitu (quamuis nec hoc faciunt nisi a licito) and non
temperant a rapina, etc. i. This is a new kind of religion. They do not things
lawful: and commit things unlawful. They abstain from copulation (although
the abst^ine not from that neither, but from that which is lawful) and
refrain not from rape. What do thou O foolish persuasion? God has
forbidden sin, and not marriage, your deeds agree not with your studies or
profession. You ought not to be favorers of vices. There is extant an epistle
of Huldricus Bishop of Augusta, who lived about the Paralip. Abba. Vsperg p. 4.
14
year of our Lord 860. unto Pope Nicholas the first concerning the forbidding
of Priests marriage, wherein is declared, that Gregory the Pope having given
forth a decree, for the single life of Priests, upon the finding of 6000.
childrens heads in ponds of water, where they had bin drowned, did revoke the
same decree, and commended the saying of the Apostle, It is better to marie
then to burn: 1. Cor. 7. 9.
adding thereunto, that it was better to marry then to give occasion of
murder. Of this epistle Pope Pius the second makes mention, entreating of
Germany, and it was found in a library in Holland before Luthers time. Bernard
the Abbot, who lived Anno domini. 1150. complains of the wicked life of the
clergy, in these words: Episcopi and Bernardus in council. Romen.
sacerdotes huius temporis c^stitatis sanctimoniam, sine qua nemo videbit deum,
tam in cord, quam in corpor^ quomodo student obseruare? traditi in reprobum
sensum faciunt quae non conueniunt. Quae enim in occulto fiunt ab episcopis,
turpe est dicere: How do the Bishops and Priests of this time keep holy
chastity both in heart and body, without which no man shall see God? Being
given up into a reprobate mind, they do the things that are not convenient:
for what things be done of Bishops in secret, it is a shame for to speak.
Again, Toll de ecclesia honorabile Supra. Cantica. ser. 86.
connubium, etc. Take from the Church honorable marriage, and the bed
undefiled, and thou shall fill it full of whoremongers, incestuous persons,
buggerers, and all kind of unclean ones. Again, he shows that there
Bernardus de persecutione. sustinenda. cap. 29.
were very many, who abstayning from the remedy of marriage, fell afterward
into all kind of wickedness. About that time, the Pope sent a Cardinal called
Ioannes Cremensis into England, to disolue Priests marriages, who in a synod
having inueyed against their marriage, saying, that it was a shameful thing,
that a Priest should arise from his wife, to consecrate the body of Christ, was
the same Fabian. part. 7 cap. 229. fol. 154.
night after taken with a whore; as Fabian and other writers do witness. And I
read the same story in an old written book, which I think was the story of
Henry Huntington, where these words were added: Celari non potuit taceri non,
debuit. It could not be kept secret, and it ought not to be suppressed in
silence. In the gloss upon Distinct. 81. Maximinus in glossa.
Gratians decrees it is said that a Priest for simple fornication is not to be
deposed from his benefice, and the reason is, because Pauci sine illo vitio
inueniuntur: i. Few were found without that vice. Robert Holkoth an English
man, and a Dominike Friar, who lived about the year of our Lord. 1340. writes
of the Priests in his time in these words: Sed proh dolor, Rober. Holkoth supra
lib. Sapient. lecti 173
his diebus verificatur nimis illud Job. cap 3. Ecce qui seruiunt ei, id est,
Domino, non sunt stabiles, and in Angelis suis reperit prauitate^. Sunt enim
quida^ de modernis sacerdotibus, Angeli Satanae per discordia^: quida^ Angeli
Apostatici per superbiam: quida^ incub^ per luxuriam: and quidam Angeli abyssi
per auaritiam: i. But alas in these days that saying of Job cap. 3. is too
true: Behold, they that serve the Lord, are not stable or constant, and in his
Angels he has found naughtines. For of the Priests of these days, some be
Angels of Satan, by discord and contention: some Apostaticall Angels by pride:
some be filthy spirits by riotousnes and uncleanness: and some the Angels of
the bottomless pit, by covetousness. Again, Hunc vilissimum deum (Priapum)
excolunt non pauci Idem ibidem.
sacerdotes moderni, discipuli illius magni Angeli de quo loquitur Paulus, 2.
Cor. 12. Datus est mihi Angelus Satanae, etc. This most vile and filthy God (
Priapus) not a few Priests of these days do serve, being the disciples of
that great Angel, of whom Paul speaks 2. Cor. 12. The Angel of Satan was
given unto me, etc. Auentinus writing of Pope Hildebrand, called Gregory the
seventh, who earnestly forbad Priests marriage says: Maxima pars sub honesto
nomine Auentinus in Annalibus Boiorum, lib. 5. page, 56 ^. ex* cusi,
Ingolstadii^ 1554.
castimoniae, stupra, incestus, and adulteria passim and impune committunt: A
great number of Priests, under the honest name of chastity, committed every
where, and without punishment, Whoredom, Incest and adulteries. Yea what other
great mischiefs were committed he there declares. There is a treatise in the
second tome of the Councels, entitled Opusculum Tripartitum, in the second
part Council. tom. 2. page 1002.
whereof are these words. T^nta immunditia luxuriae notoria est in multis
partibus mundi, non solum in Clericis, sed etiam in sacerdotibus, imo (quod
horribile est audire) in praelatis maioribus: So great uncleanness is notorious
in many parts of the world, not only in Clearks, but also in Priests, and
(that which is horrible to hear) in great Prelates, Panormitane who lived anno
1431. and was a great dooer in the Council of Basile, having showed that the
vow of continency is not of the order of Priesthood, nor holds by the law of
God, but is a constitution of the Church, Panormita, part. 3. de clericis
coniuga, cap, cum olim.
adds these words: Credo quod pro bono and salute animarum, etc. I believe
that it were a wholesome ordinance for the good and salvation of souls, to
leave it to their own wills, that would live continently, and merit more, and
that they which could not contain, might marry: because that experience does
teach, that a clean contrary effect does follow that law of continency, for
that now adays they do not live spiritually, nor be clean, but be defiled
by unlawful copulation to their most grievous sin, whereas they might live
chastely with their own wife, John. Gerson. Tom. 1. declar. defectuum virorum
eccles.
as the Nicene Council said. John Gerson in his time complained that some
Cloisters of Nuns were become stews of strumpets and whores: his words be
these: Rursus occulos aperite, and inquirite, Si quae hodie Claustra monialium
facta sunt quasi prostibula meretricum. Mantuan the Carmelite Italian Friar,
who was an excellent learned man, and lived an hundred years past, writing of
this vow, and the fruits thereof says thus.

Propterea leges quae sunt connubia contra, Lib. 1. fastor.

Esse malas quidam perhibent: prudentia patrum,
Non satis aduertit, dicunt, quid far recuset,
Quid valeat natura pati; cer^icibus, aiunt,
Hoc insuaue ingum nostris imponere Christus
Noluit: istud onus quod adhuc quam plurima mo^stra
Fecit, ab audaci dicunt pietate repertum,
Tutius esse volunt, qua lex diuina sinebat,
Isse via, voterumque sequi vestigia patrum,
Quoru^ vita fuit melior cum coniuge, quam nunc
Nostra sit, exclusis thalamis and coniugis vsu.
Mantuan here shows, first, that many in those days misliked that law of
vowing single life. Secondly, that it had bred many monsters, that is to say,
such as for their wickedness did lead a monstrous life. Thirdly, that the life
of the ancient Fathers that lived in marriage, was better then of these which
vowed chastity. Polidorus Virgilius an Italian, and gatherer of the Popes
Peter pense here in England, writes thus: Illud tamen dixerim tantum abfuisse
Polidor. Virg. de invent. rerum. lib: 5. cap: 4.
vt ista coacta castitas illam coniugalem viterit, etc. Yet this I will say,
that this enforced chastity is so far from excelling that chastity of
marriage, that no crime and sin has brought more shame to ye order of
Priesthood, more evil to religion, nor more grief to all good men, than that
blot of the filthiness of Priests. Wherefore peradventure it were expedient,
both for the Christian common wealth, and the estate of that order of
Priesthood, that at the last the right of public marriage were restored to
Priests, which they might holyly use without infamy, rather then most filthily
defile themselves with such a natural vice. Such a loosenes and filthiness of
life, this doctrine of vowing chastity, and forsaking matrimony has brought
forth: whereof much more might be alleged, but this shall suffice. Yet
herevunto I will add not only their practice, but also their doctrine of having
Lupanaria, stews, where whoredom is publicly permitted: for the restoring of
which, Friar Perine preached at Paul's Cross in Queen Mary's days Co^sut.
Apolog.
and D. Harding calls them necessary evils. And if it were not the doctrine
of the Church of Rome to allow them, neither would they have so long permitted
them, nor Sixtus the fourth would have built Nobile Lupanar, a noble brothell
house in Rome, as before I alleged out of Cornelius Agrippa. In these places,
what filthiness and incest, and what murders were committed, God knowweth, and
ancient men may somewhat remember. God says, There shall be no whore of the
daughters of Israel, nor Deuteronomy. 23. 17.
whorekeeper of the sons of Israel.

Another doctrine of theirs tending to looseness and wickedness of life, is
their doctrine of Popes pardons, whereby they falsely feign, that the Pope
having the merits of Martyrs (which they call ye treasure of the Church) to
dispense and bestow at his pleasure, he can pardon whatsoever sin men have
committed, and acquit and discharge them both a poena and culpa: that is from
the sin and punishment, which is more by their doctrine, then the death and
passion of Christ can do. What miserable mischief has flowed from these
pelting pardons of Popes (from which the ruin of their kingdom has justly
proceeded) By Luthers dealing against them.
I will declare out of the words of ye Princes and estates of Germany in their
100. grieuances exhibited to the Popes Legate at Norenberg, anno 1522. and
printed at Colen, anno In fasciculo ^erum expete^^arum. fol. ^77. Grauamen. 3.
1533. In ye third grieuance be these words: Illud importabile iam olim
increbuit Romanarum indulgentiarum onus, etc, That importable burden^ of Romish
pardons has now a long time increased, when under the pretense of piety,
either for building of Churches in Rome, or that the Bishops of Rome promised
a voyage against the Turk, they sucked all the marrow of money from the simple
and ever credulous Germans: And that which is much more to be regarded, by
these deceits, and the publishers and Preachers of them, the true godliness of
Christians is abolished, whilst they to broach the sale of these their bulls,
and pardons, give praise unto their wares, that by these bought pardons, great
and strange offenses both which be past, and that are to come, not only of the
living* but also of the dead, being in the fire of Purgatory, (as these
publishers of pardons call it) be pardoned, so that money be paid, and that
it ti^gle in their right hand: and by the sale and merchandise of this ware,
both Germany of money is spoiled, and Christian godliness is extinguished* when
every one according to the quantity, which he bestows upon this ware, does
take unto himself liberty and impunitie to sin. Hence whoredom, incest,
adulterie^s, perjury, murder, theft, robberies, usury, and an whole heap of
mischiefs have proceeded, and taken their beginning. For what mischiefs will
men be afraid to commit, when they be once persuaded, that they obtain by
money of these brokers and pardoning pedlers* license and impunitie to sin,
not only in this life, but also after their death? etc, by these words it does
evidently appear, to what looseness of life, and manifold mischiefs this
doctrine did tend, Alphons. de cast. lib 8. Duran in lib. 4 did. ^0. quaest 3
Antoni 1. part summae. titul 10 cap^ 3.
some Papists themselves confess, to have no warrant of the Scriptures, John.
Mayor. in 4. sent. did. 20. quaest. 2. Onus ^^^les. cap. 15. fol. 26.
and other some affirm such pardons as be granted for twenty thousand years
to be superstitious and foolish. I might speak much of this matter, but at
this time I will conclude it with two sayings, the one contained in a book
printed at Colen, anno 1531. Entitled Onus Ecclesiae, wherein after great
complaint of these pardons, and of the wickedness that proceeded of them, be
these words: Illi autem indulgentiarum buccinatores omnimo^dam promittunt
securitatem, quae parit negligentiam, and negligentia offensam Dei: These
publishers of pardons do promise all manner of security, which breeds
negligence, and negligence the offense of God. The other is in the treatise I
named before in the second Tome of the Councels, called Opus^ul Tripart* ^om ^.
Council. ^art. 3. Page ^00. 2
Opusculum Tripartitum, in these words: Item habent breuia quae rel^qunt in
singulis parochijs, in quibus continentur indulgentiae, quod mirantur boni
viri, Si vnquam de conscientia papae vell etiam alicuius boni viri potuerunt
illa procedere: They have also briefes which they leave in every parish, in
which such pardons be granted, that good men do marvel, that ever they could
proceed from the conscience of the Pope, or any good man.

The doctrine of the Popes dispensations to what loosenes and wickedness of life
did it tend? First, hereby in^est was committed, as before I showed how Pope
Martin Phil: Comines de bel^o n^opo* lib. 5. P. 626. Sleyda^^. lib. 25.
5. gauea dispensation to one to marry his own Sister, Ferdinandus a King of
Naples married his Aunt, Emanuell King of Portingale married two Sisters. So
did also Sigismundus King of Polonia Anno Domini 1553. Sigismundus also now
King of Polonia, this last year married Sleda. lib. 25. Gotardi Arth^s Mer.
Galobell. Anno. 1606. page 95.
his former wives Sister. King Henry the eight married Catheri^ne his brothers
widow, and lately Maximilian the Emperors daughter was married to King Philip
of Spain her Uncle, of whom he begat this present King. Th^se and many such
other were not done without the Popes dispensation, So Bonif^cius a Bishop of
Germany in one Epistle to Pope Zachary shows, how a great man by the Popes
dispensation married his Uncles widow. T^m. 2. council. page ^. 47. Fabi. 7.
part. in Charles. 5. page 189. Vide Rob. Giguinum lib, 8 fol, 133.
Fabian our English Chronicler, who lived somewhat before Luther, writes that
Charles the fifth the French King did by the dispensation of Pope John 22. put
away Blanch his wife, because her mother was his Godmother, and afterward was
by the same Pope dispensed with to marry his Cousin German. Many Kings, by
means of such dispensation bought of the Pope for money, have put away Micha.
Ritus lib, ^. Rob. Gaguinus in ^udo. 12. Sabel. Enne. 10. lib, 2.
their lawful wives, and married others: as Vladislaus king of Hungary,
Ludouicus the 12. the French King, etc. Yea I am ashamed to express what a
horrible sin Pope Sixtus 4. did dispense with, to be used in the hot months
of June, July and August, as writes V^selus Groningensis in his treatise of
Pardons. They did dispense to keep as many Benefices as one could get, so that
Cardinals of Rome, had some 200. some 300. Benefices, as I have out of Io.
Gerson page 17.
and Nicholaus C^emangis before declared. Hereof also that learned Earl of
Mirandula Io. Franc. Picus complained in In faciculo rerum expetend. ^c
s^^iend. impr^ss Coloni^ 1553. fol. 210
an Oration to Pope Leo. 10. in these words: Sanctissime cauetur, ne multa ab
vno Sacerdotia quibus annexa sit ^nimaru^ cura, possideantur: dispensatio (ita
solet appellari) effecit, vt iam non multa, non plura, sed innumera ten^ant
multi, qui ne diaco^i quide^ mererentur offici^ defungi: at eiusmodirerum
dissipationem non ego, sed Bernardus tot ante secul^ appellauit: It was most
godly provided that one man should not have many Benefices whereunto cure of
souls is annexed. But dispensation (for so it is called) has brought to pass
that ^xlib 3. de co^sideratione a^ ^^ge.
many men have not some, and many; but innumerable Benefices, which are not
worthy to execute the office of a deacon. This not I, but Bernard many ages
past called a dissipation. Io. Gerson, having made mention of Bernards Io.
Gerson tom 1. de potesta. ecclesiae consider. 10.
complaint, adds these words Quid modo dicendum putabimus de tam facili, vt
appellant, dispensatione per Papam and Praelatos super iurametis licitis, super
votis rationabilibus, super immensa beneficiorum pluralitate, super general^
concili^rum non obstantia, super priuilegiorum and exemptionum commune ius
priuantium concessione. Quis omnia denumeraret per quae nunc vigor
ecclesiasticae, imo and Euangelicae disciplinae totus vere elanguit, emarcuit,
euanuit? i. What shall we think is to be said now of such easy dispensing by
the Pope, and Prelates, concerning lawful oaths, reasonable vows, infinite
plurality of Benefices, the general infringing of Councels, and the granting
of privileges and exemptions, which take away common rights. Who can number up
all, by which the whole strength of Ecclesiastical and Evangelical discipline
is languished, withered, and perished. Hereby it may sufficiently appear what
dissolution and loosenes of life has proceeded from the doctrine of the Popes
power in dispensing.

What great mischifes and calamities have comen of their doctrine concerning
the Popes power in deposing Emperors, Kings and Princes from their Crowns and
dignities, no pen can express, nor any mind sufficiently Vide marsili^^ pataui
in d^fer. pacis part. 2. cap. 25. page 403.
conceive. Hereupon infinite bloody battles have been fought, Cities sacked,
Countries wasted, and millions of people* consumed. As appears by ye
hisstories of Henry 4. Henry 5. Frederick 1. and Frederick 2. Lud^uicus
Bau^rus and many others. From hence came that fearful faction of the
Gibellines, holding with the Emperor; and the Guelses, holding with the Pope:
whereby not only the Cities of Italy were distracted and in a manner wasted,
Vide. Platina^ in. Bonifacio. 9
but also the inhabitants of singular Cities were divided, amongst themselves,
expelling, killing, and murdering one another. So that even in Rome it self,
those two Carrion per Pe^ c^rum part, 4 lib. 5, page, 94, ^t Ant^n, H^st. par 3.
Tit. 21 cap 2. Sect, 5. fol. 9^.
great families the Columns being Gibellines, and the Vrsines, being Guelfes,
have fought one with another daily three months together. Here by the way the
Christian Reader may consider, how vainly and salsely the author of that other
lying and slanderous Libell, entitled A Reason 24. page 150.
Quartron of reasons, etc. glories that peace and tranquillity find harbor
and intertainment only in Catholic Realms and Commonwealths: and that their
Catholic religion ever brings with it, peace, quietness, love, friendship,
plenty, and all kind of happiness. Whereby he shows his gross ignorance in
histories, which most plainly and plentifully show the contrary, and that it
was with Christian countries in time of Popery, as Azaria said, There was no
peace to him that did go out and in, but 2. Paral. 15. 5.
great troubles were to all the inhabitants of the earth. For Nation was
destroyed of Nation, and City of City: for GOD troubled them with all
adversity. But of this I will speak no more at this present; hereafter GOD may
give an occasion more largely to handle it.

Moreover, their doctrine of easy expiation and purging of sins by a Priests
absolution, by buying the Popes Pardons, by hearing Masses, by procuring Dirges
and Trentals, by sprinkling holy warer, by bearing Agnus Dei, and many such
other paltries, whereunto did it tend but to loosenes and wickedness of life,
by encouraging them to commit that, which might by such easy means be
discharged? Whereunto did their doctrine of worshipping Images tend, but to
Idolatry? whereof what calamity has come to the Christian Commonwealth, by
weakening and renting asunder the Empire, and thereby strengthening Infidels, I
will not at this present show. Whereunto does their doctrine of keeping no oath
nor faith with Infidels and Heretics tend, but to cause perjury, and to take
peace and tranquillity from Countries? What fearful plagues of God have ensued
hereof, might easily be showed. I will only note one, namely that great
overthrow which the Christians received at Varna by Amurathes the Turk, with
whom Vladislaus the king of Polonia, and Ioannes Huniades having made an
honorable and Bonfin. Decad. 3. lib, 6, page 457.
profitable peace, and confirmed the same with oaths and writings, Pope
Eu^enius 4. urged them first by Francis the Cardinal of Florence, and
afterward by Iulianus the Cardinal, to break peace, and to renew war.
Whereat the Turk wondered, and in the heat of the battle, as Bonfinius
Bonfin. Decad. 3. l^b. 5. page 464.
writes, Amurathes took out of his bosom the writings of the peace and
league, and looking up to heaven said, This is the league, O Jesus Christ,
which thy Christians have made, and confirmed by thy name, who have falsified
their faith given by thy name. If thou be God, as they say, avenge thy injury,
and punish these faulse abusers of thy name. After which words the victory fell
to the Turks, there Vladislaus the King was slain, all the Polonians killed,
the Nobles of Aeneas Si^^ius Comment. ia Europ page, 399.
Hungary destroyed, Iulianus the Cardinal the Popes Messenger, and causer of
that mischief in flight murdered. By which great overthrow, the power of
Hungary was so weakened, that afterward it was the easilier conquered by the
Turk. This great calamity came of their doctrine of keeping no oath nor league
with Infidels and Heretics, and of the Popes power in dispensing therewith.
And what a hinderance of stablishing peace among Christian Princes it is at
this day, any man of mean understanding may easily consider.

Now for as much as this man makes so much of their devotion and our
dissolution and loosenes of life, I will according to my promise before made,
show what holiness the Popes have inspired and breathed into the City of
Rome, where they reside, and into their own court. Bernard writes of Rome in
these words: Quid tam notum seculis quam proteruia and fastus Romanorum? gens
insueta pacitumultui Bernard. lib. ^. de considerat.
assueta. Gens immitis and intractabilis, vsque adhuc subdi nescia, nisi cum
non valet resistere: What is so well known unto ages as the frowardnes and
pride of the Romans? A people unacquainted with peace, accustomed to tumult
and trouble. A people cruel and intractable, which will not as yet be subject,
but when it is not able to Idem ^odem. lib.
resist. And of the Court of Rome thus: Curia bonos facilius recipere, magis
quam facere co^sueuit. etc. The Court rather receives good men, then makes
them good. But if we have proved, that more good men have become naught in it,
then euillmen have become good: then such are to be sought, as neither decaying
in them is to be feared, nor amending is to be wished, as being already perfect.

Franciscus Petrarch, who lived in Rome, greatly co^plaineth Anno 1370.
of the abominations of Rome, and the Popes Court. Quicquid vspiam perfidiae
and doli, quicquid inclementiae superbiaeque Epist. 19.
quicquid imp^dicitiae effr^nataeque libidinis audistia^t legisti, qu^cquid
denique impietatis and morum pessimorum sparsim habet aut habuit orbis terrae,
totum istic cumulatim videas, aceruatimque reperias, etc. i. Whatsoever
treachery and deceit, whatsoever cruelty and pride, whatsoever uncleanness and
unbridled lust thou have heard or read, finally whatsoever impiety the world
now has, or has had, thou may see it and find it in full heap and measure
there. For I need not to speak of coueteousnesse and ambition, of the which
the one has there set the throne of her kingdom, from whence she might rob
and spoil the world; and the other dwells no where but there. I would the
learned reader would read the rest of that 19. Epistle, and the next Epistle
following, and see how he painteth forth the abominations of Rome, and the
Popes Court, which would be too long and tedious for me to write. Friar
Mantuan (of whom I made mention before) writes thus of Rome:

Si quid Roma dabit, nugas dabit, accipit aurum, Eclog^.

Verba dat. Heu Romae nunc sola pecunia regnat:
Exilium virtus patitur. i.
If Rome give any thing, it gives trifles; it receives gold, and gives
words: Alas only money does reign in Rome, virtue is banished out of Rome.

Again.
Viuere qui sancte cupitis discedite Roma* ^ib. 1 Siluar^

Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse pium. i.
You that desire to live godly depart ye from Rome, whereas all things are
lawful there, it is not lawful to be a godly man there.

Again.
I pudor in villas, si non patiuntur easdem ^^b. 2. fastor^.

Et vill^ vomicas: vrbs est iam tota Lupanar. i.
Depart honesty into villages, if they be not also infected with the like
filthy impostumes. The City (meaning Rome) is wholly become a Stews. Many
such other complaints he has which I omit. Palingenius another Italian Poet
and Papist says:

Atque r^gant, quidnam Romana ageretur in vrbe. Marcel paling. in Cap^icorno.

Cuncti luxuriae atque gulae, f^rtisque dolisque,
Cert^tim incumbunt, nosterque est sexus vterque i.
They ask what is done in the City of Rome. All are wholly given to riot, to
gluttony, to theft, to deceit, and to Sodomitrie.

Andrew Board Doctor of Physic and a popish Priest Andrew Board in his
Breuiary of health named Extrauag. Cap. 2.
writes thus of Rome: And shortly to conclude, I did never see no virtue nor
goodness in Rome, but in Bishop Adrians days, which would have reformed
diverse enormitics, and for his good will and pretense he was poisoned within
three quarters of a year after he did come to Rome, etc. Again, And now to
conclude, whosoever ^bidem.
has been in Rome, and has seen their vsuage ther^, except grace do work
above nature, he shall never be good man after, etc. Catherina Senensis that
holy woman, whom Pius 2. canonized for a Saint, because she was his Antoni.
part. 3. titul. 23. cap. 14. se^. 13. fol. 224. b Foetore^ in^ernalium vitiorum.
country woman, talking with Pope Gregory the 11. complained, as Antoninus the
Archbishop of Florence writes, that in the Court of Rome where should be a
delicate paradise of virtues, she found b a stink of hellish vices. And of the
same Court Aeneas siluius himself a Pope writes A^neas Siluiu^ epist 66. page
554.
thus: Nihil est absque argento Romana curia dedat. Nam and ipsae manus
impositiones, and spiritus sanct^ dona venduntur. Nec peccatorum venia nisi
nummitatis impenditur: The Court of Rome grants nothing without money: for
even imposition of hands, and the gifts of the holy Ghost are sold. Forgiveness
of sins is not granted but to them that have money. Again, Quid est Romana
curia ^dem epist. 188. page 763.
his qui summam tenent, nisi ^urpissimum pelagus ventis vndique durissimis
tempestatibus agitatum? Au^ritiae ibi atque inuidiae procella vix qnenquam
intactum praeterit: What is the Court of Rome in them that be the chief, but a
most filthy sea on every side tossed with winds and strong tempests? The
storm of covetousness and envy does there scarsely leave any one untouched.
And because this man complains so much of our dissolution and looseness of
life: I will add hereunto a few complaints of some Papists of the great and
general dissolution, loosenes, and prophan^nesse of life of former ages, when
Popery most flourished. The same Aeneas Siluius who lived above eight score
years past writes thus: Vsque adeo apud homines nostri Histor. de Europa cap.
21. p. 763. Comme^t. in ^ict^ and facta Alphonsi.
seculi diuina and humana perierunt: So greatly both divine and humane things
be perished with men of our age. Again, Quid magis Barbarum quam rapto
viuere, and omnem aequitatem, omnemque religionem proculcare, quem Italicum
morem esse videmus? What is more babarous then to live by robbery, and to
tread under feet all equity and religion, which we see to be the manner of
Italy? Again, Quod cum singulari moestitia referimus, statuum omnium and
Epist. 128
sexuum omnium religionem, fidem, and vrbanos mores in populo Christiano adeo a
iustitiae tramite declinasse, quod diuinam non cessant irritare and prouocare
vindictam: The religion, faith, and civil manners of all estates and sexes
(which with great grief I declare) is so declined from justice, that they
cease not to provoke the vengeance of God. Again, Nulla inter nos concordia,
nulla obedientia est, neque spirituali, Epist. 39^
neque temporali paremus capiti. Iacet spreta religio, iustitiae nullus honos,
fides pene incognita: There is neither concord nor obedience. We obey neither
the spiritual, nor temporal head. Religion lies despised, righteousness not
honored, faith is in a manner unknown. Platina who was the Popes Secretary,
and lived at the same time, in many places greatly complains of the horrible
corruption of life, both in the Priests and people in those days: Quanta sit
auaritia sacerdotum etc. How Platina in Marcell. 1*
great covetousness of Priests, and especially of those that be in chiefest
authority, how great leachery, how great ambition and pomp? how great pride
and idleness, how great ignorance both of themselves, and of Christian
doctrine, how little religion, and the same rather fained then true, how
corrupt manners to be detested in profane and secular men; I need not
declare, when they themselves do so openly sin, as though they sought
praise thereby. Believe me, the Turk a more cruel enemy of Christianity then
Diocletian or Maximinian will come (I would I might be a false prophet) and
even now knocks at the gates of Italy. The like complaints he has in many
other places in Dionysio 1. in Bonifacio 5. in Stephan 3. in Gregorio 4. etc.

Petrus de Aliaco a Cardinal of Rome, in his treatise Petr. de Aliaco Car^^: n
^asc. ^^rum (...) ac fugiend. Colo^^ae excus. A^no. ^535. fol. 207.
concerning the reformation of the Church exhibited to the council of
Constance Anno 1415. has these words: Adhibenda ^sset correctio crica mores
ecclesiasticorum qu^ iam nimis (proh^d^lor) sunt corrupti ira gula, luxuria,
pompa, prodigalitate, otio, and aliis generibus, quod cedit in grave la^corum
scandalum: A reformation were to be had about the manners of Ecclesiastical
persons, who now (which is greatly to be lamented) be so much corrupted by
anger gluttony riot or uncleanness by pomp, prodigality, idleness, and other
kinds of vices, which redoundeth to the great scandal and offense of lay men.
That noble and learned Earl of Mirandula, in his Oration to Pope Leo the tenth
and the Council of Laterane concerning the reformation of manners, has these
words: Apud plaerosque religionis nostrae Ibidem 209.
primores ad quorum exemplum componi atque formari plebs ignara debuisset, aut
nullus, aut cer^e exig^us Dei cultus, nulla been viuend^ ratio atque
insti^u^io, nullus pudor, nulla modestia: iustitia vel in odium, vel in gratia^
declmauit, pietas in superstition^ pene procubuit; palamque omnibus in hominum
^rd^^bus peccatur, sic vt saepenumero virtus probis v^r^s ^itio vertatur, vitia
loco virtutum honorari soleant, etc. With most of the chief of our religon, to
whose example the ignorant people should conform their lives, there is either
no worship of God, or surely very little, no manner nor order of good life, no
shamefastnes, no modesty: justice is turned either into hatred or into favor,
godliness in a manner into superstition. All sorts of men do so openly sin,
that oftentimes virtue is made a reproach in good men: and vices be honored in
place of virtues. etc. The learned reader may there read of other horrible
sins that then reigned, which I am ashamed to utter. If I should set down
many other complaints of the horrible and universal wickedness that reigned
in Popery, I should be too tedious: I will end it with the complaint of one
Bredenbachius: who was Deane of the Church of Mentz in Germany in the time of
Charles the 4. about Anno 1370. in these words: Recessit lex a sacerdotibus.
etc. The law is departed Berd^nbach. in suae p^^igrinationis historia.
from Priests, justice from Princes, council from the Elders, faithfulness from
the people, love from parents, reverence from subjects, charity from Prelates,
religion from Monks honesty from young men, discipline from Clerks, learning
from teachers, study from scholars, equity from judges, concord from Citizens,
fear from servants, fellowshippe from Countrymen, truth from Merchants, virtue
from noblemen, chastity from Virgins, humility from widows, love from the
married, and patience from the poor. O times, O manners! most troublesome and
miserable times, reprobate and wicked manners both in Clergy and of the people!
Although this which I have alleged do sufficiently show what great wickedness
abounded in the days of darkness, when Popery most flourished, yet because this
man so much exagitateth our dissolution, and glories of their devotion, I will
further show what effects and fruits their Pope-Holy devotion has brought
forth by declaring what murders and mischieues have been committed in the
Church, and in the time of their Mass and other service wherein I will not
stand to observe precisely the order of time, but will take them as they come
page, 185, Anno, 889. Page, 222. Circa An 1076. Page ^69. Anno. 1123.
to hand. Arn. Bishop of Wirtzburg in Saxony was killed in the time of Mass
as writes the Abbat of Vrsperge in his cronicle. He also declares how Centius
a citizen of Rome with the favorers of Henry Emperor pulled Gregory the Pope
from the Altar as he was saying Mass early in the morning upon the feast of
CHRIST'S nativity, sore wounded him, and put him in prison. The same Author
shows how a Monk of an Abbey which Dretericus Bishop of S^cens had built
and founded, being admonished and rebuked of him for his wicked life, stabed
with a knife the said Bishop as he was praying before the alter, whereof he
died three days after, Matthew Paris a Monk of Saint Albons writes that where
as the Emperor Conradus kept Whitsontide in a certain city of Germany, and
was upon Whitsunday in In Stephano page 113. cir^a annum. 1033.
the Church at divine service, there arose by the instigation of the devil a
contention between the Bishops and Prelates who should sit highest and
nearest to the Emperor. About which, while they were brauling, there servants
came with swords and clubs, pulling some out of their places, and setting
others in the same, casting about there Miters, and breaking their Crosier
staves, and shedding much blood in the Church. Of the like tragical sturres
twice repeated in the days of the foresaid Emperors son, called Henry the
third, writes Lamb^rtus Sch^fnaburge^sis in these words: Rex natalem Domini
Goslarea celebrauit etc. The King kept the feast of the nativity of our Lord at
Goslare, where upon the same day, whilst fol 177. Anno. 1063.
the Bishops seats were placed for evening prayer there fell a grievous
strife between the servants of Helecon the Bishop of Hildeneshem, and the
servants of Widerad the Abbat of Fuldens: they began with chiding, afterward
with fistes: and had quickly come to swords, if the authority of Otho Duke of
the Baioarians had not stayed it. Again a little after. The King kept
Whitsontide at Goslare, where when the King and Bishops met at evening
prayer, there rose again a tumult for the setting of the Bishops seats, not by
sudden chance as before, but by a fore premeditate purpose; for the Bishop
of Hiledeneshem being mindful of the reproach before received, did hide Cont
Ecbert with provided soldiers behind the Alter. These hearing the noise and
stir of the servants came quickly in, and of the servants of the Abbots of
Fuldens they did beat some with their fistes, others with their clubes, did
throw them down, and easily drive them (being amassed at the sudden danger)
out of the chancell of the Church, who forthwith calling there fellows to
fight, the Abbots men having their weapons in redines, did rush on a heap into
the Church, and in the midst of the Queere among the singers they fought, not
now with cudgels but with swords. A fierce fight was there made, and through
the whole Church in steed of spiritual hymns, and Songs there was heard the
crying out of some exhorting to fight, and the sorrowful mourning of others
dying. Sorrowful sacrifices were slain upon the Alters of God, and floudes of
blood did every where run in the Church* shed not as in old time by the
religion of the law, but by hostile cruelty.

The Bishop of Hildensheyme getting up into a high place and as it were
founding a trumpet for war, exhorted his men to fight valiantly, and that
they should not be feared by the holiness of the place from fighting, he
alleged his own authority and promise. Many were on both sides wounded, many
were slain, amongst the chief were Rege^bado the Abbot of Fuldens
Standart-bearer, and Bero a soldier very dear unto Count Ecbert. In these
stirs the King cried out, and by his Kingly majesty exhorted the people to
peace, but he seemed to speak unto them that were deaf. At the last being
admonished by his followers to provide for the safety of his own life, he
left the fight and with much ado escaped through the multitude thronged
together, to his Palace. The Bishop of Hildeneshems men who came to the fight
prepared, had the upper hand. The Abbots as unarmed, and suddenly gathered
together upon the sudden rising of the storm of this seditious tumult, were
driven away and ouerthrown, and expelled out of the Church. Whereupon by and
by the doors were locked. The Abbots men who in the beginning of the tumult
had gone far off to fetch their weapons, came armed in great number, and did
get the porch of the Church, and put themselves in array, y^ they might
forthwith set upon them which should come out of the Church: But the night
did break off the fray. Hitherto Lambert of Schafnaberge.

Charles Earl of Flanders was slain at Bruges in the Church at Mass, as
testifies these writers: Matthew 1127.
Paris in Henrico 1. Page. 94. Tritemius in Chro. Mon. Hersong. Page 156.
Sig^bertu^ fol. 137. and Fabian part. 7. 230.

Henry the son of Richard Earl of Cornewale was Enncad. 9 lib. 5. D^^a^ 2.
lib 8.
slain in the Church at Viterbum in Italy in the time of the Mass by Guy
M^nserratens, as testify Sabelicus Blondus and others. This was about the
year of our Lord 1273.

Antoninus shows how one Thomas Clevallis Governor of Fabrian a great and
populous town, and other P^t. 3. Titul. 22. Cap. 10. fol. 170. ^^no ^436
Castles thereabouts was slain with his two sons in the great Church of the
said Fabrian upon the Ascension day, whilst he was present at a solemn Mass.

Famous or rather infamous is that murder of Alphonsus Medices in the Church
of Florence which Raphaell Volaterranus in his Geography (dedicated to Pope
Julius L^b. 5 page 57.
the second) declares in these words: Laurence Medices suffered sundry
conspiracies, but especially the Pactian most perilous of all the rest, which
was in this sort. At Rome two Francisces, Pactuis and Saluiatus Bishop of Pisa
were authors of it. Saluiate was greiued because in obtaining his Bishoppricke
he had Laurence his adversary, the other for that seeing himself equal to
Laurence in Nobility, wit, and almost in wealth, was not equal to him in
power and authority. Therefore they did impart the matter with Hierome a
kinsman of Pope Sixtus the fourth, because they did know that he also did hate
him. For whereas be was the first keeper of the Popes treasure, he was found
to have given secret aid against the Pope to Nicholas Vitellius of Tiserni in
the siege of Tiserni. Therefore they being privy and consenting they went first
to Pisa, afterward they came to Pactius town, where they continued certain
days, until they had gotten together ye rest of the conspirators, and had
disposed of the whole matter. From thence upon the tenth C^lendes o^ May being
Sunday in the year 1478. the Conspirators under the pretense of Gods service
came to Florence with Ra^hael the Popes Legate, and Hieroms kinsman, who from
the school of Pisa being lately made a Cardinal, came thither either by
chance, or of set purpose. They came all early to the Church of Reparata to
Mass. In the mean while Saluiatus with his armed men departed secretly from
the Church, and came under pretense of an other matter to the Court or common
Hall to talk with Caesar Vc^iliser.
the Governor, but yet to this end, that the murder being committed in the
Church he might be ready to invade and set upon the Court and Magistrates:
Therefore the token being given when the Eucharist or Sacrament was lifted up,
Barnard Bandine first did thrust through Julian Laurences brother. Antony
Volateran who moved with hatred for an old injury done to the Volaterans, had
required the first part in that action, did on the other side set upon
Laurence behind his back, and did strike him a little below the throat,
whereas he straight ways turning himself at the cry of the people did
somewhat avoid the blow, and when the other would have given him an other
blow, he speedily escaped into the Reuestrie of the Church near thereunto,
where he was by the multitude of his friends received and preserved etc.
Hitherto Volaterans words, who immediately shows how Pope Sixtus interdicted
Laurence for laying hands upon the Legate and the Priests, and made wars
upon the Florentines, drawing Ferdinandus King of Sicile and Frederick Duke
of Vrbine to join with him in that war, etc.

The same Rap. Volaterane shows how both Ioannes lib. 4. fol. 54. Ibidem fol.
55.
Maria, and Galeatus Sfortia Dukes of Millayne were slain in the Church in
time of the Mass and service: Sigibertus Gemblacensis a Monk, declares how
that Grimoaldus In Chronico. fol. 96. Ar. 713.
chief Governor of the house of Leodium whilst he was praying before the
Altar of Saint Lambert was murdered by Rauinger a servant of Rabode Duke of
Frisia. He also shows both how one Gualcerus a Bishop of England was slain
in the time of Mass. And also how one Gerrardus a noble soldier or Knight was
slain by ye Bishops Ibidem fol, 134.
servants as he was praying before the Image of Christ. Albertus Krantzius
writes that Stanislaus Archbishop of Cracouia in Polonia as he was saying
Mass was slain In VVandalia, lib. 2. page 62. Part. 3. Titul. 22. cap. 11. 8.
10. Theod. a Niem, lib. 1. cap. 25. p. 20. Part. 2. Titul. 16. cap. 4. 55. 3.
fol 95.
by the commandment of King Bodislaus.

John the Cornetan Cardinal did assault the King of Aragon as he was hearing
Mass; as writes Antoninus. Ioane the Queen of Naples as she was kneeling
before ye Altar was at the commandment of Charles strangled by four Hungarian
soldiers.

Antoninus makes mention of a fray in the Church a little before Mass,
between the servants of the Archbishop of Mentz, and of the Abbot of Fulda
about sitting near to the Emperor, by which the pauement of the Church was
filled with blood: But whether this was the same fray ^ is alleged before out
of Matthew Paris I do not know, neither have I leisure to examine.

The people of Bedera slew William Trentheuell their Guliel Neubrig reru^
Angli, lib. 2. cap. 11. page 389. lib. 1. in Henr. 1. part. 7. In Richard. 1.
fol. 6.
Lord with his friends and Nobles before the Altar, and in the presence of the
Bishop.

Fabian writes that one Guye a French man was slain at Mass. He also
declares how Hugh Nouante Bishop of Chester made complaint that the Monks of
Couentry had shed his blood before the high Altar of ye Church, for which cause
the Bishop of Elye deemed that the said Monks should be put from their Abbey.

Geffrey Archbishop of York, and brother to King Richard the first and King
John having said Mass, and standing Act and monu. in Rich, 1. page 323.
at the Altar having his Mass garments on, was by the Bishop of Elies men and
commandment bound, and dragged through the dirt and mire.

Robert Haul Esquier who had escaped out of the Tower Ex libelio de S^pult et
mon* ^u^eclesie VV^stmon. Anno 137^.
of London with his fellow John Shakel fled unto ye sanctuary at Westminster,
from whence Alane Buxh^l and Raphe Ferrers with 50. men did go about by force
when he was at Mass to bring him: who making resistance and crying for the
peace of the Church, was slain with swords, with a servant of the Abbey who
would have let them.

Hollingshead writes of a fraye in Saint Dunstans Hollingsh. Croni^l in Hen.
5. page 562.
Church in London in these words: In this year 1418 In the first year of the
reign of this Victorious King, on Easter day in the afternoon (a time which
required devotion) at a sermon in Saint Dunstons in the East of London, a great
fraye happened in the said Church, where through many people were sore wounded,
and one Thomas Petwarden fishmonger that dwelt at Sprots key was slain out
right, as they upon a good intent did what they could to their own peril, as
it unfortunately befell, to appease the turmoile, and to procure the keeping of
the Kings peace. This broile began between the Histor. Mont. Hersang, page 17.
in VVandalia. lib. 13. cap. 20. and lib. 10. cap. 9. etc.
Lord Strange, and Sir John Trussell Knight, by the malice of their wives. Many
such other broils committed in the Church and in the time of their Mass might
be alleged, as the learned may read in Tritemius; Krantius and others, but I
will forbear them.

They have also showed their devotion in not sparing, to Platina in victor, 3,
use or rather horribly to abuse the Sacrament of Christ's blood to poisoning of
their enemies. Pope Victor ye third was by poison put into the Chalice poisoned
and killed. Plat, in Clement 5. fasci^. tempor. Septa aetate. fol. 84.
So Henry the 7. Emperor was poisoned by a Monk called Bernard de Mont
Pol^tiano, in the Chalice when he received the Sacrament.

So was Henry Archbishop of York poisoned in the Chalice, when himself said
Mass, as writes the Monk In Stephano, page 122.
Matthew Par^s.

Thus the reader may see, that the devotion of Papists is like (if not much
worse) the devotion of those women who Act. 13. 50.
were stirred up by the Jews to persecute Paul and Barnabas.

Hereby, this man and others who so much accuse our manners, and these times,
may see what has been the estate of the Church, and manners both of Priests
and people heretofore when Popery most flourished, and thereby may discern with
whom dissolution and looseness of life do most reign.

The Pamphlet. The Protestants make God the author of sin, the only cause of
sin, that man sins not, that GOD is worse then the Devil.
5. Article.
Whosoever defends that God commands, persuades, urges, impelleth to
sin, makes God the cause of sin.

Ca^uia. lib. 1. Institu. cap. 17.. 11. and cap. 18.. 4. and lib. 3. cap. 23..
7. 8. 9. Quintius sermon. de prouidenti^. Beza Aphoris.
But all Protestants say that God commands, persuades, urges, impelleth to
sin: Ergo,

The Protestants make God the cause and author of sin.

The Mayor I prove: for if God persuade or impell men to sin, as for example:
Judas to sell Christ, Saint Peter to deny Christ, the Jews to crucify Christ:
questionless he intended the sacrilege of Judas, the negation of Peter, the
murder of the Jews: and this much more effectually then Judas, Peter, or the
Jews. For who can resist his impulsion? or who can frustrate his intention?
Voluntati eius quis resistet? Who is able to oppose himself against his will?
yea what man is he, that in conscience were not bound to conform his will unto
the will of God, who is the author of all good wills, and the first rule and
square of all regular wills. Judas, Peter, and the Jews, if they had followed
the motions of God, who could have blamed them, for following him, who could
not err in impelling, nor sin in persuading them?

But some will say, that God moved them for a good end: videlicet, the
redemption of man, and they intended an ill end: to wit, Luere, revenge, or
some other sinister effect. Yet this shif^ will not salve the sore, for evil
may not be done, that good may follow. Non sunt facienda mala vt inde veniant
bona: For Romans 3. ver. 8.
otherwise a man might steal to give alms, be arunke for a meriment, commit
ad^^utrie to beget children.

Moreover, why might not Judas, Peter or the Jews, intend that good end which
God intended, and yet have sold, denied, and crucified Christ conforming their
intentions to his, they being instruments and he the first meouer?

Again it cannot be said, but that God indirectly, and most effectually
intended their sins; for he that intends any effect wherewith another
effect is necessarily conjoined, consequently intends it: as for example: He
that intends to burn a ship in the midst of the sea, intends consequently
the death of all the men which be in her. In like manner, if God intended that
Judas should sell Christ, unto which action sin was necessarily adjoined,
consequently God intended the sin as well as the selling.

The Minor is too too evident. For the Protestants deride Gods permission, they
say that all his actions are energeticall, or effectual: they desperately
auerre, that Paul's conversion, and David's aduoutrie, were in like manner the
works of God: And as he elected some to glory, before the preuision of
works; so he rejected some from glory before the preuision of sins. Here
hence I infer, that according to the Protestants principles, God is most
properly the author of sin, because he impelleth most effectually thereunto.

Next, that he is the only author of sin, for that he inforceth men upon
necessity to sin, and they as instruments follow the motion of their first
cause.

Again, that man sins not; for where there is necessity of sinning, there
is no sin, for sin is free or no sin: besides, how can man sin in
conforming his will with Gods will?

Finally, God is worse then the devil: for that the wickedness of the devil,
principally consists in moving, persuading, and iuducing of men to sin:
the which by the Protestants confession, God perf^rmeth more effectually then
the devil, because the motions of God are more forcible, and l^sse resistable,
then the illusions or suggestions of the devil.

Many sins moreover are acted without the temptations of the devil, some of
ignorance, some of passion, but none without the motions of God: so that God is
worse then the devil, both in causing a greater multitude of sins then ^^
devil, and in the forcible manner of causing sins, which the devil cannot
attain unto. The which doctrine is as good a ground for Atheism as ever hell
could devise: for were it not much more reasonable to say there were no God at
all, then to believe there were such a God, as commands, persuades, urges,
impelleth men to sin; and yet for the same sins will torment them with the
inexplicable pains of hell?

Answer.
THis man shows himself to be like to the unrighteous Luke 18. 2. Apocal.
12. 10. John 8. 4^.
Judge, who neither feared God, nor reverenced man; or rather like him that is
a slanderer of Gods Saints, and a liar, and the father of li^s. For the Minor
or assumption of this syllogism, that all Protestants say, that God
commands, persuades, urges, and impelleth men to sin, is as true, as
that is, that Catholics in England be wrapped in Bears skins, and cast unto
dogs to be devoured, which was published in Rome by a printed book, and set
out in tables, confirmed with Pope Gregory In a book entitled Eccles.
Anglicane Tr^phea, printed in Rome 1584.
the 13. privilege. The which as all men know to be a false malicious slander,
to discredit our gracious Queens merciful and good government: so is this
also to defame the teachers of Gods truth. For if this man or any of his
partners can prove, that either all Protestants, or any learned Protestant does
say, that God commands, persuades, urges, and impelleth to sin, then
will I yield unto him, not only in this, but in all other matters of religion.
If this cannot be showed, as most certainly it cannot, what a shameless man
is this, to utter such a gross and palpable lie, as even a blind man may (as
it were) feel it with his fingers: and in what miserable estate be those
simple ignorant souls, which credit such lying spirits? But this is the just
judgment of God against them that receive not the love of the truth, that 2
These. 2. 10.
they might be saved, to send them strong delusion, that they should believe
lies. As touching the matter, we believe with our hearts, and confess with
our mouths, that God tempts no man to evil and sin, but every man is
tempted, James 1. 13.
when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is intised: and that
every good gift and every perfect gift is from ^boue, and comes down from
the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.
Whereby Saint James means, that God is in such sort good, and so the giver
and author of good things, that there is no change or alteration with him, and
therefore is the giver of all good gifts and graces, and never of any evil.
And we say with the Prophet David: Thou art not a God that loves or wills
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with Psalm. 5. 8.
thee. And with Saint* John, God is light, and in him is no 1. John 1. 5.
darkness. And as there is no darkness, that is to say, ignorance and wickedness
in God; so is he not the author thereof, neither does he command, persuade,
urge, or impell unto it. Fulgentius says: In^quitas igitur quia in Deo Lib. 1.
ad Monimum.
non est, v^ique ex Deo non est: Because iniquity is not in God, therefore it
is not of God. These blasphemies we deny and defy, neither do Calvin or
Beza in the places Beza Aphoris. 1.
by him quo^ed, or any where else affirm them. What is it then that they say?
They ^ay, that there is nothing done by any, neither universally, nor
particularly, but by the ordinance of God, no not those things excepted, which
be evil and to be detested, not in as much as they be ordained of God, who is
always good and just: but in as much as they be done by the devil, and other
wicked instruments. So that we say, that the power and 2. Cor. 4. 6.
providence of God (who makes the light to shine out of darkness) does so
cooperate and work with the evil actions of wicked men, and does so direct
them to the execution of his holy ordinance, and just judgments, that the
same, as they be done and directed by God, be pure and holy; and as they be
committed of man be wicked and abominable. Joseph's brethren did wickedly, and
of malice sell him into Egypt for a slave: yet Joseph says; God sent me
before you to preserve your posterity in this land, Gone. 45. 7.
and to save you by a great deliverance. Now then you sent not me hither, but
God, who has made me a father unto Pharaoh. And again: When ye thought evil
against me, God disposed it Chap. 50. 20.
to go^d. Here God did neither command, persuade, nor impell Joseph's brethren
to sell and send him into Egypt: yet his omnipotent hand was in that action to
turn it unto good. So when the Chaldeans and Sabeans took away Jobs Oxen and
Camels, and slew his Servants, they were urged and impelled thereunto by the
devil: yet Job says; God has given, and God has taken, blessed be the name
of God. To this spoiling of Jobs goods, God did Job. 1. 21.
not command, persuade, urge, or impell the Chaldeans and Sabeans; yet the
same was not done without his providence and ordinance, who turned the same to
his glory, in proving and purging Job in the furnace of affliction, in making
him a pattern of patience to all posterity, and in teaching men thereby not to
judge of men by outward afflictions and adversities, whereunto both the
faithful and wicked be subject. So in the examples here set down, the devil
put into the heart of Judas to betray Christ, and impelled the Jews to
crucify him; yet he Acts 2. 23 and 4. 28.
was delivered to them by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, to
do whatsoever the hand and counsel of God had determined before to be done.
Thus these things which were done against the will of God, were not done (as
Saint Augustine says) beside or without the Enehir. ad Lau^. cap. 100.
will of God, that is, they were done against the commandment and will of God
revealed in his word; yet not without the eternal purpose, counsel, and
decree of God. And the same being most wickedly committed by man, God turned
and directed them to the endless praise of his mercy, and the eternal
salvation of his elect. So Saint Augustine says: Cum ergo and pater tradiderit
filium August. epist. 48. ad Vincent. page 109.
suum, and ipse Christus Corpus suum, and Judas Dominum suum, cur in hac
traditione Deus est pius, and homo reus, nisi in re vna quam fecerunt, causa
non vna est ob quam fecerunt? Whereas both the Father gave his son, and
Christ gave his own body, and Judas gave or betrayed Christ, why in this
giving is God holy, and man guilty, but that in one thing which they did,
there was not one and the same cause wherefore they did it? This is not to do
evil that good may come of it: for all actions as they are of God are good and
righteous. For if a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, as our Savior
Math. 7. 18.
Christ says; how much less can God, who is the author of all goodness, and
even goodness it self, bring forth evil actions. Neither does God directly or
effectually intend the sins of men nor their damnation, but his own glory,
which shines not only in the manifestation of his mercy toward the faithful
and godly, but also in the declaration of his justice against the wicked and
reprobate. The similitude of intending the burning of a ship, and consequently
the death of them that be in it, will not here hold. For God (as I have said
before) does intend neither the sin nor perdition of man, but his own glory
and the execution of his just judgments. Your own Angelical Doctor Thomas
Aquinas to the like similitude of drowning a ship answers thus: Ad tertium
dicendum, Thom. Aquin. part. 1. summae quaest. 49.
quod subuersio nauis attribuitur nautae vt causae, ex eo quod non agit quod
requiritur adsalutem nauis: sed Deus non deficit ab agendo quod est necessarium
ad salutem, inde non est simile. i. To the third we say, that the drowning of a
ship is attributed to the Mariner as the cause thereof, because he does not
that which is requisite for the safety of the ship: but God fails not from
doing that which is necessary unto salvation: whereupon this is not like. So
in burning a ship, malice in man is the cause thereof: but there is no malice
in God, Ezech. 18. 32.
neither does he desire the death of him that dies, but the execution of his
justice. Yet it is true which Augustine says: Deus operatur in cordibus
hominum ad inclinandas voluntates August de gra^ia and lib. arbitr. cap. 21.
eorum quocunque vult sieve ad bona pro sua misericordia, sieve ad mala pro
ipsorum meritis, iudicio vtique aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto, semper
autem iusto. i. God works in the hearts of men to incline their wills to
whatsoever he will, either to good things by his mercy, or to euist for their
deserts, by his judgment, which sometime is open, and sometime secret, but
always just. And which Fulgentias says: Deus licet auctor Fulgentius ad
Monimum lib. 1.
non sit malarum cogitationum, ordinator est tamen malarum voluntatum, and de
malo opere c^iuslibet mali, non desinit ipse bonum operari. i. Although God be
not the author of evil cogitations, yet is he the orderer of evil wills: and
of the evil work of every evil man, he cease not to work a good work.
Therefore these wonderful works of God whose judgments Romans 11. 33.
are unsearchable and ways past finding out, are not curiously to be
discussed, but reverently to be adored. For, O man what art thou that pleadest
against God? In the Romans 9. 20.
probation of his Minor, he first untruly (according to his custom) says,
that we deride Gods permission, the which is false: for we neither deride,
nor deem Gods permission. God said to Abimeleth: I kept thee also that Genes.
20. 6.
thou should^st not sin against me: Non permisi te vt tangeres eam: Therefore
I have not permitted thee to touch her. Again, God permitted him not to hurt
me: But we say, first, that Ibid. cap. 31. 7.
God permits not sin inuitus, against his will, but of his will: for else
he were not omnipotent. Secondly, that he does not only permit sins, but
also by his infinite wisdom, and almighty power, draws good out of them,
and directs them to his glory. So S. Augustine says: Hoc quippe ipso quod
contra Dei voluntatem fecerunt, August. ^d Lament. cap. 103.
de ipsis facta est voluntas eius, etc. In that thing which they have done
against the will of God, the will of God is done in them. Therefore the works
of the Lord are great, and are to be Psalm. 111. 2.
sought out of them that love them. So that by a wonderful and unspeakable
manner, that is not done without his will, which is done against his will:
because it could not be done, unless he did permit it: nec vtique nol^ns
si^it, sed volens, neither does he permit it against his will, but with his
will. Neither would he being good, permit evil to be done, unless he being
omnipotent, could also of evil do good S. Hierome says: Dicam quicquam
Hieron in Habac. cap 1.
sine te fieri, o Domine Deus, and te nolente tantu^^ posse impium? Ho^ sentire
blasphemum est. Quum itaque ^^sis vniuersitatis rector and Dominus, tu necesse
est facias, quod sine te fieri non potest. i. Shall I say that any thing is
done without thee O Lord God, and that the wicked can do^ so much thou being
unwilling? To think this is blasphemous. Seeing therefore thou art the ruler
and Lord of the world, thou must needs do that, which cannot be done
without thee. We say indeed that Gods works be energeticall and effectual
not only in the faithful, but also in the wicked and reprobate, whose Exodus
4. 21. Rom 9 18.
hearts he hardens, Ioh. 12 40.
and eyes blinds, Rom 1. 28.
whom he gives up to a reprobate mind, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
and to whom he sends a strong delusion to believe lies. These be Gods just
judgments, whereby he punishes the wicked, who yet are not impelled or
coacted of God to these sins, but willingly harden their own hearts by the
deceit of sin, shut their eyes that they may not see, Romans 6. ^9.
give up their members servants to uncleanness and iniquity, and delight in
delusions, and in believing lies, as Papists now do. We do not desperately
auerre, but you do falsely and impudently affirm, that we teach, that Paul's
conversion, and David's adultery, were in like manner the works of God. This
shameless saying you have picked out of Campians reasons, out of which you
have Ratione 8.
like a goodly Rapsodist gleaned a great part of this lying Libel, but you
cannot show it in the writing of any Protestant. This is calumniari, and non
ratiocinari, to slander, and not rightly to reason. But you know your friends
and favorers will believe you, though it be never so false. And you have
learned that lesson, Audacter calumniare, semper aliquid adhaeret. We say that
Paul's conversion was a work of Gods mercy, agreeable to his will revealed in
his word: David's sin of adultery was a work which he hates and repugnant
to his said will. God wrought mightily in Paul by his holy spirit, in
converting his heart, in drawing him out of darkness, and in making him of a
persecuter, a preacher of his Gospel, and a minister of his mercy. God did
not so work at that time in David, but left him to himself, to be tempted,
drawn away, and overcome of his own corrupt concupiscence: yet we say, that
God did draw good out of that sin of David, in making him a pattern of true
repentance, and example of Gods mercy in forgiving his sins, and thereby
teaching us to walk warily, and flee carnal security. For if so excellent a
man, that was according to Gods heart, did so foully and fearfully fall, what
may fall unto us, if we walk not circumspectly, and pray not fervently to God
to uphold us with his hand, and to guide us with his holy spirit?

Touching Gods preuision, you write as though you neither did know what we
teach, nor regard what your self do write. Do we teach that God elected some
to glory before the preuision of works, and rejected some from glory before
the preuision of sins? You shall find this false assertion in our books,
when you find the former shameless slander. We do not teach that God elected
any to glory before he did foresee their works. For from everlasting, he (to
whom all things be present) did foresee both the good works of his elect, and
the wicked works of the reprobate. But this we say, that the foundation and
cause of Gods election and reprobation is not his prescience and foreseeing of
the good works of the one, and the wicked works of the other, but his own
purpose, will, and pleasure, and that good works be not causes of Gods
election, but fruits and effects of it. Saint Paul says: Before the children
were borne, and when Romans 9. 11.
they had neither done good, nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain
according to election, not by works, but by him that calls, It was said to
her, The elder shall serve the younger: As it is written, I have loved Jacob,
and have hated Esau. Again, As he has chosen us in Christ before the
foundation Ephesians. 1. 4.
of the world that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: Who
has predestinate us, to be adopted through 5.
Jesus Christ in himself, according to the good pleasure of his 11.
will, in whom also we are chosen, when we were predestinate according to the
purpose of him, which works all things after the counsel of his own will.
Again, God has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to
our works, but according 2. Timoth. 1. 9.
to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us through Christ Jesus
before the world was. Where we may see that the foundation and cause of Gods
election is his own will, pleasure, and purpose, and not the foreseeing of our
works. Saint Augustine says: Quod si futuros eorum August. lib. de
Praedestina. and gratia. cap. 7.
mores dicitur diuinum discreuisse iudicium, profecto illud euac^abitur quod
praemisit Apostolus dicens, etc. i. But if it be said, that the judgment of
God did discern the manners of Esau and Jacob which afterward would be, then
surely that which the Apostle said before, shall be made frustrate and in
vain, Not of works, but by him that calls, it was said, The elder shall
serve the younger. For he says not, by the works past, but having said
generally, Not by works, he would thereby have understood works both past
and to come: works past, which were none; to come, which as yet were not.
Jacob was predestinate a vessel unto honor, because not by works, but by
him that calls, it was said, The elder shall serve the younger. Again, Nam
quid est August. lib. 1. de pr^destin. Sanct^. cap. 17.
quod ait Apostolus, sicut elegit nos in ipso, etc. i. For what is that which
the Apostle says, As he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world? The which if it be therefore said, because God did foresee that they
would afterward believe, and not that he would make them to believe, against
this foreseeing the Son speaks, saying, You have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you. A little after he says: Elegit ergo Deus fideles, sed vt sint, non
quia iam erant: i. God has chosen the faithful, that they might be, and not
because they now were. Again, Vt essemus sancti and immaculati: Non ergo quia
futuri eramus, sed vt essemus: i. That we might be Ibid. cap. 18.
holy and without blame, therefore not because we after should be, but that
we might be. Again, Quos elegit, etc. i. Whom August. lib. 6. contra I^lian.
cap. 8.
he has chosen before the foundation of the world, by the election of grace,
not of works, either past, or present, or to come: for then grace were no
grace. Thus Saint Augustine shows, that Gods election is not his prescience
and foreseeing of works to come, but his own grace, good pleasure and purpose.

Now I come to your illations, which upon these false assertions you falsely
infer. To the first I answer, that God impelleth no man to sin, and
therefore God is not the author of sin. Secondly, God inforceth not men upon
necessity to sin, but they sin willingly, and by the instigation of the
devil, who works in the children of disobedience: therefore God is not the
author of sin. In your third inference, where you say, that sin is free, or
no sin: belike you hold with Pighius, and some other Papists, that original
sin is no sin: for it is not free for us to be without it. And whereas you
ask, how man can sin, in conforming his will with Gods will: I answer, that
they that sin, do not conform their will to Gods will, but do disobey it,
and oppose themselves unto it. This is the will of ^od (says Saint Paul) your
sanctification, and that ye should abstain from fornication. 1. These. 4. 3.
Finally, for as much as you can never show, that it is the Protestants
confession that God moves, persuades, and induces men to sin, therefore you
make a false and blasphemous collection, for the which the Lord rebuke thee
Satan. Lastly, whereas you thus charge us to hold, that God is the author of
sin, I would desire you to show, where we do write more hardly of this
matter, then John Fisher Bishop of Rochester has written hereof, whose words
be these: Neutrum sane potest sine Deo, nec ad John Roffens. asserti. Luther,
confuta artic. 36. page 339.
bonum se parar^, neque malum opus facere. Neque enim adulter absque generali
fluxu Dei, potest adulterand^ facinus committere: sed neque postquam ipsum
admisit, sine speciali auxilio Dei conari valebit vt resurgat: i. Man can do
neither without God, neither prepare himself to good, nor do that which is
evil. For the adulterer can neither commit adultery without the general
influence of God, nor after he has committed it, can he endeavor to rise
without the special help of God. And again: Nam quantum ad substantiam
actus, etiam operibus malis cooperatur Deus. Neque tamen recte Idem ibidem.
page 340.
quisquam Deo peccatum imputabit, quia tametsi cooperetur Deus adsubstantiam
actus, non tamen ipsam deficientiam operatur, sed hoc agit sola voluntas: i. As
touching the substance of the act, even GOD does cooperate or work with
evil works: yet may not any man rightly impute sin unto God, for although
God does cooperate to the substance of the deed, yet he does not work the
defect of the deed, but only man's will does that. Either show where we have
written more hardly hereof, or else condemn this Bishop, and Martyr for the
Popes cause with us. I trust you will not say, that he taught Atheism, which
is so rife in Rome, as I have before showed, etc.

The Pamphlet. That faith once had may be lost.
6. Article.
Whosoever leeseth his charity, leeseth his faith, But David when he killed
Vrias lost his charity. Ergo, David when he killed Vrias, lost his faith.

The Mayor is a principle undoubted of in the schools of Protestants: for they
peremptorily affirm that true faith (such as was in David one of Gods elected)
can n^ more be severed from charity, then heat from fire, or light from the
sun, and therefore if David killing Vrias lost his charity, no doubt but
therewithal, he lost his faith.

The Minor I prove: for whosoever remains in death is without charity: but
David when he killed Vrias remained in death: Ergo, David when he killed Vrias
was without charity. If he was without that which once he had, no doubt but
then he lost it, for he was deprived thereof for his sin.

The Mayor proposition of this last Syllogism thus I prove: for charity is
the life of the soul, and it is as impossible for a man to have charity and
remain in death, as it is impossible to be dead in body, and yet endued with
a reasonable soul.

The Minor cannot be denied (to wit, that David by killing Vrias remained in
death:) for it is the express word of God; Qui non diligit manet in morte; He
that loves not 1. Ioh. 3. ver. 14.
his neighbor remains in death: but certain it is that David loved not
Vrias when he killed him: Ergo, likewise certain it is, that David remained in
death.

The same position might easily be proved out of the eighteenth chapter of
Ezech. verse twenty four. Si autem auerterit se iustus a iustitia sua, etc.

Answer.
IDenie the Minor or second proposition, that David in procuring Vrias to be
killed, lost his charity. For although in this combat between the spirit and
the flesh in David, the spirit retired, and the flesh prevailed; the new man
was foiled, and the old man overcame: yet was not the spirit utterly
extinguished, nor the new man clean killed. Indeed David's faith fainted, his
charity was cooled, and his other gifts and graces covered, yet not clean
quenched: but there remained sparks of Gods spirit, which afterward being
stirred up, and blown by Nathans bellows kindled and flamed to Gods glory,
and David's eternal comfort and salvation. Shall we think that David had lost
all love of God, of his law and of man? was he clean deprived of Gods spirit?
it appears by his own words that he was not. Who upon Nathans preaching and
reproving of his sin, prayed and said: Take not thy holy spirit from me.
Whereupon I reason thus: Psalm. 51. 11.
He that was not clean deprived of Gods spirit, had not wholly lost faith and
charity: But David was not clean deprived of Gods spirit; therefore he had not
wholly lost faith and charity. The first proposition is evident by the words
of David: the second is manifest. For it is absurd to say, that the spirit of
God should continue in him, that has lost all graces and gifts of the spirit.
It is with Gods elect and chosen children, as it is with fire which in the
night is so hid and covered, that none appears; and yet in the morning is
stirred up, and is made to brune and to flame: and as with a tree, which in the
Winter has neither fruit nor leaf upon it; yet it has a sap fallen into the
root, which in the spring springs, and brings forth both leaf and fruit:
So is it with Gods holy Saints, they be sometimes so overtaken and overcome
with temptations that they seem to be as trees without fruit, withered, and
perished: yet there remains a sap of Gods spirit and grace in them, which
afterward rises and buddeth forth good fruit. And therefore to the second
proposition of your second Syllogism I say, that although David by those foul
and fearful offenses deserved eternal death: yet he did not remain in
death; and although God hated those sins, yet he never hated David. For whom
God loves, he loves to the end, and the gifts and calling ^ohn 13 1. Romans 11.
29.
of God are without repentance. If we love a man, and yet hate some sin that
he commits, might not God, who is love it self, hate David's sin, and yet
love him, and keep some sparks of his spirit and grace in him, and so
preserve as the external life of the body, so the internal life of the soul
in him? So that neither David remained in death, neither was his love, no not
to Vrias altogether extinguished in him. No doubt but he did love him as his
true and faithful subject, and might love him, as the servant of GOD: yet in
that temptation his own selfeloue, and desire to cover his own sin and shame,
did prevail against his love to Vrias, and did draw him to do an act, which
was no fruit nor effect of love and charity, and yet did not wholly quench
love in him. The Mayor of your latter Syllogism, which needs no proof, you
seek to prove by a false assertion, in barely saying according to your manner,
but not by any place of Scripture proving, that charity is the life of the
soul. I say that faith is the life of the soul, the which I prove by these
two sayings of the Scripture. The Prophet Habacuck says: The just shall live
by his faith, Saint Paul says: In that H^b^c 1. 24. Rom ^. 17. Gal 2. 20.
I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith in the son of God, who has
loved me, and given himself for me. Let this man show two such plain places
of Scripture, to prove charity to be the life of the soul. Properly Christ is
the life of our souls* Saint Paul in the place before alleged says, Christ
lived in me. And when Christ, which is our life, shall appear. And our Savior
himself says: I am the way, the Col ^ 4. Ioh. ^4. 6.
truth, and the life. For when we were dead in sins, he has quickened us,
and as he has restored life unto us, so he does continually nourish and
preserve life in us. But this is attributed to faith, because by it Christ
dwells in us, and we by it be put into the possession of Christ, and of all
the benefits of his passion. Concerning the place of Ezechiel, because you do
not urge it, I will not stand upon it. We doubt not, but men may and do fall
from God and just actions unto wicked and ungodly deeds, and may have a
temporal faith, and fall away from the grace of God. But this we say, that
true faith in Gods elect, which are sealed with the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.
and to whose spirit Gods spirit does bear witness, that they are the sons
of God, is never wholly lost in them, and the same spirit works by charity,
which in them may be cooled, but never clean quenched. But of the losing of
faith, and of the conjunction thereof with charity, I have before entreated.

Now to return this argument in some sort upon you: Whereas the Papists
auerre, that the Popes faith cannot fail, I reason thus: He that loses his
charity, may lose his faith: the Pope may lose his charity: Ergo, the Pope
may lose his faith. The first proposition I have proved already, and have
showed that true faith is not separated from charity, but works by it. And
most manifest it is by Saint James, that the faith which is without charity,
Iam. 2. 26.
and good works is dead: So that if the Pope be without charity, then he has
but a dead faith. And a dead faith, is as much faith, as a dead man is a man.
That the Pope may be without charity, I think they will not deny: and if
they do, it may be proved by many examples. Platina in Joan. 13. Blond. epito
decad. 2. lib. 2 page 200. Supplem. chronicorum in Johan. 12.
Pope John the twelfth, or as Platina reckons the thirteenth, took two of
his Cardinals, and cut off the nose of the one, and the hand of the other, as
witness Platina, Blondus, and many others. Platina in Stephan. 6. Supple.
chron. in Stephan. 6.
Stephanus the sixth did take the body of Formosus his predecessor out of the
grave, after he was dead, put him out of his pontifical habit, and put on him
a lay man's at^ire, cut off the two fingers of his right hand, wherewith he did
consecrate, and threw them into Tiber. Platina in Serg. 3. Supplement. chron.
in Serg. 3.
Pope Sergius the third took up again the body of the same For^osus, did cut
off his head as if he had been alive, and threw the body into Tiber, as
unworthy of burial. Platina in Bonisac. 7. Suppl. Chron.
Boniface the seventh took John a Cardinal, and put out his eyes. P^atina in
Urban 6. Bo^fintus. Decad. 3. libr. 1. page 354. Supplem. Chron. fol. 221.
Urban the sixth, of seven of his Cardinals which he apprehended at Nuceria,
took five of them, put them in sackes, and cast them into the Sea. Platina in
Inno. 7. Supplementum Chronico. lib. 13. fol. 226.
Innocentius the seventh caused by Jews his nephew certain citizens of Rome,
which sought the restitution of their ancient liberties, and the reformation of
the commonwealth decayed by his evil government, to be thrown out of
windows, and so killed. Alexander the sixth caused both the right hand and
tongue of Antonius Mancinellus to be cut out, because he had written an
eloquent oration against his wicked and filthy life. Many such other prankes of
Popes might be alleged, which were no more fruits of charity, then was David's
procuring of Vrias death by the sword of the Ammonites. But notwithstanding
these and such other tragical and tyrannical acts, these Popes faith never
failed. For they never had any, but a false and dead faith, such a faith as the
Devil has.

The Pamphlet. The Protestants shall never have life everlasting, because they
will have no merits, for which everlasting life is given.
7. Article.
Whatsoever is given ac wages, is given for works.
But the kingdom of Heaven is given as wages.
Ergo, the kingdom of Heaven is given for works.
The Mayor or first proposition may be declared after this manner: for example,
her majesty may bestow 1000. pounds by year upon some suitor, either gratis,
of mere liberality, and so it is called a gift, donum, a grace or favor: or
upon condition, if he be have himself manfully in the wars of Ireland, and
in this case the revenue is called merces, wages, Remuneratio, stipendium, a
reward, or payment; and although her m^^estie did show him a grace and favor
to promise such a reward for performing such a work, the which he was bound
upon his allegiance otherwise to perform; yet once having promised, and the
work being performed, her majesty is bound upon her fidelity and justice to
pay that she promised. In like manner, God may give us the kingdom of Heaven,
without any respect or regard of works, as he gives it to little children
which are baptized, and so it is a mere gift, and a pure grace. Or he may
give it with some respect unto our works, and so he gives it to all them, who
having use of discretion keep his commandments: and for this cause it is
called wages merces, areward: Ad Romans 4. v 5.
and thus the Mayor must be understood: to wit, that whatsoever God gives as
wages, is given for works, and such wages are called merits. Wages then and
merits have a mutual relation: for what are wages, but a reward of merits? and
what are merits, but a desert of wages?

The Minor is most plain, and inculcated in Scriptures: Voca operarios and
read illis mercedem: Call the workmen, Matthew. 208.
and pay them their wages. Ecce venio and merces mea mecum est, reddere
vnicuique secundum opera sua: Lo Apoc. 22. 12.
I come, and my wages with me, to give to every one according to his works.
Vnusquisque propriam mercedem accipiet, secundum suum laborem: Every one shall
receive proper wages, 1. Ad Cor. 3. 8. Matthew. 5. 12. and cap. 6. ver. 1. ^. ad
Tim. 5. 18.
according to his labor. The like we have in twenty other places of
Scripture, all which infallibly prove, that the kingdom of heaven is given as
wages for merits: and consequently that Protestants, who are enemies to merits,
shall never attain to the kingdom of heaven, which is purchased by good
works and merits. And for such men we may well say, that heaven was never
made, no more then learning for him that will never study, nor virtue for him
who despises the exercise thereof.

Answer.
AS everlasting life is not in your bestowing, so we want not merits to
obtain it, to wit, Gods mercies, and Christ's sufferings for us, with the which
we content our selves; and nothing doubt, but they be sufficient to discharge
us of damnation, and to bring us to salvation. Of these merits sweetly says
Bernard: Meum proinde meritum miseratio Domini, etc. My merit is Gods Bernard.
in Cantic. sermon. 61.
mercy. I am not clean void of merit, as long as he is not void of
mercies. And if the mercies of the Lord be much, I am much in merits. What
though I be guilty to my self of many sins? Surely where sin has
abounded, grace also has superabounded. And if the mercies of the Lord be from
everlasting to everlasting, I will also from everlasting sing the mercies of
the Lord. Shall I sing my own justice? O Lord I will remember thy justice
only, for that is mine also, in that thou August. in Psalm. 139.
art of God made justice to me. So Augustine says: Meritis suis nihil tribuunt
sancti: totum non nisi misericordiae tuae tribuunt o Deus. i. The Saints
attribute nothing to their own merits, they attribute all O God only to thy
mercy. Hierome Hieron. lib. 1. aduers. Pelag. f^. 120.
says, Tunc ergo iusti sumus, quando nos peccatores fatemur; and iustitia
nostra non ex proprio merito, sed ex Dei consistit misericordia. i. Then are
we just, when we acknowledge our selves to be sinners; and our justice or
righteousness consists not in our merits, but in Gods mercy. S. Basil
says: (...), etc. i. Ete^rnal rest or life is propounded Basil. in Psalm. 114
Homil. 16. page 224. ^ (...).
to them that strive lawfully in this life, not rendered according to the merit
or desert of works, but according to the grace of the * magnificent God
bestowed upon them that trust in him. But these counterfeit Catholics not
content therewith, nor thinking the same sufficient, will put unto them the
merits of Saints departed, and of men living, and their own works and
satisfactions, thereby fully to effect that, which Gods mercies, and Christ's
merits are not able perfectly to perform. This their doctrine appears both
by their prayers in their Masse-bookes, and Porteises, and also by the form of
a Monks absolution in these words: Meritum passionis Domini nostri I^s^s
Luther in 2. cap. ad Ga^at. Tileman, de Hesusius de 600. errori^^s Papista.
loc. 9. de ^oenitent. fol. 67.
Christi, and beatae Mariae semper Virginis, and omnium sanctorum. Meritum
ordinis, grauamen religionis, etc. i. The merit of the pas^ion of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and of blessed Mary always a Virgin, and of all Saints, The
merit of thy order, the heaviness of thy religion, the humility of thy
confession, the contrition of thy heart, the good works that thou have done,
and shall do, for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, be unto thee for the
forgiveness of thy sins, to the increase of merit and grace, and to the
reward of eternal life. Thus these men by their doctrine make Jesus Christ not
a full, perfect, and sufficient Savior, and so infringe the saying of Saint
Peter: There is not salvation in any other: for among men there is given none
other name under heaven whereby we Act. 4. 12.
must be saved. What is this but to deny the Lord that has bought us, as
Peter also says? Whether this doctrine 2. Pet. 1. 1.
be agreeable to the word of God, let the Christian reader by these places
discern and judge. Christ came Math. 20. 28. Ioh. 1. 29.
to give his life (...), a ransom for many. He is that lamb of God which
takes away the sin of the world. In him we Coloss 1. 14. 20. 22. 1. Pet.
1. 18.
have redemption through his blood, that is, the forgiveness of sins. He
has made peace by the blood of his cross, and has reconciled us in the body
of his flesh through death. We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, from our vain conversation received by the traditions of the
Fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled and
without spot. He himself bare our sins in his body on Ibid. cap. 2. 24.
the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live in righteousness, by whose
stripes we are healed. The blood of Jesus Christ his 1. Io^. 1. 7.
son cleanses us from all sin. He has loved v^, and vvashed Apocal. 1. 5.
us from our sins in his blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God his
father. As these places attribute our justification and salvation only to
Jesus Christ and his merits: so others do detract and take the same from our
works and deseruings. To him that works not, but believes Romans 4. 5.
in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. If
it be of grace, it is no more of works: or else Romans 11. 6.
were grace no more grace: but if it be of works, it is no more Ephesians. 2. 8.
grace: or else were work no more work. By grace ^e are saved, through faith,
and that not of your selves: it is the gift of 2 Timoth. 1. 9.
God, not of works, lest any man should glory. Who has saved us, and called
us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his
purpose and grace, etc. Not by the Tit. 3. 5.
works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy he
saved us. Although this which I have said may seem sufficient to answer this
article, yet I will say something to this syllogism.

To the Mayor or first proposition I answer, that with men wages is given for
works: but with God ( whose Isai. 55. 8.
thoughts are not as our thoughts: nor ways as our ways) it is other ways.
Man may do labor and service to man, which may merit and deserve by equity
and justice wages and reward. For that there may be a proportion between the
service and reward, and also a benefit and commodity comes to him to whom
the service is done. As in this example here alleged, the Lord Deputy, or
some other may do some such singular service in Ireland, that if her Majesty
should bestow upon him 1000. pound a year, he might in some proportion deserve
it, and her Majesty may receive double benefit by it. But can we do any
works, that can either merit and deserve the kingdom of God, or bring any
benefit unto God? David says, My Psalm. 16. 2, Romans 8. 18.
weldoing extends not to thee. And as S. Paul says, that all the afflictions
of this present life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be showed unto
us: so may I say, that all our imperfect and stained works are not worthy of
the kingdom of God, which we have not deserved, but Jesus Christ by his death
and passion has purchased for us. Can a bondseruant by any services look to
deserve an earthly kingdom? and can we which are bond-seruants to God* in
respect both of creation, and of redemption, look to deserve the kingdom of
God? Christ our Savior says: Does he thank that servant, because he did
that which Luke 17. 9.
was commanded unto him? I trow not. So likewise ye, when ye have done all
things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have
done that which was our duty to do. If he that has done all things which
were commanded, must confess himself to be an unprofitable servant, how much
more must we confess our selves to be unprofitable servants, who have both
omitted many things commanded, and committed many great and grievous sins
prohibited? So says Hierome: S^inutilis est qui fecit omnia, quid de illo
dicendum Hieron. ad C^esiphont. aduers. Pelagian.
est qui explere non potuit? i. If he be unprofitable that has done all,
what is to be said of him, that could not fulfill all? Therefore we are not
to trust in our own merits, but in Gods mercy, which imports our misery,
and not worthiness.

But for the proof of your Minor, you allege the saying of our Savior
Christ: Call the laborers, and give them Math. 20. 8.
their wages. I grant that God does give to them that labor in his vineyard, a
reward which is called wages, because it follows piety and good works, as
outward wages follows labor. But that this heavenly wages is not deserved by
our works, as that other is by our labor, it evidently appears by that
parable, where they that had wrought but one hour, received as much as they
did which had borne the burden and heat of the day. Which shows, that this
reward came of grace, and not of merit, and so S. Ambrose does expound it: Non
labori Ambros. de vocat. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 5.
praemium soluens, sed diuitias bo^tatis suae in eos quos sine operibus eligit,
effundens, vt etiam (...) qui in multo labor sudarun^, nec amplius quam
nouissimi acceperunt, intelligant, donum se gratiae, non operum accepisse
mercedem. i. Not paying a reward unto our labor, but pouring forth the riches
of his goodness upon them, whom he has chosen without works, that they also
which in great labor have ^oysed, and have received no more then the last,
may know, that they have received a gift of grace, and not a wages of works.

To your other places, Apocal. 20. 12. and 1. Cor. 3. 8. I say with S. Paul,
that God will reward every man according to his works, but not for the merit
and desert of their works. To them that continuing in well doing seek R^^t.
2. 6. 7.
glory, honor, and immortality, he will give everlasting life: and unto
them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness,
shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon the soul of
every man that does evil. But you will say, Why is not everlasting life the
wages of good works, as everlasting death is of evil works and sins? I
answer, that our evil works be simply evil, and being transgressions of
Gods righteous law, offend his infinite majesty, provoke his infinite wrath,
and deserve infinite pain and punishment. But our works are not simply and
perfectly good, but be imperfect, and are stained with the corruption of our
sinful nature (as I have before declared) and therefore cannot satisfy Gods
infinite justice, nor pacify his infinite anger, nor deserve his infinite
glory, but rather require Gods great mercy, as has been showed. And
therefore Saint Paul in the sixth to the Romans having said, that the wages of
sin is death, Romans 6. 23.
does not say (which had been most meet to have been said, if this
pharisaicall doctrine were true) the wages of good works is eternal life: but
he says; the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord: as
also Oecumenius does well observe.

You confidently affirm, that the Protestants, who are enemies to merits,
shall never attain to the kingdom of Heaven, which is purchased by good
works and merits. Where first I would advise you to take heed, that you be not
brethren to those old heretics called Hieraclitae, to whom Saint Augustine
does ascribe this as an heresy, that they denied infants to appertain to the
kingdom of Heaven, because they had no merits. His words be these: Hieraclitae
ad regnum coelorum non pertinere paruulos dicunt, August. in catal. H^res.
Here Is. 47.
quia non sunt eis vlla merita certaminis, quo vitia superentur. i. The
Hieraclites say, that infants belong not to the kingdom of Heaven, because
they have no merits of strife whereby to overcome vices. How near you iumpe
with these old Heretics, as you do in many matters with many others, let the
Christian reader indifferently judge. Secondly, I say, that we are enemies
neither to those true merits of Gods mercies, and Christ's sufferings before
mentioned, nor to man's good works, but to the merit of them, and vain
confidence put in them. We say with Saint Augustine: A^gust. praefat. in Psalm.
31.
Si vis alienus esse a gratiae, iacta merita tua. i. If thou vvilt he void of
grace, boast thine own merits. Thirdly, we believe that the kingdom of Heaven
comes to us by inheritance, and not by the purchase of our works and merits.
Christ says: Come ye blessed of my father, take the inheritance Math. 25. 34.
of the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world. Saint
Paul says: If we be children, we are also Romans 8. 17.
heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. Thus the
kingdom of Heaven is ours, in that we be coheires with Christ. By whose
bloody and blessed merits it is purchased to us: and not by the works and
deserts of us unprofitable servants, and prodigal children, who have always
need to pray and say: Enter not into Psalm. 1 ^3. 2.
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man that lives be
justified: and ^f thou O Lord straightly markest iniquity, Psalm. 130. 3.
O Lord who shall be able to stand?

To conclude, you that so severely censure us, look to your selves, and take
heed you be not like that proud Pharisee, who gloried of his works, and
disdained the sinful Luke 18. Apoc 3. 17.
Publican: and that you be not like the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, who
said that he was rich, increased Athen^us lib. 12.
with goods, and had need of nothing, and did not know that he was wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, and naked. And that you be not like that mad man of
Athens, called Thraselaus, who coming in his madness to the haven named Pyreum,
did vainly imagine, that all the ships and riches there, were his own: but
being cured, and brought to good understanding, he saw his poverty, and
perceived that he scarce had a penny in his purse. Even so, if you were
thoroughly cured of this frenzy of Popery, you would acknowledge your own
misery, and hunger for Gods mercy: confess your own poverty, that Christ
may enrich you: your own nakedness, that he may with the robe of his
righteousness cover you: your own guiltiness, that he may acquit and
justify you; and finally, humble your self, that he may exalt you. For it is
he that fills Luke 1. 53.
the hungry with good things, and sends the rich empty away. I would you
would join with your own Cardinal Poole in this point, who misliking of
Osorius book de iustitia dedicated to him, for attributing too much to man's
justice and righteousness, did add this worthy saying, and worthy by all
means to be received, That we can never attribute too much to the mercy and
righteousness of God: nor too much take from the righteousness of man. This is
written not only by Doctor Hoddon in his book against Osorius: but also by
Pruilus his Secretary in his life, as that excellent Antiquarie, and learned
man my good friend Master Camden did tell me. To conclude, be not like the
froward Jews, who having a zeal toward God, but not according to knowledge,
being Romans 10. 2. 3.
ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God: For
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness unto every one that believes;
but obey the counsel and calling of God: Ho, every one that thirsts come ye
to the waters, and ye that Isai. 55. 1.
have no silver, come, buy and eat: Come I say, buy wine and milk without
silver and without money. Wherefore do ye As buyers of Popes Pardons,
Masses, etc. do.
lay out silver, and not for bread? and your labor without being satisfied?
Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and let your soul
delight in fatness. Incline your ears and come unto me: hear and your soul
shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David. The which sweet and hid Manna of Gods mercies they that
refuse to eat, but had rather feed on the draffe of their own muddie merits,
shall never inherit heaven, but shall be cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, Apocal. 20. 10.
where the beast and false Prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night
for evermore.

Basil in Moral. Sum. 72. cap. 1. (...), It behooves the hearers (and readers)
being instructed in the Scriptures, to prove the things which be spoken (and
written) by their teachers: and to receive those things that be consonant to
the Scriptures, and to reject those things that differ from them, and utterly
to avoid those that do continue in such Doctrines. JOB. 6. 24. Teach me, and
I will hold my tongue: and cause me to understand, wherein I have erred. ISAIA.
41. 21. Stand to your cause, says the Lord: bring forth your strong reasons,
says the King of Jacob. An answer to certain Popish questions, and frivolous
cauillations, given forth underhand to seduce the simple, and to slander the
truth: now first printed.
TO THE READER.
GOod Reader, I am to certify thee of the occ^sion of the first writing and
now publishing of this my answer to these ^op^sh questions and calumntations.
In the year 1592. a good virtuous gentlewoman, called M^stris lane Brograue,
^et living, and dwelling in Wapnam in Northampton shire, being in her native
Country with her friends, some not so well ^ffected to the truth as others,
pra^sed be God, are, ^id give to her these questions, intending thereby (as it
seems) to pervert her, and to convert her from the truth of God, unto their
false Doctrine and Idolatry. The which she presently delivered unto me, and
desired me to write an answer unto them. This her godly request I thought my
self bound in conscience for to satisfy, and thereupon I did forthwith in
short time write this answer, the which she did send to her deceived friends,
for their better instruction and information. Afterward by wards which a
Popish Priest in conference with me did utter, I did gather, that the same was
sent to Wish ^he, there to be hammered, and examined. But what they did wi^h
it. I do not know. I never heard that either they, or any other ^uer made any
reply unto it. I have been moved by some, and namely by M. Christopher Goodman
(to whom I did send a copy of it, because it did concern him) to publish it
in print. The which although it was allowed to the Press many years past, by
one in great place and authority now, yet I have until this time suppressed
it, howbeit now I have yielded to publish it, partly because the matter both
objected and answered is suitable to the former articles, and my answers: and
partly because the Printer, who had intelligence of it, did earnestly desire to
have it. I have now passed it, as at the first I did write it without addition
or alteration. This I confess that thou good Reader may read these things,
namely those of Aerius, Vigilantius, etc. objected to us, more learnedly and
largely answered by others, especially by that reverend and learned man M. D.
Abbot in his learned answer to D. Bishops Epistle. Notwithstanding, if this my
simple labor herein bestowed, may serve in some measure to the confirmation of
the truth, and confutation of error: to the instruction and edification of the
faithful that read and receive it, and, if not to reclaim the seduced, yet
to be a testimony and witness against them, that will be more ready to reject
it, then to read and examine it, I know that God shall thereby be glorified,
and his Church profited, the which is the only thing I seek and desire.

April 22. 1608. Thine in Jesus Christ, ED. BRILKLEY.

I received of a good Christian Gentlewoman the 14. of June 1592. a paper
containing three questions, with other things hereafter following, the title of
which writing was set down in these words.
Three questions moved to M. Goodman a Preacher in Westchester by a Catholic
Gentlewoman, to the which he could give no answer.
THis title seems partly to contain an untruth, and partly to show a proud
and arrogant spirit. Whether this be not an untruth or in plain words a Lie,
that M. Goodman, so ancient and learned a man (who above forty years past
was public professor and reader of Divinity in the University of Oxford,
and since has been a continual and painful Preacher) could not answer
these frivolous and fond questions, let the indifferent Reader judge. And
whether this proceeds not of a proud spirit, that this Catholic gentlewoman
(as she is termed) should propound such pithie and profound questions, that M.
Goodman could not answer them, let the reader uprightly consider. But this is
the manner of all these counterfeit Catholics, to despise^^ as unlearned; and
to think highly of themselves, and then favorers. But let such take heed
that the saying of the Prophet take not hold on them; Woe be to them which are
voise in their Esaias 5. 21.
own eyes, and prudent in their own sight. I would with Solomon exhort this
Gentlewoman not to be wise in her Prou. 3. 7.
own eyes, but to fear God, and to depart from evils and rather humbly to
submit her self to learn of M. Goodman, then proudly to think, that she is
able to propound such questions in Divinity, as he is not able to answer. Now
whereas this Gentlewoman is called a Catholic, a title which the enemies of
Gods truth (whom for distinction sake we call Papists) do falsely arrogate to
themselves, and vainly brag of, let us a little consider how truly or falsely
they take this title upon them. That godly father S. Chrysostom has a good
saying: Satis sufficere credimus Homil. de Adam and Euae.
quicquid secundum praedictat regulas Apostolica scripta nos docuerunt, vt
prorsus non opinemur Catholicum, quod apparuerit praefixis sentent ijs
contrarium. i. We believe to be sufficient whatsoever the vvritings of the
Apostles have taught us, according to the aforesaid rules, so that we do not
at all think that to be Catholic, which shall appear to be contrary to
the foresaid sentences. Chrysostom here shows us that the Apostles writings
do sufficiently teach us Gods truth, and that that is not to be called or
counted Catholic, which does appear to be contrary to those Apostolical
writings. Now, if we can plamely prove that sundry points of doctrine which
these Catholics do Falsely so called.
hold, be contrary to the writings of the Apostles, as their 1. Cor 14. Romans
10 14. 1. Tim. 2. 5.
prayers in a strange unknown tongue, their prayers to Saints, their making of
other Mediators and Intercessours besides Jesus Christ, their mangling of
Christ's holy supper, in taking away the cup from Gods people their offering of
Jesus Christ for a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the quick and the
dead their Images their Pilgrimages, their Popes supremacy, and sundry such
others; then neither is their doctrine Catholic, nor they true Catholics.
Vincentius Lyrinensis, an Author greatly esteemed of these men, and not
misliked of me, writes thus: In ipsa etiam Catholica Ecclesia magnopere
curandum Vincen. Lyrinen. aduersus prosu. omn. Haeresion Nouati.
est, vt id teneamus quod vbique, quod semper, quod ad omnibus creditum est:
hoc est eten^m vere proprteque Catholicum, quod ipsa vis nominis ratioque
declarat: i. Also in the Catholic Church it self we ought to be careful
that we hold that with has been believed in all places, in all times,
and of all persons, for that is truly and properly Catholic, which the force
and reason of the name does declare. Now if these called Catholics can prove
that their Romish doctrine, has every where in all ages and of all persons
been believed, then we will grant it to be Catholic, and them to be
Catholics. But this they shall never be able to do: for as it is most
certain that the primitive Church never taught nor believed the doctrine now
taught in the Romish Church: so the Greek Church, the Muscouites, the
Christians in Aethiopia, A^menia, and other countries (where Christianity has
continued, have neither submitted themselves to the Church of Rome, nor have
believed and accepted all the doctrine therein professed. In the Council
called Agathense it was thus decreed, Council. Agathen. Canon. 18. distinct. 2
cap. Secula.
and is also recorded in the Popes decrees. Seculares qui in narali Domini,
Pasche and Peutecoste non communicauerint, Catholici non credantur, nec inter
Catholicos habeantur. i. Those secular on vvorldly men which communicate not
all the feast of the Nativity of Christ, at Easter and Whitsontide, let them
not be believed to be Catholics, nor counted to be among Catholics. By the
which this Gentlewoman and many other her favorers will be proved to be no
Catholics. But to conclude this point, those which believe and obey the true
doctrine of almighty God contained in the holy canonical Scriptures, be true
and sincere Catholics; and those which maintain false and damnable doctrine,
not agreeable to the same, be indeed Heritiques. And whether they or we do
hold the said true doctrine of God, let every one that has care of his own
salvation, carefully seek, and wisely in the fear of God consider: and let
them not be carried away with naked names and bare titles, wherewith the enemies
of Gods truth have in all ages seduced the simple. There were in the time of
our Savior Christ a sect, and sort of men which held, that there was no
resurrection Act. 23. 8.
of the dead, neither Angel nor spirit, and yet these Monsters had got them a
glorious title, and were called Sadduces, which in the Hebrew tongue does
signify just and righteous men. Another sect were Pharisees, so called as some
think, because they were expounders of the Law, as others judge: Tanquam
separati. i. as separated from the society of others, in effect the same that
Monachi, that is to say, livers alone: yet notwithstanding this glorious title,
and sundry austere and strait observations which in their lives they used,
they were the greatest adversaries our Savior Christ had. The Valentinian
Epipha. herae. 31. ^ertul. de mongam.
and Montaniest Heritiques called themselves, Spirituales, spiritual men, and
counted others carnal. Therefore we are not to be moved with such outward
titles, which are but sheep clothings to hide ravening Wolves. But Romans 2. 28.
as S. Paul says, he is not a Jew, which is one outward, even so every one
is not a Catholic, that is so outwardly called, but he is a true Catholic,
that truly in his heart believes and obeieth the heavenly doctrine of
almighty God, contained in the holy canonical Scriptures; in which the only
rule both of faith and life is Cause. 8. Quaest. 1. ^ec sufficere.
prescribed unto us (as Beda says) the which holy doctrine delivered and
sanctified unto us in the holy Scriptures, if this Gentlewoman, and other of
the same sect not obey, as most certainly they do not, and as hereafter shall
be proved, they be no true Catholics, howsoever they be so outwardly called,
and do vainly brag of the same, to whom may be well applied that saying of
the Prophet. Hear ye this O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of
Israel, and come out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the
Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth nor in
righteousness. But now I come to the questions.

1. First, whether Mass or Communion was brought first to England at the
conversion of our English nation to Christianity.

2. Secondly, whether Mass or Communion be more ancient.

3. Thirdly, whether the Communion as it is now practiced in England, were
extant in any nation before the Reign of King Henry the eight.

Answer.
AS touching the administration of the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood,
which is commonly called the Communion, because it is a pledge unto us of that
Communion and fellowship which we have both with our Savior Christ, and also
one with another, two kind of things are to be considered. First, such as be
of the substance and essence thereof, which are unchangeable. Secondly, such
things as be Accidental pertaining to the form and fashion of the
ministration thereof, which be variable. Of the former sort is the having of
bread and wine, the distribution of the same to them that be present, prayer,
and thanksgiving in a known tongue, that all with one mouth and heart may
give thanks to God for his great and infinite mercies toward us, in nor
sparing, but giving his own dear son for us even his body to be broken upon
the Cross, and his blood to be shed for our salvation, whereof the bread and
wine is a Sacrament, that is to say, a holy sign, remembrance, and pledge unto
us, yea and a mean and instrument, whereby we are made partakers of Christ's
body and blood given for us, and of all the benefits of his passion. These
things be of the substance of the Sacrament, and ought always to be used, and
may not be altered. Other things there be accidental, as the time and place of
ministering the same, the habit or tire to be used of the Minister, the form of
prayer, and thanksgiving in respect of the words. These and such other be not
of the substance of the Sacrament, and have no express commandment, but be
variable and changeable, so that all things be done decently and to edification.

Now to come unto your questions. If you mean by the Communion and Mass, the
form of prayers and Liturgy used by us and you; I may well say, that neither
of them both were first brought into England at the conversion thereof to
Christianity, altogether in such form as now they be used; for both, what
diversities of Liturgies, and service books have been; and also what
additions have been put to the same is not unknown. Gregory Lib 7. iud. 2.
Epist. 6 3.
says, the Apostles did consecrate and minister the Sacrament only with the
prayer of our Savior Christ. There be extant diverse and sundry Liturgies, of
the which the Papists attribute one to S. James, another to S. Basil, another
to S. Chrysostom, one differing from another. And in this small Island within
the time of Popery, there were three or four sorts of Mass books: one after
the manner of York, another after Sarum, another after Bangor. And about
thirty years past there was brought in a Roman Missall, which abolisheth the
rest. It appears both by Augustine the Monks questions, and Gregory the
first answers, that there were diverse and different orders in diverse Churches.
Augustines question has these words; Cum vna sit fides, sunt Ecclesiarum
diuersa consuetudines, Beda Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 1. cap. 28.
and altera consuetudo missarum in sancta Romana ecclesia, utque altera in
Galliarum tenetur: i. Whereas there is but one faith, there be diverse customs
of the Churches, and there is one custom or order of Masses in the holy Church
of Rome, and another in the Churches of France. So also we confess that in
the Churches, where the truth of Christ's Gospel is taught, there be sundry
Liturgies differing in form of words, and yet agreeing in substance of matter,
which may well be used to the glory of God, and comfort of his people. So that
it forces not though our Liturgy, or form of prayer used at the ministration
of Christ's holy supper, were not brought into this Land at the first conversion
thereof, or were never used before the reign of King Henry the eight, as long
as it cannot be proved, that it contains any thing ungodly, and dissenting
from the word of God: neither does it avail them, though they could prove,
that their Mass as it is now used, was brought into this Land at the
conversion of it (which they cannot do) as long as we can plainly prove, that
it contains a false sained sacrifice, and has many wicked prayers, and
superstitious toys, contrary to the word of God. Well says T^rtullian:
Quad^unque Tertul. de Virgin. v^land.
aduersus veritatem sapit, hoc ^rit H^resi^, ettam vetus consuetudo. i.
Wha^soeuer is against the tru^th, the same is Heresi^, even an old custom.
But I will show that some of their old prayers which they use in their Mass,
be wicked and dissenting from the word of God.

The Priests in the Canon of the Mass after Consecration, prays in these
words: Supra quae propitio and sereno vultu respicere digneris, etc. That thou
would vouchsafe to look with a merciful and favorable countenance upon
the said sacrifice, and that thou would accept the same, as thou
vouchsafedst to accept the gifts of thy righteous servant Abel, and sacrifice
of our Patriarch Abraham, and the holy sacrifice and immaculate host which
Melchisedech the high Priest offered unto thee. Here the Priest prays to God
mercifully to look upon, and to accept this sacrifice, as he accepted the
sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedech. And what is this sacrifice?
forsooth, say they, Jesus Christ himself, whom they offer for a propitiatory
sacrifice: So that by this doctrine the Priest prays to God the father,
mercifully and favorably to look upon, and to accept Jesus Christ his son.
S. Paul teaches us, that Christ sits Romans 8. 34.
at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us: this Popish Canon
teaches us, that the Priest makes intercession to GOD the father for Jesus
Christ And whereas Saint Paul faith* that Christ is the only Mediator 1. Tim.
2. 5.
between God and man; this Popish Canon makes the Priest Mediator between
God the father and Jesus Christ. Is not this good Catholic doctrine? the which
must needs follow, if their doctrine of their Real offering, and sacrificing
of Jesus Christ himself for a propitiatory sacrifice be true Moreover, if
here by the sacrifice of Melch^sedech, be meant that which in the 14. of
Genesis is mentioned, whereby they often endeavor to prove their fained
sacrifice, then I say the Scripture is falsified, for Melchisedech did not
offer bread and wine for a sacrifice unto God: but brought them forth to
refresh Abraham, and his Soldiers returning from the battle.

In the Canon they have another prayer. Libera nos quaesu^us Domine, etc.
Deliver us we beseech thee O Lord from all evils past, present, and to come,
and through the intercession of the blessed and glorious, and always Virgin
Mari^ the mother of God, and of thine Apostles Peter, and Paul, grant us
mercifully peace in our days, etc. When they shall by the holy Scriptures, the
only rule of faith and life, as is before said, prove that this doctrine of
the intercession of the blessed Virgin, and other Saints, is ^ound and true,
then we will grant this to be an holy prayer: in the mean time we must
otherwise judge of it, to be a wicked and blasphemous prayer, derogating from
the intercession of Jesus Christ, of whom Saint John says: If any man sin,
we have an Advocate with the father Jesus the just, and 1. Ioh. 2. 2
he is the reconciliation* for our sins. Where Saint John teaches us, that
he is the Mediator and Advocate to make intercession for us, who is the
reconciliation for our sins: but neither the Virgin Marie, nor any Saint in
heaven, is the reconciliation for our sins, therefore no Saints can be our
Advocate and Mediator to make intercession to God for us. Other most
blasphemous prayers they have used in their Masses; as for example: Christ
Jesus per. Thomae vulnera, quae^nos ligant reaxa s^elera. i. Oh Christ Jesus, by
the vvounds of Thomas release or unloose our sins which do bind us.
Again, Op^ nobis Thoma porrige, rege sta^tes, i^centes erige, mores, actus ac
vitam corrige, in pacis nos viam dirige. Salve Thoma, virga, iustitiae, mund^
iubar, robur ecclesiae, plebis amor, cleri deliciae; salve gregis tutor
egregie, salua tua gaud^n^es glori^. O Thomas help us, govern them which
stand, lift up them that fall, correct our manners, actions and life, and
direct us in the way of peace. All hail Thomas the rod of righteousness, the
brightness of the world, the strength of the Church, the true love of the
people, the delight of the Clergy: All hail oh thou worthy preserver of the
flock, save those that rejoice in thy glory. Whether these be not most wicked
and blasphemous prayers, let any that has any spark of judgment judge. What
can we more in a manner either ask of God, or attribute to our Savior Christ,
then here is attributed and asked of Thomas Becket, of whom we may well doubt
whether he be a Saint in heaven or not? Yea by the testimony of certain old
chroniclers it may be thought, that he is rather a devil in hell, then a
saint in Heaven. For both he wickedly disobeied the King, which had been his
gracious Lord and aduancer, and also most of the Bishops of England then were
against him. But it is enough that the holy father of Rome has canonized him
and made him a Saint, though God never did. Then we may also pray and say,
Tuper Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit, fac nos Christ scandere quo
Thomas asendit. The which that they might not be void both of rhyme and reason,
they thus translated and printed in Queen Mary's days. By the blood of
Thomas, which he for thee did spend make us, Christ, to come whither Thomas did
ascend. If such prayers as these which tend even to the denying of our Lord
Jesus Christ that has bought us, were in our communion books, then I would
even wish them all in a flaming fire, with the which I would all the mass
books, Portuisses, and popish Primers in England were purged. Now if these
named Catholics can prove, that the prayers used by us at the ministration of
Christ's supper be wicked, and not agreeable to Gods holy word, then they say
somewhat. But if they be sound and godly, then it makes no matter how new they
be in respect of the form of words; being old, godly and comfortable in
respect of the substance and matter. Their own horae cano^icae, canonical
hours, used in their portuises were ordained by Vrbanus the second, in the
time of William Rufus. Moreover, as touching those essential and substantial
things of the Sacrament before mentioned, I would ask of this Catholic
gentlewoman, and her favorers, whether they in their consciences do think
that the said sacrament was first ministered in a tongue known generally of the
people, or in a strange unknown tongue; and whether is most ancient the
ministering of it, under both kinds of bread and wine, or only under one kind;
and whether is elder the distributing of it to all the people present, or the
sole receiving of it by the Priest alone, the people standing by gazing upon it
and worshipping it. I am sure none can affirm the latter, but he that is
ferreioris, et plumbei cordis, has a face of iron, and a heart of lead, as Lud
uicus V^u^s himself a Papist sometimes said of the Author of The title of the
Legend.
the golden legend. And therefore the godly Christian Reader may plainly
perceive that our ministering the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood is more
ancient then theirs. And if we compare our communion book with their new
Roman Missall now and newly received, though ours were never before the reign
of King Henry the eight, yet it is more ancient then theirs, which has not
been (for ought that I know) before the reign of our gracious Queen
Elizabeth. And this may sufficiently serve for to answer the three first
questions, which tend all to one end: in the which not only antiquity, but
also verity is to be respected: for as antiquity joined with verity is
effectual: so separated from the same it is of no force, as Saint Cyprian
says, Consuetudo sine veritate Ad Pom Co^* Epist. Stepha.
vetustas erroris est. i. Custom without truth is but old error. Now follows
in the said paper.

Wherefore is not the communion according to the institution of Christ recorded
in the three Evangelists, viz. Matthew, Mark and Luke, where it is written that
Christ first washed the feet of all them that received, and commanded them to
do the like, then preached unto them, afterward took bread in his hand,
lifted up his eyes to heaven, blessed it, brake it etc. and all this he did
after supper: but our minister now does observe none of these. Answer.
IN this question is both folly and falshoode: folly, in asking wherefore the
Communion is not administered according to the institution of Christ, which does
agree therewith in all the substantial points thereof: whereas their mass
utterly differs from the same. And falsehood, in saying that it is written in
the three Evangelists, Matthew, Mark and Luke, that Christ washed the feet of
all those that received; whereas indeed this is written in none of them, but
only in Saint John: neither was that either done by our Savior Christ, or
recorded by Saint John, to bind us always to wash the feet of those that do
receive the Sacrament, but only to teach us to avoid ambition and pride (which
has too much reigned in the papacy,) and to humble and submit our selves one
to another in the fear of God. 1. Cor. 11. Justin. Apol. 2.
We read both in the scriptures, and in the ancient Fathers of the
ministration of Christ's holy supper* yet there is no mention of washing of
feet before the same. Neither was the same required or used in the time of
Popery: And therefore this is foolishly required of us, now as a part of the
institution of Christ, which may appear to be no part thereof, in that by the
providence of God, those three Evangelists he^e named, who do rehearse and
describe the institution of our Savior Christ's supper, do omit it, and that
Evangelist which does not touch the institution, does record it. Therefore the
scope and purpose of our Savior Christ is (as I have said) by this washing of
his disciples feet, to teach us humility, and not to bind us of necessity to
wash the feet of them that shall receive.

Moreover, this gentlewoman, or Author says, that Christ preached, took bread
in his hand, lifted up his eyes to heaven, blessed it, brake it etc. and all
this he did after supper: but our minister now observes none of all these
things.

As touching preaching, all good, godly and learned ministers do use to preach
the word of God before the ministration of the Sacrament, both thereby to
declare the death of Christ until he come, that by it only we be delivered
from eternal death, and be made the children of Gods mercy, and heirs of his
glory: and also to stir up the people reverently and worthily to receive
that holy mystery, being as I said before, a pledge unto us of Christ's body
and blood given for us, and of our salvation purchased thereby. This preaching
of Gods word we think very requisite to be joined with the Sacrament, which
is a seal thereof, and therefore we be as near in following Christ's steps in
this point, as it has been utterly neglected by the Papists, who have been
so far from preaching at the ministration of the Sacrament, that they have
not made any declaration of Christ's death, and the fruit thereof in a known
tongue, to the peoples instruction and edification. If the preaching of the
word be in some particular Churches omitted, it is for want of the sufficiency
of allowance in some parishes, not able to maintain a learned and a preaching
Minister: and yet in those Churches there are by order appointed such lessons
instructions an ^ exhortations to be read at the ministry of that blessed
Sacrament, which setting out plainly the excellent power and effect of Christ
his death, may move the people present to a m^re reverend regard of that holy
service. We take the bread into our hands, both when we receive it our selves,
and deliver it to others: whereas in Popery the people were not so holy as the
Priest, to touch it with their hands, but had it thrust into their mouths. As
touching lifting up of eyes, I read not in the three Evangelists here named,
any mention made of our Savior Christ's lifting up of his eyes at the time of
the celebrating of his Supper with his Disciples: and therefore you have falsely
foysted in this of your own. But yet if our Savior Christ did at his Supper,
lift up his eyes to heaven, we are not thereby bound of necessity to follow
the same. True it is, that every action of our Savior Christ is for our
instruction: but false it were to say, that every action of our Saviors, is
for our im^tation, that is, of necessity of us to be followed. I write not
these as though I thought it unlawful to lift up our eyes to heaven: but this
I acknowledge, that as when we do behold and consider our own manifold,
heinous, and horrible sins whereby we have transgressed Gods laws, offended
his Majesty, and deserved his wrath and eternal damnation, we may with the
Publican be ashamed to lift Luke. 18. 13.
up our eyes to heaven: So on the other side, when by a true faith in Gods
promises, we behold his great love and mercy toward us, in not sparing but
giving his own dear Son for us, we have good cause to lift up our eyes,
hands, and hearts unto God which is in heaven: giving him most humble and
hearty thanks for his said unspeakable mercies toward us in Jesus Christ.
But whereas you say, that Christ blessed it, meaning the bread; I say in plain
words, that you belly the text: for it is not there said, that he blessed the
bread, but that he blessed, that is to say, gave thanks to his heavenly
father for his great mercy toward mankind, and for the great work of our
redemption and salvation, which he was then to accomplish. That our Savior
Christ, by blessing, did mean not a Magical incantation of the consecrating
and transubstantiating the bread and wine into his natural body and blood, as
you falsely surmise, but a thanksgiving to his father, it is most manifest by
the texts: for whereas in Saint Matthew and Saint Mark it is recorded, Matthew.
26. 26. 27. Mark. 14. 22. 23.
that when our Savior Christ took the bread he blessed, immediately follows,
that when he took the cup, he gave thanks: whereby it most evidently
appears, that blessing and thanksgiving is all one thing. And yet this is
more manifest: For whereas Saint Matthew, and Saint Mark say, as is before
declared, that our Savior when he took bread, blessed; Saint Luke Luke ^2
19. 1 Cor. 10 24. ^ Cor. 14. 16.
and Saint Paul say, he gave thanks. Hereunto also pertains that plain
place of Saint Paul: When th^^ blessest in the spirit, how shall he that
occupies the place of the unlearned, say, Amen, to thy giving of thanks,
seeing he knows not what thou say? Who is so blind and so ignorant, that
here sees not blessing and thanksgiving to be all one thing? And therefore
again I say, that by blessing, is not here meant a secret whispering of five
words, to the converting of the substance of bread and wine, into Christ's body
and blood, as Priests foolishly use, and falsely teach: but a thanksgiving to
GOD for so loving us, that he has given his only begotten John. 3. 26.
Son for us, that as many as believe in him, shall not perish but have
everlasting life: For the which cause, this Sacrament is of the ancient fathers
called Eucharistia, that is to say, thanksgiving. As touching the breaking of
bread, which may resemble to us the breaking of Christ's body upon the Cross,
we do follow our Savior Christ therein, and do break it when we distrib^^e
it unto the people: the which the Papists do not, but thrust in a whole
unbroken wafer into their mouths. Indeed, I know that the Priest himself does
in his Mass break his host into three parts: One to signify the Saints in
heaven: another the faithful upon the earth: the third, the souls in
Purgatory. But this deep diu^nity they have found upon the back side of the
Bible. But because this Gentlewoman, or author of this scrole urges eagerly
the breaking of bread, I would feign know what the Priest does break, when he
breaks his Hos^e (as they call it) into three parts. First he breaks not
(by their doctrine) the substance of bread: for they say there is none
remaining: to say that they break Christ's body, wre blasphemy, although it
pleased that holy Pope Nicholas, with his Council, to prescribe that godly and
learned man Berengarius, in his De consecra. did. 2 ^go Berengariu^.
recantation, to affirm the body of Christ, Manibus Sacerdotum tractari,
frangi, and fidelium den^^bus atter^. i. To be handled with the Priests hands,
to be broken, and torn with the teeth of the faithful. And to say, they
break accidents without a substance were folly, or rather madness.

These things before being considered, let the indifferent reader uprightly
consider how truly this Catholic Gentlewoman says, that we observe none of
these. Now it follows in the said paper.
The truth of the Catholic religion and of every part thereof, is proved
evidently* by the testimony and consent of all writers in all ages, since
Christ and his Apostles. As for example* the Real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, the Sacrifice of the mass, Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, Prayers
to Saints, the use of Images, the sign of the Cross, Pilgrimage to holy
Places, and the rest now in controversy.
Answer.
Here be things as boldly affirmed, as they be barely proved, or rather
clean omitted; and therefore they might without further proof as well be
denied of me, as they be affirmed of them. And although I mind not long to
stand upon these particular points: yet I will not let them go so nakedly as
they do, but will somewhat touch them. But here let the Christian reader
consider and mark, that whereas this Catholic Gentlewoman says, that the
truth of their Catholic religion, and every part thereof is proved evidently
by the testimonies of all writers in all ages, since Christ and his Apostles;
they seem to exclude from this proof, the Law and the Prophets, the Gospel
of our Savior Christ, and the writings of the Apostles contained in the
canonical Scriptures: For if they had meant otherwise, they would have said,
that the truth of the Catholic religion, and every part thereof, is proved
evidently by the testimony of the holy Scriptures. and of all writers in all
ages since Christ and his Apostles.

Therefore if their meaning be, as their words seem to import, to exclude
from this proof the canonical Scriptures, then they exclude the only true
trial of Christian religion: for if the holy Scriptures Ca^s. 8. quest. Nec
suff^. ^er^.
be the only rule of our faith and life, as Beda says in these words before
alleged; Nobis sacris literis vnica est credendi pariter and viuendi regula
praescripta. i. The only rule both of faith and life is prescribed unto us in
the holy Scriptures: then in the proof of Christian religion, we ought not to
exclude them, but chiefly, yea only to admit them. And if Saint Aug. de natu
^. and great. cap. 60.
Augustine do truly say, that we ought without refus^ll to give our consent
only to the Canonical Scriptures; then surely we ought to try and examine
all matters by them* Therefore I may say unto you with the same Saint
Augustine, Auferantur ergo, De v^itat. Eccle* cap. 2.
etc. Let these things be taken away which we recite and bring one against
another, not out of the holy Canonical books, but from else where. And so let
us try these points of your Catholic Religion, by the holy Canonical
Scriptures; the testimony whereof is sufficient; and all other testimonies
without the same, be of no force: so says the same Saint Agustine; Qui diuina
testimonia non sequuntur, etc. Arg. Epist 50.
i. They that follow not the divine testimonies, have lost the weight of man's
testimony. Therefore I conclude this point with the same Saint Augustine; Non
audi^mus, etc. i. Let us not hear, This say I, This say thou: but Aug. de
vnitat. Eccles. cap. 3.
let us hear, This says the Lord. There be the Lords books, whose authority
we both consent unto, we both believe, and we both obey: there let us see^ke
the Church, there let us discuss our cause. Bring then plain proofs out of
the holy Canonical Scriptures for those your catholic points of Religion, and
I will yield. And without them, whatsoever testimonies you bring else where,
you shall nothing prevail. Well says Saint Jerome, Omne quod loquimur,
debemus affirmare Hier. in Psalm. 98.
de Scripturis sacris: i. Whatsoever we speak, we ought to affirm or prove
it out of the holy Scriptures. Idem ad Titum.
And again: Sine authoritate Scripturarum, garrulitas non habet fidem: i.
Without the authority of the Scriptures, prattling has no credit.

Now to come to your particular points. As touching your Real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, if you mean thereby not a Real presence of Christ to
the faith of the godly and worthy receiver, (whereby we affirm and believe,
that he does truly receive Jesus Christ, and does eat his flesh and drink
his blood, to the feeding and nourishing of his soul to eternal life, but an
euacuating of the substance of the bread and wine, and the turning and
transubstantiating of the same into the very natural body and blood of Christ,
contained under the outward accidents of bread and wine; concerning this false,
gross, and carnal doctrine, I have said sufficiently in a printed sermon,
published twenty years past, and as yet not confuted; wherein I have showed,
that this doctrine is contrary to the holy Scriptures, which call it bread
after it is consecrated, and when it 1 Cor. 10 16. 17. and 2. 26. 27. 28.
is received: and that it is contrary to the nature of a Sacrament, which must
have a substantial element, or else it can be no Sacrament; that it is
contrary to the Articles of faith, and holy Scrip^ures, which teach us that
Christ in respect of his humanity is ascended into heaven, and there is to be
sought, and not upon the earth; and that this doctrine draws with it many
absurdities: as that Christ's body is at one moment in heaven and earth, and in
infinite places of the earth without either quantity or quality of a body; and
that wicked and unfaithful men do eat the very body and blood of Christ, and
such other absurdities which are more largely laid down in my said Sermon,
whereunto I remit the reader: where also I have set down sundry testimonies
of the ancient godly learned Fathers, against this gross and false doctrine of
transubstantiation. As touching their Sacrifice of the Mass, wherein they
falsely feign, that they offer up Jesus Christ for a propitiatory sacrifice for
the sins of the living, and of the dead, I say, that this doctrine has
neither warrant of the word of GOD, nor of the ancient godly and learned
Fathers, but is contrary to them both.

First, no man ever did* or can offer up Jesus Christ for a propitiatory
Sacrifice. Iud^^ betraved him, the Priests accused him, Pilate condemned him,
the Jews crucified him; but none did offer him for a sacrifice for our sins
but himself; Who Heb. 9. 14:
through the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to GOD. So says
Saint Paul, that Christ gave Ephesians. 5. 2.
himself for unto be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
to God. And if a man could offer up Jesus Christ unto his Father for a
Sacrifice, then see what an absurdity would follow; that Jesus CHRIST should
be accepted of his heavenly Father, for the man's sake that does offer him: for
in all Sacrifices, the man is not excepted for the sacrifice sake, but the
Sacrifice for the man's sake that does offer it. As for example: Caine and Abel,
offered either of them a Sacrifice; the one of the fruit of his field, the
other of the increase of his cattle; there was no difference before God in the
outward sacrifice, yet the one was accepted, and the other was rejected,
because the one was a godly and faithful man that did offer it, and the other
a wicked Hypocrite; and therefore the Apostle says, that by faith Abel offered
a greater sacrifice Heb. 2. 4.
then Caine did.

The Sacrifices of Noah, Abraham, and other faithful Fathers pleased GOD, and
it is said, that he smelled a sweet ^auour of rest: and this was because they
Genesis 8. 21.
were godly and faithful which did offer them. Afterward the same Sacrfices
offered by the wicked Jews, which were a sinful nation, a people laden with
iniquity, the seed of the wicked, corrupt children, which Isa. 1.
had forsaken the Lord, and provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, whose
hands were full of blood; 15
were so odious and abominable to GOD, that he says of them, What have I to
do with the multitude 2
of your sacrifices, says the Lord; I am full of the burnt offerings of
Rams; and the fat of fed beasts. And a little after: Bring no more
oblations in vain, incense is an obhomination unto me. Yea GOD says of those
sacrifices in another place, He that kills a Bullock is as if he slew a
man; he that sacrifices a sheep, is as if he cut off a dogs neck; he
that offers an oblation is as if he had offered Isa. 66. 3.
swines blood: he that remembers incense, is as if he had blessed an idol,
etc. Why did God thus abhor these sacrifices, which he himself! had commanded
to be offered? even because they were wicked men, void of true faith and
repentance, which did offer them. And to come nearer to the purpose, why was
the sacrifice of Jesus Christ upon the Cross a sweet smelling sacrifice to
God; to pacifice his wrath, to satisfy his justice, and to purchase his mercy
unto us? surely because Jesus Christ the Son of God did offer it, as before
is declared. And therefore it must in like manner follow, that if a miserable
man could offer Jesus Christ, for a sacrifice to his Father, then Christ should
be accepted for the man's sake, the which if it be false and blasphemous, then
can no man offer up Jesus Christ for a propitiatory sacrifice to his Father.
Moreover this sacrifice of our Savior Christ upon the Heb. 7, 27
Cross, for our redemption, was but once offered, and can never be repeated.
So says the Apostle, that Christ needed not daily, as those high priests did
offer up sacrifice, first for their own sins, and then for the people, for
that did he once, when he offered up himself. Again: neither by Heb. 9, 12
the blood of G^ates and Calves, but by his own entered he once into the holy
place, and obtained eternal redemption. Again not that he should offer
himself often, as the high priest 9. 25.
entered into the holy place every year with other blood, for then must he
often have suffered since the foundation of the world, but now in the end of
the world, has he appeared once, to put away sin by the offering of
himself. And as it is 10. 19.
appointed to all men once to die, and then comes judgment: So Christ was
once offered, to take away the sins of man. etc. Again: By the which will
we be sanctified, even by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made,
Again: but this Vsc. 12.
man after he had offered one sacrifice for sin, sits for ever at the
right hand of God. Thus we see that the holy scripture teaches us, that our
Savior Christ once offered himself, once entered into the holy place, with one
oblation once made has sanctified us, and so can never be repeated. And if
this sacrifice should be repeated, and our Savior Christ should daily be
offered in the Mass, see what absurdities would follow. First that the
sacrifice of our Savior Christ upon the Cross were weak, imperfect and
insufficient to take away sin: for so the Apostle does reason, and does
prove, that the sacrifices of the Jews were not perfect, and were unable to
take away sins, because they were still repeated, and ceased not to be
offered. By the which reason, it should follow, that if our Savior Christ be
often and continually offered, then his sacrifice which he offered upon the
Cross was imperfect, and unable to take away sin: which if it be false and
blasphemous to affirm, then Christ is not continually to be offered in the
Mass. And hereupon I do make an argument. Those sacrifices which cease not to
be offered for sin, cannot purge sin: but the sacrifice of the Mass
cease not to be offered for sin; therefore the sacrifice of the Mass
cannot purge sin. The first proposition of this syllogism is proved by the
Apostle. Hebr. 10. 12. as I have before declared. The second proposition cannot
of them be denied, as I would it might: and therefore the conclusion must
needs follow, or otherwise I make the argument thus. That sacrifice which is
perfect, and able to take away sins, is not to be repeated: but the
sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross was perfect and able to take away sins:
therefore the sacrifice of Christ is not to be repeated.

An other absurdity would follow, that if Christ be often Hebr. 9. 25.
offered in the Mass, then he does often suffer and die, for so the Apostle
says, not that he should offer himself often, as the high priest enters into
the holy place every year with strange blood, for then must he have often
suffered since the foundation of the world, etc? but Christ does not often
suffer and die Romans 6. therefore he is not often offered. Another reason I
will use against the fained sacrifice of the Mass in this sort: Without
sheding of blood there is no forgiveness of sin: but in the sacrifice of the
Mass, there is no shedding of blood, therefore by the sacrifice of the Mass,
there is no forgiveness of sin, and so consequently it is no sacrifice
propitiatory for the sins of the quick and the dead. The first proposition is
the very words of the Apostle. Heb. 9. 22. the second they do grant themselves
in calling it an unbloody sacrifice, and therefore the concusion cannot be
denied. My last reason shall be this.

Where there is forgiveness of sin, there is no more Hebr. 10. 18.
offering for sin, but by the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross we have
forgiveness of sins, therefore thereis no more offering for sin. The first
proposition is the words of the Apostle, the second I hope this Catholic
Gentlewoman and her favorers will not deny, therefore ye conclusion must needs
be true, and so consequently ye forged sacrifice of the Mass is justly
abolished. But me think I hear this Catholic gentlewoman exclaming and
saying, what have we now no sacrifices in the church as you would seem here to
conclude? I answer that we have, but not (...) propitiatory sacrifices, to
make satisfaction to Gods justice, and to purchase his mercy for our sins,
which our Savior Christ by that one sacrifice once for all and ever offered
upon the Cross, has sufficiently performed: but we have (...) sacrifices of
thanksgiving, whereby we show forth our thankfulness to God for his great
mercy toward us, in not sparing, but giving his own dear son to death for
us: of these sacrifices we read. Psalm 4 5. and 50. 22. and 51 18. Heb. 13.
15. 16. 1. Pet. 2. 5. Romans 12. 1. etc. And of this sort is the supper of our
Savior Christ, which though it be properly a sacrament and not a sacrifice,
yet of some of the Ancient fathers it is called a sacrifice, because it is a
holy sign and pledge unto us of that sweet smelling sacrifice which Jesus
Christ upon the cross offered for our redemption and salvation, and because in
celebrating and receiving of it, we do give thanks to God for the same, for
the which cause (as I said before) it is called Eucharistia, that is to say
thanksgiving. Saint Augustine says Sacrificium Visibile inuisibilis
sacrificii. Sacramentum, id est sacrum signum est. 1. The visible De Ciuit.
dei. lib. 20. cap. 5.
sacrifice is of the invisible sacrifice a sacrament, that is to say a holy
sign. And again, Quod ab omnibus appellatum est sacrificium, signum est very
sacrificii. 1. that which of all men is called a sacrifice, is a sign of the
true sacrifice. So Saint Chrysostom says (which is also recorded in the
Homil. 17. ad Hebr. deic Consecr^^ g^.
Popes decrees, but falsely attributed to Saint Ambrose) we offer every day,
sed ad recordationem mortis eius. 1. but to the remembrance of his death. Hoc
autem sacrificium exemplum est illius. 1. this sacrifice is an example of that.
By these places that I allege no more, it sufficiently appears, in what
sense, the holy Fathers called this Sacrament a sacrifice, because that it is
an holy sign and remembrance of Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross. Now to end
this matter, if this Catholic Gentlewoman, or some friend of hers, will
maintain and defend this false forged sacrifice of the Mass, (as you say) it
may be evidently proved by the testimony and consent of all writers, in all
ages since Christ, and his Apostells, then I would desire them, not only
directly without cauillation to answer my reasons which I have alleged
against it, but also syllogistically to set down as many or more grounded upon
the scripturs for proof of it. You shall not need to take so much pains as
to bring the testimony and consent of all writers in all ages since Christ and
his Apostles, only bring plain pregnant proofs out of the holy Scriptures,
and it shall be sufficient. Well says Saint Basil. Quicquid vel dicimus In
moralib. rig. 26
vel facimus, id testimonio diuinarum literarum confirmari debet. 1. Whatsoever
we say, or do, we ought to prove it by the testimony of the holy
scriptures. And well Conta. Idol.
says Saint Athanasius* Sufficia^t sanctae and diuinitus inspiratae scripturae
ad omnem indicationem. 1. The holy scriptures inspired of God be sufficient
for the declaration of all truth. Bring them, and ye shall get the victory,
and I will yield: and without them, all other testimonies be of no validity
and force. Because this mine answer is grown long, I will but briefly touch ye
other points of doctrine here set down, requiring this gentlewoman, and her
adherents, not so boldly and barely to affirm, as plainly and effectually to
prove them by the holy scriptures. As touching ye fained fire of Purgatory,
which the Papists love so dearly because it has greatly heat their Kitchins,
as Erasmus Lib. Epist. 20. Hierome. Agathe.
says, and purged mo purses then souls, I affirm that it cannot be proved
neither by the Scriptures, nor by the testimony and consent of all writers in
all ages since Christ, and his Apostles, and it derogateth from the purging and
cleansing of our sins which we have in the blood of Jesus Christ, whereof I
will only set down a few places: with one offering has he made perfect them
which are H^^ 10. 14. 1. 3. Heb 9. 14. 1 John 1. 7.
sanctified, having by himself purged our sins, sits on the right hand on
the Majesty on high; how much more shall the blood of Christ, which through
the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your
consciences from dead works to serve the living God. The blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanses us from all sin. If we confess our sins God is faithful
and righteous to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us Apoc. 1. 5. 7. 14.
from all our iniquities. Christ has loved and washed us from our sins in his
own blood, and makes us Kings and Priests unto God, etc. The Saints wash
their long Robes, and make Ioh. 1. 29. Psalm. 51. 7. Isa. 2. 18. Rom 5. 10.
them white in the blood of the Lamb, that is Christ Jesus, who is the Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the world. Purge me with Isope and I shall be
clean, wash me and I shall be whiter then snow. Though your sins were as
Crimson, they shall be made as white as snow. If when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God, by the death of his son, much more being reconsiled we shall
be saved by his life. How these and such like places of Scripture will agree
with the Popish Purgatory (in the which they imagine sins to be punished,
souls to be purged, and Gods justice to be satisfied) let the Christian
Reader consider: and so mark what the word of God shows to be our true
Purgatory, even the blood of Jesus Christ. Saint Paul says, that we b^ing
Romans 5. 1. Apoc. 14. 13.
justified by faith, have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. And
Saint John says. Blessed are the dead which hereafter die in the Lord. Even so
says the spirit that they rest from their labors and their works follow them.
How the faithful have peace with God, and rest from their labors, and yet be
tormented in the terrible pains of Purgatory I would saine understand? But of
this popish purgatory, and prayer for the dead which depend on it, I will write
no more at this present, expecting that this Catholic Gentlewoman which can
propound such profound and unanswerable questions, will profoundly and pithily
prove them by the Scriptures: which when she does, she shall by the grace of
God hear further from me.

As concerning prayer to Saints departed out of this life, I say and here-vppon
do stand, that in all the holy Scriptures, there is not one commandment of
God that we should pray unto them; nor one promise made to such prayer, nor
one example of any Patriarch, Prophet, Apostle, or godly man that ever prayed
unto them.

And although this may sufficiently satisfy a Christian conscience, which
ought to be grounded upon the word of GGD, and thereby directed, and may move
it to hate and abhor this false doctrine; which has no warrant in Gods word,
yet the more to persuade this Gentlewoman and others of her crew to the truth I
will set down a few arguments grounded upon the Scriptures, to confute this
their doctrine of praying unto Saints. My first reason shall be upon these words
of ye Apostle, Rom, 10. 14.
How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed. Whereupon I make
this argument: we are to pray only to him in whom we believe: but we believe
only in God, therefore we are to pray only to God, and so consequently not
unto Saints. The first proposition is the word of Apostle, the second if they
deny I will hereafter prove it. My second Argument shall be this: They are not
to be prayed unto, y^ hear not our prayers; but the Saints departed hear not
our prayers: therefore we are not to pray unto them. The first proposition is
evident. If they shall deny the second, I will hereafter prove it; in the mean
time, let them consider these places of Scripture. Isa. 63 16. 2. Reg. 22. 20
Psalm. 27. 10. My third Argument is this: They are not to be prayed unto, which
know not our hearts, and know not whether our prayers proceed from our hearts
or not, but the Saints know not our hearts. Ergo we ought not to pray unto them.

My last argument shall be this, we are to offer sacrifizes Hosea. 14. 2. H^b
13 15. Psalm. 50. 23.
to none but only God, Exodus 22. 20. but our prayers be sacrifices, therefore
we are to offer them only to God, and so consequently not unto Saints. When
this Gentlewoman, and her friends shall directly and plainly answer these
reasons, and set down as many or mo grounded upon ye Scriptures to prove their
assertion, then they hear more from me.

As touching Images if they can prove them by the Scriptures, and by the
testimonies of all writers since Christ and his Apostles, they shall work
wonders: the which until they do, I will set down a few places out of the
holy Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, which I would wish them well and deeply
to consider, and either to answer them, or to yield unto the truth of them. I
will begin with the commandment of GOD. Thou shall Isa. 20 4, Deuteronomy. 5. ^.
make thee no graven Image, neither any similitude of things that are in heaven
above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the waters under
the earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: For I am the
Lord thy GOD, etc. Take good heed unto your selves: for Deuteronomy. 4. 15:
you saw no Image in the day that the LORD spoke unto you in the Mount Horeb,
out of the midst of the fire, that you corrupt not your selves, and make you
agrauen Image or representation of a^y figure, whether it be male or female,
etc. Cursed be the man that shall make any caruen or molten 27. 15.
Image which is an abhominatio^ unto the Lord, the work of the hands of the
crafts man, and puts it in a secret place, and all the people shall answer and
say Amen. To whom the^ Isa. 40. 18.
will you like^ God, or what similitude will you set up to him? the workman
melts an Image, or the Goldsmith beats it out in gold, etc. Al they that
make an Image are vanity, and their 44. 9.
delectable things shall nothing profit, and they are their own witnesses that
they see not, nor know not, therefore they shall be Hab. 2. 18.
confounded who have made a God or molten Image, that is profitable for
nothing? Read ye rest that does there follow. Habacuke says: what profits
the Image, for the maker thereof has made it an Image. and a teacher of lies,
though he that made it trust therein, when he makes dumb Idols, etc. The
inuenting of Idols and Images was the beginning of Wis. 14. 2 Cor. 6. 16. 1
Ioh. 5. 21. Apoca. 9. 20.
whoredom, and the finding of them, is the corruption of life. What agreement
has the Temple of God with Idols or Images. Babes keep your selves from
Images. The remnant of the men which were not killed by these plagues repented
not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils and
Idols of gold, and of silver, and of brass and of stone, and of wood, which
neither can see, neither hear, nor go. Also they repented not of their
murder, and of their sorcerie, neither of their fornication, nor of their
theft. I will for shortness sake omit many other places of Scripture, wherein
Images in the worship of God are condemned, and the vanity of them lively
painted forth.

Now as touching the state of the Church after Christ and his Apostles, it is
most certain, that the Christians in Lib. 3. cap. 23.
the primitive Church neither had, nor worshipped Images. Eusebius writes that
Plinius secundus a Pagane, writing to Traiane the Emperor a persecutor of
Christians, did certify him that he found no wickedness in the Christians, but
that they would not worship Images.

Origne writes that Celsus that railer and Blasphemour of Christianity, did
object this as a fault against the Con. Celse. lib. 4. Apolog. cap. 12.
Christians, that they had no Images. Tertullian writes thus. If we worship
not vain pictures and Images, that are like dead men, which Kites, Mise and
Spiders, know what they be, does not the forsaking of this known error
deserve rather praise then punishment? Lactantius says that God is greater
then man, therefore he is above, and not below, neither Lib, 2. de Orig. 9.
error. cap, 19.
is he to be sought below upon the earth, but in the highestrehio^ of heaven;
wherefore there is no doubt, but that there is no religion, wheresoever there is
an Image. Clemens writes Lib. 5. recog. cap, 6.
thus. That Serpent the Devil uses by others to utter such words: we to the
honor of God do worship visible Images, the which is most certainly false, for
if you would truly worship the Image of God, by doing well unto man, you should
in him worship the true Image of God: for in every man is the true Image of
God: But yet not in all the true similitude, but where there is a good soul,
and a pure mind. If therefore you would honor the Image of God, we do show
you what is good, that you do good, and give honor, and reverence unto man, who
is made after the Image of God, giving meat unto the hungry, and drink unto
the thirsty, apparel unto the naked, service unto the sick, hospitality, unto
strangers, and things necessary unto him that is in prison. And this is that
which shall be accepted, as truly done unto God. And these things do so far
forth tend unto Gods Image, and the honor thereof, that he that does them not
is thought to offer injury unto the Image of God. Therefore what honor of God
is this, to g^d after Images of stone, and of wood, and to worship as God,
vain and liuelesse Images, and to despise man in whom is truly the Image of
God. Hitherto Clement.

Epiphanius coming into a church and there finding a Com. 3. opem Hicronimi.
veil hanging, and having on it an Image as it were of Christ or some Saint,
did tear it in pieces, and willed them to wrap some dead body in it and not to
hang such in the churches contrary to the authority of the scriptures. This
Epistle wherein this is contained has the authority, not only of Epiphanius
which did write it, but also of Saint Hierome, who did translate, and allege
it against John the Bishop of Jerusalem. Saint Augustine commends that Lib.
^. de ciuit. dei. cap. 9
learned Roman Varro for that he affirmed, that they which ordained Images
for the people, both took away fear, and brought in error. And again he
writes of the Ibim. cap. 31
same Varro in this sort. Wherefore seeing that Varro did say, that they did
know what was God, who did believe, that he is a soul or spirit governing the
world, and did think that religion might more chastely be observed without
Images, who did not see, how near he came to truth: Hear Saint Augustine
affirms that Varro came near unto the truth, in thinking that religion might
more chastely and purely be observed without Images, then with them. The same
Saint Augustine writes thus: Vere mendatia etc. Our fathers have indeed
worshipped lies, even Images in which is no profit. Saint Ambrose says. The De
fug ^culi. cap. 5. cap. 36.
Church knows not idle forms, and vain figures and Images. The counsel
Elibertimum, decreed, that Images ought not to be in the Church, and that which
is worshipped or adored (...). lib. 1. a coas. a. Euangel. cap. 10.
should not be painted ^po^ walls, I will conclude this matter o Images with an
other saying of S. Augustine. Sic omnine errare meruerunt quia Christu^ et
Apostolos eius non in sanctis condicibus, sed in pictis parietibus
quaesiueru^t. i. They have altogether deserved to be deceived, because they
have sought Christ and his Apostles, not in the holy books of the scriptures,
but in painted walls. And thus much at this time for Images, expecting that
this Catholic gentlewoman, or some of her friends will prove by the testimony
of the holy scriptures, and the testimony of all writers in all ages since
Christ and his Apostles, not only the use of them, (as here they say) but also
the horrible abuse of them, such as was in Popery, in running a pilgrimage to
them, in kneeling and creeping to them, in burning candles and tapers before
them, in offering incense, and all kind of other oblations unto them, in
making them to nodde with their heads, and their eyes to gogle, to deceive the
simple etc. This shall be as easy for them to do as to move mountains. As
touching the cross and pilgrimage I will for shortness sake write nothing,
requiring them by the foresaid testimonies for to prove them.

Now, it follows in the said scroole or paper.

I Would know whether it be not true that Aerius was condemned an Heretic
above these thousand years, for denying prayer for the dead, and Vigilantius
for denying the prayers to Saints: and the Nouatianes for denying the power of
the Church to forgive sins: and Eustathius for denying Pilgrimage to holy
places: and Simon Magus for denying free will: and Iouiniane for affirming the
marriage of Priests, all the which opinions and many more that are now preached
for Gods word, have been these thousand years condemned for heresies, as I am
told out of books of Saint Ireneus, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint
Epiphanius, Saint Hierome and other holy fathers of the primitive Church.

Answer.
AS touching these here charged with heresy, to whom you seek to liken us,
first I answer generally, that neither whatsoever an heretic has holden is
to be counted heresy, for there has been no heretic, but he has held some
truth; nor whatsoever a Godly father of the church has maintained, is to be
esteemed for truth and verity, for it is not unknown, that the ancient Godly
fathers had their infirmities, and were subject to some errors. The which
although by particular examples might be declared, yet at this present I will
spare them. Therefore a doctrine is not simply either to be rejected, because
an Heritike held it: nor to be embraced, because a Godly father maintained it:
But if it be agreeable to the word of God, it is to be received: if it dissent
from it though an Angel from heaven deliver it, we are to refuse it. But
Epiph: heress. 75. Augu. de her. cap. 53.
perticulerly to come to those persons here named, I do confess that Aerius
was an Heretic in maintayning the horrible heresy of Arius, wherewith
Epiphanius and Augustine do charge him. But whereas they did object unto him
the denying of prayer for the dead, first I say, that they do not convince and
confute him by the scriptures. And therefore let this Gentlewoman or some of
her favorers perform that, which they have ommitted, and plainly prove this
doctrine of praying for the dead by the holy canonical scriptures, and then
we will grant the denial of it to be an herisie, and Aerius for the same to
have been an Heritike. Secondly I say that that prayer for the dead which
Epiphanius and Augustine do mean, neither does prove purgatory, nor is the
same which the Papists do Here Is. 75.
now use. Epiphanius rendering a reason of their praiets for the dead, does not
say, that they prayed for them, that they might have remission of such sins,
as were not here forgiven them, nor to make satisfaction for their sins, and
to release them out of the pains of purgatory, (for the Greek Church,
(whereof Epiphanius was) never to this day believed purgatory) but he gives
this reason thereof, that they which be alive should think and hope, that
they which be departed (...). Conses. lib. de. cap. 12, etc.
hence do live and are not perished, but be and live with God, but they that
be and live with God, be in heaven, and not in purgatory. So Saint Augustine
prayed for his mother, and yet believed that she was in heaven: so Saint
Ambrose prayed for Theodosius the Emperor, and yet assured himself of his
salvation. For these be his words of him: Absolutus certamime fruitur nunc
Theodosius luce perpetua etc. Theodosius being now freed from fight, enjoys
eternal light, continual tranquillity, and glory in assembly of the Saints.
Then Theodosius was not in purgatory. The ancient Church also prayed for the
Virgin Litu^g Christ.
Mary, for the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martirs, whom I hope this
Catholic gentlewoman will not believe to have been in purgatory. And
therefore that kind of prayer for the dead which in the ancient Church was
used, was rather a commemoration of them, and thanksgiving for them, then a
petition to deliver them from the fained fire of purgatory, and so proves
neither pick purse purgatory, nor that popish prayer for the dead, which is
now used and maintained. And thus much touching Aerius.

You also say that you have been told that Vigilantius was above a thousand
years past condemned for an Hetike for denying prayer unto Saints. But take
heed you be not over oredulous, lightly to believe whatsoever a prating
Priest, or iugling Jesuit does tell you, lest you be deceived as Eua was. You
should have demanded how and where it does appear that Vigilantius was
condemned for an Heritike for denying prayer unto Saints. Neither Epiphanius,
nor Augustine in their books of heresies do condemn him, or make mention of
him. Indeed Saint Hierome did write a bitter book against him, which I have
twice read over. Yet cannot I perceive that he charge him with denying
prayer unto Saints, neither does Hierome make any defense thereof, but seems
rather to maintain the contrary. Affirming in these word that Martires are not
to be worshipped. Quis, O insanum Hier. Contra. Vilgilani.
caput M^rtires aliquando adorauit. 1. For who (oh thou foolish head) at any
time has worshipped M^rtires? Indeed I confess, that Vigilantius denied that
the Saints in heaven prayed for us one earth the which Saint Hierome aloweth.
But it is one thing for the Saints in heaven to pray for us, and another for us
to pray unto them. Though the former could be proved (as by the holy
scriptures it cannot) yet the other is not there upon to be inferred or
granted. Lastly I say that if Vigilantius, (whom many Bishops of his time
did favor) did deny prayer to Saints, yet until you have effectually both
confuted my reasons before set down, and proved your doctrine by the
scriptures, we will neither condemn it for Heresy, nor count him therefore
an Heretic. As touching the Nouatian heretics, who denied repentance to them
that after baptism did fall, we abhor their heresy, and wish that the
papists were as free from the poison of them, as we be. The Nouatians gloried
in their merits: and so do the Papists. The Nouatians condemned second
marriages, and so do Papists in some: in that one may not be a priest that
has been twice married. The Nouatians re-baptised those that after Baptism
did fall and publicly offend: and so do papists in corners baptize such as
have been baptized in our Churches, which is an error condemned above a
thousand years ago.

You would have us to be like Eustathius in denying pilgrimages to holy
places. But it will appear that we be as unlike, as the papists be like
unto him, and in sundry points do join hand in hand with him. Sozomenus
writes of him, that he was Monasticae Conuersationis Lib. 3, cap. 14.
author. 1. An author of Monastical life, that is of Monkery. And both there
and in an Epistle or preface before the Counsel called Gangrense, in the which
Eustathius and his doings Tom. 1. cons.
were condemned, he is charged with these things.

First that he had caused wives to leave their husbands, and profess chastity:
whereupon husbands and wives sometimes fell into whoredom.

Secondly that dispising common and usual garments, he took new and strange
habits. Thirdly he caused servants under a pretense of religion to forsake
their Masters, and children their parents: And women upon the same pretense
to sheare and cut of their hair. Lastly, that Priests which were married were
to be despised, and the Sacraments which they ministered were not to be
touched. Against this last error, the foresaid Council thus decreed. Si quis
cernit presbiterum coniugatum, etc. i. If Council. Gang. cap. 4. Tom. 1. Consil.
any make difference of a Priest that is married, as though by occasion of his
marriage he ought not to offer, and therefore do abstain from his offering,
be he accursed.

Now these things well waied and considered, let even this Catholic
Gentlewoman her self judge, whether we or her counterfeyt Catholics be
likest unto Eustathius.

As touching such gadding a Pilgrimage unto Idols and Images, as is used in
Popery; that either such was then used, or by Eusta^bius condemned, you shall
never be able to prove, this is that the Council in that point decrees. Si
quis superbiam, etc. i. If any through Cap. 20.
pride as thinking himself perfect, do either accuse the assemblies which are
made at the Churches, and places of the holy Martirs, or also believes that ye
oblations which there be celebrated are to be despised, and the memories of
Saints to be condemned, be he accursed, but this is far from Popish
pilgrimage.

That Simon Magus denied free will, I cannot find, but Vide Calu. contra
Pighium. p. 205. Lamb. daneus in August. lib. de here is. cap. 1. Euse^i. lib. 2.
cap 13. Act. 8.
by that which I have read, it may rather be gathered, that he maintained it;
for it is written of him, that he affirmed the soul not to be defiled with
vices, but only the flesh. And if the soul be not defiled with vices, then
has it freewil. But this I find written and received of him, y^ he brought
again the suspicion of Images, from ye which the Christians seemed to have
been delivered: and that he would sell the giving of the holy Ghost, and his
graces and gifts for money. Wherein whether the Pope in selling pardons for
sin, and making of Sai^^es for money, be liker to him, or Simon Peter, let
wise men consider.

Lastly you would feign match us with Iouinian, who you say affirmed the
marriage of Priests; but herein you mistake the matter, for Iouinians opinion
was not directly concerning the marriage of Priests, or Ministers, but that he
made marriage equal unto virginity, and virginity of no great worthiness, or
as some term it merit, more then matrimony.

Saint Hierome writing against Iouinian acknowledges Lib. 1. contra. Iouini.
the marriage of Priests, Si autem Samuel, etc. i* If Samuel being nourished
in the Tabernacle married a wife, is this to the prejudice of virginity? as
though even now also many Priests were not married. And the Apostle describes
1. Sozom lib. 1. cap 2. 2. Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 19. 3 Greg. Nazi^. in oration
funeb. de patre, et ^antu lib. 1. fastor. 5. Eusebius. lib. 6. Cap. 42. 6. Eus^b.
lib. 8. cap. 9. 7. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25. ^t tom Conc. p. 8. Polidor Virgil
cap 9. de Iuuent. erum lib. 5. cap. 9. Fabian. part. 7. sol. 151. Math.
Parrish. 1. in Galiel, Conquest. 9. Heb, 13.
a Bishop to be the husband of one wife, having children with all chastity,
etc. Eliguntur mariti in sacerdotium non nego, etc. i. That married men be
chosen to be Priests I do not deny, etc. Therefore if Iouinians opinion had
been about the marriage of Ecclesiastical persons. Saint Hierome who writ
bitterly against him had yielded the cause unto him. But if Iouinian were an
Heretic for affirming Priests marriage, then were ye Priests of the old law
Heretics: So were sundry godly Bishops in Christ's Church long after his
ascension, as first Spiridion: second Gregorius Nisines: third Gregory
Nazianze^s father, fourth Prosper Aquitanicus: fifth Cheremon: sixth Phileas:
seventh Policrates, etc. Which were married Bishops* Yea it may be proved
that in England and other countries Priests were married a thousand and more
years after Christ.

But to conclude this matter, let the Papists bark as much as they list
against the marriage of Ecclesiastical persons, we say with the Apostle.
Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge the^: of with sort most popish priests have bin, for in
the Popes decree a Q. is asked whither a Priest for fornication is to be
deprived, the gloss answers it seems not. His reason is quia pauci sine
illovitio D^stinct ^ 1.
inueniuntur. First, because few are found void of that vice.

Now whereas this Catholic Gentlewoman says she heard that these aforenamed,
where a thousand years ago condemned, for such heresies which are now (as she
says) preached for Gods word: Although I have sufficiently (I suppose)
answered the same: yet will I show her what ^ have heard of other heretics
condemned a thousand years ago, and what doctrine they have maintained.

I have heard (beside Simon Magus before named) of Iren^us lib. 1. cap. 14.
^p^phan. here is. 27.
certain Heretics called Gnostici, and Ca^pocratitae, which had Images
painted in gold and silver, and other matter, which they said were the Images
of Jesus, and were made under Pontius Pilate, when Christ was among men, which
they decked with Gyrlands, and did set them forth, etc.

I have heard beside that, y^ Monster Marcion was charged Epiphan. here is. 42.
Tertul. lib. 2. Contr^a Marcion.
besides other matters with these three things. First, that he permitted women
to baptize. Secondly that he thought fish a more holy meat then flesh; and
thirdly that he denied the truth of Christ's* body, and thought that it was a
Phantasma or Ghost, such a body as the Romish Catholics seem to attribute
unto him, which they say is in heaven and earth, and infinite places of the
earth at one instant, and is in the sacrament without any quallitie or
quantity of a body, without length, breadth or thickenes, form, or figure,
etc,

I have heard of an Heretic called Montanus charged Eusebius. ex Apolonio*
Ecclesi. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 18. Tertul. aduers. Prax^am et. Rhenan ibid.
above a thousand years past with these things: First that he taught to
dissolve marriages. Secondly that he prescribed laws of fasting: And thirdly
that under precence of oblations he craftily devised a getting of gifts. And
that he brought in sundry unwritten traditions, whereof it is thought some have
continued in the Church until this time, and the rather for that in Tertullian
and Beatus Rhenanus a Papist do affirm. I have heard of certain Angu. Epist.
74
Heritikes of which some were called Tatian^, some Eucratitae, some Originiani,
some Maniche^, of those some generally condemned marriage, some prohibited it
only to their Priests as namely the Maniches. And as touching the other, I
have heard that some write thus of Epiphan, here is. 47.
them. ^actant pudicitiam fallaciter, omnia fa^ientes etc. i. They brag of
continency doing all things deceitfully; for both they be found among women,
and they every where deceive women: they take iournies with women; they live
together with them, they admit the services of them, so that they be far
from the truth, having a show of Godliness, but have denied the power thereof.
etc. I have heard of certain Heretics called Pelagians, which were charged
with three opinions.

First that the grace of God whereby we are saved, is given Hier. et Augu^.
aduersus pelag.
according to our merits. Secondly that the law of God might be fulfilled of
us. Thirdly, that we have freewill, and said that therefore grace was given
unto men, that what things they might do by free will, they might the more
easily do them by grace. I have heard that there Hier. aduersus Heluidium.
was an Heritike called Heluidius reproved by an ancient learned father, for
foolishly thinking that the greek books of the new testament were corrupted,
which both our Rhemists in their preface of the new testament by them set
forth, and others also of the same crewe do openly avouch: I have heard of
certain heritikes called Angellici, so named for worshipping Angels, and of
others called Augu de here is. cap 39. ^rencus lib 1. cap 35 Ep^ph here is. 79.
Collyradiani condemned for worshipping the Virgin Mary. And yet they did not
call her Queen of heaven, Empress of hell; the gate of Paradise, their hope,
etc. They did not pray unto her saying lube deum pec^ator. bus misereri. i.
Command God to be merciful to sinners: nor, monstrate esse matrem, iure matris
impera. i. Show thy self ^^nauent in Ps^l^^rio ^ea^^ Vi^ginis.
to be a mother: rule or command Christ by the authority of a mother, but only
they offered a cake in the honor of her. Whether these be not now taught and
maintained for Catholic doctrines in the Romish church. let the indifferent
reader uprightly judge. Now to conclude, and make an end. I would exhort this
gentlewoman and all others of her sect and opinion, to take heed in the name of
God, how they resist the truth of God, which in his great mercy he has
reueiled unto us, and that they do not wilfully shut their eyes against it nor
maintain false and damnable doctrines which they be never able by the word of
God to defend. Let them consider the gross blindness, and ignorance of former
ages, when such fables ^eg^nd Fest^ual. etc.
and lies were published and preached, as they be now ashamed of them and the
book of God was as good as lost, the light thereof being kept under the
bushel of a strange tongue: by means whereof the people had no instruction
nor comfort of it, but sat in darkness, and shadow of death, were carried
away after creatures and led after dum Idols, as the Apostle, says. 1. Corr.
12. 2.


Now is the word of God truly translated and sincerely preached, the truth of
God published, and Popish heresies Ioh. 3. 19.
effectually, confuted and confounded. Light is come into the world, love not
darkness more then light.

We have the Heavenly Manna; of Gods holy word among us, be not like the
unthankful Isralites, loathing the same, and desiring to eat again Onyons
and Garlike in Aegipt. But search diligently the holy scriptures, make them the
rule of your religion, and line to lead your life by.

Prove all things, hold that which is good, and abstain from all appearance of
evil. The God of all mercy root 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
out all errors and Herisies, and give free passage to his holy word, lighten
the eyes of the ignorant, strengthen them that be weak, tread down satan
under our feet, and give us grace to be like minded one toward another
according to Jesus Christ, that with one mind, and one mouth we may glorify
God even the Father of our Jesus Christ. So be it.

Amen, Amen.
I received above two years past out of Lank^shire this writing here
following, which I have have set down in the same words, form, and
orthography, as I received it, and can yet show it. Thus it begins; with
this title.
Notes of dissension etc.
D. BVckley in answer to the 12. articles etc. fol. 17. 18. 19. notes that
the Waldenses, Albingenses, Boemia, and many such other etc. Were the true
church of God: were killed for the word of God, and have washed their roabes in
the blood of the Lamb, and now have beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning etc. B. ante o. e. A. ante. d. a. A. ante. l. i.


Vide Coupers Dixionary in these words Boemia, Adamitae, Albingenses
Albanenses.

Boemia is a Realm called Beam enclosed with the bounds of Germany having on
the East Hungary, on the South Bauier: on the West etc.

They vary from the Catholic faith in sundry opinions, and do scorn a^l
ceremonies: In some places there the privily observe the sect of the Adamites,
and Waldenses, the act of lechery, whereof it is written in the words Adamitae
etc.

2 Adamitae or Adamiani were heretics which took their beginning of a Pi^ard,
who came into the Land of Bohemia. And said that he was the son of God: and
named himself Adam, and he commanded all men and women to go naked, and that
whosoever desired to company carnally with any woman should take her by the
hand and bring her to him and say, that he fervently desired her company and
then would Adam say, go together, and increase and multiply. This heresy
began the year of our Lord 1412. in the time of Sigismundus the Emperor, and
men suppose, that it dureth yet, not only in Boemia but in other places also.

3. Albingenses were the heretics, which began by Tolouse in France the year
of our Lord 120. which held the heresies of the Albanenses touching soul;
Baptism; God, and the general Resurrection. Moreover, that it was not lawful
for the christian men to eat flesh.

4. Albanenses were certain Heretics in the year of our Lord, 1120. This
sect held sundry heresies, one was that the soul of man after his death, was
put into an other body, an other that Baptism was of no effect. The third that
there were two Gods one good and an other evil, And that of the good proceeded
good things, and of the evil God evil things, the 4. that in heil were none
other pains, then be in this world: the 5. that the general judgment, is
past, and that there is none to come, the 6. that it is lawful for any man to
swear: the 7. that man has no free will.

The 8. that the matter whereof the world was made, was not made of God, but is
co-eternall with God: the 9. that there is no original sin, also that sin
comes not of free will but of the diue^l: the 10. they denied that the body
should eftsoons arise at the day of judgment: the 11. they abiected all the
old testament, as a vain thing; and of none authority.

An Objection.
SEe these several opinions of two of your Doctors, Buckley and Couper, of the
manner of belief of doctrine of the above named Martirs, who Buckley page 18.
( says) have washed their roabes in the blood of the Lamb therefore judge as
to your own self shall seem best.

Begardy were women, impeccabiles that is without sin, Buckley page 17 vide
acts and ^o. tom. 2
and not able to proceed further in grace, and that they need neither prayer
nor fast, nor be subject to law, and carnal act no sin having a desire
thereto with other such like opinions. Concilium viennense, yet Martirs.

Jewel, defense Apol. part. 1. cap. 7. Division 3. speaking of the Albingenses
says of them, we have no skill, they are none of ours: But Master Buckley
does say and hold that they were the true Church of God with much more (page vt
supra)

Therefore what godliness or goodness master Buckley has red of them more then
Jewel or Bishop Couper, feign would I know (vale in Christo) I mean of the
Albigenses and the rest. Also D. Willet in his Trast. page 113. of the latter
editi^n calls them heretics (I mean Begardy) and D. Fulke answer to the
Remis. Romans cap. 11. Sect. 3. comm^ndeth the Waldenses etc.

Hitherto the words of the said paper which I received, proceeding: (as it may
seem) from some morrow massepriest, of more skill in his Portuise and
masse-booke, and better studied in Eliots and Coupers Dictonary, then in other
good authors. The drift and scope thereof seems to be, to show a difference
and contradiction betwixt me and those reverend and learned Bishops D. Couper
and ^ewel: for that I do commend the Albigenses for faithful and Godly men,
and holy Martiers: and they in the opinion of this ignorant papist do seem to
mislike them.

I will first render ^ reason of my good opinion conceived of them: and then I
will endeavor to wipe away that fancy of contradiction, which this man
imagines to be be-twixt me, and the forenamed reverend and learned fathers. I
am moved to think reverently of that people called Albingenses, and to
commend them as witnesses of Gods truth. First because the Pope of Rome, (whom
we Rad. Gualt. Hom 5. de Antichri. Lamb. Danaeus de Antic^ri* Rob Abbot
demonst. de Antichristo. D. Downam of Antichrist. Gabr. Powel de Antichri.
Aduers. haeres. lib. 2. de commu. here is 7 Rob. Gaguin H^sto l^b. 6 Fascicul.
Temp fol. 77. Lib. 5. p. 458
charge to be the great Artichrist prophesied of by Saint Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and Saint John in the Apocaplips, of which imputation his followers and
favorers the Iebusites neither have, nor can discharge him) did so cruelly
persecute them, and raise such bloody war against them.

Secondly for that it is certain that these Albingenses (so called of the
country Albingens nere Tholosa, where they inhabited, as the Spanish friar
Alphonsus de Castro writes of them) were the same which otherwise, and else
where were called Waldenses, and Pauperes de Lugduno, who were dispersed into
sundry countries, as diverse Popish writers do confess, and hold the same
doctrines that they did. This is also confessed by that reverend and learned
man Iacobus Aug. Thuanus praesident of the parliament of Paris in the first
part of his excellent history.

And what their doctrines were, none does more effectually show, then does Pope
Pius the second in his History Aenaeas Siluy. Histor. Bohem. cap. 35. p. 103.
of Bohemia, attributing in these words these opinions unto them.

That the Bishop of Rome is equal to other Bishops, and Vide quoque. Albert
Krantii vandalia lib. 10. cap. 2.
that there is no difference among Priests: that not dignity but good life
makes a prasbiter or Priest the better: that souls as soon as they depart
out of the bodies be forthwith, either cast into perpetual pain, or obtain
eternal joy. That no purgatory can be found, that it is a vain thing to pray
for the dead, and an invention of covetous Priests. That the images of God and
Saints are to be destroyed. That the blessinge of water and palms is to be
derided. That the orders of begging Freers were invented by the devil, that
Priests ought to be poor, and be content only with alms. That the preaching
of the word of God ought freely to be open to all. That no capital on great
sin ought to be suffered, for the avoiding of a greater evil.

That he which is guilty of deadly sin ought not to enjoy either secullar or
Ecclesiastical dignity, nor to be obeyed. That confirmation with oil, and
extreme Unction are not to be counted amongst the Sacraments of the Church.
That auricular confession is frivolous, and that it is sufficient for men to
confess their sins unto God in their chamber. That baptism is to be used in
water without mixture of hollowed oil. That the use of Church-yardes was vain
and brought in for couetousnee sake, and that it makes noe matter with what
earth men's bodies be covered. That the world is the temple of God who is in all
places, and that do they restrain his majesty which build Churches,
Monasteries, and oratories, as though his divine goodness and mercy were to be
found sooner in them, then in other places.

That the robes of Priests, ornaments of Altars, palles, Corporasses,
Chalices, Patens, and other vessels are of no value. That a Priest may in any
place, and at all times consecrat the holy body of Christ, and minister it to
them that do require it, and that it is sufficient for him only to use the
sacrame^tal words. That the prayers of Saints reigning with Christ in heaven
are in vain prayed for, and cannot help us. That the time is evil spent in
singing or saying Canonical service or prayers, That men ought to cease from
their labors upon no day, but upon that, which is now called the Lords day,
and that the feasts of Saints are to be rejected. That there is no merit or
goodness in the fastes which be appointed by the Church. These be the
doctrines which the Pope imputes to the Waldenses. Now when any of you shall
effectually prove by the word of GOD, the most and chief of these doctrines
(for some seem to be more hardly set down by this their adversary, then they
did mean them) to be errors and heresies, then I will confess my self to
have been deceived, and both the Waldenses and Albingenses to have been
justly reputed for heretics. And that the Albingenses joined with the
Waldenses in these doctrines, although it be the harder to show, because it
appears that the Pope and his followers were very careful to suppress their
doctrines and to keep them from the knowledge of the people, as Robert Gaguine
In Philip August. Lib. 6. fol. ^04.
the French historiographer shows, in that no writer before his time which
he did know had committed them to writing, for whereas (says he) they call
them haeretikes, and do declare that for that offense they were destroyed, yet
they have let pass to show the kind of their haeresie. By this their
polliticke concealing of their doctrines, it seems that they did to nearly
touch the Popes triple Crown, and too much did shake the cup of his
abominations wherewith he has made Kings and nations drunken.
Notwithstanding by some writers it appears, what their doctrines and opinions
were, even the same which (as you have heard) were maintained by the good
faithful people called Waldenses, and Pauperes de Lugduno. Master Fox shows
out of Nicholas Trivet (who died anno 1328.) that the Albingenses Act. and
monumen. tom. 1 p. 299. 2. edit. onis.
denied transubstantiation in the Sacraments of Christ's body and blood, and
that matriymony, was not a Sacrament: and further writes that in some Error
he found that they did deal against the wanton I^ il page 35.
wealth, pride, and tyranny of the Prelates, and denied the popes authority to
have any ground of the Scriptures, and that they could not away with there
ceremonies, and traditions, as images, pardons, purgatory of the Romish Church,
calling them (as some say) blasphemous occupyings etc. Henry Pantalion in his
Chronographie affirms out of P. Aemilius, that they denied Christ's body Page,
98.
to be in the bread of the Eucharist. And a little before he writes that one
Hoyry a learned Monk of Tolosa did Page, 92.
teach, that prayers for the dead, and to the dead, excomucations of priests,
Pilgrimages, consecrations of Chrisme are all unprofitable, whereupon he was
condemned. Thus I have showed to satisfy this man's longing desire, what I have
read of their Albingenses; by which I have been moved to conceive a good
opinion of them, and to account them for witnesses of Gods truth, for the which
they were so cruelly presecuted and destroyed by that Beast, to whom Apac^. 13,
7.
it was given to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them.

I do confess that I have also read not only in this pelting paper, but
also in lying and prating Prateclus, and other malicious enemies of Gods truth,
of other filthy and false opinions asscribed to them. But this is no new devise
of the devil, but an old stratageme, to attribute to the faithful and Godly
faulse titles, and slanderous and filthy opinions and practices, to bring them
into hatred, and to move the world to persecute and destroy them. So was Jesus
Christ the son of God entreated, being called a Samaritane, a deceauer of the
people and by Beelzebub Math. 27, 63. Luke, 23, 2. Math, 12. 24. and 9. 34. Act,
24.
the Prince of devils to cast out devils. So was Saint Paul used, being termed
a pestilent and seditious fellow, and chief mai^tainer of the herisie of the
Nazarens. So were the Christians in the primitive Church handled, who were
slandered to kill children, to eat their flesh, and to Turtull in Apolog.
drink there blood and in there assembles having put out the candles, to
commit adultery and incests. So does Gabr. pratcoleleuch haerae. lib. 14, 13.
paup. ac L^gd.
that lying companion Gabriel Prateolus and the writer of this scroule deal
with the walldenses, otherwai^^ ^lled Pauperaes de Lugduno, whom they affirm
to hold that carnal copulation betwixt men and women, when the lust of the
flesh burns, is lawful: to women Aeneas Siluius does not ascribe any such
opinion. In those days the Papists were not grown to such impudency in
lying, as now they are. Thus we see, that it ought not to seem strange unto
us, for filthy facts, and false doctrines, to be by malicious enemies falsely
imputed to Gods true Saints and servants: It were rather a marvel, if the
devil being by name and long practice a Slaunderer, should leave his old
occupation in slaundering and defaming the faithful favorers of Gods truth.

But this man says that I dissent from those Bishops D. Cowper and Jewel. I
answer, that as I do reverence the memory of them, so I do nothing herein
differ from them. For concerning B Cowper, I say that not he, but Sir Thomas
Eliot did set down in the dictionary all that therein is written of the
Albingenses, and Albanenses, as appears by the first edition of it by Sir
Thomas Eliot himself printed by Thomas Barth^let anno Dom. 15. 42. having this
title.

Bib^otheca Eliotae.
Eliotes Library.
There the reader shall find all those things written of the Albingenses and
Albanenses without addition, detraction, or alteration, before D. Cowper did
deal in it D. Cowper in supplying of words that there wanted, did leave these
things, and such like, especially concerning proper names, as he found them,
and not as he himself did judge of them. As for the difference in judgment
betwixt Sir Thomas Eliot and me concerning these Albingenses, although I do
greatly reverence the memory of him for his learning, and for his good labors
to the advancing thereof: yet I do not think my self bound to stand to his
judgment therein, who might be to much carried away with the corrupt errors
which over much swaied in his time; whereby he did to little espic the devils
accustomed devise and practice before mentioned, and much credit ye false
reports of their malicious adversaries.

As touching that precious Jewel, and most learned Bishop, whereas D.
Harding writes thus: If ye mean Hus: Hierome of prage: Wicklesse, Almar^rke,
Ab^lard, the Apostolikes, Consuta of the Apol^g.
Peterbuisians, Beren^arians, Waldenses, Albingenses, Image-breakers and such
like, which ever found fau^te with the Church. etc he answers in these words:
Of Abailard Defens. of the Apol^g.
and Almerike, and certain other your strange names, if they have taught any
thing contrary to the truth of God, we have no skill, they are none of ours:
of John Hus, Hierome of Prage and Berengarius, and other like virtuous men, we
have no cause to be a hamed. etc. This is all that Bishop Jewel says, in which
words he does not once name the Albingenses, much less impute those filthy and
false opinions to them* Nether does he absolutely affirm, that Abaila^d, and
Almarike, or any of the rest maintained any thing contrary to the truth of God;
but conditionly says, if they taught any thing contrary to the truth of God,
we have no skill: they are none of ours, to the which I say, Amen. But that B.
Jewel did not account the Albingenses for wicked heretics, it may hereby
appear, in that he thought well of the Sea defens. of the Apolo. vt 1. cap.
2. diuis. 1. and part 4. ^^p, 1^. diuis. 1. page 503.
Waldenses (which were the same that were the Albingenses (as I have before
showed) but diversely called in diverse places) and did repute them for good and
Godly men. By this that I have said the judicious reader may see, that there is
no difference at all betwixt me, and these reverend and learned Bishops
concerning the Albingenses, as this ignorant Romanist does vainly imagine. And
if there had been some diversity in judgment herein betwixt us, I in thinking
well, and they in hardly judging of them, it had been a matter of no great
moment. Heretofore under ^lati^a in Bonifac 8. Gabr. prateo. page 206.
Popery, many worshipped Herman of Ferrara for a Saint, whom Pope Boniface the
8. caused to be dug up, and burned for an heritike. Some Popes and Papists
thought well of Pope Formosus, whom other Popes did maliciously and
dispitefully* use being dead. Some papists thought well of them that were
called ^agellantes: whom others condemned and punished for ^uill dooers. Vide
paralip. Abba^ v^sp^rg. page 369.


Pope Alexander the 6. and others burned at Florence Hierom Saoa^orola, whom
both Phillip Comineus, and Antonius Falminius accounted for a holy man.
^aminius fine verses in commendation of him, worthy to be read, Anno. 1497.
I have thought good to set down.

Dum f^ra flamma tuos, Hieroni me, pascitur artus,
Religio s^nctas dilaniata c^mas
Fleuit, ^t o dixit, crudeles parcite flammae,
parite, s^nt isto viscera nostra rogo.
But to omit this, I cannot omit to show the gross ignorance of this blind
Papist, in saying that these Albingenses began by Tolousa in France the year
of our Lord 120. I grant that it is so in the said first edition of Sir Thomas
Eliot^ Dictionary, and continued in the other editions following. But I cannot
so much attribute so gross an oversight and error to Sir Thomas Eliot being a
learned man as to the negligence ^ther of the writer or printer, which fault
by them might easily be committed, for whereas this number in the said first
edition is set down in these figures, 120. they might easily omit the figure
in the fourth place. So that Master Eliot setting i^ down 1120. they might
either write or print 120. But this man of purpose alleging it, might (if all
his Historical learning had not been contained in the sad dictionary, have
easily espied and amended this fault: for most certain it is that noe ancient
writer near an 120 years after Christ, or diverse hundredth years after does
make any mention of a people called Albi^genses, and noted for religon. The
first mention that I find of them, or that this man with all his companions can
show is in the reign Rob. G^g^i^ l^b. 6.
of Phillip, surnamed Augustus King of France, who entered into his Kingdom in
the year of our Lord 1181. Matheus B^roaldus at^rybuteth their time to the
thirtieth year of the said King, which was in the year 1210. and many popish
writers declare, that they were persecuted and destroyed by the procurement of
Pope Innocent the third, who entered into his Papacy in the year 1199.

This I confess, that as the errors, which the Albinggenses impugned and
abhorred, were not in the year of Christ 120. by the Devil hatched and
broched: so the true doctrine which they maintained, and for the same
constantly suffered, was then of the faithful professed and before by our
Savior Christ and his Apostles published. But that they were then known by
this name, none but such a blind buzard as this is, would ever affirm. And
such blind guides they deserve to have, to be led by them unto perdition, that
wilfully shut their eyes against the light of Gods truth, which might shine
to their salvation, if their eyes were open to see it, and their hearts to
receive and believe it.

Concerning them that were called Begardi, to whom this man out of lying
Prateolus, and other mallicious enemies, attributes false and wicked opinions
abhorred by us, I will show what has and does move me, to think also of them,
as witnesses of GODS truth. I do nothing doubt but these called by some
writers Begardi, were the same which others do call Pychard^. Now what opinions
these Pychard^ did hold, Ioannes Slechta Kostelecius a learned Bohaemian and
Papist declares in an epistle to Erasmus in these words: Tertia secta est
eorum quos Inter epist. Erasmus. lib. 12. page 464. scripta. 10. October. 1519.
voca^t Pyghardos etc. The third sect is of them, whom they call Pyghardi (so
he writes them) who were so named of a Fugitive of the same nation ( Picardie
in France) that coming hither about 97. years past, when John Zisca a
sacriligeous and wicked man made war against the So untruly he terms him.
ecclesiastical persons, and whole Clergy, and spoiled their goods: this man
being joined to him, infected with pestiferous doctrines both the Captain
himself, and all the whole army, which he had gathered of thieves,
murthertherers, So they call them but cannot so prove them.
outlawed, and other dregs of wicked men: which continued unto the time of
King Vladislaus, who of late years died, and under him greatly increased, for
he being King of Hungary, and abiding there more then in Bohemia, had small
care what was done there, so that al his subjects did live* in peace. These men
did accoumpt the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical parsons
for manifest Antichrists: they called the Pope sometimes the beast, and
sometimes the whore spoken of in the Apocalips, and that they doing all things
against the Doctrine and tradition of Christ, they could do nothing of any
authority or virtue in Gods service, but that whatsoever proceeded from their
service, was neither holy, nor sacraments, nor blessings, but mere
execrations, abominations and curses. These men choose for themselves for
Bishops and Priests, Lay men rude and void of learning, having wives and
children: they call and salute one an other by the name of brothers and
sisters. They receive only the authority of the old and new Testament of the
Scriptures. They contemn all old and new Doctors, nor attribute any thing to
their doctrine. Their Priests when they say Mass, do it without any Priestly
garments, nor therein use any prayers besides the Lords prayer, wherewith they
consecrate the bread being leauened. They believe almost little or nothing of
the Sacraments of the Church. They that receive their heresy are caused to be
rebaptized in simple water, neither blessing salt, nor water, nor using any
consecrate oil. They believe that the d^ity is not in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, but affirm that there is only bread and wine consecrate,
representing by certain sercet signs the death of Christ, and that therefore
all that bow their knees, and kneel before it, or worship it, be Idolaters,
seeing that Sacrament was not ordained by Christ to any other end, but to put
us in remembrance of his passion and not to be carried up and down hither and
thither, nor to be lifted up of the Priest, and showed to the people: because
that Christ himself, who is to be adored and worshipped with the worship of
Latria, sits at the right hand of the father, as the Church of Christ
confesses in ye Creed. They accoumpt prayers to Saints, and for the dead to
be a vain and ridiculous thing: in like manner Auriculare confession and
penance enjoined by Priests for sin. They affirm vigils and fastes to be
but counterfeyt couerings of hypocrites, and that the holy days of the virgin
Mary, of the Apostles, and other Saints are but the invention of idle parsons,
and they only keep the Lords days, and the feast of the Nativity of Christ,
of Easter and Whitsontide. etc. Hitherto the words of John Slechta (who was no
favorer, but a misliker of them) Centur. 4. page 334.
truly translated. Master Bale in the life of Clement the fifth writes thus
of them: Beghardos ac Beguinas quia panem Eucharisticum honorare nolebant,
impr^bat. i. Clement the fifth misliked ye Beghardi and Beguins, because they
would not honor the bread of the Eucharist. And that these men (...) tempor
fol. ^^.
maintained the doctrines of the Waldenses, Wer^^rus, the Charthusian Monk of
Colen, in plain words affirms: Beghardi multi combuste sunt Parysiis
propter heresim pauperum de Lugduno etc. many Begwardi were burnt at Paris for
the heresy of the poor men of Lions, that is to say the Waldenses.

Thus as I deny and defy the filthy and false opinions imputed (I know not how
truly) to the Adamites, and Albanenses: so I do confess that I do accoumpt
these that were called Waldenses, Albingenses, and Beghardi, or Picardy, to
have been faithful men, and witnesses of Gods holy truth, whom although the
world hated, rejected, and persecuted, (as it did Christ) yet were they elect
and precious, and beloved of God. And I fear not to affirm, that they have
washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb, and now have beauty for ashes,
the oyl^ of joy for mourning, etc. and are more worthy to be reputed for holy
Martirs and confessors, then either Thomas Beck^t, or Dominicus that bloody
Friar, or Cather^n^ his minion, or Francis, that superstitious hypocrite, or
Clara his companion, or many others whom the Popes have canonized for Saints.
For not he that himself (or any other man) commends, but whom God
commends is approved, and a Saint in his sight. ^. Cor. 16. 1^.


And let this man, and all such others bark as much as they will or can
against that true doctrine, which the Waldenses, Albingenses, and Beghardi
heretofore professed, and is now through GODS great mercy in this land, and
many other Christian countries by public authority maintained, they shall do
but as mad dogs do, that bark against the Moon, and shall but ki^ke
against the prick, and rush against that rock that will not yield, but bruise
them to powder. Great is the truth, and it will prevail. Well says Epiphan^us
Contra Ap^l. lian. Her^s. 4^.
(...) etc.: etc. Neither shall darkness prevail, when the light shines.
Now the light of GODS word shines, now is that man of sin revealed, now are
his errors and abominations disclosed* and confuted: and all his sworn
soldiers they Iebusites are not able, either to cover and hide him, or defend
them: If this man think that they are, why do they so long suffer the books
of D. Abbot, D. Downam, and master Powell, in the which they have plainly
proved the Pope to be Antichrist, and soundly confuted Bellarmines weak
defense and simple shifts, to stand so long unanswered, and that their grand
master, from whom they receive life, and upon whom they wholly depend, to
be undefended. This is a matter of no small moment, which cannot without the
loss of all be neglected.

If ye Pope be Antichrist, then is their doctrine Antichristian, and they are
the slaves of Antichrist. This sort, wherein their whole safety consists,
ought with all might and maine be defended, and this breach with all speed be
repaired: And it has by the canons of the men before named these four years
past been battered, and yet is the defense and repair thereof utterly
neglected.

They write many pelting Pamphlets, and such slender scroules as this is: but
to answer these books, with raize the foundation of their religion, or rather
superstition, and overthrow there great Golia^ of Rome, they be very slack.
Wherein appears to any that willingly will not shut his eyes the weakness,
and desperate estate of there forlorn cause etc.

And thus much I thought good to answer to the contents of the said scrowle,
which may seem more then it deserves, being a foolish babble, void of
learning and truth.

Eusebius history Eccles.
lib. 7. cap. 24 fol. 79.
(...), etc Truth is a friend, and before all things to be honored; and we
ought without envy to commend and approve that which is well spoken, and to
examine and correct or confute whatsoever is not soundly written.

S. R. IN his answer to Master Thomas Bells challenge named the downfall o^
Popery nipp^th at me in these Page 126.
words. Bell terms him (Berengarius) a silly Deacon, though his brother
Buckley call him an excellent and holy man. Here first I do observe, that
whereas this writer, in this his answer (which carries a greater show of
learning, then substance of truth) does in three places make mention of this my
answer, viz. in the page here noted, also page 144. and lastly page 208. it
may seem that he never read it: for that in all these places he quoteth my
answer to 8. reasons, whereas it is unto 12. Neither can he excuse this by
saying that by the figure 8. he means the eight reason for the two first
places are in my answer to the forth reason, and the third place is to the
seventh. This does also the more appear, in that he does not truly allege
my words, but adds to them. For whereas I called Berengarius an excellent man
he says that I called him, an excellent and holy man. Hereby it may seem
that this man received these places by hand from others, and not by the reading
of his own ^ies, As touching Berengarius, I do willingly confess, that I have
a most reverent opinion of him, and do think that, notwithstanding his
weakness in recanting once the truth, he was an excellent, yea and holy man,
both for his singular learning, and virtuous life. And to conceive this
reverent opinion of him, I am moved by the testimony of some Papists, who
favored not the true doctrine which he maintained, but especially by the great
commendations which that learned father, and notable poet Hildebartus bishop of
Maine in France does give him.

Atoninus the Archbishop of Florence writes of him: Histor. part. 2. Tit. ^^.
cap. 1 ^. 20. fol. 175.
Fiuit autem alias Berengarius iste vir bonus, plenus elemosynis et humilitate,
magnarum poss^ssionum quae omnia in vsus pauperu^ dispersit, praeterea nuillam
foem^nam in conspectu suo patiebatur admitti. This Berengarius was otherwise a
good man, full of alms deeds, and of humility, and dispersed great
possessions to the use of the poor: and would suffer no woman to come in his
sight. Robert Gaguin in his French history has these words of him: Henrici
tempore etc. In the time of this Henry, Berengarius Deacon (or rather
Archdeacon) of Tours raised an error concerning the sacrament of the Eucharist,
wherein he said Lib. 6. in Henrico.
was not the true body of Christ, but a certain example of his body, from
which he afterward repenting changed his mind, and lived very liberal to the
poor, and fleeing the company of women: in so much as after his death he was
honored for his great holiness. The same and more does the continuer of Beda
his story write of him in these words: Porro li^et Berengarius primum etc.
Although Berengarius did discredit the first heat of his youth by De gestis
Anglerum continuat. lib. 3. cap. 27.
defending some heresies, yet in his riper age he so repented, that without
retraction he was of some men countted for a Saint, being approved by
innumerable good works, and especially by humility, and alms deeds. He was a
Lord of great possessions by dispersing them, and not a servant of them by
hiding and adoring them. He was so sparing of woman's beauty, that he would
suffer none to come in his sight, least he should taste the same with his eye,
which he did not covet in his heart. He despised not the poor, nor flattered
the rich. He lived agreeable to nature, having food and apparel as ye
Apostle says being content with the same, whereupon Hildebartus the Bishop of
Main an excellent Poet does commend him. etc.

Whose verses as the said author thought meet to insert into his history: so I
have thought good to allege them here, both because they be most worthy to
read, and do plainly show what an excellent and holy man he was.

QVem m^do miratur, semper mirabitur orbis.
Ille Berrengarius non obiturus obit:
Quem sacra fidei fastigia summa tenentem,
Iam quinta dies abstulit, ausa nefas.
Illa dies damnosa dies, et perfida mundo,
Qua dolor, et rerum summa ruina fuit.
Qua status ecclesia, qua spes et gloria clers,
Qua cultor iuris, iure ruente ruit.
Quicquid Philosophi, quicquid cecinere Poetae,
Ingenio cescit, eloquioque suo.
Sanctior et mayor sapientia, maius adorta,
Impleuit sacrum pectus et ora deo.
Pectus eam voluit, vox protulit, actio promisit,
Singula factori sic studuere suo.
Vir sacer et sapiens, cui nomen erescit in horas
Quo minor est, quisquis maximus est hominum,
Cui fensus peperit, paros seruauit, honores,
Cui pauper potior diuite, iusque lucro,
Cui nec desidiam, nec luxum res dedit ampla,
Nec tumidum fecit multus et a tus honor.
Qui nec ad argentum, nec ad aurum lumina flexit,
Sed doluit quoties cui daret, hoc aberat
Qui non cessauit in opum fulcire ruinas,
Donec inops dando, pauper et ipse fuit.
Cuius cura sequi naturam, legibus vti
Et mentem vitijs, or a negare dolis.
Virtutes opibus, rarum praeponere falso,
Nil vacuum sensu dicere, nec facere.
Laedere nec quemquam, cunct is prodesse, fauorem
Et populare lucrum pellere mente, manu.
Cui vestis textura rudis, cui non fuit vnquam
Ante sitim potus; nec cibus ante famen.
Quem pudor Hospitium statuit sibi, quamque libido
Incestos superat, tam superauit eam.
Quem natura parens cum mundo contulit, inquit,
Degenerant alij, nascitur iste mihi.
Quoque vagabatur, et pene reliquerat orbem,
Inclusit sacro pectore iustitiam.
Vir sacer a puero, qui quantum praeminet orbi,
Fama, tam famae praminet ipse suae.
Fama minor meritis, cum totum peruolet orbem,
Cum semper crescat, non erit aequa tamen,
Vir pius atque grauis, vir fic in vtroque modestus,
Vt liuor neutro rodere posset eum.
Liuor eum deflet, quem carpserat ante, nec tam
carpsit, et odit eum, qua modo laudat, amat.
Quam prius ex vita tam nunc ex morte gemiscit:
et quaeritur celeres huius abisse dies.
Vir vere sapiens, et part beatus ab omni,
Qui caelos anima, corpore ditat humum,
Post obitum viuam secum, socum requiescam
Nec fiat melior sors mea sort sua.
Verses of Hildebert Bishop of Mons upon Berengarius tran slated English.
THe wonder of the Timesthat was of late,
And shall continue everlasting date,
That Berengarius, who gave place to none,
For holy Faiths profession now is gone.
A woeful day unto the world, wherein
Creat loss and sorrow threatens to begin.
Whereby the Church, the Clergy, and the Law,
The hopes of their success to ruin draw:
All parts of wisdomes-loue, and Poets vain
Within his wit and tongue he did retain,
But greater and more holy wisdom brought
Those gifts to more deuine-inspired thought.
Which working in his heart his mouth did preach,
And by example of his life did teach.
So all things did concur unto his praise,
To give him name, that should survive his days.
A wise and holy man, who did regard
Poor more then rich, and right above reward,
Whose plenty neither sloth nor riot bred:
Nor honor to proud humor him misled,
Who in delight of Lucre did not live
But all his grife was, he did want to give:
Who from the needy never shut his door,
Until by giving he himself was poor:
Who sought to follow Nature, yield to law,
His mind from vice, his words from guile to draw.
To truth and virtue he gave chief defense,
He never said nor did things void of sense:
He hurt no man: but sought to pleasure all,
No popular respects could him enthral:
Plain were his clothes: nor meat did he desire
Nor drinck, till thirst and hungar did require:
Him honest shame did choose her chiefest ghest,
While lust (which conquers others) he suppressed:
And nature at his birth in joy (said she)
Let others go, this man is borne to me:
And Justice, whom the world did clean forsake,
He to the Harbor of his heart did take:
Bred holy from a child, who now does more,
Excel himself in fame, then all before:
All fame too little for his great deserts,
To equal, by report, his worthy parts:
A Godly sober man, so wise and grave,
That enuies-selfe could not his praise deprave:
Nay, Envy which at him, in life, did rail,
Now, after death, does love him, and bewail:
A man most happy, and most perfect-wise,
Whose soul now reigns in the everlasting skies:
O let my soul partake his blessed rest,
No better place of safety I request.
OF these verses both Antoninus in the place above cited, Tritem. de scriptor.
Eccle. in He^. lebert^ fol. 68.
and Tritemius the Abbat do make mention, and of the number of them 52. as
these are: by the which I have alleged, the christian reader not moved with
malice (as it seems. S. R. is) but led by Godly reason may judge whether I
had not good cause to call Berengarius an excellent man. The like I may say of
Doctor Reynoldes of blessed memory, whom I called an excellent Ornament, page
144.
which S. R. in like manner in his malice misliketh. But the Godly I doubt not
will acknowledge, that his great learning, and upright and innocent life did
well deserve that commendation.

Moreover where S. R. page 208. says, that Calvin, Whitaker, Perkins, and I do
say, all good works are sin: this is as true as is that lving sclaunder of
Duraeus the Jesuit, who shameth not to say, that we affirm all works to be
nothing Duraeus contr. VVhitakerum. fol. 13. 14.
else but inquinamenta, et sordes, et veram iniquitatem apud deum, pollutions,
filthe, and very iniquity before God. The which is most false: for we teach
and believe, that the works of the faithful and regenerate be good and
acceptable unto God: for although they be so infected and stained with sin,
which is in us, and hangs on us, that they cannot of themselves abide Gods
strict and severe examination but had need of mercy: yet in that they proceed
from faithful hearts, and sanctified in some measure with, Gods spirit, and
are covered with the robe of Christ's righteousness, they are accepted of God
as pure and perfect, as I have in my answer to the second article concerning
good life and piety before declared, the which I desire the Christian reader to
read and examine, and not over lightly to believe this Lying-sclanderer, who
thought it the wisest way not to set down our sayings, but to quote the
places, which he is well assured his affectionate favorers will never examine,
nor read what we shall write in our defense, so strongly have they charmed
them, and by a strong delusion bewitched them. And this shall suffice for
answer to S. R. in that which concerns me. The rest Master Bell has
answered: but I know not whether it be printed.

JOB. 6. 24. Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: and cause me to understand,
wherein I have erred. ISAIA. 41. 21. Stand to your cause, says the Lord: bring
forth your strong reasons, says the King of Jacob.
Faults escaped in the Printing, p. is for page, l. for, line, and r. for read.
P. 16. l. 10 r. revealed, p. 23. l 25. r. up to the Church, p. 32. l. 14. r.
appoint unto, p. 45 l. 2. r. or the Remish, p. 48. The addition in the first
line, beginning with these words: Whereas yousay, etc. is misplaced, and
should have been inserted in the second line above, after these words: to
discredit. I must entreat thee gentle reader to pardon this ouer-sight. p. 54.
l. 5. r. mediation, ibid. l. 13. r. eternal predestination, p. 56. l. 7. r. to
be God, p. 56. l. 16. r absurdum, p. 57. l. 33. r. repelleth, p. 58. l. 18. for
new, r. true, p. 59 l. 29. r. punished for, and in the end of the next line put
out, for. p. 61 l. 6, for mystical, r ministerial, ibid. l. 24. put out, of.
p. 72. l. 12 for, of, r. for. p. 73. l. 14. r. Deum, p. 84. l. 23. r. affirm,
p. 84, l. 11. r. to be the lauer, p. 87. l, 7. r. of sin. p. 88. l. 16. r. of
it self, p. 96, l. 1, r. Cross, and l. 8. r that God does, p. 105, l. 11. r.
such as is, p. 106. in the 19. and 20. lines, these words, first, second, are
misplaced. p. 100. 25, r. in that over obstinately they did, p. 1^. ^^8, for.
that. r. they. ^ 18. l. 7, r. (...) and (...) 159. 19, for he r. ye, p. 120, l.
26. for poest, r. do, p. 127. l. 1. r. we are made, ibid l. 25, for, affect,
r. effect, p. 129, l. 6. for, ale, r. oil, ibid. the last line, r. Jesuits
is, who p. 133, l. 18, for boubt, r. doubt, p. 135, l. 17, r. I say, ibid. l.
24, for, given, r. giving, p. 139, l. 6, r. keeping, p. 141, l. 29, r. our
virtues, p. 144, l. 3, r. first they say, ibid: l, 24, r, or else few or none,
p, 149, l, 8, blot out these words: and so attribute all to Gods grace and
mercy, for they be twice, p. 152, l, 12, r, solam, p, 153. l, 18, r, merciful,
p, 154, l, 1. r, (...), p, 159, l, 6, r, this sacred, p, 169, l, 9, r, tend,
which some, ibid. l, 26, r, tot indulgentiae, p, 175, l, 30, r, munnatis, p,
233, l, 20, r, his own blood, p, 240, l, 31, r, Region, p, 246 l, 36, r,
superstition, p, 247, l, 38, r, for, Q, question, p, 248, l, 3, put out (first)
ibid, l, 20, put out (Beside), ibid, l, 38, r, for that in Tertullians time the
Bishop of Rome favored his haeresies, as both Tertullian. and Beatu^ Rhenanus
a papist do affirm, p, 254. l, 28, r, they do, p, 255, l, 36, r, for, error,
author, p* 256, l, 8, r, Henry, ibid, l, 13, r, these, p, 259, l. 10, r,
parcite, ibi them, l, 25, r, said, p, 262, I, 16, r. combas^^, p. 263, l, 36, r.
race, p, 264, l 10, r, fuit. p, 266, l, 14, r, Sacrae, ibid, l, 15, Jani, ibid,
l, 24, r, promsit, ibid, l, 28, r, censu^, ibid. r, partos. p, 267. l, 3, r.
verum, ibid, l, 13, r, quaeque, ibid, l, 21, r, a^te^, ibid, l, 22, r. quam,
ibid, l, 30, for Mons, r, Main.


