SEVEN SPARKS OF THE ENKINDLED SOVLE.

WITH FOUR LAMENTATIONS, WHICH COMPOSED in the hard times of Queen Elizabeth,
may be used at all times, when the Church happens to be extremely persecuted.

Drawn out of the holy Scriptures, after the form of Psalms. By R. B. P.

In my meditation breaks out fire. Psalm. 38.

Is any of you sad? let him pray: Is he of a calm mind? let him Psalm.
Iac. 5. v. 13.

IHS.

Printed with license.

TO THE VERY WORSHIPFVLL, MY EVER-HONOVRED Mother B.B. increase of all good in
him, who is the only good.
TO many we owe much, and to sundry their certain duties; to friends,
kindred, clyents, neighbors; to instructors, and governors: but unto our
parents we owe all; we owe our selves. Of which eminent prerogative although
Christians can not be ignorant, through the frequent commendation thereof in
the word of God, as which began in the Exodus 20,
ten Commandments, was by our Math 15.
Saviors blessed mouth recommended; by Ephesians. 6.
S. Paul noted to be the first Commandment, having a promise thereunto
annexed: so neither were the Heathens so destitute of natures light, but that
they always held this as a high principle. The great reverence of 3. Reg. 3.
King Solomon toward his mother, is to be read in the book of Kings: and no
less rare example had the Gentiles of Plut.
Cleobis and Biton, who submitted their own shoulders to the drawing of their
Mothers Chariot. 1. Tim. 5.
And the Apostle expressly commanded children to yeald requital unto their
aged parents; saying that it was acceptable and commendable in the sight of God
so to do. That same by way of Proverb drawn from the Storke, committed they
to an eternal care and memory: gladly also at all times reciting that
memorable nature of this bird, which is, Antipelargein.
that the younger fostreth again the elder, of whom before he was fed and
bred up. Let this little labor of mine be in some sort to play the Storke,
although in a contrary, yet most equivalent sort of food; such surely as in
this time of my long absence from you will be as acceptable (I doubt not) to
receive, as it was grateful to minister it; and shall prove as cordial in the
use, as it was paynefull in the composition. Live you to God; who also preserve
you.

Your Son with all love and duty. R. B.

TO THE DEVOVTLY AFFECTED, AND enduring Catholics.
THANKS ought we alvvayes to render unto God for you (DEAR BRETHREN) as
worthy and meet it is: The. 1.3.
for that your faith highly increases, and the charity of each of you toward
other abounds: so that (other nations) glory in the Church of God for your
patience, and faith in all the persecutions, and tribulations which you
sustain to an example of GODS just judgment, that ye may be accounted worthy
of the Kingdom of GOD, for which ye also suffer. Persist ye that our joy may
be full. Phil. 2.27.
And be not in any thing terrified by the adversaries, what to them is cause of
perdition is to you of salvation; and this from God: for as much as to you it is
given for Christ, that not only ye believe in him but that ye also suffer for
his sake. Ephesians. 12.
Ye were in times past without Christ, alienated from the conversation of
Israel, strangers to the testament, having no hope of the promise, and without
a God in this world. But now are ye, who erst were far off, in Christ JESUS
become near in the blood of Christ for he is our peace. Collos. 2.13.
Dead when ye were in sins God revived you together with him, imparting
co^donation of all your offenses. Phil. 1.26.
Walk ye therefore worthy of the gospel of Christ, Phil. 2, 15.
without reprehension in the midst of a wicked and perverse people, among
whom ye shine as lights in the world. 1. These. 5.11.
Be mutually comfortable, and edify one another; as also ye do. 1. Cor. 2.12.
Ye have not received the spirit of this world. 1. These. 5.2.4.
The day of our Lord shall come as a thief in the night. But ye (BRETHREN) are
not in darkness, whereby that day might as a thief catch ye vnwarres: for all
ye are Sons of light, and Sons of God. We are not of the night, neither of
darkness: therefore let not us sleep as do others, but let us watch and be
sober. Be instant in prayer, watchful therein in thanksegiuing. Ephesians. ^ 18.
Be not inebriate with wine, wherein is luxury: but be filled with spirit,
speaking unto your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs; singing
and Psalming in your hearts unto our Lord, yealding always thanks for all
things to God the Father, in the name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Ioh. 14.13,
15.16, 16.23.
Whatsoever is asked in his name, it is obtained. Yet Iac. 4.3.
some receive not, because they euilly ask. And commonly Romans 8.26.
we do not know what we pray, as behooves us. But 1. Ioh. 5.14.
this is the comfort which we have to Godward: in that whatsoever we shall
request according to his will he hears us.

Not the Author: but sacred Authority.

AN INVOCATION OF GODS AID, FOR CEASSING THE AFFLICTION OF his Church.
THE FIRST PSALM.
O MY LORD, O my God: how long will thou defer the delivery of thy people?

Arise, and free us O Lord: arise (O Lord) and save us.

Help us thou in our tribulations: for vain is the aid of man.

Accomplish graciously, what thou mercifully seem to begin: show forth
the amiable light of thy countenance.

By the hand of thy great servant JAMES, shake off our yoke: that we may find
him an honorable comforter.

Beautify him with a name, more precious then his Crown: by the true name of
a good King.

Deserve he the resemblance of thy own Title: Prince of peace.

Least they which vex us, exalt their hearts for ever: and magnify
themselves, in their iniquities.

Thou have tried us, as the Diamond is tried by hammers: or gold in the furnace.

Thou have chastised us thoroughly for our offenses: now spare us for thy mercy.

To thee lift we up our eyes, who dwell in the heavens: and sit upon the
Cherubins.

As slaves in their Masters fury: or handmaides at their Mistress feet.

Attend from thy heavenly throne unto our cry: for exceedingly have we been
oppressed.

How many are the days of our afflictions: when will thou do us favor and
bow our Persecutors unto pity?

Thine we are, thy children and thy servants: the scattered and oppressed
sheep of thy pasture.

Preserve us, for we have embraced thy ways: and diligently searched thy
commandments.

For which cause we sustain the note of folly, and madness: and are a daily
laughing stock to each wicked person.

Reputed also as unworthy to live: and enemies to our dear country.

Our acquaintance have vvithdrawne themselves from us: and abhorred our company.

Our friends have forsaken us: our kindred have no will to know us.

Our brethren of the same womb passed by us as a stream: which stays for
no man's talk.

Swifter then Swallows fled they from us: for dread of the nets which are
round about us.

They to whom we should be dear, despise us: they which should help,
follow in the chase.

Like sole Camels in the wilderness are we become: like solitary birds which
have lost their company.

Outcastes, of no body regarded: as broaken potsherdes were we trodden under
foot.

At meetings men devised against us: at tauernes and banquets made they songs
upon us.

Neither ceasseth their rage to repine: that the milder minded draw back from
persecuting.

Without committing folly are we scorned: and slaundred without desert.

Tongues are sharpened against us like swords: malice is bent against us as a
bow.

Arrows are in secret let fly to wound us: snares are laid to entrap us.

The children of this world, seek nothing more then our destruction.

This their assemblies forget not: this is their business all the day long.

Laws laid they erst for stumbling blocks: and crossed thy edictes, the
paths of innocence.

Beset by them as thick as bees: we live enclosed amidest an armed host.

They raged among us as a river which swells with rain: bearing down the
banks with violence.

Their insolent fury as a flame: which catches hold upon a pile of thorns.

Oppressed thus by our adversaries, we lay groueling on the ground: and by
strong hand were our necks kept down.

Oh that at length they would not kick against our little redress present: for
of the passed time who can record the calamity.

Even so, O heavenly Father: for it has pleased thee, to compass us with
pain and peril.

Our bowels are filled with worm wood: our hearts long since inebriated with
gall.

To what shall I compare our sorrow: and resemble the misery many years
sustained?

Our woes as waves of the Sea: our adversities as the sands thereof.

Persecution follows us, like thunder, and lightning: fire, hail, and
brimstone.

More cruel are our foes then Unicorns: more outrageous then swift Tigres.

As David sought to death by Saul: as the Israelites in the bondage of Egypt.

As innocent Susanna in the hands of her accusers: as Daniel in the Lions Den:
such is our case, O Lord.

Under us is the appaling pit: above us the brandishing sword.

Within us, fears: without us, terrors.

No mean left to escape: but only thy divine assistance.

Were it not for thy great mercy: long since had we been wasted and gone.

Our Fathers sinned and we bear their iniquities: but unto how many
generations will thy wrath be extended?

How long vvilt thou shut thy eyes from the oppression of thy poor: and
bannish their cry from thine ears?

A great space have our souls thirsted after thee: expecting the day of their
redemption.

As trauaylers in a dry and uncouth way: as children weaned from their Mothers
breast.

Our hearts are replenished with sorrow and heaviness: to see thine anger so
confirmed against us.

Hold not thy peace, but answer us: now we lift up our hands before thy holy
Seat.

Consider at length of our complaint, O Protector of thy holy Church: look
down from thy throne of Majesty.

Regard the daily Sacrifices: and turn not thy face from thine anointed.

Iniquity has prevailed: gotten the upper hand, and proceeded with all
extremity.

Because of this we groan by day: and at midnight power forth our souls in
tears.

Memory of our tribulation comes into our lips, at table of refection: and
busieth our thoughts upon the bed of our rest.

At our rising it is in our first prayers: at our going to bed we again
commend our cause to thy mercy.

Diverse times in the day we bow our knees: beseeching thee at length to relent.

Our eyes drop continually unto thy Godhead: and our sighs are every moment
sent up toward thy throne.

We have put on sackcloath and hair: and humbled our selves in fasting and
abstinence.

Girt our loins with cord, abased our heads to the earth: and multiplied our
prayers.

Arise therefore, O God of hoastes stand for thy people: give thy maligners to
understand, that their Doctrines are of flesh and blood.

Heal the crushed and bruised: set captives at liberty.

Thy might is not abridged: thy wisdom is no whit diminished.

Make therefore the iron rod quite to cease from our shoulders: bind up the
wounds of the guiltless.

Spare us for thy name sake, O benign Lord: release thy congregation from
their affliction.

Convert the hearts of people to thee: and they shall be converted.

Send forth thy grace: and put up thy sword.

Thou have powered forth thine indignation like a stream: and laid thy
habitation like a waste plotte.

Jerusalem has streatched out her hand, and finds no help: she bewayleth
her children, without all consolation.

Now therefore arise, untwist the twine of our tribulation: and break the
exactors staff.

Prevent the appointed time, O fountain of mercy: abridge the days to the
salvation of many.

If thousands wilfully run astray: yet thousands find their ruin by
ignorance.

Most part of this harvest perishes for want of reaping: though much be
blighted before the sickle.

Many which shined in thy church like stars: are fallen as from heaven, into
the bottomless pit.

Many bredde up in thy fragrant garden: vvallowe now without doors upon
filth with swine.

Whom thy Spouse fostered up with her own breasts: those have savage beasts
raught from between her arms, and devoured.

So that she is become as a tree blasted: and casting her blossoms with the
frost.

Her fair ones are altered to Aethiopians: her strong ones changed to
weakelinges.

They which seemed stro^gest have shrunk under the burden: they which seemed
soundest are consumed.

Hell has widned his entrailles: and opened his mouth beyond all measure.

So that almost as many souls are swallowed in his gulf: as bodies are
carried to the grave.

The fainter sort are tired in this long probation: and blaspheamously say in
their hearts, where is our God become?

Scarce the just and elect have been able to endure: Respect therefore at last
(O Lord) our oppression and desolation.

For thy love and for defense of our faith it is: that we have taken so hard a
course.

For righteousness we sustain reproof: for not violating our allegiance to
thy sovereign Majesty.

Who art the only Lord of Lords: and Monarch of the whole world.

Before whose face the mountayns tremble: and to whom Angels bow.

Whose slaves and vassals: are all the Princes of the earth.

When thou list thou pluckest away their chains of gold: and tiest a rope
about their necks.

For thy service we suffer, hating the profane Church: and refusing to sit in
the congregation of the wicked.

Ungodly assemblies we have detested: and held in abomination the Doctrine of
the chair of pestilence.

Conceal therefore no longer our innocence: the mouth of the ungodly is opened
against us.

And that without our fault, thou know: who quietly seek to direct our
lives.

They say to us, talk not of conscience: meddle not of Religion and you shall
be free.

Yeald to us in show: and give outward consent to our laws and actions.

Come reverently to our rites, and prayers: be one of us, at least in
profession.

Forsake your accustomed Sacraments: renounce the society and communion of
Catholics.

Then believe in heart how you lift: we admit you good subjectes, and no
enemies of our Religion.

Misery hangs over our heads, if we yeald not to this suggestion: but a
thousand miseries if we do relent.

If we forsake thy Tabernacle, hell claymeth interest in us: the fiend takes
seyzion of our souls.

Standing steadfast we are consumed to nothing: neither find end of trouble
but by death.

A CONSOLATORIE PSALM, ANSWEring to the former.
THE SECOND PSALM.
LIFT up thy head, O Virgin Sion: receive comfort, ye children of Jerusalem.
Ye zealous souls, who groan under sore persecution: and sit in heaviness for
your conscience sake.

Who have been tried by fire, and found pure: peysed in balance, and found
sufficient.

Your constancy our Lord and maker has beheld: accepting the same as a most
grateful Sacrifice.

Confirm your hearts in hope: for your redemption is not far off.

The year of visitation draws to an end: and Iubilation is at hand.

Albeit ye be as drops fallen into the Sea: and as grains of gold among the
mountains.

Yet are ye respected from on high as loyal, and loving children: the
relics of Israel shall be saved.

Jerusalem shall be built up again: and the second glory thereof shall be
greater then the first.

The Church purged in the furnace of tribulation: shall shine brighter then ever
before.

Righteousness shall prosper: and infidelity shall be plucked up by the roots.

God will arise, as from a long slumber: and establish again the Arc of his
sanctification.

Fear not, little JACOB: he that is thy Redeemer from the Devil, will be thy
deliverer from all evil.

His thou art, his flock and fold: Catholic is thy name.

To hurt thee, is to hurt him: to touch thee, is to touch the apple of his eye.

Arise therefore from the earth, shake off sorrows: thy confusion shall give
glace to glory.

The morning dew is pressed to fall: and the night to be discharged of her course.

With the eye of pity the Lord of hosts shall visit us: and send salvation to
his people.

Turning their water into wine: their wormwood into sugar canes.

His scattered flock he will unite again: and reduce strayers into safety.

The root which has waxen old under ground, shall shoot up again: as a
fresh plant by the river side.

No man shall vpbraid it with barrennes: or say it was a cursed stock.

False error shall vanishe like smoke: and they which saw it shall say,
where is it become?

Just judgment and holy laws: shall be restored.

If a Woman can forget her child, or if we can forget our right hands: yet
will not Christ be unmindful of Sion his heritage.

Sooner shall he forget his own throne: then her desolation.

For ashes, he shall give her a Crown: for baths of tears, unction of joy.

Requiting her ignominy with honor: her sackcloath of sorrow with robes of
festiuity.

His Tabernacle he will spread again: and dwell among us as in time past.

Cladding his Priests with holiness: and his servants with purity.

Sacred songs shall break their long silence: the lamp of our Lord shall be
revived.

Preachers of salvation: shall without fear lift us their voice.

The Churches shall be hallowed again: and no unclean persons shall enter
therein.

The forests and rocks shall send thither their chiefest glory: for
beautifying of sacred works.

Screetch-owles shall seek new habitation: and resign to the simple Dove.

With sweeter then milk and honey: seven fountaynes shall spring afresh, and
flow.

The resemblance of heaven shall be renewed: the resemblance of hell shall be
destroyed.

England shall be called a happy Realm: a blessed Country, a Religious people.

Those which knew the former glory of Religion: shall lift up their hands for
joy, to see it returned again.

Those which never saw it: shall be stroaken with admiration.

VVishing that they had sooner known the truth: and condemning their fathers,
which forsook it.

Men shall say of it one to another: here is indeed the house of God, and the
gate of heaven.

How great diversity is between truth, and falshoode: devout solemnities, and
counterfeit ceremonies?

From the East point to the West: men shall confess their errors.

They which thought themselves wisest: shall say they knew nothing.

Gladly shall people walk in their ancients steps of truth and equity:
beginning to learn how to love God aright.

How to love him, and serve him: how to honor him sincerely in a perfect
heart.

Be no more apald, O little flock of Christ: the Prince of peace will break
the exactors rod.

Rescuing you from captivity: and bringing you unto desirable pastures

Take courage for he is with you: his assistance never fails.

To his glory he created you: and for his name sake he will protect and save you.

No longer will he dissemble the oppression of his people: he is bent to
revenge their cause.

The Daughters of Babylon shall be cast down: and in the dust lament their
ruin.

Proud Heresy shall strike her sail: and groan as a beast, crushed under a
cartwheele.

Though her heart be flint: her neck iron, her forhead brass.

The Omnipotent has sworn to make her stoop: and that he will abase her
haughtines.

Though she fret his chosen vine never so much: in despite of her it shall
shoot up and prosper.

Ten times if it be cut down: ten times it shall arise more glorious.

God has planted it with his own hand: he has watered it with the blood of
Martirs, and it shall flourish.

He has considered the insolency of our enemies: their cruel dealing has not
escaped his sight.

How arrogantly they walk before our face: glorying in their wickedness.

But the memory of novelties shall perish with a crack: as a ruinous house
falling to the ground.

Repent ye seducers with speed: and prevent the dreadful wrath of the most
powreable.

Least his ire tread upon you: like a conqueror.

Least suddenly he draw you forth out of your terrestrial Paradise: as
thorns, which are not pulled up with hands.

We have long tasted the cup of his indignation: but for sinners he has
reserved the dregs thereof.

Green and flourishing boughs have not escaped his heavy hand: and shall he
be merciful to rotten branches?

Let iniquity no longer lie: deceiving it self with vain security.

For thus promises the defendor of Israel.

He will come as a flame: that bursteth out beyond the furnace.

His enemies, shall be like stubble in his way.

His fury shall fly forth as thunder: and pitch upon their tops, which malign
him.

With him, is both wisdom and strength: he quaileth the world with a beck.

He knows how to dull the weapons of the mighty: and to frustrate the
counsel of the sage.

He builds, and breaks scepters: and brings wisardes to their wits end.

Pharao was by his plagues compelled: to let the children of Israel Sacrifice
in liberty.

Cyrus by his aid conquered the Oppressor: and dissolved by his instinct, the
long captivity of Judah.

A second Cyrus has he stirred up: confirming his scepter for the good of his
people.

He shall likewise bring the Infants of Sion, from all quarters of their
banishment: joyfully shall they return from foreign lands.

And those Countries where now they harbor: shall find succor in this Isle
to their own necessities.

Thrice happy are ye who shall see those days: your hearts shall be
replenished with joy.

There shall not be any more grief: misery, and tribulation.

But persecution shall be recoumpted with mirth: as persons arrived discourse of
shipwreck.

The arm of the malignant being broaken: our LORD shall reign in men's hearts,
for ever and ever.

The tempestuous night being passed: a perpetual day shall be our comfort.

Which if we live to see: to have suffered for Christ, shall be a joy during
life.

If we die before: we rest in assured confidence, of a happy resurrection.

And always an immaculate conscience, shall be a svveete odor to the
Almighty: and a banquet to our selves.

By affliction our souls are purged of their dross: and their imperfections
consumed.

By persecution we are tried as by the fan: whether we will be carried away
with every wind.

They which now stand shall be planted afresh, as a glorious generation: and
be as principal stones in restoration of the Temple.

Abundantly shall Gods mercies recompense their losses: gladness shall exceed
their sorrows an hundredfold.

All that shall see them shall know and say: these are they which would not
bow to Baall.

Constant Confessors of Christ Jesus: and the only glory of our nation.

Just is God in his judgementes: and has ordained a time, wherein to remember
us.

His coming shall be as a sweet shower to the parched ground: and as a
laborers wages at the weeks end.

Cease shall our bondage: and he shall bless us with an eternal liberty.

His truth, his justice, his Priests, his Sacrifice: shall no more be taken
away.

For a moment he afflicted us: but for ever shall his consolation endure.

Now therefore show your selves men: ye that endure for justifying your faith.

Run forward without wearines: atchieue without fainting a happy course.

A Crown hangs over your heads: unspeakable bliss is prepared for you.

God himself shall be your great reward: your hope is full of immortality.

A DEEP RECOGITATION, OF THE FIRST conversion of the English nation to the
faith of Christ, and the continuance thereof.
THE THIRD PSALM.
MY heart melts, and my bowels tremble: while I confer the times, O my God.

The times of this our miserable age: with the golden days of our forefathers.

We have heard with our ears: and thy Scribes have commended to eternal
memory.

The work that thou wroughtest one thousand years past: in converting our
Ancestors to the faith.

To a people that sat in darkness and shadow of death: it pleased thee to
show the light of thy countenance.

That the relics of an Heathen nation should be saved: that no people should
be exempt from knowledge of thy law, and title to thy glory.

Thou preparedst thine elect servant Gregory: to govern the Apostolic Sea.

A Pastor like David: according to thine own heart.

Who with great care executing his charge: fulfilled perfectly the name and
office of a watchman.

Thou stirredst up his heart: to enterprise the conversion of the English.

And enflamedst his mind: with zeal of dilating thy name unto the ends of
the world.

While he was yet private: thou had sent of our youth to be sold at Rome.

Intending thereby: the accomplishment of thy purposed mercy.

They were brought to the Marketplace, to be cheapned as beasts: price was
set upon them as slaves.

Endevved yet with reasonable souls, and such visages: as commended the
excellency of thy beautiful workmanship.

Just nevertheless was their present condition: who were brute beasts by
sin, and slaves of the Devil by infidelity.

Thy holy servant saw them: and his heart yearned at their calamity.

But thou inspiredst him that their salvation was near: and that himself
should be the instrument thereof.

Thou placedst thy words in his lips: and hearing that they were called
Angles, he said.

To Angels this nation must be united: whom in countenance they so resemble.

Understanding their Province was called Deira: and their King Aelle.

He inferred, that delivered from Gods ire and indignation: they shortly should
sing Alleluia.

After this (O Lord) thou did raise up Gregory: to be supreme Pastor of
thy universal flock.

Thou gave him both ability and will: to compass that which he had before
thirsted.

And to finish the work: which thou secretly had in hand.

He sent Augustine thy approved Priest: with a chosen company, fit for so
great and holy an enterprise.

A long and weary some way they passed: but thou easedst their travail with
daily consolation.

In the midst of their journey their courage languished: but thou confirmedst
them afresh.

Through strange lands, and uncouth ways they passed: but thy hand evermore
protected them.

They crossed the Seas: and came to an Island, whose tongue they understood not.

Thou did always assist them: and were a present aid to their necessities.

Thou art Lord of the Isles, no less then of the continent: neither does
distance of places abridge thy power.

Thus thou broughtest Monks from beyond the high and insuperable Alps: to
kindle in Infidels hearts the fire of thy love.

At their entrance they bare before them the triumphant sign of the Cross:
the badge of Christians, the memory of our Redemption.

A token that they preached the Son of Man crucified: a protestation of their
faith, and profession.

They sange the sacred Litanies with loud voice: inuocating Saints and Angels
to their assistance.

Grace thou gave them in the sight of Princes: and our Country began to
yeald her fruits.

The seed which they sowed took root: and yealded increase apace.

Through many tempests, and storms it prevailed: through contradictions it
augmented the more.

They conquered this land to thy CHRIST: and subdued all men's hearts to thy
Gospel.

Possessing the Provinces not by the sword, but in thy word: not in their arm,
but in thy spirit.

They established the function of thy holy Altar: wherein thy Son is both
Priest and Sacrifice.

They administered the seven SACRAMENTS: and planted the whole Doctrine of
the Catholic Church.

They laid a firm foundation of their forefathers faith: with the honorable
rites thereunto appertayning.

And once more this Island flourished afresh: recovering her ancient glory.

Which many years before she had attained: by embracing the Christian faith.

Vaunting her self to be the first Christian Province of the world: the eldest
child of the Church.

The faithful throughout the earth: rejoiced at her Religious example.

Singing her happy choice, and celebrating her with Titles: some of Christ's
birthright, some of our Ladies dowry.

King Lucius by thy secret motion: inclined his heart to search thy truth.

Animated by thee (O Sovereign Sanctifier) to Rome as the fountain he sent
for water of life.

Thy high Steward and Lieutenant Eleutherius: assigned Priests for execution of
his holy desires.

The light of thy word was soon spread through Britain: to the salvation of
many souls.

The Prophecy was so fulfilled: that from the Isla^ds our Lord should begin
his reign.

In this thy garden grew white Lillies without number: and integrity of life
adorned the Realm.

But neither was the red Rose wanting: purpled with the blood of thy Saints.

Alban the Prothomartir: for harboring a Priest lost his life.

Amphiabel thy consecrated servant was slain for thy sake: Julius and Aaron
with many more.

When the Saxons invaded with fire and sword: thou laiedst not aside the care
of thy land.

But pitying that Infidels should possess the jewel: which thou louedst so
well.

Thou broughtest to pass by incomprehensible wisdom: that they also were by
Gregory converted.

Thus from the holy City, from Peter's Seat: both the conqueror, and conquered
received Religion.

And being otherwise mortal enemies: yet in points of belief consented in one.

Neither did the Britain argue the Saxon of heresy: or reproach him to have
received an vpstart and falsified faith.

As likewise, neither did the Dane change the Saxons belief: nor the
victorious Norman bring in new opinions.

For they found no other: then all Christendom at that time professed.

Of the faith Catholic, which in this Island: thou (O eternal truth) hadest
in this wise planted, watered, and established.

Who is able to comprehend the success? what tongue can express the increase?

All quarters of the earth talked of her fruit: all corners of this Realm
testify it.

So many Churches and Chapels so many Colleges and Hospitals: so many sundry
foundations of charity.

So many thousands of vowed Religious: among whom night nor day, thy praises
never ceased.

Who spent their time in praying for their Country: putting themselves as a
wall between thy wrath, and the people.

Watching, whilst others slept: living in penance, whilst others past their
time in pleasures.

No Country yealded more Kings Canonized for their lives: or Martirs by their
deaths.

More that visited in Pilgrimage: the Temples and Monuments of the chief
Apostles.

More Princes which laying aside their Crown and Scepter: in Religious habit
and Cloisters, finished their age.

Or more Queens, and Kings Daughters: who renouncing worldly pomp, chose
Christ for their Spouse.

Holy Bishops in whom thy heart was well pleased, were very many: some of which
lost their lives for their flock.

Thou had here also Eremites and Anchorets many: equal in perfection to the
Fathers of Aegipt.

Both sanctity and wisdom thou did power abundantly: upon diverse of thy
servants.

This Isle as a nource of learning: sent teachers into strange lands.

As a Seminary of Religion: it did spread abroad the Christian faith.

No Country but boasts of some English Saint: honoring his relics, whose
life they had in admiration.

Germany acknowledges from Enland: her first Apostles, and Evangelists.

Who founded there thy faith, O Lord: by word, works, and by their blood.

By one of our nation: were the Noruegians reclaymed from their superstitions.

And the frosen nations of the North Pole: began to be enflamed with thy love.

Our Kings also in honor of thy sacred name: and in sign of perfect union to
thy Church;

Offered up their protestation of obedient Children: and made the Realm
tributary to Peter's chair.

They erected a College at Rome thy holy City: that from whence their faith
first proceeded, it might still be conserved.

The devotion of all to thy holy and dreadful Sacrifices: it is not my tongue,
thou know, can express.

It was thou which gave them both ability and will to crect so many stately
Temples, with towers aspiring to the clouds.

To adorn the same with such rich furniture: Crosses, Chalices, and shrines of
precious metal.

So that neither sparing labor nor cost: they left examples of devotion to all
posterity.

Religious zeal being well grounded in all men's hearts: other fruits of good
life followed accordingly.

The vine yealdeth not Scamony: the Pomegranate bears not Coloquintida.

Neither could good Doctrine: bring forth evil fruits.

It delighted thee to look upon this Realm: and to regard the state thereof.

To see how parents loved their children, more to thee then to the world:
more by reason then fond affection.

How children obeyed their parents, not to the eye only, but from the heart:
not for their own behoof, but for thy commandment.

How Masters to their servants, servants to their Masters: the Prince to the
people, the people to the Prince.

Each observed to other their duty inviolable.

The Clergy to the laity: the laity toward the Clergy.

How all Superiors to their Inferiors bare themselves upright: and received
likewise of them their due.

How each man had just care of his soul: and few gave themselves over to
iniquity.

How sinners hastened by penance and tears: to reconcile themselves to thy
merciful Majesty.

All things went in order, and the sweet co^sort of the common wealth: was as
the harmony of a wel-tuned instrument.

A DEPLORATION OF THE REVOLT OF ENgland, from the received faith.
THE FOVRTH PSALM.
MY God, O my God; O God of our Ancestors: where is the goodly tree of thy
planting become?

Which prospered and grew so mightily: which flourished so beautifully.

Whose shade was most pleasant and recreatiue: whose arms streatched to the
four Seas.

The Cedars of Libanus were not taller; the Palms of Palestina fairer: nor
the Oaks of the forest stronger.

I heard of the glory and fame thereof, and I wondered: I looked about to see
it, and it is not to be found.

Alas, O Lord, that thou have suffered a parching wind to blow from the North:
which made the boughs thereof to wither, and the flourish thereof to decay.

The leaves first fell away by one and by one: other followed by ten and by
twenty.

As when the Sun draws to his farthest point: and the cold nipping winter
prepares his recourse.

The smaller boughs began to fall to the ground: being become dry sticks
without sap.

The contagion at length possessing the heart: maine branches brake away.

The trunk all rotten fell down: the fall thereof was very great.

The crack was heard into all lands: and made Nations quake for fear.

Peevish shrubs, whom her shade oppressed: and inferior trees, whom her
glory disgraced;

Such triumphed at her fall: and rejoiced at her ruin.

But the other goodly trees of the wood, pitied her calamity: and feared their
own estate.

Yet just art thou, O judge of all the world: and there is no iniquity in thy
ways.

Before thou did thus abase our Nation, they sinned: and before thou did so
chastise our Country, it deserved the rod.

Our forefathers were unmindful of the multitude of thy mercies: and kept not
the covenant of thy commandments.

But beginning to waver at the noise of new opinions: their manners drew
infection from the weakness of their faith.

When they saw the thief they followed him: to be partaker of his pray.

They joined shot with the adulterous generation: and furthered their
proceedinges.

And eating with uncircumcised persons: mingled themselves with those, which
thou have strictly forbidden.

They learned their works, they sucked in their opinions: and stumbled to their
utter ruin.

They found in their conversation the scandal of Balam: eating and drinking,
and fornication.

Thy Nazarites were provoked to violate their vows: and invited to meats
renounced.

Way was by liberty made open to intrusion of a new belief: and men vaunted
their proper inventions to be thy word.

Blessed is the memory, and everlasting is the glory of the shepherds: which
looked well to their charge, at the time of Apostasy.

For the brightness of Israel was not quite put out: but that many lamps
gave their accustomed light.

Rather choosing triumphantly to loose their lives: then by yealding to betray
their flock.

Cursed for ever are those Prelates and Pastors: not worthy the name of
subjectes and sheep.

Who either slept while the Devil sowed his cockle, O eternal reproach! or
like dumb dogs bayed not when they saw the wolf.

Idols and stocks, not trusty watchmen: who saw the sword coming, and gave
no warning.

But won with reward, or amazed with fear: suffered souls to be seduced.

The Prince frowning: and commanding his laws to be observed for Gods truth;

They staggered as men drunk: all their wisdom and learning was gone with a
word.

Holding down their heads as degenerate: and shrinking as rams that had
lost their horns:

In steed of denouncing to people their danger: and deterring them from
iniquity.

They themselves yealded GODS honor to man: and augmented the scandal by
their example.

Great was the multitude, which swaying with the time: did cut off themselves
from the body of Christendom.

The earth was infected with the pride thereof: and the air detested so
great abomination.

The elements were defiled with continual sacrileges: the blood of the
Saints cried vengeance.

Angry vvast thou with those, which were once thy beloved people: and
disclaymedst from England, as none of thine inheritance.

Also deliueredst up therefore the faint-harted shepherdes, with their
flocks: to the hands of their mortal enemies.

Thy Sacrifice was taken from an unworthy generation: thy Ceremonies were
abolished.

Under name of divine service were obtruded new rites: for thy Sons body, a
bare piece of bread.

The table and cup of Devils, was thrust upon the people: with prayers
thereunto belonging.

Blasphemies and heresies were proclaimed for Gospel: and all men's mouths
opened against heaven.

England, ah ungrateful England, forgate thee the living God: and felt the
curse of having a child to her King.

Thus the bournes became desert: and a batefull land turned to a sour soil.

Catholic faith here first planted: which neither Saxons altered, nor Dane
abolished;

Which the Normans rejected not: which so many ages had not worn out;

Was now at last in a most unfortunate age: corrupted, changed, and destroyed.

And our Nation after a thousand of years, Apostated from thy faith: to the
which it was first converted.

Yet remembering thy former mercies: thou did dissolve at last this heavy
yoke.

Sending a Debora, which judged Israel in peace and tranquillity: and repared
the late ruins.

But too soon thou tookest her away: for the unworthiness of her subjectes.

Quickly was thy goodness forgotten: the Realm returning to her vomit.

Thou pouredst forth therefore thine indignation in abundance: and kindledst
all thy wrath to the full.

Thou gave us over to our own inventions: suffering us with full sail to
make our course.

Our sins deserved no less: yet what could thy wrath do more extreme?

The Nobility to their own utter extirpation: shamefully forsook their
Bishops without assistance.

Who constantly in defense of the Church: pined all in durance and perished one
by one.

The common sort went universally to the golden Calves: and at the commanders
voice, bowed their knees to Baall.

Sincere Christians fled from Babylon: least they should be plunged in her
iniquities.

Thou determinedst in thy wrathful fury: to cast of England for evermore.

To let it run to the bottomless pit: and never to recall it to the faith.

But a Moses stood up before thee: entreating for his comfortless country.

Appeasing thy wrath, thou said unto him: prepare thy self to be my
instrument.

For I will rear up a new generation, of Priests and people.

They which so easily forsook me in time of tentation: shall not enter into
the land of promise.

Forthwith did thou puruey in a strange land: a receptacle for thy people,
a refuge for thy persecuted.

Choosing out such as it pleased thee: of whom to frame vessels of honor.

Many thou drewst to thy service: by whom the Devil wished to set forth his
own glory.

As diligent bees they gathered honey in abundance: for succor of their
distressed Country.

Being delivered like Israelites out of the furnace of Aegipt: and called like
Abraham from house and kindred.

Thou inspiredst them with desire of converting souls: and sentest them in
due season of thy harvest.

Under banner of a second Gregory: they adventured the second conversion of
their Nation.

Opposing themselves to the stream of the time: hope against hope was their
comfort.

As thou gave them learning, which their adversaries can not resist: so
constancy, which they can not overcome.

They purchased souls by their Doctrine: and confirmed them by seal of their
blood.

Springes of health were opened: and from all coasts men sought help of their
maladies.

The cause waxed famous: men began to lift up their eyes, and flow to the
Church apace.

Sound of the Catholic faith, pierced through the Island: and none can any
more plead ignorance.

Darkness strove to repel light: not able to endure the glimps thereof.

The Devil armed himself with fury to maintain his KINGDOM: feelinge the
foundation thereof to tremble.

Rigourous laws were made: and executed with all extremity.

Worse and worse daily added: severity finding neither end, nor measure.

In these terms of contradiction (O ineffable Majesty) stands thou see,
our miserable Britany.

Who by this time (had thou not sent supply) had become worse then Sodom and
Gomorrha.

Iniquity has engendered impiety: and want of faith, has brought forth double
iniquity.

Ah thou eldest Daughter of Sion: how is thy beauty faded?

How miserable is now the land: wont to be so happy and fortunate?

The Lady of Isles is become like a perilous rock: which far and near is
shunned for danger of shipwreck.

Or as a cursed quick-sand: infamous through destruction of many passengers
swallowed.

The chief of Provinces is become the basest: the most Religious, turned to
most sacrilegious.

Woe to a sinful people: whose burden is iniquity.

Woe to an Apostatrice nation: who like an Harlot has broaken her faith.

From the crown of the head to the sole of the foot: she is full of sores
and maladies.

Who is able to cure her leprosy: and to remedy her loathsomenesse?

She is proved a bastard vine: and degenerated to a sour grape.

A froward bow, which will rather fly in pieces: then come to the bent.

A fruitless and barren soil: not answerable to the sowers hope.

Against thee her God, she has lifted up her hand: against the omnipotent she
has vaunted her feathers.

With a proud gate, and lofty countenance, she has stalked against thee: as
though she would check thee to thy face.

She says I am safe, in the midest of waters: my ships are my brazen wall.

Yet is she flesh, and not a spirit: a worm and not a God.

Be it that she soareth as high as an Eagle: she should be reached with thy
arrowe: but spare her, O Lord.

Be it she were as strong as steel, she should be dashed in pieces by thy
fury: but mittigate thy wrath.

She extolleth her self in conceit of prosperity: and vannteth her
proceedinges in iniquity.

In a moment can thou crush her bones: and lay her pride in the dust: but, oh
remember thy mercy.

VVhat-soeuer this people thinks, is mere iniquity: all their communication,
is conspiracy against heaven, and treason against thee.

They have all made a league with death: and concluded a covenant with hell.

Their feet are svvifte to evil: and their hands strong to do mischief.

The earth it self is infected with wickedness of the inhabitants: and cries
unto thee for vengeance.

And possibly would svvallovve them, as it did Chore and his company: were it
not for thy elect sake.

Revenging fire of Sodom and Gomorrha, might be justly feared: if the
faithful stayed not thy rod.

If any forsake iniquity, he is made a pray: our channels flow with blood.

Who did ever hear such horrible things: as this people commit against thee
their maker?

Degenerated is thy vineyarde and turned wild: yealding verjuce for wine.

Thy darling and vowed Virgin: has given over her self, common to all
adulteries.

To Luther and Calvin she has opened her bosom: and to whom so-euer else,
that would dishonor her.

She has sought her lovers far and near: and hired teachers for her itching
ears.

She cares not whom she admit, so she admit not thee her first spouse: nor
whither she run, so she fly from thy face.

As a woman contemns her husband, so has she contemned thee: and with
disdain turned her back.

Defending her iniquity under pretext of thy glory: she dares to say; I am no
adulteress, I am no Apostatrice.

Her brazen face cannot blush: her impudent mind can conceive no repentance.

But if she harden her face not to repent: harden the face of thy messengers to
reprehend.

If she harden her face to persecute: harden thou their face to withstand.

Confirm the hearts of those thy laborers: endue them with strength from
above, and give success unto their endeauours.

Whose only presence represents in some sort: the state of former times.

And maintayneth thy holy fire: that it go not out.

Diminish not their number, because of our sins, and unworthiness: but
increase it for our better comfort.

That the daily food of our souls we may receive at their hands: and not
want their assistance in our extreamities.

Protect them night and day from their enemies: wheresoever thy business
detayneth them.

Embolden our hearts with courage from heaven: to concur with them freely in
furthering thy service.

Fully thereby to discharge our Christian duty: and be partaker of their reward
and Crown.

So may they build apace the wales of thy Jerusalem: and win innumerable
souls to thy Kingdom.

So may they speedily bring to pass: that ancient happiness may return.

So may thy Temples be cleansed of their abominations: returning to the use
whereunto they were builded.

No longer be dens of Devils: and instruments of thy dishonor.

Be it so, O mighty Patron of thy afflicted: be it so.

And all that love their Country: let this be their daily tears.

A CONTEMPLATION OF THE BLESsed state of a Catholic.
THE FIPT PSALM.
COME and consider with me the sweetness of our Lord: O all ye, that be of
his holy congregation. Come and consider with me the glory of his Spouse: O all
ye, that dwell in her Tabernacle.

Come and consider with me the happiness of your own souls: ye which have
entered into the sanctuary of our God.

Meditate his goodness in the night: and in the day time lift up your hands
unto his holy Seat.

Great is he, and worthy of all praise: thy works bear witness of thee, O
Lord.

Thou have erected thy Church, as thy Kingdom upon earth: her glory shall not
depart from the lips of thy Saints.

In thy only Son it was founded from the beginning: and to the end of the
world it shall endure.

For faithful art thou in all thy words: and holy in all thy works.

Just and righteous in all thy ways: and perfect in thy determinations.

As in the sunne-beames, thou have placed this thy Tabernacle: that the virtue
thereof might comfort the world.

Upon an hill thou have situated thy City: whither all people should repair
for laws, and doctrine.

This is the Queen standing at thy right hand: glittering in gold, and rich
attire.

Thy Spouse, whom thou can not, but love: thy turtle, which can not, but be
chaste and true.

The pillar of truth: whereupon thy faith is builded.

The rock, against which hell gates shall not prevail.

The ship which thou permittest to be tossed: but never suffer to be
overwhelmed.

The arc ordained to save the elect: out of which who so is found, perishes
everlastingly.

The sanctuary of refuge: whither to fly from the anger to come.

The mount of thy sanctification: which the right hand has conquered.

The inheritance, which thou have purchased with thy Sons blood.

A pauilion immovable: whose pinnes can never be pulled out, whose cords
can never be broaken.

A high and strong Castle, whose wales are Adamant: against which no
strength can prevail.

A massy and hard stone: upon whom it lights, it crusheth him in pieces.

All benediction thou have bestowed upon thy Church: who has not her for
Mother, shall not have thee for Father.

In her only thou have established thy true worship: and confirmed it never to
fail.

As other people have Gods: none the true God but Christians:

So may factions adore the also: none truly and fruitfully, but thy Catholic
Church alone.

Among all trees thou have chosen one Palm: among al birds one Dove.

Among all flowers thou have preferred one Lilly: among all hills one Sion.

All nations are thy subjectes and creatures: but we thine inheritance.

Rejoice and be glad, ye inhabitants of Jerusalem: among whom is the great
and holy one of Israel.

Ye are all like Gods: the true children of the Highest.

Happy are the eyes, which see that ye see: and enjoy the presence of him,
whom ye adore

Happy are the ears, that hear, what ye hear: and the hearts, which are
partakers of your instructions.

No nation under heaven has a God so potent, so loving: so near to them,
which worship him.

More precious are your souls in his sight: then the Phoenix or the Unicorns
fool.

He has raised unto you a seat of mercy: whither to have recourse for
remission of sins.

And prepared a table for your refection: wherein himself is the banquet and
feast.

O how delectable are thy dainties, O Lord? how acceptable are thy holy
Altars?

Much better are the relics there of: then the exquisite cates of princes.

Much better is it to be an abject in thy household: then a great man in Kings
Courts.

The meanest in thy Church is noble: the poorest in thy Church is rich.

Who is able to express the magnificence of thy Church: or the one half of
her glory?

We have Priests rightly consecrated: and anointed in sacred wise.

Orderly accomplishing thy dread full mysteries: in vestments of holiness and
honor.

Monks, and other Religious persons: persisting day and night in prayer.

With fasting and disciplines afflicting themselves: in sackcloath and hair
for the sins of the people.

Vowed Virgins, veiled handmaides of thy Christ: by like order of life contend
for like Crown.

And fixing him profoundly in heart: whom they have chosen as celestial Spouse.

Endeavor nothing else, then to be perfect in his sight: and serve him without
distraction.

Upon the society of thy faithful: legions of Angels attend for their defense.

Upon them thy eyes are perpetually open: to consider their wants, and hear
their prayers.

Who lives in their unity, is in the communion of Saints: partaker of their
assistance and patronage.

Has his part in every good deed: and is daily prayed for, throughout the
world.

Who dies a lively member of this holy body mystical: by prayers of the
living has remission of pain.

Happy art thou, O flock of Peter: blessed are all nations, subject to his
chair.

Where sit the judges of the house of Jacob: the rod and scepter of thy
Kingdom, O Redeemer.

Thy self art a watchman over it, who never sleep: a protector, who never
slumbrest.

Whosoever impugn it shall rotte as they live: their eyes shall sink, and
their tongue shall be eaten out.

They shall perish in thy fury: and melt like wax before the fire.

None shall resist thy Church, and be innocent.

No man fights against her without foil: he dasheth his fist against a Rock.

Her enemies shall lick the dust of her feet: and those which oppugned her,
kiss her steps.

Such as will not, shall be called a reprobate company: with whom thou will
exercise eternal wrath.

Abundance of blessings upon all them, which honor her: and curses eternally
will follow them, which vex her.

Her love and mercy is more: then the tender heart of a Mother.

Her anger more to be feared: then a Princes rage.

In her remains knowledge, which can not err: power, which may not be
contradicted.

In her is the treasure of thy Sons merits reposed.

In her possession are the Keys of thy heavenly Kingdom.

Thou art her teacher: that she may not be ignorant.

The holy Ghost is her sanctifier: to preserve her from iniquity.

As the Moon from the Sun fetches her light: so is she illuminated from
Christ her Spouse.

In her only do thou reign with magnificence: in her only thou art to be
found.

Not so the Sinagogue of the wicked: not so the congregation of Heretics.

Among whom, as in his Kingdom, sits the Prince of pride: who has
dominion over all children of darkness.

Presuming as though they were thy counsailors: or as if the holy Ghost spoke
in their ear.

As though they were the lamps of the world: with whom Religion was borne,
and with whom it should die.

They say to the ancient Fathers, hold your peace: and to the Doctors of the
Church, we will teach you wisdom.

But their pride is more then their power: for thou dwell not in hearts
subject to sinfulness.

Swelling in cogitations of their hearts: they proudly toss up their heddes, as
untamed coltes.

As children of Belial without yoke: they challenge liberty without obedience.

Priests they make to themselves for their new law: and put upon them
authority, which they cannot give.

Like Apostata children they have made assemblies, and not in thy name: begone
a web, and not in thy spirit.

False Prophets sell them follies and lies: and set cushions of ease under
sinners elbowes.

For a little lucre they justify the wicked: upon confidence of faith, they
assure salvation.

Peoples sores they close with a false skin: when the vvound festreth, they
say all is well.

Eating in effect the peoples sins: and clothing themselves with their
iniquities.

In steed of the supersubstantiall Bread of life, they give them Serpents: for
the Chalice of salvation, poison of Adders.

Making thee more unjust then any Tyrant: they teach that thou punishest all
sins with equal pain.

And that without difference of deserts: thou rewardest all with equal
glory.

They say thou can not make thy Saints and Angels, to understand our prayers:
nor show to them things done in earth.

They foolishly say that thou will not have us honor thy friends: and that
thou set little by their intercession.

Denying that whose sins the Church forgiueth, are forgiven in heaven: they
say thou can not give such authority to man.

Doubting of thy Omnipotency, they say with the Capharnaits: how can Christ
give us his body for food?

With the faithless they stick not to say: his words are hard, and who can
believe him?

His promise of being with his Church to the end of the world: they contemn.

And that the Holy Ghost shall teach her all truth they credit not.

Wanting the band of unity: under, several heads, they make several
companies, and sects.

Having no certain rule of faith, each is author of his own belief: framing
a Religion by private fancy.

Both in Doctrine and life, all disorder is among them: eternal horror, and
confusion.

Oh with how great difference (most supereminent light) have thou separated
Israel from the Egyptians?

So plain have thou made the high way of truth: that a very fool need not
miss the path.

Our enemies give testimony to our faith: and confess that we may be saved
therein.

They which oppugn it do justify it: in confessing the primitive Doctors to
have erred with us.

And thy Church not unmindful of her great privilege: nor ungrateful for
thy benefits.

Honors thee always with inward purity, worthy of thy holiness: and with
outward ornaments, worthy of thy Majesty.

Seven times in the day she sings thy praises: and prays for Catholics
throughout the world.

Hear her prayers (O enemy of falsehood) and give all the earth to understand;

That Heresy is a tempest raging only for a time: but the foundation of thy
Church endures for ever.

A PSALM, WHEREIN THE CATHOLIC Calls to mind his conversion, giving
thanks to God for the same.
THE SIXTH PSALM.
MEDITATE, O my soul, a new song: open my lips to a psalm of thanksgiving.

Rejoice in him that made thee: rejoice in him that redeemed thee.

Rejoice in him that conserueth thee: rejoice in him that sanctifies thee.

Rejoice in thy Lord, thy God: rejoice in thy King, and Captain.

He has delighted in thee, and loved thee: and exalted thee to salvation.

Lifted up thy head: and awaked thee from sleep of death.

Broaken thy bonds asunder, and set thee at liberty: that thou should live
acceptably before him, in the land of the living.

Whilst thou walkedst perverse paths, he regarding thy misery: determined
better of thee, then thou did deserve.

From thee, not ceassing to offend him daily, he turned away his anger: and
kindled not all his wrath.

His eye of pity he fixed upon thee: when thou were utterly unmindful of him.

By secreet and sundry means: he drew thee to his service.

Clean he has wiped thee from al filth: placed thee in a fair way, and bid
thee walk therein.

As the potter frames his vessel, or the jueller polisheth his precious
stone: so labored he thee, to his holy purpose.

By open examples: by privy inspirations.

By threats and allurements, by prosperity and adversity: he ceased not to
call thee.

Aproach therefore, O ye, which fear our Lord: harken what great mercy he
has performed in my soul.

I will sing unto him for his abundant clemency: I will praise the name of the
Highest.

He who from a-loft, watreth the hills with sweet showers: that the earth may
bring forth her increase;

Has refreshed my barraine soul with heavenly dewes of grace: that it may
wax fruitful to righteousness.

He who provides wherewith the beasts of the desert may quench their thirst:

Has not suffered my soul: to perish in a desolate land.

He which neasteth the birds in trees, and fowls in the rocks: has placed
me in the tree of his own planting, and in the rock of his own foundation.

Thou gave me knowledge, O my God, to seek remission of sins: and inckling
to fly from the wrath to come.

As the day star arising from the East: thou shall chase darkness from my heart.

I heard thy voice as a whispering in mine ear, and trembled thereat: I felt
thy knocking, as of one desirous to be let in.

So had I often done before, but still was obstinate: exasperating too too
much thy long patience.

Pardon me, O Lord, that I was so dull to hear thee: pardon me, and I will
redeem those days with great diligence.

Pardon me, for thou know we are flesh and blood: prone to evil, and slow
to piety.

At last thou calledst me with an effectual voice: and I answered, I am ready.

For why thou knew what was fittest to move me: and gave me thy hand to
help me up.

I cast off my former damnable sloth: and set forward my feet to the paths
of peace.

I said to my self, hie thee O wreatch, into the house of God: into the lap
of his holy Spouse.

I resolved to take no repast, nor enter into the bed of my repose: until my
soul were made the Temple of the Holy ghost.

Until she had made her peace with the Almighty: and were purged of her
iniquities;

Whereby endued with grace I might securely go to rest: and sleep in salvation

I bowed my knees, and lifting up my hands: humbly besought thee, Author of
all goodness;

Happily to accomplish the work which thou had begone in me: and to set me
in state of grace.

Thou heardst my prayer: and I achieved the just desire of my heart.

I sought earnestly to find one of thine anointed: for discharge of my
conscience.

One of those whom thou have chosen: and sent to guide people to thy Kingdom.

To whom Christ bequeathed the exercise of his function: as he before had
received it of his Father.

To whom he gave the Holy Ghost: promising that in forgiving or loosing
sinners, their judgment he would ratify.

In whom he has placed the word of reconciliation: and the administration
of his holy Testament.

Sending them as Ambassadors to declare his will: and commanding to receive
them as representers of his own person.

Hard was it for me to find such one of thy servants: for the days of Elias
are returned, when the Prophets were hidden in caves.

Yet thou gave me favor in the sight of thy Sunamite: I was admitted to
speech of the heavenly Physician.

Embracing his spiritual exhortation: in solitarynes I began to prepare.

I sat down and straightly examined my soul: as he, which is to render
account of most weighty matters.

Our adversary the Devil stood on my left side, and said: will thou confess
thy secrets to a sinful man?

I answered, auant Satan, who having made me impudent to sin: suggestest
shame of repentance.

He wished me to differ till a fitter time: and said, there was no have.

But considering how long I had provoked thy patience: I feared by sudden
summos of death, to be taught unprovided.

He proposed danger of the law: I replied, that God was to be obeyed before
Princes.

He objected that the Lord only forgiueth sins: I answered, that from him
only I expected remission, but by ministry of man.

As likewise in thy name (O mighty of mightiest) Physicians heal, and thy
Saints work miracles, thou being the author of both.

I let not therefore to disclose my sins to thy servant: that I might of
him receive absolution, and counsel.

I discovered even my most secret sores, as to a skillful Surgeon: and
obtained with health, wholesome preservatives.

Recounting my sins in the bitterness of my soul: I accused my self with
my own lips.

I sorrowed for all, knowing that thou will not be served by halues: and that
thou acceptest not him, which renounceth not every sin.

I confessed all: knowing that cursed is he, who lies to the holy ghost.

Abominable is a dissembler in thy Sacraments: and his fruit as of him, who
lays venime to his wound.

Or thinks to be eased of his burden: when he foolishly adds a mighty
weight to his back.

I overcame shame, and endured to blush: that in the world to come I might not
be confounded.

But, oh how soon did I receive the reward of my labor: who can express
the sweetness that I found in my soul?

I tasted of thy dainties (O Sovereign sweetness) which thou have reserved
for them, which fear thee.

The excellency whereof none can imagine: but they only which prove it.

A drop (as it were) I felt of the celestial fountain: wherewith thou
blessest thy Saints and Angels.

A testimony of thy invisible grace; a seal of the remission of my sins: a
pledge of eternal glory.

When shall the memory of that time be renewed: by experiment of like joy?

Which while I tasted I could hunger nothing else, then righteousness: nor
thirst any thing, but the Kingdom of heaven.

I said boldly, come death now when thou will: I have vnburdned my soul, and
am ready.

Fly Satan, I renounce thee for ever: thou have no part in me at all.

The blood of our LORD has washed me: and the merit of his Passion has made
me hole.

Now find I them liars, which slaundered our holy Mother: terrifying me from
her Paradise.

Sects have a shadow and name of Religion: not like thy law, O Lord.

I found thy faith to be unspotted: without stayne of any folly.

Converting souls from their sinful ways: and giving wisdom to the ignorant.

Pearcing to the very heart: and comfortable to a single spirit.

Quickly was my desolation turned to joy: thou claddedst me with consolation,
as with a robe.

Now therefore being redeemed by my Maker: from the hands of the enemy;

I confess that he is gentle, good, and exceeding bountiful: and his mercy
endures for ever.

I sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and there was none to help
me.

I cried unto him, and he aided me: breaking my fetters in sunder.

Had he not assisted me: the enemy had even swallowed me quick.

Blessed be his holy name: who gave me not for a pray to the Dragons jaws.

As a little bird I escaped the fowlers net: as the silly hare from the pursuing
gray-hound.

By the old adversary of mankind I had been seduced: and supplanted by his
malice.

My God streatched out his potent hand: delivering me from the violent stream.

Who caught me in his arms, as if a father should catch his child: from the
devouring bear.

Because he loved me, he sought my salvation: not suffering the enemy to
triumph.

Praise him therefore, O my soul: be not ungrateful for his benefits.

Forget not what he has done for thee: preventing thee in his blessings.

He has made thee flourish afresh: as in the years of thy first regeneration.

Restoring thy innocence again: and renewing thy youth as an Eagle.

As far as heaven is from earth, or East from West: so far has he removed
from thee thine iniquities.

He has crowned thee with better then precious stones: all parts and powers
within me, magnify his mercy.

I staggered in attempting my salvation: the difficulties of the time amazed me.

Thou girdedst me with virtue: and under thy protection I overcame those
tentations.

I was slow and weak, thou made me swift like an Heart: that I ran forwards
without impediment.

Thou have taught me to fight ma^fully against the enemy: and confirmed my heart
to be thy champion.

Thou have raised me from worse then the dunghill: and placed me amongst thy
holy, and princely people.

Out of the lake of misery thou have pulled me: and from the dirty dregs of
sin, and heresy, thou have drawn me forth.

From Deaths door thou reuiuedst me: from Hel-gates thou broughtest me back.

Often to the barre^ thou sendest children: to me an orphane thou gave thy
Spouse for a Mother.

Many vvonderfull things thou bring est to pass: none more strange do I
know, then the conversion of my hard heart.

Many ways thy mercy shows it self: but never more then in pardoning my
offenses.

What should I say, O Lord? thou have engraffed thy name in my heart: and
enroled my name in thy book of life.

Thou have shrouded me in thy tabernacle: against the day of wrath;

Opening to me the gates: where none but the just enter.

In vain have the fiends like foxes sought my soul: departing void of their
expectation.

I will love thee therefore, O my aid and refuge: my strength, and the
foundation of my hope.

The new tune which thou have given to my mouth: I will always sing.

I will offer before thy Altar a Sacrifice of praise: in the sight of thy
Angels and Saints I will give thanks.

The cup of thy Cross I will expect: desiring to suffer for thy sake.

What other way can I be answerable to thy gifts? or how can I do this also,
except thou give it.

Thou need neither me, nor my good deeds: thou have chosen me, and not I
thee, O Redeemer.

My conversion was thy handyworke: without whose assistance I can not think a
good thought.

Who am I, O Fountain of goodness: that thou thus should manifest thy
self unto me?

That suffering thousands to wallowe still in wickedness: thou chosest me on
whom to show mercy.

Neither tookest me out of this life in time of blindness: in midest of mine
iniquities.

To thy self, O Lord, to thy self: be the glory of this thy merciful
kindness.

Let the heavens praise thee for it: and in earth others be converted by my
example.

Let my daily endeauours be to further thy faith: and draw others to the
delectable spring, wherewith my self have been refreshed.

So shall thy graces in some sort redound to thee again: as floodes return to
the Sea.

So shall I not perish like an unfruitful tree: which leaves not his like
behind.

Praise ye meane-space, your Creator and mine, O ye his Angels: who rejoice
at conversion of every sinner.

Who perpetually execute his will: without declining at any time from his hests.

Praise ye him, O his holy Priests: messengers of his will, shepherdes of his
fold: by whose hands he reconcileth sinners.

Praise ye him, O al ye my Brethren: partakers of like salvation.

Whom of caytiues plunged in like errors: he has justified, and made
righteous.

Praise ye him, O all his servants: never yet entangled with like misery.

Praise him, O my soul, whilst thou quicknest my body: when thou partest by
death, cease not to do the same.

And when thou receiuest the body again: praise him perfectly without end.

AN IMPLORATION OF DIVINE GRACE, against temptations of Religion.
THE SEVENTH PSALM.
THOU taughtest me perfect wisdom in my first conversion, O Lord: and I verily
trusted never more to be shaken.

In the day of her reconciliation, thou said unto my soul: now art thou my
fair Spouse, this day have I assumed thee.

Why then does the tempter whisper in my ear, and say: how long vvilt thou
serve thy GOD in vain?

Why do the speeches of those move my mind: who saying they love me well,
vpbraide me to my face of folly.

Objecting that I spend my age in wilful calamity: neither reap the pleasure
of my life.

Remember, O Lord, the comfortable word: that thou spakest to my heart.

Preserve me still among the generation, which seeks thee: which alone
enjoys thy presence and protection.

Which with undefiled lips and clean heart, offer up day lie sacrifices: and
magnify thy holy name.

Among whom only, is salvation to be hoped for: and thy true honor to be
found.

Let me always put my trust in thee: and never be ashamed of the God of my
forefathers;

Nor deny my self: to be of his holy chosen company.

Keep me, O my maker; that never in thought, word, or deed: I consent to
rites of a strange Religion, or partake in their actions.

Neither openly, nor privily, in speech nor silence: by action nor omission, or
any sign whatsoever.

Least I be enwrapped in their plagues, because of their company: and drink
the cup of their damnation.

Let neither friendship, nor hatred: profit nor loss;

Pain nor pleasure, life nor death: separate me from thy Church.

Suffer not that my brethren, and fellow servants: stumble by my example, to
their ruin;

Or say of me; see how he has lost his part in Israel: his inheritance above
the stars.

Lo how he was not built upon a rock, but upon sand: great and shameful is
his fall.

Permit not that my ghostly enemies scorn at me, and point me out: this is he,
whose soul we have seduced.

Who began a work, and could not finish it: satisfying our eyes with his
disgrace.

Let not the adversaries of thy law and testament: triumph over me as of a
conquest.

Conceiving by my example that more will yeald: and few resist a cruel
assault.

And that we esteem no more of our faith, then they of theirs: nor have
assured certainty of our Religion.

Forbid the fowls of the air, the fiendes of hell: to take from my heart the
seed, which thou have sown.

Forbid that either riches and cares choke it: or the heat of persecution
wither it.

Forbid that persuasions of carnal friends should corrupt it: or any thing
else hinder the increase thereof.

Fie, that wealth should be dearer to me, then my faith* or worldly friends,
then my God.

Heretofore I comforted other: and when I am touched my self, shall I tremble?

Where is then my awe and love? where is sortitude and patience?

Where is the duty of a Christian man become?

The constancy and service, which I owe to thee my GOD, I will always keep:
to thee my life shall live.

The word of truth take not out of my mouth: for in thee is all my confidence.

Cursed are they: which decline from thy Commandments.

All iniquity therefore be far from me: still may I cleave to thy law.

Dilate my heart, comfort my spirit: that I may cheerfully run my race, and
gain my crown.

Shall I not love thee: whom only I ought to serve?

Shall I join with thy enemies: in their prouocations and blasphemies?

Or shall I lie with my lips, and say I love thee: when I do not follow
thee?

No, no, I will confess thy Religion: neither before people, or Magistrate
will I be ashamed.

Least thou deny me likewise at the latter day: and before thy Angels and
Saints, put me to confusion.

If they urge me with obedience: I will not let to tell them, that God must be
obeyed before man.

If they threaten pains: I will set before mine eyes the everlasting torments,
prepared for rennegats.

I will tell them, that whatsoever they can do: must have a short end.

Happy man, who escapes pains: which never cease.

If they punish me, I will with thy Apostles rejoice: that thou have vouchsafed
me, to suffer for thy sake.

If they kill me, it is the utmost of their power: and the beginning of my
glory.

Yet know I that Satan is chayned: and can not hurt a hair, but by thy
permission.

Thou art my light, and my salvation, whom should I fear? thou art my
protector, whereat should I quake?

Heaven fall; the earth sink: the whole frame of the world turn vpside down;

All that is therein run to confufusion: chance whatsoever may chance;

Rather then that I forsake my faith: by renouncing to be of thy holy
congregation.

One thing only is necessary, O my Lord, and my God: to serve thee steadfastly;
and all things else are vain.

In this happy course begone: grant that I faint not, during my life.

The zeal which thou once did in me kindle: suffer not to wax cold.

Let not the spirit of thy love: be in me extinguished.

Though I forsake all for the precious pearl: which thou have revealed unto
the world:

Yea though I forsake my self also: I buy it not too dear.

Thou have showed me a hidden treasure: the price of the field, I must, and
will pay.

This only with David I ask of thy divine Majesty: to dwell in thy house all
the days of my life.

To be a member of thy holy body mystical: a child of thy Spouse for ever.

That I may be partaker: of thy perpetual Sacrifice;

Whereby thy Passion is applied unto us: and we reap the fruit of our
redemption.

Give me thy grace, O thou which sanctifiest souls: give me strength and
courage, give me wisdom and patience.

Then, though a thousand fall on my right side, and ten thousand on my left:
yet will I stand.

Though those, which shine like the Sun and Moon, fall from thy kingdom:
yet will I be steadfast.

Thou forsakest none, except they first forsake thee: confirm therefore my
heart, that it may never quail

Confidence in mine own power I have none: but what is it that in thee, I dare
not undertake?

In thee, who art the mightiest, have I placed my hope: thou art my refuge, to
thee I commend my self.

Thou shall deliver me from the open arrovve by day: and from dark dangers
of secret malice.

From the Day-diuell, and temptations: which coming in their own likeness,
dare show their face.

And from the night spirits: which shroude themselves under fair pretenses.

Whatsoever become of me, to thy blessed will I resign up my self: my fortune
is in thy hand.

Great, O Lord, art thou; great is thy might: and thy wisdom is
incomprehensible.

Many perils our frailty is wont to forecast: still we cry, fearing to be
drowned.

But if we delight in thee thou will, thou will give us our desires: and bring
those fears to nothing.

Men will forge excuses: to serve their turn.

And a thousand shifts iniquity searches: to build unto it self a sinful,
and false security.

Thou searchest the hearts and peines: discerning easily how men flatter
themselves.

Shall I (as diverse do) blind mine eyes, least I should see? or when I see,
shall I not understand?

Shall I seek darkness in the open Sun: and subject my conscience to my
will?

Direct my paths according to thy law: that unrighteousness never subdue me.

Regard my affliction and combat: dispose of me according to thy providence
over the Elect.

Keep my feet from sliding, and be still before mine eyes: preserve my soul
from the death of deadly sin.

For those which so die inherit not with thee: but with them in whose service
they partake.

Thou have once lightened my la^pe: keep me therefore evermore from darkness.

Examples sometime do give me scandal: provoking my heart in like sort to
ralent.

Ah wreatch that I were: if I relied my soul upon such shattered reeds;

And would (as it were) for company: post forward to hell.

Whereas holy examples are plentiful: of glorious Confessors, which fill the
prisons.

It has come to my mind, that I may be saved at the last: and repent when
Death knocks at the door.

A fool, whosoever so ventureth eternal damnation: not knowing how soon he
shall be cited to appear.

Thy grace is not always at commandment: and uncertain is the valewe of
constrained repentance.

The tempter has suggested that thou art merciful: and wilt easily enough
forgive.

But thy mercy and clemency I have already proved: in expecting me to
salvation;

In not striking me in midst of my sins: and taking me away in mine ignorance.

It is now time to think of thy judgementes: and hazard no more to provoke
thy wrath.

Who assurest us that thou art a severe Judge: and comparest thy self to a
sour Master.

The vvilie Serpent has put into my head: that the secret of my conscience, I
may to my self reserve.

But thou commaundest not to dissemble Religion: but precisely to stand upon
profession of a Catholic.

He would make me believe that there is small diversity: whereas their faith
is blasphemy, or ours Idolatry.

The Devil therefore once chased from my soul: never more may be return to
his former habitation.

Having once set my hand to the plough: no more must I look back, least I
become unfit for thy Kingdom.

Being delivered out of Sodom, I must no more mind it: but remember the
dreadful example of Lots wife;

Whom thou turnedst into a pillar of falt: a perpetual monument of an
unsteadfast, and unseasoned heart.

Save me (O my Savior) from all such unstableness: that during my life, I may
praise thee in thy house.

Make me to flourish like a bay: within precincts of thy Court.

Least I wither in my prime: and enter quick into hell-gates.

Least my latter sins become more grievous then the former: and my end worse
then my beginning.

Now is the time of trial: now proouest thou my loyalty.

Our state is a warrefare: and now is the hour of battle.

If I streatch out my hand to a strange sect: will thou not revenge it with
rigor?

If I betray thee: shall I remain unpunished?

Stand steadfast in justice, O my soul: depart not from the Tabernacle and
tents of thy God.

Then may I with confidence show my face: and not be afraid at the terrible day.

I shall depart this life in a good hope: my bones shall rest in security.

Little it is that I can suffer for thy sake, O bountiful King: and greater
scourges the wicked themselves sustain.

My storm shall pass: and when I seem consumed;

At evening shall brightness and felicity arise: as if the Sun were at his
highest.

Under the shadow of thy winge I will shrowde my self: until the days of
desolation be passed over.

Observing my profession and faith: my duty, purpose, promise, and allegiance
unto thee, O my God.

FOUR LAMENTATIONS, WHICH COMPOSFD IN THE HARD TIMES OF QVEENE ELIzabeth, may
be used at all times, when the Church happens to be extremely persecuted.
The first Lamentation.
BEHOLD, Behold, O thou eternal eye, which never sleep: behold the daily
vexations of thy faithful.

See how they are had in chase: and devoured every hour.

Regard how thy ship is tossed: and conduct her to the haue^ of peace.

The Seas swell, the skies loure: the air is cladde with dusky and grisly
weeds.

The waters lift up their voice: the tempestuous billows roar.

The vvindes hideously torment our laboring bark: and all the elements seem
to conspire our rain.

Wicked fury houleth against us, crying out: when shall they be plucked up by
the roots? when shall their name perish?

All bowels of mercy are shut up: and before our face they consult upon our
lives.

Daily do the pangues of death discover themselves: we are as those which
expect their last hour.

Our life hangs by a small thread: our feet are entering into the grave.

We pass through fire and water, through nets and snares: and a-midst the
haunt of savage beasts.

We must look to our steps, as if we walked among Serpents: for many are they,
which lie in wait to annoy us.

Our dwelling is worse then among Scorpions: and Cockatrice eyes lurk under
every covert.

We lie open to accusation of every dissolute unthrift: to the injuries of
every froward companion.

To the vnsatiablenes of every couetuous wreatch: to the violence of every
extortioner.

Our backs are charged with tribulations: and every body sittes on our top.

Whosoever will pretend any thing against us, has easy audience: who claymeth
any thing from us, it is adjudged his right.

Our inheritaunces are given to strangers: our possessions are rent and
dismembered.

If we demand justice, it is denied: it is answered that we be out of the
laws protection.

Well it is, that we be not out of thine, O defendor of Jacob: O fortifier of
orphans, and staff of widows.

Shadow us therefore under the wings of thy mercy: until the course of
iniquity be at an end, and her tide at the highest.

For our enemies have assembled to pursue us: that they may rauin our goods,
and live of the spoil.

They fall upon us, as a Lion awayting his pray: and as a Leopard lurking
behind a rock.

When they devour the innocent: they think his God shall not consider it.

With our bowels they glut themselves: forcing us to yeald up that, which we
took from no man.

Loss of our heritages, is the price of our piety: our patrimonies are taken
from us.

Tabernacles of strangers abound with our goods: and like hounds well fleshed,
they follow eagerly the game.

As if this were nothing to our deserts: our persons are also sought to farther
punishment.

Pursuiuants are cast off after us, as grayhou^ds after dear: or as the
goshauke is let fly at the silly partridge.

By ungodly ribauldes our houses are ransacked: and that which ought to be to
each man his castle, is no security.

What pleases them, is their booty: whatsoever they lay hand upon, is good
purchase.

We are haled forth of our doors: and brought before the Magistrate as
malefactors.

In whose presence we are bayted at on every side: each man by bitter taunts,
either wreaking his spite, or seeking credit.

If any speak fair, the poison of adders is most of all under his lips:
from venomous allurements deliver us, O Lord.

Refusing to do against our conscience: we are termed Traitors.

Disturbers of the Realm: and obstinate Rebels.

Our youngers deride us: the vilest among all the people laugh at us.

The foolishest of them all, think them selves wise, beholding our case: and
condemn us of folly.

Persons unworthy to live, because of their wickedness, to justify themselves:
cry out at us, as impious.

The Judges frown: beholding us with a terrible look.

The standers by sharpen their tongues against us: and gnash their teeth.

Entreating we are sharply taken up: speaking reason in mild sort, we are
answered with rebukes and curses.

Clamor of the basest sort hastneth judgment: crying, Away with them, away
with them.

Much labor there is to find us guilty of crimes: with strange questions we
are molested.

By oath we are urged to accuse our benefactors and brethren, yea our own
selves: and are charged with things which we know not.

Advantage is taken of whatsoever we say false witnesses depose against us.

Like wild Bulls they push at us with all their force: and open their mouths
like ramping Lions.

Malice barketh at us on all sides: and Envy thrusts out her sting.

Howsoever we answer, escape we cannot: except by yealding to their
profession, we deny thy faith.

Some pity our rebuke and distress: but none stand by us in necessity.

Some favor us inwardly: but dare not speak in our behalf.

Kindred and familiars are estranged: the nearest in friendship stand farthest
off.

Aloof they behold our calamities: as those which safe on the land, see others
suffer shipwreck.

Had we stolen, ordinary favor might be found: appeached of murder, we might
be succored:

But now for our conscience we find no mercy: neither can supplication find
grace.

To prison we are drawn: and laid up close.

Rods are made ready for us: racks and other engines of torture are prepared.

He that escapes best, lies long forgotten: enduring the designments of his
Keepers fury.

Thus are we become like outcasts of this world: like vile rags, which are
thrown out of doors.

Every day brings his load of affliction: no place can recline our heads in
safety.

Comfort we have none but only this: thou art on high, and in thy hands lies
the lotte of our fortune.

We are brought exceeding low: as low as worms of the earth.

Upon which passengers tread: and bigger creatures make their pray.

Neither have we at any time rest: neither find we in any place security.

If for a space our Persecutors relent: it is to reenforce their cruelty.

If a calm arise in one place: the sword rages in many others with double
severity.

If they pretend any favorable remission: it is only in regard of farther
policy.

Who is yet free: can not warrant himself any little while from their fingers.

And who thinks himself secure: is often times in most danger.

The day lays us open: the night can give us no assurance.

At home we are caught by searches: in the ways we are apprehended by watches.

False brethren are mingled among us: and by feigned friends we are often
betrayed.

No wit is equal to the malice of our foes: hardly can any foresight
frustrate their diligence.

No not their sinful subtilty, who seldom seek thy gracious Sacraments:
more trusting their own policy, then thy divine providence.

In this wise while prisons are filled with thy servants: or that otherwise
they are had in pursuit.

Families run to ruin: and children want necessary education.

Of this fathers feel in their hearts the grief: and mothers do often
complain.

But better is thy grace then great wealth: and a clean soul then exquisite
learning.

To this and all other tribulations: give an end, O blessed Father of heaven.

Joyfully that we may serve thee: in holiness, and piety; in peace, and
security.

The second Lamentation.
WHY number we our temporal detrime^ts, O most bounfull Lord: which are the
least part of our present calamity:

And lament not rather our spiritual losses: the diminishing of thy glory?

Not our private damages: not our earthly discommodities, so much vex and
torment us.

But the zeal of thy faith consumes us: thy dishonor is the great corasiue:

Reproaches against thy Religion we repute as our own: daily they light upon
us as a tempest of stones.

We pine away to see thy law forgotten: and die for grief that thy ordinances
are despised.

Mourning to consider the kingdom of darkness so enlarged: and impiety so
deeply rooted.

In our captivity we weep amain: calling to mind the calamity of thy Church.

For neither can we sing thy notes: having lost our Temple;

Nor with worthy magnificence celebrate thy Mysteries: being so impouerished
and spoiled;

Nor have any hearty gladness: being abridged of thy most honorable Service.

Because of this our VIRGIN mourn: our young men lament, our aged wring their
hands.

Our Priests girt with hair, offer Sacrifice: as in the days of Judith.

For why, our lights are few in number: our solemn Service is impared.

Organs and music are laid aside: the melody of Sion is out of use.

Our glory is in captivity: our ornaments are in the enemies hand.

Susteinance of our souls is barred: from the conduits of salvation we are
excluded.

Precious and rare in these days is thy word: thy holies are seldom seen.

No otherwise live thy Priests with the rest of thy servants: then as in the
time of Elias, when they were hidden in caves.

They are put to silence, who would raise up Jacob to remorse: and convert
Israel from her Apostasy.

Few are left to instruct people in the way of justice: and teach wreatches to
shun sin.

With groans, people seek the supersubstantiall food.

Neither without danger of death: search they spiritual refection.

The paths are beset with envious eyes: in passage to thy holy rites, our
steps are watched.

Little ones crave the bread which came from heaven: and there is none to give
it them.

They which had sometime the celestial Manna at will: die in the streets for
hunger.

He which feeds thereon, lives for ever; and he which does not, can have in
him no life: yet is it taken from us.

Abolished are Confirmation, and holy Chrisme: principal armor unto Christian
constancy.

The reverent rites of Baptism: are quite rejected as unprofitable.

The Devil rejoices that he is not adjured: but may dwell in infants from
their first nativity.

Matrimony is concluded to be a profane bargain: neither blessing nor grace
belonging thereunto.

Orders are none at all: where thy Priests sat enstalled, reign those whose
persons are not sacred.

Blind guides, unfaithful watchmen, dogs dumb to the thief, and barking
at the household.

Hirelinges they peele the woole: suffering the sheep to perish.

They run, and were not sent: take charge of souls, without vocation.

In at the window they came, and not at the door: they cry, The Lord, the
Lord, and he spoke not unto them.

Worn out in prison are al thy true Bishops: no one is alive to sustain thy
flock.

Prophecies, miracles, and visions are taken away: rarely reuealest thou the
secrets of thy Kingdom.

No public Altar, incense, or oblation: either resembled or verified is the
time of Antichrist.

Ah, how are golden times turned to dross: our plate to pewter?

To adore thee in spirit and truth is heinous: to be present at thy Altar is a
grievous penalty.

To unburden conscience at feet of a spiritual father: is a matter of life.

At the hour of death it self, absolution is denied: the extremity avails
not to pardon.

The holy Unction ordained for our better passage: is not permitted.

So that without just preparation: we must enter combat with our deadly
enemy.

Books for edification and prayer are committed to the flame: whatsoever
serves us to devotion, is destroyed.

If they find thy holy Mysteries, they tread them under feet: the furniture
of thy glory is their pray.

Ornaments and vessels consecrated to thy service, are profaned to private
uses: as in the captivity of Babylon.

At monuments of thy Sons passion, or representation of thy Saints: they
vpbraid us with Gods, and Idolatry.

Defacing thy memories, they pretend thy honor: and blaspheming thy friends,
they allege thine own Commandment.

Lighting upon relics, they revile them: if they find the memorial of thy
death about us, they pronounce us Traitors.

If they catch a Priest, a hundred D^^egs are at hand: which dare lay violent
hand upon thine anointed.

Who concealeth the guide of his soul, is not Caesar's friend: Abdias is not
innocent.

If any devout Sunamite harbor Elias: her offense is unpardonable.

Who reuerenceth the highest Bishop: is a supposed enemy.

Prohibited it is to ascend unto thy Holy hill: to receive any instructions
from Sion:

To seek exposition of the law at Peter's chair: and direction from the
pillar of truth.

Neither are we permitted to enter into the Arc, out of which is no salvation:
neither will they which forbid us, enter themselves.

They press us continually to run with them toward hell: and to reverence in
show, that which we detest in heart.

If they infatuate any man by fair words, or threats: they tread him under
foot, as salt which has lost the savor.

They triumph as of a conquest: and hang up flags of victory;

Glorying to find a Catholic as cold as themselves: and which will cast
behind him, the care of his soul.

Not for exercise of our faith only are we thus afflicted: but for our
conversation also we are detested.

Virtue is accounted misdemeanour: all things are lawful, except to live well.

Who waxes sober and grave: suspected is he, to intend somewhat.

He that in quaffing and gluttony is not forward: is hated as a backward person.

Give any man great alms, deemed he is a corrupter of people: a solliciter of
men's hearts to his Religion.

Our thoughts are examined: what greater mischief could man's wit invent
against us.

As if it were a small matter: to renounce in words the supreme Pastor

An oath is administered of unbelief: and abjuring in conscience his authority.

In such sort are our hearts sifted: yet are we scorned with freedom of faith,
and that liberty of conscience is not impeached.

Urged we are on al-sides: and enclosed between streightes, stand at the mercy
of our armed enemy.

Open thy arms, O God of our sanctification: and receive us into thy bosom.

Whither else to fly we have not: neither art thou far from them, which call
upon thee.

The third Lamentation.
END our misery (O Father of pupilles) or take us unto thee, least malice of
the time subvert us.

Better it is to die: then to see the enormity, and desolation of our Country.

In every corner we hear thy name blasphemed: constrained to lay our hand
upon our mouths.

Reprehension is not endured: thy Angels are forbidden to denounce the truth.

Commandment is given to those which preach, to speak plausible things: and
conformable to the time.

The sinner sins and is commended: wicked men are magnified in their doings.

Godliness is quite gone: piety has taken her leave.

Banished are truth and virtue: into foreign lands.

All mouths are full of leasinges: guilefull lips yealding the abundance of
their double hearts.

Every head searches a pillowe to his iniquity: and every elbowe a cushion of
ease;

That without al remorse they may swallowe sin as dainties: and wallowe in
blood as in a pleasant bath.

They wink, least they should see: and will needs believe what sensuality
suggesteth.

Inspirations are rejected as temptations: perswaders to perfect Christianity,
are condemned for seducers.

How long will thou endure thy faith to be thus neglected: and thy holies to
be profaned?

Thy Saints to be persecuted: thy truth to be trodden under foot?

No persecution like unto our oppression: no grief comparable unto our
sorrows.

From the East to the West, over all the face of this earthly globe: no where
is the Catholic faith so pursued.

Amongst the Turks and Saracens, is greater liberty of Religion: the Moors and
Infidels restrain not Christian rites, with such severity.

Since we deserve not release of affliction: yet for thy own glory, let thy
name no longer be profaned.

See how thy enemies have stricken out alarm: and thy professed foes, lifted
up their horns.

Saying openly, root we out the nation of the faithful: that the name
Catholic may be no more heard of.

They have invaded thine inheritance: as it were with fire and sword.

Polluted thy Tabernacle with their abominations: contaminated thy sanctuary.

Thy Churches are pulled down: with the ruins whereof are built unhappy
palaces of pride.

Those which stand, either serve for every vile office: or are worse abused to
the table, cup, and service of Devils.

Such possess the temple as should be scourged forth: and whom thou forbadest
to set foot within thy gates.

Men have there placed their own signs, in steed of thine: and for thy
Sacraments, their own inventions.

Translating thy glory to their superstition: thy solemnities and feasts to the
Idol of their own imagination.

Houses of prayer are dens of thieves: places sanctified are become
abominable.

From whence the sweetincense of devotion ascended to heaven: arises now the
stench of the bottomless pit.

Where Angels sung and freque^ted: the Devils now dance and triumph.

For a new faith is set up against the ancient belief: a new table and
service, in defiance of thy holy Altar and Sacrifice.

Thy high steward is quite rejected: they say, we will not hear his voice.

If he call us home we will not return: if he command us, we will run
farther off.

Let us break the bands of his law: and cast off his yoke from our neck.

The bands, O Lord, of thy religion they have cast of, which were so pleasant:
and thy yoke which was so sweet.

They have left thee, the fountain of life: and dug to themselves pits,
which bear no water.

They have settled their malice against thee: and contriue that, which they
shall never accomplish.

The name yet of heresy they reject from their sect: and the penalties of it,
they return upon us.

Laws of the first Christian Princes, they usurp and abuse against the
Church: ordained by them for her defense.

Their Superintendents cite us, concerning our faith: as if they held the
chair, which can not err.

They excommunicate us from their congregation: and banne us in their malignant
Synagogue.

Whither to go is to be accursed indeed: and worse then to enter into a
flaming furnace.

As fast as they curse, thou will bless: and our reward shall redound into our
bosom.

When they are disposed, our life is their pastime: in testimony of thy truth,
we are daily slain.

The Magistrate rages on his bench: the Ministers from their pulpits clappe
their hands.

The people mutter against us: and Baals false Prophets as fire-brandes of
mischief, sound to the slaughter.

For our faith, we are as sheep ready for the butchery: streets are dyed with
martyrdomes of thy Saints.

Their flesh is given for food to the fowls of the air: their blood batneth
the earth, being shed like water.

Ripped up they are alive: which to sheep and oxen men abhor to do.

With bloody gripe, are their trembling and breathing bowels drawn forth:

In most execrable sort cast into the fire: even before their face.

Their quarters, least thou should not see it plain enough, deforme the
gates of every City: and vpbraide thy patience.

Their heads are raised on high: to the terror of the simple.

Served thus are thy Priests, whom thou have given charge of: not to be once
injuriously touched.

The earth covers not the blood that is shed: neither stops the air the
cry thereof.

All the rivers of the valleys, nor all the showers of heaven: are able to wash
away the stayne and shame.

No soap, nor scowring can cleanse the crime: no darkness, nor death it self
can hide it.

No continuance of time, nor the age of the world: shall make it forgotten.

Other nations hear of it, and hardly believe it: because such cruelty has
scarce seemed possible.

Posterity shall read of it and wonder: all generations to come shall detest
the fact.

Our Persecutors own issue shall blush: to hear the outrageous acts of their
ancestors.

Barbarous death of innocents is much: yet to misreporte the cause augmenteth
the despite.

Refusal to commit an act against conscience, call they rebellion: not to deny
the Catholic faith, they term felony and treason.

Traitors indeed, such as were thy chosen Apostles: when forbidden to preach
the truth.

Such as the Primitive Christians: when by Heathen statutes impugned was
Religion.

Manifest is our guilt, and great is our offense: when by going to Church all
is pardoned.

All this we endure for thy sake, (O thou fountain of grace) not reuolting
from thy belief.

We have not forsaken thee: least we should be forsaken of thee, at the last
hour.

Not denied thee before men: least we should be denied of thee, before thine
Angels.

Turn therefore unto us thy gracious countenance: wherewith thou cheerest the
world.

Give ear to our prayers: consider of our complaint.

Hear the voice of thy Martirs blood: or at least wise, hear their
supplication and intercession.

Whom spoiled of their garment of flesh: thou have clad with robes of
immortality.

The fourth Lamentation.
THE garland of glory is fallen from our head: the beauty of thy City is
defaced.

O God, the beholder of our combatte: be mindful of our abasement, under the
heavy hand of those which hate us.

We hope in thee: because we have known thee, and professed thy name.

Thou exaltest the humble: and regardest a contrite heart.

Streatch out thy hand to our aid: for thou art the buckler and defense of
Israel.

Father of orphans, Husband of widows: pillar of the poor.

Teach men, not to lift up themselves upon earth against thee: and thy Saints.

Let not the memory of thy afflicted be laid aside: forget not his patience for
ever.

Cheer up his just desire: ease the mourning of his heart.

Chastise us no longer in thy rage: nor correct us with indignation.

Heal us for we are bruised: have mercy upon us, for we are brought exceeding
low.

In silence we expect thy long-desired consolation.

True it is that we deserve more of thy rod, then we feel: and before thine
anger, we sinned.

If we sin, are our foes righteous? if Jacob offend, is Esau innocent?

If Jerusalem please thee not: shall Babylon delight thee?

Will thou evermore be angry, O Supreme Judge? or can thou forget mercy?

Will thou serve this Realm: as thou have served Afrike and Syria?

To let misbeliefe prepare the way to Infidelity: suffering to enter an
eternal Apostasy?

Let not the name of thy Christ and Church be exiled: let not a faithless
generation root us out.

Not so, O Lord, for thy tender kindness and mercy: pull us violently out of
cruel hands.

Rouse up thy self like a Giant: revenge the blood of thy Saints.

Let not the scourge of the ungodly: be always upon the backs of the just:

Least they presume, saying, thou maintaynest their cause: and that salvation
is on their side.

Chastise us with thine own rod as children: and not with the rod of the
uncircumcised.

Pull the spear out of the enemies rest: knappe his lance in sunder, and
break his sword.

Thou dwell still where thou did: thou art the same God and glory of
Israel.

To thee our forefathers called oppressed by Heathen: and thou redeemedst them.

To thee Catholics made their moan, under the yoke of Arrian heretics: and
thou did redress their bondage.

So utterly annihilating the adverse sect: that scant their name remained upon
earth.

Evils innumerable compass us about: how long will thou turn away thy face?

Not for ever, O Lord: not for ever, we beseech thee.

Shall so many ignorants, yet zealous: never have thy light revealed?

So many which for want of instruction perish: shall they never have true
teachers?

Because diverse which lived in the flourish of thy Church, have set it at
naught: shall those never see it, who if they saw it would never forsake it?

Because many by yealding deserve such a yoke: shall they which are constant be
always under it?

Shall the few sparkles which thou have left in the land: be extinguished for
lack of cherishing?

What if the fathers did eat a sour grape? shall the teeth of their children
for ever be on edge?

The wicked will not worship thee aright: shall they therefore be always vexed,
which worship thee in spirit and truth?

If thou have decreed (O wisdom incomprehensible) concerning that generation,
which enjoyed the highest glory of thy sanctuary;

And forsaking their Pastors, stood not steadfastly for their Religion: in the
time of contradiction;

That they shall pine away by forty years travail in the desert: and never
enter into the land of promise:

Nor see the glory of thy second Temple: in all Royal magnificence:

If this be thy holy pleasure: and the secret counsel of thy long delays:

Or if the number of thy designed Martirs be not yet accomplished: to whom by
these times, thou furnishest a Crown:

Or if thou will needs have the secrets of all hearts to be opened: and rippe
up all dissemblers, by long probation:

That the whole world world may behold, who served thee from their heart:
and who follow thee with corrupt intention:

Or whatsoever else the depth of thy designments intends: by this so long
persecution:

Yet hasten the times for thy dear mercy sake: O living Lord.

Calm the tempest, alay the raging wanes.

Save us who are daungerously tossed: unite us who are dispersed, and
commanded a-sunder.

That as one in heart, so with one voice in free assemblies we may laud thy
holy name: and extol thy praises all the day long.

Give us in the mean space patience in our afflictions: and ghostly profit by
these our temptations.

Let them neither win us by words, nor weary us by cruel deeds: O thou
which art the salvation of thy people.

Aid us, O Savior: glorify thy self in our deliverance.

Thou art the God of our forefathers: thee only we will magnify.

Thou art a zealous God: we will not partake in thy dishonor.

Prepare the feet of thy forerunners: let us hear the noise of their steps
approaching.

Reveal the treasures of thy kingdom: which have been so long suppressed.

Grant us to reap at length with joy: who have a great space, sowed in tears.

In expectation whereof our life vanishes in grief: our years consume in
sobs;

While we power forth our souls before thee: craving at thy hands salvation.

Arise, O Lord, visit thy flock: raise up the rased walls of Jerusalem.

Neglect not the vvasting of thy heritage.

Renew thy truth, which has been so long a time without fruit: let faith
flourish again like an olive.

Then shall all nations fear thy name: the Kings of the earth shall have thy
mercy in admiration.

We shall all with one harmony sing glory in thy Temple: and sanctify thy
Altars with Sacrifice.

All generations to come, shall praise thee: and make honorable mention of thy
great goodness.

Thy Angels of heaven shall magnify thee: the Saints and blessed Spirits shall
fall at thy feet, and give thanks.

Every soul pray that this may soon come to pass: and every tongue say Amen.

Come, O sweet IESV, come.

FINIS.

